18
Businesses are generally quick to adopt AI-based solutions. 
This means an increasing demand for new types of jobs 
and skills that are linked to the use of AI in industry. As 
such, there is strong imperative for the education sector 
to respond in that curricula must be reworked and 
policies reformulated. However, no country in the world is 
genuinely ready for intelligent automation; not even those 
traditionally conceived as leaders in the field as policy 
response to intelligent automation remains nascent (The 
Economist Intelligence Unit, 2018). Nevertheless, there is 
exemplary work being done by countries across the world 
to ensure that their education systems are promoting the 
acquisition of competencies required by an AI-powered 
society. Their efforts can serve as starting points towards 
the development of a concerted policy framework for 
education’s response to AI.
(1)  A new curriculum for a digital and 
AI-powered world 
Education plays a critical role in efforts to make future 
workforces AI-ready. Bridging the AI skills gap goes beyond 
the adoption of increasingly powerful technologies to 
facilitate learning. It also means rethinking the content 
and methods used to deliver instruction at all levels of 
education. The curricular reform efforts cited in this paper 
show a clear need to define ‘AI competencies’ beyond 
basic ICT competencies, which is how many countries 
defined them when incorporating 21st century skills in 
their respective educational programs, towards skills that 
would allow learners to identify and solve problems using 
computing techniques, methods and technologies. 
In the context of a near future society empowered by AI, 
it is important to develop new skills to create and decode 
digital technologies. To approach this topic, we will focus on 
new frameworks that characterise digital skills for students 
and teachers and some cases from different countries. The 
objective is to reveal the power of digital competencies 
that can analyse, use and decode Artificial Intelligence as a 
powerful technology, to which we must necessarily think in 
a context to understand its scope, limitations, potential and 
challenges.
Digital competencies frameworks
The need to collect data for the SDG 4 Education indicators 
sets the table for a collective work of developing a 
Global Framework to Measure Digital Literacy. This has 
4 The corresponding publication can be accessed via this link: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000213475been the priority of a task force of experts and country 
representatives established by the Global Alliance to 
Monitor Learning (GAML) and chaired by the GEM Report. 
The main definition of digital literacy is: “the ability to 
access, manage, understand, integrate, communicate, 
evaluate and create information safely and appropriately 
through digital devices and networked technologies 
for participation in economic and social life. It includes 
competencies that are variously referred to as computer 
literacy, ICT literacy, information literacy, and media literacy” 
(Antoninis & Montoya, 2018). The following table shows the 
set of competencies defined as part of this framework. 
As a parallel initiative, the Information and Communication 
Technologies Competency Framework for Teachers (ICT-
CFT) was developed by UNESCO (2011) in consultation 
with major private actors such as ISTE, Cisco, Intel and 
Microsoft, and has been regularly updated since. The 
framework was updated in 2018.4 This framework specifies 
the competencies that teachers need to integrate in their 
professional practices to develop critical knowledge and 
awareness with their students in the digital era. 
The framework emphasises the role that digital 
technologies have in supporting six key areas of 
knowledge: 1-Understanding ICT in education; 
2-Curriculum & Assessment; 3-Pedagogy; 4-ICT; 
5-Organisation & Administration; 6-Teacher Professional 
Learning. The framework sets three phases of knowledge 
acquisition: 1-technology literacy; 2-knowledge deepening; 
3-knowledge creation.
This framework underlines that it´s not enough for teachers 
to have certain skills to manage digital technologies and 
to teach them to their students, but also that teachers 
must help their students be capable of collaborating, 
solving problems and being creative in the use of digital 
technologies. In a growing technological world, these skills 
become part of their citizenship training to participate in 
the digital society where they will live.
Another framework along this same line of support to 
teachers in the integration of digital technologies to their 
practices is “ICT Competencies and Standards from the 
Pedagogical Dimension” , developed by UNESCO Santiago 
and the Universidad Javeriana (2016).
This framework was created to contribute in the vision 
of teacher training to face the challenge of teaching in Section II        Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI