32
●●learn better, e.g. in a more personalised manner
●●learn more, i.e. achieve better outcomes from learning
●●learn different things, i.e. achieve learning goals that only 
technology can enable
Research should ascertain the strategies that will make this 
possible, the conditions in which they would be feasible 
and, ultimately, capable of being applied widely. The 
feasibility issue is extremely important for school learning 
because there may be many strategies that could prove to 
be incompatible with the current configuration of schools 
and even the teaching profession.
Education research, relating to technology and also in 
general, is complicated by the very nature of its subject 
matter and because contextual conditions limit its capacity 
to provide results from which generalisations can be drawn, 
thereby affecting its ability to contribute to the creation of 
universally valid theories. 
In education, there is an omnipresent problem of these 
so-called “ubiquitous interactions” , i.e. the sheer number 
of variables that increase the difficulty of isolating impacts 
or combining the results of different studies (Lederman, 
2003). As it is very difficult to isolate the influence of 
instructional strategies, any example relating to strategies 
to improve learning would serve student skills and abilities, 
socioeconomic status, motivation and the interaction 
between all these variables. 
Finally, there is also a need for a localised and decentralised 
examination of what is taking place in classrooms, 
particularly in the context of developing countries. 
Despite that the international agenda for education seems 
to suggest that AI may bring only benefits, there is an 
understanding of “local needs in local contexts” in order to 
find more broad strategies that could be supported by AI, 
replicated and also capable of being scaled up. There is no 
such thing as a universal technology-based solution for the 
current educational challenges of small developing states, 
which will not be the case with AI either. Well-oriented, local 
research can help recognise teachers as actors and not mere 
beneficiaries or users of well-packed technology solutions. 
No doubt, research has a role to play in investigating further 
into the role that technology solutions play in improving 
the quality of education, including developing countries. 
However, the right research questions must be asked. Given that educational phenomena are quite complex and multi-
faceted, the right questions are not about whether or not 
to use AI in education at all, but about which AI solutions 
can best suit the evolving learning requirements that 
each individual teacher has to manage in the classroom 
considering the reality of teaching conditions and 
opportunities. AI may shine and speak by itself, but unless 
it is properly embedded into sound teacher practices no 
educational effects will ever be seen.
Sixth challenge: ethics and transparency in 
data collection, use and dissemination
The ethical quandaries that come with the large-scale 
collection, production, analysis and dissemination of data 
about persons are another important consideration in 
the development of any concerted policy framework for 
AI. It must be noted, though, that seeking to understand 
the ethical implications of new technologies is by no 
means a new pursuit. Over the past 30 years, scholars and 
practitioners have sought to define some form of computer 
or information ethics that can be summarised as a question 
“What does the ethical use of technology look like?” (Floridi 
& Taddeo, 2016). However, the emergence of data science as 
the “latest phase of the information revolution” has shifted 
the discourse from information ethics to data ethics. Experts 
have forwarded the notion that “it is not the hardware that 
causes ethical problems… [I]t is what the hardware does 
with the software and the data that represents the source of 
our new difficulties” (Floridi & Taddeo, 2016). 
While AI has many positive applications, there are also 
societal and ethical concerns that should be addressed. 
Most people have at least read something about AI systems 
discriminating unfairly (ProPublica, 2016; Mic, 2016; Reuters, 
2018), taking life-impacting decisions in a non-transparent 
way (Cathy O’Neil, 2016), ready to take all our jobs 
(McKinsey Global Institute, 2017) and set to wrest control 
from humans (The Register, 2018). While there is no need to 
panic, all those concerns should nevertheless be considered 
when AI becomes massively applied in our societies and 
especially because the technology is improving quickly 
insofar as what is impossible today could be possible 
tomorrow. There is much work going on today that tries 
to come up with answers to such concerns (The European 
Commission, 2018; Dillon, 2018; Future of Humanity, 2018; 
Nuffield 2018).Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications