23
resource provision and subsidies for hiring scholars and 
professors internationally. The government has committed 
around 4.3 million USD to fund this research initiative 
(Sharma, 2018). Furthermore, the country aims to allocate 
2 billion USD towards the establishment of six new AI 
graduate institutions, the strengthening of academia-
industry partnerships and the creation of 4,500 domestic 
scholarships for AI students (Sharma, 2018).
China has also developed a Next Generation Artificial 
Intelligence Plan, which was launched in 2017. This plan sets 
out a vision for the country to be the world’s centre of AI 
innovation by 2030 (Government of the People’s Republic 
of China, 2017). Education and training play a huge part in 
the realisation of this plan, with the government aiming to 
accelerate the cultivation of top-tier talent in the field of 
AI (Government of the People’s Republic of China, 2017). 
The government intends to achieve this by developing AI 
majors in university, increasing enrolment in master’s and 
doctorate programmes in AI, and integrating AI content 
in the study of other disciplines such as mathematics, 
biology, psychology, sociology and law, among others 
(Government of the People’s Republic of China, 2017). In 
line with the objectives of this plan, the country launched 
an International AI Training Programme for Chinese 
Universities, which began operating at Peking University in 
2018 (China Daily, 2018). Through this programme, China 
aims to train at least 500 teachers and 5,000 students in 
AI in the country’s top universities over the next five years 
(China Daily, 2018). The government has also invested 
in vocational training with the Ministry of Education 
collaborating with three robotics enterprises to co-establish 
10 public vocational training hubs and 90 vocational 
training centres within Chinese vocational schools by 2020 
(He, 2017). Towards this end, the Ministry of Education has 
allocated 5 million RMB (≈726,427 USD) to each training 
hub and 3 million RMB (≈435,856 USD) to each training 
centre, as well as supplementary resources for training 
teachers and procuring equipment (He, 2017).
Technical and Vocational Education 
and Training (TVET) 
TVET institutions should also be capable of offering 
programmes that incorporate AI-related competencies, 
especially if they intend to produce graduates whose skills 
are attuned to changes in the labour market. In some 
countries, lifelong learning is understood as referring 
to basic skills education and adult literacy programmes 
(Chakroun & Daelman, 2018). However, while lifelong learning certainly includes these aforesaid initiatives, it 
encompasses a broader spectrum. The International Labour 
Organisation (ILO) defines lifelong learning as including 
“all learning activities undertaken throughout life for 
the development of competencies and qualifications” 
(ILO, 2004). The ILO argues that “the renewed interest in 
lifelong learning is partly due to the interest by industry 
which considers lifelong learning as the appropriate skill 
formation strategy for the ‘new economy” (ILO, 2004). 
Germany and Singapore have similar individual training 
account schemes. In the former, eligible individuals, 
either unemployed or employed workers in specific 
circumstances, can receive education vouchers from 
their respective employment agency or job centre to 
pursue relevant training; these vouchers are redeemed 
at educational institutions that have been accredited to 
provide continued training and education (Federal Ministry 
of Labour and Social Affairs, 2012). Similarly, the latter 
launched its SkillsFuture initiative in 2016 to provide 500 
SGD worth of credits (topped up periodically) to every 
citizen aged 25 and up to pay for courses at any of the 500 
government-sponsored training providers (Skills Future, 
n/d). Data analytics is one of eight training streams that 
Singaporeans can follow.
The UNESCO Education Sector is also developing initiatives 
that harness AI to achieve SDG 4, with a particular focus 
on TVET. For instance, in partnership with Ericsson, 
UNESCO’s ICT in Education Unit is launching the initiative 
‘Artificial Intelligence for Youth’ that focuses on scaling up 
AI skill development for young people. This project aims 
to support and foster the capacities of master trainers to 
empower youth in developing innovative AI applications. 
It will also create a repository of curated AI-related training 
courses, and mobilise AI hub centres and hackathons to 
cascade training for youth across a broader scale.
The examples herein emphasise the importance of 
collaborating with industry in bolstering the effectiveness 
of TVET when it comes to filling in AI competency gaps. 
Constant coordination with industry is needed to ensure 
that the instructional content of TVET programmes are 
aligned with the needs of the labour market. Since AI 
technologies evolve very quickly, this coordination must 
be regular and systematic; it should not be surprising 
that instructional programmes might need to be 
constantly rethought and revisited, given the rapid pace of 
development in AI technologies. Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI       Section II