34
citizens, both in policy and practice – particularly in 
developing countries (World Wide Web Foundation, 2017).
A 2016 study by the United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development (UNCTAD) reveals growing public distrust 
in systems that use and collect personal data. People are 
often uncertain about how their data will be used after 
giving their consent (UNCTAD, 2016). Governments should 
be particularly concerned about this growing distrust, 
especially given the generally increasing amount of data 
being collected by the public sector with the rise, for 
instance, of digital identification systems (World Wide 
Web Foundation, 2017). While it may be true that these 
digitisation efforts contribute to improved service delivery, 
concerns about potential data breaches and expanded 
government surveillance are nonetheless abound – and 
reasonably so. Given these concerns, legal frameworks 
therefore need to not only ensure that personal data 
are strongly protected against cyber-attacks; they must 
also reassure citizens that their data will not be used for 
unwarranted surveillance (World Wide Web Foundation, 
2017).
Governments must clearly communicate the scope and 
purpose of any data collection exercise: what sort of data 
will be collected, for what end the data will be used, and 
what consequences, intended or unintended, might occur 
within the data model. This not only increases citizen 
willingness to participate in the exercise, but it also allows 
citizens to weigh its benefits against its potential risks, 
thus allowing them to make more informed decisions 
about consenting to the use of their data. This is yet again 
grounded on the notion of data ‘prosumption’ . As sources of 
data, citizens must know why their data are being collected 
and be able to provide their consent in an informed 
manner. Furthermore, data collection should be anchored 
on the minimisation principle, i.e. to use the minimum 
amount of data required to achieve public benefit (World 
Wide Web Foundation, 2017).
The ethical issues discussed above convey a clear need 
for policy frameworks for the use of AI in education to 
incorporate an ethical orientation. The collection and use 
of individual data, even when used for improving learning, 
should always be anchored on express and informed 
consent, transparency, equity and fairness.Conclusions
To date, non-State actors, particularly the private sector, 
have principally led the response to AI in most countries. 
Tech giants, concentrated largely in the United States and 
China, for instance, are dominating the development of 
AI-enabled technologies. The rise of tech startups has also 
played a significant role in accelerating AI penetration. 
The rapid expansion of the EdTech industry is particularly 
notable, with AI-enabled learning technologies seeing 
increasing use in the classroom. 
Nonetheless, given the increasing ubiquity of AI in all 
aspects of human activity, more and more governments 
are beginning to actively implement concrete responses to 
AI. Some countries such as France, Australia, Estonia, South 
Korea, China and the United States have even released 
national AI strategies. In all such responses, education is an 
comprehensive element. However, in developing countries, 
these discussions are far off and limited by structural 
obstacles (basic technological infrastructure, high profile 
trained human resources in the field of AI, etc.). What are 
the possible paths to unfurling comprehensive strategies 
in developing countries to integrate AI in education? What 
is the international community’s role in helping bridge the 
digital gap between countries that is increasing their social 
divide?
This paper discussed these questions using examples and 
reflections on two main axes through which the education 
sector can leverage and adapt to AI: (1) using AI to 
generate real-time insights towards improving educational 
outcomes; and (2) rethinking and redeveloping educational 
programmes to make them more responsive to changes 
brought about by AI.
Some countries are taking advantage of the abundance 
of educational data that came with the advent of the 
Information Age. These countries and their respective 
educational institutions have begun harvesting insights 
from large masses of data to provide more personalised 
learning experiences. Of course, the elephant in the room 
begs noticing, i.e. the ethical implications of collecting and 
mining data from learners. As such, any concerted policy 
framework regarding the use of AI in education needs to 
address this issue; education systems must clearly delimit Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications