20
an information and knowledge society. This aims to be a 
benchmark in training for the improvement of educational 
quality in educational institutions at any level of training 
base on an approach of levels of appropriation of ICT 
and its educational uses. This framework describes the 
contextual elements where the proposal is framed. The ICT 
Competencies and Standards model is presented from the 
pedagogical dimension based on levels of appropriation of 
ICT, its meaning and use from the training route.
The relevance of this proposal is its constitution as a guiding 
base for any teacher and educational institution facing 
the appropriation of ICT in their practices and educational 
strategies. The educational institution or the teacher in 
particular can evaluate their practices and educational 
strategies with use of ICT regarding the expected standards 
and, from this process of identification and recognition, 
continue with a process of training, support and evaluation 
based on their level of ICT appropriation.
Finally, another framework is DigComp (Joint Research 
Centre, 2018), designed by the European Union to support 
the development of digital skills of individuals.5 The 
framework describes what competencies are needed today 
to use digital technologies in a critical, reliable, collaborative 
and creative way, so that individuals can achieve their goals 
related to work, learning, leisure, inclusion and participation 
in the digital society.
This framework is structured in five competency areas that 
describe the key components of digital competencies, 
namely Information and data literacy; Communication 
and collaboration; Digital content creation; Safety; and 
Problem solving. The framework takes these dimensions 
and maps them through four proficiency levels: foundation, 
intermediate, advanced, highly specialised.
Computational thinking
Computational Thinking (CT) has emerged as one of the key 
competencies to enable learners to thrive in an AI-powered 
society. There is clear acknowledgement of the importance 
of CT skills: The countries examined in this paper have 
either laid out plans to incorporate CT in their educational 
curricula or have already done so. The Computer Science 
Teachers Association (USA) defines CT as a problem-
solving process possessing the following characteristics 
(International Society for Technology in Education and 
Computer Science Teachers Association, 2011):
5 See also https://schools-go-digital.jrc.ec.europa.eu/.●●Formulating problems in a way that enables us to use a 
computer and other tools to help solve them;
●●Logically organising and analysing data;
●●Representing data through abstractions such as models 
and simulations;
●●Automating solutions through algorithmic thinking (a 
series of ordered steps);
●●Identifying, analysing and implementing possible 
solutions with the goal of achieving the most efficient 
and effective combination of steps and resources; and
●●Generalising and transferring this problem-solving 
process to a wide variety of problems.
While distinctly belonging to the domain of computer 
science, CT is therefore a competency that finds 
applications in other disciplines. Given the increasing 
presence of AI in the workplace, CT becomes a critical 
competency if learners are to cope with changing labour 
market demands. Many countries have thus begun 
incorporating CT in their respective educational curricula.
A survey conducted by the European Commission shows 
that while European Union (EU) Member States are 
at different stages of integrating CT in their respective 
educational curricula, each one has begun working on 
it (European Commission, 2016). The survey found three 
clusters in terms of the level of CT integration in curricula:
1 countries that have started a curriculum review and 
redevelopment over the past three to five years such 
as the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Portugal and 
Finland
2 countries that are planning to introduce CT into their 
curricula such as Greece, Sweden, Norway and the 
Czech Republic; and
3 countries that have a longstanding tradition 
of computer science education, particularly in 
secondary school such as Austria, Poland and 
Lithuania.
4 In other words, there is universal recognition across 
the EU of the importance of integrating CT in 
educational programs.
In the United Kingdom (UK), for instance, the Royal 
Society published a report in 2012 that described the Section II        Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI