40
Data Mining
i)  Data mining is the process of discovering interesting 
patterns and knowledge from large amounts of 
data. The data sources can include databases, data 
warehouses, the Web, other information repositories or 
data dynamically streamed into the system.
 − Han, Jiawei, Jian Pei, and Micheline Kamber. Data 
mining: concepts and techniques. Elsevier, 2011.
ii)   Data mining is the process of discovering insightful, 
interesting and novel patterns, and descriptive, 
understandable and predictive models from large-scale 
data
 − Zaki, Mohammed J., Wagner Meira Jr, and Wagner 
Meira. Data mining and analysis: fundamental 
concepts and algorithms. Cambridge University 
Press, 2014.
iii)  Data mining is the analysis of (often large) observational 
data sets to find unsuspected relationships and 
summarise the data in novel ways that are both 
understandable and useful to the data owner
 − Hand, David J., Heikki Mannila, and Padhraic 
Smyth. Principles of Data Mining. MIT press, 2001.
Data Analytics
i)   Big Data An alytics is a way of extracting value from 
these huge volumes of information, and it drives 
new market opportunities and maximises customer 
retention.
 − Zakir, Jasmine, Tom Seymour, and Kristi Berg. Big 
Data Analytics. Issues in Information Systems 16.2 
(2015).
ii)   Data analytics is the science of drawing insights from 
raw information sources. https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/d/data-analytics.aspiii)  Data analytics is the pursuit of extracting meaning 
from raw data using specialised computer systems. 
These systems transform, organise and model the data 
to draw conclusions and identify patterns. https://
www.informatica.com/ca/services-and-training/
glossary-of-terms/data-analytics-definition.
html#fbid=ETHvIPIs4QM
iv)  Data Analytics (DA) is the method of examining 
and analysing raw data so that conclusions 
can be drawn. Data analytics is a valuable part 
of science-centred industries in verifying or 
disproving current theories or models. The 
purpose of DA is to sort through data to arrive at 
a conclusion.  https://study.com/academy/lesson/
what-is-data-analytics-definition-tools.html
Learning Analytics
In this context, learning Analytics (LA) is an emerging 
discipline that pursues improvement in teaching and 
learning by a critical evaluation of raw data and the 
generation of patterns that characterise learner hab -
its, predict learner responses and provide timely feed -
back. Moreover, LA supports decision-making, tailors 
readable content, simplifies realistic assessments and 
provides personal supervision of learners’ progress. 
The goal is to scale the real-time exploitation of LA by 
learners, teachers/academics and educational com-
puter-based systems to enhance learners’ accomplish -
ments at course and individual levels.
 − Peña-Ayala, Alejandro, Learning Analytics: 
Fundaments, Applications, and Trends: A View 
of the Current State of the Art to Enhance 
e-Learning. Vol. 94. Springer, 2017.ANNEX       AI definition and related concepts