22
Digital Economy Corporation, 2017). In 2018, 22 schools in 
Malaysia have been selected as #mydigitalmaker Champion 
Schools, i.e. schools funded by MDEC to implement the 
#mydigitalmaker framework, including the establishment 
of a Digital Maker Hub, which is a key feature of the 
#mydigitalmaker Movement (My Digital Maker, 2018). A 
Digital Maker Hub functions like a workshop or laboratory 
with a structured learning programme, whereby students 
have access to various tools to create and collaborate on 
tech projects (Ministry of Education & Malaysia Digital 
Economy Corporation, 2017). All Digital Maker Hubs contain 
a ‘creative lab’ where students can convert their ideas into 
code in any programming language, and a prototyping 
studio, where they can test and see their products at work.
It must be noted, though, that the examples provided 
are only illustrative and are in no way exhaustive. The 
incorporation of CT in educational curricula is a reform that 
pervades across several countries and regions worldwide. 
This shows a clear shift from basic digital literacy to higher-
order (computational) thinking skills. While the push to 
integrate ‘ICT competencies’ into educational curricula has 
long existed, particularly since the movement towards 21st 
century skills, ‘ICT competencies’ were defined so broadly 
that their incorporation into educational curricula across 
countries ranged from basic digital literacy to algorithmic 
skills. The increasing presence of AI in all aspects of human 
activity clearly conveys a need to operationalise ‘ICT 
competencies’ as being more than digital literacy, in which 
regard CT becomes critical.
Beginning CT-related instruction from early education is a 
common thread across these countries. The acquisition of 
CT skills thus becomes a cumulative process with well-
defined target competencies for learners as they progress 
through a ladder of proficiency levels. These proficiency 
levels need not necessarily have to be associated with 
specific grade levels such as the case with Estonia, since 
educators may simply use proficiency levels as a framework 
to identify learners’ individual progress in acquiring CT 
skills and subsequently provide individual interventions as 
needed, regardless of a learner’s formal grade level.
(2)  Strengthening AI capacities through 
post-basic education and training
The number of countries that have developed a national AI 
strategy is increasing. France in Europe, China in Asia and 
lately the United States in North America are examples of 
the kind of comprehensive strategies that, despite a huge 
focus on R&D, assign a major role to the development of an AI-capable workforce. In all these three cases, most 
attention is given to higher education, because of its 
obvious links with R&D, but also to technical and vocational 
education. Yet Finland has chosen a different pathway by 
creating a national platform to rapidly achieve the goal of 
1% of the total population being AI-literate.
Higher education
The pressing need to adapt to rapid developments in AI 
exerts itself on post-compulsory educational institutions 
as well. Building AI expertise through higher education 
and research is one of the main approaches used by 
governments to address their respective skill gaps. In an 
effort to boost their respective capacities in AI and become 
leaders in the field, many countries are seeking to make 
professions in AI research and practice more attractive.
France , for example, published a report that laid out a 
strategic framework for AI domestically and in Europe. 
Research and human resource development are key 
components of this strategy, with France envisioning, 
among others:
●●the creation of research laboratories to study how AI 
transforms the workplace;
●●increased incentives for AI researchers to attract both 
domestic and international talent; and
●●the development of AI programmes at the bachelor’s, 
master’s and doctoral levels, as well as in technical and 
vocational education and training (TVET) (Villani, 2018).
The country also aims to build more academia-industry 
collaborations and forge more partnerships between 
universities and other research institutes, in effect creating 
a university network for AI studies. Towards this end, French 
President Emmanuel Macron committed €1.5 billion, which 
will be managed by the Institut National de Recherche en 
Informatique et en Automatique (Campus France, 2018).
South Korea also published a master plan to prepare the 
country for what it calls the ‘Fourth Industrial Revolution’ . 
Education forms an important part of this master plan: 
The Government of the Republic of Korea aims to produce 
5,000 new graduates trained in AI every year, beginning 
in 2020, thus adding 50,000 new AI specialists to its talent 
pool by 2030 (Government of the Republic of Korea, 
2016). Moreover, the country also intends to provide 
10-year support to ‘topnotch graduate-schools-turned-
research-centres to lead the development of intelligent 
IT, including AI’ through Research Innovation Grants, Section II        Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI