28
stand in the journey. This could even allow countries to 
compare themselves on becoming AI ready. For instance, 
the Automation Readiness Index: Who is ready for the 
coming wave of automation? Government AI Readiness 
(Stirling, Miller & Martinho-Truswell, n/d). 
With this comprehensive view in mind, what are the 
possibilities for introducing AI in education in developing 
countries? Technology has open new opportunities for 
countries facing large social challenges. In Africa, access 
to mobile phones has grown exponentially in the last 15 
years, driving economic growth (Aker & Mbiti, 2010). New 
discussions are emerging in developing countries to use the 
power of AI to promote social equality (BID, 2018).
Second challenge: Ensuring inclusion and 
equity in AI in education
While AI can open numerous possibilities as presented 
in this paper, it can also be a disruptive technology and 
may deepen the existing inequalities and divides as the 
marginalised and disadvantaged population are more likely 
to be excluded from AI-powered education. The result is a 
new kind of digital divide: a divide in the use of data‐based 
knowledge to inform intelligent decision‐making (Hilbert, 
2015).
Equity and inclusion should be core values when designing 
policies for AI in education. Policy makers should thus ask 
several inclusion and equity questions when developing 
their policies. For instance, what infrastructure conditions 
are urgent in developing countries to make AI in education 
possible? What have we learned from previous experiences 
to build sustainable and equitable conditions to digital 
rights in terms of internet access? How can AI serve 
the education provided to disadvantaged groups and 
populations? How can digital education and AI grow faster 
in developing countries to close the educational gap 
between rich and poor students of the world? What are the 
good practices on AI for women and girls to close gender 
gaps?
Recent studies have mapped the obstacles for introducing 
AI in education in developing countries. The main ones 
include 1-ICT hardware availability, 2-Electrical availability, 
3-Internet reliability, 4-Data costs, 5-Students´basic ICT 
skills, 6-Language and 7-Lack of culturally appropriate 
content (Nye, 2015). Further reviews on the introduction 
of Big Data in developing countries show that the lack of 
basic infrastructures creates a new digital divide in the use of data-based knowledge for informed intelligent 
decision-making (Hilbert, 2015). To remove these obstacles, 
multiple policies must be put in place. It is essential to start 
by defining the internet as a human right and creating 
multiple international alliances to build infrastructure in 
the poorest sectors of the developing world (Mutoni, 2017). 
The work carried out by the United Nations Broadband 
Commission is one clear example of this.
Third challenge: Preparing teachers for 
AI-powered education and preparing AI to 
understand education
There are no indications of a system-wide adoption of 
AI-based applications for teaching and learning or system 
management, even though the educational technology 
industry has yet to cease production on new developments. 
Their fundamental flaw is that, rather than addressing 
the existing problems and issues that teachers face, they 
promote new ways of organising teaching that collide with 
mainstream traditional practices, often without rigorous 
evaluations supporting the claimed benefits of new 
solutions. Not surprisingly, teachers hear what vendors 
have to say, but do not necessarily buy into it. Against this 
context, some countries have already designed policies that 
support the national EdTech industry’s efforts to promote 
innovation, intensify efforts and modalities of qualifying 
and empowering the demand (teachers and schools), while 
supporting their innovative practices and, finally, exploring 
how AI can contribute to a richer, more evidence-informed 
policy and planning environment in education.
The examples presented herein show how learning 
analytics platforms can use predictive algorithms to help 
teachers diagnose and anticipate learning difficulties 
faced by learners and thus implement personalised 
interventions to respond to those difficulties. However, 
while predictive algorithms certainly facilitate data analysis 
and interpretation, these algorithms are not what make 
learning analytics systems powerful. The effectiveness 
of learning analytics systems lies in their usefulness and 
relevance to learners and educators. Real-time data 
processing should translate into real-time feedback, 
quicker intervention and individualised instruction. As 
such, educators continue to play the primary role. Teachers 
and head teachers should be given sufficient autonomy to 
manage their respective classrooms and schools, founded 
on the notion that they are most familiar with the needs 
of their learners. Automated analyses only serve that Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications