26
AI-powered services have already become prevalent in 
human lives in many places, including the least developed 
countries. For instance, bots in Kenya  now give answers 
to questions about reproductive health in a safe and 
confidential way, thus dispensing with a visit to the doctor’s 
office. The bots rely on AI technology to process and reply 
to questions concerning sexual and reproductive health 
securely and confidentially. Several AI applications have 
also emerged in the agriculture sector across several African 
countries. In Kenya , Vital Signs collects and integrates data 
on Agriculture, Ecosystems and Human Well-Being. It uses 
satellite imagery data to estimate rainfall and drought 
patterns. In Nigeria, Zenvus is a data-driven platform that 
provides farmers with insights based on data collected 
from sensors and other means. Their mission is to eliminate 
poverty in developing countries by improving overall 
farming productivity. 
Financial and public transportation sectors are further 
examples of where AI-powered technologies are changing 
people’s lives. Tala is Kenya’s number one finance 
application. It provides credit with low fees and easy 
repayment schedules. Their target customers have no 
credit history. Through the application, the company can 
assess excluded customers by analysing Facebook and 
SMS data to determine the customer’s risk of failure to pay. 
Another example in Nigeria is Kudi.ai, a system that lets 
users improve the use of money transfers by using natural 
languages and AI to make peer-to-peer payments easier 
using a chatbot that works on popular messaging apps.
These examples prove that radical innovation is possible 
under extreme conditions. Some authors have developed 
a framework to analyse frugal innovations as solutions 
conceived through needs under difficult conditions 
(Leadbeater & Wong, 2010). New discussions both in the 
field of international aid and within national policies are 
starting to unfold. Is education a field in which technology 
can help leapfrog inequalities (Winthrop, Barton & 
McGivney, 2018)? How can developing countries with 
severe social problems address the complex ecosystem 
needed to develop AI solutions in education? How can 
public policies empower teachers so they are key actors in 
this process and not mere spectators? 
Recent systematic reviews show that AI in Education 
has been a field of research concentrated in developed 
countries (Roll & Wylie, 2016). As part of an advance 
technological discussion that builds upon firmly developed 
infrastructure and knowledge ecosystems, AI in Education 
is a neglected topic in the developing world. This document intends to bring the discussion to the least developed and 
developing countries, recognising the multiple limitations 
these countries face while uncovering the need for 
structural innovation to leapfrog education as a human 
right using technological opportunities to advance at a 
large scale in new learning scenarios. 
This final section presents the six main future challenges 
regarding the incorporation of AI in education as a way to 
improve the equity and quality of learning and to promote 
the realisation of SDG 4. It combines the two main topics 
of this document, namely the new opportunities of AI to 
improve learning and the way education should prepare 
students and future workers in an AI-powered world.
First challenge: a comprehensive 
public policy on AI for sustainable 
development
The education sector is both customer and actor in the face 
of sweeping developments in AI-powered technology. In 
this regard, the education component becomes key when 
countries develop national AI strategies, as we’ve seen in 
the cases of Australia, China, Estonia, France, Singapore, 
South Korea and, albeit more recently, the United States.
On one hand, AI holds great potential for improving 
education systems: How can AI help learners, teachers, 
administrators and policymakers? On the other hand, 
education systems are expected to form learners who 
possess the skills needed to thrive in a society surrounded 
by AI. Currently, most of the AI developments in education 
come from the private sector. Companies such as Pearson, 
McGraw-Hill, IBM, Knewton, Cerego, Smart Parrow, 
Dreambox, LightSide or Coursera are advancing in the 
introduction of adaptive learning through intelligent 
algorithms that use Big Data to personalise learning. Most 
governments are struggling to manage this serge in private 
sector engagement with AI in education.
Recent studies show that the digital education market will 
increase 5% annually until 2021 (Docebo, 2016). Experts 
forecast a 50% growth in the artificial intelligence market 
between 2017 and 2021 (HTF Market Intelligence, 2018). 
What is the role of the state in this context? Can it cope 
with the velocity of technological change driven by private 
markets?Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications