15
 Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity       Section I
platform, M-Shule tracks and analyses learner performance 
to empower parents and schools with insights and 
recommendations.
Some further EdTech initiatives in developing countries also 
promise to use some elements of AI in education, although 
they are no strictly AI based, e.g. SkoolDesk (Uganda), 
Siyavula (South Africa and Nigeria), Virtual Learning 
Africa and TopDog (South Africa), private companies that 
develop educational content for students of all levels in 
Africa; and Zaya Learning Labs (India). 
(2)  Data analytics in Education Manage-
ment Information Systems (EMIS) and 
the evolution to Learning Management 
Systems (LMS)
An Education Management Information System (EMIS) is 
an organised group of information and documentation 
services that collects, stores, processes, analyses and 
disseminates information for educational planning and 
management. It is widely used for education leaders, 
decision-makers and managers at the regional, local and 
school levels and for the generation of national statistics. 
Data-Driven Decision Making (DDDM) applied to student 
achievement testing data is a central focus of many school 
and district reform efforts, in part because of federal and 
state test-based accountability policies. With massive data 
collected from EMIS, AI algorithms are able to make data-
driven decisions to improve school education.
A well-designed and well-functioning EMIS lets members 
across all levels of the education community access 
useful information for managing and administering an 
education system more efficiently, developing feasible 
and cost-effective plans, formulating responsive policies, 
and monitoring and evaluating educational outcomes. 
In countries where data are complete, reliable, regularly 
collected, and can be aggregated and disaggregated, 
AI-enhanced EMIS would have a much stronger capacity 
to automatically analyse the data and generate data 
dashboards at both the school and national levels. Moving 
forward, EMIS even opens up a potential for developing 
predictive decision-making algorithms. While this 
remains a very nascent area in EMIS development, more 
countries, both developed and developing, are interested 
in transforming their current EMIS from a school-based 
aggregated administrative data management system 
into an integrated and dynamic learning management 
systems that can effectively support real-time decision-
making in every aspect of education sector management.In the United Arab Emirates (UAE), the Ministry of 
Education rolled out an advanced data analytics platform 
with over 1,200 schools and over 70 higher education 
institutions, totalling over 1.2 million students. This data 
analytics system contains data on curricula, teachers’ 
professional development, learning resources, financing, 
operations, performance reports, teacher, student and 
parent feedback, and scores from international assessments 
like PISA and TIMSS (Leading Countries of the World, 2018). 
UAE has a data analytics section in its Ministry of Education, 
dedicated to developing machine learning algorithms in 
support of strategic studies on the country’s education 
system.
Middle and lower-income countries are also exploring the 
potential of AI-enhanced EMIS. For instance, iMlango is an 
educational technology program delivered by a partnership 
of public and private sector organisations in Kenya. Schools 
measure daily attendance using sQuid’s digital attendance 
system, enabling quick and easy attendance monitoring, 
real-time data reporting and high reliability and insight 
into complex student data patterns. Class and school 
attendances are tracked and reported using advanced 
analytics, which are then used by teachers and a field team 
to identify low-attending pupils. sQuid’s interactive learning 
platform delivers learning content in multiple formats for 
students and teachers. Pupils can access Maths Whizz, 
the personalised virtual math tutor that tailors the pupils’ 
learning experiences depending on their ability, and other 
content such as Africa-focused stories, the world’s first 
children’s encyclopaedia, and curriculum-aligned revision 
guides. 
While still at a very nascent stage, countries such as Bhutan 
and Kyrgyzstan are aspiring to create integrated education 
information management systems based on individual 
student tracking that can allow for personalised learning 
support, and efficient and effective school and sector 
management. This opens the possibilities of introducing 
AI-enhanced learning analytics in their systems in the near 
future.
The school mapping initiative UNICEF Innovation is 
exploring the potential of Deep Learning (DL) algorithms 
in collaboration with academic institutions and private 
companies. Their studies show that DL algorithms are useful 
for example to recognise schools in satellite imagery, thus 
rendering unmapped schools visible.
AI has begun unveiling its potential in research for 
sustainable development. The contest “New debates.