7   Executive Summary
must learn new digital skills to use AI in a pedagogical and 
meaningful way and AI developers must learn how teachers 
work and create solutions that are sustainable in real-life 
environments. 
The fourth challenge is to develop quality and inclusive 
data systems. If we are headed towards the datafication of 
education, the quality of data should be our chief concern. 
It´s essential to develop state capabilities to improve data 
collection and systematisation. AI developments should 
be an opportunity to increase the importance of data in 
educational system management.
The fifth challenge is to make research on AI in education 
significant. While it can be reasonably expected that 
research on AI in education will increase in the coming 
years, it is nevertheless worth recalling the difficulties that 
the education sector has had in taking stock of educational 
research in a significant way both for practice and policy-
making.
The sixth challenge deals with ethics and transparency 
in data collection, use and dissemination. AI opens many 
ethical concerns regarding access to education system, 
recommendations to individual students, personal data 
concentration, liability, impact on work, data privacy and 
ownership of data feeding algorithms. AI regulation will 
thus require public discussion on ethics, accountability, 
transparency and security.
The document ends with an open invitation to create new 
discussions around the uses, possibilities and risks of AI in 
education for sustainable development. 
Introduction
In this age of big data, we all leave behind individual 
information footprints, resulting in an abundance of data, 
allowing human and societal behaviour to be objectively 
quantified and, therefore, easily tracked, modelled and, to 
a certain extent, predicted. This phenomenon surrounding 
information footprints is referred to as ‘datafication’ 
(Mayer-Schönberger & Cukier, 2014) and also affects the 
education sector. While datafication certainly raises some 
ethical concerns, which also require a concerted policy 
response, it also brings a world of possibilities in terms 
of individualising learning and education governance. To 
date, little has been discussed about the possibilities and 
limitations of AI in education in the developing world, 
particularly regarding the extreme problems of the least 
developed countries. With a view to helping bridge this gap, this paper will discuss AI technologies that education 
systems worldwide are beginning to use and also explore 
how they have helped or can help improve learning 
outcomes.
In this context, this paper aims to identify the education 
policy implications of AI by examining four main 
challenges:
1 Ensuring inclusive and equitable use of AI in 
education
2 Leveraging AI to enhance education and learning
3 Promoting skills development for jobs and life in the 
AI era 
4 Safeguarding transparent and auditable use of 
education data
This paper was drawn up to assist education policymakers, 
specifically in developing countries, in understanding and 
anticipating the extent to which AI impacts the education 
sector so they can determine appropriate policy responses. 
By examining the education sector’s response to AI in 
various countries, this paper suggests critical considerations 
for public policies in developing countries to integrate 
AI-powered technologies. The overall goal is to ensure 
that learners acquire the competencies to thrive in an 
AI-powered society. In doing so, this paper also elaborates 
on the key risks and challenges that countries are facing in 
steering the use and development of AI. 
This document was also drawn up to open urgent 
discussions on the role of AI in education in developing 
countries. To do so, this document is broad and simple in 
its style, open and careful in its suggestions, and full of 
examples to tackle these discussions in dialogue with real-
world applications as they unfold in the present.
Given the complexity of the topic with changes happening 
at an exponential and unpredictable rate, public policy 
discussions have been elicited but postponed by the 
surrounding urgencies educational systems face worldwide. 
Nevertheless, in a world that is becoming AI-powered, 
education must prioritise this discussion for the public 
policy agenda in every context.
This paper is divided into three sections. 
Section I, “Leveraging AI towards improving learning 
outcomes” , presents examples of how AI technology can 
help education systems use data to improve teaching 
in the developing world. This section comprises two 
sub-sections that address pedagogical and system-wide