35
how learner data are used and be expressly based on 
learners’ consent to their data being used.
Education systems have also been actively reforming 
themselves to ensure that learners are acquiring the skills 
required by an AI-enabled future workplace. These reforms 
are happening across all educational sub-sectors, from the 
early years to continuing education. This lifelong learning 
orientation is of course appropriate in light of how fast AI 
technologies evolve. As such, this process of rethinking and 
redeveloping educational programmes in response to AI 
might need to become a regular and continuous process.
Since these reforms are taking place in light of an AI 
skills gap, there also needs to be more dialogue and 
collaboration between industry and the education sector. 
Bridging this skills gap is not the sole responsibility of the 
education sector; if educational institutions are to produce 
a workforce that satisfies the needs of industry, it would be 
in the best interests of industry to be more involved in the 
development and delivery of learning programmes.
UNESCO, given its leadership role in the SDG 4-Education 
2030 Agenda, has the mandate to coordinate with national 
governments and mobilise non-State actors, including 
NGOs and private enterprises. Furthermore, UNESCO’s 
extensive network of businesses, policymakers and 
practitioners working within the education sector, allows 
the Organisation to broker partnerships between learning 
solution providers. Moreover, the Organisation’s normative 
function allows it to define fundamental criteria and 
standards for the selection of appropriate AI technologies, 
in light of SDG 4 objectives. Moreover, UNESCO’s mandate 
makes the Organisation competent to provide technical 
assistance to countries seeking to move towards AI-enabled 
education systems.
Inevitably, AI is a field that spurs innovation and, by doing 
so, increases countries’ competitiveness. Countries will 
continue competing in such a rich and rapidly evolving 
arena. Yet, at least when it comes to education, there is also 
room for cooperation, whose basis is knowledge sharing. 
To promote the discussion and the relevance of adopting 
comprehensive perspectives of AI in education there is a 
need of more information about how countries are moving 
forward in this uncertain and constantly changing territory. 
The creation of an Observatory of AI in education to look 
at relevant initiatives of AI in education and to inform on national and international AI strategy plans may be seen 
as a platform for knowledge sharing and peer learning. 
This observatory (with strong emphasis on developing 
countries) will help increase the evidence-based dialogue 
among decision makers.
Indeed, there have been multiple responses to the changes 
accompanying the rise of AI in various areas of human 
activity as shown by the examples provided in this paper. 
However, these responses remain independent of a holistic 
and concerted policy framework for AI in education. 
Nonetheless, it is important to note that the initiatives 
presented are worthwhile starting measures that can guide 
the creation of a coherent policy framework. It is of course 
critical to engage different sectors in the development of 
such a framework, since the impact of AI sweeps across 
sectors. AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III