14Section I        Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity
devoted to digital education from the region. One of its 
main initiatives is an online adaptive learning solution 
called “Mathematics Adaptive Platform” (PAM for its Spanish 
acronym). PAM’s content has been adapted to the national 
curriculum and it is a tool that provides personalised 
feedback according to each student’s skill level based on an 
analysis of student experiences. Some studies have already 
shown how the program has already had a positive impact 
on learning (Perera & Aboal, 2018). 
PAM was developed by the German company Bettermarks 
and began to be used in 2013 as part of the One Laptop 
Per Child program, offering students over 100,000 activities 
to give personalised assistance to students according to 
their level of knowledge. PAM provides students with help 
through a set of over 25 thousand step-by-step exercises 
and 2800 feedback patterns to explain the solutions of each 
exercise. 
According to Plan Ceibal’s official website, the PAM platform 
offers the following advantages for learning: immediacy of 
the response; student independence; ease of correction; 
learning personalisation; classroom gamification; 
promoting group work; adaptation to the rhythms of class 
and each student, and a large number of activities.
Some other cases of public endeavours to promote the 
use of AI in education also come from Latin America3. 
In Brazil, the federal government created Mec Flix as a 
state educational platform. It is a video content platform 
designed to prepare students for the national higher 
education examination (ENEM). It has some emergent 
elements of AI: students have to log in and they can 
create personalised playlists of video-lessons and get 
recommendations based on their preferences. 
Projects with AI elements in education also come from 
philanthropic initiatives that work in the developing world. 
IBM is using technology to make an impact on eradicating 
poverty through the ’Simpler Voice: Overcoming Illiteracy’ 
project. This project uses AI to help adult learners who are 
illiterate or have low literacy skills, navigate texts with more 
confidence by translating texts and presenting the basic 
meaning through visuals or simple spoken word. This will 
help users overcome difficult obstacles in their day-to-day 
lives.
3 In Guayaquil, Ecuador, the project “Más Tecnología” introduced computers for students with a software that personalises curriculums based 
on the results of assessments in language and mathematics. The project was accompanied by a teacher training plan to implement computer-
based lessons three hours per week. A study by the IDB showed that after two years the programme had a positive impact on mathematics 
test scores (Carrillo, Onofa & Ponce, 2010).Learning Equality is a non-profit initiative that started 
as an extension of the Kahn Academy to use the contents 
of the platform in developing countries. Learn Equality 
launched Kolibri, an open-source educational platform and 
toolkit designed for low-resource communities.
Other philanthropic international initiatives use prizes 
as a way to innovate. The $15 million Global Learning 
XPRIZE (XPrize Foundation, 2019) challenges teams 
from around the world to develop open-source, scalable 
software that will enable children in developing countries 
to teach themselves basic reading, writing and arithmetic 
within 15 months. One of the solutions, RoboTutor (XPrize 
Foundation, 2019) was developed by Carnegie Mellon 
specialists to create a learning machine based on AI with 
robot tutors, voice recognition and data driven algorithms 
to personalise learning at a large scale. 
Finally, many of these “first-generation AI initiatives in 
education in developing countries” come from the private 
sector with a lucrative perspective or in partnership with 
public authorities. In Brazil, an EdTech company Geekie 
– the adaptive learning platform in Brazil accredited by 
the country’s Ministry of Education – is used by over 5,000 
schools across the country to provide customised learning 
experiences for students (WISE, 2011; Rundle, 2015; Rigby, 
2016). Through machine learning, the software provides 
more personalised content as the student uses it more 
often. It also becomes better at flagging learning difficulties 
encountered by students, which human educators can then 
use to determine the necessary interventions. 
Daptio is a South African solution that uses deep analytics 
and provides personalised learning to teachers, students 
and content creators in Africa and other emerging markets 
through its online software service. Founded in 2013 and 
based in Cape Town, Daptio uses artificial intelligence 
to help students, mentors and teachers to understand 
the proficiency level of each student and then match the 
relevant content. Daptio’s key local competitors are Get 
Smarter, Funda and ReThink Education. 
M-Shule was launched in Kenya  in 2016 as a mobile 
platform filled with lessons based on national curriculum 
standards delivered via SMS that adapt to each student’s 
skills and abilities using AI technology. As students use the