21
shortcomings of computing instruction in the country. This 
report described how instruction on ICT at the time merely 
aimed for students to acquire basic digital literacy skills, i.e. 
the general ability to use computers, and recommended a 
curricular shift towards information technology, computer 
science, programming and computing (The Royal Society, 
2012). The Royal Society argued for the importance of CT 
and its applications to natural and artificial systems. They 
posited that CT skills were also useful and applicable to 
domains outside computer science (The Royal Society, 
2012). Based on the findings of this report, the UK 
redesigned and implemented a new computing curriculum 
in 2014, whose aims were more oriented towards fostering 
an understanding of fundamental principles and concepts 
in computer science and their applications, and the ability 
to analyze problems in computational terms and to create 
computer programs that would solve those problems (UK 
Department for Education, 2013). Instruction proceeds 
along four key stages, spanning preschool, primary school, 
lower secondary school and upper secondary school, with 
well-defined target competencies for each stage (Yadav, 
2016). Computer science and computing instructors are 
able to share ideas and resources through communities of 
practice like “Computing at School” , an affiliate organisation 
of the British Computer Society, the Chartered Institute for 
IT (Heintz, Mannila & Färnqvist, 2016).
Estonia launched a similar initiative in 2012 called 
the “ProgeTiger Programme” , which aims to introduce 
programming and robotics in educational curricula 
(HITSA, n/d), spanning pre-school, primary and vocational 
education (HITSA, n/d). This programme is managed by the 
Education Information Technology Foundation (Hariduse 
Infotehnoloogia Sihtasutuse, HITSA), which is in turn funded 
by the Estonian Ministry of Education and Research. The 
Government of Estonia set HITSA’s objective of “[ensuring] 
that sufficient age-appropriate digital competency 
necessary for further studies and to succeed in society is 
acquired at all levels of education by integrating the use 
of digital solutions into the entire process of teaching 
and learning” (HITSA, 2015). The ProgeTiger Programme 
approach has three axes, two of which directly relate to 
the development of AI-related competencies: Engineering 
Sciences, encompassing programming, robotics and 
electronics; and Information and Communications 
Technology, encompassing computer science and digital 
communications (HITSA, 2015). 
The push to integrate CT in educational curricula 
from as early as preschool is not exclusive to Europe. Argentina’s Ministry of Education, for instance, recently 
announced a plan called ‘Aprender Conectados’ , which 
aims to incorporate digital learning across all levels of 
compulsory education. One component of this plan is 
to integrate programming and robotics in the country’s 
educational program, beginning from preschool all the way 
to secondary school, in all schools by 2019. The learning 
curriculum prescribes specific, age-appropriate learning 
competencies at each level of education, from preschool 
to secondary school, building towards full competency in 
using computing methods and techniques, individually and 
collaboratively, to solve problems (Ministerio de Educación, 
2017).
Singapore also starts young in its effort to develop CT 
competencies amongst learners. In 2016, the country’s 
Info-communications Media Development Authority 
(IMDA) launched the PlayMaker Programme, which 
introduced robots to 160 preschool centres to develop very 
young learners’ appetite for and competency in robotics, 
programming and computer science through play (Graham, 
2018). A mid-test and post-test study involving a sample 
of preschool children using KIBO – one of the robotics kits 
used in the PlayMaker Programme – showed high success 
in developing foundational programming concepts among 
children in the sample group (Sullivan & Bers, 2017). The 
PlayMaker Programme is part of a broader movement, 
called CODE@SG, to integrate coding and CT in Singapore’s 
formal education system through Infocomm clubs, student 
competitions, enrichment programmes and gamified 
approaches to learning (Infocomm Media Development 
Authority, 2017). This initiative aims to build a “Smart 
Nation for the future” , whose citizens are “familiar with 
tech skills and … also sensitive to how tech can be applied 
to improve living” , acknowledging that CT is “[becoming] 
an increasingly essential part of our lives and careers” 
(Infocomm Media Development Authority, 2017).
Malaysia has also embedded CT in its educational 
programme. During the launch of Malaysia’s 
#mydigitalmaker movement in 2016, Malaysia Digital 
Economy Corporation (MDEC) CEO Yasmin Mahmood 
emphasised that the integration of CT in educational 
curricula meant “embedding thinking skills – not IT skills 
– […] to then apply to problem-solving” (Singh, 2016). 
The #mydigitalmaker Movement is a partnership across 
the private sector, public sector and academia to “help 
create and encourage the development of digital making 
curriculums that are mapped to the objectives set by the 
Ministry of Education” (Ministry of Education & Malaysia  Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI       Section II