29
autonomy if teachers and head teachers are empowered 
to manage learning provision in their respective schools. If 
not, the implementation of any AI-powered tool can only 
do so much.
Teachers will therefore remain at the frontline of education; 
it is misinformed to say that AI can replace teachers. 
Arguments to the contrary reduce the teaching profession 
to the performance of solely cognitive and routine tasks, 
ignore the research that stresses the importance of a 
human mentor to support the learning process and 
neglect the creative and socio-emotional aspects of 
teaching, which go beyond mere knowledge transmission 
(Bali, 2017). Furthermore, teachers will decide how and 
when it would be appropriate to use AI-enabled tools. 
As such, the development of these AI-enabled tools 
and their integration into the delivery of educational 
programmes must be a participatory process, designed 
to “deliver the support that educators need – not the 
support that technologists or designers think they need” 
(Luckin et al., 2016). That said, AI-enabled technologies 
do provide opportunities to automate certain routine and 
administrative tasks such as grading and recordkeeping, 
which teachers are currently performing. Automating 
such tasks can free up teachers’ time, effectively allowing 
teachers to devote more energy to the creative, empathetic 
and inspirational aspects of their profession.
Given the eventual widespread use of AI in the classroom, 
teacher training is therefore a critical aspect of empowering 
teachers to use educational data to improve pedagogy. To 
be able to use AI-enabled technologies effectively, teachers 
would also need assimilate new competencies, specifically 
(Luckin et al., 2016):
●●A clear understanding of how AI-enabled systems can 
facilitate learning provision, so that they can make 
sound value judgments on new AI-enabled educational 
products;
●●Research and data analytical skills, so that they can 
interpret data provided by AI-enabled systems, ask useful 
questions about the data and provide students with 
feedback based on insights that arise from the data; and
●●New management skills, so that they can effectively 
manage both human and AI resources at their disposal.●●A critical perspective on the ways Ai and digital 
technologies affect human lives and new frameworks of 
computational thinking and digital skills can increment 
students´ capacities to understand the power, the 
dangers and the possibilities of AI.
●●Enable teachers to take advantage of AI taking over 
repetitive tasks to bring in more human capabilities they 
may not have had time for before: mentorship, emotional 
support, interpersonal skills, etc.
●●Help learners acquire those skills and competencies that 
are likely not to be replaced by machines.
Teacher training programmes should therefore account for 
these new competencies, both at the in-service and pre-
service level. 
Not only teachers have to prepare to understand and grasp 
the new technological possibilities digital and AI-powered 
education are developing. The history of innovations in 
education is full of lost promises that fail to understand how 
teachers work and the culture of schools. To create new 
educational possibilities, AI developers have to participate 
in a new dialogues with educators, content designers and 
cross-disciplinary specialists. 
At present, two distinct communities have evolved, namely 
learning analytics (LA) and Educational Data Mining (EDM). 
These two communities significantly overlap in terms of 
objectives and techniques, but they differ in that EDM 
researchers, originating from the community of intelligent 
tutoring systems, work on very small-scale cognition. EDM 
methods are drawn from a variety of disciplines, including 
data mining, machine learning, psychometrics of statistics, 
information visualisation and computational modelling. 
The field of learning analytics is more focused on learning 
content management systems and large-scale test results. 
To do so, they combine institutional data, statistical analysis 
and predictive modelling to identify which learners need 
help and how instructors can change academic behaviour. 
Future developments in AI-powered software in education 
must build strong bridges between cognition, classrooms 
and large-scale test scores. The challenge is to create 
new pedagogical dialogues at micro and macro levels of 
understanding education. For instance, we should analyse 
systems thinking, critical thinking, self-regulation and active 
listening. Data analysis should move across individual 
tutoring systems and evaluate students’ skills for the 21st 
Century (Woolf et al. 2013). AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III