A reference book on the AI domain: Russell, Stuart J. &  Peter 
Norvig called Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach  
(2010) . Refer to the figure below for definitions based on 
different dimensions.
The definitions in the top quadrants address thought 
processes and reasoning while the ones in the bottom 
quadrants address behaviour. The definitions on the left 
measure success in terms of fidelity to human performance 
while the ones on the right measure success against an 
ideal performance measure, referred to as rationality. A 
system is rational if it does the “right thing” , given what 
it knows. A human-centred approach must be, at least 
partly, an empirical science, involving observations and 
hypotheses about human behaviour. A rationalist approach 
involves a combination of mathematics and engineering.
The full references in the image are:
 − Haugeland, John. Artificial intelligence: The very 
idea. MIT press, 1989.
 − Bellman, Richard. An introduction to artificial 
intelligence: Can computers think? Thomson 
Course Technology, 1978.
 − Charniak, Eugene. Introduction to artificial 
intelligence. Pearson Education India, 1985.
 − Winston Patrick. Henry. Artificial Intelligence (Third 
edition). Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1992. − Kurzweil, Ray, et al. The age of intelligent machines. 
Vol. 579. Cambridge, MA: MIT press, 1990.
 − Rich, Elaine, and Kevin Knight. Artificial intelligence. 
Tata McGraw-Hill, 1991.
 − Poole, David Lynton, Alan K. Mackworth, and Randy 
Goebel. Computational intelligence: a logical 
approach. Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1998.
 − Nilsson, Nils J., and Nils Johan Nilsson. Artificial 
intelligence: a new synthesis. Morgan Kaufmann, 
1998.
Different proposed definitions for:
Machine Learning
i)  The field of Machine Learning seeks to answer the 
question “How can we build computer systems that 
automatically improve with experience, and what 
are the fundamental laws that govern all learning 
processes?
 − Mitchell, Tom Michael. The discipline of machine 
learning. Vol. 9. Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon 
University, School of Computer Science, Machine 
Learning Department, 2006.
ii)   Machine learning algorithms can figure out how to 
perform important tasks by generalising from examples.
Thinking Humanly
‘The exciting new effort to make computers think… 
machines with minds, in the full and literal sense. ’ 
(Haugeland, 1985)
‘[The automation of] activities that we associate with 
human thinking, activities such as decision-making, 
problem-solving, learning… ’ (Bellman, 1978)Thinking Rationally
‘The study of mental faculties through the use of 
computational models. ’ (Charniak & McDermott, 1985)
‘The study of the computations that make it possible 
to perceive, reason, and act. ’ (Winston, 1992)
Acting Humanly
‘The art of creating machines that perform functions 
that require intelligence when performed by people. ’ 
(Kurzweil, 1990)
‘The study of how to make computers do things at 
which, at the moment, people are better. ’ (Rich & 
Knight, 1991)Acting Rationally
‘Computational Intelligence is the study of the design 
of intelligent agents. ’ (Poole, et al., 1998)
‘AI… is concerned with intelligent behavior in 
artifacts. ’ (Nilsson, 1998)ANNEX       AI definition and related concepts