30
Fourth challenge: Developing quality and 
inclusive data systems 
Given that data fuel AI, complete, reliable and timely data 
constitute an important prerequisite for installing AI-
enhanced data analytics systems. A fully functional data 
analytics system with comprehensive and up-to-date data 
opens possibilities for AI-enabled predictive and machine 
learning algorithms. Data enable intelligent systems. 
Without the needed data, no sort of algorithm, no matter 
how sophisticated, can function properly. As such, a data-
rich environment is a prerequisite to AI-enabled systems. 
However, data availability is a necessary yet insufficient 
condition. It follows that any AI-enabled system is only 
as good as the data it contains. After all, inaccurate data 
are likely to make machine learning algorithms generate 
incorrect outputs. Indeed, predictive algorithms can only 
make complete and accurate predictions if the data they are 
handling are itself complete and accurate.
However, many countries still struggle with collecting 
basic yet critical educational data. The UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics (UIS) cites the many hindrances to the efficient 
and effective collection and use of educational data (UIS, 
2018b). Educational data should be open and usable at the 
school level. An EMIS should be able to generate analyses 
that are granular enough to help teachers and education 
administrators understand the key challenges while also 
being able to aggregate data to reveal trends that can 
inform policy development.
Furthermore, data must also account for inequities, 
providing insights, for example, on learning outcomes 
disaggregated according to demographic factors 
such as age, gender and socio-economic background 
(UNESCO, 2018). The ability to generate such analyses 
allows education systems to determine the educational 
disadvantage experienced by specific marginalised or 
vulnerable populations. However, data on disadvantaged 
groups still currently tend to be incomplete and even 
absent. For instance, a 2016 study by UNICEF showed 
that, out of 40 countries surveyed, 19 had no data at all on 
children with disabilities; for many countries that did have 
data, it was only specified that the child was on a special-
needs programme but failed to indicate the disability 
(UNICEF, 2016). Data on refugees and internally displaced 
populations (IDPs) also remain limited, with most of those 
data coming from camps and camp-like settings (UNESCO & UNHCR, 2016). Refugees studying in national schools 
are also frequently not identified as refugees in national 
education statistics, thus making it more difficult to monitor 
and evaluate their learning outcomes. Furthermore, since 
the collection and analysis of education data usually 
happens on a once-a-year basis, the data are often unable 
to convey accurate information on transient populations.
It is also important to note that the education system 
itself is not the only source of data relevant to learning 
provision. Household data, as specifically mentioned by the 
UIS, can also provide insights on exogenous factors that 
might account for learning difficulties at school. The same 
can be said of data coming from other ministries, e.g. the 
ministry of health. Data on nutrition can be used to report 
on, for instance, the design of school meal programmes. 
This speaks to the importance of data integration: When 
government systems are integrated, more data become 
shared and available across all sectors. This data sharing 
means that more data can be used by the education sector 
to run AI algorithms and consequently, more possibilities to 
generate analyses, models or predictions. 
The understanding that data are capable of yielding direct 
value and are useful across all levels of the education 
system is critical to ensuring data quality. In fact, the extent 
of data use at least partly determines data quality (Orr, 
1998). After all, the more useful data is to a stakeholder, 
the more incentive there is for that stakeholder to ensure 
that the data is produced in an accurate and timely 
manner. Open data can also be an impetus for data use. 
The ability to access data and metadata does not only allow 
intermediaries (e.g. NGOs) and community stakeholders 
to draw direct value and mine insights from education 
data, but this transparency also creates a greater sense 
of accountability on the part of ministries of education 
for the improvement of educational outcomes (UNESCO, 
2018). Open data are anchored on the discourse of data 
‘prosumption’ , i.e., stakeholders do not only consume data 
but are also involved in data production and interpretation 
(Williamson, 2015). Stakeholders must have access to data 
analytics if they are to be involved in the improvement of 
the education system. 
AI-powered technologies provide opportunities to make 
educational data more useful at each level of the education 
system. Learning analytics, for instance, as demonstrated 
in the examples provided in this paper, provide educators 
with real-time insights about students’ individual progress Section III        AI in education - challenges and policy implications