8Executive Summary    
solutions, namely (1) AI to promote personalisation 
and better learning outcomes, and (2) Data analytics in 
Education Management Information Systems (EMIS).
Section II, “Preparing learners to thrive in an AI-
saturated future” , explores different means by which 
governments and educational institutions are rethinking 
and reworking learning programmes to prepare learners 
for the increasing presence of AI in all aspects of human 
activity. It is based on examples from different contexts 
and also divided in two subsections, namely (1) A new 
curriculum for a digital and AI-powered world, and 
(2) Strengthening AI capacities through post-basic 
education and training.
Section III, “Challenges and policy implications “ . 
The last section addresses the challenges and policy 
implications that need to be part of the global and local 
conversations surrounding the possibilities and risks of 
introducing AI in education and preparing students for 
an AI-powered context.
A brief introduction to AI
Since its ‘birth’ at the 1956 Dartmouth Conference, the 
field of artificial intelligence (AI) has continued garnering the interest of a and industries alike. Few technological 
developments in recent history have been as polarising 
as AI. While AI has be en around for nearly 60 years, it 
nevertheless remained a fringe technology until only 
recently because of sweeping changes in recent years 
(referred to as “the big leap”), entailing the abundance of 
data (big data), economic access to computing power and 
advances in Machine Learning. The present paper uses 
terms such as AI and Big Data, the two main technology 
buzzwords of the current decade, and other concepts such 
as machine learning, learning analytics, etc. as technologies 
that work well together. It should be borne in mind that 
these terms are sometimes used interchangeably in the 
news and articles, thus creating confusion. With a view to 
avoiding such confusion, this subsection contains a brief 
explanation of these concepts, clarifying their differences 
and how they work together (there is also a complementary 
definition in the annex hereto).
While there is no straightforward and consensual definition 
of AI, several classic definitions of AI are nevertheless 
provided from the different literature, including McCarthy 
(2006), Zhong (2006), ITU (2018).
In this paper, AI is best understood considering different 
dimensions (see Figure 1)
Thinking Humanly
‘The exciting new effort to make computers think… 
machines with minds, in the full and literal sense. ’ 
(Haugeland, 1985)
‘[The automation of] activities that we associate with 
human thinking, activities such as decision-making, 
problem-solving, learning… ’ (Bellman, 1978)Thinking Rationally
‘The study of mental faculties through the use of 
computational models. ’ (Charniak & McDermott, 1985)
‘The study of the computations that make it possible 
to perceive, reason, and act. ’ (Winston, 1992)
Acting Humanly
‘The art of creating machines that perform functions 
that require intelligence when performed by people. ’ 
(Kurzweil, 1990)
‘The study of how to make computers do things at 
which, at the moment, people are better. ’ (Rich & 
Knight, 1991)Acting Rationally
‘Computational Intelligence is the study of the design 
of intelligent agents. ’ (Poole, et al., 1998)
‘AI… is concerned with intelligent behavior in 
artifacts. ’ (Nilsson, 1998)Figure 1. Different dimensions of AI