39 − Domingos, Pedro. A few useful things to know about 
machine learning. Communications of the ACM 
55.10 (2012): 78-87.
iii)  Machine Learning is the science (and art) of 
programming computers so they can learn from data.
 − Géron, Aurélien. Hands-on machine learning with 
Scikit-Learn and TensorFlow: concepts, tools, and 
techniques to build intelligent systems. O’Reilly 
Media, Inc., 2017.
iv) Machine learning tools are concerned with endowing 
programs with the ability to “learn” and adapt.
 − Shalev-Shwartz, Shai, and Shai Ben-
David. Understanding machine learning: From 
theory to algorithms. Cambridge university press, 
2014.
Deep Learning 
i)   Deep learning is a specific subfield of machine 
learning: a new take on learning representations from 
data that puts an emphasis on learning successive 
layers of increasingly meaningful representations. 
The “deep” in deep learning isn’t a reference to any 
kind of deeper understanding achieved by the 
approach; rather, it stands for this idea of successive 
layers of representations. The depth of the model is 
the amount of layers contributing to a data model. 
Perhaps more suitable names for the field could have 
been layered representations learning and hierarchical 
representations learning. Modern deep learning often 
involves tens or even hundreds of successive layers of 
representations, which are all learned automatically 
from exposure to training data. Meanwhile, other 
approaches to machine learning tend to focus on 
learning only one or two layers of representations of the 
data and sometimes referred to as shallow learning.
In deep learning, these layered representations are 
(nearly always) learned via models called neural networks, 
structured in literal layers stacked on top of each other.
 − Chollet, Francois. Deep learning with python. 
Manning Publications Co., 2017.
ii)   The true challenge to artificial intelligence proved to 
be solving tasks that are easy for people to perform but 
hard for people to describe formally, e.g. problems that 
we solve intuitively and feel automatic like recognising 
spoken words or faces in images.Deep learning allows computers to learn from experience 
and understand the world in terms of a hierarchy of 
concepts, with each concept defined in terms of its 
relation to simpler concepts. By gathering knowledge 
from experience, this approach avoids the need for 
human operators to formally specify all the knowledge 
that a computer needs. The hierarchy of concepts allows 
computers to learn complicated concepts by building them 
out of simpler ones. A graph showing how these concepts 
are built on top of each other would be deep (with many 
layers). For this reason, this approach to AI is referred to as 
sdeep learning.
 − Goodfellow, Ian, et al. Deep learning. Vol. 1. 
Cambridge: MIT press, 2016.
Big Data
i)   Big data is a combination of data-management 
technologies that have evolved over time. Big data lets 
organisations store, manage and process vast amounts 
of data at the right speed and at the right time to gain 
the right insights. The key to understanding big data is 
that data should be managed so that they can meet the 
business requirement that a given solution is designed 
to support.
 − Hurwitz, Judith S., et al. Big data for dummies. John 
Wiley & Sons, 2013.
ii)  Big data is a blanket term for any collection of data sets 
so large or complex that it becomes difficult to process 
them using traditional data management techniques 
such as, for example, the RDBMS (relational database 
management systems).
The characteristics of big data are often referred to as the 
three Vs:
●●Volume — How much data are there?
●●Variety — How diverse are different types of data?
●●Velocity — At what speed are new data generated?
Often these characteristics are complemented with a 
fourth V, Veracity: How accurate are the data? These four 
properties make big data different from the data found in 
traditional data management tools.
 −Cielen, Davy, Arno Meysman, and Mohamed 
Ali. Introducing data science: big data, machine 
learning, and more, using Python tools. Manning 
Publications Co., 2016. AI definition and related concepts       ANNEX