6
Executive Summary    
Artificial Intelligence is a booming technological domain 
capable of altering every aspect of our social interactions. 
In education, AI has begun producing new teaching and 
learning solutions that are now undergoing testing in 
different contexts. AI requires advanced infrastructures and 
an ecosystem of thriving innovators, but what about the 
urgencies of developing countries? Will they have to wait 
for the “luxury” of AI? Or should AI be a priority to tackle as 
soon as possible to reduce the digital and social divide?
These are some of the questions guiding this document. 
In this regard, this urgent discussion should be taken up 
with a clear picture of what is happening and what can 
be done. This document gathers examples of how AI has 
been introduced in education worldwide, particularly in 
developing countries. It also sows the seeds of debates 
and discussions in the context of the 2019 Mobile 
Learning Week and beyond, as part of the multiple ways to 
accomplish Sustainable Development Goal 4, which targets 
education.
This document was drawn up for education policymakers 
and anticipates the extent to which AI affects the education 
sector so that informed and appropriate policy responses 
can be made in this regard.
The first section of this document analyses how AI can be 
used to improve learning outcomes. It presents examples of 
how AI technology can help education systems use data to 
improve educational equity and quality in the developing 
world. The section is divided into two topics that address 
pedagogical and system-wide solutions:
i) AI to promote personalisation and better learning 
outcomes, exploring how AI can favour access to education, 
collaborative environments and intelligent tutoring systems 
to support teachers. We briefly introduce cases from 
countries such as China, Uruguay, Brazil, South Africa and 
Kenya as examples experimental solutions conceived from 
public policies, philanthropic and private organisations. 
ii) Data analytics in Education Management Information 
Systems (EMIS). Here we present opportunities for 
improving a state’s capacity to manage large-scale 
educational systems by increasing data from schools and 
learning, presenting cases from United Arab Emirates, 
Kenya, Bhutan, Kyrgyzstan and Chile.
The second section “Preparing learners to thrive in an AI-
saturated future” explores the different means by which 
governments and educational institutions are rethinking 
and reworking educational programmes to prepare learners for the increasing presence of AI in all aspects of human 
activity. Based on examples from different contexts, the 
section is also divided into two main parts: 
i) “A new curriculum for a digital and AI powered world” 
elaborates further on the importance of advancing 
in digital competency frameworks for teachers and 
students. Some current initiatives are presented such as 
the “Global Framework to Measure Digital Literacy” and 
“ICT Competencies and Standards from the Pedagogical 
Dimension” . The discussion of the curricular dimension 
is broadened to include new experiences for developing 
computational thinking in schools with examples from 
the European Union, United Kingdom, Estonia, Argentina, 
Singapore and Malaysia.
ii) The second part is more focused on strengthening AI 
capacities through post-basic education and training. How 
can each country prepare the conditions for an AI-powered 
world? Here we present some of the most advanced 
cases from developed countries who are generating 
comprehensive plans to tackle this question, namely France, 
South Korea and China. We also present some cases from 
the technical and vocational education and training sector 
and some opportunities from non-formal and informal 
learning scenarios.
The last section addresses the challenges and policy 
implications that should be part of the global and local 
conversations regarding the possibilities and risks of 
introducing AI in education and preparing students for an 
AI-powered context. Six challenges are presented: 
The first challenge lies in developing a comprehensive 
view of public policy on AI for sustainable development. 
The complexity of the technological conditions needed 
to advance in this field require the alignment of multiple 
factors and institutions. Public policies have to work in 
partnership at international and national levels to create an 
ecosystem of AI that serves sustainable development. 
The second challenge is to ensure inclusion and equity 
for AI in education. The least developed countries are at 
risk of suffering new technological, economic and social 
divides with the development of AI. Some main obstacles 
such as basic technological infrastructure must be faced 
to establish the basic conditions for implementing new 
strategies that take advantage of AI to improve learning.
The third challenge is to prepare teachers for an AI-powered 
education while preparing AI to understand education, 
though this must nevertheless be a two-way road: teachers