4
Acknowledgments 
This Working Paper was produced by the Division for Policies and Lifelong Learning Systems in UNESCO’s Education 
Sector in partnership with ProFuturo. It was drafted by Francesc Pedro and Miguel Subosa (UNESCO), Axel Rivas (Udesa) 
and Paula Valverde (ProFuturo, Telefonica), with contributions from Sara Bin-Mahfooz and Satoko Yano (UNESCO), Richard 
Benjamins (LUCA, Telefonica),  Edson Prestes (UFRGS) and Javier Martinez Elicegui.
The paper also benefited from the inputs of the following experts: Borhene Chakroun, Keith Holmes, Valtencir Mendes, 
and Mark West (UNESCO), Javier Gonzalez Casado (ProFuturo), Pedro Antonio de Alarcon and  Javier Carro (LUCA, 
Telefonica), Manuel Martin-Merino (UPSA),  Massa Mufti (Sonbola),  Lars Stalling (Alpha, Telefonica), Susan Teltscher, and 
Kemal Huseinovic (ITU), Alexa Joyce (Microsoft),  Lauren Dawes (GSMA) and Andrea Naletto.
Abstract
Artificial Intelligence is a booming technological domain capable of altering every aspect of our social interactions. In 
education, AI has begun producing new teaching and learning solutions that are now undergoing testing in different 
contexts. This working paper, written for education policymakers, anticipates the extent to which AI affects the education 
sector to allow for informed and appropriate policy responses. This paper gathers examples of the introduction of AI in 
education worldwide, particularly in developing countries,  discussions in the context of the 2019 Mobile Learning Week 
and beyond, as part of the multiple ways to accomplish Sustainable Development Goal 4, which strives for equitable, 
quality education for all.
First, this paper analyses how AI can be used to improve learning outcomes, presenting examples of how AI technology 
can help education systems use data to improve educational equity and quality in the developing world. Next, the 
paper explores the different means by which governments and educational institutions are rethinking and reworking 
educational programmes to prepare learners for the increasing presence of AI in all aspects of human activity. The 
paper then addresses the challenges and policy implications that should be part of the global and local conversations 
regarding the possibilities and risks of introducing AI in education and preparing students for an AI-powered context.
Finally, this paper reflects on future directions for AI in education, ending with an open invitation to create new 
discussions around the uses, possibilities and risks of AI in education for sustainable development.