27
The best way to approach these initial questions for 
developing countries is through a comprehensive 
perspective on the topic. AI works within complex 
ecosystems of knowledge, innovation, business and 
new regulations. State policies should be capable of 
simultaneously addressing multiple questions to generate 
solutions and regulations, and create or support innovation 
ecosystems to bring the opportunities of AI to the field of 
education. 
The development of public policies regarding AI in 
education is still in its infancy, but it is a field that will most 
likely grow exponentially in the next ten years. It is difficult 
to find some common components at such an early stage, 
but some issues are starting to emerge as key factors shown 
by the study cases:
●● Public policies will not be able to cope with the speed 
of innovation in the field of AI with its traditional 
institutions. New agencies and institutions within the 
public sector are key to creating the AI intellectual and 
material context of sustainable development.
●●As part of this strategy, countries are developing labs and 
incubators with public funds to unfold initiatives in AI 
that promote public goods.
●●The state must create partnerships with the private sector 
to enlarge the AI ecosystem because the public sector will 
not be able to innovate at such a complex technological 
level alone.
●●To address ethical issues, it´s essential to consult experts 
and form teams to create blueprints and roadmaps in the 
uncertainty of the near future development of AI.
●●As part of the ecosystem, it´s essential to create new 
funding opportunities to develop academic and research 
facilities for the formation and training of AI specialists. 
●●The initiatives from these countries are unleashing the 
potential of AI in education with experiments of adaptive 
learning platforms, online assessments, automatic essay 
correction, specially design in context of large-scale 
technological penetration.
●●Some of these countries are also concerned with the 
ethical consequences of AI in education. Therefore, new 
regulations are being introduced to secure the use of AI 
by private companies in terms of data uses, privacy and 
the transparency of the ways in which algorithms are 
designed. ●●As part of the commitment to develop a complex 
ecosystem of AI as a common good, some governments 
are starting to enlarge the public understanding and 
public debate regarding these issues within the context 
of a new democratic ideal.
As presented in this paper, many countries have 
programmed significant budgetary commitments towards 
the creation of AI research centres and the recruitment 
and training of AI professionals. Indeed, strengthening AI 
training and research through higher education is seen as 
critical for building national expertise in AI. Governments 
are investing in research and advanced training in AI, which 
primarily occur at higher education institutions, through 
the establishment of academic centres of excellence in AI, 
university and research institute networks and scholarships 
to attract more talent into the field of AI. 
Public-private partnership is another important aspect of 
strengthening AI training and research. Countries cited in 
this paper have forged partnerships between industry and 
academia not only to share material and financial resources 
but also to ensure that educational programmes are well-
aligned with labour market needs. Partnerships should not 
be limited to industry and academia, though; intra-sector 
partnerships prove just as important as academia-industry 
partnerships. Partnerships between universities and 
research institutes foster collaborative research, which can 
accelerate the development of expertise in AI.
For these efforts to be effective, however, they must be 
aligned with a broader national strategy for AI, with a clear 
vision and clearly defined objectives. This is the case for 
all three examples described above. The elaboration of 
such strategies can be seen as anticipatory responses to AI: 
Rather than passively responding to developments in AI, 
the cited countries have chosen to build national expertise 
so they can lead the development and dialogue in this 
regard. An effective education sector response to AI should 
not be merely ‘palliative’ . The education sector is well-placed 
to shape a country’s vision for AI since it is, after all, the 
cradle of future expertise in the field.
At this point, we promote the creation of an AI Observatory 
to look at relevant initiatives of AI in education and inform 
on national and international AI strategy plans (see 
Conclusions).
To understand the potential of these initiatives and the 
situation of other countries, attention needs be shifted 
towards benchmarking parameters. This will allow 
initiatives to compare themselves and identify where they  AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III