31
and learning patterns, thus allowing the former to make 
real-time adjustments to their instructional approach. 
Furthermore, the real-time generation of data could also 
mean that student-level data are constantly updated, i.e., 
if the learning analytics systems used at the school level 
directly feed into a system-level EMIS. This real-time data 
capture also provides opportunities to expand data sets 
on refugees and IDPs, given how traditional annual data 
collection schedules have produced insufficient data on 
such populations. Automated analytics also make it easier 
to disaggregate data according to various demographic 
factors, thus also making it relatively easier to identify 
sources of educational inequality. Of course, having an 
adequate amount of data is a prerequisite to producing 
such analyses. As such, countries with weak or incomplete 
data systems should focus on strengthening their data 
systems and bridging their data gaps.
It must be acknowledged, however, that while technologies 
for capturing data are indeed becoming more and 
more powerful, their costs could be prohibitively high, 
particularly for low- and middle-income countries. As 
such, the costs of such data systems need to be carefully 
examined and weighed against the potential benefits. 
While numerous governments are able to produce large 
amounts of education data to inform decision-making, 
many countries are still unable to do so (Custer et al., 
2018). Many efforts to remedy this problem have fallen 
short since they focused on the procurement of more 
sophisticated data reporting technologies, even when the 
issue lay in weak institutional processes that would result 
in faulty, incomplete and unused data. This harks back to 
strong institutional and organisational processes being 
a prerequisite to the installation of any data-dependent 
system, including AI technology. As such, institutional 
capacity-building becomes a crucial investment, particularly 
for countries whose data processes remain ad hoc and thus 
unable to produce consistent, relevant and timely data.
Fifth challenge: making research on AI in 
education significant
While we can reasonably expect increased research on AI 
in education in the coming years, it is also worth recalling 
the difficulties that the education sector has in taking stock 
of educational research in a significant way for practice 
and policy-making. The particular domain of research on 
educational technology clearly demonstrates that what researchers state as key research questions are quite often 
unrelated to teachers’ needs.
Technology’s potential to transform education has often 
been stated, though it is widely accepted that, for various 
reasons, this potential has yet to be harnessed as expected 
in developed countries (Conlon & Simpson, 2003; Cuban, 
2001; OECD, 2015; Sandholtz, 2001) or developing countries 
(Power, Gater, Grant, & Winters, 2014). When reviewing how 
decisions about technology use in education are made, 
it is striking how little is known about the effects of using 
technology on the quality of school education, and, more 
specifically, which particular uses of technology can result 
in better learning. Current developments regarding AI in 
education seem to be yet another instance of this well-
known phenomenon. This is a far from optimal state of 
affairs in poorer, resource-constrained developing contexts, 
where technology-based reforms are being pushed as the 
remedy for poor economic and social conditions. As the 
emphasis of many national initiatives in this context is 
usually put on granting access to technology as an intrinsic 
added-value, not much research has been conducted on 
the actual effects on learning.
There is a great need to sustain AI applications in 
education in ways that contribute to making schools 
better suited to the needs and activities of an AI-
empowered society. To do so effectively is not just 
a matter of financing, but also of monitoring and 
assessing what works in education, disseminating it 
in ways that are meaningful for teachers and suitable 
for scaling up. The pending issue of how AI use 
relates to educational performance can be explored 
through correlations and will be done even more in 
the future, but accompanying empirical research and 
experiments will have to be carried out so as to build 
a useful knowledge base. Rather than claiming that 
more research must be done, the conclusion is that 
research must be oriented differently.
It is well known that the adoption of an innovation 
essentially depends on end users perceptions of the 
advantages of applying a new strategy in relation 
to what they are currently using (Rogers, 2003). 
Applying this principle to the concrete example of 
technology in education, it might be expected that AI 
can support the design of new strategies to achieve 
the following: AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III