Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity       Section I
13
answering frequently asked questions over and over 
again in school settings. A dual-teacher model entailing 
a teacher and a virtual teaching assistant, which can take 
over the teacher’s routine task, frees up teachers’ time, 
enabling them to focus on student guidance and one-to-
one communication. Teachers have already started working 
together with AI assistants for the best outcomes for their 
learners.
The Computer Assisted Learning (CAL) field creates 
alternatives to support students´ learning strategies with 
digital and AI technology (Schittek Janda et al., 2001). AI 
can help map each student’s individual learning plans 
and trajectories, their strengths and weaknesses, subjects 
that cost more and are easily assimilated or learned, and 
learning preferences and activities. Using algorithms to 
help students navigate through different content paths, 
AI can personalise learning and improve opportunities 
for students with the help of their teachers and schools. 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems are part of the new 
technological possibilities to expand educational learning 
in developing countries as shown in recent reviews (Nye, 
2015).
Moreover, when considering the tremendous amount 
of time spent on grading tests and homework, AI as an 
assessment tool can be applied to learn how a teacher 
grades and thus free up the teacher’s time. AI is not only 
being used to grade multiple choice tests, but also to assess 
essays1. 
These opportunities are starting to unfold in developed 
countries. There is a myriad of applications presently 
undergoing tests across public and private initiatives 
alike2. This section presents some examples from 
developing countries to open a discussion regarding the 
possibilities and risks involved in bringing AI-powered 
software to personalise learning. We will begin with the 
case of China, unique in its scope, dimension and level of 
comprehensive perspective with cutting-edge technology 
and public-private partnerships, followed by Uruguay, 
a small developed country that became a bellwether in 
Latin America. Next, we will present some other state-
based, philanthropic and private initiatives in developing 
countries. These cases have been included as examples 
to illustrate the state of the art in this field in developing 
1 For example, in the United States, the Educational Testing Service developed automatic an NLP assessment system to co-grade essays in 
standardised tests.
2 Refer to the examples presented during Mobile Learning Week 2019: https://en.unesco.org/mlw/2019.countries and do not aim to be an exhaustive list of every 
initiative worldwide.
China is a good country to start with, since it is in many 
ways unique insofar as its size and recent technological 
development, and also in its recent economic growth 
(although it remains a developing country in formal 
definitions). China has 730 million internet users. In 2016, 
the government launched a plan to become the largest 
pole of AI development in the world by 2030. China 
set its national AI strategy for education as part of this 
technological vision (Jing, 2018).
The state-centred initiative will rely on private pillars. 
Hujiang, a private digital education company, is 
developing image and voice recognition software capable 
of understanding student facial expressions to give AI 
feedback online. Liulishuo is an adaptive platform that 
teaches English to 600,000 students at the cost of a single 
teacher. Master Learner is developing a “Superteacher” 
capable of answering 500 million simultaneous questions 
from students preparing for the Gaokao university entrance 
examination. 
In 2016, China’s Ministry of Education established that every 
educational branch of local governments must allocate at 
least 8% of its budget to the digitisation of education. With 
95% of schools connected to the internet, the country is 
ready for the largest digital education experiment in the 
world. One of the biggest breakthroughs so far in China 
is the experimental design to correct essays with AI. The 
country started to work with 60,000 schools for automatic 
essay correction with a level of precision matching humans 
in 92% of the cases. The essay grading machine is based on 
neural network AI and is improving its ability to understand 
human language by using deep learning algorithms 
to plough through essays written by Chinese students 
and compare notes with human teachers’ grading and 
comments. “It has evolved continuously and become so 
complex, we no longer know for sure what it was thinking 
and how it made a judgment, ” said one of the project 
researchers (Chen, 2018).
In Latin America, several initiatives have been pushing 
the introduction of computers in education at a large 
scale in recent years (Sunkel & Trucco, 2012). Plan Ceibal  
in Uruguay is probably the most advanced state agency