A APPENDIX
In this section, we provide necessary information for reproducing
our insights and experimental results. These include the quantita-
tive results and qualitative visualization on more datasets that can
further support our insights, the proofs of lemmas, and the detailed
description of datasets.
A.1 Test Accuracy and Smoothness Metric
Value of GCNs
Test accuracy and smoothness metric value of node representations
with different numbers of GCN layers are shown in Figure 7 for
CiteSeer and PubMed. They have the same trends as we discussed
in Section 3.2.
Figure 7: Test accuracy and smoothness metric value of node
representations with different numbers of GCN layers on
CiteSeer and PubMed. "Init" means the smoothness metric
value of the original data.
A.2 Test Accuracy and Smoothness Metric
Value of Models as Eq.(6)
Test accuracy and smoothness metric value of node representations
with different numbers of layers adopted in models as Eq.(6) are
shown in Figure 8 for CiteSeer and PubMed. It is illustrated that
after decoupling transformation from propagation, we can apply
deeper models without suffering from performance degradation.
Figure 8: Test accuracy and smoothness metric value of node
representations with different numbers of layers adopted in
models as Eq.(6) on CiterSeer and PubMed.
A.3 Visualization of Representations Derived
by GCNs
The t-SNE visualization of node representations derived by different
numbers of GCN layers are shown in Figure 9 and 10 for CiteSeerand PubMed, respectively. The node representations become indis-
tinguishable when several layers are deployed.
A.4 Visualization of Representations Derived
by Models as Eq.(6)
The t-SNE visualization of node representations derived by model
as Eq.(6) with different numbers of layers are shown in Figure 11
and 12 for CiteSeer and PubMed, respectively. It is shown that after
the entanglement of representation transformation and propaga-
tion is removed, the model with a large receptive field, such as
50-hop, still generating distinguishable node representations. The
over-smoothing issue affects the distinguishability only when an
extremely receptive field, like 200-hop, is adopted.
A.5 Proof for Lemma 3.3
Proof. Ifλis an eigenvalue of bA⊕with left eigenvector vl
and right eigenvector vr, we have vlbA⊕=λvlandbA⊕vr=
λvr, i.e.vleD−1eA=λvlandeD−1eAvr=λvr. We right multi-
ply the first eigenvalue equation with eD−1
2and left multiply the
second eigenvalue equation with eD1
2, respectively. Then we can
derive(vleD−1
2)eD−1
2eAeD−1
2=λ(vleD−1
2)andeD−1
2eAeD−1
2(eD1
2vr)=
λ(eD1
2vr). Hence, λis also an eigenvalue of bA⊙with left eigenvector
vleD−1
2and right eigenvector eD1
2vr. FrombA⊙tobA⊕, we can prove
it in the same way. □
A.6 Proof for Lemma 3.4
Proof. We first prove that bA⊕andbA⊙always have an eigen-
value 1 and all eigenvalues λsatisfy|λ|≤1. We have bA⊕eT=eT
because each row of bA⊕sums to 1. Therefore, 1is an eigenvalue
ofbA⊕. Suppose that there exists an eigenvalue λthat|λ|>1with
eigenvector v, then the length of the right side in bAk
⊕v=λkv
grows exponentially when kgoes to infinity. This indicates that
some entries of bAk
⊕shoulde be larger than 1. Nevertheless, all en-
tries of bAk
⊕are positive and each row of bAk
⊕always sums to 1, hence
no entry of bAk
⊕can be larger than 1, which leads to contradiction.
From Lemma 3.3, bA⊕andbA⊙have the same eigenvalues. There-
fore,bA⊕andbA⊙always have an eigenvalue 1 and all eigenvalues
λsatisfy|λ|≤1.
According to the Perron-Frobenius Theorem for Primitive Ma-
trices [ 27], there exists an eigenvalue rfor an n×nnon-negative
primitive matrix such that r>|λ|for any eigenvalue λ,rand
the eigenvectors associated with rare unique. The property that
the given graph is connected can guarantee that for ∀i,j:∃ks.t.
bAk
⊕[i,j]>0. Furthermore, there must exsit some kthat can make
all entries of bAkto be simultaneously positive because self-loops
are included in the graph. Formally, ∃k:bAk
⊕[i,j]>0for∀i,j. Hence,
bA⊕is a non-negative primitive matrix. From the Perron-Frobenius
Theorem for Primitive Matrices, bA⊕always has an eigenvalue 1
with unique associated eigenvectors and all other eigenvalues λ
satisfy|λ|<1. Based on Lemma 3.3, this property can be extended
Research Track Paper
 
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
347