Figure 1: t-SNE visualization of node representations derived by different numbers of GCN layers on Cora. Colors represent
node classes.
deep graph neural networks. We observe and argue that the en-
tanglement of representation transformation and propagation is
a prominent factor that compromises the network performance.
After decoupling these two operations, deeper graph neural net-
works can be built to learn graph node representations from large
receptive fields without suffering from performance degradation.
The over-smoothing issue is shown to influence the performance
only when extremely large receptive fields are adopted. Further,
we provide a theoretical analysis of the above observation when
building very deep models, which aligns with the conclusion of
over-smoothing issue and can serve as a rigorous description of
the over-smoothing issue.
3.1 Quantitative Metric for Smoothness
Smoothness is a metric that reflects the similarity of node repre-
sentations. Here, we first define a similarity metric between the
representations of node iand node jwith their Euclidean distance:
D(xi,xj)=1
2



xi
∥xi∥−xj
∥xj∥



, (3)
where xiis the feature representation of node iand∥·∥denotes the
Euclidean norm. The Euclidean distance is a simple but effective
way to measure the similarity of two representations, especially in
high dimensional space. Smaller Euclidean distance value incidates
higher similarity of two representations. To remove the influence
of the magnitude of feature representations, we use normalized
node representations to compute their Euclidean distance, thus
constraining D(xi,xj)in the range of[0,1].
Based on the similarity metric in Eq.(3), we further propose a
smoothness metric SMV ifor node i, which is computed as the
average distance between node ito other nodes:
SMV i=1
n−1Õ
j∈V,j,iD(xi,xj). (4)
Hence, SMV imeasures the similarity of node i’s representations
to the entire graph. For instance, a node in the periphery or a leaf
node usually has a large smoothness metric value. Further, we can
useSMV Gto represent the smoothness metric value of the whole
graph G. Its mathematical expression is defined as:
SMV G=1
nÕ
i∈VSMV i. (5)
Here, SMV Gis negatively related to the overall smoothness of
nodes’ representations in graph G.
3.2 Why Deeper GNNs Fail?
In this section, we utilize our proposed smoothness metric to inves-
tigate the performance deterioration phenomenon in deep graph
Figure 2: Test accuracy and smoothness metric value of node
representations with different numbers of GCN layers on
Cora. "Init" means the smoothness metric value of the orig-
inal data.
neural networks. Here, we mainly use the GCN layer for anal-
ysis, but the main results can be easily applied to other graph
deep learning methods. Besides using our proposed metric from
the quantitative perspective, we employ a data visualization tech-
nique t-SNE [ 19]. t-SNE provides an interpretable visualization,
especially on high-dimensional data. t-SNE is capable of capturing
both the local structure and the global structure like clusters in
high-dimensional data, which is consistent with the classification
of nodes. Hence, we utilize t-SNE to demonstrate the discriminative
power of node representations in the graph.
We develop a series of graph neural networks (GNNs) with differ-
ent depths in terms of the number of GCN layers, and evaluate them
on three citation datasets; those are Cora, CiteSeer and PubMed [ 26].
In particular, we also include a graph neural network with depth of
0, which is approximated with a multi-layer perceptron network. A
GNN with depth of 0 can be viewed as aggregating information from
a 0-hop neighborhood, which only considers node features while
with the graph structure ignored. We conduct 100 runs for each
model on each dataset, using the same data split scheme as [11].
The result on Cora is illustrated in Figure 2. We provide results
on other datasets in Section A.1 in the appendix. We can observe
that test accuracy increases as the rise of the number of layers in
the beginning, but degrades dramatically from 3 layers. Besides,
from the t-SNE visualization on Cora in Figure 1 (t-SNE visual-
ization results of other datasets are provided in Appendix A.3.),
the discriminative power of the node representations derived by
different numbers of GCN layers has the similar trend. The node
representations generated by multiple GCN layers, like 6 layers,
are very difficult to be separated.
Research Track Paper
 
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
340