Towards Deeper Graph Neural Networks
Meng Liu
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
mengliu@tamu.eduHongyang Gao
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
hongyang.gao@tamu.eduShuiwang Ji
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
sji@tamu.edu
ABSTRACT
Graph neural networks have shown significant success in the field of
graph representation learning. Graph convolutions perform neigh-
borhood aggregation and represent one of the most important
graph operations. Nevertheless, one layer of these neighborhood
aggregation methods only consider immediate neighbors, and the
performance decreases when going deeper to enable larger recep-
tive fields. Several recent studies attribute this performance dete-
rioration to the over-smoothing issue, which states that repeated
propagation makes node representations of different classes indis-
tinguishable. In this work, we study this observation systematically
and develop new insights towards deeper graph neural networks.
First, we provide a systematical analysis on this issue and argue
that the key factor compromising the performance significantly
is the entanglement of representation transformation and propa-
gation in current graph convolution operations. After decoupling
these two operations, deeper graph neural networks can be used
to learn graph node representations from larger receptive fields.
We further provide a theoretical analysis of the above observation
when building very deep models, which can serve as a rigorous and
gentle description of the over-smoothing issue. Based on our theo-
retical and empirical analysis, we propose Deep Adaptive Graph
Neural Network (DAGNN) to adaptively incorporate information
from large receptive fields. A set of experiments on citation, co-
authorship, and co-purchase datasets have confirmed our analysis
and insights and demonstrated the superiority of our proposed
methods.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Mathematics of computing →Graph algorithms ;•Com-
puting methodologies →Artificial intelligence ;Neural net-
works.
KEYWORDS
deep learning, graph representation learning, graph neural net-
works
ACM Reference Format:
Meng Liu, Hongyang Gao, and Shuiwang Ji. 2020. Towards Deeper Graph
Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7998-4/20/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403076Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining USB Stick (KDD ’20), August 23–
27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403076
1 INTRODUCTION
Graphs, representing entities and their relationships, are ubiquitous
in the real world, such as social networks, point clouds, traffic net-
works, knowledge graphs, and molecular structures. Recently, many
studies focus on developing deep learning approaches for graph
data, leading to rapid development in the field of graph neural net-
works. Great successes have been achieved for many applications,
such as node classification [ 7,9,11,12,21,30,31,33], graph clas-
sification [ 6,8,14,18,32,34,35,38] and link prediction [ 1,36,37].
Graph convolutions adopt a neighborhood aggregation (or message
passing) scheme to learn node representations by considering the
node features and graph topology information together, among
which the most representative method is Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) [ 11]. GCN learns representation for a node by
aggregating representations of its neighbors iteratively. However,
a common challenge faced by GCN and most other graph con-
volutions is that one layer of graph convolutions only consider
immediate neighbors and the performance degrades greatly when
we apply multiple layers to leverage large receptive fields. Several
recent works attribute this performance degradation to the over-
smoothing issue [ 3,15,33], which states that representations from
different classes become inseparable due to repeated propagation. In
this work, we study this performance deterioration systematically
and develop new insights towards deeper graph neural networks.
We first systematically analyze the performance degradation
when stacking multiple GCN layers by using our quantitative met-
ric for node representation smoothness measurement and a data
visualization technique. We observe and argue that the main fac-
tor compromising the performance greatly is the entanglement of
representation transformation and propagation. After decoupling
these two operations, it is demonstrated that deeper graph neu-
ral networks can be deployed to learn graph node representations
from larger receptive fields without suffering from performance
deterioration. The over-smoothing issue is shown to affect per-
formance only when extremely large receptive fields are utilized.
We further give a theoretical analysis of the above observation
when building very deep models, which shows that graph node
representations will become indistinguishable when depth goes
infinity. This aligns with the over-smoothing issue. The previous
descriptions of the over-smoothing issue simplify the assumption
of non-linear activation function [ 15,33] or make approximations
of different probabilities [ 33]. Our theoretical analysis can serve as
a more rigorous and gentle description of the over-smoothing issue.
Based on our theoretical and empirical analysis, we propose an effi-
cient and effective network, termed as Deep Adaptive Graph Neural
Research Track Paper
 
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
338