Figure 3: t-SNE visualization of node representations derived by models as Eq.(6) with different numbers of layers on Cora.
Colors represent node classes.
Figure 4: Test accuracy and smoothness metric value of node
representations with different numbers of layers adopted in
models as Eq.(6) on Cora.
Several studies [ 3,15] attribute this performance degradation
phenomenon to the over-smoothing issue. However, we question
this view for the following two reasons. First, we hold that the
over-smoothing issue only happens when node representations
propagate repeatedly for a large number of iterations, especially
for a graph with sparsely connected edges. As shown in Table 1,
all these three citation datasets have a small value of edge density,
hence several propagation iterations are not enough to make over-
smoothing happen, theoretically. Second, as shown in Figure 2, the
smoothness metric value of graph node representations has a slight
downward trend as the number of propagation iterations increases.
According to [ 15], the node representations suffering from the over-
smoothing issue will converge to the same value or be proportional
to the square root of the node degree, where the corresponding
smoothness metric value should be close to 0, computed by our
quantitative metric. However, the metric value in our experiments
is relatively far from the ideal over-smoothing situation.
In this work, we argue that it is the entanglement of transfor-
mation and propagation that significantly compromise the perfor-
mance of deep graph neural networks. Our argument is originated
from the following two intuitions. First, the entanglement of rep-
resentation transformation and propagation makes the number of
parameters in transformation intertwined with the receptive fields
in propagation. As illustrated in Eq.(1), one hop propagation re-
quires a transformation function, thus leading to a large number
of parameters when considering a large receptive field. Hence, it
might be hard to train a deep GNN with a large number of param-
eters. This can possibly explain why the performance of multiple
GCN layers in Figure 2 fluctuates greatly. Second, representationpropagation and transformation should be viewed as two separate
operations. Note that the class of a node can be totally predictable
by its initial features, which explains why MLP, as shown in Figure
2 and 1, performs well without using any graph structure informa-
tion. Propagation based on the graph structure can help to ease the
classification task by making node representations in the same class
to be similar, under the assumption that connected nodes usually
belong to the same class. For instance, intuitively, the class of a
document is completely determined by its content (i.e. its feature
derived by word embedding), instead of the references relation-
ships with other documents. Utilizing its neighbors’ features just
eases the classification of documents. Hence, representation trans-
formation and propagation play their distinct roles from feature
and structure aspects, respectively.
To support and verify our argument, we decouple the propaga-
tion and transformation in Eq.(2), leading to the following model:
Z=MLP(X)
Xout=softmax
bAkZ
.(6)
Z∈Rn×cdenotes the new feature matrix transformed from the
original feature matrix by an MLP network, where cis the number of
classes. After the transformation, we apply a k-steps propagation to
derive the output feature matrix Xout∈Rn×c. A softmax classifier
is applied to compute the classification probabilities. Notably, the
separation of transformation and propagation processes is also
adopted in [ 12] and [ 31] but for the sake of reducing complexity.
In this work, we analyze this scheme systematically and reveal
that it can help to build deeper models without suffering from
performance degradation, which has not been prioritized by the
community.
The test accuracy and smoothness metric value of representa-
tions with different numbers of layers adopted in Eq.(6) on Cora
are illustrated in Figure 4 (Results for other datasets are shown in
Appendix A.2). After resolving the entanglement of feature trans-
formation and propagation, deeper models is capable of leveraging
larger receptive fields without suffering from performance degrada-
tion. We can observe that the over-smoothing issue starts compro-
mising the performance at an extremely large receptive field, such
as 75-hop on Cora. The smoothness metric value decreases greatly
after that, which is demonstrated by the metric value of nearly 0.
Besides, from the t-SNE visualization in Figure 3 (The t-SNE visual-
ization results of other datasets are provided in Appendix A.4), deep
models with large receptive fields, like 50-hop, still generating dis-
tinguishable node representations, which is impressive compared
to the regular GCN model. In practice, we usually do not need an
extremely large receptive field because the highest shortest path
distance in a connected component usually is an acceptable small
Research Track Paper
 
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
341