Figure 9: t-SNE visualization of node representations derived by different numbers of GCN layers on CiteSeer. Colors represent
node classes.
Figure 10: t-SNE visualization of node representations derived by different numbers of GCN layers on PubMed. Colors repre-
sent node classes.
Figure 11: t-SNE visualization of node representations derived by models as Eq.(6) with different numbers of layers on CiteSeer.
Colors represent node classes.
Figure 12: t-SNE visualization of node representations derived by models as Eq.(6) with different numbers of layers on PubMed.
Colors represent node classes.
tobA⊙. We then compute the eigenvectors associated with eigen-
value 1. Obviously, eTis the right eigenvector of bA⊕associated
with eigenvalue 1. Next, assume vlis the left eigenvector of bA⊕
associated with eigenvalue 1and thus vleD−1
2is the left eigenvector
ofbA⊙associated with eigenvalue 1. We know bA⊙is a symmet-
ric matrix, whose left and right eigenvectors associated with the
same eigenvalue are simply each other’s transpose. Hence, we uti-
lizevleD−1
2=(eD1
2eT)Tto obtain vl=eeD. After deriving the
eigenvectors of bA⊕associated with eigenvalue 1, corresponding
eigenvectors of bA⊙can be computed by Lemma 3.3. □
A.7 Datasets Description and Statistics
Citation datasets. Cora, CiteSeer and PubMed [ 26] are represen-
tative citation network datasets where nodes and edges denote
documents and their citation relationships, respectively. Node fea-
tures are formed by bay-of-words representations for documents.
Each node has a label indicating what field the corresponding doc-
ument belongs to.
Co-authorship datasets. Coauthor CS and Coauthor Physics [ 28]
are co-authorship graphs datasets. Nodes denote authors, which
are connected by an edge if they co-authored a paper. Node featuresrepresent paper keywords for each author’s papers. Each node has a
label denoting the most active fields of study for the corresponding
author.
Co-purchase datasets. Amazon Computers and Amazon Photo [ 28]
are segments of the Amazon co-purchase graph [ 20] where nodes
are goods and edges denote that two goods are frequently bought
together. Node features are derived from bag-of-words representa-
tions for product reviews and class labels are given by the product
category.
The datasets statistics are summarized in Table 1.
Research Track Paper
 
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
348