number. Thus training signals can be propagated to the entire graph
with a small number of layers. This is demonstrated by the fact
that graph neural networks with 2 or 3 GCN layers usually perform
competitively. However, deep models with large receptive fields are
necessary to incorporate more information, especially with limited
training nodes under a semi-supervised learning setting.
3.3 Theoretical Analysis of Very Deep Models
The empirical analysis in the previous section shows that decou-
pling transformation and propagation can help to build much deeper
models which can leverage larger receptive fields to incorporate
more information. In this section, we provide a theoretical analysis
of the above observation when building very deep graph neural net-
works, which aligns with the over-smoothing issue. [ 15] and [ 33]
study the over-smoothing issue from the perspective of Laplacian
smoothing and nodes’ influence distribution, with several simpli-
fied assumptions like non-linear transformation and probability
approximations. After decoupling transformation from propaga-
tion, our theoretical analysis can serve as a more rigorous and
gentle description of the over-smoothing issue. In this section, we
strictly describe the over-smoothing issue for 2 typical propagation
mechanisms.
bA⊕=eD−1eAandbA⊙=eD−1
2eAeD−1
2, where eA=A+I, are two
frequently utilized propagation mechanisms. The row-averaging
normalization bA⊕is adopted in GraphSAGE [ 9] and DGCNN [ 38].
The symmetrical normalization scheme bA⊙is applied in GCN [ 11].
In the following, we describe the over-smoothing issue by proving
the convergence of bAk
⊕andbAk
⊙, respectively, when kgoes to infinity.
Lete=[1,1,···,1]∈R1×nbe a row vector whose all entries
are1. Function Ψ(x)=x
sum(x)normalizes a vector to sum to 1and
function Φ(x)=x
∥x∥normalizes a vector such that its magnitude
is1.
Theorem 3.1. Given a connected graph G,limk→∞bAk
⊕=Π⊕,
where Π⊕is the matrix with all rows are π⊕andπ⊕=Ψ(eeD).
Theorem 3.2. Given a connected graph G,limk→∞bAk
⊙=Π⊙,
where Π⊙=Φ(eD1
2eT)(Φ(eD1
2eT))T.
From the above two theorems, we can derive the exact conver-
gence value of bAk
⊕andbAk
⊙, respectively, when kgoes to infinity
in an infinite deep model. Hence, applying infinite layers to prop-
agate information iteratively is equivalent to utilizing Π⊕orΠ⊙
to propagate features by one step. Rows of Π⊕are the same and
rows of Π⊙are proportional to the square root value of the cor-
responding nodes’ degrees. Therefore, rows of Π⊕orΠ⊙are lin-
early inseparable and utilizing them as propagation mechanism
will generate indistinguishable representations, thereby leading to
the over-smoothing issue.
To prove these two theorems, we first introduce the following
two lemmas. The proofs of these two lemmas can be found in
Appendix A.5 and A.6.
Lemma 3.3. Given a graph G,λis an eigenvalue of bA⊕with left
eigenvector vl∈R1×nand right eigenvector vr∈Rn×1if and onlyifλis an eigenvalue of bA⊙with left eigenvector vleD−1
2∈R1×nand
right eigenvector eD1
2vr∈Rn×1.
Lemma 3.4. Given a connected graph G,bA⊕andbA⊙always have
an eigenvalue 1with unique associated eigenvectors and all other
eigenvalues λsatisfy|λ|<1. The left and right eigenvectors of bA⊕
associated with eigenvalue 1areeeD∈R1×nandeT∈Rn×1, respec-
tively. For bA⊙, they are eeD1
2∈R1×nandeD1
2eT∈Rn×1.
Proof. (of Theorem 3.1) bA⊕can be viewed as a transition matrix
because all entries are nonnegative and each row sums to 1. The
graph Gcan be further regarded as a Markov chain, whose transi-
tion matrix PisbA⊕. This Markov chain is irreducible and aperiodic
because the graph Gis connected and self-loops are included in the
connectivity. If a Markov chain is irreducible and aperiodic, then
limk→∞Pk=Π, where Πis the matrix with all rows equal to π
andπcan be computed by πP=π, s.t.Í
iπi=1[13]. It is obvious
thatπis the unique left eigenvector of Pand is normalized such
that all entries sum to 1. Hence, limk→∞bAk
⊕=Π⊕, where Π⊕is
the matrix with all rows are π⊕andπ⊕=Ψ(eeD)from Lemma
3.4. □
Proof. (of Theorem 3.2) Although bA⊙cannot be processed as
a transition matrix like bA⊕, it is a symmetric matrix, which is
diagonalizable. We have bA⊙=QΛQT, where Qis an orthogonal
matrix whose columns are normalized eigenvectors of bA⊙andΛ
is the diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are the eigenvalues.
Then the k-th power of bA⊙can be computed by
bAk
⊙=QΛQT···QΛQT=QΛkQT=kÕ
i=1λn
ivivT
i, (7)
where viis the normalized right eigenvector associated with λi.
From Lemma 3.4, bA⊙always has an eigenvalue 1with unique
associated eigenvectors and all other eigenvalues λsatisfy|λ|<1.
Hence, limk→∞bAk
⊙=Φ(eD1
2eT)(Φ(eD1
2eT))T. □
These two theorems hold for connected graphs that are fre-
quently studied in graph neural networks. For a disconnected graph,
these theorems can also be applied to each of its connected compo-
nents, which means that applying these propagation mechanisms
infinite times will generate indistinguishable node representations
in each connected components.
The above theorems reveal that over-smoothing will make node
representations inseparable and provide the exact convergence
value of frequently used propagation mechanisms. Theoretically, we
have proved that the over-smoothing issue is inevitable in very deep
models. Further, the convergence speed is a more important factor
that we should consider in practice. Mathematically, according
to Eq.(7), the convergence speed depends on the other eigenvalues
except 1of the propagation matrix, especially the second largest
eigenvalue. Intuitively, the propagation matrix is determined by the
topology information of the corresponding graph. This might be the
reason for our observation in Section 3.2 that a sparsely connected
graph suffers from the over-smoothing only when extremely deep
models are applied.
Research Track Paper
 
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
342