…...………...
MLP
x z h1 hk h2 
s 
s0 s1 s2 sk …...Transformation
Adaptive adjustmentPropagation
xout 
softmaxFigure 5: An illustration of the proposed Deep Adaptive Graph Neural Network (DAGNN) . For clarity, we show the pipeline
to generate the prediction for one node. Notation letters are consistent with Eq.(8) but bold lowercase versions are applied to
denote representation vectors. sis the projection vector that computes retainment scores for representations generating from
various receptive fields. s0,s1,s2, and skrepresent the retainment scores of z,h1,h2, and hk, respectively.
4 DEEP ADAPTIVE GRAPH NEURAL
NETWORK
In this section, we propose Deep Adaptive Graph Neural Network
(DAGNN) based on the above insights. Our DAGNN contributes
two prominent advantages. First, it decouples the representation
transformation from propagation so that large receptive fields can
be applied without suffering from performance degradation, which
has been verified in Section 3.2. Second, it utilizes an adaptive
adjustment mechanism that can adaptively balance the information
from local and global neighborhoods for each node, thus leading
to more discriminative node representations. The mathematical
expression of DAGNN is defined as
Z=MLP(X) ∈Rn×c
Hℓ=bAℓZ, ℓ=1,2,···,k∈Rn×c
H=stack(Z,H1,···,Hk)∈Rn×(k+1)× c
S=σ(Hs) ∈Rn×(k+1)×1
eS=reshape(S) ∈Rn×1×( k+1)
Xout=softmax
squeeze
eSH
∈Rn×c,(8)
where cis the number of node classes. Z∈Rn×cis the feature
matrix derived by applying an MLP network to the original fea-
ture matrix. We utilize the symmetrical normalization propagation
mechanism bA=eD−1
2eAeD−1
2, where eA=A+I.kis a hyperparam-
eter that indicates the depth of the model. s∈Rc×1is a trainable
projection vector. σ(·)is an activation function and we apply sig-
moid. stack, reshape andsqueeze are utilized to rearrange the data
dimension so that dimension can be matched during computation.
An illustration of our proposed DAGNN is provided in Figure 5.
There are three main steps in DAGNN: transformation, propagation
and adaptive adjustment. We first utilize a shared MLP network for
feature transformation. Theoretically, MLP can approximate any
measurable function [ 10]. Obviously, Zonly contains the informa-
tion of individual nodes themselves with no structure informationincluded. After transformation, a propagation mechanism bAis ap-
plied to gather neighborhood information. Hℓdenotes the represen-
tations obtained by propagating information from nodes that are
ℓ-hop away, hence Hℓcaptures the information from the subtree of
height ℓrooted at individual nodes. As the depth ℓincrease, more
global information is included in Hℓbecause the corresponding
subtree is deeper. However, it is difficult to determine a suitable ℓ.
Small ℓmay fail to capture sufficient and essential neighborhood in-
formation, while large ℓmay bring too much global information and
dilute the special local information. Furthermore, each node has a
different subtree structure rooted at this node and the most suitable
receptive field for each node should be different. To this end, we
include an adaptive adjustment mechanism after the propagation.
We utilize a trainable projection vector sthat is shared by all nodes
to generate retainment scores. These scores are used for represen-
tations that carry information from various range of neighborhood.
These retainment scores measure how much information of the cor-
responding representations derived by different propagation layers
should be retained to generate the final representation for each
node. Utilizing this adaptive adjustment mechanism, DAGNN can
adaptively balance the information from local and global neighbor-
hoods for each node. Obviously, the transformation process and the
adaptive adjustment process have trainable parameters and there
is no trainable parameter in the propagation process, leading to a
parameter-efficient model. Note that DAGNN is trained end-to-end,
which means that these three steps are considered together when
optimizing the network.
Decoupling representation transformation from propagation and
utilizing the learnable retainment score to adaptively adjust the
information from local and global neighborhoods make DAGNN
have the ability to generate suitable representations for specific
nodes from large and adaptive receptive fields. Besides, removing
the entanglement of representation transformation and propaga-
tion, we can derive a large neighborhood without introducing more
trainable parameters. Also, transforming representations to a low
dimensional space at an early stage makes DAGNN computationally
Research Track Paper
 
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
343