Network, to learn node representations by adaptively incorporating
information from large receptive fields. Extensive experiments on
citation, co-authorship, and co-purchase datasets demonstrate the
reasonability of our insights and the superiority of our proposed
network.
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
First, we introduce our notations used throughout this paper. Gen-
erally, we let bold uppercase letters represent matrices and bold
lowercase letters denote vectors. A graph is formally defined as
G=(V,E), where Vis the set of nodes (vertices) that are indexed
from 1tonandE⊆V×Vis the set of edges between nodes in V.
n=|V|andm=|E|are the numbers of nodes and edges, respec-
tively. In this paper, we consider unweighted and undirected graphs.
The topology information of the whole graph is described by the
adjacency matrix A∈Rn×n, where A(i,j)=1if an edge exists be-
tween node iand node j, otherwise 0. The diagonal matrix of node
degrees are denoted as D∈Rn×n, where D(i,i)=Í
jA(i,j).Ni
denotes the neighboring nodes set of node i. An attributed graph
has a node feature matrix X∈Rn×d, where each row xi∈Rd
represents the feature vector of node ianddis the dimension of
node features.
2.1 Graph Convolution Operations
Most popular graph convolution operations follow a neighborhood
aggregation (or message passing) fashion to learn a node represen-
tation by propagating representations of its neighbors and applying
transformation after that. The ℓ-th layer of a general graph convo-
lution can be described as
a(ℓ)
i=PROPAGATION(ℓ)n
x(ℓ−1)
i,{x(ℓ−1)
j|j∈Ni}o
x(ℓ)
i=TRANSFORMATION(ℓ)
a(ℓ)
i
.(1)
x(ℓ)
iis the representation of node iatl-th layer and x(0)
iis initial-
ized as node feature xi. Most graph convolutions, like GCN [ 11],
GraphSAGE [ 9], GAT [ 30], and GIN [ 32], can be obtained under this
framework by deploying different propagation and transformation
mechanisms.
Without losing generalization, we focus on the Graph Convolu-
tional Network (GCN) [ 11], the most representative graph convolu-
tion operation, in the following analysis. The ℓ-th layer forward-
propagation process is formulated as
X(ℓ)=σ
bAX(ℓ−1)W(ℓ)
, (2)
where X(ℓ)∈Rn×d(ℓ)andX(ℓ−1)∈Rn×d(ℓ−1)are the output and in-
put node representation matrices of layer ℓ.bA=eD−1
2eAeD−1
2, where
eA=A+Iis the adjacency matrix with added self-connections.
eD(i,i)=Í
jeA(i,j)is the diagonal node degree matrix. W(ℓ)∈
Rd(ℓ−1)×d(ℓ)is a layer-specific trainable weight matrix. σis a non-
linear activation function like ReLU [ 22]. Intuitively, GCN learns
representation for each node by propagating neighbors’ represen-
tations and conducting non-linear transformation after that. GCN
is originally applied for semi-supervised classification, where onlypartial nodes have training labels in a graph. Thanks to the propa-
gation process, representation of a labeled node carries the infor-
mation from its neighbors that are usually unlabeled, thus training
signals can be propagated to the unlabeled nodes.
2.2 Related Works
From Eq.(2), one layer GCN only considers immediate neighbors,
i.e. one-hop neighborhood. Multiple layers should be applied if
multi-hop neighborhood is needed. In practice, however, the perfor-
mance of GCN degrades greatly when multiple layers are stacked.
Several works reveal that stacking many layers can bring the over-
smoothing issue, which means that representations of nodes con-
verge to indistinguishable limits. To our knowledge, [ 15] is the
first attempt to demystify the over-smoothing issue in the GCN
model. The authors first demonstrate that the propagation pro-
cess of the GCN model is a special symmetric form of Laplacian
smoothing [ 29], which makes the representations of nodes in the
same class similar, thus significantly easing the classification task.
Then they show that repeatedly stacking many layers may make
representations of nodes from different classes indistinguishable.
The same problem is studied in [ 33] by analyzing the connection
of nodes’ influence distribution and random walk [ 17]. Recently,
SGC [ 31] is proposed by reducing unnecessary complexity in GCN.
The authors show that SGC corresponds to a low-pass-type filter
on the spectral domain, thus deriving smoothing features across a
graph. Another recent work [ 3] verify that smoothing is the nature
of most typical graph convolutions. It is showed that reasonable
smoothing makes graph convolutions work and over-smoothing
results in poor performance.
Due to the potential concern of the over-smoothing issue, a
limited neighborhood is usually used in practice and it is diffi-
cult to extend. However, long-range dependencies should be taken
into consideration, especially for peripheral nodes. Also, small re-
ceptive fields are not enough to propagate training signals to the
whole graph when the number of training nodes is limited under
a semi-supervised learning setting. [ 15] applies co-training and
self-training to overcome the limitation of shallow architectures.
A smoothness regularizer term and adaptive edge optimization
are proposed in [ 3] to relieve the over-smoothing problem. Jump-
ing Knowledge Network [ 33] deploys a layer-aggregation mecha-
nism to adaptively select a node’s sub-graph features at different
ranges rather than to capture equally smoothed representations for
all nodes. [ 12] utilizes the relationship between GCN and PageR-
ank [ 23] to develop a propagation mechanism based on personalize
PageRank, which can preserve the node’s local information while
gather information from a large neighborhood. Recently, Geom-
GCN [ 25] and non-local GNNs [ 16] are proposed to capture long-
range dependencies for disassortative graph by designing non-local
aggregators.
3 EMPIRICAL AND THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
OF DEEP GNNS
In this section, we first propose a quantitative metric to measure
the smoothness of graph node representations. Then we utilize
this metric, along with a data visualization technique, to rethink
the performance degradation when utilizing GCN layer to build
Research Track Paper
 
KDD '20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, USA
339