Computers 2023 ,12, 60 11 of 22
and, thus, proposed a novel knowledge-distilling strategy to improve its performance. The
main idea of knowledge distillation was that the student model imitated the teacher model
to achieve competitive, or even superior, performance. The key focus was how to transfer
knowledge from a large teacher model to a small student model.
In the process of knowledge distillation, knowledge types, distillation strategies, and
teacher–student architectures have played key roles in the student learning process. The
activations, neurons, and features of the middle layer were available as knowledge to guide
the learning of the student model [ 113–117]. The relationship between different activations,
neurons, and features contained the rich knowledge learned by the teacher model [ 118–122].
As shown in Figure 6, three methods of knowledge distillation were introduced. These
three distillation methods are described in detail in the following sections.
Figure 6. (a) The generic response-based knowledge distillation. ( b) The generic feature-based
knowledge distillation. ( c) The generic instance-relation-based knowledge distillation.
5.1. Response-Based Knowledge
Response-based knowledge distillation is a simple and effective model compression
method that has been widely used in a variety of tasks [ 108,110]. Response-based knowl-
edge is the ﬁnal output layer of the teacher model, and the main idea is to directly mimic
the ﬁnal prediction of the teacher network. The response-based image knowledge is called
a soft target, which is the probability of different classes of inputs that can be estimated by
the Softmax function, as in Equation (6):
q(zi,T) =exp(Zi/T)
åjexp(Zj/T)(6)
where Ziis the logit for the i-th class, j2(1, 2,,k),kis the total number of classes, exp
is an exponential operation, and Tis the temperature parameter to control the importance
of each soft target. If T=1, it is the original Softmax function.
5.2. Feature-Based Knowledge
Deep neural networks are excellent at learning multiple-level representations of fea-
tures. This became deﬁned as representational learning [ 123–125]. Therefore, the feature
map, as the output of the ﬁnal and middle layers, is available as knowledge to supervise the
training of student models. The feature-based knowledge from the middle layer is a good
extension of the response-based knowledge. The feature-based knowledge-distillation loss
was deﬁned by Equation (7):
LFeaD (ft(x),fs(x)) =LF(ft(ft(x)),fs(fs(x))) (7)