Computers 2023 ,12, 60 14 of 22
It is easy to directly improve the accuracy of a network by revising one dimension.
However, revising two or three dimensions of the network at the same time requires tedious
manual tuning and is difﬁcult to optimize. To address these problems, Tan et al. [ 146]
proposed a hybrid scaling method for model scaling that could better select the width,
depth, and resolution dimensional scaling, thus enabling the model to achieve higher
accuracy. Han et al. [ 147] proposed a Ghost module to extract more features using fewer
parameters. First, the Ghost module used the output with the fewest raw convolution
operations for the output. Then a series of simple linear operations were used on the output
to generate more features. GhostNet was proposed based on the Ghost module, replacing
the original convolution layer with the Ghost module. The experimental results showed
that GhostNet compressed well and maintained good accuracy. Ma et al. [ 148] proposed a
simple and efﬁcient dynamic generative network, WeightNet, which integrated the features
of squeeze and excitation networks (SENet) [ 16] and CondConv [ 149] in the weight space.
WeightNet dynamically generated convolutional kernel weights based on sample features
and adjusted the hyperparameters to achieve a compromise between accuracy and speed.
Li et al. [ 150] proposed MicroNet, which contained micro-factorized convolution and dy-
namic shift-max. Micro-factorized convolution maintained the input–output connectivity
and reduced the number of connections through low-rank decomposition. Dynamic shift-
max compensated for the performance degradation caused by the reduced network depth
by dynamically fusing features between groups to increase node connectivity and improve
non-linearity. Radosavovic et al. [ 151] proposed RegNet, which was a new network design
paradigm that combined the advantages of manually designed networks and NAS. Finally,
self-supervised representation learning (SSL) has received signiﬁcant attention. However,
recent studies have concluded that when the model size decreased, its performance de-
creased substantially.Since current SSL methods rely heavily on contrast learning to train a
network, Gao et al. [ 134] proposed a simple and effective method called distillation contrast
learning (DisCo) to alleviate this problem. DisCo aligned the ﬁnal embedded constraints of
lightweight students with those of teachers, maximizing the transfer of teacher knowledge.
7. Discussion
With the rapid development of hardware, DNNs have become the dominant algorithm
for computer vision tasks. The growth in overall computational power has improved the
data-processing power of DNNs, which has substantially improved the generalization
ability of the models. Furthermore, DNN architecture design is a hotspot in the research
and may become one of the most widely used artiﬁcial intelligence techniques in the
future. In addition, deploying models on edge devices facilitates the development of model
compression techniques. For the application of DNNs on edge devices, lightweight network
architecture is one of the mainstream research topics. In this survey, we summarized the
research achievements in recent years. The challenges and prospects of DNN development
are as follows.
In model-pruning algorithms, most existing approaches remove redundant connec-
tions or neurons from the network. This low-level pruning introduces unstructured risks.
Therefore, it is important to propose more effective methods to evaluate the impact of
pruned objects on their models.
Parameter quantization greatly reduces the size of the model. However, the quan-
tization operation increases the complexity of the operation. During the quantization
process, some special processing is required. Otherwise, the accuracy loss is more severe.
In addition, quantization usually results in a loss of accuracy. An appropriate quantization
strategy reduces the complexity of the model while minimizing the loss of accuracy. In
addition, mixed accuracy quantization strategies have been used to reduce the size of the
parameters to a reasonable level on a contribution basis.
Low-rank decomposition speeds up the computational process of the model, and the
mathematical principles of the decomposition process are more helpful for explaining the
optimization mechanism of the network structure. However, low-rank decomposition