Computers 2023 ,12, 60 5 of 22
feature representation in DNNs. Kuang et al. [ 39] obtained the importance of a channel
by considering the effect of each channel on a task-dependent loss function. The smaller
the loss function value, the less important the channel. According to this characteristic,
Li et al. [ 40] proposed a highly efﬁcient layer-wise reﬁned pruning method for DNNs at the
software level that accelerated the inference process at the hardware level [41].
Channel-based pruning has also been applied in the ﬁelds of image segmentation
and object detection. Sawant et al. [ 42] proposed an optimal-score-based ﬁlter pruning
(OSFP) approach to prune redundant ﬁlters according to their similarities in the feature
space. OSFP removed redundant ﬁlters, improved segmentation performance, and ac-
celerated network learning. As a special pruning method, sparse training [ 43] and mask
learning [44] created new connections during the pruning process. Chu et al. [ 45] proposed
a three-stage model-compression method: (1) dynamic sparse training, (2) group channel
pruning, and (3) spatial attention distilling, in the ﬁeld of object detection. Group channel
pruning divided the network into multiple groups according to the scale of the feature
layers and the similarity of the module architecture in the network. Then, the channels in
each group were pruned according to different thresholds. In addition, Chang et al. [ 46]
proposed an automatic channel pruning method. This method ﬁrst performed hierarchical
channel clustering using feature map similarity and initial network pruning simultane-
ously. Then, a population initialization method was presented to transform the pruned
architecture into candidate populations. Finally, the optimal compression architecture was
found via particle-swarm optimization. By evaluating the performance of their parameters,
Liu et al. [ 47] presented a method for network slimming, which did not require any special
software/hardware accelerators for the model. During the training process, unimportant
channels were automatically identiﬁed and later pruned. It employed an L1regulariza-
tion [ 48] on the weights of the batch-normalization (BN) [ 49] layers to achieve the sparsity
of the parameters. Then, iterative pruning was used to achieve high pruning rates.
Yang et al. [ 50] proposed an energy-aware pruning algorithm. The algorithm guided
the process by using the computational consumption of the convolutional neural network
(CNN). The pruning was implemented layer by layer and was more effective than pre-
viously proposed pruning methods by minimizing the errors in the output feature map,
rather than the ﬁlter weights. To accomplish this, the weights were ﬁrst pruned by layer.
After that, local ﬁne-tuning was performed by closed-form least squares to recover the
accuracy after pruning. Finally, the layers were pruned, and the entire network was glob-
ally ﬁne-tuned using back-propagation. In 2021, Fan et al. [ 51] proposed a hierarchical
channel pruning to group different layers by reducing the model accuracy of the pruned
network. After pruning each layer in a speciﬁc order, the network was retrained. There was
a small decrease in the accuracy of the network model, but the computational resources
deployed on the hardware were greatly reduced. To reduce the computational cost of
multiple training, Chen et al. [ 52] proposed only-train-once (OTO), a training and pruning
framework. OTO greatly simpliﬁed the complex multi-stage training channel of current
pruning methods. Furthermore, the method of a half-space random projection gradient
was proposed, which solved the problem of structured sparsity-induced regularization. As
compared to multiple ﬁne-tuning processes, OTO required only one, which signiﬁcantly
simpliﬁed the pruning process. Chung et al. [ 53] pruned certain convolution channels
in the ﬁrst layer of a pre-trained CNN. Pruning of the ﬁrst layer greatly facilitated the
channel compression of the subsequent convolution layers. However, the input of the ﬁrst
layer was a single channel. To address these issues, Chen et al. [ 54] proposed a solution to
strategically manipulate neurons by “grafting” appropriate levels of linearized insigniﬁcant
rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) neurons to eliminate the non-linear components. However, this
method required the associated slopes and intercepts of the replaced linear components
to be optimized in order to restore model performance. With the continuous advances in
structured pruning algorithms, whether layer-based or ﬁlter-based, the original multiple
pruning and ﬁne-tuning approaches were developed to only be used once.