Computers 2023 ,12, 60 12 of 22
where ft(x)and fs(x)are feature maps of the middle layers of the teacher and student
networks, respectively. The transformation functions ft(ft(x))andfs(fs(x))transform the
feature maps of the teacher and student networks into the same shape, respectively. In
addition,LF()is the similarity function used to match the feature maps of the teacher and
student networks.
5.3. Relation-Based Knowledge
Both response-based and feature-based knowledge methods use the output of a partic-
ular layer in the teacher model. The relation-based knowledge method further explores
the relationship between different layers. Yim et al. [ 118] proposed the ﬂow of the solution
process (FSP), which was deﬁned by the Gram matrix between the different layers. The FSP
matrix reﬂected the relationship between the feature map by the inner product between the
two layers of features. Correlations between feature maps were used as prior knowledge.
Knowledge distillation by SVD extracted information from the feature maps [126].
Zhang et al. [ 127] proposed a graph-based distillation framework to use the knowledge
of multiple teachers. Lee et al. [ 119] proposed a multi-headed graph-based knowledge-
distillation method. The student network simulated the mutual information ﬂow of the
paired queuing layers of the teacher network to explore paired-queuing information. Usu-
ally, the distillation loss of relation-based knowledge over the relations of the feature map
is expressed as Equation (8):
LRelD(ft,fs) =LR1(Yt(ˆft,ˇft),Ys(ˆfs,ˇfs)) (8)
where ftand fsare the feature maps of the teacher network and the student network,
respectively. ˆft,ˇftand ˆfs,ˇfsare a pair of feature maps in the teacher network and student
network, respectively. Y()is the similarity function of a pair of feature maps. LR1denotes
the correlation function between the teacher and student feature maps.
6. Lightweight Model Design
Lightweight DNN model design refers to the redesign based on the existing DNN
structure to achieve a reduction in the number of parameters and the computational
complexity. Table 4 shows the design skills for the lightweight model. Iandola et al. [ 128]
proposed SqueezeNet, which replaced 3 3 convolution kernels with a 1 1 convolution
kernel. The parameters of a 1 1 convolution kernel were 1/9 of the parameters of a 3 3
convolution kernel. However, this also decreased the number of input channels available
as compared to 3 3 convolution. By learning ResNet and adding bypass branches
to the original network, the classiﬁcation accuracy was improved by approximately 3%.
Howard et al. [ 129] proposed MobileNet, which divided convolution into depth-wise
convolution and point-wise convolution. Each convolution kernel ﬁlter of a depth-wise
convolution performed convolutional operations on only one speciﬁc input channel. Point-
wise convolution used a 1 1 size convolution kernel to combine the multi-channel
outputs of the depth-wise convolution layer. Zhang et al. [ 130] proposed ShufﬂeNet, which
shufﬂed the input groups into channels, thus ensuring that the perceptual ﬁelds of each
convolutional kernel were spread across the inputs of different groups to increase the
learning ability of the model.