Computers 2023 ,12, 60 13 of 22
Table 4. Skills for lightweight models.
Model Methods
SqueezeNet [128]11 convolution instead of 3 3 convolution.
Reducing the number of input channels for 3 3 convolution.
Downsampling operation.
SqueezeNext [131]Number of compressed feature map channels.
Low-rank separable convolution.
Reducing the number of input channels in the FC layer.
MobileNetV1 [129]Depthwise separable convolution.
Two hyperparameters, aandr.
MobileNetV2 [132]Reducing the use of 1 1 convolution.
Linear bottleneck structure.
Two hyperparameters, aandr.
ShufﬂeNetV1 [130]11 group convolution.
Channel shufﬂe.
ShufﬂeNetV2 [133]Replacing 11 group convolution with 1 1 dense convolution.
Keeping the number of input and output channels consistent.
Using concatenating instead of adding.
Channel segmentation.
Channel shufﬂe.
Gao et al. [ 134] improved the effectiveness of lightweight models in self-supervised
learning.Tan et al. [ 135] proposed MnasNet, a neural architecture search (NAS) method.
The time consumption of the model on the device was incorporated into the search space
through multi-objective optimization. Next, using a decomposed hierarchical search space
allowed the network to maintain layer diversity while maintaining a simpliﬁed search
space. This enabled a better compromise between accuracy and time consumption in
the search model. Huang et al. [ 136] proposed that group convolution was learnable.
Learning group convolution continued the training by combining the training process with
pruning for more accurate pruning. Mehta et al. [ 137,138] proposed an end-to-end speech
processing network (ESPNet), which was a lightweight network for semantic segmentation,
and its core was an ESP module. The ESP module contained point-wise convolution and
a spatial pyramid of dilated convolution, which were more efﬁcient than to MobileNet
and ShufﬂeNet. Depth-wise separable convolution reduced the computation time and the
number of parameters of the network, whereas point-wise convolution used the highest
number of parameters. Motivated by this, Gao et al. [ 139] proposed a channel-wise and
depth-wise separable convolution. ChannelNet was constructed by replacing the FC layer
and the global pooling layer of the network.
The interleaved group convolution (IGC) series network was an extreme use of group
convolution [ 140–142]. IGC decomposed the regular convolution into multiple group
convolutions, reducing a large number of parameters. Furthermore, the complementarity
principle and the sorting operation ensured the ﬂow of information between groups with a
minimum number of parameters. The FBNet series [ 143–145] was a lightweight network
series based entirely on the NAS method. FBNet [ 143] combined DNAS and resource
constraints. FBNetV2 [ 144] added a channel and input resolution search. FBNetV3 [ 145]
used accuracy prediction to perform a fast network structure search. Currently, DNN
performance optimization is carried out to improve the following three areas.
• Increase the width of the network.
• Increase the depth of the network.
• Increase the resolution of input images.