Computers 2023 ,12, 60 4 of 22
1.2. Organization of This Paper
Figure 1 shows the paper organization as follows: Section 2 introduces the method
for model pruning, including structured and unstructured pruning. Section 3 provides
an overview of the parameter quantization, post-training quantization, and quantization-
aware training. Section 4 outlines the method used for low-rank decomposition. Section 5
presents relevant research concepts and methods for knowledge distillation. Section 6
reports the strategies and recent advances in lightweight model design. Section 7 discusses
the current state-of-the-art of model compression and future research directions. Section 8
summarizes this article.
Model compression Model pruning
Parameter 
quantization
Low-rank 
decomposition
Knowledge 
distillation
Lightweight 
model designStructured pruning
Unstructured pruning
Quantization-aware training
Post-training quantization
Response-based knowledge
Feature-based knowledge
Relation-based knowledgeIntroduction
Conclusion and 
future workDiscussion
Figure 1. Organization of the survey.
2. Model Pruning
The earliest pruning method was biased weight decay [ 26]. In the 1990s, the objective
function was used in a Taylor expansion method to ﬁnd the neuron with the least impact on
the loss [ 27,28]. These methods focused on removing inessential components from DNNs
without having a signiﬁcant effect on the performance. As the research progressed, model
pruning was divided into structured and unstructured methods.
2.1. Structured Pruning
Structured pruning is normally performed with a channel (ﬁlter) as the basic prun-
ing unit [ 29–33]. When one channel is pruned, the corresponding channels are also re-
moved [ 34,35]. Channel-based structured pruning was realized by evaluating the impor-
tance of channels. Li et al. [ 34] measured the relative importance of channels in each
layer by calculating the sum of the absolute weights of the channels [ 36]. This approach
did not require the support of a sparse convolution library, nor did it produce sparse
connections. Meanwhile, it reduced time, as compared to layer-by-layer iterative ﬁne-
tuning. The time-saving advantage was particularly evident in the pruning process of
deep networks. However, this caused a degradation in model performance. Therefore,
Lin et al. [ 37] proposed a global and dynamic pruning scheme to prune redundant channels.
First, a global discriminant function based on the prior global knowledge of each channel
removed the insigniﬁcant channels from all layers. After that, it dynamically updated the
accuracy of the ﬁlters by comparing the pruned and sparse networks in order to recover
any incorrectly pruned channels. Next, it was retrained to improve the performance of the
model. Furthermore, Li et al. [ 38] proposed a fused max-average pooling operation and
an improved channel-attention mechanism by using two pooling functions to enhance the