Computers 2023 ,12, 60 15 of 22
is not effective in accelerating models with small convolutional kernels, and it cannot
compress the size of the network model.
Knowledge distillation guides the training of student networks by teacher networks.
However, the training difﬁculty varies for different student network architectures. There-
fore, building a student network architecture requires designers to have a richer theoretical
foundation and nuclear engineering experience.
Currently, the determination of hyperparameters relies on manual expertise and abla-
tion experiments. Over the course of experiments, small changes in hyperparameters have
led to inconsistent results overall. Therefore, a standardized design approach for hyperpa-
rameter optimization is needed. A neural architecture search algorithm is also necessary to
design a network, as it automatically searches for the correct network architecture.
Training DNN models requires powerful hardware resources. Therefore, the deploy-
ment of DNN models on mobile devices needs to be explored. Most model-acceleration
methods implement optimization for image recognition tasks, and few are dedicated to
accelerating tasks in other areas of computer vision. Furthermore, the evaluation system
of network compression algorithms is rather weak and generally focuses on comparing
network parameters and running time. As a future research direction, researchers should
balance the size and speed of a network and provide a network performance evaluation
system for different scenarios.
Model compression signiﬁcantly reduces model size, improves model inference speed,
and reduces computational demands. Many model compression techniques have achieved
model compression by removing some parameters, which results in the loss of model
performance. In addition, model compression increases the training time and may also lead
to model over-ﬁtting. Therefore, these limitations should be considered before performing
model compression to ensure the accuracy and stability of the model. According to the
survey of lightweight model designs, the application of neural architecture search technol-
ogy increased the speed in the lightweight model designs. For example, both MnasNet
and RegNet utilized a neural architecture search approach. Therefore, in the process of
designing a lightweight model, it is necessary to consider methods to reduce the resource
consumption during neural architecture searches.
8. Conclusions and Future Work
This paper provided a survey of deep neural network model compression. Five deep
neural network model compression methods were discussed. Structured and unstruc-
tured pruning were discussed from the perspective of model pruning. The advantages
and disadvantages of the two quantization methods, quantization-aware training and
post-training quantization, were compared. The method of low-rank decomposition was
introduced. Three applications of knowledge distillation in model compression were
presented. Lightweight models achieved performance improvements by designing efﬁ-
cient architectures and have become the dominant model-compression and -acceleration
methods in recent years. By analyzing and discussing areas related to model compres-
sion, this literature review intended to provide researchers with new information and
research directions and to promote the further development of deep neural network model
compression.
In future work on deep neural network model compression, model size should be
reduced by utilizing hybrid precision without losing model performance. Model pruning
and low-rank decomposition reveal hidden information in the model (e.g., the importance
of layers and channels), which facilitates a better understanding of the model and provides
insights for model design. Knowledge distillation transfers knowledge between different
models, resulting in a shorter training time and better performance. In addition, model
compression has been achieved faster and more efﬁciently by merging multiple model com-
pression methods. For example, by merging knowledge distillation and neural architecture
search, a lightweight model is obtained faster. As neural architecture search technology