Computers 2023 ,12, 60 6 of 22
2.2. Unstructured Pruning
Unstructured pruning was based on a heuristic approach to zero-out unimportant
parameters, such as weight magnitude [ 55,56], gradients [ 57], and hessian [ 27] statistics. It
has typically resulted in competitive performance improvements, but it has been difﬁcult
to accelerate due to irregular sparsity [58,59].
In 1989, LeCun et al. [ 27] suggested the concept of optimal brain damage, which used
second-derivative information to determine a compromise between network complex-
ity and training-set error, so unimportant weights would be removed from the network.
Han et al. [ 56] described a method, train–prune–retrain, to reduce the storage and computa-
tion of neural networks by learning only the important connections. The performance was
improved by an order of magnitude without affecting the accuracy. Yang et al. [ 50] utilized
the energy consumption of each layer to determine the pruning order. Yang et al. [ 60]
created latency tables that utilized greed to determine the layers that should be cropped.
Furthermore, Yang et al. conducted comparison experiments using L1and L2regular-
ization. According to the experimental results, pruning with L1regularization achieved
better accuracy than L2regularization after pruning and without retraining. This occurred
because L1regularization had converted more parameters closer to zero. However, L2
regularization outperformed L1after retraining pruning. Guo et al. [ 61] proposed dynamic
network surgery, which reduced network complexity signiﬁcantly by pruning connections
in real time. In contrast to the previous method, Guo et al. included connected splicing
throughout the process to avoid incorrect pruning. By adding a learning process to the
process of ﬁltering important and unimportant parameters, it was possible to more accu-
rately identify the optimal parameters. Neill et al. [ 62] proposed two weight regularizers
that aimed to maximize the alignment between units of pruned and unpruned networks in
order to mitigate alignments in pruned cross-lingual models. Unstructured pruning greatly
reduced the number of parameters and computations. However, the unstructured pruning
set the redundant neurons to zero, rather than remove them from the network [ 63]. As a
result, the non-regular sparsity was not fully utilized to accelerate the model according to
current hardware architectures. Therefore, accelerating unstructured pruning techniques
for use on current hardware architectures should be further examined.
3. Parameter Quantization
Parameter quantization reduces the size and inference time of models [ 64–67]. Pa-
rameter quantization is versatile and applicable to most models and hardware devices.
Parameter quantization of neural networks is the process of converting the weights and
activation values of a network model from high precision to low precision. Algorithm 1
shows the steps of parameter quantization. Parameter quantization has several advantages:
• Less storage overhead and bandwidth requirements.
• Lower power consumption.
• Faster calculation speed.
Algorithm 1 Parameter quantization.
Step 1: Count the corresponding min_value and max_value in the input data (weights
or activation values);
Step 2: Choose the appropriate quantization type, symmetric (int-8) or asymmetric
(uint-8);
Step 3: Calculate the quantization parameters Z/Zero point and S/Scale according to
the quantization type, min_value and max_value;
Step 4: Quantize the model based on the calibration data, converted from FP32 to INT-8;
Step 5: Verify the performance of the quantized model, and if the result is not good, try
to use a different way to calculate S and Z, and re-execute the above operation.