Computers 2023 ,12, 60 10 of 22
There are several methods for exploiting low rankings in FC layers [ 97,101]. For
example, Denil et al. [ 102] reduced the number of dynamic parameters in a deep model
using a low-rank method. Sainath et al. [ 103] explored a low-rank matrix factorization of
the ﬁnal weight layer in DNNs for acoustic models. Lu et al. [ 104] used a truncated singular
value decomposition (SVD) to decompose the FC layers to design compact multi-task DNN
models. The low-rank decomposition method was straightforward for model compres-
sion. However, the low-rank decomposition method was difﬁcult to implement due to
the decomposition operation itself. Another problem was that the modern approaches
employed layer-by-layer low-rank decomposition, so global parameter compression was
not possible since different layers had different information. These methods identiﬁed
redundant parameters of DNNs by employing the matrix and tensor decomposition. The
ﬁlter of a neural network was viewed as a tensor with four dimensions: width W, heightH,
number of channels C, and a number of convolution kernels N. AsCandNhave a large
impact on the overall network architecture, network compression was performed using
low-rank decomposition methods based on the characteristics of information redundancy
of the convolution kernel ( WH) matrix and its low-rank property.
Since the weight vectors were mostly distributed in a low-rank subspace, the con-
volution kernel matrix was reconstructed with a small number of basis vectors to reduce
memory requirements. Low-rank decomposition methods had good compression and
speed improvements for large convolution kernels and in small and medium-sized net-
works. However, new networks increasingly use 1 1 convolution in recent years. A 1 1
convolution is not conducive to the use of low-rank decomposition. In addition, the matrix
decomposition operation is expensive, layer-by-layer decomposition is not conducive to
global parameter compression, and it requires signiﬁcant retraining to achieve convergence.
To address this problem, Jaderberg et al. [ 98] proposed a two-step method for accelerating
convolution layers in large convolutional neural networks based on tensor decomposition
and discriminative ﬁne-tuning [105].
5. Knowledge Distillation
As shown in Figure 5, knowledge distillation is a teacher–student architecture [106–108] .
The teacher network is a complex pre-trained network, and the student network is a simple
small network. The teacher network provides the student network with prior knowledge
so that the student network achieves similar performance to that of the teacher network.
Figure 5. Model compression based on knowledge distillation.
Deploying deep models in mobile devices is challenging due to the limited processing
power and memory of these devices. To address these issues, Bucilu˘ a et al. [ 109] ﬁrst pro-
posed model compression to transfer information from a large model to train a small model
without signiﬁcant accuracy degradation. Henceforth, the training of small models by
large models was called knowledge distillation [ 108,110,111]. Chen et al. [ 112] posited that
feature embedding from deep neural networks could convey complementary information