Computers 2023 ,12, 60 8 of 22
3.1. Quantization-Aware Training
Quantization introduces perturbations into the parameters of the trained model, caus-
ing the model to deviate more from the convergence point than when trained with ﬂoating-
point precision [ 68–73]. To make the model converge to a better loss point, the problem
can be solved by retraining the quantization parameters. A commonly employed method
has been QAT, which quantiﬁes during both forward and backward propagation [ 74–76].
However, the model’s parameters are quantiﬁed after each gradient update. In particular, it
is important to perform this calculation after the weight updates in ﬂoating-point precision.
Similarly, it is important to perform the backward transfer in a ﬂoating-point manner, as
accumulating gradients with quantization precision can lead to high errors in zero gradients
or gradients, especially with low-precision quantization.
3.2. Post-Training Quantization
Post-training quantization was a good alternative to QAT, as it performed quantization
and adjusted the weights without any ﬁne-tuning [ 77–81]. Therefore, the cost of PTQ was
very low and negligible. Furthermore, PTQ could be applied with limited or no labeling
of data, which was a distinct advantage. However, PTQ required enough training data to
retrain but only achieved a low accuracy rate, particularly for low-precision quantization.
To address the problem of PTQ’s decreasing accuracy, researchers have proposed various
methods [ 82–85]. For example, Banner et al. [ 86] and Finkelstein et al. [ 87] observed an
inherent bias in the mean and the variance of the quantiﬁed weight values and proposed a
bias-correction method. Meller et al. [ 88] and Nagel et al. [ 89] showed that balancing the
weight ranges across the layers or channels could reduce the quantization errors. ACIQ [ 86]
analytically calculated the optimal clipping range and channel-bit-width settings for PTQ.
Although ACIQ achieved low-precision degradation, the channel-wise activation quantiza-
tion used in ACIQ was difﬁcult to implement effectively in hardware devices. To address
this problem, the OMSE [ 90] approach eliminated channel quantization at activation and
proposed PTQ by optimizing the L2distance between the quantized tensor and the corre-
sponding ﬂoating-point tensor. In addition, to better mitigate the adverse effects of outliers
in PTQ, Zhao et al. [ 91] proposed an outlier channel-splitting method, which duplicated and
halved the channels containing outliers. Another notable work was AdaRound [ 92], which
proposed an adaptive rounding method that reduced losses more effectively. Although
AdaRound restricted the variation in the quantization weights to within 1, AdaQuant [ 93]
proposed a more general approach that allowed the weight of the quantization to change
as needed. In PTQ, all weights and activation quantization parameters were determined
without any retraining of the neural network models. Therefore, PTQ was a very fast way
to quantify neural network models. However, PTQ tended to be less accurate than QAT.
4. Low-Rank Decomposition
Low-rank decomposition uses a low-rank matrix to approximate the weight matrix
in a neural network [ 94]. Approaching the weight matrix with a low rank is particularly
effective and produces a 3 compression on the fully-connected layer. However, it does not
speed up the model signiﬁcantly, since the computational operations of CNN are mainly in
the convolution layer. Therefore, reducing the number of convolution layers improves the
compression rate.
This concept of low-rank decomposition was derived from the speculation that there
was a structural capacity in a 3-dimensional (3D) tensor. The convolution kernel was
viewed as a 3D tensor by [ 95], and the fully connected (FC) layer was considered as a 2D
matrix or 3D tensor. Low-rank ﬁlters were used to accelerate convolutional operations.
For example, a high-dimensional discrete cosine transform (DCT) and wavelet systems
were constructed from 1D DCT transforms and 1D wavelets, respectively, using tensor
products. Learning separable 1D ﬁlters was proposed by [ 96] using a dictionary learning
approach. Denton et al. [ 97] proposed clustering schemes with low-rank decomposition
and convolution kernel for simple DNN models. They achieved a 2 increase in speed