6 Auto-sklearn: Efﬁcient and Robust Automated Machine Learning 131
PoSH Auto-sklearn starts by running successive halving with a ﬁxed portfolio
of 16 machine learning pipeline conﬁgurations, and if there is time left, it uses the
outcome of these runs to warmstart a combination of Bayesian optimization andsuccessive halving. The ﬁxed portfolio of 16 pipelines was obtained by running
greedy submodular function maximization to select a strong set of complementary
conﬁgurations to optimize the performance obtained on a set of 421 datasets; thecandidate conﬁgurations conﬁgured for this optimization were the 421 conﬁgura-
tions found by running SMAC [ 27] on each of these 421 datasets.
The combination of Bayesian optimization and successive halving we used to
yield robust results within a short time window is an adaptation of the multi-
ﬁdelity hyperparameter optimization method BOHB (Bayesian Optimization and
HyperBand) [ 17] discussed in Chap. 1. As budgets for this multiﬁdelity approach,
we used the number of iterations for all iterative algorithms, except for the SVM,
where we used dataset size as a budget.
Another extension for large datasets that is currently ongoing is our work on
automated deep learning; this is discussed in the following chapter on Auto-Net.
6.8.4 Conclusion and Future Work
Following the AutoML approach taken by Auto-WEKA, we introduced Auto-
sklearn, which performs favorably against the previous state of the art in AutoML.
We also showed that our meta-learning and ensemble mechanisms improve itsefﬁciency and robustness further.
While Auto-sklearn handles the hyperparameter tuning for a user, Auto-sklearn
has hyperparameters on its own which inﬂuence its performance for a given timebudget, such as the time limits discussed in Sects. 6.5,6.6, and 6.7, or the resampling
strategy used to calculate the loss function. We demonstrated in preliminary work
that the choice of the resampling strategy and the selection of timeouts can be castas a meta-learning problem itself [ 19], but we would like to extend this to other
possible design choices Auto-sklearn users face.
Since the time of writing the original paper, the ﬁeld of meta-learning has
progressed a lot, giving access to multiple new methods to include meta information
into Bayesian optimization. We expect that using one of the newer methods
discussed in Chap. 2could substantially improve the optimization procedure.
Finally, having a fully automated procedure that can test hundreds of hyperpa-
rameter conﬁgurations puts us at increased risk of overﬁtting to the validation set.
To avoid this overﬁtting, we would like to combine Auto-sklearn with one of thetechniques discussed in Chap. 1, techniques from differential privacy [ 14], or other
techniques yet to be developed.