1 Hyperparameter Optimization 15
which allows to stop training based on the probability of not beating the best known
model. When combined with Bayesian optimization, the predictive termination cri-
terion enabled lower error rates than off-the-shelve blackbox Bayesian optimizationfor optimizing neural networks. On average, the method sped up the optimization
by a factor of two and was able to ﬁnd a (then) state-of-the-art neural network for
CIFAR-10 (without data augmentation) [ 26].
While the method above is limited by not sharing information across different
hyperparameter conﬁgurations, this can be achieved by using the basis functions as
the output layer of a Bayesian neural network [ 80]. The parameters and weights of
the basis functions, and thus the full learning curve, can thereby be predicted for
arbitrary hyperparameter conﬁgurations. Alternatively, it is possible to use previous
learning curves as basis function extrapolators [ 21]. While the experimental results
are inconclusive on whether the proposed method is superior to pre-speciﬁed
parametric functions, not having to manually deﬁne them is a clear advantage.
Freeze-Thaw Bayesian optimization [ 148] is a full integration of learning curves
into the modeling and selection process of Bayesian optimization. Instead of
terminating a conﬁguration, the machine learning models are trained iteratively for
a few iterations and then frozen . Bayesian optimization can then decide to thaw one
of the frozen models, which means to continue training it. Alternatively, the method
can also decide to start a new conﬁguration. Freeze-Thaw models the performance
of a converged algorithm with a regular Gaussian process and introduces a specialcovariance function corresponding to exponentially decaying functions to model the
learning curves with per-learning curve Gaussian processes.
1.4.2 Bandit-Based Algorithm Selection Methods
In this section, we describe methods that try to determine the best algorithm
out of a given ﬁnite set of algorithms based on low-ﬁdelity approximations oftheir performance; towards its end, we also discuss potential combinations with
adaptive conﬁguration strategies. We focus on variants of the bandit-based strategies
successive halving andHyperband , since these have shown strong performance,
especially for optimizing deep learning algorithms. Strictly speaking, some of the
methods which we will discuss in this subsection also model learning curves, but
they provide no means of selecting new conﬁgurations based on these models.
First, however, we brieﬂy describe the historical evolution of multi-ﬁdelity
algorithm selection methods. In 2000, Petrak [ 120] noted that simply testing various
algorithms on a small subset of the data is a powerful and cheap mechanism toselect an algorithm. Later approaches used iterative algorithm elimination schemes
to drop hyperparameter conﬁgurations if they perform badly on subsets of the
data [ 17], if they perform signiﬁcantly worse than a group of top-performing
conﬁgurations [ 86], if they perform worse than the best conﬁguration by a user-
speciﬁed factor [ 143], or if even an optimistic performance bound for an algorithm
is worse than the best known algorithm [ 128]. Likewise, it is possible to drop