72 T. Elsken et al.
incurs a large bias as it underestimates the actual performance of architectures
severely; nevertheless, it allows ranking architectures reliably, since the estimated
performance correlates strongly with the actual performance [ 6]. Different one-shot
NAS methods differ in how the one-shot model is trained: ENAS [ 46] learns an RNN
controller that samples architectures from the search space and trains the one-shot
model based on approximate gradients obtained through REINFORCE. DARTS[39] optimizes all weights of the one-shot model jointly with a continuous relaxation
of the search space obtained by placing a mixture of candidate operations on each
edge of the one-shot model. Bender et al. [ 6] only train the one-shot model once
and show that this is sufﬁcient when deactivating parts of this model stochastically
during training using path dropout. While ENAS and DARTS optimize a distribution
over architectures during training, the approach of Bender et al. [ 6] can be seen
as using a ﬁxed distribution. The high performance obtainable by the approach
of Bender et al. [ 6] indicates that the combination of weight sharing and a ﬁxed
(carefully chosen) distribution might (perhaps surprisingly) be the only requiredingredients for one-shot NAS. Related to these approaches is meta-learning of
hypernetworks that generate weights for novel architectures and thus requires
only training the hypernetwork but not the architectures themselves [ 9]. The main
difference here is that weights are not strictly shared but generated by the shared
hypernetwork (conditional on the sampled architecture).
A general limitation of one-shot NAS is that the supergraph deﬁned a-priori
restricts the search space to its subgraphs. Moreover, approaches which require
that the entire supergraph resides in GPU memory during architecture search will
be restricted to relatively small supergraphs and search spaces accordingly and arethus typically used in combination with cell-based search spaces. While approaches
based on weight-sharing have substantially reduced the computational resources
required for NAS (from thousands to a few GPU days), it is currently not wellunderstood which biases they introduce into the search if the sampling distribution
of architectures is optimized along with the one-shot model. For instance, an initial
bias in exploring certain parts of the search space more than others might lead to theweights of the one-shot model being better adapted for these architectures, which
in turn would reinforce the bias of the search to these parts of the search space.
This might result in premature convergence of NAS and might be one advantageof a ﬁxed sampling distribution as used by Bender et al. [ 6]. In general, a more
systematic analysis of biases introduced by different performance estimators would
be a desirable direction for future work.
3.5 Future Directions
In this section, we discuss several current and future directions for research on NAS.
Most existing work has focused on NAS for image classiﬁcation. On the one hand,
this provides a challenging benchmark since a lot of manual engineering has beendevoted to ﬁnding architectures that perform well in this domain and are not easily
outperformed by NAS. On the other hand, it is relatively easy to deﬁne a well-suited
search space by utilizing knowledge from manual engineering. This in turn makes