2 Meta-Learning 51
gradient and loss (on a test set). It then backpropagates the meta-gradient to update
the weights {wk}in the direction in which they would have been easier to update.
In other words, after each iteration, the weights {wk}become a better Winitto start
ﬁnetuning any of the tasks. Finn and Levine [ 52] also argue that MAML is able to
approximate any learning algorithm when using a sufﬁciently deep fully connected
ReLU network and certain losses. They also conclude that the MAML initializationsare more resilient to overﬁtting on small samples, and generalize more widely than
meta-learning approaches based on LSTMs.
REPTILE [ 106] is an approximation of MAML that executes stochastic gradient
descent for Kiterations on a given task, and then gradually moves the initialization
weights in the direction of the weights obtained after the Kiterations. The intuition
is that every task likely has more than one set of optimal weights {w
∗
i}, and the goal
is to ﬁnd a Winitthat is close to at least one of those {w∗
i}for every task.
Finally, we can also derive a meta-learner from a black-box neural network.
Santoro et al. [ 145] propose Memory-Augmented Neural Networks (MANNs),
which train a Neural Turing Machine (NTM) [ 60], a neural network with augmented
memory capabilities, as a meta-learner. This meta-learner can then memorize
information about previous tasks and leverage that to learn a learner lnew.S N A I L
[101] is a generic meta-learner architecture consisting of interleaved temporal con-
volution and causal attention layers. The convolutional networks learn a common
feature vector for the training instances (images) to aggregate information from pastexperiences. The causal attention layers learn which pieces of information to pick
out from the gathered experience to generalize to new tasks.
Overall, the intersection of deep learning and meta-learning proves to be
particular fertile ground for groundbreaking new ideas, and we expect this ﬁeld to
become more important over time.
2.4.4 Beyond Supervised Learning
Meta-learning is certainly not limited to (semi-)supervised tasks, and has been
successfully applied to solve tasks as varied as reinforcement learning, activelearning, density estimation and item recommendation. The base-learner may be
unsupervised while the meta-learner is supervised, but other combinations are
certainly possible as well.
Duan et al. [ 39] propose an end-to-end reinforcement learning (RL) approach
consisting of a task-speciﬁc fastRL algorithm which is guided by a general-purpose
slow meta-RL algorithm. The tasks are interrelated Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs). The meta-RL algorithm is modeled as an RNN, which receives the
observations, actions, rewards and termination ﬂags. The activations of the RNN
store the state of the fast RL learner, and the RNN’s weights are learned by observingthe performance of fast learners across tasks.
In parallel, Wang et al. [ 182] also proposed to use a deep RL algorithm to
train an RNN, receiving the actions and rewards of the previous interval in order