x Preface
but of course, if you’re reading this book, you know that – while NAS is an
excellent example of AutoML – there is a lot more to AutoML than NAS. This
book is intended to provide some background and starting points for researchersinterested in developing their own AutoML approaches, highlight available systems
for practitioners who want to apply AutoML to their problems, and provide an
overview of the state of the art to researchers already working in AutoML. Thebook is divided into three parts on these different aspects of AutoML.
Part Ipresents an overview of AutoML methods. This part gives both a solid
overview for novices and serves as a reference to experienced AutoML researchers.
Chap. 1discusses the problem of hyperparameter optimization, the simplest and
most common problem that AutoML considers, and describes the wide variety of
different approaches that are applied, with a particular focus on the methods that arecurrently most efﬁcient.
Chap. 2shows how to learn to learn , i.e., how to use experience from evaluating
machine learning models to inform how to approach new learning tasks with newdata. Such techniques mimic the processes going on as a human transitions from
a machine learning novice to an expert and can tremendously decrease the time
required to get good performance on completely new machine learning tasks.
Chap. 3provides a comprehensive overview of methods for NAS. This is one of
the most challenging tasks in AutoML, since the design space is extremely large and
a single evaluation of a neural network can take a very long time. Nevertheless, thearea is very active, and new exciting approaches for solving NAS appear regularly.
PartIIfocuses on actual AutoML systems that even novice users can use. If you
are most interested in applying AutoML to your machine learning problems, this isthe part you should start with. All of the chapters in this part evaluate the systems
they present to provide an idea of their performance in practice.
Chap. 4describes Auto-WEKA, one of the ﬁrst AutoML systems. It is based
on the well-known WEKA machine learning toolkit and searches over different
classiﬁcation and regression methods, their hyperparameter settings, and data
preprocessing methods. All of this is available through WEKA’s graphical userinterface at the click of a button, without the need for a single line of code.
Chap. 5gives an overview of Hyperopt-Sklearn, an AutoML framework based
on the popular scikit-learn framework. It also includes several hands-on examplesfor how to use system.
Chap. 6describes Auto-sklearn, which is also based on scikit-learn. It applies
similar optimization techniques as Auto-WEKA and adds several improvementsover other systems at the time, such as meta-learning for warmstarting the opti-
mization and automatic ensembling. The chapter compares the performance of
Auto-sklearn to that of the two systems in the previous chapters, Auto-WEKA andHyperopt-Sklearn. In two different versions, Auto-sklearn is the system that won
the challenges described in Part IIIof this book.
Chap. 7gives an overview of Auto-Net, a system for automated deep learning
that selects both the architecture and the hyperparameters of deep neural networks.
An early version of Auto-Net produced the ﬁrst automatically tuned neural network
that won against human experts in a competition setting.