3 Neural Architecture Search 65
Fig. 3.2 An illustration of
different architecture spaces.Each node in the graphscorresponds to a layer in aneural network, e.g., a
convolutional or pooling
layer. Different layer typesare visualized by differentcolors. An edge from layer L
i
to layer Ljdenotes that Lj
receives the output of Lias
input. Left: an element of achain-structured space. Right:an element of a morecomplex search space withadditional layer types andmultiple branches and skipconnectionsinput
L0
L1
Ln
outputinput
L0
L2
L4
L6
L8
L10L1
L3
L7
L9L5
outputLn−1
3.2 Search Space
The search space deﬁnes which neural architectures a NAS approach might discover
in principle. We now discuss common search spaces from recent works.
A relatively simple search space is the space of chain-structured neural networks ,
as illustrated in Fig. 3.2(left). A chain-structured neural network architecture A
can be written as a sequence of nlayers, where the i’th layer Lireceives its
input from layer i−1 and its output serves as the input for layer i+1, i.e.,
A=Ln◦...L 1◦L0. The search space is then parametrized by: (i) the (maximum)
number of layers n(possibly unbounded); (ii) the type of operation every layer can
execute, e.g., pooling, convolution, or more advanced layer types like depthwiseseparable convolutions [ 13] or dilated convolutions [ 68]; and (iii) hyperparameters
associated with the operation, e.g., number of ﬁlters, kernel size and strides for
a convolutional layer [ 4,10,59], or simply number of units for fully-connected
networks [ 41]. Note that the parameters from (iii) are conditioned on (ii), hence the
parametrization of the search space is not ﬁxed-length but rather a conditional space.
Recent work on NAS [ 9,11,21,22,49,75] incorporate modern design elements
known from hand-crafted architectures such as skip connections, which allow to
build complex, multi-branch networks , as illustrated in Fig. 3.2(right). In this case
the input of layer ican be formally described as a function g
i(Lout
i−1,...,Lout
0)
combining previous layer outputs. Employing such a function results in signiﬁcantly
more degrees of freedom. Special cases of these multi-branch architectures are (i)
the chain-structured networks (by setting gi(Lout
i−1,...,Lout
0)=Lout
i−1), (ii) Residual
Networks [ 28], where previous layer outputs are summed ( gi(Lout
i−1,...,Lout
0)=
Lout
i−1+Lout
j,j < i ) and (iii) DenseNets [ 29], where previous layer outputs are
concatenated ( gi(Lout
i−1,...,Lout
0)=concat(Lout
i−1,...,Lout
0)).