24 M. Feurer and F. Hutter
be further robustiﬁed by not choosing it according to the lowest observed value,
but according to the lowest predictive mean of the Gaussian process model used in
Bayesian optimization [ 95].
Another possibility is to use a separate holdout set to assess conﬁgurations
found by HPO to avoid bias towards the standard validation set [ 108,159].
Different approximations of the generalization performance can lead to differenttest performances [ 108], and there have been reports that several resampling
strategies can result in measurable performance differences for HPO of support
vector machines [ 150].
A different approach to combat overﬁtting might be to ﬁnd stable optima instead
ofsharp optima of the objective function [ 112]. The idea is that for stable optima,
the function value around an optimum does not change for slight perturbations ofthe hyperparameters, whereas it does change for sharp optima. Stable optima lead to
better generalization when applying the found hyperparameters to a new, unseen set
of datapoints (i.e., the test set). An acquisition function built around this was shownto only slightly overﬁt for support vector machine HPO, while regular Bayesian
optimization exhibited strong overﬁtting [ 112].
Further approaches to combat overﬁtting are the ensemble methods and Bayesian
methods presented in Sect. 1.2.1 . Given all these different techniques, there is no
commonly agreed-upon technique for how to best avoid overﬁtting, though, and it
remains up to the user to ﬁnd out which strategy performs best on their particularHPO problem. We note that the best strategy might actually vary across HPO
problems.
1.6.5 Arbitrary-Size Pipeline Construction
All HPO techniques we discussed so far assume a ﬁnite set of components
for machine learning pipelines or a ﬁnite maximum number of layers in neuralnetworks. For machine learning pipelines (see the AutoML systems covered in
PartIIof this book) it might be helpful to use more than one feature preprocessing
algorithm and dynamically add them if necessary for a problem, enlarging the searchspace by a hyperparameter to select an appropriate preprocessing algorithm and
its own hyperparameters. While a search space for standard blackbox optimization
tools could easily include several extra such preprocessors (and their hyperparame-ters) as conditional hyperparameters, an unbounded number of these would be hard
to support.
One approach for handling arbitrary-sized pipelines more natively is the tree-
structured pipeline optimization toolkit (TPOT [ 115], see also Chap. 8), which uses
genetic programming and describes possible pipelines by a grammar. TPOT uses
multi-objective optimization to trade off pipeline complexity with performance toavoid generating unnecessarily complex pipelines.