Chapter 4
Auto-WEKA: Automatic Model Selection
and Hyperparameter Optimization in
WEKA
Lars Kotthoff, Chris Thornton, Holger H. Hoos, Frank Hutter,
and Kevin Leyton-Brown
Abstract Many different machine learning algorithms exist; taking into account
each algorithm’s hyperparameters, there is a staggeringly large number of possible
alternatives overall. We consider the problem of simultaneously selecting a learning
algorithm and setting its hyperparameters. We show that this problem can be
addressed by a fully automated approach, leveraging recent innovations in Bayesian
optimization. Speciﬁcally, we consider feature selection techniques and all machine
learning approaches implemented in WEKA’s standard distribution, spanning 2
ensemble methods, 10 meta-methods, 28 base learners, and hyperparameter settings
for each learner. On each of 21 popular datasets from the UCI repository, the
KDD Cup 09, variants of the MNIST dataset and CIFAR-10, we show performance
often much better than using standard selection and hyperparameter optimization
methods. We hope that our approach will help non-expert users to more effectively
identify machine learning algorithms and hyperparameter settings appropriate to
their applications, and hence to achieve improved performance.
4.1 Introduction
Increasingly, users of machine learning tools are non-experts who require off-the-
shelf solutions. The machine learning community has much aided such users by
making available a wide variety of sophisticated learning algorithms and feature
L. Kotthoff (/envelopeback)
University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY, USA
e-mail: larsko@uwyo.edu
C. Thornton · K. Leyton-Brown
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
H. H. Hoos
Leiden Institute for Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
F. Hutter
Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
© The Author(s) 2019
F. Hutter et al. (eds.), Automated Machine Learning , The Springer Series
on Challenges in Machine Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05318-5_481