166 C. Steinruecken et al.
conjugate-gradient method; the model with optimised parameters is then evaluated
using the Bayesian Information Criterion [ 29]:
BIC(M)=−2l o gp(D|M)+|M|logN (9.1)
where Mis the optimised model, p(D|M)is the marginal likelihood of
the model integrating out the latent GP function, |M|is the number of
kernel parameters in M, and Nis the size of the dataset. The Bayesian
Information Criterion trades off model complexity and ﬁt to the data, andapproximates the full marginal likelihood (which integrates out latent functions and
hyperparameters).
The best-scoring model in each round is used to construct new proposed models,
either by: (1) expanding the kernel with production rules from the grammar, such
as introducing a sum, product, or change point; or (2) mutating the kernel by
swapping out a base kernel for a different one. The new set of proposed kernelsis then evaluated in the next round. It is possible with the above rules that a kernel
expression gets proposed several times, but a well-implemented system will keep
records and only ever evaluate each expression once. The search and evaluationprocedure stops either when the score of all newly proposed models is worse than
the best model from the previous round, or when a pre-deﬁned search depth is
exceeded.
This greedy search procedure is not guaranteed to ﬁnd the best model in the
language for any given dataset: a better model might be hiding in one of the
subtrees that weren’t expanded out. Finding the globally best model isn’t usuallyessential, as long as a good interpretable models is found in a reasonable amount
of time. There are other ways of conducting the search and evaluation of models.
For example, Malkomes et al. [ 22] describe a kernel search procedure based on
Bayesian optimisation. Janz et al. [ 14] implemented a kernel search method using
particle ﬁltering and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo.
9.3.3 Generating Descriptions in Natural Language
When the search procedure terminates, it produces a list of kernel expressions
and their scores on the dataset. The expression with the best score is then usedto generate a natural-language description. To convert a kernel to a description
in natural language, the kernel is ﬁrst converted to a canonical form, using the
following process:
1. Nested sums and products are ﬂattened into a sum of products form.
2. Some products of kernels can be simpliﬁed into base kernels with modiﬁed
parameters, for example: SE ×SE→SE
∗,C×k→k∗for any k, and
WN×k→WN∗for any k∈{C,SE,WN,PER}.