6 Auto-sklearn: Efﬁcient and Robust Automated Machine Learning 119
6.4 A Practical Automated Machine Learning System
To design a robust AutoML system, as our underlying ML framework we chose
scikit-learn [ 36], one of the best known and most widely used machine learning
libraries. It offers a wide range of well established and efﬁciently-implemented ML
algorithms and is easy to use for both experts and beginners. Since our AutoML
system closely resembles Auto-WEKA, but—like H YPEROPT -SKLEARN —is based
on scikit-learn, we dub it Auto-sklearn.
Fig.6.2is an illustration Auto-sklearn’s machine learning pipeline and its com-
ponents. It comprises 15 classiﬁcation algorithms, 14 preprocessing methods, and4 data preprocessing methods. We parameterized each of them, which resulted in a
space of 110 hyperparameters. Most of these are conditional hyperparameters that
are only active if their respective component is selected. We note that SMAC [ 27]
can handle this conditionality natively.
All 15 classiﬁcation algorithms in Auto-sklearn are listed in Table 6.1.T h e y
fall into different categories, such as general linear models (2 algorithms), supportvector machines (2), discriminant analysis (2), nearest neighbors (1), naïve Bayes
(3), decision trees (1) and ensembles (4). In contrast to Auto-WEKA [ 42]( a l s o ,
see Chap. 4for a description of Auto-WEKA), we focused our conﬁguration space
on base classiﬁers and excluded meta-models and ensembles that are themselves
parameterized by one or more base classiﬁers. While such ensembles increased
Auto-WEKA’s number of hyperparameters by almost a factor of ﬁve (to 786),Auto-sklearn “only” features 110 hyperparameters. We instead construct complex
ensembles using our post-hoc method from Sect. 6.3.2 . Compared to Auto-WEKA,
this is much more data-efﬁcient: in Auto-WEKA, evaluating the performance ofan ensemble with ﬁve components requires the construction and evaluation of ﬁve
Fig. 6.2 Structured conﬁguration space. Squared boxes denote parent hyperparameters whereas
boxes with rounded edges are leaf hyperparameters. Grey colored boxes mark active hyperparame-ters which form an example conﬁguration and machine learning pipeline. Each pipeline comprisesonefeature preprocessor ,classiﬁer a n du pt ot h r e e data preprocessor methods plus respective
hyperparameters