Chapter 9
The Automatic Statistician
Christian Steinruecken, Emma Smith, David Janz, James Lloyd,
and Zoubin Ghahramani
Abstract The Automatic Statistician project aims to automate data science, pro-
ducing predictions and human-readable reports from raw datasets with minimal
human intervention. Alongside basic graphs and statistics, the generated reports
contain a curation of high-level insights about the dataset that are obtained from
(1) an automated construction of models for the dataset, (2) a comparison of these
models, and (3) a software component that turns these results into natural language
descriptions. This chapter describes the common architecture of such Automatic
Statistician systems, and discusses some of the design decisions and technical
challenges.
9.1 Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) and data science are closely related ﬁelds of research, that
are focused on the development of algorithms for automated learning from data.
These algorithms also underpin many of the recent advances in artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI), which have had a tremendous impact in industry, ushering in a new golden age
of AI. However, many of the current approaches to machine learning, data science,
and AI, suffer from a set of important but related limitations.
Firstly, many of the approaches used are complicated black-boxes that are
difﬁcult to interpret, understand, debug, and trust. This lack of interpretability
hampers the deployment of ML systems. For example, consider the major legal,
technical and ethical consequences of using an uninterpretable black-box system
that arrives at a prediction or decision related to a medical condition, a criminal
justice setting, or in a self-driving car. The realisation that black-box ML methods
are severely limited in such settings has led to major efforts to develop “explainable
AI”, and systems that offer interpretability, trust, and transparency.
C. Steinruecken ( /envelopeback) · E. Smith · D. Janz · J. Lloyd · Z. Ghahramani
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
e-mail: tcs27@cam.ac.uk
© The Author(s) 2019
F. Hutter et al. (eds.), Automated Machine Learning , The Springer Series
on Challenges in Machine Learning, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05318-5_9161