16 M. Feurer and F. Hutter
hyperparameter conﬁgurations if they perform badly on one or a few cross-
validation folds [ 149]. Finally, Jamieson and Talwalkar [ 69] proposed to use the
successive halving algorithm originally introduced by Karnin et al. [ 76] for HPO.
Fig. 1.3 Illustration of successive halving for eight algorithms/conﬁgurations. After evaluating all
algorithms on1
8of the total budget, half of them are dropped and the budget given to the remaining
algorithms is doubled
Successive halving is an extremely simple, yet powerful, and therefore popular
strategy for multi-ﬁdelity algorithm selection: for a given initial budget, query allalgorithms for that budget; then, remove the half that performed worst, double the
budget
2and successively repeat until only a single algorithm is left. This process is
illustrated in Fig. 1.3. Jamieson and Talwalkar [ 69] benchmarked several common
bandit methods and found that successive halving performs well both in terms
of the number of required iterations and in the required computation time, that
the algorithm theoretically outperforms a uniform budget allocation strategy if thealgorithms converge favorably, and that it is preferable to many well-known bandit
strategies from the literature, such as UCB andEXP3 .
While successive halving is an efﬁcient approach, it suffers from the budget-
vs-number of conﬁgurations trade off. Given a total budget, the user has to decide
beforehand whether to try many conﬁgurations and only assign a small budget to
each, or to try only a few and assign them a larger budget. Assigning too small abudget can result in prematurely terminating good conﬁgurations, while assigning
too large a budget can result in running poor conﬁgurations too long and thereby
wasting resources.
2More precisely, drop the worst fractionη−1
ηof algorithms and multiply the budget for the
remaining algorithms by η,w h e r e ηis a hyperparameter. Its default value was changed from 2
to 3 with the introduction of HyperBand [ 90].