7 Towards Automatically-Tuned Deep Neural Networks 137
We describe the conﬁguration space and implementation of Auto-Net 1.0 in
Sect. 7.2and of Auto-Net 2.0 in Sect. 7.3. We then study their performance
empirically in Sect. 7.4and conclude in Sect. 7.5. We omit a thorough discussion
of related work and refer to Chap. 3of this book for an overview on the extremely
active ﬁeld of neural architecture search. Nevertheless, we note that several other
recent tools follow Auto-Net’s goal of automating deep learning, such as Auto-Keras [ 20], Photon-AI, H2O.ai, DEvol or Google’s Cloud AutoML service.
This chapter is an extended version of our 2016 paper introducing Auto-Net,
presented at the 2016 ICML Workshop on AutoML [26].
7.2 Auto-Net 1.0
We now introduce Auto-Net 1.0 and describe its implementation. We chose to
implement this ﬁrst version of Auto-Net as an extension of Auto-sklearn [ 11]b y
adding a new classiﬁcation (and regression) component; the reason for this choice
was that it allows us to leverage existing parts of the machine learning pipeline:
feature preprocessing, data preprocessing and ensemble construction. Here, we limitAuto-Net to fully-connected feed-forward neural networks, since they apply to a
wide range of different datasets; we defer the extension to other types of neural
networks, such as convolutional or recurrent neural networks, to future work. Tohave access to neural network techniques we use the Python deep learning library
Lasagne [ 6], which is built around Theano [ 42]. However, we note that in general
our approach is independent of the neural network implementation.
Following [ 2] and [ 7], we distinguish between layer-independent network hyper-
parameters that control the architecture and training procedure and per-layer
hyperparameters that are set for each layer. In total, we optimize 63 hyperparame-
ters (see Table 7.1), using the same conﬁguration space for all types of supervised
learning (binary, multiclass and multilabel classiﬁcation, as well as regression).
Sparse datasets also share the same conﬁguration space. (Since neural networkscannot handle datasets in sparse representation out of the box, we transform the
data into a dense representation on a per-batch basis prior to feeding it to the neural
network.)
The per-layer hyperparameters of layer kare conditionally dependent on the
number of layers being at least k. For practical reasons, we constrain the number of
layers to be between one and six: ﬁrstly, we aim to keep the training time of a singleconﬁguration low,
1and secondly each layer adds eight per-layer hyperparameters
to the conﬁguration space, such that allowing additional layers would further
complicate the conﬁguration process.
The most common way to optimize the internal weights of neural networks is via
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) using partial derivatives calculated with back-
propagation. Standard SGD crucially depends on the correct setting of the learning
1We aimed to be able to afford the evaluation of several dozens of conﬁgurations within a time
budget of two days on a single CPU.