1 Hyperparameter Optimization 21
1.6 Open Problems and Future Research Directions
We conclude this chapter with a discussion of open problems, current research
questions and potential further developments we expect to have an impact onHPO in the future. Notably, despite their relevance, we leave out discussions on
hyperparameter importance and conﬁguration space deﬁnition as these fall under
the umbrella of meta-learning and can be found in Chap. 2.
1.6.1 Benchmarks and Comparability
Given the breadth of existing HPO methods, a natural question is what are the
strengths and weaknesses of each of them. In order to allow for a fair com-
parison between different HPO approaches, the community needs to design and
agree upon a common set of benchmarks that expands over time, as new HPOvariants, such as multi-ﬁdelity optimization, emerge. As a particular example for
what this could look like we would like to mention the COCO platform (short
for comparing continuous optimizers), which provides benchmark and analysistools for continuous optimization and is used as a workbench for the yearly
Black-Box Optimization Benchmarking (BBOB) challenge [ 11]. Efforts along
similar lines in HPO have already yielded the hyperparameter optimization library(HPOlib [ 29]) and a benchmark collection speciﬁcally for Bayesian optimization
methods [ 25]. However, neither of these has gained similar traction as the COCO
platform.
Additionaly, the community needs clearly deﬁned metrics, but currently different
works use different metrics. One important dimension in which evaluations differ
is whether they report performance on the validation set used for optimization oron a separate test set. The former helps to study the strength of the optimizer
in isolation, without the noise that is added in the evaluation when going from
validation to test set; on the other hand, some optimizers may lead to moreoverﬁtting than others, which can only be diagnosed by using the test set. Another
important dimension in which evaluations differ is whether they report perfor-
mance after a given number of function evaluations or after a given amount oftime. The latter accounts for the difference in time between evaluating different
hyperparameter conﬁgurations and includes optimization overheads, and therefore
reﬂects what is required in practice; however, the former is more convenient andaids reproducibility by yielding the same results irrespective of the hardware used.
To aid reproducibility, especially studies that use time should therefore release an
implementation.
We note that it is important to compare against strong baselines when using
new benchmarks, which is another reason why HPO methods should be published
with an accompanying implementation. Unfortunately, there is no common softwarelibrary as is, for example, available in deep learning research that implements all