6 Auto-sklearn: Efﬁcient and Robust Automated Machine Learning 121
models; in contrast, in Auto-sklearn, ensembles come largely for free, and it is pos-
sible to mix and match models evaluated at arbitrary times during the optimization.
The preprocessing methods for datasets in dense representation in Auto-sklearn
are listed in Table 6.1. They comprise data preprocessors (which change the
feature values and are always used when they apply) and feature preprocessors
(which change the actual set of features, and only one of which [or none] isused). Data preprocessing includes rescaling of the inputs, imputation of missing
values, one-hot encoding and balancing of the target classes. The 14 possible
feature preprocessing methods can be categorized into feature selection (2), kernelapproximation (2), matrix decomposition (3), embeddings (1), feature clustering
(1), polynomial feature expansion (1) and methods that use a classiﬁer for feature
selection (2). For example, L
1-regularized linear SVMs ﬁtted to the data can be used
for feature selection by eliminating features corresponding to zero-valued model
coefﬁcients.
For detailed descriptions of the machine learning algorithms used in Auto-
sklearn we refer to Sect. A.1 and A.2 of the original paper’s supplementary
material [ 20], the scikit-learn documentation [ 36] and the references therein.
To make the most of our computational power and not get stuck in a very slow
run of a certain combination of preprocessing and machine learning algorithm,
we implemented several measures to prevent such long runs. First, we limited the
time for each evaluation of an instantiation of the ML framework. We also limitedthe memory of such evaluations to prevent the operating system from swapping
or freezing. When an evaluation went over one of those limits, we automatically
terminated it and returned the worst possible score for the given evaluationmetric. For some of the models we employed an iterative training procedure; we
instrumented these to still return their current performance value when a limit was
reached before they were terminated. To further reduce the amount of overly longruns, we forbade several combinations of preprocessors and classiﬁcation methods:
in particular, kernel approximation was forbidden to be active in conjunction with
non-linear and tree-based methods as well as the KNN algorithm. (SMAC handlessuch forbidden combinations natively.) For the same reason we also left out feature
learning algorithms, such as dictionary learning.
Another issue in hyperparameter optimization is overﬁtting and data resampling
since the training data of the AutoML system must be divided into a dataset
for training the ML pipeline (training set) and a dataset used to calculate the
loss function for Bayesian optimization (validation set). Here we had to trade offbetween running a more robust cross-validation (which comes at little additional
overhead in SMAC) and evaluating models on all cross-validation folds to allow for
ensemble construction with these models. Thus, for the tasks with a rigid time limitof 1 h in Sect. 6.6, we employed a simple train/test split. In contrast, we were able
to employ ten-fold crossvalidation in our 24 and 30 h runs in Sects. 6.5and6.7.
Finally, not every supervised learning task (for example classiﬁcation with
multiple targets), can be solved by all of the algorithms available in Auto-sklearn.
Thus, given a new dataset, Auto-sklearn preselects the methods that are suitable for
the dataset’s properties. Since scikit-learn methods are restricted to numerical inputvalues, we always transformed data by applying a one-hot encoding to categorical
features. In order to keep the number of dummy features low, we conﬁgured a