164 C. Steinruecken et al.
desirable outputs, for example raw predictions or decisions. In such cases, the
language, search, and evaluation components may be modiﬁed appropriately to
prioritise the chosen objective.
9.2.1 Related Work
Important earlier work includes statistical expert systems [ 11,37], and equation
learning [ 26,27]. The Robot Scientist [16] integrates machine learning and scientiﬁc
discovery in a closed loop with an experimental platform in microbiology to
automate the design and execution of new experiments. Auto-WEKA [17,33] and
Auto-sklearn [6] are projects that automate learning classiﬁers, making heavy use
of Bayesian optimisation techniques. Efforts to automate the application of machine
learning methods to data have recently gained momentum, and may ultimately result
in practical AI systems for data science.
9.3 An Automatic Statistician for Time Series Data
Automatic Statistician systems can be deﬁned for a variety of different objectives,and can be based on different underlying model families. We’ll start by describingone such system, and discuss the wider taxonomy later, with notes on common
design elements and general architecture.
An early Automatic Statistician for one-dimensional regression tasks was
described by Lloyd et al. [ 18]. Their system, called Automatic Bayesian Covariance
Discovery (ABCD) , uses an open-ended language of Gaussian process models
through a compositional grammar over kernels. A Gaussian process (GP) deﬁnes adistribution over functions, and the parameters of the GP – its mean and its kernel –
determine the properties of the functions [ 25]. There is a broad choice of available
kernels that induce function distributions with particular properties; for exampledistributions over functions that are linear, polynomial, periodic, or uncorrelated
noise. A pictorial overview of this system is shown in Fig. 9.2.
9.3.1 The Grammar over Kernels
As mentioned above, a grammar over GP kernels makes it possible to represent
many interesting properties of functions, and gives a systematic way of constructingdistributions over such functions. This grammar over kernels is compositional: it
comprises a set of ﬁxed base kernels , and kernel operators that make it possible to
compose new kernels from existing ones. This grammar was carefully chosen to beinterpretable : each expression in the grammar deﬁnes a kernel that can be described
with a simple but descriptive set of words in human language.