68 T. Elsken et al.
networks to win competition datasets against human experts [ 41]. NAS became
a mainstream research topic in the machine learning community after Zoph and
Le [74] obtained competitive performance on the CIFAR-10 and Penn Treebank
benchmarks with a search strategy based on reinforcement learning. While Zoph
and Le [ 74] use vast computational resources to achieve this result (800 GPUs
for three to four weeks), after their work, a wide variety of methods have beenpublished in quick succession to reduce the computational costs and achieve further
improvements in performance.
To frame NAS as a reinforcement learning (RL) problem [ 4,71,74,75], the
generation of a neural architecture can be considered to be the agent’s action,
with the action space identical to the search space. The agent’s reward is based
on an estimate of the performance of the trained architecture on unseen data (seeSect. 3.4). Different RL approaches differ in how they represent the agent’s policy
and how they optimize it: Zoph and Le [ 74] use a recurrent neural network (RNN)
policy to sequentially sample a string that in turn encodes the neural architecture.They initially trained this network with the REINFORCE policy gradient algorithm,
but in follow-up work use Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) instead [ 75]. Baker
et al. [ 4] use Q-learning to train a policy which sequentially chooses a layer’s type
and corresponding hyperparameters. An alternative view of these approaches is
as sequential decision processes in which the policy samples actions to generate
the architecture sequentially, the environment’s “state” contains a summary of theactions sampled so far, and the (undiscounted) reward is obtained only after the
ﬁnal action. However, since no interaction with an environment occurs during this
sequential process (no external state is observed, and there are no intermediaterewards), we ﬁnd it more intuitive to interpret the architecture sampling process
as the sequential generation of a single action; this simpliﬁes the RL problem to a
stateless multi-armed bandit problem.
A related approach was proposed by Cai et al. [ 10], who frame NAS as a
sequential decision process: in their approach the state is the current (partially
trained) architecture, the reward is an estimate of the architecture’s performance, andthe action corresponds to an application of function-preserving mutations, dubbed
network morphisms [ 12,63], see also Sect. 3.4, followed by a phase of training the
network. In order to deal with variable-length network architectures, they use a bi-directional LSTM to encode architectures into a ﬁxed-length representation. Based
on this encoded representation, actor networks decide on the sampled action. The
combination of these two components constitute the policy, which is trained end-to-end with the REINFORCE policy gradient algorithm. We note that this approach
will not visit the same state (architecture) twice so that strong generalization over
the architecture space is required from the policy.
An alternative to using RL are neuro-evolutionary approaches that use evolu-
tionary algorithms for optimizing the neural architecture. The ﬁrst such approach
for designing neural networks we are aware of dates back almost three decades:Miller et al. [ 44] use genetic algorithms to propose architectures and use back-
propagation to optimize their weights. Many neuro-evolutionary approaches since
then [ 2,55,56] use genetic algorithms to optimize both the neural architecture