90 L. Kotthoff et al.
For each dataset, the second and third columns in Table 4.2present the best
and worst “oracle performance” of the default learners when prepared given all the
training data and evaluated on the test set. We observe that the gap between the bestand worst learner was huge, e.g., misclassiﬁcation rates of 4.93% vs. 99.24% on the
Dorothea dataset. This suggests that some form of algorithm selection is essential
for achieving good performance.
A stronger baseline we will use is an approach that in addition to selecting
the learner, also sets its hyperparameters optimally from a predeﬁned set. More
precisely, this baseline performs an exhaustive search over a grid of hyperparametersettings for each of the base learners, discretizing numeric parameters into three
points. We refer to this baseline as grid search and note that—as an optimization
approach in the joint space of algorithms and hyperparameter settings—it is a simpleCASH algorithm. However, it is quite expensive, requiring more than 10,000 CPU
hours on each of Gisette, Convex, MNIST, Rot MNIST +BI, and both CIFAR
variants, rendering it infeasible to use in most practical applications. (In contrast,we gave Auto-WEKA only 120 CPU hours.)
Table 4.2(columns four and ﬁve) shows the best and worst “oracle performance”
on the test set across the classiﬁers evaluated by grid search. Comparing theseperformances to the default performance obtained using Ex-Def, we note that in
most cases, even WEKA’s best default algorithm could be improved by selecting
better hyperparameter settings, sometimes rather substantially: e.g., , in the CIFAR-10 small task, grid search offered a 13% reduction in error over Ex-Def.
It has been demonstrated in previous work that, holding the overall time budget
constant, grid search is outperformed by random search over the hyperparameterspace [ 5]. Our ﬁnal baseline, random search , implements such a method, picking
algorithms and hyperparameters sampled at random, and computes their perfor-
mance on the 10 cross-validation folds until it exhausts its time budget. For eachdataset, we ﬁrst used 750 CPU hours to compute the cross-validation performance
of randomly sampled combinations of algorithms and hyperparameters. We then
simulated runs of random search by sampling combinations without replacementfrom these results that consumed 120 CPU hours and returning the sampled
combination with the best performance.
4.5.2 Results for Cross-Validation Performance
The middle portion of Table 4.2reports our main results. First, we note that grid
search over the hyperparameters of all base-classiﬁers yielded better results thanEx-Def in 17/21 cases, which underlines the importance of not only choosing the
right algorithm but of also setting its hyperparameters well.
However, we note that we gave grid search a very large time budget (often
in excess 10,000 CPU hours for each dataset, in total more than 10 CPU years),
meaning that it would often be infeasible to use in practice.