152 R. S. Olson and J. H. Moore
In response to this challenge, several automated machine learning methods have
been developed over the years [ 10]. Over the past several years, we have been
developing a Tree-based Pipeline Optimization Tool (TPOT) that automaticallydesigns and optimizes machine learning pipelines for a given problem domain [ 16],
without any need for human intervention. In short, TPOT optimizes machine
learning pipelines using a version of genetic programming (GP), a well-knownevolutionary computation technique for automatically constructing computer pro-
grams [ 1]. Previously, we demonstrated that combining GP with Pareto optimization
enables TPOT to automatically construct high-accuracy andcompact pipelines that
consistently outperform basic machine learning analyses [ 13]. In this chapter, we
extend that benchmark to include 150 supervised classiﬁcation tasks and evaluate
TPOT in a wide variety of application domains ranging from genetic analyses toimage classiﬁcation and more.
This chapter is an extended version of our 2016 paper introducing TPOT,
presented at the 2016 ICML Workshop on AutoML [15].
8.2 Methods
In the following sections, we provide an overview of the Tree-based Pipeline
Optimization Tool (TPOT) v0.3, including the machine learning operators used as
genetic programming (GP) primitives, the tree-based pipelines used to combine the
primitives into working machine learning pipelines, and the GP algorithm used toevolve said tree-based pipelines. We follow with a description of the datasets used to
evaluate the latest version of TPOT in this chapter. TPOT is an open source project
on GitHub, and the underlying Python code can be found at https://github.com/
rhiever/tpot .
8.2.1 Machine Learning Pipeline Operators
At its core, TPOT is a wrapper for the Python machine learning package, scikit-
learn [ 17]. Thus, each machine learning pipeline operator (i.e., GP primitive)
in TPOT corresponds to a machine learning algorithm, such as a supervisedclassiﬁcation model or standard feature scaler. All implementations of the machine
learning algorithms listed below are from scikit-learn (except XGBoost), and we
refer to the scikit-learn documentation [ 17] and [ 9] for detailed explanations of the
machine learning algorithms used in TPOT.
Supervised Classiﬁcation Operators DecisionTree, RandomForest, eXtreme
Gradient Boosting Classiﬁer (from XGBoost, [ 3]), LogisticRegression, and
KNearestNeighborClassiﬁer. Classiﬁcation operators store the classiﬁer’spredictions as a new feature as well as the classiﬁcation for the pipeline.