4 Auto-WEKA: Automatic Model Selection and Hyperparameter ... 83
This chapter is based on two previous papers, published in the proceedings
of KDD 2013 [31] and in the journal of machine learning research (JMLR) in
2017 [ 20].
4.2 Preliminaries
We consider learning a function f:X/mapsto→Y, whereYis either ﬁnite (for
classiﬁcation), or continuous (for regression). A learning algorithm Amaps a set
{d1,...,d n}of training data points di=(xi,yi)∈X×Yto such a function,
which is often expressed via a vector of model parameters . Most learning algorithms
Afurther expose hyperparameters λ∈/Lambda1, which change the way the learning
algorithm Aλitself works. For example, hyperparameters are used to describe a
description-length penalty, the number of neurons in a hidden layer, the number ofdata points that a leaf in a decision tree must contain to be eligible for splitting, etc.
These hyperparameters are typically optimized in an “outer loop” that evaluates the
performance of each hyperparameter conﬁguration using cross-validation.
4.2.1 Model Selection
Given a set of learning algorithms Aand a limited amount of training data D=
{(x1,y1),...,( xn,yn)}, the goal of model selection is to determine the algorithm
A∗∈Awith optimal generalization performance. Generalization performance
is estimated by splitting Dinto disjoint training and validation sets D(i)
trainand
D(i)
valid, learning functions fiby applying A∗toD(i)
train, and evaluating the predictive
performance of these functions on D(i)
valid. This allows for the model selection
problem to be written as:
A∗∈argmin
A∈A1
kk/summationdisplay
i=1L(A,D(i)
train,D(i)
valid),
whereL(A,D(i)
train,D(i)
valid)is the loss achieved by Awhen trained on D(i)
trainand
evaluated on D(i)
valid.
We use k-fold cross-validation [ 19], which splits the training data into kequal-
sized partitions D(1)
valid,...,D(k)
valid, and sets D(i)
train=D\D(i)
validfori=1,...,k .1
1There are other ways of estimating generalization performance; e.g., we also experimented with
repeated random subsampling validation [ 19], and obtained similar results.