36 J. Vanschoren
known as meta-features . Second, we need to learn from this prior meta-data,
to extract and transfer knowledge that guides the search for optimal models for
new tasks. This chapter presents a concise overview of different meta-learningapproaches to do this effectively.
The term meta-learning covers any type of learning based on prior experience
with other tasks. The more similar those previous tasks are, the more types of
meta-data we can leverage, and deﬁning task similarity will be a key overarching
challenge. Perhaps needless to say, there is no free lunch [ 57,188]. When a new
task represents completely unrelated phenomena, or random noise, leveraging priorexperience will not be effective. Luckily, in real-world tasks, there are plenty of
opportunities to learn from prior experience.
In the remainder of this chapter, we categorize meta-learning techniques based
on the type of meta-data they leverage, from the most general to the most task-
speciﬁc. First, in Sect. 2.2, we discuss how to learn purely from model evaluations .
These techniques can be used to recommend generally useful conﬁgurations andconﬁguration search spaces, as well as transfer knowledge from empirically similar
tasks. In Sect. 2.3, we discuss how we can characterize tasks to more explicitly
express task similarity and build meta-models that learn the relationships betweendata characteristics and learning performance. Finally, Sect. 2.4covers how we can
transfer trained model parameters between tasks that are inherently similar, e.g.
sharing the same input features, which enables transfer learning [ 111] and few-shot
learning [ 126] among others.
Note that while multi-task learning [25] (learning multiple related tasks simulta-
neously) and ensemble learning [35] (building multiple models on the same task),
can often be meaningfully combined with meta-learning systems, they do not in
themselves involve learning from prior experience on other tasks.
This chapter is based on a very recent survey article [ 176].
2.2 Learning from Model Evaluations
Consider that we have access to prior tasks tj∈T, the set of all known tasks, as
well as a set of learning algorithms, fully deﬁned by their conﬁgurations θi∈/Theta1;
here/Theta1represents a discrete, continuous, or mixed conﬁguration space which can
cover hyperparameter settings, pipeline components and/or network architecture
components. Pis the set of all prior scalar evaluations Pi,j=P(θi,tj)of
conﬁguration θion task tj, according to a predeﬁned evaluation measure, e.g.
accuracy, and model evaluation technique, e.g. cross-validation. Pnewis the set
of known evaluations Pi,new on a new task tnew. We now want to train a meta-
learner Lthat predicts recommended conﬁgurations /Theta1∗
newfor a new task tnew.T h e
meta-learner is trained on meta-data P∪Pnew.Pis usually gathered beforehand,
or extracted from meta-data repositories [ 174,177].Pnewis learned by the meta-
learning technique itself in an iterative fashion, sometimes warm-started with an
initial P/prime
newgenerated by another method.