40 J. Vanschoren
conﬁguration θin which linear surrogate models can accurately predict Pi,new .T h e
surrogate models are pre-trained on OpenML meta-data to provide a warm-start
for optimizing NN(θi)in a multi-task learning setting. Earlier work on multi-task
learning [ 166] assumed that we already have a set of ‘similar’ source tasks tj.
It transfers information between these tjandtnewby building a joint GP model
for Bayesian optimization that learns and exploits the exact relationship betweenthe tasks. Learning a joint GP tends to be less scalable than building one GP per
task, though. Springenberg et al. [ 161] also assumes that the tasks are related and
similar, but learns the relationship between tasks during the optimization processusing Bayesian Neural Networks. As such, their method is somewhat of a hybrid
of the previous two approaches. Golovin et al. [ 58] assume a sequence order (e.g.,
time) across tasks. It builds a stack of GP regressors, one per task, training each GPon the residuals relative to the regressor below it. Hence, each task uses the tasks
before it to deﬁne its priors.
2.2.3.4 Other Techniques
Multi-armed bandits [ 139] provide yet another approach to ﬁnd the source tasks t
j
most related to tnew[125]. In this analogy, each tjis one arm, and the (stochastic)
reward for selecting (pulling) a particular prior task (arm) is deﬁned in terms ofthe error in the predictions of a GP-based Bayesian optimizer that models the
prior evaluations of t
jas noisy measurements and combines them with the existing
evaluations on tnew. The cubic scaling of the GP makes this approach less scalable,
though.
Another way to deﬁne task similarity is to take the existing evaluations Pi,j,u s e
Thompson Sampling [ 167] to obtain the optima distribution ρj
max, and then measure
the KL-divergence [ 80] between ρj
maxandρnew
max[124]. These distributions are then
merged into a mixture distribution based on the similarities and used to build anacquisition function that predicts the next most promising conﬁguration to evaluate.
It is so far only evaluated to tune 2 SVM hyperparameters using 5 tasks.
Finally, a complementary way to leverage Pis to recommend which conﬁgu-
rations should notbe used. After training surrogate models per task, we can look
up which t
jare most similar to tnew, and then use sj(θi)to discover regions of /Theta1
where performance is predicted to be poor. Excluding these regions can speed up thesearch for better-performing ones. Wistuba et al. [ 185], do this using a task similarity
measure based on the Kendall tau rank correlation coefﬁcient [ 73] between the ranks
obtained by ranking conﬁgurations θ
iusingPi,jandPi,new , respectively.