4 M. Feurer and F. Hutter
• improve the performance of machine learning algorithms (by tailoring them
to the problem at hand); this has led to new state-of-the-art performances for
important machine learning benchmarks in several studies (e.g. [ 105,140]).
• improve the reproducibility and fairness of scientiﬁc studies. Automated HPO
is clearly more reproducible than manual search. It facilitates fair comparisons
since different methods can only be compared fairly if they all receive the samelevel of tuning for the problem at hand [ 14,133].
The problem of HPO has a long history, dating back to the 1990s (e.g., [ 77,
82,107,126]), and it was also established early that different hyperparameter
conﬁgurations tend to work best for different datasets [ 82]. In contrast, it is a rather
new insight that HPO can be used to adapt general-purpose pipelines to speciﬁcapplication domains [ 30]. Nowadays, it is also widely acknowledged that tuned
hyperparameters improve over the default setting provided by common machine
learning libraries [ 100,116,130,149].
Because of the increased usage of machine learning in companies, HPO is also of
substantial commercial interest and plays an ever larger role there, be it in company-
internal tools [ 45], as part of machine learning cloud services [ 6,89], or as a service
by itself [ 137].
HPO faces several challenges which make it a hard problem in practice:
• Function evaluations can be extremely expensive for large models (e.g., in deep
learning), complex machine learning pipelines, or large datesets.
• The conﬁguration space is often complex (comprising a mix of continuous, cat-
egorical and conditional hyperparameters) and high-dimensional. Furthermore,it is not always clear which of an algorithm’s hyperparameters need to be
optimized, and in which ranges.
• We usually don’t have access to a gradient of the loss function with respect to
the hyperparameters. Furthermore, other properties of the target function often
used in classical optimization do not typically apply, such as convexity and
smoothness.
• One cannot directly optimize for generalization performance as training datasets
are of limited size.
We refer the interested reader to other reviews of HPO for further discussions on
this topic [ 64,94].
This chapter is structured as follows. First, we deﬁne the HPO problem for-
mally and discuss its variants (Sect. 1.2). Then, we discuss blackbox optimization
algorithms for solving HPO (Sect. 1.3). Next, we focus on modern multi-ﬁdelity
methods that enable the use of HPO even for very expensive models, by exploitingapproximate performance measures that are cheaper than full model evaluations
(Sect. 1.4). We then provide an overview of the most important hyperparameter
optimization systems and applications to AutoML (Sect. 1.5) and end the chapter
with a discussion of open problems (Sect. 1.6).