Foreword
“I’d like to use machine learning, but I can’t invest much time. ” That is something
you hear all too often in industry and from researchers in other disciplines. Theresulting demand for hands-free solutions to machine learning has recently given
rise to the ﬁeld of automated machine learning (AutoML), and I’m delighted that
with this book, there is now the ﬁrst comprehensive guide to this ﬁeld.
I have been very passionate about automating machine learning myself ever
since our Automatic Statistician project started back in 2014. I want us to be
really ambitious in this endeavor; we should try to automate all aspects of theentire machine learning and data analysis pipeline. This includes automating data
collection and experiment design; automating data cleanup and missing data imputa-
tion; automating feature selection and transformation; automating model discovery,criticism, and explanation; automating the allocation of computational resources;
automating hyperparameter optimization; automating inference; and automating
model monitoring and anomaly detection. This is a huge list of things, and we’doptimally like to automate all of it.
There is a caveat of course. While fullautomation can motivate scientiﬁc
research and provide a long-term engineering goal, in practice, we probably want tosemiautomate most of these and gradually remove the human in the loop as needed.
Along the way, what is going to happen if we try to do all this automation is that
we are likely to develop powerful tools that will help make the practice of machinelearning, ﬁrst of all, more systematic (since it’s very ad hoc these days) and also
more efﬁcient .
These are worthy goals even if we did not succeed in the ﬁnal goal of automation,
but as this book demonstrates, current AutoML methods can already surpass human
machine learning experts in several tasks. This trend is likely only going to intensify
as we’re making progress and as computation becomes ever cheaper, and AutoMLis therefore clearly one of the topics that is here to stay. It is a great time to get
involved in AutoML, and this book is an excellent starting point.
This book includes very up-to-date overviews of the bread-and-butter techniques
we need in AutoML (hyperparameter optimization, meta-learning, and neural
architecture search), provides in-depth discussions of existing AutoML systems, and
vii