50 J. Vanschoren
optimization or reinforcement learning. See Chap. 3for an in-depth discussion.
However, most of these methods do not (yet) generalize across tasks and are
therefore not discussed here.
2.4.3 Few-Shot Learning
A particularly challenging meta-learning problem is to train an accurate deeplearning model using only a few training examples, given prior experience with
very similar tasks for which we have large training sets available. This is called
few-shot learning . Humans have an innate ability to do this, and we wish to build
machine learning agents that can do the same [ 82]. A particular example of this is
‘K-shot N-way’ classiﬁcation, in which we are given many examples (e.g., images)
of certain classes (e.g., objects), and want to learn a classiﬁer l
newable to classify
Nnew classes using only Kexamples of each.
Using prior experience, we can, for instance, learn a common feature represen-
tation of all the tasks, start training lnewwith a better model parameter initialization
Winitand acquire an inductive bias that helps guide the optimization of the model
parameters, so that lnewcan be trained much faster than otherwise possible.
Earlier work on one-shot learning is largely based on hand-engineered features
[10,43,44,50]. With meta-learning, however, we hope to learn a common feature
representation for all tasks in an end-to-end fashion.
Vinyals et al. [ 181] state that, to learn from very little data, one should look
to non-parameteric models (such as k-nearest neighbors), which use a memory
component rather than learning many model parameters. Their meta-learner is a
Matching Network that applies the idea of a memory component in a neural net. Itlearns a common representation for the labelled examples, and matches each new
test instance to the memorized examples using cosine similarity. The network is
trained on minibatches with only a few examples of a speciﬁc task each.
Snell et al. [ 157] propose Prototypical Networks, which map examples to a p-
dimensional vector space such that examples of a given output class are close
together. It then calculates a prototype (mean vector) for every class. New testinstances are mapped to the same vector space and a distance metric is used to
create a softmax over all possible classes. Ren et al. [ 131] extend this approach to
semi-supervised learning.
Ravi and Larochelle [ 126] use an LSTM-based meta-learner to learn an update
rule for training a neural network learner. With every new example, the learner
returns the current gradient and loss to the LSTM meta-learner, which then updatesthe model parameters {w
k}of the learner. The meta-learner is trained across all prior
tasks.
Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) [ 51], on the other hand, does not try
to learn an update rule, but instead learns a model parameter initialization Winitthat
generalizes better to similar tasks. Starting from a random {wk}, it iteratively selects
a batch of prior tasks, and for each it trains the learner on Kexamples to compute the