10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 199
Fig. 10.4 Distribution of performance on the datasets of the 2015/2016 challenge (violin
plots). We show for each dataset the performances of participants at the end of AutoML and
Tweakathon phases, as revealed on the leaderboard. The median and quartiles are represented byhorizontal notches. The distribution proﬁle (as ﬁtted with a kernel method) and its mirror imageare represented vertically by the gray shaded area. We show in red the median performance overall datasets and the corresponding quartiles. ( a)AutoML (blind testing). The ﬁrst 5 datasets were
provided for development purpose only and were not used for blind testing in an AutoML phase.In round 3, the code of many participants failed because of computational limits. ( b)Tweakathon
(manual tweaking). The last ﬁve datasets were only used for ﬁnal blind testing and the data were
never revealed for a Tweakathon. Round 3 was not particularly difﬁcult with additional computepower and memory
were split among the tied teams. Among the winners, two teams used the starting
kit. Most of the other teams used either the starting kit or the solution open sourced
by the AAD Freiburg team in the 2015/2016 challenge.
10.5.3 Difﬁculty of Datasets/Tasks
In this section, we assess dataset difﬁculty, or rather task difﬁculty since the par-
ticipants had to solve prediction problems for given datasets, performance metrics,and computational time constraints. The tasks of the challenge presented a variety
of difﬁculties, but those were not equally represented (Tables 10.2 and10.3):
•Categorical variables and missing data. Few datasets had categorical variables
in the 2015/2016 challenge (ADULT, ALBERT, and WALDO), and not very
many variables were categorical in those datasets. Likewise, very few datasets
had missing values (ADULT and ALBERT) and those included only a fewmissing values. So neither categorical variables nor missing data presented a
real difﬁculty in this challenge, though ALBERT turned out to be one of the
most difﬁcult datasets because it was also one of the largest ones. This situationchanged drastically for the 2018 challenge where ﬁve out of the ten datasets
included categorical variables (RL, PM, RI, RH and RM) and missing values