10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 191
within given time and computer resource constraints (Sect. 10.4.1 ), and given a
particular metric (Sect. 10.4.2 ), which varies from dataset to dataset. During the
challenges, the identity and description of the datasets is concealed (except in thevery ﬁrst round or phase where sample data is distributed) to avoid the use of domain
knowledge and to push participants to design fully automated ML solutions. In the
2015/2016 AutoML challenge, the datasets were introduced in a series of rounds(Sect. 10.4.3 ), alternating periods of code development (Tweakathon phases) and
blind tests of code without human intervention (AutoML phases). Either results or
code could be submitted during development phases, but code had to be submittedto be part of the AutoML “blind test” ranking. In the 2018 edition of the AutoML
challenge, the protocol was simpliﬁed. We had only one round in two phases: a
development phase in which 5 datasets were released for practice purposes, and aﬁnal “blind test” phase with 5 new datasets that were never used before.
10.4.1 Time Budget and Computational Resources
The Codalab platform provides computational resources shared by all participants.
We used up to 10 compute workers processing in parallel the queue of submissions
made by participants. Each compute worker was equipped with 8 cores x86_64.
Memory was increased from 24 to 56 GB after round 3 of the 2015/2016
AutoML challenge. For the 2018 AutoML challenge computing resources were
reduced, as we wanted to motivate the development of more efﬁcient yet effectiveAutoML solutions. We used 6 compute workers processing in parallel the queue of
submissions. Each compute worker was equipped with 2 cores x86_64 and 8 GB of
memory.
To ensure fairness, when a code submission was evaluated, a compute worker
was dedicated to processing that submission only, and its execution time was limited
to a given time budget (which may vary from dataset to dataset). The time budgetwas provided to the participants with each dataset in its infoﬁle. It was generally set
to 1200 s (20 min) per dataset, for practical reasons, except in the ﬁrst phase of the
ﬁrst round. However, the participants did not know this ahead of time and thereforetheir code had to be capable to manage a given time budget. The participants who
submitted results instead of code were not constrained by the time budget since
their code was run on their own platform. This was potentially advantageous forentries counting towards the Final phases (immediately following a Tweakathon).
Participants wishing to also enter the AutoML (blind testing) phases, which required
submitting code, could submit both results and code (simultaneously). When resultswere submitted, they were used as entries in the on-going phase. They did not need
to be produced by the submitted code; i.e., if a participant did not want to share
personal code, he/she could submit the sample code provided by the organizerstogether with his/her results. The code was automatically forwarded to the AutoML
phases for “blind testing”. In AutoML phases, result submission was not possible.