Preface xi
Chap. 8describes the TPOT system, which automatically constructs and opti-
mizes tree-based machine learning pipelines. These pipelines are more ﬂexible than
approaches that consider only a set of ﬁxed machine learning components that areconnected in predeﬁned ways.
Chap. 9presents the Automatic Statistician, a system to automate data science
by generating fully automated reports that include an analysis of the data, as wellas predictive models and a comparison of their performance. A unique feature of
the Automatic Statistician is that it provides natural-language descriptions of the
results, suitable for non-experts in machine learning.
Finally, Part IIIand Chap. 10give an overview of the AutoML challenges, which
have been running since 2015. The purpose of these challenges is to spur the
development of approaches that perform well on practical problems and determinethe best overall approach from the submissions. The chapter details the ideas
and concepts behind the challenges and their design, as well as results from past
challenges.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst comprehensive compilation of
all aspects of AutoML: the methods behind it, available systems that implement
AutoML in practice, and the challenges for evaluating them. This book providespractitioners with background and ways to get started developing their own AutoML
systems and details existing state-of-the-art systems that can be applied immediately
to a wide range of machine learning tasks. The ﬁeld is moving quickly, and with thisbook, we hope to help organize and digest the many recent advances. We hope you
enjoy this book and join the growing community of AutoML enthusiasts.
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank all the chapter authors, without whom this book would not have
been possible. We are also grateful to the European Union’s Horizon 2020 researchand innovation program for covering the open access fees for this book through
Frank’s ERC Starting Grant (grant no. 716721).
Freiburg, Germany Frank Hutter
Laramie, WY , USA Lars Kotthoff
Eindhoven, The Netherlands Joaquin VanschorenOctober 2018