162 C. Steinruecken et al.
Secondly, the development of ML systems has turned into a cottage industry
where ML experts tackle problems by hand-designing solutions that often reﬂect
a set of ad-hoc manual decisions, or the preferences and biases of the expert. It isironic that machine learning, a ﬁeld dedicated to building systems that automatically
learn from data, is so dependent on human experts and manual tuning of models
and learning algorithms. Manual search over possible models and methods canresult in solutions that are sub-optimal across any number of metrics. Moreover,
the tremendous imbalance between the supply of experts and the demand for data
science and ML solutions is likely resulting in many missed opportunities forapplications that could have a major beneﬁt for society.
The vision of the Automatic Statistician is to automate many aspects of data
analysis, model discovery, and explanation. In a sense, the goal is to developanAI for data science – a system that can reason about patterns in data and
explain them to the user. Ideally, given some raw data, such a system should be
able to:
• automate the process of feature selection and transformation,
• deal with the messiness of real data, including missing values, outliers, and
different types and encodings of variables,
• search over a large space of models so as to automatically discover a good model
that captures any reliable patterns in the data,
• ﬁnd such a model while avoiding both overﬁtting and underﬁtting,
• explain the patterns that have been found to the user, ideally by having a
conversation with the user about the data, and
• do all of this in a manner that is efﬁcient and robust with respect to
constraints on compute time, memory, amount of data, and other relevant
resources.
While this agenda is obviously a very ambitious one, the work to date on the
Automatic Statistician project has made progress on many of the above desiderata.
In particular, the ability to discover plausible models from data and to explain thesediscoveries in plain English, is one of the distinguishing features of the Automatic
Statistician [ 18]. Such a feature could be useful to almost any ﬁeld or endeavour that
is reliant on extracting knowledge from data.
In contrast to much of the machine learning literature that has been focused on
extracting increasing performance improvements on pattern recognition problems
(using techniques such as kernel methods, random forests, or deep learning), theAutomatic Statistician needs to build models that are composed of interpretable
components, and to have a principled way of representing uncertainty about model
structures given data. It also needs to be able to give reasonable answers not just forbig data sets, but also for small ones.