22 M. Feurer and F. Hutter
the basic building blocks [ 2,117]. As a simple, yet effective baseline that can
be trivially included in empirical studies, Jamieson and Recht [ 68] suggest to
compare against different parallelization levels of random search to demonstratethe speedups over regular random search. When comparing to other optimization
techniques it is important to compare against a solid implementation, since, e.g.,
simpler versions of Bayesian optimization have been shown to yield inferiorperformance [ 79,140,142].
1.6.2 Gradient-Based Optimization
In some cases (e.g., least-squares support vector machines and neural networks) it
is possible to obtain the gradient of the model selection criterion with respect to
some of the model hyperparameters. Different to blackbox HPO, in this case eachevaluation of the target function results in an entire hypergradient vector instead of
a single ﬂoat value, allowing for faster HPO.
Maclaurin et al. [ 99] described a procedure to compute the exact gradients of
validation performance with respect to all continuous hyperparameters of a neural
network by backpropagating through the entire training procedure of stochastic
gradient descent with momentum (using a novel, memory-efﬁcient algorithm).Being able to handle many hyperparameters efﬁciently through gradient-based
methods allows for a new paradigm of hyperparametrizing the model to obtain
ﬂexibility over model classes, regularization, and training methods. Maclaurin etal. demonstrated the applicability of gradient-based HPO to many high-dimensional
HPO problems, such as optimizing the learning rate of a neural network for each
iteration and layer separately, optimizing the weight initialization scale hyperpa-rameter for each layer in a neural network, optimizing the l2 penalty for each
individual parameter in logistic regression, and learning completely new training
datasets. As a small downside, backpropagating through the entire training proce-dure comes at the price of doubling the time complexity of the training procedure.
The described method can also be generalized to work with other parameter
update algorithms [ 36]. To overcome the necessity of backpropagating through
the complete training procedure, later work allows to perform hyperparameter
updates with respect to a separate validation set interleaved with the training process
[5,10,36,37,93].
Recent examples of gradient-based optimization of simple model’s hyperparam-
eters [ 118] and of neural network structures (see Chap. 3) show promising results,
outperforming state-of-the-art Bayesian optimization models. Despite being highlymodel-speciﬁc, the fact that gradient-based hyperparemeter optimization allows
tuning several hundreds of hyperparameters could allow substantial improvements
in HPO.