20 M. Feurer and F. Hutter
performance than a Gaussian process-based approach. TPE, as well as Bayesian
optimization with random forests, were also successful for joint neural architecture
search and hyperparameter optimization [ 14,106].
Another important step in applying Bayesian optimization to HPO was made by
Snoek et al. in the 2012 paper Practical Bayesian Optimization of Machine Learning
Algorithms [140], which describes several tricks of the trade for Gaussian process-
based HPO implemented in the Spearmint system and obtained a new state-of-the-
art result for hyperparameter optimization of deep neural networks.
Independently of the Full Model Selection paradigm, Auto-WEKA [ 149] (see
also Chap. 4) introduced the Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter
Optimization (CASH) problem, in which the choice of a classiﬁcation algorithm is
modeled as a categorical variable, the algorithm hyperparameters are modeled asconditional hyperparameters, and the random-forest based Bayesian optimization
system SMAC [ 59] is used for joint optimization in the resulting 786-dimensional
conﬁguration space.
In recent years, multi-ﬁdelity methods have become very popular, especially
in deep learning. Firstly, using low-ﬁdelity approximations based on data subsets,
feature subsets and short runs of iterative algorithms, Hyperband [ 90]w a ss h o w n
to outperform blackbox Bayesian optimization methods that did not take these
lower ﬁdelities into account. Finally, most recently, in the 2018 paper BOHB:
Robust and Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization at Scale , Falkner et al. [ 33]
introduced a robust, ﬂexible, and parallelizable combination of Bayesian optimiza-
tion and Hyperband that substantially outperformed both Hyperband and blackbox
Bayesian optimization for a wide range of problems, including tuning support vectormachines, various types of neural networks, and reinforcement learning algorithms.
At the time of writing, we make the following recommendations for which tools
we would use in practical applications of HPO:
• If multiple ﬁdelities are applicable (i.e., if it is possible to deﬁne substantially
cheaper versions of the objective function of interest, such that the performancefor these roughly correlates with the performance for the full objective function
of interest), we recommend BOHB [ 33] as a robust, efﬁcient, versatile, and
parallelizable default hyperparameter optimization method.
• If multiple ﬁdelities are not applicable:
– If all hyperparameters are real-valued and one can only afford a few dozen
function evaluations, we recommend the use of a Gaussian process-basedBayesian optimization tool, such as Spearmint [ 140].
– For large and conditional conﬁguration spaces we suggest either the random
forest-based SMAC [ 59]o rT P E[ 14], due to their proven strong performance
on such tasks [ 29].
– For purely real-valued spaces and relatively cheap objective functions, for
which one can afford more than hundreds of evaluations, we recommendCMA-ES [ 51].