10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 185
this framework, the optimization of θis not performed sequentially [ 8]. All the
parameters are sampled along a regular scheme, usually in linear or log scale. This
leads to a number of possibilities that exponentially increases with the dimensionofθ.k-fold cross-validation consists of splitting the dataset into kfolds; (k−1)
folds are used for training and the remaining fold is used for testing; eventually, the
average of the test scores obtained on the kfolds is reported. Note that some ML
toolkits currently support cross-validation. There is a lack of principled guidelines
to determine the number of grid points and the value of k(with the exception of
[20]), and there is no guidance for regularizing J
2, yet this simple method is a good
baseline approach.
Efforts have been made to optimize continuous hyper-parameters with bilevel
optimization methods, using either the k-fold cross-validation estimator [ 7,50]
or the leave-one-out estimator as the upper-level objective J2. The leave-one-out
estimator may be efﬁciently computed, in closed form, as a by-product of training
only one predictor on all the training examples (e.g., virtual-leave-one-out [ 38]).
The method was improved by adding a regularization of J2[17]. Gradient descent
has been used to accelerate the search, by making a local quadratic approximation
ofJ2[44]. In some cases, the full J2(θ)can be computed from a few key examples
[39,54]. Other approaches minimize an approximation or an upper bound of the
leave-one-out error, instead of its exact form [ 53,68]. Nevertheless, these methods
are still limited to speciﬁc models and continuous hyper-parameters.
An early attempt at full model selection was the pattern search method that uses
k-fold cross-validation for J2. It explores the hyper-parameter space by steps of the
same magnitude, and when no change in any parameter further decreases J2,t h e
step size is halved and the process repeated until the steps are deemed sufﬁciently
small [ 49]. Escalante et al. [ 24] addressed the full model selection problem using
Particle Swarm Optimization, which optimizes a problem by having a populationof candidate solutions (particles), and moving these particles around the hyper-
parameter space using the particle’s position and velocity. k-fold cross-validation is
also used for J
2. This approach retrieved the winning model in ∼76% of the cases.
Overﬁtting was controlled heuristically with early stopping and the proportion of
training and validation data was not optimized. Although progress has been made
in experimental design to reduce the risk of overﬁtting [ 42,47], in particular by
splitting data in a principled way [ 61], to our knowledge, no one has addressed the
problem of optimally splitting data.
While regularizing the second level of inference is a recent addition to the
frequentist ML community, it has been an intrinsic part of Bayesian modeling
via the notion of hyper-prior. Some methods of multi-level optimization combine
importance sampling and Monte-Carlo Markov Chains [ 2]. The ﬁeld of Bayesian
hyper-parameter optimization has rapidly developed and yielded promising results,
in particular by using Gaussian processes to model generalization performance [ 60,
63]. But Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) approaches modeling P(x|y)and
P(y) rather than modeling P(y|x)directly [ 9,10] have been found to outperform
GP-based Bayesian optimization for structured optimization problems with many
hyperparameters including discrete ones [ 23]. The central idea of these methods is
to ﬁtJ2(θ)to a smooth function in an attempt to reduce variance and to estimate the