1 Hyperparameter Optimization 19
Grid search has been used for hyperparameter optimization since the 1990s [ 71,
107] and was already supported by early machine learning tools in 2002 [ 35].
The ﬁrst adaptive optimization methods applied to HPO were greedy depth-ﬁrstsearch [ 82] and pattern search [ 109], both improving over default hyperparam-
eter conﬁgurations, and pattern search improving over grid search, too. Genetic
algorithms were ﬁrst applied to tuning the two hyperparameters Candγof an RBF-
SVM in 2004 [ 119] and resulted in improved classiﬁcation performance in less time
than grid search. In the same year, an evolutionary algorithm was used to learn a
composition of three different kernels for an SVM, the kernel hyperparameters andto jointly select a feature subset; the learned combination of kernels was able to
outperform every single optimized kernel. Similar in spirit, also in 2004, a genetic
algorithm was used to select both the features used by and the hyperparameters ofeither an SVM or a neural network [ 129].
CMA-ES was ﬁrst used for hyperparameter optimization in 2005 [ 38], in that
case to optimize an SVM’s hyperparameters Candγ, a kernel lengthscale l
ifor
each dimension of the input data, and a complete rotation and scaling matrix. Much
more recently, CMA-ES has been demonstrated to be an excellent choice for parallel
HPO, outperforming state-of-the-art Bayesian optimization tools when optimizing19 hyperparameters of a deep neural network on 30 GPUs in parallel [ 91].
In 2009, Escalante et al. [ 30] extended the HPO problem to the Full Model
Selection problem, which includes selecting a preprocessing algorithm, a feature
selection algorithm, a classiﬁer and all their hyperparameters. By being able to
construct a machine learning pipeline from multiple off-the-shelf machine learning
algorithms using HPO, the authors empirically found that they can apply theirmethod to any data set as no domain knowledge is required, and demonstrated the
applicability of their approach to a variety of domains [ 32,49]. Their proposed
method, particle swarm model selection (PSMS), uses a modiﬁed particle swarmoptimizer to handle the conditional conﬁguration space. To avoid overﬁtting,
PSMS was extended with a custom ensembling strategy which combined the best
solutions from multiple generations [ 31]. Since particle swarm optimization was
originally designed to work on continuous conﬁguration spaces, PSMS was later
also extended to use a genetic algorithm to optimize the pipeline structure and
only use particle swarm optimization to optimize the hyperparameters of eachpipeline [ 145].
To the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst application of Bayesian optimization to
HPO dates back to 2005, when Frohlich and Zell [ 39] used an online Gaussian
process together with EI to optimize the hyperparameters of an SVM, achieving
speedups of factor 10 (classiﬁcation, 2 hyperparameters) and 100 (regression, 3
hyperparameters) over grid search. Tuned Data Mining [ 84] proposed to tune the
hyperparameters of a full machine learning pipeline using Bayesian optimization;
speciﬁcally, this used a single ﬁxed pipeline and tuned the hyperparameters of the
classiﬁer as well as the per-class classiﬁcation threshold and class weights.
In 2011, Bergstra et al. [ 12] were the ﬁrst to apply Bayesian optimization to
tune the hyperparameters of a deep neural network, outperforming both manual
and random search. Furthermore, they demonstrated that TPE resulted in better