10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 213
Hyper-opt sometimes fails because of time or memory limitations, which gives
room for improvement.
5.How do winner’s solutions compare with basic scikit-learn models? They
compare favorably. For example, the results of basic models whose parameters
have been optimized do not yield generally as good results as running auto-
sklearn. However, a basic model with default HP sometimes outperforms thissame model tuned by auto-sklearn.
10.7 Conclusion
We have analyzed the results of several rounds of AutoML challenges.
Our design of the ﬁrst AutoML challenge (2015/2016) was satisfactory in many
respects. In particular, we attracted a large number of participants (over 600),attained results that are statistically signiﬁcant, and advanced the state of the art
to automate machine learning. Publicly available libraries have emerged as a result
of this endeavor, including auto-sklearn.
In particular, we designed a benchmark with a large number of diverse datasets,
with large enough test sets to separate top-ranking participants. It is difﬁcult
to anticipate the size of the test sets needed, because the error bars depend onthe performances attained by the participants, so we are pleased that we made
reasonable guesses. Our simple rule-of-thumb “N = 50/E” where Nis the number of
test samples and Ethe error rate of the smallest class seems to be widely applicable.
We made sure that the datasets were neither too easy nor too hard. This is important
to be able to separate participants. To quantify this, we introduced the notion of
“intrinsic difﬁculty” and “modeling difﬁculty”. Intrinsic difﬁculty can be quantiﬁedby the performance of the best method (as a surrogate for the best attainable
performance, i.e., the Bayes rate for classiﬁcation problems). Modeling difﬁculty
can be quantiﬁed by the spread in performance between methods. Our best problemshave relatively low “intrinsic difﬁculty” and high “modeling difﬁculty”. However,
the diversity of the 30 datasets of our ﬁrst 2015/2016 challenge is both a feature and
a curse: it allows us to test the robustness of software across a variety of situations,but it makes meta-learning very difﬁcult, if not impossible. Consequently, external
meta-learning data must be used if meta-learning is to be explored. This was the
strategy adopted by the AAD Freiburg team, which used the OpenML data for metatraining. Likewise, we attached different metrics to each dataset. This contributed
to making the tasks more realistic and more difﬁcult, but also made meta-learning
harder. In the second 2018 challenge, we diminished the variety of datasets and useda single metric.
With respect to task design, we learned that the devil is in the details. The
challenge participants solve exactly the task proposed to the point that their solutionmay not be adaptable to seemingly similar scenarios. In the case of the AutoML
challenge, we pondered whether the metric of the challenge should be the area under
the learning curve or one point on the learning curve (the performance obtained after