202 I. Guyon et al.
of overﬁtting), but modern machine learning algorithm are robust against over-
ﬁtting. The main difﬁculty was rather the PRODUCT N∗Ptr. Most participants
attempted to load the entire dataset in memory and convert sparse matrices intofull matrices. This took very long and then caused loss in performances or pro-
gram failures. Large datasets with N∗P
tr>20.106include ALBERT, ALEXIS ,
DIONIS, GRIGORIS, WALLIS, EVITA, FLORA, TANIA, MARCO ,G I N A ,
GUILLERMO, PM, RH, RI, RICCARDO, RM. Those overlap signiﬁcantly with
the datasets with sparse data (in bold). For the 2018 challenge, all data sets in
the ﬁnal phase exceeded this threshold, and this was the reason of why the codefrom several teams failed to ﬁnish within the time budget. Only ALBERT and
DIONIS were “truly” large (few features, but over 400,000 training examples).
•Presence of probes: Some datasets had a certain proportion of distractor
features or irrelevant variables (probes). Those were obtained by randomly
permuting the values of real features. Two-third of the datasets contained
probes ADULT, CADATA, DIGITS, DOROTHEA, CHRISTINE, JASMINE,MADELINE, PHILIPPINE, SYLVINE, ALBERT, DILBERT, FABERT, JAN-
NIS, EVITA, FLORA, YOLANDA, ARTURO, CARLO, PABLO, WALDO.
This allowed us in part to make datasets that were in the public domain lessrecognizable.
•Type of metric: We used six metrics, as deﬁned in Sect. 10.4.2 . The distribution
of tasks in which they were used was not uniform: BAC (11), AUC (6), F1 (3),and PAC (6) for classiﬁcation, and R2 (2) and ABS (2) for regression. This is
because not all metrics lend themselves naturally to all types of applications.
•Time budget: Although in round 0 we experimented with giving different time
budgets for the various datasets, we ended up assigning 1200 s (20 min) to all
datasets in all other rounds. Because the datasets varied in size, this put more
constraints on large datasets.
•Class imbalance: This was not a difﬁculty found in the 2015/2016 datasets.
However, extreme class imbalance was the main difﬁculty for the 2018 edition.
Imbalance ratios lower or equal to 1–10 were present in RL, PM, RH, RI, andRM datasets, in the latter data set class imbalance was as extreme as 1–1000.
This was the reason why the performance of teams was low.
Fig.10.4 gives a ﬁrst view of dataset/task difﬁculty for the 2015/2016 challenge.
It captures, in a schematic way, the distribution of the participants’ performance in
all rounds on test data, in both AutoML and Tweakathon phases. One can see that themedian performance over all datasets improves between AutoML and Tweakathon,
as can be expected. Correspondingly, the average spread in performance (quartile)
decreases. Let us take a closer look at the AutoML phases: The “accident” ofround 3 in which many methods failed in blind testing is visible (introduction of
sparse matrices and larger datasets).
9Round 2 (multi-class classiﬁcation) appears to
have also introduced a signiﬁcantly higher degree of difﬁculty than round 1 (binary
9Examples of sparse datasets were provided in round 0, but they were of smaller size.