88 L. Kotthoff et al.
learners, again with any hyperparameter settings. Not all learners are applicable on
all datasets (e.g., due to a classiﬁer’s inability to handle missing data). For a given
dataset, our Auto-WEKA implementation automatically only considers the subset ofapplicable learners. Feature selection is run as a preprocessing phase before building
any model.
The algorithms in Fig. 4.1have a wide variety of hyperparameters, which take
values from continuous intervals, from ranges of integers, and from other discrete
sets. We associated either a uniform or log uniform prior with each numerical
parameter, depending on its semantics. For example, we set a log uniform priorfor the ridge regression penalty, and a uniform prior for the maximum depth for
a tree in a random forest. Auto-WEKA works with continuous hyperparameter
values directly up to the precision of the machine. We emphasize that this combinedhyperparameter space is much larger than a simple union of the base learners’
hyperparameter spaces, since the ensemble methods allow up to 5 independent base
learners. The meta- and ensemble methods as well as the feature selection contributefurther to the total size of AutoWEKA’s hyperparameter space.
Auto-WEKA uses the SMAC optimizer described above to solve the CASH
problem and is available to the public through the WEKA package manager; thesource code can be found at https://github.com/automl/autoweka and the ofﬁcial
project website is at http://www.cs.ubc.ca/labs/beta/Projects/autoweka .F o rt h e
experiments described in this chapter, we used Auto-WEKA version 0.5. The resultsthe more recent versions achieve are similar; we did not replicate the full set of
experiments because of the large computational cost.
4.5 Experimental Evaluation
We evaluated Auto-WEKA on 21 prominent benchmark datasets (see Table 4.1):
15 sets from the UCI repository [ 13]; the ‘convex’, ‘MNIST basic’ and ‘rotated
MNIST with background images’ tasks used in [ 5]; the appentency task from the
KDD Cup ’09; and two versions of the CIFAR-10 image classiﬁcation task [ 21]
(CIFAR-10-Small is a subset of CIFAR-10, where only the ﬁrst 10,000 training data
points are used rather than the full 50,000.) Note that in the experimental evaluation,
we focus on classiﬁcation. For datasets with a predeﬁned training/test split, we usedthat split. Otherwise, we randomly split the dataset into 70% training and 30% test
data. We withheld the test data from all optimization method; it was only used once
in an ofﬂine analysis stage to evaluate the models found by the various optimizationmethods.
For each dataset, we ran Auto-WEKA with each hyperparameter optimization
algorithm with a total time budget of 30 h. For each method, we performed 25runs of this process with different random seeds and then—in order to simulate
parallelization on a typical workstation—used bootstrap sampling to repeatedly
select four random runs and report the performance of the one with best cross-validation performance.