122 M. Feurer et al.
percentage threshold and a value occurring more rarely than this percentage was
transformed to a special other value [ 35].
6.5 Comparing Auto-sklearn to Auto-WEKA
and H YPEROPT -SKLEARN
As a baseline experiment, we compared the performance of vanilla Auto-sklearn
(without our improvements meta-learning and ensemble building) to Auto-WEKA
(see Chap. 4) and Hyperopt-Sklearn (see Chap. 5), reproducing the experimental
setup with the 21 datasets of the paper introducing Auto-WEKA [ 42] (see Table 4.1
in Chap. 4for a description of the datasets). Following the original setup of the Auto-
WEKA paper, we used the same train/test splits of the datasets [ 1], a walltime limit
of 30 h, 10-fold cross validation (where the evaluation of each fold was allowed to
take 150 min), and 10 independent optimization runs with SMAC on each dataset.
As in Auto-WEKA, the evaluation is sped up by SMAC’s intensify procedure, whichonly schedules runs on new cross validation folds if the conﬁguration currently
being evaluated is likely to outperform the so far best performing conﬁguration [ 27].
We did not modify H
YPEROPT -SKLEARN which always uses a 80/20 train/test
split. All our experiments ran on Intel Xeon E5-2650 v2 eight-core processors with
2.60 GHz and 4 GiB of RAM. We allowed the machine learning framework to use
3 GiB and reserved the rest for SMAC. All experiments used Auto-WEKA 0.5 andscikit-learn 0.16.1.
We present the results of this experiment in Table 6.2. Since our setup followed
exactly that of the original Auto-WEKA paper, as a sanity check we compared thenumbers we achieved for Auto-WEKA ourselves (ﬁrst line in Fig. 6.2) to the ones
presented by the authors of Auto-WEKA (see Chap. 4) and found that overall the
results were reasonable. Furthermore, the table shows that Auto-sklearn performedsigniﬁcantly better than Auto-WEKA in 6/21 cases, tied it in 12 cases, and lost
against it in 3. For the three datasets where Auto-WEKA performed best, we found
that in more than 50% of its runs the best classiﬁer it chose is not implemented inscikit-learn (trees with a pruning component). So far, H
YPEROPT -SKLEARN is more
of a proof-of-concept—inviting the user to adapt the conﬁguration space to her own
needs—than a full AutoML system. The current version crashes when presentedwith sparse data and missing values. It also crashes on Cifar-10 due to a memory
limit which we set for all optimizers to enable a fair comparison. On the 16 datasets
on which it ran, it statistically tied the best competing AutoML system in 9 casesand lost against it in 7.
6.6 Evaluation of the Proposed AutoML Improvements
In order to evaluate the robustness and general applicability of our proposed
AutoML system on a broad range of datasets, we gathered 140 binary and
multiclass classiﬁcation datasets from the OpenML repository [ 43], only selecting