196 I. Guyon et al.
In 2018, we organized a single round of AutoML competition in two phases. In
this simpliﬁed protocol, the participants could practice on ﬁve datasets during the
ﬁrst (development) phase, by either submitting code or results. Their performanceswere revealed immediately, as they became available, on the leaderboard.
The last submission of the development phase was automatically forwarded to
the second phase: the AutoML “blind test” phase. In this second phase, which wasthe only one counting towards the prizes, the participants’ code was automatically
evaluated on ﬁve new datasets on the Codalab platform. The datasets were not
revealed to the participants. Hence, submissions that did not include code capable ofbeing trained and tested automatically were not ranked in the ﬁnal phase and could
not compete towards the prizes.
We provided the same starting kit as in the AutoML 2015/2016 challenge, but
the participants also had access to the code of the winners of the previous challenge.
10.5 Results
This section provides a brief description of the results obtained during bothchallenges, explains the methods used by the participants and their elements of
novelty, and provides the analysis of post-challenge experiments conducted to
answer speciﬁc questions on the effectiveness of model search techniques.
10.5.1 Scores Obtained in the 2015/2016 Challenge
The 2015/2016 challenge lasted 18 months (December 8, 2014 to May 1, 2016). Bythe end of the challenge, practical solutions were obtained and open-sourced, suchas the solution of the winners [ 25].
Table 10.5 presents the results on the test set in the AutoML phases (blind testing)
and the Final phases (one time testing on the test set revealed at the end of theTweakathon phases). Ties were broken by giving preference to the participant who
submitted ﬁrst. The table only reports the results of the top-ranking participants.
We also show in Fig. 10.3a comparison of the leaderboard performances of all
participants. We plot in Fig. 10.3a the Tweakathon performances on the ﬁnal test
set vs. those on the validation set, which reveals no signiﬁcant overﬁtting to the
validation set, except for a few outliers. In Fig. 10.3b we report the performance in
AutoML result (blind testing) vs. Tweakathon ﬁnal test results (manual adjustments
possible). We see that many entries were made in phase 1 (binary classiﬁcation) and
then participation declined as the tasks became harder. Some participants put a lot ofeffort in Tweakathons and far exceeded their AutoML performances (e.g. Djajetic
and AAD Freiburg).
There is still room for improvement by manual tweaking and/or additional com-
putational resources, as revealed by the signiﬁcant differences remaining between
Tweakathon and AutoML (blind testing) results (Table 10.5 and Fig. 10.3b). In