8 M. Feurer and F. Hutter
Further advantages over grid search include easier parallelization (since workers
do not need to communicate with each other and failing workers do not leave holes
in the design) and ﬂexible resource allocation (since one can add an arbitrary numberof random points to a random search design to still yield a random search design;
the equivalent does not hold for grid search).
Random search is a useful baseline because it makes no assumptions on the
machine learning algorithm being optimized, and, given enough resources, will,
in expectation, achieves performance arbitrarily close to the optimum. Interleaving
random search with more complex optimization strategies therefore allows toguarantee a minimal rate of convergence and also adds exploration that can improve
model-based search [ 3,59]. Random search is also a useful method for initializing
the search process, as it explores the entire conﬁguration space and thus oftenﬁnds settings with reasonable performance. However, it is no silver bullet and often
takes far longer than guided search methods to identify one of the best performing
hyperparameter conﬁgurations: e.g., when sampling without replacement from aconﬁguration space with NBoolean hyperparameters with a good and a bad setting
each and no interaction effects, it will require an expected 2
N−1function evaluations
to ﬁnd the optimum, whereas a guided search could ﬁnd the optimum in N+1
function evaluations as follows: starting from an arbitrary conﬁguration, loop over
the hyperparameters and change one at a time, keeping the resulting conﬁguration
if performance improves and reverting the change if it doesn’t. Accordingly, theguided search methods we discuss in the following sections usually outperform
random search [ 12,14,33,90,153].
Population-based methods, such as genetic algorithms ,evolutionary algorithms ,
evolutionary strategies , and particle swarm optimization are optimization algo-
rithms that maintain a population, i.e., a set of conﬁgurations, and improve this
population by applying local perturbations (so-called mutations) and combinationsof different members (so-called crossover) to obtain a new generation of better
conﬁgurations. These methods are conceptually simple, can handle different data
types, and are embarrassingly parallel [ 91] since a population of Nmembers can be
evaluated in parallel on Nmachines.
One of the best known population-based methods is the covariance matrix
adaption evolutionary strategy (CMA-ES [ 51]); this simple evolutionary strategy
samples conﬁgurations from a multivariate Gaussian whose mean and covariance
are updated in each generation based on the success of the population’s individ-
uals. CMA-ES is one of the most competitive blackbox optimization algorithms,regularly dominating the Black-Box Optimization Benchmarking (BBOB) chal-
lenge [ 11].
For further details on population-based methods, we refer to [ 28,138]; we discuss
applications to hyperparameter optimization in Sect. 1.5, applications to neural
architecture search in Chap. 3, and genetic programming for AutoML pipelines in
Chap. 8.