52 J. Vanschoren
to learn a base-level RL algorithm for speciﬁc tasks. Rather than using relatively
unstructured tasks such as random MDPs, they focus on structured task distributions
(e.g., dependent bandits) in which the meta-RL algorithm can exploit the inherenttask structure.
Pang et al. [ 112] offer a meta-learning approach to active learning (AL). The
base-learner can be any binary classiﬁer, and the meta-learner is a deep RLnetwork consisting of a deep neural network that learns a representation of the
AL problem across tasks, and a policy network that learns the optimal policy,
parameterized as weights in the network. The meta-learner receives the current state(the unlabeled point set and base classiﬁer state) and reward (the performance of the
base classiﬁer), and emits a query probability, i.e. which points in the unlabeled set
to query next.
Reed et al. [ 127] propose a few-shot approach for density estimation (DE). The
goal is to learn a probability distribution over a small number of images of a certain
concept (e.g., a handwritten letter) that can be used to generate images of thatconcept, or compute the probability that an image shows that concept. The approach
uses autoregressive image models which factorize the joint distribution into per-
pixel factors. Usually these are conditioned on (many) examples of the targetconcept. Instead, a MAML-based few-shot learner is used, trained on examples of
many other (similar) concepts.
Finally, Vartak et al. [ 178] address the cold-start problem in matrix factorization.
They propose a deep neural network architecture that learns a (base) neural network
whose biases are adjusted based on task information. While the structure and
weights of the neural net recommenders remain ﬁxed, the meta-learner learns howto adjust the biases based on each user’s item history.
All these recent new developments illustrate that it is often fruitful to look at
problems through a meta-learning lens and ﬁnd new, data-driven approaches to
replace hand-engineered base-learners.
2.5 Conclusion
Meta-learning opportunities present themselves in many different ways, and canbe embraced using a wide spectrum of learning techniques. Every time we tryto learn a certain task, whether successful or not, we gain useful experience that
we can leverage to learn new tasks. We should never have to start entirely from
scratch. Instead, we should systematically collect our ‘learning experiences’ andlearn from them to build AutoML systems that continuously improve over time,
helping us tackle new learning problems ever more efﬁciently. The more new tasks
we encounter, and the more similar those new tasks are, the more we can tap intoprior experience, to the point that most of the required learning has already been
done beforehand. The ability of computer systems to store virtually inﬁnite amounts
of prior learning experiences (in the form of meta-data) opens up a wide rangeof opportunities to use that experience in completely new ways, and we are only