9 The Automatic Statistician 163
Data Search ModelExplanation
Prediction
CheckingLanguage of models
EvaluationReport
Fig. 9.1 A simpliﬁed ﬂow diagram outlining the operation of a report-writing Automatic Statisti-
cian. Models for the data are automatically constructed (from the open-ended language of models),and evaluated on the data. This evaluation is done in a way that allows models to be compared toeach other. The best models are then inspected to produce a report. Each model can be used to
make extrapolations or predictions from the data, and the construction blue-print of the model can
be turned into a human-readable description. For some models, it is also possible to generate model
criticism , and report on where the modelling assumptions do not match the data well
9.2 Basic Anatomy of an Automatic Statistician
At the heart of the Automatic Statistician is the idea that a good solution to the
above challenges can be obtained by working in the framework of model-based
machine learning [2,9]. In model-based ML, the basic idea is that probabilistic
models are explanations for patterns in data, and that the probabilistic framework (orBayesian Occam’s razor) can be used to discover models that avoid both overﬁtting
and underﬁtting [ 21]. Bayesian approaches provide an elegant way of trading off
the complexity of the model and the complexity of the data, and probabilisticmodels are compositional and interpretable as described previously. Moreover,
the model-based philosophy maintains that tasks such as data pre-processing and
transformation are all parts of the model and should ideally all be conducted atonce [ 35].
An Automatic Statistician contains the following key ingredients:
1.An open-ended language of models – expressive enough to capture real-world
phenomena, and to allow applying the techniques used by human statisticians
and data scientists.
2.A search procedure to efﬁciently explore the language of models.
3.A principled method of evaluating models , trading off complexity, ﬁt to data,
and resource usage.
4.A procedure to automatically explain the models , making the assumptions of
the models explicit in a way that is simultaneously accurate and intelligible to
non-experts.
Fig. 9.1shows a high-level overview of how these components could be used to
produce a basic version of a report-writing Automatic Statistician.
As will be discussed later in this chapter, it is possible to build Automatic
Statistician systems that exchange ingredient ( 4) for procedures that produce other