206 I. Guyon et al.
to perform thorough hyper-parameter tuning given rigid time constraints and huge
datasets (Fig. 10.8).
We also compared the performances obtained with different scoring metrics
(Fig. 10.9). Basic methods do not give a choice of metrics to be optimized, but auto-
sklearn post-ﬁtted the metrics of the challenge tasks. Consequently, when “common
metrics” ( BAC andR2) are used, the method of the challenge winners, which is not
optimized for BAC /R2, does not usually outperform basic methods. Conversely,
when the metrics of the challenge are used, there is often a clear gap between the
basic methods and the winners, but not always (RF-auto usually shows a comparableperformance, sometimes even outperforms the winners).
10.5.5 Meta-learning
One question is whether meta-learning [ 14] is possible, that is learning to predict
whether a given classiﬁer will perform well on future datasets (without actually
training it), based on its past performances on other datasets. We investigatedwhether it is possible to predict which basic method will perform best based on the
meta-learning features of auto-sklearn (see the online appendix). We removed the
“Landmark” features from the set of meta features because those are performancesof basic predictors (albeit rather poor ones with many missing values), which would
lead to a form of “data leakage”.
We used four basic predictors:
Fig. 10.9 Comparison of metrics (2015/2016 challenge). (a) We used the metrics of the
challenge. ( b) We used the normalized balanced accuracy for all classiﬁcation problems and the R2
metric for regression problems. By comparing the two ﬁgures, we can see that the winner remains
top-ranking in most cases, regardless of the metric. There is no basic method that dominates allothers. Although RF-auto (Random Forest with optimized HP) is very strong, it is sometimes
outperformed by other methods. Plain linear model SGD-def sometimes wins when common
metrics are used, but the winners perform better with the metrics of the challenge. Overall, thetechnique of the winners proved to be effective