10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 203
classiﬁcation). In round 4, two regression problems were introduced (FLORA and
YOLANDA), but it does not seem that regression was found signiﬁcantly harder
than multiclass classiﬁcation. In round 5 no novelty was introduced. We can observethat, after round 3, the dataset median scores are scattered around the overall
median. Looking at the corresponding scores in the Tweakathon phases, one can
remark that, once the participants recovered from their surprise, round 3 was notparticularly difﬁcult for them. Rounds 2 and 4 were comparatively more difﬁcult.
For the datasets used in the 2018 challenge, the tasks’ difﬁculty was clearly
associated with extreme class imbalance, inclusion of categorical variables and highdimensionality in terms of N×P
tr. However, for the 2015/2016 challenge data sets
we found that it was generally difﬁcult to guess what makes a task easy or hard,
except for dataset size, which pushed participants to the frontier of the hardwarecapabilities and forced them to improve the computational efﬁciency of their
methods. Binary classiﬁcation problems (and multi-label problems) are intrinsically
“easier” than multiclass problems, for which “guessing” has a lower probability ofsuccess. This partially explains the higher median performance in rounds 1 and 3,
which are dominated by binary and multi-label classiﬁcation problems. There is not
a large enough number of datasets illustrating each type of other difﬁculties to drawother conclusions.
We ventured however to try to ﬁnd summary statistics capturing overall takes
difﬁculty. If one assumes that data are generated from an i.i.d.
10process of the type:
y=F(x,noise)
where yis the target value, xis the input feature vector, Fis a function, and noise is
some random noise drawn from an unknown distribution, then the difﬁculty of the
learning problem can be separated in two aspects:
1.Intrinsic difﬁculty , linked to the amount of noise or the signal to noise ratio.
Given an inﬁnite amount of data and an unbiased learning machine ˆFcapable
of identifying F, the prediction performances cannot exceed a given maximum
value, corresponding to ˆF=F.
2.Modeling difﬁculty , linked to the bias and variance of estimators ˆF,i n
connection with the limited amount of training data and limited computational
resources, and the possibly large number or parameters and hyper-parameters to
estimate.
Evaluating the intrinsic difﬁculty is impossible unless we know F. Our best
approximation of Fis the winners’ solution. We use therefore the winners’
performance as an estimator of the best achievable performance. This estimator
may have both bias and variance: it is possibly biased because the winners may be
under-ﬁtting training data; it may have variance because of the limited amount of
10Independently and Identically Distributed samples.