7 Towards Automatically-Tuned Deep Neural Networks 143
specify a validation and testset. The validation set is used during training to get a
measure for the performance of the network and to train the KDE models of BOHB.
7.4 Experiments
We now empirically evaluate our methods. Our implementations of Auto-Net run on
both CPUs and GPUs, but since neural networks heavily employ matrix operationsthey run much faster on GPUs. Our CPU-based experiments were run on a compute
cluster, each node of which has two eight-core Intel Xeon E5-2650 v2 CPUs,
running at 2.6 GHz, and a shared memory of 64 GB. Our GPU-based experimentswere run on a compute cluster, each node of which has four GeForce GTX TITAN
XG P U s .
7.4.1 Baseline Evaluation of Auto-Net 1.0 and Auto-sklearn
In our ﬁrst experiment, we compare different instantiations of Auto-Net 1.0 on the
ﬁve datasets of phase 0 of the AutoML challenge. First, we use the CPU-based and
GPU-based versions to study the difference of running NNs on different hardware.
Second, we allow the combination of neural networks with the models from Auto-sklearn. Third, we also run Auto-sklearn without neural networks as a baseline.
On each dataset, we performed 10 one-day runs of each method, allowing up to
100 min for the evaluation of a single conﬁguration by ﬁve-fold cross-validationon the training set. For each time step of each run, following [ 11] we constructed
an ensemble from the models it had evaluated so far and plot the test error of that
ensemble over time. In practice, we would either use a separate process to calculatethe ensembles in parallel or compute them after the optimization process.
Fig. 7.1shows the results on two of the ﬁve datasets. First, we note that the
GPU-based version of Auto-Net was consistently about an order of magnitude fasterthan the CPU-based version. Within the given ﬁxed compute budget, the CPU-based
version consistently performed worst, whereas the GPU-based version performed
best on the newsgroups dataset (see Fig. 7.1a), tied with Auto-sklearn on 3 of the
other datasets, and performed worse on one. Despite the fact that the CPU-based
Auto-Net was very slow, in 3/5 cases the combination of Auto-sklearn and CPU-
based Auto-Net still improved over Auto-sklearn; this can, for example, be observedfor thedorothea dataset in Fig. 7.1b.
7.4.2 Results for AutoML Competition Datasets
Having developed Auto-Net 1.0 during the ﬁrst AutoML challenge, we used a
combination of Auto-sklearn and GPU-based Auto-Net for the last two phases