1 Hyperparameter Optimization 5
1.2 Problem Statement
LetAdenote a machine learning algorithm with Nhyperparameters. We denote
the domain of the n-th hyperparameter by /Lambda1nand the overall hyperparameter
conﬁguration space as/Lambda1=/Lambda11×/Lambda12×.../Lambda1 N. A vector of hyperparameters is
denoted by λ∈/Lambda1, andAwith its hyperparameters instantiated to λis denoted
byAλ.
The domain of a hyperparameter can be real-valued (e.g., learning rate), integer-
valued (e.g., number of layers), binary (e.g., whether to use early stopping or not), or
categorical (e.g., choice of optimizer). For integer and real-valued hyperparameters,the domains are mostly bounded for practical reasons, with only a few excep-
tions [ 12,113,136].
Furthermore, the conﬁguration space can contain conditionality , i.e., a hyper-
parameter may only be relevant if another hyperparameter (or some combination
of hyperparameters) takes on a certain value. Conditional spaces take the form of
directed acyclic graphs. Such conditional spaces occur, e.g., in the automated tuningof machine learning pipelines, where the choice between different preprocessing
and machine learning algorithms is modeled as a categorical hyperparameter, a
problem known as Full Model Selection (FMS) or Combined Algorithm Selection
and Hyperparameter optimization problem (CASH) [ 30,34,83,149]. They also
occur when optimizing the architecture of a neural network: e.g., the number of
layers can be an integer hyperparameter and the per-layer hyperparameters of layeriare only active if the network depth is at least i[12,14,33].
Given a data set D, our goal is to ﬁnd
λ
∗=argmin
λ∈/Lambda1E(Dtrain,Dvalid)∼DV(L,Aλ,Dtrain,Dvalid), (1.1)
where V(L,Aλ,Dtrain,Dvalid)measures the loss of a model generated by algo-
rithmAwith hyperparameters λon training data Dtrain and evaluated on validation
dataDvalid. In practice, we only have access to ﬁnite data D∼Dand thus need to
approximate the expectation in Eq. 1.1.
Popular choices for the validation protocol V(·,·,·,·)are the holdout and cross-
validation error for a user-given loss function (such as misclassiﬁcation rate);see Bischl et al. [ 16] for an overview of validation protocols. Several strategies
for reducing the evaluation time have been proposed: It is possible to only test
machine learning algorithms on a subset of folds [ 149], only on a subset of
data [ 78,102,147], or for a small amount of iterations; we will discuss some of
these strategies in more detail in Sect. 1.4. Recent work on multi-task [ 147] and
multi-source [ 121] optimization introduced further cheap, auxiliary tasks, which
can be queried instead of Eq. 1.1. These can provide cheap information to help HPO,
but do not necessarily train a machine learning model on the dataset of interest and
therefore do not yield a usable model as a side product.