158 R. S. Olson and J. H. Moore
24 h, which we indicated by leaving the box plot blank in Fig. 8.3. We found that
random search often generated needlessly complex pipelines for the benchmark
problems, even when a simple pipeline with a tuned model was sufﬁcient to classifythe benchmark problem. Thus, even if random search can sometimes perform as
well as TPOT in terms of accuracy, performing a guided search for pipelines
that achieve high accuracy with as few pipeline operations as possible still offersconsiderable advantages in terms of search run-time, model complexity, and model
interpretability.
8.4 Conclusions and Future Work
We benchmarked the Tree-based Pipeline Optimization Tool (TPOT) v0.3 on 150
supervised classiﬁcation datasets and found that it discovers machine learningpipelines that can outperform a basic machine learning analysis on several bench-
marks. In particular, we note that TPOT discovered these pipelines without any
domain knowledge nor human input. As such, TPOT shows considerable promisein the automated machine learning (AutoML) domain and we will continue to reﬁne
TPOT until it consistently discovers human-competitive machine learning pipelines.
We discuss some of these future reﬁnements below.
First, we will explore methods to provide sensible initialization [ 8] for genetic
programming (GP)-based AutoML systems such as TPOT. For example, we can
use meta-learning techniques to intelligently match pipeline conﬁgurations thatmay work well on the particular problem being solved [ 6]. In brief, meta-learning
harnesses information from previous machine learning runs to predict how well
each pipeline conﬁguration will work on a particular dataset. To place datasetson a standard scale, meta-learning algorithms compute meta-features from the
datasets, such as dataset size, the number of features, and various aspects about
the features, which are then used to map dataset meta-features to correspondingpipeline conﬁgurations that may work well on datasets with those meta-features.
Such an intelligent meta-learning algorithm is likely to improve the TPOT sensible
initialization process.
Furthermore, we will attempt to characterize the ideal “shape” of a machine
learning pipeline. In auto-sklearn, [ 5] imposed a short and ﬁxed pipeline structure
of a data preprocessor, a feature preprocessor, and a model. In another GP-based AutoML system, [ 22] allowed the GP algorithm to design arbitrarily-shaped
pipelines and found that complex pipelines with several preprocessors and models
were useful for signal processing problems. Thus, it may be vital to allow AutoMLsystems to design arbitrarily-shaped pipelines if they are to achieve human-level
competitiveness.
Finally, genetic programming (GP) optimization methods are typically criticized
for optimizing a large population of solutions, which can sometimes be slow
and wasteful for certain optimization problems. Instead, it is possible to turn
GP’s purported weakness into a strength by creating an ensemble out of the GP