64 T. Elsken et al.
accompanied, however, by a rising demand for architecture engineering , where
increasingly more complex neural architectures are designed manually. Neural
Architecture Search (NAS), the process of automating architecture engineering,
is thus a logical next step in automating machine learning. NAS can be seen as
subﬁeld of AutoML and has signiﬁcant overlap with hyperparameter optimization
and meta-learning (which are described in Chaps. 1and2of this book, respectively).
We categorize methods for NAS according to three dimensions: search space, search
strategy, and performance estimation strategy:
•Search Space. The search space deﬁnes which architectures can be represented
in principle. Incorporating prior knowledge about properties well-suited for a
task can reduce the size of the search space and simplify the search. However,this also introduces a human bias, which may prevent ﬁnding novel architectural
building blocks that go beyond the current human knowledge.
Performance
Estimation
StrategySearch Space
ASearch Strategyarchitecture
A∈A
performance
estimate of A
Fig. 3.1 Abstract illustration of Neural Architecture Search methods. A search strategy selects
an architecture Afrom a predeﬁned search space A. The architecture is passed to a performance
estimation strategy, which returns the estimated performance of Ato the search strategy
•Search Strategy. The search strategy details how to explore the search space.
It encompasses the classical exploration-exploitation trade-off since, on the one
hand, it is desirable to ﬁnd well-performing architectures quickly, while on theother hand, premature convergence to a region of suboptimal architectures should
be avoided.
•Performance Estimation Strategy. The objective of NAS is typically to ﬁnd
architectures that achieve high predictive performance on unseen data. Per-
formance Estimation refers to the process of estimating this performance: the
simplest option is to perform a standard training and validation of the architectureon data, but this is unfortunately computationally expensive and limits the
number of architectures that can be explored. Much recent research therefore
focuses on developing methods that reduce the cost of these performanceestimations.
We refer to Fig. 3.1for an illustration. The chapter is also structured according
to these three dimensions: we start with discussing search spaces in Sect. 3.2, cover
search strategies in Sect. 3.3, and outline approaches to performance estimation in
Sect. 3.4. We conclude with an outlook on future directions in Sect. 3.5.
This chapter is based on a very recent survey article [ 23].