9 The Automatic Statistician 171
e.g. before a given deadline. To make good model selection and evaluation choices,
an intelligent system might take into account such resource constraints. The ability
to do so will affect the overall usability of the system.
Even when there are no direct constraints on computation time, CPU cores, or
memory usage, an intelligent system might beneﬁt from allocating resources to
models whose evaluation is promising for the chosen deliverable. Such functionalitycan be implemented for models that support some form of gradual evaluation, for
example by training incrementally on increasingly large subsets of the dataset. One
of our systems used a variant of Freeze-thaw Bayesian optimisation [ 32] for this
purpose.
9.5 Conclusion
Our society has entered an era of abundant data. Analysis and exploration of thedata is essential for harnessing the beneﬁts of this growing resource. Unfortunately,the growth of data currently outpaces our ability to analyse it, especially because
this task still largely rests on human experts. But many aspects of machine learning
and data analysis can be automated, and one guiding principle in pursuit of this goalis to “apply machine learning to itself”.
The Automatic Statistician project aims to automate data science by taking care
of all aspects of data analysis, from data pre-processing, modelling and evaluation,to the generation of useful and transparent results. All these tasks should be
performed in a way that requires little user expertise, minimises the amount of user
interaction, and makes intelligent and controlled use of computational resources.
While this aim is ambitious, and a lot of the work still needs to happen,
encouraging progress has been made towards the creation of such automated
systems. Multiple Automatic Statistician systems have been built, each with slightdifferences in purpose and underlying technology, but they all share the same
intent and much of the same design philosophy. We hope that the creation of such
instruments will bring the ability to gain insights from data to a larger group ofpeople, and help empower society to make great use of our data resources.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Tameem Adel Hesham, Lars Kotthoff, and
Frank Hutter for helpful feedback.
Bibliography
1. Allingham, J.U.: Unsupervised automatic dataset repair. Master’s thesis in advanced computer
science, Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge (2018)
2. Bishop, C.M.: Pattern recognition and machine learning. Information science and statistics,
Springer (2006)
3. van Buuren, S., Groothuis-Oudshoorn, K.: mice : Multivariate imputation by chained equa-
tions in R. Journal of Statistical Software 45(3) (2011)
4. Doshi-Velez, F., Kim, B.: Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning (Mar
2017), http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.08608