18 M. Feurer and F. Hutter
Multi-task Bayesian optimization [ 147] uses a multi-task Gaussian process
to model the performance of related tasks and to automatically learn the tasks’
correlation during the optimization process. This method can dynamically switchbetween cheaper, low-ﬁdelity tasks and the expensive, high-ﬁdelity target task based
on a cost-aware information-theoretic acquisition function. In practice, the proposed
method starts exploring the conﬁguration space on the cheaper task and onlyswitches to the more expensive conﬁguration space in later parts of the optimization,
approximately halving the time required for HPO. Multi-task Bayesian optimization
can also be used to transfer information from previous optimization tasks, and werefer to Chap. 2for further details.
Multi-task Bayesian optimization (and the methods presented in the previous
subsection) requires an upfront speciﬁcation of a set of ﬁdelities. This can besuboptimal since these can be misspeciﬁed [ 74,78] and because the number of
ﬁdelities that can be handled is low (usually ﬁve or less). Therefore, and in order to
exploit the typically smooth dependence on the ﬁdelity (such as, e.g., size of the datasubset used), it often yields better results to treat the ﬁdelity as continuous (and, e.g.,
choose a continuous percentage of the full data set to evaluate a conﬁguration on),
trading off the information gain and the time required for evaluation [ 78]. To exploit
the domain knowledge that performance typically improves with more data, with
diminishing returns, a special kernel can be constructed for the data subsets [ 78].
This generalization of multi-task Bayesian optimization improves performance andcan achieve a 10–100 fold speedup compared to blackbox Bayesian optimization.
Instead of using an information-theoretic acquisition function, Bayesian opti-
mization with the Upper Conﬁdence Bound (UCB) acquisition function can also
be extended to multiple ﬁdelities [ 73,74]. While the ﬁrst such approach, MF-
GP-UCB [ 73], required upfront ﬁdelity deﬁnitions, the later BOCA algorithm [ 74]
dropped that requirement. BOCA has also been applied to optimization with morethan one continuous ﬁdelity, and we expect HPO for more than one continuous
ﬁdelity to be of further interest in the future.
Generally speaking, methods that can adaptively choose their ﬁdelity are very
appealing and more powerful than the conceptually simpler bandit-based methods
discussed in Sect. 1.4.2 , but in practice we caution that strong models are required
to make successful choices about the ﬁdelities. When the models are not strong(since they do not have enough training data yet, or due to model mismatch), these
methods may spend too much time evaluating higher ﬁdelities, and the more robust
ﬁxed budget schedules discussed in Sect. 1.4.2 might yield better performance given
a ﬁxed time limit.
1.5 Applications to AutoML
In this section, we provide a historical overview of the most important hyperparam-
eter optimization systems and applications to automated machine learning.