10 Analysis of the AutoML Challenge Series 2015–2018 215
viability of solution from the computational point of view. We required the winners
to release their code under an open source licence to win their prizes. This was
good enough an incentive to obtain several software publications as the “product”of the challenges we organized. In our second challenge (AutoML 2018), we used
Docker. Distributing Docker images makes it possible for anyone downloading
the code of the participants to easily reproduce the results without stumbling overinstallation problems due to inconsistencies in computer environments and libraries.
Still the hardware may be different and we ﬁnd that, in post-challenge evaluations,
changing computers may yield signiﬁcant differences in results. Hopefully, with theproliferation of affordable cloud computing, this will become less of an issue.
The AutoML challenge series is only beginning. Several new avenues are under
study. For instance, we are preparing the NIPS 2018 Life Long Machine Learningchallenge in which participants will be exposed to data whose distribution slowly
drifts over time. We are also looking at a challenge of automated machine learning
where we will focus on transfer from similar domains.
Acknowledgements Microsoft supported the organization of this challenge and donated the
prizes and cloud computing time on Azure. This project received additional support from theLaboratoire d’Informatique Fondamentale (LIF, UMR CNRS 7279) of the University of AixMarseille, France, via the LabeX Archimede program, the Laboratoire de Recheche en Informa-tique of Paris Sud University, and INRIA-Saclay as part of the TIMCO project, as well as thesupport from the Paris-Saclay Center for Data Science (CDS). Additional computer resources wereprovided generously by J. Buhmann, ETH Zürich. This work has been partially supported by the
Spanish project TIN2016-74946-P (MINECO/FEDER, UE) and CERCA Programme/Generalitat
de Catalunya. The datasets released were selected among 72 datasets that were donated (orformatted using data publicly available) by the co-authors and by: Y . Aphinyanaphongs, O.Chapelle, Z. Iftikhar Malhi, V . Lemaire, C.-J. Lin, M. Madani, G. Stolovitzky, H.-J. Thiesen, andI. Tsamardinos. Many people provided feedback to early designs of the protocol and/or testedthe challenge platform, including: K. Bennett, C. Capponi, G. Cawley, R. Caruana, G. Dror, T.K. Ho, B. Kégl, H. Larochelle, V . Lemaire, C.-J. Lin, V . Ponce López, N. Macia, S. Mercer, F.Popescu, D. Silver, S. Treguer, and I. Tsamardinos. The software developers who contributed to theimplementation of the Codalab platform and the sample code include E. Camichael, I. Chaabane,I. Judson, C. Poulain, P. Liang, A. Pesah, L. Romaszko, X. Baro Solé, E. Watson, F. Zhingri,M. Zyskowski. Some initial analyses of the challenge results were performed by I. Chaabane,J. Lloyd, N. Macia, and A. Thakur were incorporated in this paper. Katharina Eggensperger,Syed Mohsin Ali and Matthias Feurer helped with the organization of the Beat AutoSKLearnchallenge. Matthias Feurer also contributed to the simulations of running auto-sklearn on 2015–2016 challenge datasets.
Bibliography
1. Alamdari, A.R.S.A., Guyon, I.: Quick start guide for CLOP. Tech. rep., Graz University of
Technology and Clopinet (May 2006)
2. Andrieu, C., Freitas, N.D., Doucet, A.: Sequential MCMC for Bayesian model selection. In:
IEEE Signal Processing Workshop on Higher-Order Statistics. pp. 130–134 (1999)
3. Assunção, F., Lourenço, N., Machado, P., Ribeiro, B.: Denser: Deep evolutionary network
structured representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01563 (2018)