1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
3 
 give the possible therapeutic role for using the 
mechanical device for improving the social 
interactions [10]. Robots are being considered also for 
different domains in which children benefit, for 
example, children with experienced trauma. The social 
dimension of huma n-robot interaction is necessary not 
only in the assistive roles, but also in many areas and 
domains of the proximate interaction [11]–[15].   
For people with physical disabilities, the robot 
embodiment provides the unique opportunities which 
are not possible with other technology forms. For 
example, the researche rs are working on the design of 
the robots which provide and give the support for the 
physical therapy. Efforts include the providing of the 
prescribed force and the movement trajectories to help 
rebuild flexibility as well as strength [16]. Other work 
for detecting the motivational state and adjusting the 
therapy in order to maximize the  benefits is pre sented 
in ref. [17]. Intelligent wheelchairs are the type of the 
robot which use the external sensors for supp orting the 
path planning and the collision avoidance for the 
person that requires the wheelchair [18], [19] . 
An example of the rehabilitation robotics was 
presented in [20], in which, a robotic system was built  
as shown in Fig. 5, that performs correctly the exercise 
for the conventional physiotherapy such as the 
shoulder flexion, in similar way to what the 
physiotherapist do during the co -manipulating with 
KUKA LWR robot. In this way, the excellent 
characterist ics of the human (the capacity of the 
decision) and the robot (the precision, the work 
capacity, and the repeatability) could be combined to 
achieve better results in the musculoskeletal 
rehabilitation of the arm. Furthermore, the second as 
well as the mai n objective was evaluating the non -
pathological shoulder behaviour while performing the 
shoulder flexion movements.  
 
 
 
Fig. 5. An Example illustrates the rehabilitation robotics 
[20]. 
 
 
Coronavirus disease (COVID -19) is the infectious 
disease which is caused by the newly discovered coronavirus. The severity of COVID -19 symptoms can 
range from mild to severe. The cooperation between 
the human and the robot help to f ight against the new 
pandemic. Two cases of the human -robot cooperation 
can be used in the hospital to fight against 
Coronavirus. The robot can add the solution to the 
nasopharyngeal swabs from the patients for detecting 
the coronavirus genetic material [21]. The positive test 
result illustrates that the patient is infected with the 
coronavirus. In that case, the samples which ar e taken 
from the patients’ mouth, nose, and throat are tested 
for the genetic material of the coronavirus in the 
laboratory. The staff of the laboratory must only load 
the samples into the tray and then the COVID -19 test 
robot takes care with the pipetting . In the second case, 
a mobile unit is provided to the manipulator. The 
mobile robot works hand in hand with the human and 
align to the workpiece with high precision. The mobile 
robot can be used for providing the patients with the 
food and medicine. In ad dition, the robot can measure 
the temperature of the patients. This would minimize 
the direct contact between the patients and medical 
staff and others, and therefore, minimizes the infection 
potential. The robot can also help the humans for 
sweeping and w ashing the floors and the walls. This 
also minimizes the virus infection.  
 
 
4. HRI in Agriculture  
 
The cooperation between human and robot in 
agriculture helps with many tasks such as harvesting, 
seeding, fertilizing, spraying, weed detection, hauling, 
and mowing.  
In the precision agriculture as presented in Fig. 6 
[22], the robot helps the human -operator or farmer in 
picking the strawberry. In that case, safety between the 
human operator and the robot must be included. 
Furthermore, the robot was controlled remotely  by a 
co-located operator. Their task was to navigate the 
robot to the location of pickers when they requested it, 
allow the filled crates to be loaded onto the robot, and 
then transport these to the storage facility. In Fig. 7 
[23], intelligent robot is installed in the greenhouse to 
care and help farmers for the melon harvesting.  
In Scaffold Mode, the concept of HRI is observed 
clearly. The human operator and the robot work  as a 
collaborative unified system i n which the vehicle 
autonomously navigates along the structured trees 
rows whereas the humans on the vehicle concentrate 
on performing and doing some activities such as 1) 
thinning, 2) pruning, 3) harvesting, 4) tying trees to 
wire. Tree trimming tasks wer e presented with 
Bergerman et al. [24] and Freitas et al. [25] (see Fig.8) 
in which the humans working on the robot in the 
Scaffold Mode were able to trim trees more than twice 
as fast as humans using the traditional approach based 
on ladder.