1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
4 
   
 
Fig. 6.  The Thorvald robot in the evaluation environment interacting with the pickers: (a) in the open strawberry fields, (b) 
in the polytunnel environment [22]. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.  The robot is installed in the greenhouse for helping 
the farmers for harvesting the melon [23]. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8.  Human operators performing tree trimming while 
standing in a robot [24], [25] . 
 
 
 
 5. Other Applications  
 
HRI can be found in other applications, which 
include service, home use, inventory management, and 
mining. In addition, robots is used for promoting the 
education for the typical children, whether in the home 
or in the schools [26], [27] . Space exploration and 
UAVs are also some applications.  
Fig. 9 [28] shows the robot helps the human 
operator in mining industry. Using the robots increases 
the arsenal of the tools that help and support the min ers 
to work in more safe and more efficient environment.  
Caitlyn Clabaugh and her team [29], [30]  
developed the socially assistive robot (SAR) tutoring 
system  (Fig.  10) for supporting the educators efforts to 
teach the number concepts to the preschool children.  
This system was designed iteratively with the input of 
the education experts for being developmentally 
appropriate. The system was investigated and tested in 
the re al-world preschool classroom. The collected data 
were used for training personalized models of the 
number concepts learning, leveraging the multimodal 
data, domain knowledge, and also learning style.  
 
To achieve highly efficient human -robot 
cooperation fo r all applications discussed above, safety 
system should be found and implemented in the 
robotic system. In addition, adapted controllers should 
follow the human collaborator intention and the 
environment changes. Therefore, this can lead to 
human -friendly  robots.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 (b)