1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
1 
 Oral  Topic:  Robotics (Human -Robot Interaction)  
 
Human -Robot Interaction: Applications  
 
Abdel -Nasser Sharkawy  
Mechatronics Engineering, Mechanical Engineering Department  
Faculty of Engineering, South Valley University  
Qena 83523, Egypt  
E-mail: eng.abdelnassersharkawy@gmail.com   
 
 
Summary:  Recently, human -robot interaction (HRI) is an extensive research topic and theme which gained importance and 
significance. HRI aims at the complementary combination between the robot capabilities and human skil ls. The robots assist 
humans in terms of precision, speed, and force. The humans contribute in terms of the experience, knowledge of executing the 
task, intuition, and easy adaptation and learning, and understanding of control strategies. In this work, the  applications of 
human -robot interaction are reviewed. These applications could be industrial, medical, agricultural, servical, and educational. 
HRI can be found in industrial applications in picking and placing in the production lines, welding processes, parts assembly, 
and painting. Assistive robotics are one from the highest profile areas in HRI. For people with the physical and the mental 
challenges, the robots can provide the opportunity of interaction and therapy. In addition, HRI can be widely applie d in 
hospitals. Nowadays, HRI is very important for facing the new coronavirus (COVID -19) pandemic. In agriculture, the 
cooperation between human and the robot helps with many tasks including harvesting, seeding, fertilizing, spraying, weed 
detection, haul ing, and mowing. HRI can also be found in other applications such as education, mining, and home use.  
 
Keywords:  Human -Robot Interaction , Industrial Applications , Medical and Rehabilitation Applications , Precision 
Agriculture.  
 
 
1. Introduction  
HRI is the field of the study referring to 
understanding, designing, and evaluating the robotic 
systems used by or collaborating with the human 
operator. Interaction needs the communication 
between the robots and the humans. The human 
communication with th e robot could take many forms. 
However, these forms are highly affected by whether 
the human operator closeness to the robot. Therefore, 
the communication or interaction between both the 
human and the robot is separated into two main 
categories [1], [2] : The first category is the remote 
interaction and the second is p oximate  interaction. In 
the remote one, the human does not exist in nearby the 
robot.  In a ddition, they are spatially or even 
temporarily separated. An example for this category is 
the Mars Rovers which is separated from earth in space 
and time as well. In the proximate category, the human 
and robot coexist in the same location. An example for 
this category is the service robots during their sharing 
with the humans in the same room.  
These categories can help distinguish between the 
applications requiring the mobility, physical 
interaction, or social interaction. Remote interaction 
using mobile robots refers to the tele -operation or the 
supervised control. Remote interaction using the 
physical manipulator refers to the tele -manipulation. 
Proximate interaction using the mobile robots takes the 
form of the robot assistant. Proximate interaction 
includes the physical interaction. In social interaction, 
the social and the emotive as well as the cognitive 
interaction aspects are included. In social interaction, the humans and the robots interact using the form of 
peers or companions. Importantly, socia l interactions 
with the robots take the form of proximate interaction 
rather than remote interaction.  
From these categories, this manuscript addresses 
the proximate interaction. It presents some real 
applications for HRI in industrial environment, 
medical  and rehabilitation, agriculture, education, and 
other environments. These applications show the 
importance of the interaction happening between the 
robot and human operator in our real life.  
The rest of this paper is divided as follows. section 
2 present s the industrial applications of HRI. In section 
3, the HRI in the medical and rehabilitation 
applications is presented. HRI in agriculture is 
presented in section 4, whereas section 5 illustrates 
some other applications. Section 6 concludes the main 
impor tant point of this manuscript.  
 
 
2. HRI in Industry  
HRI is widely used in industrial applications such 
as picking and placing in the production lines, welding 
processes, parts assembly, painting, and so on.  
Some examples for HRI in the industrial 
applica tion are presented from Fig. 1 to Fig. 4 . The 
robot workstation is running in the plant of BMW in 
South Carolina in which the robot helps human 
operators to perform the assembly of the final door [3] 
(see Fig. 1). In the door assembly operation, human 
operato r and robots work together. BMW plant has 
succeeded to implement and develop the direct human -