1st IFSA Winter  Conference on Automation, Robotics & Communications  for Industry 4.0 (ARCI ’ 2021),  
3-5 February 2021, Chamonix -Mont -Blanc, France  
2 
 robot cooperation and interaction in the series 
production.  
Human -robot teams are found also in the flexible 
production lines [4], [5] , as presented in Fig. 2. In this 
figure, the robotic manipulators and the human 
operators collaborate in handling of the workpieces. 
Safety is also is very important in such environments, 
since the proximity of the human operator to the robot 
that can lead to potential injuries.  
 
 
Fig. 1. The robot helps the human performing the final door 
assembly in the BMW plant [3]. 
 
 
Fig. 2. The robot and the human workers cooperate in 
handling workpieces [4], [5] . 
 
Repetitive co -manipulation tasks as shown in Fig. 
3 [6] can be performed in suitable poses of the human 
body. The poses can minimise the effects of the 
overloading joint torque. Furthermore, they can 
maximise the capacity of the manipulation of the 
human.  
For handling of heavy and bulky components in 
welding s ituations, the multi -robot system with 
collaborative functionality assists the worker [7], as 
shown in Fig.  4. Two robots help position the 
components to be joined in the welding process, at which  point the human operator carries out the welding 
task under favourable ergonomic conditions. In 
comparison with the standard welding bench, the 
human operator does not need to assume the 
uncomfortable postures or the work overhead. All 
necessary positioni ng and orientation of the 
workpieces can be performed by the robot. This also 
includes presenting of the components in the optimal 
position for the process of welding, allowing proper 
flow of the welding bead. Since the robotic 
repositioning motion is quit e fast, the handling time 
which is about one third of the total process time is 
reduced to a minimum in comparison to welding 
processes in which HRI is not implemented.  
 
 
Fig. 3. Example for the repetitive co -manipulation tasks [6].  
 
 
Fig. 4. The multi -robot system assists the worker in the 
welding process [7]. 
 
 
 
3. HRI in Rehabilitation and Medical 
Applications  
 
Assistive robotics are one of the highest profile 
areas in HRI. For people with the physical and the 
mental challenges, robots can provide the opportunity 
for the interaction and therapy. This work is explored 
with autistic children in ref. [8], [9] . Many of them 
cannot respond strongly to the social  cues but they 
respond very well to the mechanical devices. Robots