DISCUSSION
The con ﬁgurational phase space for new inorganic materials is
immense. Forming four-component compounds from the ﬁrst 103
elements of the periodic table results in more than 1012
combinations. Such a vast materials design space is intractable
to high-throughput experiments or ﬁrst-principle computations.
On the other hand, current inorganic materials databases such asICSD and Materials Projects all consist of only a tiny portion of thewhole inorganic chemical space, which needs expansion for
computational screening of new materials.
Here we proposed a GAN-based generative model for ef ﬁcient
sampling of the vast chemical design space of inorganic materials.Systematic experiments and validations show that our GANmodels can achieve high uniqueness, validity, and diversity in
terms of its generation capability. Our generative models can be
used to explore the uncharted inorganic materials design space byexpanding ICDS, material projects (MP), and OQMD databases. Thederived expanded databases can then be used for high-throughput computational screening with higher ef ﬁciency than
exhaustively screening billions of candidates
2. While principles of
charge neutrality and electronegativity balance1have been
applied to ﬁlter out chemically implausible compositions for more
effective search of new materials, such explicit composition rulesare still too loose to ensure ef ﬁcient sampling in the vast chemical
design space for new materials search. Indeed, while thehypothetical materials with <5 elements can be enumerated (32
billion for 4-element materials with charge neutrality and
balanced electronegativity), the design space of more elementscan be challenging for which our GAN models can help a lot.
One limitation of our composition-based GAN model is due to
the issue of possible polymorphism for a given composition: onecomposition may correspond to multiple structure phases and
then multiple materials properties such as the bandgap. In this
case, structural prediction and exploration is needed for ourprediction compositions to search those phases to ensure acomprehensive inverse design process.
Our work can be extended in multiple ways. First, we found that
MatGAN can learn chemical composition rules implicitly even
though we did not explicitly enforce those rules into our GANmodel. However, it is sometimes desirable to implement chemicalruleﬁlters to remove chemically invalid candidates, which can be
easily implemented based on our matrix representation ofmaterials. Another limitation in our current study is that we only
considered the integer ratios of elements in compounds in our
material representation while doped materials with fractionalratios are very common in functional materials such as lithium-ionbattery material LiZn
0.01Fe0.99PO4, which is a doped cathodematerial. Our study can be extended by allowing real numbers on
the representation matrix. However, considering the in ﬁnite
possibility of doping ratios, our GAN method may need to work
together with other sampling techniques such as geneticalgorithms
30,31, genetic programming32, and active machine
learning for mixed parameter search33,34or the Bayesian
optimization approach33. In addition, our current GAN models
do not tell the crystal structures (lattice constants, space group,atomic coordinates, etc.) of the hypothesized materials. However,
with suf ﬁcient computational resources, it is possible to exploit
DFT-based computational software packages such as USPEX
35or
CALYPSO36to determine the crystal structure given a material
composition and its stoichiometry. Our GAN models can also be
used to work together with material structure generators11.
METHODS
Datasets
We use a subset of inorganic materials deposited in the OQMD15,17
database to train our AE and GAN models. OQMD is a widely used DFT
database with crystal structures either calculated from high-throughput
DFT or obtained from the ICSD37database. Currently it has 606,115
compounds. We use a similar screening criteria by Jha et al.38to choose
the OQMD subset for GAN training: for a formula with multiple reportedformation energies, we keep the lowest one to select the most stablecompound. Single-element compounds are all removed along withmaterials whose formation energy is out of the range of {u −5σ,u+5σ},
where u and σare the average and standard deviation of the formation
energies of all samples in OQMD. Our ﬁnal dataset, OQMD_L, has 291,884
compounds.
As comparison, we also train two GANs for the MP and ICSD databases,
respectively. Both the MP and ICSD datasets here are prepared byremoving all the single-atom compounds, the compounds which has anyelement with more than 8 atoms in their unit cell, and compoundscontaining Kr and He elements. The ﬁnal MP dataset used here has 63,922
compounds. The ﬁnal ICSD dataset used here has 28,137 compounds.
GAN neural networks training
We have optimized the hyper-parameters for training the GANs by setting
the learning rate from 0.1 to 10−6(each time decrease by 10-fold) and
batch normalization size from 32 to 1024, and using different optimizers.We train our GANs using the screened samples from the OQMD, MP, andICSD, and ICSD_ ﬁlter database, which is an ICSD subset with all charge-
neutral and electronegativity-balanced materials. These Wasserstein GANsare trained for 1000 epochs with the Adam optimizer with learning rate of
0.001 for the generator training and 0.01 for the discriminator training. The
batch size for GAN training on OQMD is set to 512 while the batch sizes areset as 32 for GAN training on all other datasets. The AE is trained with theAdam optimization algorithm with a learning rate of 10
−3and batch size
of 1024.
Training of bandgap prediction model
We choose 30,186 inorganic materials whose band gaps are >0 out of the
63,922 compounds in the selected MP dataset as the training samples to
train the bandgap prediction model. Gradient-boosted decision tree(GBDT) machine learning model is then trained with the Magpie features.The learning rate is set as 0.06. The maximum tree depth is set as 20. Thesubsample is set to 0.4. The number of estimator is set to 100.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The training and test data are downloaded from the Materials Project database and
OQMD database. Other results data that support the ﬁndings of this study are
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
CODE AVAILABILITY
Code and work ﬂow developed in this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.-30-20-100102030
-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30X2
X1Can decoder
Can not decoder
Fig. 7 Distribution of decodable and non-decodable materials. X1
and X2 are the two dimensions after dimension reduction.Y. Dan et al.
6
npj Computational Materials (2020)    84 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences