high-bandgap materials. To verify the bandgap values of
generated samples, we trained a bandgap prediction model usingthe Gradient-Boosted Decision Tree (GBDT) machine learning
algorithm with Magpie features28(see the Methods section for its
training details). We also use this model to predict the bandgapvalues of the exhaustively enumerated materials set. Figure 6
shows the distribution of the band gaps of the generated
materials set versus those of the training set and the exhaustively
enumerated set. The bandgap distribution of generated samples ismuch similar to that of the training set, which demonstrates the
capability of our GAN-bandgap can generate hypothetic high-
bandgap materials ef ﬁciently.
Discovery of potential new materials . To evaluate how likely our
GAN models can generate con ﬁrmed new materials, we take a
cross-validation evaluation approach. Essentially, for all the newhypothetical materials generated by each of our GAN models, wecheck how many of them are con ﬁrmed/included by the other
two datasets. Table 2lists the cross-validation con ﬁrmation results.
It is found that out of the 2 million generated materials by GAN-ICSD, 13,126 materials are con ﬁrmed by and included in the MP
dataset and 2349 new materials are con ﬁrmed by the OQMD
dataset. GAN-MP also has 6880 and 3601 generated samples
conﬁrmed by ICSD and OQMD, respectively. Another validation of
the predictive power of our GAN models come from a recent
study on discovering four new materials of aluminum and sul ﬁde
using DFT-based crystal structure prediction software CALYPSO
29.
Two of the four materials are in our candidate list: AlS 2, AlS, whichare con ﬁrmed by their study and we have predicted an additional
undiscovered AlS 3.
Limitation of MatGAN examined by autoencoder . Here we aim to
check the relation of AE non-decodable materials and thedifﬁculty of our GANs to generate them. To train the AE model,
we randomly split the OQMD_L dataset with 90% samples for AE
training and 10% samples as testing. The learning rate is set as10
−3, batch size 1024, and Adam optimizer is used. The ﬁnal AE
model is picked as the model with the best performance over the
test set within 1000 epochs of training. We found that our AEmodel can decode 96.31% and 95.50% of the samples from thetraining set and the test set. These samples seem to share some
common chemical composition rules.
To show the difference between the decodable samples and
non-decodable ones, we applied T-sne dimension reductiontechnique
25to reduce the dimension of the matrix representa-
tions of all OQMD_L dataset to 2 and then visualize 20% of the
samples on the 2D plot (Fig. 7), in which the red dots represent
non-decodable samples while blue ones represent decodableones. The apparent different distributions show that these two
categories of samples have different composition rules. Our
hypothesis is that the decodable samples share well-establishedchemical composition rules, which allows our GAN generators for
efﬁcient sampling of the corresponding chemical space. On the
other hand, the non-decodable samples will be dif ﬁcult to
generate by our GAN model. To verify this, we calculated thepercentage of non-decodable samples that have been generated
by the trained GAN-OQMD. It is observed that almost 95% of the
non-decodable materials are out of the scope of the generatedsamples even after generating 2 million of samples while 60.26%of the decodable training samples have been re-discovered.
This shows that our GANs have limitation in generating non-
decodable materials type. It also means that non-decodablematerials have special composition rules that either need more
data or more powerful generator models to learn. Indeed,
comparison on the enriched element distribution analysis(Supplementary Fig. 4) shows that the decodable and non-decodable materials have distinct element distributions.Fig. 6 Comparison of bandgap distributions of the generated
materials by GAN-bandgap, the training set, and the enumerated
set.The GAN-generated samples show much more similar bandgap
distribution than the enumerated compositions.Table 2. Cross-validation con ﬁrmation of generated new materials by
our GANs.
ICSD dataset MP dataset OQMD dataset
GAN-ICSD N/A 13,126 2349
GAN-MP 6880 N/A 3601GAN-OQMD 3428 58,603 N/A(a) (b)78.1%
30.4%
3.3%82.7%
31.2%
5.2%83.15%98.68% 99.98%
0%20%40%60%80%100%
Binary Ternary QuaternaryTrain recover% Leave out recover% New rate%60%70%80%90%100%
01 0 2 0 3 0 4 0Percentage of unique materias
Number of generated materials(1E4)OQMD
ICSD
MP
Fig. 5 Uniqueness and novelty check of the generated materials. a Comparison of uniqueness curves of the hypothetical materials
generated by three GANs. GAN-MP achieves the dominating curve due to its more balanced distribution of binary/ternary/quaternary trainingsamples. bDistribution of recovery rates of training and validation samples, and also percentages of new generated hypothetical materials.Y. Dan et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2020)    84