training and reduce the in ﬂuence of initial network weights22. The
ReLu is used as the activation function for all the batch
normalization layers. The Sigmoid function is used as the
activation function for the decoder ’s output layer. The detailed
conﬁguration parameters are listed in Supplementary Table 2. The
autoencoder are trained with 291,840 inorganic materials selectedfrom the OQMD database. In order to ensure the overlap betweenthe original input matrix T and the matrix reconstructed by thedecoder as much as possible, we adopt the negative dicecoefﬁcient
23commonly used in medical image semantic segmen-
tation as the loss function of AE. The AE model is then trainedusing the back-propagation algorithm. The loss function is shownin the following equation:
Loss
AE¼/C0Dice ¼/C02A\Bjj
AjjþBjj/C25/C02´A/C1B
SumðAÞþSumðBÞ(3)
where A\Bdenotes the common elements of Aand B, |g|
represents the number of elements in a matrix, /C1denotes dot
product, Sum(g) is the sum of all matrix elements. Dice coef ﬁcient
essentially measures the overlap of two matrix samples, with
values ranging from 0 to 1 with 1 indicating perfect overlap24.
The decoder module of the AE model shares the same
architecture of the generator in our MatGAN model. Ourhypothesis is that if the trained AE model cannot decode aspeci ﬁc material, it is unlikely our GAN model can generate it. By
screening out the non-decodable materials out of the OQMDdatabase using the AE, we may obtain a deeper understanding ofthe limitations of our GAN models.
The model performance of GANs
Efﬁcient sampling of the inorganic chemical space by the GANs .W e
trained our GANs according to the procedures as detailed in the
“Methods ”section. For all these GANs, including GAN-OQMD,
GAN-MP, and GAN-ICSD, we then generated 2 million hypotheticalmaterials using each of these generators and evaluate theirvalidity, uniqueness, and novelty.
Mapping inorganic materials design space
Out of the 2 million samples generated by the GAN-ICSD, we ﬁlter
out all samples that do not satisfy charge neutrality and balanced
electronegativity leading to 1.69 million generated samples. To
visualize how the generated ones are distributed compared to thetraining datasets from ICSD, we applied T-sne dimensionreduction technique
25to reduce the dimension of the matrix
representations of the samples from the generated set, thetraining set, and the leave-out validation set. The distribution ofthe generated samples versus the training and validation set areshown in Fig. 3. It is observed that the training samples from ICSDoccupy only a very small portion of the whole space. The GAN-
ICSD, however, has been able to generate potentially interestinghypothetical materials that ﬁll the design space, which may
signi ﬁcantly expand the range of the ICSD database.
Validity check . Charge neutrality and electronegativity balance
are two fundamental chemical rules of crystals. It is thus
interesting to check how the generated samples from our GANmodels satisfy these rules without explicit enforcement of suchrules during model training. To do this, we adopt the charge-
neutrality and electronegativity check procedure as proposed in
ref.
1to calculate the percentages of samples that obey these rules
within the training and generated sets of all four databases. The
results are shown in Fig. 4. First, we found that the percentages of
the validly generated samples are very close to those of thetraining set. For OQMD, when the training set has 55.8% charge-neutral samples, the generated set has 56.1%. For MP and ICSD,
the percentage of generated charge-neutral samples (84.8 and
80.3%) are also close to those of the training sets (83.5% and84.4%). Similar observations are found for electronegativity check.It is impressive that when we ensure all training samples in the
ICSD_ ﬁlter are charge-neutral and electronegativity-balanced, up
to 92.1% and 84.5% of the generated samples satisfy the twochemical rules, respectively, despite that no such rules areexplicitly modeled or enforced in our GAN training models. To
demonstrate the signi ﬁcance of this high percentage of chemi-
cally valid candidates, we compare our results to the exhaustiveenumeration approach in ref.
1, Table 1. The percentage of all
binary/ternary/quaternary samples that satisfy both charge
neutrality and electronegativity is 0.78% with exhaustive enu-meration compared with our 62.24%, which corresponds to 77times of enrichment in terms of sampling ef ﬁciency. This strongly
indicates that our GAN models have successfully learned implicit
chemical rules for generating chemically valid hypotheticalmaterials.
Formation energy distribution of generated materials
another way to evaluate the quality of generated hypothetical
materials is to check their stability, which can be measured by
their formation energy
26. To do this, ﬁrst, GAN-OQMD, GAN-ICSD,
and GAN-MP were used to generate 2 million materials candidateseach. Then, we selected all the materials with lithium element and
then ﬁlter out all those materials that do not satisfy charge
neutrality and balanced electronegativity. Finally, we obtained15,591, 137,948, and 281,320 lithium-containing compounds,
respectively, from GAN-OQMD, GAN-ICSD, and GAN-MP. We then
downloaded the formation energy prediction machine learningmodel (ElemNet) developed by Jha et al.
26and then used it to
Fig. 3 Inorganic materials space composed of existing ICSD materials and hypothetical materials generated by GAN-ICSD. The two axes
correspond to the two dimensions after t-sne-based dimension reduction. The ICSD materials only occupies a tiny portion of the chemical
space of inorganic materials. aTraining samples (green dots) and leave-out validation samples (red dots) from ICSD; b50,000 generated
samples (blue dots) together with training and leave-out samples; c200,000 generated samples together with training and leave-out samples.Y. Dan et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2020)    84