losses and least square loss of properties, which makes their
models tend to generate invalid compositions with very low
composition diversity.
In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst generative adversarial
network model for ef ﬁcient sampling of inorganic materials design
space by generating hypothetical inorganic materials. Trained
with materials from inorganic materials databases such as
OQMD15, Materials Project16, and ICSD, our GAN models are able
to learn the implicit chemical compositional rules from the knownmaterials to generate hypothetical but chemically sound com-
pounds. Without explicitly specifying the chemical rules, our GANs
trained with all charge-neutral and electronegativity-balancedsamples of the ICSD subset can generate hypothetical materials
with 84.5% reproducing the charge neutrality and balanced
electronegativity. The analysis shows that our generative GAN canachieve much higher ef ﬁciency in sampling the chemical
composition space of inorganic materials than the exhaustive
enumeration approach.
RESULTS
Representation of inorganic materialsThrough simple statistical calculation of the materials in the
OQMD dataset
17, 85 elements are found, and each element
usually has <8 atoms in any speci ﬁc compound/formula. We then
represent each material as a sparse matrix T2
Rd´sd¼8;s¼85 ðÞ with 0/1 integer values. Each column
represents one of the 85 elements while the column vector is aone-hot encoding of the number of atoms of that speci ﬁc element
(see Supplementary Fig. 5). The binary one-hot encoding is chosen
as two of the major chemical rules for valid chemical compositionsincluding the charge neutrality and electronegativity balance are
checked by the discrete atom numbers of composing elements
and our binary encoding allows us to take advantage of the strongbinary pattern learning capability of convolutional neural net-works used in our GAN models. Here the columns (elements) are
sorted by their atomic number and rows are sorted from 0 to 7.
The GAN generation model
Generative models can be built on several machine learning
algorithms such as variational autoencoder (VAE), generativeadversarial networks (GAN), reinforcement learning (RL), recurrentneural networks (RNN), and their hybrids
5. Different from other
generative models18,19, GANs do not directly use the discrepancy
of the data and an assumed model distribution (as VAE) to trainthe generator. Instead, it uses an adversarial training approach: it
ﬁrst trains a discriminator to differentiate real samples from faked
samples, which then guides the training of the generator toreduce this difference. These two training processes are alter-natively repeated. Their arm race will lead to high performance of
both the generator and the discriminator.
Our generative ML model for inorganic materials (MatGAN) is
based on the GAN scheme as shown in Fig. 1.
We choose the 8 × 85 matrix representation of materials
samples to build the GAN model. We found the integer
representation of materials greatly facilities the GAN training. Inour GAN model, both the discriminator (D) and the generator (G)
are modeled as a deep neural network. The generator is
composed of one fully connected layer and seven deconvolutionlayers. The discriminator is composed of seven convolution layersfollowed by a fully connected layer. Each of the convolution and
deconvolution layer comes with a batch normalization layer. The
output layer of the generator uses the Sigmoid function as theactivation function while all other batch normalization layers usethe ReLu as the activation function. The detailed network
conﬁguration is shown in Supplementary Table 2. In order to
avoid the gradient vanishing issue of standard GANs, we adoptthe Wasserstein GAN
20, which replaces the JS divergence distance
with the Wasserstein distance. The GAN model will be trainedusing the Wasserstein GAN approach by minimizing both the
generator loss and discriminator loss, which are de ﬁned as
Loss
G¼/C0Ex:PgfwðxÞ ½/C138 (1)
Loss D¼Ex:PgfwðxÞ ½/C138 /C0 Ex:prfwðxÞ ½/C138 (2)
where, Pgand Prare the distributions of generated samples and
real samples; fwðxÞis the discriminant network. Equations ( 1) and
(2) are used to guide the training process. The smaller the Loss D,
the smaller the Wasserstein distance between the generated
samples and the real samples and the better the GAN is trained.
Variational autoencoder for evaluating GAN performance
During our GAN generation experiments for OQMD dataset, we
found that it sometimes has dif ﬁculty to generate a speci ﬁc
category of materials. This may be caused by the limited samplesto learn the required composition rules to generate those samples.
To investigate this issue, we built an autoencoder (AE)21model as
shown in Fig. 2. The autoencoder is composed of an encoder with
seven convolutional layers followed by a fully connected layer anda decoder composed of a fully connected layer followed by sevendeconvolution layers. After each of the convolution and deconvo-
lution layer, there is a batch normalization layer used to speed up
Real 
samplesGenerated fake 
samples
Generator(G)
Discriminator(D)zLatent space
Is D
Correct
Fine-tuning
Fig. 1 Architecture of MatGAN for inorganic materials. It is
composed of a generator, which maps random vectors intogenerated samples and a discriminator, which tries to differentiatereal materials and generated ones. Detailed con ﬁguration para-
meters are listed in Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1.
Encoder Decoder
Conv DeConvComposition
EncodingComposition
EncodingMnAu MnAu
Latent space
Fig. 2 Architecture of autoencoder. Detail con ﬁguration para-
meters are shown in Supplementary Table 2 and Supplementary
Fig. 2.Y. Dan et al.
2
npj Computational Materials (2020)    84 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences1234567890():,;