ARTICLE OPEN
Generative adversarial networks (GAN) based ef ﬁcient
sampling of chemical composition space for inverse
design of inorganic materials
Yabo Dan1, Yong Zhao2, Xiang Li1, Shaobo Li1,3, Ming Hu4and Jianjun Hu1,2✉
A major challenge in materials design is how to ef ﬁciently search the vast chemical design space to ﬁnd the materials with desired
properties. One effective strategy is to develop sampling algorithms that can exploit both explicit chemical knowledge and implicit
composition rules embodied in the large materials database. Here, we propose a generative machine learning model (MatGAN)based on a generative adversarial network (GAN) for ef ﬁcient generation of new hypothetical inorganic materials. Trained with
materials from the ICSD database, our GAN model can generate hypothetical materials not existing in the training dataset, reaching
a novelty of 92.53% when generating 2 million samples. The percentage of chemically valid (charge-neutral and electronegativity-
balanced) samples out of all generated ones reaches 84.5% when generated by our GAN trained with such samples screened fromICSD, even though no such chemical rules are explicitly enforced in our GAN model, indicating its capability to learn implicit
chemical composition rules to form compounds. Our algorithm is expected to be used to greatly expand the range of the design
space for inverse design and large-scale computational screening of inorganic materials.
npj Computational Materials            (2020) 6:84 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-020-00352-0
INTRODUCTION
Discovering new inorganic materials such as solid electrolytes for
lithium-ion batteries is fundamental to many industrial applica-tions. While recent years have observed tremendous efforts onrational materials design, progress has been limited due to thechallenge to ﬁnd new materials that meet diverse technical and
economic constraints. From the computational perspective, brute-force molecular simulations or ﬁrst-principles methods are
computationally too expensive for large-scale screening of thevast chemical space. A recent effort
1to quantify the magnitude of
the compositional space for multi-component inorganic materialsshowed that even after the application of chemical ﬁlters such as
charge neutrality or electronegativity balance, the space for four-component/element materials exceeds 10
10combinations and the
ﬁve-component/element space exceeds 1013combinations.
Indeed, a machine learning (ML) based model has been appliedto screen billions of hypothetical materials to identify promisinghigh ion-conductors
2. Considering the huge space of doped
materials with different mixing ratios of elements and manyapplications such as high-temperature superconductors, where sixto seven component materials are common, the number ofpotential materials is immense. Such combinatorial explosion callsfor the need for more effective sampling approaches to search thechemical design space that employ existing explicit chemical andphysical knowledge and also implicit elemental compositionknowledge embodied within known synthesized materials. Togain more ef ﬁcient search, a variety of explicit chemical rules for
assessing the feasibility of a given stoichiometry and thelikelihood of particular crystal arrangements have been used incomputational screening such as the Pauling ’s rules (charge
neutrality), electronegativity balance, the radius ratio rules
3,
Pettifor maps4and etc. However, such approaches still fail tocapture enough implicit chemical rules to achieve ef ﬁcient
chemical design space sampling.
Recently, generative machine learning models such as auto-
encoders (AE) and its variants (VAE, AAE), RNNs, generative
adversarial networks (GANs) have been successfully applied toinverse design of organic materials5–8. These algorithms mainly
exploit the sequential or graph representations of organic
materials to learn the composition rules of the building blocksfor generating valid and novel hypothetical materials. Given alarge set of samples, a GAN is capable of learning complicated
hidden rules that generate the training data, and then applies
these learned rules to create new samples with target properties.When applied to inverse design, GANs have demonstrated their
power in ef ﬁcient sampling of design space
5,9, more ef ﬁcient than
other sampling approaches such as random sampling10, Monte
Carlo sampling, and other heuristic sampling (such as genetic
algorithms11). However, due to the radical difference in building
blocks and their composition rules, such generative machinelearning models have not been applied to the generation of
inorganic materials so far to the best of our knowledge. Recently,
variational autoencoders11,12have been proposed to generate
hypothetical crystal structures of inorganic materials. However,these methods are either limited to generate new structures of a
given material system such as the V –O system11or tend to mostly
generate crystal materials that are not physically stable12. A GAN
model for discovering new crystal structures have also been
recently proposed13. However, their study is limited to very
restricted binary systems and lacks composition diversity forgenerated structures. Another related work14proposes to use
conditional GAN and VAE models for composition generation.
However, they use real-valued one-hot encoding of materials, fullyconnected neural network architecture, and mixed Wasserstein
1School of Mechanical Engineering, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, China.2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC
29201, USA.3Key Laboratory of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, Ministry of Education, Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, China.4Department of Mechanical Engineering,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29201, USA.✉email: jianjunh@cse.sc.eduwww.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences1234567890():,;