7950and the expectation that such models will yield ad-
equate performance even with small amounts of
training data, it is unclear a priori whether – and
to what extent – established AL paradigms can
further enhance their classiﬁcation performance.
Moreover, more recent Deep AL strategies, such as
Core-Set (Sener and Savarese, 2017) and Dropout
(Gal and Ghahramani, 2016), were developed in the
vision domain for CNNs. The value of these strate-
gies on top of the BERT transformer architecture
remains unclear.
Our goal in this work is threefold. We study the
potential of (i) various AL strategies; (ii) in con-
junction with BERT, an arguably outstanding text
classiﬁcation scheme; (iii) within a highly chal-
lenging – yet common – real-world scenario of
class imbalance and scarce labeled data. To address
this goal, we conduct a systematic study, consider-
ing traditional and advanced AL strategies coupled
with BERT for a wide range of datasets. We focus
on three scenarios: A balanced setting, serving as a
reference, where the prior of the class of interest is
not too small; the more challenging imbalanced set-
ting, where the class prior is 15% but we assume
a way to obtain an unbiased set of positive sam-
ples to be used for initial training; and ﬁnally, the
imbalanced-practical setting, which is similar to
the imbalanced one, but takes a step further towards
a truly practical setup, in which there is no access
to an unbiased positive sample. Instead, we assume
the user has access to a biased sample, hopefully
enriched with positive examples, obtained by issu-
ing simple queries of keywords associated with the
positive class.
Our results convey that AL strategies can boost
BERT performance, under the challenging setting
of a small annotation budget and highly skewed
data, especially in the more practical real-world
settings. We release our research framework1, in-
cluding access to all datasets, an implementation of
multiple AL strategies, and an associated automatic
evaluation framework, aiming to facilitate further
research along the lines explored here.
2 Related Work
AL has been widely used in many ﬁelds to suc-
cessfully decrease the labeling effort involved in
the training process. A good summary of active
learning works prior to the advances in deep learn-
1https://github.com/IBM/
low-resource-text-classification-frameworking can be found in Settles (2009). Advances in
deep learning have given rise to extensive research
into deep active learning, which aims to adapt the
classic AL framework to the special properties of
DNNs. Deep AL presents some speciﬁc challenges.
Since DNNs are computationally heavy, training
a new model whenever a single training sample is
added is highly impractical. This requires a shift
to batch mode active learning, where a batch of ex-
amples is queried at every iteration. Moreover, the
tendency of the softmax layer to over-conﬁdence
has led to the development of various uncertainty-
based strategies tailored to the special properties of
DNNs (Gal and Ghahramani, 2016).
Most of the works in deep active learning fo-
cus on image classiﬁcation with convolutional neu-
ral networks (Sener and Savarese, 2017; Gal and
Ghahramani, 2016; Gissin and Shalev-Shwartz,
2019). Recent papers have demonstrated the
value of deep active learning for text classiﬁcation
(Zhang et al., 2017; Siddhant and Lipton, 2018;
Prabhu et al., 2019; Lowell et al., 2018), but in gen-
eral did not study AL for BERT. One exception is
Zhang and Zhang (2019) who applied an ensemble
of AL strategies to BERT for the task of intent clas-
siﬁcation. However, this work focuses on a single
task, and does not address the effect of small and
imbalanced data. Additionally, Shelmanov et al.
(2019) and Liu et al. (2020) focused on particu-
lar variants of BERT (BioBERT and BERT-CRF)
and studied a single or two speciﬁc tasks, with a
small collection of AL strategies. To the best of our
knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to systematically
explore advanced strategies like Core-Set (Sener
and Savarese, 2017), Dropout (Gal and Ghahra-
mani, 2016), Expected Gradient Length (Huang
et al., 2016) and Discriminative Active Learning
(Gissin and Shalev-Shwartz, 2019) for BERT, in
various settings and a diversity of tasks.
3 Empirical Evaluation
3.1 Data
We consider 10datasets (see Table 1) that cover
a variety of domains, and for each we select one
target class as our classiﬁcation goal, thus creating
a set of binary classiﬁcation tasks. Three datasets
are originally skewed, i.e., the target class prior is
15%: Wiki Attack (Wulczyn et al., 2017), which
annotates Wikipedia discussions for offensive con-