Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7949–7962,
November 16–20, 2020. c
2020 Association for Computational Linguistics7949Active Learning for BERT: An Empirical Study
Liat Ein-Dor, Alon Halfon, Ariel Gera, Eyal Shnarch, Lena Dankin, Leshem Choshen
Marina Danilevsky, Ranit Aharonov, Yoav Katz and Noam Slonim
IBM Research
fliate, alonhal, arielge, eyals, lenad, leshem.choshen, katz, noams g@il.ibm.com,
mdanile@us.ibm.com, ranit.aharonov2@ibm.com
Abstract
Real world scenarios present a challenge for
text classiﬁcation, since labels are usually ex-
pensive and the data is often characterized by
class imbalance. Active Learning (AL) is a
ubiquitous paradigm to cope with data scarcity.
Recently, pre-trained NLP models, and BERT
in particular, are receiving massive attention
due to their outstanding performance in var-
ious NLP tasks. However, the use of AL
with deep pre-trained models has so far re-
ceived little consideration. Here, we present
a large-scale empirical study on active learn-
ing techniques for BERT-based classiﬁcation,
addressing a diverse set of AL strategies and
datasets. We focus on practical scenarios of
binary text classiﬁcation, where the annota-
tion budget is very small, and the data is of-
ten skewed. Our results demonstrate that AL
can boost BERT performance, especially in
the most realistic scenario in which the ini-
tial set of labeled examples is created using
keyword-based queries, resulting in a biased
sample of the minority class. We release our
research framework, aiming to facilitate future
research along the lines explored here.
1 Introduction
Automatic text classiﬁcation is a well studied prob-
lem in Natural Language Processing (NLP), with
great practical importance and numerous real world
applications (Aggarwal and Zhai, 2012). There are
two major hurdles to developing effective text clas-
siﬁers in practice, as well as to developing classi-
ﬁers in other domains – the lack of labeled data, and
class imbalance (Japkowicz and Stephen, 2002).
Text classiﬁers often require high quantities of la-
beled data for model training. However, collecting
such labeled data is a notoriously expensive and
time-consuming process, and shortage of labeled
data is exacerbated when the desired class has a
These authors equally contributed to this work.relatively low prior in the data. In such a scenario,
even going through the burden of labeling a ran-
dom sample may yield an insufﬁcient number of
positive instances to properly train a classiﬁer. Our
focus in this work is on this challenging coupled
setup, frequently encountered by real-world users
– where labeled data is scarce andthe prior of the
desired class is small.
A classical approach for coping with limited an-
notation resources is Active Learning (AL) (Cohn
et al., 1996). In this paradigm, one assumes that un-
labeled data are abundant, and the goal is to focus
the expensive labeling process on the most infor-
mative instances. Many AL strategies have been
proposed, aiming to minimize the labeling burden,
or if taken from a different perspective – maximize
the value of labeling a small set of examples. Im-
portantly, the usefulness of an AL strategy naturally
depends on the classiﬁcation scheme with which it
is coupled. A successful AL approach for a Naive
Bayes classiﬁer may not be that effective for a mod-
ern deep-learning algorithm such as CNN, and vice
versa.
A more recent relevant development is the in-
troduction of pre-trained NLP models (cf. Qiu
et al., 2020), which have been shown to substan-
tially improve state-of-the-art results in numerous
NLP tasks. A prominent example is the BERT
model (Devlin et al., 2018), which has received
massive attention from the NLP research commu-
nity since its inception. However, the use of AL
with deep pre-trained models for text classiﬁcation
– and BERT in particular – has so far received sur-
prisingly little consideration. Thus, while recent
papers have demonstrated the value of AL for vari-
ous deep-learning text classiﬁcation schemes (Shen
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017; Siddhant and Lip-
ton, 2018; Prabhu et al., 2019), the potential of AL
combined with BERT is yet to be explored. First,
given the unique properties of pre-trained models,