7952are further an unbiased sample of the positive class.
In this setting we assume high-precision heuristics
that enable generating a relatively unbiased sample;
but in many real-world cases such heuristics may
not exist, or are expected to have limited coverage
and would not enable sampling at will4. Thus, such
heuristics cannot be assumed to yield a large train-
ing set, but may nevertheless be used for obtaining
a small initial seed in an active learning setting.
Imbalanced-practical: In this scenario, we simu-
late a more realistic setting in which a user attempts
to obtain as many positive examples as possible us-
ing the budget of 100annotations. To this end,
we design a simple keyword-based query for each
dataset, which aims to retrieve a set of instances
enriched with positive examples, using words as-
sumed to be associated with the positive class. We
opted for keyword-based queries as they are of-
ten used in practice in real-world scenarios. We
apply the query to the pool, and randomly draw
100instances from the query result, which are then
added to the seed with their ground truth labels.
Note that these 100examples are expected to be
enriched with positive examples, yet in a biased
manner, since by construction, all examples match
the query we started with. Speciﬁcally, this sce-
nario was tested on four datasets for which a simple
string (or sub-string) match query with enough hits
could be deﬁned: (i) for the fearclass in ISEAR the
query is [ fear orafraid orscared orscary ] (fear,
for example, can also capture fearsome ); (ii) for
the TREC location class, [ Where orcountr orcit]
(matching citcaptures both the singular and plural
of city); (iii) for the Wiki attack class, [ [A-Z]! ]
(capturing a word ending with an upper case letter
which is immediately followed by an exclamation
mark, e.g., IDIOT! ), and (iv) for the AG’s News-
imbworld class the query is a list of countries and
territories separated by ‘or’. It is likely that better
queries could be deﬁned. However, our goal here
was to simulate a realistic setting in which a user
relies on a relatively simple heuristic, and to exam-
ine the behavior of AL with BERT when initiated
with a potentially biased seed.
3.3 Active Learning Strategies
We consider several AL strategies for choosing the
batch of 50instances to label in each iteration. In
4For instance, for the task of classifying emotional sit-
uations, the preﬁx “This is a situation where I felt afraid:”
indicates that the following sentence belongs to the fear class,
but is expected to be rare within the corpus.addition, as a baseline, we consider a Random
strategy, where batch instances are chosen at ran-
dom from the unlabeled set.
Least Conﬁdence (LC, Lewis and Gale, 1994):
selects instances for which the model is least cer-
tain according to the max-entropy decision rule.
Monte Carlo Dropout (Dropout , Gal and
Ghahramani, 2016): Similar to LC, but instance un-
certainty is calculated using Monte Carlo Dropout
on10inference cycles, with the max-entropy ac-
quisition function5.
Perceptron Ensemble (PE): Selects instances
with highest uncertainty – similarly to LC – but av-
eraging over an ensemble of models. Here, we use
a light-weight ensemble strategy to overcome the
unrealistic computational cost required for training
an ensemble of BERT models. PE is composed
of10perceptrons which are trained to solve the
original task using L, where the perceptron inputs
are the CLS vectors of the ﬁne-tuned BERT model.
Expected Gradient Length (EGL , Huang et al.,
2016): selects instances with the largest expected
gradient norm, as they are expected to wield a
large inﬂuence on the model. The expectation is
computed over the posterior distribution of labels
for the example according to the trained model.
Core-Set (Sener and Savarese, 2017): selects in-
stances that best cover the dataset in the learned
representation space (CLS), using the greedy
method described in Sener and Savarese (2017).
Discriminative Active Learning (DAL , Gissin
and Shalev-Shwartz, 2019): This approach aims to
select instances that make L most representative of
the entire pool. We follow the exact method used
in Gissin and Shalev-Shwartz (2019).
We chose these strategies as spanning the lead-
ing state-of-the-art approaches in the AL do-
main: uncertainty-sampling (LC and Dropout),
uncertainty-sampling using ensemble methods
(PE), expected model change (EGL), and diversity
sampling (DAL and Core-Set).
3.4 Implementation Details
Overall, the results presented here consist of 2,520
ﬁne-tuning experiments ( 14dataset-scenario com-
binations5initial seeds(1base model + ( 7
selection strategies 5iterations)). In order to
run multiple experiments in parallel, experiments
were performed on IntelR
Xeon CPU E5-2699 v4
5other functions were shown to yield similar results (Gissin
and Shalev-Shwartz, 2019)