7956
Figure 2: Diversity (left) and Representativeness (right) of the batches selected by the different AL strategies in
each of the three scenarios.
each scenario we average results over all datasets
and seed selections. As expected, the batch-aware
strategies, DAL and Core-Set, which were de-
signed to increase diversity, are characterized by
the most diverse batches, with DAL achieving the
highest diversity values, demonstrating the suc-
cess of using mini-queries (Gissin and Shalev-
Shwartz, 2019) to reduce redundancy of the se-
lected examples. In contrast, the other strategies
tend to select less diverse batches, i.e., they are
prone to choose redundant examples, especially in
theimbalanced-practical scenario. Thus, combin-
ing these approaches with methods that encourage
diversity (e.g., He et al., 2014; Zhdanov, 2019;
Ash et al., 2019) can potentially lead to further
improvement in their resultant prediction perfor-
mance. In terms of representativeness, DAL, which
is a representativeness-driven method, again con-
sistently leads across the scenarios. In contrast,
the tendency of the greedy core-set version to se-
lect outliers (Sener and Savarese, 2017), is indeed
reﬂected in its relatively low representativeness
scores. Interestingly, this is not the case for the
imbalanced-practical scenario. This result can
be attributed to the high bias of L towards query
matches, which results in poor representativeness
of L, which in turn leaves the main ”responsibility”
for representing the dataset on the batch examples
selected from U. A deeper investigation of this
result is left for further investigation. Other strate-
gies have low representativeness scores compared
to DAL, implying that they can be improved by
combining them with techniques for encouraging
representativeness and avoiding outliers.
A popular approach for improving classiﬁcation
quality is combining several, preferably comple-
mentary, AL strategies. In order to ﬁnd pairs ofstrategies with high synergistic potential, we mea-
sured the overlap between the batches selected by
each pair of strategies. Our analysis shows that
for all pairs of strategies, the expected batch over-
lap is relatively low, and does not exceed 15%.
In general, overlap was higher in the imbalanced
scenarios, probably due to the general incentive
to select positive examples, which are rare in the
data. Also, the overlap within the uncertainty-based
strategies was generally quite high. Nevertheless,
the highest overlap between batches was between
EGL (which is not an uncertainty-based approach)
and LC. We leave for future work to try a combi-
nation of strategies with low overlap as a way to
improve classiﬁcation even further.
6 Conclusions
The recent emergence of pre-trained models, with
BERT as a prominent example, is reshaping the
NLP arena (Qiu et al., 2020). The promise em-
bodied in these models is their ability to exploit
massive unlabeled textual data to learn versatile,
arguably universal language representations. These
representations, in turn, are proven to be effective
for a multitude of downstream NLP tasks.
A parallel line of research, dating back nearly
three decades, is the notion of AL, aiming to mini-
mize labeling burden within the supervised learn-
ing paradigm. The pairing of these two inﬂuential
threads raises non-trivial questions. For example,
BERT arguably attains excellent performance with
relatively little labeled data, used to ﬁne-tune this
pre-trained model for a concrete task. It is not ob-
vious to begin with, to what extent AL strategies
can be used to outperform this already high bar.
To the best of our knowledge, the present work
provides the ﬁrst systematic study in this context,