Model Interpretability through the Lens of
Computational Complexity
Pablo Barceló1;4, Mikaël Monet2, Jorge Pérez3;4, Bernardo Subercaseaux3;4
1Institute for Mathematical and Computational Engineering, PUC-Chile
2Inria Lille, France
3Department of Computer Science, Universidad de Chile
4Millennium Institute for Foundational Research on Data, Chile
pbarcelo@ing.puc.cl ,mikael.monet@inria.fr ,[jperez,bsuberca]@dcc.uchile.cl
Abstract
In spite of several claims stating that some models are more interpretable than
others – e.g., “linear models are more interpretable than deep neural networks” – we
still lack a principled notion of interpretability to formally compare among different
classes of models. We make a step towards such a notion by studying whether folk-
lore interpretability claims have a correlate in terms of computational complexity
theory. We focus on local post-hoc explainability queries that, intuitively, attempt
to answer why individual inputs are classiﬁed in a certain way by a given model.
In a nutshell, we say that a class C1of models is more interpretable than another
classC2, if the computational complexity of answering post-hoc queries for models
inC2is higher than for those in C1. We prove that this notion provides a good theo-
retical counterpart to current beliefs on the interpretability of models; in particular,
we show that under our deﬁnition and assuming standard complexity-theoretical
assumptions (such as P6=NP), both linear and tree-based models are strictly more
interpretable than neural networks. Our complexity analysis, however, does not
provide a clear-cut difference between linear and tree-based models, as we obtain
different results depending on the particular post-hoc explanations considered. Fi-
nally, by applying a ﬁner complexity analysis based on parameterized complexity,
we are able to prove a theoretical result suggesting that shallow neural networks
are more interpretable than deeper ones.
1 Introduction
Assume a dystopian future in which the increasing number of submissions has forced journal editors
to use machine-learning systems for automatically accepting or rejecting papers. Someone sends
his/her work to the journal and the answer is a reject, so the person demands an explanation for the
decision. The following are examples of three alternative ways in which the editor could provide an
explanation for the rejection given by the system:
1.In order to accept the submitted paper it would be enough to include a better motivation
and to delete at least two mathematical formulas.
2.Regardless of the content and the other features of this paper, it was rejected because it has
more than 10 pages and a font size of less than 11pt.
3.We only accept 1 out of 20 papers that do not cite any other paper from our own journal. In
order to increase your chances next time, please add more references.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.