Models and instances. We consider an abstract deﬁnition of a model Msimply as a Boolean
functionM:f0;1gn!f0;1g. That is, we focus on binary classiﬁers with Boolean input features.
Restricting inputs and outputs to be Booleans makes our setting cleaner while still covering several
relevant practical scenarios. A class of models is just a way of grouping models together. An instance
is a vector inf0;1gnand represents a possible input for a model. A partial instance is a vector
inf0;1;?gn, with?intuitively representing “undeﬁned” components. A partial instance x2
f0;1;?gnrepresents, in a compact way, the set of all instances in f0;1gnthat can be obtained by
replacing undeﬁned components in xwith values inf0;1g. We call these the completions ofx.
Explainability queries. Anexplainability query is a question that we ask about a model Mand a
(possibly partial) instance x, and refers to what the model Mdoes on instance x. We assume all
queries to be stated either as decision problems (that is, YES/NOqueries) or as counting problems
(queries that ask, for example, how many completions of a partial instance satisfy a given property).
Thus, for now we can think of queries simply as functions having models and instances as inputs. We
will formally deﬁne some speciﬁc queries in the next section, when we instantiate our framework.
Complexity classes. We assume some familiarity with the most common computational complexity
classes of polynomial time ( PTIME ) and nondeterministic polynomial time ( NP), and with the notion
of hardness and completeness for complexity classes under polynomial time reductions. In the
paper we also consider the class p
2, consisting of those problems that can be solved in NPif we
further grant access to an oracle that solves NPqueries in constant time. It is strongly believed that
PTIME (NP(p
2[2], where for complexity classes K1andK2we have thatK1(K2means
the following: problems in K1can be solved inK2, but complete problems for K2cannot be solved
inK1.
While for studying the complexity of our decision problems the above classes sufﬁce, for counting
problems we will need another one. This will be the class #P, which corresponds to problems that
can be deﬁned as counting the number of accepting paths of a polynomial-time nondeterministic
Turing machine [ 2]. Intuitively, #Pis the counting class associated to NP: while the prototypical
NP-complete problem is checking if a propositional formula is satisﬁable ( SAT ), the prototypical #P-
complete problem is counting how many truth assignments satisfy a propositional formula ( #SAT ).
It is widely believed that #P is “harder” than p
2, which we write as p
2(#P.1
Complexity-based interpretability of models. Given an explainability query Qand a classCof
models, we denote by Q(C)the computational problem deﬁned by Qrestricted to models in C. We
deﬁne next the most important notion for our framework: that of being more interpretable in terms of
complexity (c-interpretable for short). We will use this notion to compare among classes of models.
Deﬁnition 1. LetQbe an explainability query, and C1andC2be two classes of models. We say
thatC1isstrictly more c-interpretable than C2with respect to Q, if the problem Q(C1)is in the
complexity classK1, the problem Q(C2)is hard for complexity class K2, andK1(K2.
For instance, in the above deﬁnition one could take K1to be the PTIME class andK2to be the NP
class, orK1=NP andK2= p
2.
3 Instantiating the framework and main results
Here we instantiate our framework on three important classes of Boolean models and explainability
queries, and then present our main theorems comparing such models in terms of c-interpretability.
3.1 Speciﬁc models
Binary decision diagrams. Abinary decision diagram (BDD [ 35]) is a rooted directed acyclic
graphMwith labels on edges and nodes, verifying: (i) each leaf is labeled with true or with false;
(ii) each internal node (a node that is not a leaf) is labeled with an element of f1;:::;ng; and
1One has to be careful with this notation, however, as p
2and#Pare complexity classes for problems of
different sort: the former being for decision problems, and the latter for counting problems. Although this issue
can be solved by considering the class PP, we skip these technical details as they are not fundamental for the
paper and can be found in most complexity theory textbooks, such as that of Arora and Barak [2].
3