Proposition 11. For everyt1theMINIMUM CHANGE REQUIRED query over rMLPs with 3t+ 3
layers is W(Maj)[t]-hard and is contained in W(Maj)[3t+ 7].
By assuming that the W(Maj)-hierarchy is strict, we can use Proposition 11 to provide separations
for rMLPs with different numbers of layers. For instance, instantiating the above result with t= 1
we obtain that for rMLPs with 6layers, the MCR problem is in W(Maj)[3t+ 7] = W( Maj)[10] .
Moreover, instantiating it with t= 11 we obtain that for rMLPs with 36layers, the MCR problem
isW(Maj)[11] -hard. Thus, assuming that W(Maj)[10](W(Maj)[11] we obtain that rMLPs with 6
layers are strictly more c-interpretable than rMLPs with 36layers. We generalize this observation in
the following result.
Proposition 12. Assume that the W(Maj)-hierarchy is strict. Then for every t1we have that
rMLPs with 3t+ 3layers are strictly more c-interpretable than rMLPs with 9t+ 27 layers wrt. MCR.
6 Discussion and concluding remarks
Related work. The need for model interpretability in machine learning has been heavily advocated
during the last few years, with works covering theoretical and practical issues [ 3,19,23,26,27].
Nevertheless, a formal deﬁnition of interpretability has remained elusive [ 23]. In parallel, a related
notion of interpretability has emerged from the ﬁeld of knowledge compilation [9,30,31,32,
33]. The intuition here is to construct a simpler and more interpretable model from a complex
one. One can then study the simpler model to understand how the initial one makes predictions.
Motivated by this, Darwiche and Hirth [ 8] use variations of the notion of sufﬁcient reason to
explore the interpretability of Ordered BDDs (OBDDs). The FBDDs that we consider in our
work generalize OBDDs, and thus, our results for sufﬁcient reasons over FBDDs can be seen as
generalizations of the results in [ 8]. We consider FBDDs instead of OBDDs as FBDDs subsume
decision trees, while OBDDs do not. We point out here that the notion of sufﬁcient reason for a
Boolean classiﬁer is the same as the notion of implicant for a Boolean function, and that minimal
sufﬁcient reasons (with minimailty refering to subset-inclusion of the deﬁned components) correspond
toprime implicants [9]. We did not incorporate a study of minimal sufﬁcient reasons (also called
PI-explanations ) to our work due to space constraints. In a contemporaneous work [ 24], Marques-
Silva et al. study the task of enumerating the minimal sufﬁcient reasons of naïve Bayes and linear
classiﬁers. The queries COUNT COMPLETIONS andCHECK SUFFICIENT REASON have already been
studied for FBDDs in [ 9] (CHECK SUFFICIENT REASON under the name of implicant check ). The
query MINIMUM CHANGE REQUIRED is studied in [ 31] for OBDDs, where it is called robustness .
Finally, there are papers exploring queries beyond the ones presented here [ 30,31,32], such as
monotonicity ,unateness ,bias detection ,minimum cardinality explanations , etc.
Limitations. Our framework provides a formal way of studying interpretability for classes of
models, but still can be improved in several respects. One of them is the use of a more sophisticated
complexity analysis that is not so much focused on the worst case complexity study propose here,
but on identifying relevant parameters that characterize more precisely how difﬁcult it is to interpret
a particular class of models in practice. Also, in this paper we have focused on studying the local
interpretability of models (why did the model make a certain prediction on a given input?), but
one could also study their global interpretability , that is, making sense of the general relationships
that a model has learned from the training data [ 27]. Our framework can easily be extended to the
global setting by considering queries about models, independent of the input it receives. In order to
avoid the difﬁculties of deﬁning a general notion of interpretability [ 23], we have used explainability
queries and their complexity as a formal proxy. Nonetheless, we do not claim that our notion of
complexity-based interpretability is thedeﬁnitive notion of interpretability. Indeed, most deﬁnitions
of interpretability are directly related to humans in a subjective manner [ 5,10,25]. Our work is
thus to be taken as a study of the correlation between a formal notion of interpretability and the
folk wisdom regarding a subjective concept. Finally, even though the notion of complexity-based
interpretability gives a precise way to compare models, our results show that it is still dependent on
the particular set of queries that one picks. To achieve a more robust formalization of interpretability,
one would then need to propose a more general approach that prescinds of speciﬁc queries. This is a
challenging problem for future research.
9