These are examples of so called local post-hoc explanations [3,19,23,26,27]. Here, the term “local”
refers to explaining the verdict of the system for a particular input [ 19,27], and the term “post-hoc”
refers to interpreting the system after it has been trained [ 23,26]. Each one of the above explanations
can be seen as a query asked about a system and an input for it. We call them explainability queries .
The ﬁrst query is related with the minimum change required to obtain a desired outcome (“what is the
minimum change we must make to the article for it to be accepted by the system?”). The second one
is known as a sufﬁcient reason [32], and intuitively asks for a subset of the features of the given input
that sufﬁces to obtain the current verdict. The third one, that we call counting completions , relates to
the probability of obtaining a particular output given the values in a subset of the features of the input.
In this paper we use explainability queries to formally compare the interpretability of machine-
learning models. We do this by relating the interpretability of a class of models (e.g., decision trees)
to the computational complexity of answering queries for models in that class. Intuitively the lower
the complexity of such queries is, the more interpretable the class is. We study whether this intuition
provides an appropriate correlate to folklore wisdom on the interpretability of models [20, 23, 28].
Our contributions. We formalize the framework described above (Section 2) and use it to perform a
theoretical study of the computational complexity of three important types of explainability queries
over three classes of models. We focus on models often mentioned in the literature as extreme points
in the interpretability spectrum: decision trees, linear models, and deep neural networks. In particular,
we consider the class of free binary decision diagrams (FBDDs), that generalize decision trees, the
class of perceptrons , and the class of multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) with ReLU activation functions.
The instantiation of our framework for these classes is presented in Section 3.
We show that, under standard complexity assumptions, the computational problems associated to our
interpretability queries are strictly less complex for FBDDs than they are for MLPs. For instance, we
show that for FBDDs, the queries minimum-change-required and counting-completions can be solved
in polynomial time, while for MLPs these queries are, respectively, NP-complete and #P-complete
(where #Pis the prototypical intractable complexity class for counting problems). These results,
together with results for other explainability queries, show that under our deﬁnition for comparing the
interpretability of classes of models, FBDDs are indeed more interpretable than MLPs. This correlates
with the folklore statement that tree-based models are more interpretable than deep neural networks.
We prove similar results for perceptrons: most explainability queries that we consider are strictly
less complex to answer for perceptrons than they are for MLPs. Since perceptrons are a realization
of a linear model, our results give theoretical evidence for another folklore claim stating that linear
models are more interpretable than deep neural networks. On the other hand, the comparison between
perceptrons and FBDDs is not deﬁnitive and depends on the particular explainability query. We
establish all our computational complexity results in Section 4.
Then, we observe that standard complexity classes are not enough to differentiate the interpretability
of shallow and deep MLPs. To present a meaningful comparison, we then use the machinery of
parameterized complexity [12,16], a theory that allows the classiﬁcation of hard computational
problems on a ﬁner scale. Using this theory, we are able to prove that there are explainability queries
that are more difﬁcult to solve for deeper MLPs compared to shallow ones, thus giving theoretical
evidence that shallow MLPs are more interpretable. This is the most technically involved result of
the paper, that we think provides new insights on the complexity of interpreting deep neural networks.
We present the necessary concepts and assumptions as well as a precise statement of this result
in Section 5.
Most deﬁnitions of interpretability in the literature are directly related to humans in a subjective
manner [ 5,10,25]. In this respect we do not claim that our complexity-based notion of interpretability
istheright notion of interpretability, and thus our results should be taken as a study of the correlation
between a formal notion and the folklore wisdom regarding a subjective concept. We discuss this and
other limitations of our results in Section 6. We only present a few sketches for proofs in the body of
the paper and refer the reader to the appendix for detailed proofs of all our claims.
2 A framework to compare interpretability
In this section we explain the key abstract components of our framework. The idea is to introduce the
necessary terminology to formalize our notion of being more interpretable in terms of complexity .
2