enough to determine the output M(x). Observe that an instance xis always a sufﬁcient reason for
itself, and that xcould have multiple (other) sufﬁcient reasons. However, given an instance x, the
sufﬁcient reasons of xthat are most interesting are those having the least possible number of deﬁned
components; indeed, it is clear that the less deﬁned components a sufﬁcient reason has, the more
information it provides about the decision of Monx. For a partial instance y, let us writekyk
for its number of components that are not ?. The previous observations then motivate our next
interpretability query.
Problem: M INIMUM SUFFICIENT REASON (MSR)
Input: ModelM, instance x, andk2N
Output: Y ES, if there exists a sufﬁcient reason yforxwrt.Mwithkykk,
and N Ootherwise
As for the case of MCR, notice that we have formalized this interpretability query as a decision
problem. The last query that we will consider refers to counting the number of positive completions
for a given partial instance.
Problem: C OUNT COMPLETIONS (CC)
Input: ModelM, partial instance y
Output: The number of completions xofysuch thatM(x) = 1
Intuitively, this query informs us on the proportion of inputs that are accepted by the model, given
that some particular features have been ﬁxed; or, equivalently, on the probability that such an instance
is accepted, assuming the other features to be uniformly and independently distributed.
3.3 Main interpretability theorems
We can now state our main theorems, which are illustrated in Figure 1. In all these theorems we
useCMLPto denote the class of all models (functions from f0;1gntof0;1g) that are deﬁned by MLPs,
and similarly forCFBDD andCPerceptron . The proofs for all these results will follow as corollaries from
the detailed complexity analysis that we present in Section 4. We start by stating a strong separation
between FBDDs and MLPs, which holds for all the queries presented above.
Theorem 2.CFBDD is strictly more c-interpretable than CMLPwith respect to MCR ,MSR , and CC.
For the comparison between perceptrons and MLPs, we can establish a strict separation for MCR
and MSR , but not for CC. In fact, CC has the same complexity for both classes of models, which
means that none of these classes strictly “dominates” the other in terms of c-interpretability for CC.
Theorem 3.CPerceptron is strictly more c-interpretable than CMLPwith respect to MCR andMSR . In
turn, the problems CC(CPerceptron )andCC(CMLP)are both complete for the same complexity class.
The next result shows that, in terms of c-interpretability, the relationship between FBDDs and
perceptrons is not clear, as each one of them is strictly more c-interpretable than the other for some
explainability query.
Theorem 4. The problems MCR (CFBDD)and MCR (CPerceptrons )are both in PTIME . How-
ever,CPerceptron is strictly more c-interpretable than CFBDD with respect to MSR , whileCFBDD is
strictly more c-interpretable than CPerceptron with respect to CC.
We prove these results in the next section, where for each query Qand class of models Cwe pinpoint
the exact complexity of the problem Q(C).
5