Notice that this result immediately yields Theorems 2, 3, and 4 for the case of MCR.
4.2 The complexity of M INIMUM SUFFICIENT REASON
We now study the complexity of MINIMUM SUFFICIENT REASON . The following result yields
Theorems 2, 3, and 4 for the case of MSR.
Proposition 6. TheMINIMUM SUFFICIENT REASON query is (1) NP-complete for FBDDs (and
hardness holds already for decision trees), (2) in PTIME for perceptrons, and (3) p
2-complete for
MLPs.
Proof sketch. Membership of the problem in the respective classes is easy. We show NP-completeness
of the problem for FBDDs by a nontrivial reduction from the NP-complete problem of determining
whether a directed acyclic graph has a dominating set of size at most k[22]. For a perceptron M=
(w;b)and an instance x, assume without loss of generality that M(x) = 1 . As in the proof of
Proposition 5, we consider the importance of every component of x, and prove that it is enough to
check whether the kmost important features of xare a sufﬁcient reason for it, in which case we
return YES, and simply return NOotherwise. Finally, the p
2-completeness for MLPs is obtained
again using a technical reduction from the problem called SHORTEST IMPLICANT CORE, deﬁned
and shown to be p
2-complete by Umans [34].
To reﬁne our analysis, we also consider the natural problem of checking if a given partial instance is a
sufﬁcient reason for an instance.
Problem: C HECK SUFFICIENT REASON (CSR)
Input: ModelM, instance xand a partial instance y
Output: Y ES, ifyis a sufﬁcient reason for xwrt.M, and N Ootherwise
We obtain the following (easy) result.
Proposition 7. The query CHECK SUFFICIENT REASON is (1) in PTIME for FBDDs, (2) in PTIME
for perceptrons, and (3) co-NP -complete for MLPs.
We note that this result for FBDDs already appears in [ 9] (under the name of implicant check ).
Interestingly, we observe that this new query maintains the comparisons in terms of c-interpretability,
in the sense thatCFBDD andCPerceptron are strictly more c-interpretable than CMLPwith respect to CSR.
4.3 The complexity of C OUNT COMPLETIONS
What follows is our main complexity result regarding the query COUNT COMPLETIONS , which yields
Theorems 2, 3, and 4 for the case of CC.
Proposition 8. The query COUNT COMPLETIONS is (1) in PTIME for FBDDs, (2) #P-complete for
perceptrons, and (3) #P-complete for MLPs.
Proof sketch. Claim (1) is a a well-known fact that is a direct consequence of the deﬁnition of FBDDs;
indeed, we can easily compute by bottom-up induction of the FBDD a quantity representing for each
node the number of positive completions of the sub-FBDD rooted at that node (e.g., see [ 9,35]). We
prove (2) by showing a reduction from the #P-complete problem #KNAPSACK , i.e., counting the
number of solutions to a 0=1knapsack input.2For the last claim, we show that MLPs with ReLU
activations can simulate arbitrary Boolean formulas, which allows us to directly conclude (3) since
counting the number of satisfying assignments of a Boolean formula is #P-complete.
Comparing perceptrons and MLPs. Although the query COUNT COMPLETIONS is#P-complete
for perceptrons, we can still show that the complexity goes down to PTIME if we assume the weights
and biases to be integers given in unary; this is commonly called pseudo-polynomial time .
Proposition 9. The query COUNT COMPLETIONS can be solved in pseudo-polynomial time for
perceptrons (assuming the weights and biases to be integers given in unary).
2Recall that such an input consists of natural numbers (given in binary) s1; : : : ; s n; k2N, and a solution to
it is a set Sf1; : : : ; ngwithP
i2Ssik.
7