An Overview of Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
from Game Theoretical Perspective
Yaodong Yang∗1,2and Jun Wang1,2
1University College London,2Huawei R&D U.K.
Abstract
Following the remarkable success of the AlphaGO series, 2019 was a boom-
ing year that witnessed signicant advances in multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) techniques. MARL corresponds to the learning problem in a multi-agent
system in which multiple agents learn simultaneously. It is an interdisciplinary do-
main with a long history that includes game theory, machine learning, stochastic
control, psychology, and optimisation. Although MARL has achieved considerable
empirical success in solving real-world games, there is a lack of a self-contained
overview in the literature that elaborates the game theoretical foundations of mod-
ern MARL methods and summarises the recent advances. In fact, the majority
of existing surveys are outdated and do not fully cover the recent developments
since 2010. In this work, we provide a monograph on MARL that covers both the
fundamentals and the latest developments in the research frontier.
Our work is separated into two parts. From x1 tox4, we present the self-
contained fundamental knowledge of MARL, including problem formulations, basic
solutions, and existing challenges. Specically, we present the MARL formulations
through two representative frameworks, namely, stochastic games and extensive-
form games, along with dierent variations of games that can be addressed. The
goal of this part is to enable the readers, even those with minimal related back-
ground, to grasp the key ideas in MARL research. From x5 tox9, we present an
overview of recent developments of MARL algorithms. Starting from new tax-
onomies for MARL methods, we conduct a survey of previous survey papers. In
later sections, we highlight several modern topics in MARL research, including
Q-function factorisation, multi-agent soft learning, networked multi-agent MDP,
stochastic potential games, zero-sum continuous games, online MDP, turn-based
stochastic games, policy space response oracle, approximation methods in general-
sum games, and mean-eld type learning in games with innite agents. Within
each topic, we select both the most fundamental and cutting-edge algorithms.
The goal of our monograph is to provide a self-contained assessment of the
current state-of-the-art MARL techniques from a game theoretical perspective. We
expect this work to serve as a stepping stone for both new researchers who are
about to enter this fast-growing domain and existing domain experts who want to
obtain a panoramic view and identify new directions based on recent advances.
∗This manuscript is under actively development. We appreciated any constructive comments and
suggestions corresponding to: <yaodong.yang@outlook.com >.
1arXiv:2011.00583v3  [cs.MA]  18 Mar 2021