5 A Survey of MARL Surveys
In this section, I provide a non-comprehensive review of MARL algorithms. To begin, I
introduce dierent taxonomies that can be applied to categorise prior approaches. Given
multiple high-quality, comprehensive surveys on MARL methods already exist, a survey
of those surveys is provided. Based on the proposed taxonomy, I review related MARL
algorithms, covering works on identical interest games, zero-sum games, and games with
an innite number of players. This section is written to be selective, focusing on the
algorithms that have theoretical guarantees and less focus on those with only empirical
success or those that are purely driven by specic applications.
5.1 Taxonomy of MARL Algorithms
One signicant dierence between the taxonomy of single-agent RL algorithms and MARL
algorithms is that in the single-agent setting, since the problem is unanimously dened,
the taxonomy is driven mainly by the type of solution (Kaelbling et al., 1996; Li, 2017),
for example, model-free vs model-based, on-policy vs o-policy, TD learning vs Monte-
Carlo methods. By contrast, in the multi-agent setting, due to the existence of multiple
learning objectives (see Section 4.2), the taxonomy is driven mainly by the type of prob-
lem rather than the solution. In fact, asking the right question for MARL algorithms is
itself a research problem, which is referred to as the problem problem (Balduzzi et al.,
2018b; Shoham et al., 2007).
Based on Stage Games Types. Since the solution concept varies considerably ac-
cording to the game type, one principal component of the MARL taxonomy is the nature
of stage games. A common division26includes team games (more generally, potential
games), zero-sum games (more generally, harmonic games), and a mixed setting of the
two games, namely, general-sum games. Other types of \exotic" games, such as potential
games (Monderer and Shapley, 1996) and mean-eld games (Lasry and Lions, 2007), that
originate from non-game-theoretical research domains exist and have recently attracted
tremendous attention. Based on the type of stage game, the taxonomy can be further
enriched by how many times they are played. A repeated game is where one stage game
26Such a division is complementary because any multi-player normal-form game can be decomposed
into a potential game plus a harmonic game (Candogan et al., 2011) (also see Denition 4); in the
two-player case, it corresponds to a team game plus a zero-sum game.
44