includes broader areas of evolutionary computation, complex systems, etc. Matignon
et al. (2012) surveyed the solutions for fully-cooperative games only; in particular, they
focused on evaluating independent RL solutions powered by Q-learning and its many
variants. Jan't Hoen et al. (2005) conducted an overview with a similar scope; moreover,
they extended the work to include fully competitive games in addition to fully cooper-
ative games. Bu soniu et al. (2010), to the best of my knowledge, presented the rst
comprehensive survey on MARL techniques, covering both value iteration-based and pol-
icy search-based methods, together with their strengths and weaknesses. In their survey,
they considered not only fully cooperative or competitive games but also the eectiveness
of dierent algorithms in the general-sum setting. Now e et al. (2012), in the 14th chapter,
addressed the same topic as Bu soniu et al. (2010) but with a much narrower coverage of
multi-agent RL algorithms.
Tuyls and Now e (2005) and Bloembergen et al. (2015) both surveyed the dynamic
models that have been derived for various MARL algorithms and revealed the deep con-
nection between evolutionary game theory and MARL methods. We refer to Table 1 in
Tuyls and Now e (2005) for a summary of this connection.
Hernandez-Leal et al. (2017) provided a dierent perspective on the taxonomy of how
existing MARL algorithms cope with the issue of non-stationarity induced by opponents.
On the basis of the opponent and environment characteristics, they categorised the MARL
algorithms according to the type of opponent modelling.
Da Silva and Costa (2019) introduced a new perspective of reviewing MARL algo-
rithms based on how knowledge is reused, i.e., transfer learning. Specically, they grouped
the surveyed algorithms into intra-agent and inter-agent methods, which correspond to
the reuse of knowledge from experience gathered from the agent itself and that acquired
from other agents, respectively.
Most recently, deep MARL techniques have received considerable attention. Nguyen
et al. (2020) surveyed how deep learning techniques were used to address the challenges
in multi-agent learning, such as partial observability, continuous state and action spaces,
and transfer learning. OroojlooyJadid and Hajinezhad (2019) reviewed the application of
deep MARL techniques in fully cooperative games: the survey on this setting is thorough.
Hernandez-Leal et al. (2019) summarised how the classic ideas from traditional MAS re-
search, such as emergent behaviour, learning communication, and opponent modelling,
were incorporated into deep MARL domains, based on which they proposed a new cate-
49