hold in normal-form games. Many eorts have since been dedicated to nding the NE
of (static) PGs (L~ a et al., 2016), among which ctitious play (Berger, 2007) and gener-
alised weakened ctitious play (Leslie and Collins, 2006) are probably the most common
solutions.
Generally, stochastic PGs (SPGs)29can be regarded as the \single-agent component"
of a multi-agent stochastic game (Candogan et al., 2011) since all agents' interests in
SPGs are described by a single potential function. However, the analysis of SPGs is
exceptionally sparse. Zazo et al. (2015) studied an SPG with deterministic transition
dynamics in which agents consider only open-loop policies30. In fact, generalising a PG
to the stochastic setting is further complicated because agents must now execute policies
that depend on the state and consider the actions of other players. In this setting,
Gonz alez-S anchez and Hern andez-Lerma (2013) investigated a type of SPG in which they
derive a sucient condition for NE, but it requires each agent's reward function to be a
concave function of the state and the transition function to be invertible. Macua et al.
(2018) studied a general form of SPG where a closed-loop NE can be found. Although
they demonstrated the equivalence between solving the closed-loop NE and solving a
single-agent optimal control problem, the agents' policies must depend only on disjoint
subsets of components of the state. Notably, both Gonz alez-S anchez and Hern andez-
Lerma (2013) and Macua et al. (2018) proposed centralised methods; optimisation over
the joint action space surely results in a combinatorial complexity when solving the SPGs.
In addition, they do not consider an RL setting in which the system is a priori unknown.
The work of Mguni (2020) is probably the most comprehensive treatment of SPGs
in a model-free setting. Similar to Macua et al. (2018), the authors revealed that the
NE of the PG in pure strategies could be found by solving a dual-form MDP, but they
reached the conclusion without the disjoint state assumption: the transition dynamics and
potential function must be known. Specically, they provided an algorithm to estimate
the potential function based on the reward samples. To avoid combinatorial explosion,
they also proposed a distributed policy-gradient method based on generalised weakened
ctitious play (Leslie and Collins, 2006) that has linear-time complexity.
Recently, Mazumdar and Ratli (2018) studied the dynamics of gradient-based learn-
29As with team games, stochastic PG is also called dynamic PG or Markov PG.
30Open loop means that agents' actions are a function of time only. By contrast, close-loop policies
take into account the state. In deterministic systems, these policies can be optimal and coincide in value.
For a stochastic system, an open-loop strategy is unlikely to be optimal since it cannot adapt to state
transitions.
60