Table 1: Common assumptions on the level of local knowledge made by MARL algorithms.
Levels Assumptions
0 Each agent observes the reward of his selected action.
1 Each agent observes the rewards of all possible actions.
2 Each agent observes others' selected actions.
3 Each agent observes others' reward values.
4 Each agent knows others' exact policies.
5 Each agent knows others' exact reward functions.
6 Each agent knows the equilibrium of the stage game.
is played repeatedly without considering the state transition. An SG is a sequence of
stage games, which can be innitely long, with the order of the games to play determined
by the state-transition probability. Since solving a general-sum SG is at least PSPACE -
hard (Conitzer and Sandholm, 2002), MARL algorithms usually have a clear boundary
on what types of game they can solve. For general-sum games, there are few MARL
algorithms that have a provable convergence guarantee without strong, even unrealistic,
assumptions (e.g., the NE is unique) (Shoham et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2019b).
Based on Level of Local Knowledge. The assumption on the level of local knowl-
edge, i.e., what agents can and cannot know during training and execution time, is
another major component to dierentiate MARL algorithms. Having access to dierent
levels of local knowledge leads to dierent local behaviours by agents and various levels
of diculty in developing theoretical analysis. I list the common assumptions that most
MARL methods adopt in Table (1). The seven levels of assumptions are ranked based
on how strong, or unrealistic, they are in general. The two extreme cases are that the
agent can observe nothing apart from itself and that the agent knows the equilibrium
point, i.e., the direct answer of the game. Among the multiple levels, the nuance between
level 0 and level 1, which has been mainly investigated in the online learning literature,
is referred to as the bandit setting vs full-information setting. In addition, knowledge
of the agents' exact policy/reward function forms is a much stronger assumption than
being able to observe their sampled actions/rewards. In fact, knowing the exact policy
parameters of other agents in most cases are only possible in simulations. Furthermore,
from an applicability perspective, observing other agents' rewards is also more unrealistic
than observing their actions.
45