stochastic analysis (Borkar, 1997) and its application in RL (Borkar, 2002).
Two-timescale stochastic analysis is a set of tools certifying that, in a system with
two coupled stochastic processes that evolve at dierent speeds, if the fast process con-
verges to a unique limit point for any particular xed value of the slow process, we can,
quantitatively, analyse the asymptotic behaviour of the algorithm as if the fast process
is always fully calibrated to the current value of the slow process (Borkar, 1997). As a
direct application, Leslie et al. (2003); Leslie and Collins (2005) noted that independent
Q-learners with agent-dependent learning rates could break the symmetry that leads to
the non-convergent limited cycles; as a result, they can converge almost surely to the NE
in two-player collaboration games, two-player zero-sum games, and multi-player match-
ing pennies. Similarly, Prasad et al. (2015) introduced a two-timescale update rule that
ensures the training dynamics reach a stationary local NE in general-sum SGs if the critic
learns faster than the actor. Later, Perkins et al. (2015) proposed a distributed actor-critic
algorithm that enjoys provable convergence in solving static potential games with contin-
uous actions. Similarly, Arslan and Y uksel (2016) developed a two-timescale variant of
Q-learning that is guaranteed to converge to an equilibrium in SGs with weakly acyclic
characteristics, which generalises potential games. Other applications include develop-
ing two-timescale update rules for training GANs (Heusel et al., 2017) and developing
a two-timescale algorithm with guaranteed asymptotic convergence to the Stackelberg
equilibrium in general-sum Stackelberg games.
8.4 Solutions by Policy-Based Methods
Convergence to NE via direct policy search has been extensively studied; however, early
results were limited mainly by stateless two-player two-action games (Abdallah and
Lesser, 2008; Bowling, 2005; Bowling and Veloso, 2002; Conitzer and Sandholm, 2007;
Singh et al., 2000; Zhang and Lesser, 2010). Recently, GAN training has posed a new
challenge, thereby rekindling interest in understanding the policy gradient dynamics of
continuous games (Heusel et al., 2017; Mescheder et al., 2018, 2017; Nagarajan and Kolter,
2017).
Analysing gradient-based algorithms through dynamic systems (Shub, 2013) is a nat-
ural approach to yield more signicant insights into convergence behaviour. However, a
fundamental dierence is observed when one attempts to apply the same analysis from
the single-agent case to the multi-agent case because the combined dynamics of gradient-
85