interests (Li et al., 2019b). In addition to opponents, one should also consider robustness
towards the uncertainty of environmental dynamics (Zhang et al., 2020), which in turn
will change the behaviours of opponents and pose a more signicant challenge.
Model-Based MARL. Most of the algorithms I have introduced in this monograph
aremodel-free , in the sense that the RL agent does not need to know how the envi-
ronment works and it can learn how to behave optimally through purely interacting
with the environment. In the classic control domain, model-based approaches have been
extensively studied in which the learning agent will rst build an explicit state-space
\model" to understand how the environment works in terms of state-transition dynam-
ics and reward function, and then learn from the \model". The benet of model-based
algorithms lies in the fact that they often require much fewer data samples from the en-
vironment (Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011). The MARL community has initially come
up with model-based approaches, for example the famous R-MAX algorithm (Brafman
and Tennenholtz, 2002), nearly two decades ago. Surprisingly, the developments along
the model-based thread halted ever since. Given the impressive results that model-based
approaches have demonstrated on single-agent RL tasks (Hafner et al., 2019a,b; Schrit-
twieser et al., 2020), model-based MARL approaches deserves more attention from the
community.
Multi-Agent Meta-RL. Throughout this monograph, I have introduced many MARL
applications; each task needs a bespoke MARL model to solve. A natural question to
ask is whether we can use one model that can generalise across multiple tasks. For
example, Terry et al. (2020) has put together almost one hundred MARL tasks, including
Atari, robotics, and various kinds of board games and pokers into a Gym API. An
ambitious goal is to develop algorithms that can solve all of the tasks in one or a few
shots. This requires multi-agent meta-RL techniques. Meta-learning aims to train a
generalised model on a variety of learning tasks, such that it can solve new learning
tasks with few or without additional training samples. Fortunately, Finn et al. (2017)
has proposed a general meta-learning framework { MAML { that is compatible with any
model trained with gradient-descent based methods. Although MAML works well on
supervised learning tasks, developing meta-RL algorithms seems to be highly non-trivial
(Rothfuss et al., 2018), and introducing the meta-learning framework on top of MARL is
99