N-player Stochastic GameLearning in gamesNash equilibrium of N-player gameN→+∞N→+∞Mean-field/Mckean-Vlasov dynamicsLearning in gamesMean-field GameMean-field ControlMean-field MARL≠≠Empirical average for states/actions of finite NFigure 11: Relations of mean-eld learning algorithms in games with large N.
2009; Weiss, 1907), or more recently, understanding the learning dynamics of over-
parameterised deep neural networks (Hu et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2020b; Sirignano and
Spiliopoulos, 2020; Song et al., 2018). In the game theory and MARL context, mean-eld
approximation essentially enables one to think of the interactions between every possible
permutation of agents as an interaction between each agent itself and the aggregated mean
eect of the population of the other agents, such that the N-player game ( N!+1)
turns into a \two"-player game. Moreover, under the law of large numbers andthe theory
of propagation of chaos (G artner, 1988; McKean, 1967; Sznitman, 1991), the aggregated
version of the optimisation problem in Eq. (80) asymptotically approximates the original
N-player game.
The assumption in the mean-eld regime that each agent responds only to the mean
eect of the population may appear rather limited initially; however, for many real-
world applications, agents often cannot access the information of all other agents but
can instead know the global information about the population. For example, in high-
frequency trading in nance (Cardaliaguet and Lehalle, 2018; Lehalle and Mouzouni,
2019), each trader cannot know every other trader's position in the market, although
they have access to the aggregated order book from the exchange. Another example is
real-time bidding for online advertisements (Guo et al., 2019; Iyer et al., 2014), in which
of the spins is chaotic, and when the temperature is low, the directions of the spins tend to be aligned.
Without the mean-eld approximation, computing the probability of the spin direction is a combinatorial
hard problem; for example, in a 5 5 2D lattice, there are 225possible spin congurations. A successful
approach to solving the Ising model is to observe the phase change under dierent temperatures and
compare it against the ground truth.
88