1 Introduction
Machine learning can be considered as the process of converting data into knowledge
(Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014). The input of a learning algorithm is training data
(for example, images containing cats), and the output is some knowledge (for example,
rules about how to detect cats in an image). This knowledge is usually represented
as a computer program that can perform certain task(s) (for example, an automatic
cat detector). In the past decade, considerable progress has been made by means of a
special kind of machine learning technique: deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015). One
of the critical embodiments of deep learning is dierent kinds of deep neural networks
(DNNs) (Schmidhuber, 2015) that can nd disentangled representations (Bengio, 2009)
in high-dimensional data, which allows the software to train itself to perform new tasks
rather than merely relying on the programmer for designing hand-crafted rules. An
uncountable number of breakthroughs in real-world AI applications have been achieved
through the usage of DNNs, with the domains of computer vision (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) and natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2018) being the
greatest beneciaries.
In addition to feature recognition from existing data, modern AI applications often
require computer programs to make decisions based on acquired knowledge (see Figure
1). To illustrate the key components of decision making, let us consider the real-world
example of controlling a car to drive safely through an intersection. At each time step, a
robot car can move by steering, accelerating and braking. The goal is to safely exit the
intersection and reach the destination (with possible decisions of going straight or turning
left/right into another lane). Therefore, in addition to being able to detect objects, such
as trac lights, lane markings, and other cars (by converting data to knowledge), we aim
to nd a steering policy that can control the car to make a sequence of manoeuvres to
achieve the goal (making decisions based on the knowledge gained). In a decision-making
setting such as this, two additional challenges arise:
1. First, during the decision-making process, at each time step, the robot car should
consider not only the immediate value of its current action but also the consequences
of its current action in the future. For example, in the case of driving through an
intersection, it would be detrimental to have a policy that chooses to steer in a
\safe" direction at the beginning of the process if it would eventually lead to a car
4