dimensional learning objectives , and 3○the issue of non-stationarity all result
in the majority of MARL algorithms being capable of solving games with 4○only two
players , in particular, two-player zero-sum games. In this section, I will elaborate each
of the grand challenge in many-agent RL.
4.1 The Combinatorial Complexity
In the context of multi-agent learning, each agent has to consider the other opponents'
actions when determining the best response; this characteristic is deeply rooted in each
agent's reward function and for example is represented by the joint action ain their Q-
functionQi(s;a) in Eq. (13). The size of the joint action space, jAjN, grows exponentially
with the number of agents and thus largely constrains the scalability of MARL methods.
Furthermore, the combinatorial complexity is worsened by the fact that solving a NE
in game theory is PPAD -hard, even for two-player games. Therefore, for multi-player
general-sum games (neither team games nor zero-sum games), it is non-trivial to nd an
applicable solution concept.
One common way to address this issue is by assuming specic factorised structures
on action dependency such that the reward function or Q-function can be signicantly
simplied. For example, a graphical game assumes an agent's reward is aected by only
its neighbouring agents, as dened by the graph from (Kearns, 2007). This assumption
leads directly to a polynomial-time solution for the computation of a NE in specic tree
graphs (Kearns et al., 2013), though the scope of applications is somewhat limited beyond
this specic scenario.
Recent progress has also been made toward leveraging particular neural network ar-
chitectures for Q-function decomposition (Rashid et al., 2018; Sunehag et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2020). In addition to the fact that these methods work only for the team-game
setting, the majority of them lack theoretical backing. There remain open questions to
answer, such as understanding the representational power (the approximation error) of
the factorised Q-functions in a multi-agent task and how factorisation itself can be learnt
from scratch.
39