supervised learning, which takes labelled data as the input (for example, an image labelled
with cats), RL is goal-oriented: it constructs a learning model that learns to achieve the
optimal long-term goal by improvement through trial and error, with the learner having
no labelled data to obtain knowledge from. The word \reinforcement" refers to the
learning mechanism since the actions that lead to satisfactory outcomes are reinforced in
the learner's set of behaviours.
Historically, the RL mechanism was originally developed based on studying cats' be-
haviour in a puzzle box (Thorndike, 1898). Minsky (1954) rst proposed the compu-
tational model of RL in his Ph.D. thesis and named his resulting analog machine the
stochastic neural-analog reinforcement calculator . Several years later, he rst suggested
the connection between dynamic programming (Bellman, 1952) and RL (Minsky, 1961).
In 1972, Klopf (1972) integrated the trial-and-error learning process with the nding of
temporal dierence (TD) learning from psychology. TD learning quickly became indis-
pensable in scaling RL for larger systems. On the basis of dynamic programming and
TD learning, Watkins and Dayan (1992) laid the foundations for present day RL using
the Markov decision process (MDP) and proposing the famous Q-learning method as the
solver. As a dynamic programming method, the original Q-learning process inherits Bell-
man's \curse of dimensionality" (Bellman, 1952), which strongly limits its applications
when the number of state variables is large. To overcome such a bottleneck, Bertsekas and
Tsitsiklis (1996) proposed approximate dynamic programming methods based on neural
networks. More recently, Mnih et al. (2015) from DeepMind made a signicant break-
through by introducing the deep Q-learning (DQN) architecture, which leverages the
representation power of DNNs for approximate dynamic programming methods. DQN
has demonstrated human-level performance on 49 Atari games. Since then, deep RL
techniques have become common in machine learning/AI and have attracted consider-
able attention from the research community.
RL originates from an understanding of animal behaviour where animals use trial-
and-error to reinforce benecial behaviours, which they then perform more frequently.
During its development, computational RL incorporated ideas such as optimal control
theory and other ndings from psychology that help mimic the way humans make deci-
sions to maximise the long-term prot of decision-making tasks. As a result, RL methods
can naturally be used to train a computer program (an agent) to a performance level com-
parable to that of a human on certain tasks. The earliest success of RL methods against
6