10 Future Directions of Interest
MARL Theory. In contrast to the remarkable empirical success of MARL methods,
developing theoretical understandings of MARL techniques are very much under-explored
in the literature. Although many early works have been conducted on understanding the
convergence property and the nite-sample bound of single-agent RL algorithms (Bert-
sekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996), extending those results into multi-agent, even many-agent,
settings seem to be non-trivial. Furthermore, it has become a common practice nowa-
days to use DNNs to represent value functions in RL and multi-agent RL. In fact, many
recent remarkable successes of multi-agent RL benet from the success of deep learning
techniques (Baker et al., 2019b; Pachocki et al., 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019b). Therefore,
there are pressing needs to develop theories that could explain and oer insights into
the eectiveness of deep MARL methods. Overall, I believe there is an approximate
ten-year gap between the theoretical developments of single-agent RL and multi-agent
RL algorithms. Learning the lessons from single-agent RL theories and extending them
into multi-agent settings, especially understanding the incurred diculty due to involv-
ing multiple agents, and then generalising the theoretical results to include DNNs could
probably act as a practical road map in developing MARL theories. Along this thread,
I recommend the work of Zhang et al. (2019b) for a comprehensive summary of existing
MARL algorithms that come with theoretical convergence guarantee.
Safe and Robust MARL. Although RL provides a general framework for optimal
decision making, it has to incorporate certain types of constraints when RL models are
truly to be deployed in the real-world environment. I believe it is critical to rstly account
for MARL with robustness and safety constraints; one direct example is on autonomous
driving. At a very high level, robustness refers to the property that an algorithm can
generalise and maintain robust performance in settings that are dierent from the training
environment (Abdullah et al., 2019; Morimoto and Doya, 2005). And safety refers to the
property that an algorithm can only act in a pre-dened safety zone with minimum
times of violations even during training time (Garca and Fern andez, 2015). In fact, the
community is still at the early stage of developing theoretical frameworks to encompass
either robust or safe constraint in single-agent settings. In the multi-agent setting, the
problem could only become more challenging because the solution now requires to take
into account the coupling eect between agents, especially those agents that have con
ict
98