tion concept to the NE { cyclic equilibria { that value-based methods converge to. The
concept of no regret (also called the Hannan consistency in game theory (Hansen et al.,
2003)), measures convergence by comparison against the best possible strategy in hind-
sight. This was also proposed as a new criterion to evaluate convergence in zero-sum
self-plays (Bowling, 2005; Hart and Mas-Colell, 2001; Zinkevich et al., 2008). In two-
player zero-sum games with a non-convex non-concave loss landscape (training GANs
(Goodfellow et al., 2014a)), gradient-descent-ascent methods are found to reach a Stack-
elberg equilibrium (Fiez et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2019) or a local dierential NE (Mazumdar
et al., 2019b) rather than the general NE.
Finally, although the above solution concepts account for convergence, building a
convergent objective for MARL methods with DNNs remains an uncharted area. This
is partly because the global convergence result of a single-agent deep RL algorithm, for
example, neural policy gradient methods (Liu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019) and neural
TD learning algorithms (Cai et al., 2019b), has not been extensively studied yet.
4.3 The Non-Stationarity Issue
The most well-known challenge of multi-agent learning versus single-agent learning is
probably the non-stationarity issue. Since multiple agents concurrently improve their
policies according to their own interests, from each agent's perspective, the environmen-
tal dynamics become non-stationary and challenging to interpret when learning. This
problem occurs because the agent itself cannot tell whether the state transition { or
the change in reward { is an actual outcome due to its own action or if it is due to its
opponent's explorations. Although learning independently by completely ignoring the
other agents can sometimes yield surprisingly powerful empirical performance (Matignon
et al., 2012; Papoudakis et al., 2020), this approach essentially harms the stationarity
assumption that supports the theoretical convergence guarantee of single-agent learning
methods (Tan, 1993). As a result, the Markovian property of the environment is lost,
and the state occupancy measure of the stationary policy in Eq. (5) no longer exists.
For example, the convergence result of single-agent policy gradient methods in MARL is
provably non-convergent in simple linear-quadratic games (Mazumdar et al., 2019b).
The non-stationarity issue can be further aggravated by TD learning, which occurs
with the replay buer that most deep RL methods currently adopt (Foerster et al., 2017b).
In single-agent TD learning (see Eq. (9)), the agent bootstraps the current estimate of the
41