1.2 2019: A Booming Year for MARL
2019 was a booming year for MARL development as a series of breakthroughs were made
in immensely challenging multi-agent tasks that people used to believe were impossible to
solve via AI. Nevertheless, the progress made in the eld of MARL, though remarkable,
has been overshadowed to some extent by the prior success of AlphaGo (Chalmers, 2020).
It is possible that the AlphaGo series (Silver et al., 2016, 2018, 2017) has largely fullled
people's expectations for the eectiveness of RL methods, such that there is a lack of
interest in further advancements in the eld. The ripples caused by the progress of
MARL were relatively mild among the research community. In this section, we highlight
several pieces of work that we believe are important and could profoundly impact the
future development of MARL techniques.
One popular test-bed of MARL is StarCraft II (Vinyals et al., 2017), a multi-player
real-time strategy computer game that has its own professional league. In this game, each
player has only limited information about the game state, and the dimension of the search
space is orders of magnitude larger than that of GO (1026possible choices for every move).
The design of eective RL methods for StarCraft II was once believed to be a long-term
challenge for AI (Vinyals et al., 2017). However, a breakthrough was accomplished by
AlphaStar in 2019 (Vinyals et al., 2019a), which has exhibited grandmaster-level skills
by ranking above 99 :8% of human players.
Another prominent video game-based test-bed for MARL is Dota2, a zero-sum game
played by two teams, each composed of ve players. From each agent's perspective, in
addition to the diculty of incomplete information (similar to StarCraft II), Dota2 is more
challenging, in the sense that both cooperation among team members and competition
against the opponents must be considered. The OpenAI Five AI system (Pachocki et al.,
2018) demonstrated superhuman performance in Dota2 by defeating world champions in
a public e-sports competition.
In addition to StarCraft II and Dota2, Jaderberg et al. (2019) and Baker et al. (2019a)
showed human-level performance in capture-the-
ag and hide-and-seek games, respec-
tively. Although the games themselves are less sophisticated than either StarCraft II or
Dota2, it is still non-trivial for AI agents to master their tactics, so the agents' impres-
1There are an estimated 1082atoms in the universe. If one had one trillion computers, each processing
one trillion states per second for one trillion years, one could only reach 1043states.
2Arguably, AlphaGo can also be treated as a multi-agent technique if we consider the opponent in
self-play as another agent.
8