CFR-type methods in a two-player zero-sum EFG generates an O(jSj=p
T)-approximate
NE afterTsteps through self-play43.
Compared with the LP approach (recall Eq. (33)), which is applicable only for small-
scale EFGs, the standard CFR method can be applied to limit Texas hold'em with as
many as 1012states. CFR+, the fastest implementation of CFR, can solve games with up
to 1014states (Tammelin et al., 2015). However, CFR methods still have a bottleneck in
that computing Eq. (65) requires a traversal of the entire game tree to the terminal nodes
in each iteration. Pruning the sub-optimal paths in the game tree is a natural solution
(Brown et al., 2017; Brown and Sandholm, 2015, 2017). Many CFR variants have been
developed to improve computational eciency further. Lanctot et al. (2009) integrated
Monte Carlo sampling with CFR (MCCFR) to signicantly reduce the per iteration time
cost of CFR by traversing a smaller sampled portion of the tree. Burch et al. (2012)
improved MCCFR by sampling only a subset of a player's actions, which provides even
faster convergence rate in games that contain many player actions. Gibson et al. (2012);
Schmid et al. (2019) investigated the sampling variance and proposed MCCFR variants
with a variance reduction module. Johanson et al. (2012b) introduced a more accurate
MCCFR sampler by considering the set of outcomes from the chance node, rather than
sampling only one outcome, as in all previous methods. Apart from Monte Carlo methods,
function approximation methods have also been introduced (Jin et al., 2018; Waugh et al.,
2014). The idea of these methods is to predict regret directly, and the no-regret algorithm
then uses these predictions in place of the true regret to dene a sequence of policies. To
this end, the application of deep neural networks has led to great success (Brown et al.,
2019).
Interestingly, there exists a hidden equivalence between model-free policy-based/actor-
critic MARL methods and the CFR algorithm (Jin et al., 2018; Srinivasan et al., 2018).
In particular, if we consider the counterfactual value function in Eq. (65) to be explicitly
dependent on the action athat player ichooses at state S, in which we have ^ vi(;S) =
P
a2(S)i(S;a)^qi(;S;a), then it is shown in Srinivasan et al. (2018) [Section 3.2] that
the Q-function in standard MARL Qi;(s;a) =Es0P;aP
t
tRi(s;a;s0)js;a
diers
43The self-play assumption can in fact be released. Johanson et al. (2012a) shows that in two-player
zero-sum games, as long as both agents minimise their regret, not necessarily through the same algorithm,
their time-average policies will converge to NE with the same regret bound O(p
T). An example is to
let a CFR player play against a best-response opponent.
73