(2004) proposed an algorithm in which a homotopic path between the equilibrium points
ofNindependent MDPs and the N-player SG is traced numerically. This approach yields
a Nash equilibrium point of the stochastic game of interest. However, all these methods
are tractable only in small-size SGs with at most tens of states and only two players.
8.2 Solutions by Value-Based Methods
A series of value-based methods have been proposed to address general-sum SGs. A
majority of these methods adopt classic Q-learning (Watkins and Dayan, 1992) as a
centralised controller, with the dierences being what solution concept the central Q-
learner should apply to guide the agents to converge in each iteration. For example, the
Nash-Q learner in Eqs. (19 & 20) applies NE as the solution concept, the correlated-
Q learner adopts correlated equilibrium (Greenwald et al., 2003), and the friend-or-foe
learner considers both cooperative (see Eq. (35)) and competitive equilibrium (see Eq.
(54)) (Littman, 2001a). Although many algorithms come with convergence guarantees,
the corresponding assumptions are often overly restrictive to be applicable in general.
When Nash-Q learning was rst proposed (Hu et al., 1998), it required the NE of the SG
be unique such that the convergence property could hold. Though strong, this assumption
was still noted by Bowling (2000) to be insucient to justify the convergence of the
Nash-Q algorithm. Later, Hu and Wellman (2003) corrected her convergence proof by
tightening the assumption even further; the uniqueness of the NE must hold for every
single stage game encountered during state transitions. Years later, a strikingly negative
result by Zinkevich et al. (2006) concluded that the entire class of value-iteration methods
could be excluded from consideration for computing stationary equilibria, including both
NE and correlated equilibrium, in general-sum SGs. Unlike those in single-agent RL, the
Q values in the multi-agent case are inherently defective for reconstructing the equilibrium
policy.
8.3 Solutions by Two-Timescale Analysis
In addition to the centralised Q-learning approach, decentralised Q-learning algorithms
have recently received considerable attention because of their potential for scalability. Al-
though independent learners have been accused of having convergence issues (Tan, 1993),
decentralised methods have made substantial progress with the help of two-timescale
84