general case is Paradigm 2, where agents are fully decentralised, with no information
exchange of any kind allowed at any time, and each agent executes its own policy. Re-
laxation of Paradigm 2 yields the 1st and the 3rd paradigms, where the agents, although
they cannot exchange information, share a single set of policy parameters, or, within a
pre-dened group, share a single set of policy parameters.
Based on Five AI Agendas. In order for MARL researchers to be specic about
the problem being addressed and the associated evaluation criteria, Shoham et al. (2007)
identied ve coherent agendas for MARL studies, each of which has a clear motivation
and success criterion. Though proposed more than a decade ago, these ve distinct goals
are still useful in evaluating and categorising recent contributions. I, therefore, choose to
incorporate them into the taxonomy of MARL algorithms.
5.2 A Survey of Surveys
A multi-agent system (MAS) is a generic concept that could refer to many dierent
domains of research across dierent academic subjects; general overviews are given by
Weiss (1999), Wooldridge (2009), and Shoham and Leyton-Brown (2008). Due to the
many possible ways of categorising multi-agent (reinforcement) learning algorithms, it
is impossible to have a single survey that includes all relevant works considering all
directions of categorisations. In the past two decades, there has been no lack of survey
papers that summarise the current progress of specic categories of multi-agent learning
research. In fact, there are so many that these surveys themselves deserve a comprehensive
review. Before proceeding to review MARL algorithms based on the proposed taxonomy
in Section 5.1, in this section, I provide an overview of relevant surveys that study multi-
agent systems from the machine learning, in particular, the RL, perspective.
One of the earliest studies that surveyed MASs in the context of machine learning/AI
was published by Stone and Veloso (2000): the research works up to that time were
summarised into four major scenarios considering whether agents were homogeneous or
heterogeneous and whether or not agents were allowed to communicate with each other.
Shoham et al. (2007) considered the game theory and RL perspective and introspectively
asked the question of \if multi-agent learning is the answer, what is the question?". Upon
failing to nd a single answer, Shoham et al. (2007) proposed the famous ve AI agendas
for future research work to address. Stone (2007) tried to answer Shoham's question
47