Factorised MDPs (Boutilier et al., 1999) are an eective way to avoid exponential
blowups. For a coordination task, if the joint-Q function can be naturally written as
Q=Q1(a1;a2) +Q2(a2;a4) +Q3(a1;a3) +Q4(a3;a4);
then the nested structure can be exploited. For example, Q1andQ3are irrelevant in
nding the optimal a4; thus, given a4,Q1becomes irrelevant for optimising a3. Given
a3;a4, one can then optimise a1;a2. Inspired by this result, Guestrin et al. (2002a,b); Kok
and Vlassis (2004) studied the idea of coordination graphs , which combine value function
approximation with a message-passing scheme by which agents can eciently nd the
globally optimal joint action.
However, the coordination graph may not always be available in real-world applica-
tions; thus, the ideal approach is to let agents learn the Q-function factorisation from
the tasks automatically. Deep neural networks are an eective way to learn such factori-
sations. Specically, the scope of the problem is then narrowed to the so-called decen-
tralisable tasks in the Dec-POMDP setting, that is, 9
Qi	
i2f1;:::;Ng8o2OOO;a2AAA, the
following condition holds.
arg max
aQ(o;a) =2
664arg maxa1Q1(o1;a1)
...
arg maxaNQN(oN;aN)3
775: (36)
Eq. (36) suggests that a task is decentralisable only if the local maxima on the individual
value function per every agent amounts to the global maximum on the joint value function.
Dierent structural constraints, enforced by particular neural architectures, have been
proposed to satisfy this condition. For example, VDN (Sunehag et al., 2018) maintains an
additivity structure by making Q(o;a) :=PN
i=1Qi(oi;ai). QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018)
adopts a monotonic structure by means of a mixing network to ensure@Q(o;a)
@Qi(oi;ai)0;8i2
f1;:::;Ng. QTRAN (Son et al., 2019) introduces a more rigorous learning objective on
top of QMIX that proves to be a sucient condition for Eq. (36). However, these
structure constraints heavily depend on specially designed neural architectures, which
makes understanding the representational power (i.e., the approximation error) of the
above methods almost infeasible. Another drawback is that the structure constraint also
damages agents' ecient exploration during training. To mitigate these issues, Yang et al.
52