participants can only observe, for example, the second-best prize that wins the auction
but not the individual bids from other participants.
There is a subtlety associated with types of games in which one applies the mean-eld
theory. If one applies the mean-eld type theory in non-cooperative53games, in which
agents act independently to maximise their own individual reward, and the solution
concept is NE, then the scenario is usually referred to as a mean-eld game (MFG)
(Gu eant et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2006; Jovanovic and Rosenthal, 1988; Lasry and
Lions, 2007). If one applies mean-eld theory in cooperative games in which there exists
a central controller to control all agents cooperatively to reach some Pareto optima,
then the situation is usually referred to as mean-eld control (MFC) (Andersson and
Djehiche, 2011; Bensoussan et al., 2013), or McKean-Vlasov dynamics (MKV) control.
If one applies the mean-eld approximation to solve a standard SG through MARL,
specically, to factorise each agent's reward function or the joint-Q function, such that
they depend only on the agent's local state and the mean action of others, then it is
called mean-eld MARL (MF-MARL) (Subramanian et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2018b;
Zhou et al., 2019).
Despite the dierence in the applicable game types, technically, the dierences among
MFG/MFC/MF-MARL can be elaborated from the perspective of the order in which
the equilibrium is learned (optimised) and the limit as N!+1is taken (Carmona
et al., 2013). MFG learns the equilibrium of the game rst and then takes the limit as
N!+1, while MFC takes the limit rst and optimises the equilibrium later. MF-
MARL is somewhat in between. The mean-eld in MF-MARL refers to the empirical
average of the states and/or actions of a nite population; Ndoes not have to reach
innity, though the approximation converges asymptotically to the original game when
Nis large. This result is in contrast to the mean-eld in MFG and MFC, which is
essentially a probability distribution of states and/or actions of an innite population
(i.e., the Mckean-Vlasov dynamics). Before providing more details, we summarise the
relationships of MFG, MFC, and MF-MARL in Figure 11. Readers are recommended to
revisit their dierences after nishing reading the below subsections.
53Note that the word \non-cooperative" does not mean agents cannot collaborate to complete a task,
it means agents cannot collude to form a coalition: they have to behave independently.
89