Littman (1994) rst studied this approach in SGs. However, one issue with this ap-
proach is that when multiple equilibria exist (e.g., a normal-form game with reward
R=0;0 2;2
2;2 0;0), unless the selection process is coordinated among agents, the agents'
optimal policy can end up with a worse scenario even though their value functions have
reached the optimal values. To address this issue, Claus and Boutilier (1998b) proposed
to build belief models about other agents' policies. Similar to ctitious play (Berger,
2007), each agent chooses actions in accordance with its belief about the other agents.
Empirical eectiveness, as well as convergence, have been reported for repeated games;
however, the convergent equilibrium may not be optimal. In solving this problem, Wang
and Sandholm (2003) proposed optimal adaptive learning (OAL) methods that provably
converge to the optimal NE almost surely in any team SG. The main novelty of OAL is
that it learns the game structure by building so-called weakly acyclic games that elim-
inate all the joint actions with sub-optimal NE values and then applies adaptive play
(Young, 1993) to address the equilibrium selection problem for weakly acyclic games
specically. Following this approach, Arslan and Y uksel (2016) proposed decentralised
Q-learning algorithms that, under the help of two-timescale analysis (Leslie et al., 2003),
converge to an equilibrium policy for weakly acyclic SGs. To avoid sub-optimal equi-
libria for weakly acyclic SGs, Yongacoglu et al. (2019) further rened the decentralised
Q-learners and derived theorems with stronger almost-surely convergence guarantees for
optimal policies.
6.1.1 Solutions via Q-function Factorisation
Another vital reason that team games have been repeatedly studied is that solving team
games is a crucial step in building distributed AI (DAI) (Gasser and Huhns, 2014; Huhns,
2012). The logic is that if each agent only needs to maintain the Q-function of Qi(s;ai),
which depends on the state and local action ai, rather than joint action a, then the
combinatorial nature of multi-agent problems can be avoided. Unfortunately, Tan (1993)
previously noted that such independent Q-learning methods do not converge in team
games. Lauer and Riedmiller (2000) reported similar negative results; however, when the
state transition dynamics are deterministic, independent learning through distributed Q-
learning can still obtain a convergence guarantee. No additional expense is needed in
comparison to the non-distributed case for computing the optimal policies.
51