4.2 The Multi-Dimensional Learning Objectives
Compared to single-agent RL, where the only goal is to maximise the learning agent's
long-term reward, the learning goals in MARL are naturally multi-dimensional, as the
objective of all agents are not necessarily aligned by one metric. Bowling and Veloso
(2001, 2002) proposed to classify the goals of the learning task into two types: rationality
andconvergence . Rationality ensures an agent takes the best possible response to the
opponents when they are stationary, and convergence ensures the learning dynamics
eventually lead to a stable policy against a given class of opponents. Reaching both
rationality and convergence gives rise to reaching the NE.
In terms of rationality, the NE characterises a xed point of a joint optimal strategy
prole from which no agents would be motivated to deviate as long as they are all perfectly
rational. However, in practice, an agent's rationality can easily be bound by either
cognitive limitations and/or the tractability of the decision problem. In these scenarios,
the rationality assumption can be relaxed to include other types of solution concepts, such
as the recursive reasoning equilibrium, which results from modelling the reasoning process
recursively among agents with nite levels of hierarchical thinking (for example, an agent
may reason in the following way: I believe that you believe that I believe ...) (Wen
et al., 2019, 2018); best response against a target type of opponent (Powers and Shoham,
2005b); the mean-eld game equilibrium, which describes multi-agent interactions as a
two-agent interaction between each agent itself and the population mean (Guo et al.,
2019; Yang et al., 2018a,b); evolutionary stable strategies, which describe an equilibrium
strategy based on its evolutionary advantage of resisting invasion by rare emerging mutant
strategies (Bloembergen et al., 2015; Maynard Smith, 1972; Tuyls and Now e, 2005; Tuyls
and Parsons, 2007); Stackelberg equilibrium (Zhang et al., 2019a), which assumes specic
sequential order when agents take decisions; and the robust equilibrium (also called the
trembling-hand perfect equilibrium in game theory), which is stable against adversarial
disturbance (Goodfellow et al., 2014b; Li et al., 2019b; Yabu et al., 2007).
In terms of convergence, although most MARL algorithms are contrived to converge to
the NE, the majority either lack a rigorous convergence guarantee (Zhang et al., 2019b),
potentially converge only under strong assumptions such as the existence of a unique
NE (Hu and Wellman, 2003; Littman, 2001b), or are provably non-convergent in all cases
(Mazumdar et al., 2019a). Zinkevich et al. (2006) identied the non-convergent behaviour
of value-iteration methods in general-sum SGs and instead proposed an alternative solu-
40