Table 2: Summary of the ve agendas for multi-agent learning research Shoham et al. (2007).
IDAgenda Description
1Computational To develop efficient methods that can com-
pute solution concepts of the game. Examples:
Berger (2007); Leyton-Brown and Tennenholtz
(2005)
2Descriptive To develop formal models of learning
that agree with the behaviours of peo-
ple/animals/organisations. Examples: Camerer
et al. (2002); Erev and Roth (1998)
3Normative To determine which sets of learning rules are
in equilibrium with each other. For example,
we can ask if fictitious play and Q-learning can
reach equilibrium with each other in a repeated
prisoner's dilemma game.
4Prescriptive, co-
operativeTo develop distributed learning algorithms
for team games. In this agenda, there is
rarely a role for equilibrium analysis since the
agents have no motivation to deviate from the
prescribed algorithm. Examples: Claus and
Boutilier (1998a)
5Prescriptive,
non-cooperativeTo develop effective methods for obtaining a
\high reward" in a given environment, for ex-
ample, an environment with a selected class
of opponents. Examples: Powers and Shoham
(2005a,b)
by emphasising that MARL can be more broadly framed than through game theoretic
terms, and he noted that how to apply the MARL technique remains an open question,
rather than being an answer, in contrast to the suggestion of Shoham et al. (2007). The
survey of Tuyls and Weiss (2012) also re
ected on Stone's viewpoint; they believed that
the entanglement of only RL and game theory is too narrow in its conceptual scope, and
MARL should embrace other ideas, such as transfer learning (Taylor and Stone, 2009),
swarm intelligence (Kennedy, 2006), and co-evolution (Tuyls and Parsons, 2007).
Panait and Luke (2005) investigated the cooperative MARL setting; instead of consid-
ering only reinforcement learners, they reviewed learning algorithms based on the division
ofteam learning (i.e., applying a single learner to search for the optimal joint behaviour
for the whole team) and concurrent learning (i.e., applying one learner per agent), which
48