in the simplest setting of a two-player fully cooperative nite-horizon game, solving a
POSG isNEXP -hard (see Figure 5), which means it requires super-exponential time
to solve in the worst-case scenario (Bernstein et al., 2002). However, the benets of
studying games in the partially observable setting come from the algorithmic advantages.
Centralised-training-with-decentralised-execution methods (Foerster et al., 2017a; Lowe
et al., 2017; Oliehoek et al., 2016; Rashid et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2020) have achieved
many empirical successes, and together with DNNs, they hold great promise.
A POSG is one of the most general classes of games. An important subclass of POSGs
is decentralised partially observable MDP (Dec-POMDP), where all agents share the same
reward. Formally, this scenario is dened as follows:
Denition 6 (Dec-POMDP) A Dec-POMDP is a special type of POSG dened in
Denition 5 with R1=R2==RN.
Dec-POMDPs are related to single-agent MDPs through the partial observability
condition, and they are also related to stochastic team games through the assumption
of identical rewards. In other words, versions of both single-agent MDPs and stochastic
team games are particular types of Dec-POMDPs (see Figure 6).
Denition 7 (Special types of Dec-POMDPs) The following games are special types
of Dec-POMDPs.
•partially observable MDP (POMDP) : there is only one agent of interest,
N= 1. This scenario is equivalent to a single-agent MDP in Denition 1 with a
partial-observability constraint.
•decentralised MDP (Dec-MDP) : the agents in a Dec-MDP have joint full
observability. That is, if all agents share their observations, they can recover the
state of the Dec-MDP unanimously. Mathematically, we have 8o2OOO;9s2Ssuch
thatP(St=sjOOOt=o) = 1 .
•fully cooperative stochastic games : assuming each agent has full observability,
8i=f1;:::;Ng;8oi2Oi;9s2Ssuch that P(St=sjOt=oi) = 1 . The fully-
cooperative SG from Denition 4 is a type of Dec-POMDP.
I conclude Section 3 by presenting the relationships between the many dierent types
of POSGs through a Venn diagram in Figure 6.
27