special case where the information set is a singleton, i.e., jSi
jj= 1;8j, so a choice node
can be equated to the unique history that leads to it. Imperfect-information EFGs (e.g.,
Kuhn poker or Texas hold'em) are those in which there exists i;jsuch thatjSi
jj1, so
the information state can represent more than one possible history. However, with the
assumption of perfect recall (described later), the history that leads to an information
state is still unique.
3.3.1 Normal-Form Representation
A (simultaneous-move) NFG can be equivalently transformed into an imperfect-information
EFG18(Shoham and Leyton-Brown, 2008) [Chapter 5]. Specically, since the choices of
actions by other agents are unknown to the central agent, this could potentially leads to
dierent histories (triggered by other agents) that can be aggregated into one information
state for the central agent.
On the other direction, an imperfect-information EFG can also be transformed into an
equivalent NFG in which the pure strategies of each agent iare dened by the Cartesian
productQ
Si
j2Si(Si
j), which is a complete specication19of which action to take at every
information state of that agent. In the Kuhn poker example, one pure strategy for
player one can be check-bet-check-fold-call-fold; altogether, player one has 26= 64 pure
strategies, corresponding to 3 23= 24 pure strategies for the chance node and 26= 64
pure strategies for player two. The mixed strategy of each player is then a distribution
over all its pure strategies. In this way, the NE in NFG in Eq. (17) can still be applied to
the EFG, and the NE of an EFG can be solved in two steps: rst, convert the EFG into an
NFG; second, solve the NE of the induced NFG by means of the Lemke-Howson algorithm
(Shapley, 1974). If one further restricts the action space to be state-dependent and adopts
the discounted accumulated reward at the terminal node, then the EFG recovers to an
SG. While the NE of an EFG can be solved through its equivalent normal form, the
computational benet can be achieved by dealing with the extensive form directly; this
motivates the adoption of the sequence-form representation of EFGs.
18Note that this transformation is not unique, but they share the same equilibria as the original game.
Moreover, this transformation from NFG to EFG does not hold for perfect-information EFGs.
19One subtlety of the pure strategy is that it designates a decision at each choice node, regardless of
whether it is possible to reach that node given the other choice nodes.
31