convergence rates for the gradient-based learning process to reach the dierential NE. In
the second case, they derived concentration bounds guaranteeing with high probability
that agents will converge to a neighbourhood of a stable local NE in nite time. In
the same framework, Fiez et al. (2019) studied Stackelberg games in which agents take
turns to conduct the gradient update rather than acting simultaneously and established
the connection under which the equilibrium points of simultaneous gradient descent are
Stackelberg equilibria in zero-sum games. Mertikopoulos and Zhou (2019) investigated
the local convergence of no-regret learning and found local NE is attracting under gradient
play if and only if a NE satises a property known as variational stability . This idea is
inspired by the seminal notion of evolutionary stability observed in animal populations
(Smith and Price, 1973).
Finally, it is worth highlighting that the above theoretical analysis of the performance
of gradient-based methods on stateless continuous games cannot be taken for granted in
SGs. The main reason is that the assumption on the dierentiability of the loss function
required in continuous games may not hold in general-sum SGs. As clearly noted by
Fazel et al. (2018); Mazumdar et al. (2019a); Zhang et al. (2019c), even in the extreme
setting of linear-quadratic games, the value functions are not guaranteed to be globally
smooth (w.r.t. each agent's policy parameter).
9 Learning in Games when N!+1
As detailed in Section 4, designing learning algorithms in a multi-agent system with
N2 is a challenging task. One major reason is that the solution concept, such as
Nash equilibrium, is dicult to compute in general due to the curse of dimensionality
of the multi-agent problem itself. However, if one considers a continuum of agents with
N!+1, then the learning problem becomes surprisingly tractable. The intuition is
that one can eectively transform a many-body interaction problem into a two-body
interaction problem (i.e., agent vs the population mean) via mean-eld approximation.
The idea of mean-eld approximation, which considers the behaviour of large num-
bers of particles where individual particles have a negligible impact on the system, origi-
nated from physics. Important applications include solving Ising models52(Kadano,
52An Ising model is a model used to study magnetic phase transitions under dierent system temper-
atures. In a 2D Ising model, one can imagine the magnetic spins are laid out on a lattice, and each spin
can have one of two directions, either up or down. When the system temperature is high, the direction
87