MotherNets: Rapid Deep Ensemble Learning
Table 1. Existing approaches to train ensembles of deep neural
networks are limited in speed, accuracy, diversity, and size.
Fast High Diverse Large
train. acc. arch. size
Full data  
Bagging   
Knowledge Dist.   
TreeNets    
Snapshot Ens.  
MotherNets
creases linearly with the ensemble size. The rising training
cost is a bottleneck for numerous applications, especially
when it is critical to quickly incorporate new data and to
achieve a target accuracy. For instance, in one use case,
where deep learning models are applied to detect Diabetic
Retinopathy (a leading cause of blindness), newly labelled
images become available every day. Thus, incorporating
new data in the neural network models as quickly as possi-
ble is crucial in order to enable more accurate diagnosis for
the immediately next patient (Gulshan et al., 2016).
Problem 1: Restrictive ensemble size. Due to this pro-
hibitive training cost, researchers and practitioners can only
feasibly train and employ small ensembles (Szegedy et al.,
2015; He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017b;a). In partic-
ular, neural network ensembles contain drastically fewer
individual models when compared with ensembles of other
machine learning methods. For instance, random decision
forests, a popular ensemble algorithm, often has several hun-
dreds of individual models (decision trees), whereas state-of-
the-art ensembles of deep neural networks consist of around
ﬁve networks (He et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017b;a; Oshiro
et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015). This is restrictive since
the generalization accuracy of an ensemble increases with
the number of well-trained models it contains (Oshiro et al.,
2012; Bonab & Can, 2016; Huggins et al., 2016). Theoreti-
cally, for best accuracy, the size of the ensemble should be
at least equal to the number of class labels, of which there
could be thousands in modern applications (Bonab & Can,
2016).
Additional problems: Speed, accuracy, and diversity.
Typically, every deep neural network in an ensemble is
initialized randomly and then trained individually using all
training data (full data), or by using a random subset of the
training data (i.e., bootstrap aggregation or bagging) (Ju
et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2015a; Moghimi & Vasconcelos,
2016). This requires a signiﬁcant amount of processing
time and computing resources that grow linearly with the
ensemble size.
To alleviate this linear training cost, two techniques have
been recently introduced that generate a knetwork ensemblefrom a single network: Snapshot Ensembles and TreeNets.
Snapshot Ensembles train a single network and use its pa-
rameters at kdifferent points of the training process to
instantiateknetworks that will form the target ensemble
(Huang et al., 2017a). Snapshot Ensembles vary the learning
rate in a cyclical fashion, which enables the single network
to converge to klocal minima along its optimization path.
TreeNets also train a single network but this network is
designed to branch out into ksub-networks after the ﬁrst
few layers. Effectively every sub-network functions as a
separate member of the target ensemble (Lee et al., 2015b).
While these approaches do improve training time, they also
come with two critical problems. First, the resulting en-
sembles are less accurate because they are less diverse com-
pared to using kdifferent and individually trained networks.
Second, these approaches cannot be applied to state-of-
the-art diverse ensembles. Such ensembles may contain
arbitrary neural network architectures with structural differ-
ences to achieve increased accuracy (for instance, such as
those used in the ImageNet competitions (Lee et al., 2015a;
Russakovsky et al., 2015)).
Knowledge Distillation provides a middle ground between
separate training and ensemble generation approaches (Hin-
ton et al., 2015). With Knowledge Distillation, an ensemble
is trained by ﬁrst training a large generalist network and
then distilling its knowledge to an ensemble of small spe-
cialist networks that may have different architectures (by
training them to mimic the probabilities produced by the
larger network) (Hinton et al., 2015; Li & Hoiem, 2017).
However, this approach results in limited improvement in
training cost as distilling knowledge still takes around 70
percent of the time needed to train from scratch. Even then,
the ensemble networks are still closely tied to the same
large network that they are distilled from. The result is
signiﬁcantly lower accuracy and diversity when compared
to ensembles where every network is trained individually
(Hinton et al., 2015; Li & Hoiem, 2017).
MotherNets. We propose MotherNets, which enable rapid
training of large feed-forward neural network ensembles.
The core beneﬁts of MotherNets are depicted in Table 1.
MotherNets provide: (i) lower training time and better gen-
eralization accuracy than existing fast ensemble training
approaches and (ii) the capacity to train large ensembles
with diverse network architectures.
Figure 2 depicts the core intuition behind MotherNets: A
MotherNet is a network that captures the maximum struc-
tural similarity between a cluster of networks (Figure 2 Step
(1)). An ensemble may consist of one or more clusters; one
MotherNet is constructed per cluster. Every MotherNet is
trained to convergence using the full data set (Figure 2 Step
(2)). Then, every target network in the ensemble is hatched
from its MotherNet using function-preserving transforma-