MotherNets: Rapid Deep Ensemble Learning
Model variance. Our goal in assessing variance is to see
how the training procedure affects how models in the en-
semble correlate with each other on each example. To do
this, we train each of the ﬁve models in V5ﬁve times under
MN, SE, and FD. Letting Yijbe the softmax of the correct
model on test example jusing model i, we then estimate
Var(Yij)for eachi;jandCov(Yij;Yi0j)for eachi;i0;j
withi6=i0using the sample variance and covariance. To
get a single number for a model, instead of one for each
test example, we then average across all test examples, i.e.
Cov(Yi;Yi0) =1
nPn
j=1Cov(Yij;Yi0j). For total variance
numbers for the ensemble, we perform the same procedure
onYj=1
5P5
i=1Yij.
Figure 8 shows the results. As expected, independent train-
ing between the models in FD makes their corresponding
covariance 0 and provides the greatest overall variance re-
duction for the ensemble, with ensemble variance at 0:0051 .
For both SE and MN, the covariance of separate models is
non-zero at around 0:009per pair of models; however, it is
also signiﬁcantly less than the variance of a single model.
As a result, both MN and SE provide signiﬁcant variance
reduction compared to a single model. Whereas a single
model has variance around 0:026, MN and SE provide en-
semble variance of 0:0125 and0:0130 respectively.
Takeaways. Since both SE and MN train nearly as fast as a
single model, they provide variance reduction in prediction
at very little training cost. Additionally, for MN, at the cost
of higher training time, one can create more clusters and
thus make the training of certain models independent of each
other, zeroing out many of the covariance terms and reduc-
ing the overall ensemble variance. When compared to each
other, MN with g=1 and SE have similar variance numbers,
with MN slightly lower, but MotherNets has a substantial
increase in individual model accuracy when compared to
Snapshot Ensembles. As a result, its overall ensemble per-
forms better.
Additional results. We demonstrate in Appendix C how
MotherNets can improve inference time by 2. In Ap-
pendix D, we show how the relative behavior of MotherNets
remains the same when training using multiple GPUs. Fi-
nally, in Appendix E we provide experiments with Wide
ResNets and demonstrate how MotherNets provide better
accuracy-training time tradeoff when compared with Fast
Geometric Ensembles.
4 R ELATED WORK
In this section, we brieﬂy survey additional (but orthogonal)
ensemble training techniques beyond Snapshot Ensembles,
TreeNets, and Knowledge Distillation.
Parameter sharing. Various related techniques share pa-
rameters between different networks during ensemble train-ing and, in doing so, improve training cost. One interpre-
tation of techniques such as Dropout and Swapout is that,
during training, they create several networks with shared
weights within a single network. Then, they implicitly en-
semble them during inference (Wan et al., 2013; Srivastava
et al., 2014; Huang et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2016; Huang
et al., 2017a). Our approach, on the other hand, captures the
structural similarity in an ensemble, where members have
different and explicitly deﬁned neural network architectures
and trains it. Overall, this enables us to effectively com-
bine well-known architectures together within an ensemble.
Furthermore, implicit ensemble techniques (e.g., dropout
and swapout) can be used as training optimizations to im-
prove upon the accuracy of individual networks trained in
MotherNets (Srivastava et al., 2014; Singh et al., 2016).
Efﬁcient deep network training. Various algorithmic tech-
niques target fundamental bottlenecks in the training process
(Niu et al., 2011; Brown et al., 2016; Bottou et al., 2018).
Others apply system-oriented techniques to reduce mem-
ory overhead and data movement (De Sa & Feldman, 2017;
Jain et al., 2018). Recently, specialized hardware is being
developed to improve performance, parallelism, and energy
consumption of neural network training (Prabhakar et al.,
2016; De Sa & Feldman, 2017; Jouppi et al., 2017). All
techniques to improve upon training efﬁciency of individual
neural networks are orthogonal to MotherNets and in fact
directly compatible. This is because MotherNets does not
make any changes to the core computational components
of the training process. In our experiments, we do utilize
some of the widely applied training optimizations such as
batch-normalization and early-stopping. The advantage that
MotherNets bring on top of these approaches is that we can
further reduce the total number of epochs that are required to
train an ensemble. This is because a set of MotherNets will
train for the structural similarity present in the ensemble.
5 C ONCLUSION
We present MotherNets which enable training of large and
diverse neural network ensembles while being able to nav-
igate a new Pareto frontier with respect to accuracy and
training cost. The core intuition behind MotherNets is to
reduce the number of epochs needed to train an ensemble by
capturing the structural similarity present in the ensemble
and training for it once.
6 A CKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank reviewers for their valuable feedback. We also
thank Chang Xu for building the web-based demo and all
DASlab members for their help. This work was partially
funded by Tableau, Cisco, and the Harvard Data Science
Institute.