Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 12 of 27
3.2. WSN Routing Protocols Based on SI
Dierent from traditional wireless networks, the scale of WSN is often very large, and nodes are
often randomly deployed in the network. The WSN still has limited capabilities in a node or a network.
For example, each node has limited calculation and communication capabilities, and its energy is
often restricted. Therefore, the e cient design of routing protocols needs to take into account the
communication path between sensor nodes (source) and the command center (receiver) to save energy.
Furthermore, protocols must be self-organizing and robust to failures and losses. The SI algorithms
have promising characteristics—such as self-adaptability, robustness, and search ability—to solve
complex non-linear problems, which are key attributes required by the WSN. Therefore, a growing
number of SI-based routing algorithms have been developing in WSN routing. In this paper routing
protocols according to distributed (D) /centralized (C), Beste ort (B) /QoS (Q), single path (S) /multipath
(M), event-driven /query-based routing, routing fault tolerance, energy awareness, loop free.
3.2.1. Routing Protocol Classiﬁcation Properties
 Distributed (D) /Centralized (C)
If the protocol is centralized, the discovery and maintenance of routing information are controlled
by a single node called receiver or base station. In a distributed way, each node collects or builds its
own routing information.
 Beste ort (B) /QoS (Q)
Agreements that do not provide any QoS assurance for delivery to the application are classiﬁed as
the best e ort. Protocols that provide quality assurance for application routing services are labeled
QoS-aware (e.g., end-to-end latency, latency jitter, available bandwidth, packet loss, etc).
 Single path (S) /Multipath (M) routing
Routing protocols may maintain single or multiple routes to a given destination. Single path
routing can ﬁnd one or more routes and select the best path for data transmission as well as discard the
other paths. Multipath routing is a protocol that ﬁnds, maintains, and uses multiple paths to transmit
perceptual data.
 Event-driven /Query-based routing
The application program based on routing protocol service is divided into event-driven and
query-driven. In the event-driven protocol, data routing is initiated after the sensor detects the event.
In the query-based protocol, the sink node broadcasts the corresponding query interest, and later the
sensor satisfying the query starts the data routing.
 Fault tolerant
The protocol is robust to topology changes and packet loss
 Energy aware
Whether the protocol prioritizes routing based on energy metrics (for example, the remaining
energy of nodes on the route).
 Loop free
If the path used by the packet is guaranteed to have no loops, the protocol is called no loops.
The protocol must contain explicit mechanisms to check for and avoid possible cycles.