Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 14 of 27
Reference [ 27] proposed a multi-path routing in WSNs by using the FABC algorithm and the
EACO algorithm. The ﬁrst step is to use the FABC algorithm with the ﬁtness function to ﬁnd the CH.
In the second stage, the proposed new algorithm EACO is adopted to realize multi-path path discovery.
The EACO uses an exponential weighted moving average mode control convergence speed of ACO.
Compared with other SI +SI algorithms, as the number of rounds increases, FABC +EACO is better in
terms of energy consumption and goodput, but the advantage decreases with the increase of nodes.
Reference [ 32] proposed an improved energy-saving routing algorithm based on ACO, considering
location information and search direction. The algorithm considers not only the distance from the
node to the next node but also the distance from the node to sink. It also speciﬁes the search range
and direction (pointing to sink) for the next node. Simulation results showed that this algorithm is
signiﬁcantly better than other algorithms when the distance between the sink and the target region is
far away, and the average energy consumption of this algorithm increases slowly with the increase of
simulation times.
Reference [ 33] proposed a secure routing protocol based on multi-objective ACO (named SRPMA).
The goal of this algorithm is to ﬁnd better multi-path routing results. The main idea of this algorithm is
to introduce Pareto multi-objective optimization strategy into the ACO, and to use the improved ACO
to take the residual energy of nodes and the trust value of routing path as the routing optimization
targets. Compared with related ACO-based security routing protocols, the SRPMA can achieve better
performance in terms of packet loss rate, routing load and average energy consumption under black
hole attack. Also, the advantage becomes more evident with the increase of the number of black hole
nodes because the SRPMA requires additional routing control packets to maintain the trust model and
update the trust values of the nodes.
Large-scale WSNs may contain a large amount of sensor nodes distributed into the area of
interest [ 34]. Reference [ 35] proposed a routing protocol, named CB-RACO in large-scale WSNs,
where the ACO and LP are combined. The goal is to keep data transmission at a high level while
minimizing energy consumption. Although this protocol divides clusters but is not CH-based, in order
to prevent energy consumption too fast, each ant can only live in its own community (cluster activity).
Besides, considering large-scale WSNs, the inter-community retransmission and intra-community
multi-path routing strategies are respectively used to improve the reliability and load balance of data
transmission. The advantage of this strategy lies in the ability to organize and to run the network
autonomously when the network is overloaded whilst the memory cost is very low. The CB-RACO
method can achieve high data delivery rates in large-scale WSNs.
Table 4 compares the routing algorithms. With respect to WSN routing protocol, the following
factors need to be considered: ﬁrst, because the energy of nodes is limited, the routing protocol design
should be simple, e cient, and energy-saving and take into account the energy balance to extend
the network life cycle. Second, the network can be extended to respond quickly to changes when
nodes die, or new ones join. Third, convergence should be rapid. To sum up, from the literature, most
routing algorithms in WSN are distributed, and only a few of them support QoS. Besides, the number
of energy-aware protocols is relatively large because WSN requires energy saving. Finally, the PSO
or ACO algorithms are popular for routing optimization in WSN applications and for multipath
communication. The ACO is good at ﬁnding the optimal path. The design of WSN routing protocols
has to not only take into account security, latency, packet loss rate, fault tolerance, and other issues but
also to consider energy consumption, as do routing protocols in general networks. Factors to consider
for WSN routing protocols and their solutions: energy saving (increase the number of clusters, prevent
energy cavity made relay protection mechanisms to prevent low energy nodes, balance transmission
distance, use mobile sinks, optimize multipath routing), average end-to-end delay, packet loss rate,
fault tolerance (multipath routing), and safety.