Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 4 of 27
 We survey the state-of-art SI algorithms in IoT applications and discuss potential future
development directions.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the principle of SI algorithm.
Section 3 analyzes and compares di erent applications of swarm intelligence algorithms in WSNs.
Section 4 presents the application of SI in UAV-aided wireless network. Section 5 summarizes the
application of swarm intelligence algorithm in other Internet of Things. Section 6 concludes the
veriﬁcation scenarios and veriﬁcation platforms adopted. Section 7 discusses the current state of the SI
algorithms in the wireless network and forecasts their future development. The conclusion is drawn in
Section 8.
2. Swarm Intelligence Algorithms
The SI algorithms were designed to study the principles of simple individuals produce that can
exhibit advanced and complex swarm optimization behaviors through cooperation, organization,
information exchange, and learning among individuals in a swarm [ 12]. In Figure 2, the SI algorithms
are classiﬁed according to their historical development and related applications. To be more speciﬁc,
the SI algorithms were initially proposed in the 1990s, and now their applications have been largely
examined and are relatively mature, including ACO by Dorigo (1992), and PSO by Kennedy and
Eberhart (1995). SI algorithm proposed from 2000 to 2010 includes Bacterial Foraging Optimization
(BFO) by KM Passino (2002), Artiﬁcial ﬁsh-swarm Algorithm by XL Li (2002) [ 13], artiﬁcial bee colony
(ABC) algorithm by Basturk and Karaboga (2006), ﬁreﬂy algorithm (FA) by Yang (2008) [ 14]. Newer and
promising SI algorithms, including pigeon, inspired optimization (PIO) [ 15] by Duan (2014) [ 12], grey
wolf optimizer (GW) by S. Mirjalili and A. Lewis (2014) [ 7], butterﬂy optimization algorithm (BOA) by
S. Arora and S. Singh (2015). In the following, the basic principles of these widely used SI algorithms
are brieﬂy introduced.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 25 
 • This paper introduces and summarizes more than 40 applications of SI in IoT —such as 
the WSN and UAV network, especially in the last three years;  
• This paper compares 11 SI -based CH selection a lgorithms and 13 SI -based routing 
protocols in WSN applications;  
• We summarize the validation platform and parameter selection of each method used in 
WSNs as well as their merits and demerits;  
• We survey the state -of-art SI algorithms in IoT applications  and discuss potential future 
development directions.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the principle of SI algorithm. 
Section 3 analyzes and compares different applications of swarm intelligence algorithms in WSNs. 
Secti on 4 presents the application of SI in UAV -aided wireless network. Section 5 summarizes the 
application of swarm intelligence algorithm in other Internet of Things. Section 6 concludes the 
verification scenarios and verification platforms adopted. Section 7 discusses the current state of the 
SI algorithms in the wireless network and forecasts their future development. The conclusion is 
drawn in Section 8.  
2. Swarm Intelligence Algorithms  
The SI algorithms were designed to study the principles of simple indi viduals produce that can 
exhibit advanced and complex swarm optimization behaviors through cooperation, organization, 
information exchange, and learning among individuals in a swarm [12]. In Figure 2 , the SI 
algorithms are classified according to their his torical development and related applications. To be 
more specific, the SI algorithms were initially proposed in the 1990s, and now their applications 
have been largely examined and are relatively mature, including ACO  by Dorigo (1992), and PSO  by 
Kennedy a nd Eberhart (1995). SI algorithm proposed from 2000 to 2010 includes Bacterial Foraging 
Optimization （BFO）by KM Passino (2002 ), Artificial fish -swarm Algorithm by XL Li (2002)  [13], 
artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm by Basturk and Karaboga (2006), firefly algorithm (FA)  by 
Yang (2008)  [14]. Newer and promising SI algorithms, including pigeon, inspired optimization 
(PIO) [15] by Duan (2014)  [12], grey wolf optimizer （GW）by S. Mirja lili and A. Lewis (2014)  [7], 
butterfly optimization algorithm (BOA) by S. Arora and S. Singh (2015). In the following, the basic 
principles of these widely used SI algorithms are briefly introduced.  
Bio-inspired algorithms
Swarm intelligence Evolution Ecology
2000 -2010 Before 2000 and widely used After 2010 and need further deveiopment
PSO Widely used ACO Need further development PIO GW BOA
FA ABC AFS BFO
 
Figure 2.  Taxonomy of SI -based computation algorithms.  
2.1. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)  
PSO algorithm is a SI global random search algorithm proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart, 
which simulates migration and swarm behavior during foraging. Each individual in the flock 
aggregation model follows the followin g rules: ( a) avoiding collisions with neighboring individuals; 
(b) matching individual velocity in the neighborhood; ( c) flying to the center of the flock, and the 
Figure 2. Taxonomy of SI-based computation algorithms.
2.1. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)
PSO algorithm is a SI global random search algorithm proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart, which
simulates migration and swarm behavior during foraging. Each individual in the ﬂock aggregation
model follows the following rules: ( a) avoiding collisions with neighboring individuals; ( b) matching
individual velocity in the neighborhood; ( c) ﬂying to the center of the ﬂock, and the ﬂock as a whole
ﬂies to the target. In the PSO, the potential solution to each optimization problem is a bird in the
search space, called a particle. All particles have a ﬁtness value of the particle itself determined by
the optimized function, and each particle has a speed that determines its direction and distances.