Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 23 of 27
7.2.3. QoS Assuring on WSN
The QoS refers to the capability of a network that can provide promising services (including
ensuring the transmission bandwidth, reducing the transmission delay, reducing the packet loss rate)
for speciﬁed network communications using various underlying technologies. Since the traditional
OSI model does not apply to wireless networks. Moreover, WSN combines sensor technology and
distributed information processing technologies. The traditional QoS system is not applicable to WSNs.
More improved QoS system frameworks are needed for WSN. For example, energy conservation
and scalability should be emphasized for the physical layer, and the dormancy mechanism should
be considered for the sensor to save energy. The network layer should consider the whole network
energy consumption balance. In our references, the proportion of literature considering QoS quality is
relatively small; thus, how to solve the QoS problem in the WSN is a direction that can be studied.
7.2.4. Intelligent Mobile Edge Computing
As mentioned in [ 21], the BS in the center has a longer life cycle than in the corner or outside the
domain. Moreover, the centralized processing mode represented by cloud computing is unable to
handle the number generated by edge devices e ciently. Smart edge proposes that every edge device
in the IoT can be equipped with data collection, analysis, computing, communications, and most
importantly intelligence. The prominent advantages of the intelligent edge are to reduce latency, reduce
bandwidth, reduce duplication, and improve security. However, at present, the intelligent edge also
has the problem of resource limitation. Some intelligent edge computing methods can be considered to
improve the QoS of wireless networks: (1) real-time use of a UAVs and an e cient means to obtain
and analyze data, it is about the UAV task allocation problem, the swarm intelligence algorithm is
very good at addressing this issue; (2) only connecting the most valuable data in the edge device to
the cloud to reduce data transfer. Ideally, edge nodes send only the absolutely necessary information
and make critical decisions as soon as they have access to critical data. For this purpose, appropriate
scheduling tasks are needed by considering the priority assignment where SI algorithms are available.
7.2.5. 5G Networks
With the ever-growing development of networks, a 5G network has emerged. Compared with the
4G network, the innovation of the 5G network lies in: micro-base station, beam shaping, and D2D [ 62].
Reference [ 58] reported that PSO is used to deal with the problem of joint uplink subcarrier distribution
and power control in the D2D underlying cellular network in 5G. Regarding the application of SI to
5G, there may be the following research direction: (1) 5G network is one of the core technology of
massive MIMO, due to the intelligent algorithm in solving a large space, global optimum, nonlinear
complex problems better than the traditional algorithms, so a lot of application examples of SI in
MIMO (especially) based on PSO, follow-up can be further in this direction to massive MIMO; (2) as
5G network is oriented towards a variety of scenarios, di erent scenarios have di erent requirements
on network mobility, security, delay, and other requirements. Therefore, it is necessary to divide
the physical network into multiple virtual networks, which falls into the topic of network slicing
technology. However, when a large number of users and devices increase dramatically, the virtual
machine resources in the network slice may not meet the demands of users, so the network slice function
migration mechanism is strongly required. The migration problem is an NP-hard combinational
problem, which is suitable to be solved by the SI algorithm. Moreover, in the 5G-based migration
problem, a low time delay has to be seriously considered. Both PSO and ABC algorithms have the
advantage of fast convergence speed. We believe that introducing SI algorithms into the 5G migration
problem is a feasible and advantageous research direction.