Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 22 of 27
There are various problems in traditional SI algorithms. Two examples are that the PSO is easy
to fall into the local optimal, and the ACO’s early convergence speed is very slow. The optimization
of SI algorithms has been considered in the literature we studied. As Figure 9 shows, most kinds of
the literatures (61%) currently select improved parameters. For example, the PSO adjusts the inertia
factor to adjust the global optimization and local optimization ability. The ACO adjusts the pheromone
update factor to improve the convergence rate. Most SI algorithms are easy to implement, so combining
them with other algorithms is a good way to improve. For example, many SI algorithms are used
in conjunction with other SI (17%), SI is combined with machine learning related technologies (e.g.,
k-means [58]) and FCM [59]. Other technologies (e.g., LP) can also be combined with SI.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW  20 of 25 
 convenience of communication, individuals should not be too far apart. It is similar to the flight 
patterns of UAVs, so the PSO  can be used in path planning, UAV positioning, task assignment, 
multi -UAV cooperation.  The ACO is originally from ant path -finding, so it is widely used in path 
planning.  The ABC is originally from bee collaboration, so it can be used for multi -UAV 
coopera tion.  
As figure 8 shows, t he applications of SI in WSNs mainly lies in CH selection (about 41%) and 
routing protocol (about 47%). On one hand, many WSN studies focuses on these two problems. On 
other hand, most SI algorithms can be applied to these two pro blems. The applications of PSO in 
WSN is more about CH selection, routing algorithm, and node location. Among them, SI -based 
node location algorithm adopts PSO more. The ACO has the characteristics of distribution, adaptive 
optimization, and strong scalabi lity to residual pheromones. Therefore, it is often used to solve 
routing protocol problems in WSNs. The algorithm has few parameters and high precision. In the 
optimization, only fitness functions are used as an evolutionary basis. In WSN applications, th e 
ABC has been widely used to solve CH selection, sensor deployment, node location, and other 
related problems.  
PSO ACO ABC0%20%40%60%80%100%
 node localization
 senseor deployment
 routing protocol
 CH selection
 
Figure 8. Different applications for PSO/ACO/ABC in WSNs.  
There are various problems in traditional SI algorithms. Tw o examples are that the PSO is easy 
to fall into the local optimal, and the ACO’s early convergence speed is very slow. The optimization 
of SI algorithms has been considered in the literature we studied.  As figure 9 shows, most kinds of 
the literatures (61 %) currently select improved parameters. For example, the PSO adjusts the inertia 
factor to adjust the global optimization and local optimization ability. The ACO adjusts the 
pheromone update factor to improve the convergence rate. Most SI algorithms are e asy to 
implement, so combining them with other algorithms is a good way to improve. For example, many 
SI algorithms are used in conjunction with other SI (17%), SI is combined with machine learning 
related technologies (e.g., k -means [5 8]) and FCM [ 59]. Ot her technologies (e.g., LP) can also be 
combined with SI.  
 
Figure 9. SI algorithm optimization methods.  
7.2. Development Trend  Modify the 
parameters
61% Combined with 
other SI
17%Combined with 
machine learning
12%Other
5%
Figure 9. SI algorithm optimization methods.
7.2. Development Trend
Based on the analysis of state-of-art related works, it believes that the applications of SI in wireless
networks has the following development directions: SI has very broad applicational prospects in the
WSN. Potential development directions are discussed below.
7.2.1. SI Applications in More WSNs
Reference [ 27,60] mentioned that the cognitive behavior of artiﬁcial bees is completely consistent
with the intrinsic dynamic characteristics of cognitive WSN. However, according to the current
literature, the applications of SI in a cognitive WSN is relatively rare. The application of ABC in a
cognitive wireless network is a direction that researchers can consider.
WSN has become an important part of 5G mobile technology, thereby opening up a new prospect
for the advanced application of smart sensors in future IoT applications [ 61]. Smart sensors are capable
of complex processing and analysis of perceived data. In the WSN with smart nodes, if the smart node
does not detect an event, it does not need to send a message to CH to save energy, or smart node sensed
data for CH events have no e ect on test results, it can be suppressed. Therefore, for this kind of WSNs,
need to take into account the smart node is the dynamic changes of energy consumption. The energy
consumption of di erent nodes are di erent, while the commonly used CH selection methods are
based on the same energy consumption of nodes in the cluster. In the WSN with smart nodes, CH
selection methods have a large development space.
7.2.2. Wireless Network Based on UAV
Due to the wide applicability of UAV , drones have a promising future for assisting wireless
networks. In such a network, the problems to be considered are the ﬂight path of UAV , the cooperation
between UAV . The characteristic of SI is distributed control, and each individual is directly connected,
which is highly consistent with UAV control. At present, the SI algorithm has been widely used in
UAV . For example, the PSO is used to locate the optimal solution of UAV , and the ACO is used for
optimal path planning of UAV . The next step should be to consider combining the use of drones with
actual network scenarios to make drone assistance more targeted.