Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 8 of 27
3.1. CH Selection Algorithms Based on SI
Routing protocols in WSNs can be divided into planar routing protocols and hierarchical routing
protocols according to communication logic [ 18]. In hierarchical routing protocols, networks are
split into clusters of di erent sizes. Each cluster consists of a CH and several members of the cluster.
The cluster head manages or controls the member nodes in the whole cluster, coordinates the work
among member nodes, takes charge of the collection of information in the cluster, the fusion processing
of data and the forwarding between clusters. Sensor nodes send their perception data to the associated
CH. Then, CHs add them up and send them to a BS or the sink node. Therefore, the CH energy
consumption is generally faster.
The CH selection is a key problem in WSN design. In this paper, the CH selection method is
classiﬁed according to sensor coverage mode, clustering method, whether the number of clusters has
changed, and the mobility of CH, whether the size of clusters has changed, Intra-cluster communication
method and factors for selecting CH. The explanation of these classiﬁcation methods can be found
in Section 3.1.1. Also, they are compared with low energy adaptive clustering hierarchy (LEACH),
a classical hierarchical routing protocol that does not employ SI methods. The basic idea of LEACH is
to randomly select cluster head nodes in a cyclic manner and distribute the energy load of the entire
network to each sensor node evenly. Network energy consumption will decrease, and the overall
network survival time will increase. The explanation of classiﬁcation attributes is described below:
3.1.1. Cluster Classiﬁcation Properties
 Sensor coverage mode
Divide sensor node coverage into two types: deterministic coverage and random uncertainty
coverage. Random uncertainty coverage refers to the random distribution of sensor nodes.
The distribution of sensors controls deterministic coverage.
 Clustering method
Classify the clustering methods into static clustering and dynamic clustering. In the static
clustering network, the network is divided into many clusters. In dynamic clustering, a cluster is
passively created near the CH node.
 The number of clusters
The number of clusters represents the number of clusters per turn. There are two types: ﬁxed (F)
and variable (V).
 The size of the cluster
The size of the cluster refers to the maximum path length from the CH to other nodes in the cluster.
There are two types: ﬁxed (F) and variable (V).
 Intra-cluster communication method
Inter-cluster communication means communication between sensor nodes and communication
between sensors and CH. There are two types: multi-hop jumps and single-hop, depending on whether
multi-hop communication is used.
 CH selection factors
The main factors that need to be considered when selecting CH: residual energy (E), distance to
sink (D2S), distance to BS (D2B), cluster center (C), distance to other nodes (D2N).