Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 10 of 27
some parameters, such as energy, distance, and delay. In the second stage, the proposed new algorithm
EACO (index ACO) is adopted to realize the multi-path path discovery. Compared with other SI
hybrid algorithms, the EACO-FABC has better performance in energy and goodput. Also, it can easily
adapt to the IEEE 802.15.4 protocol (a low-rate communication protocol). However, as can be seen
from the simulation diagram, the CH distribution is very uneven.
Reference [ 28] proposed a centralized cluster routing protocol based on Sugeno fuzzy reasoning
system named LEACH-SF. The ABC is used to adjust fuzzy rules. Each optimization is performed
before LEACH -SF runs. The results showed that the LEACH-SF is superior to the existing fuzzy-based
clustering algorithms in terms of minimizing the distance within the cluster, maximizing the network
lifetime and maximizing the number of packets received by the BS. The LEACH -SF also has the
potential to be expanded in mobile sensor nodes and multi-hop routing. The simulation is based on a
heterogeneous network.
In [29], the authors proposed an improved ABC named iABC. Therefore, iABC used a Student’s t
distribution to improve the population’s initialization and used di erential evolution to improve the
solution search equation. The method enhances global convergence by using a compact student T
distribution. Simulation results showed that this method consumes less energy and delivers the most
packets with minimum end-to-end delay. When the BS is placed outside the network ﬁeld, the impact
on the performance of the protocol is also small.
Table 3 compares the CH selection algorithms.
With respect to CH selection, clusters can be formed in two ways: (1) First, the family of clusters
is divided, and then the CH is found; (2) For the former, the initial CH is usually selected as the node at
the center of the cluster. While the latter at the CH when the choice to consider to whether the CH
uniform distribution, the size of the cluster (high node can lead to CH burden too big, reduce energy
consumption too fast, accelerate CH death) for the CH rotation, now more literature or rotation as the
standard with CH energy is lower than the threshold value also has to rotate according to time, but we
think the former is more ﬂexible, now for the development direction of intelligent sensors (which can
switch of receiving to save energy) or consider QoS of WSN has more practical value. In addition,
the WSN is divided into single-hop and multi-hop within the cluster. The multi-hop WSN within the
cluster should also consider those member nodes that are close to CH and will consume energy faster.
In this case, one possible solution is to use the mobile sink to seek the energy balance. According to [ 25],
CH transformation is based on "signiﬁcant di erences in energy in di erent regions", which can enable
preventing relay nodes from dying too quickly.
In the SI-based CH selection algorithm, it heavily relies on the performance of selected SI algorithm
to locate the optimal solution and the use of SI to ﬁnd the CH according to the requirements (parameters
such as residual energy and distance of nodes). It is important to combine SI algorithms with other
approaches to improve the analytic performance further. For instance, the PSO algorithm is limited to
giving the local optimum solution; thus, using other algorithms can prevent the PSO from falling into
local optimum.