Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 20 of 27
points, and proposed a PSO-based novel shortcut addition algorithm for multi-sink IoT (SAPS).
Each cluster is treated as a single aggregate network. The ﬁtness function is composed of the average
path length and load to sink. The GA is introduced to update particles through crossover (retaining
some information about the current particle and its optimal particle) and mutation (generating new
individuals). Simulation results showed that the SAPS can ensure that the average path length of the
whole network is short and the load balance between sink nodes is stable.
6. Analysis of the Veriﬁcation Methods Adopted by SI in WSN and Problems
This section presents the veriﬁcation method in SI-based WSN applications and highlights some
key problems. Table 6 concludes the parameters of the simulation platform according to its changes to
the scene, such as the change in the number of nodes in WSN, in the area size, and in the location of
the base station. The simulated scene types are summarized and compared in Table 7.
Table 6. Simulation platforms analysis.
Simulation Platform Percentage
Did not mention 32.4
MATLAB 38.3
Java 5.9
Ns2 5.9
OMNeT ++/Castalia 8.8
jMetal 2.9
CloudSim package 2.9
QT Creator 2.4.0 2.9
Table 7. Experimental simulation scene selections analysis.
Number of Scenarios Percentage
One or two 61.8
Three or four 17.6
At least ﬁve 20.6
These statistics point out: (1) A third of the papers does not address the simulation platform, so it is
hard to recreate the experiment; (2) Experimental results are often compared to earlier methods such as
LEACH, not compared to the existing outstanding method; (3) Most of the methods for the simulation
environment, only consider the result of a case, or there are only one scene change conditions (e.g.,
only change the number of nodes). There is hard to know if its approach would have an advantageous
outcome in other scenarios; (4) In general, most experiments are carried out on the Matlab platform,
and castalia3.2 under omnet4.6 is also used as a simulation framework based on wireless body area
network and sensor network.
7. Current Situation and Development Trend
7.1. Current Statuses
In this section, we conduct a statistical analysis in two aspects. On the one hand, we analyze
the number of related literature using PSO, ACO, and ABC in wireless, WSN and UAV in the past
three years (2017–2019) and further analyzed the speciﬁc applications of the three algorithms in WSNs.
On the other hand, we analyze the measures considered by these SI algorithms in optimization.
Figure 7 presents related works where SI algorithms (PSO, ACO, and ABC) are applied in wireless
network applications in the past three years (2017–2019) (this data comes from Scopus’ search results).