Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 3 of 27
but it is not suitable for WSN because of its high energy consumption and unavailability in some
speciﬁc areas. Node localization can be regarded as an error optimization problem, which belongs to a
complex optimization problem, and the SI algorithm can be used to solve this kind of problems.
UAV plays an extremely important role in the ﬁeld of IoT due to its features of dynamic
deployment, convenient conﬁguration, and high autonomy. In general, there are three typical use
cases in UAV-assisted communications: (1) UAV-aided coverage, carrying the ﬂight base station,
completing the heterogeneous 5G system, and improving the coverage and capacity of wireless access
technology; (2) UAV-aided relay, deploying UAVs to provide wireless connections between two or more
remote users or user groups without reliable direct communication links; (3) UAV-aided information
dissemination and data collection, such as data collection in smart city. The challenges of UAV
network lie in the fact that the link is required to be established indirectly due to the variable topology
structure, dynamic routing protocol planning, and energy-saving requirements. There exist many UAV
applications where SI is used to improve their applicability. For instance, the PSO algorithm is applied
to path planning and UAV positioning technology. The design of an individual collaboration of the SI
algorithm is compatible with UAV , so the UAV swarm was later proposed.
Many studies concentrate on the summarization of the principles and applications of SI algorithms
in the WSN. In 2011, Muhammad Saleem et al. [ 9] Reviewed SI-based routing protocols in WSNs. In their
study, they proposed a WSN routing protocol framework based on SI and classiﬁed WSN routing
protocols, which include multiple /single routing, reactive /active /hybrid routing, source /next-hop
routing, plane /layered routing, data /address for the center routing, distributed /centralized routing,
best-e ort/QoS-aware routing, the event-driven /query-based routing, using energy-aware or not,
packet path if there is a cycle, fault tolerance, and load balancing, and compared WSN routing protocols
based on SI and non-SI. In 2015, Sandra Sendra et al. [ 10] studied systems based on animal and natural
behavior in WSNs; their articles classiﬁed systems according to animal species and analyzed the usage
trend of each type of system. In 2018, Zedadra O et al. [ 11] reviewed various SI algorithms according
to the inspiration source and algorithm maturity. Also, their potential application scenarios were
also summarized.
Although some studies summarized relevant improvements in SI-based applications, most of
them only consider ant colony and bee colony algorithms. Some algorithms proposed algorithms,
such as PSO-based routing algorithms, are ignored. The scope of Muhammad’s survey mainly focused
on routing protocol in WSNs; however, it does not discuss sensor deployment and CH selection
problems. In Sandra’s study, they considered a variety of bioinspired systems in WSNs [ 10], but there
were few comparative analyses of di erent approaches to the same problem. In Zedadra O’s study,
they presented an elaborate introduction to the classiﬁcation of SI [ 11], but it lacks the analysis and
comparison of related methods towards similar problems.
To solve these problems, this paper summarizes the application of SI algorithm in the IoT.
Our paper generally classiﬁes the network types into three categories: (1) the application of SI in the
WSN which is then divided into ﬁve sub-problems in terms of CH selection, routing protocol, UAV
application, sensor deployment, and node location; (2) the application of SI in UAV-aided wireless
network; (3) the application of SI in other related IoTs. According to the role of UAV in the network,
UAV-aided wireless network is classiﬁed into three categories: UAV as a base station (DBS), UAV
as relay and UAV assisted information collection, respectively. Besides, we presented some widely
applied SI algorithms, such as PSO, ACO, and ABC.
The main contributions of the survey are outlined below:
 This paper introduces and summarizes more than 40 applications of SI in IoT—such as the WSN
and UAV network, especially in the last three years;
 This paper compares 11 SI-based CH selection algorithms and 13 SI-based routing protocols in
WSN applications;
 We summarize the validation platform and parameter selection of each method used in WSNs as
well as their merits and demerits;