Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 24 of 27
7.2.6. Wireless Security Assured by SI Algorithms
At present, SI algorithms apply to intrusion detection in network security (e.g., attack source
location and cluster analysis), to cryptography (e.g., block cipher), and to reduce computation in a
cryptographic algorithm [ 12]. The characteristics of distributed SI and strong robustness have great
development prospects in network security. In the future, it is suggested to improve the global optimum
ability and convergence speed of the SI algorithms and reduce the alarming rate of intrusion detection.
8. Conclusions
With continuing advancements in IoT technologies, the number of IoT access devices is rapidly
increasing. In this case, 5G networks with low latency, high speed, and high capacity as well as
good QoS have become challenges. With the fast-growing 5G, the IoT becomes more complex and
heterogeneous but more promising. The WSN is a key technology in the IoT. It is of great importance
to support monitoring tasks in large-scale areas. At present, due to the limited energy of WSN nodes,
the key problems lie in e cient node selection (CH selection) and node collaborative (e.g., localization
problem). The SI algorithms can transform complex NP-problems into individual adaptability to the
environment to obtain the optimal solution iteratively. Therefore, it is believed that the SI algorithm
enables solving many speciﬁc problems in WSN applications. Also, the UAVs have considerations
collaboration between individual UAVs that are similar to biological communities. They are crucial
mobile and ﬂexible IoT devices that can assist IoT and wireless cellular networks (e.g., 5G) in the future.
This paper reviews representative SI algorithms and summarizes their applications in the IoT.
We consider the applications of WSN and UAV-assisted wireless networks as examples. Also, we discuss
the key issues in WSN applications and highlight the potential usability of SI algorithms in optimization
problems, such as the CH selection problem. Moreover, the simulation platform and scenarios
mentioned in related studies are summarized. We generally divide the UAV-aided wireless network
into three categories according to their principles, and their applications based on SI are analyzed.
Finally, we summarize the application status of SI in the wireless network and discuss the potential
prospects of SI algorithms in the application of wireless networks. The wide applicability of SI
techniques has exhibited promising prospects in the WSN. Furthermore, the combination of UAV with
5G, mobile edge computing, the IoT, and other technologies presents a direction worthy of development.
Author Contributions: W.S. and L.S. designed study; M.T. and L.Z. searched literatures; M.T. and L.Z. designed
tables and ﬁgures. W.S., L.S. and M.T. analyzed and interpreted data; M.T., L.Z. and Z.H. wrote the manuscript.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by National Key Research and Development Program of China Stem Cell and
Translational Research 2018YFB1700100.
Acknowledgments: This work is supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB1700100),
the Fundamental Scientiﬁc Research Project of Dalian University of Technology (DUT18JC28), and the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (DUT19ZD103).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Kennedy, J.Y. Swarm Intelligence ; Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.: San Francisco, CA, USA, 2001.
2. Eberhart, R.; Kennedy, J. Particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of the ICNN’95-International
Conference on Neural Networks, Perth, WA, Australia, 27 November–1 December 1995; Volume 4,
pp. 1942–1948.
3. Dorigo, M.; di Caro, G.A. Ant colony optimization: A new meta-heuristic. In Proceedings of the 1999 congress
on evolutionary computation-CEC99 (Cat. No. 99TH8406), Washington, DC, USA, 6–9 July 1999; Volume 2,
pp. 1470–1477.
4. Karaboga, D. An Idea Based on Honey Bee Swarm for Numerical Optimization ; Technical report-tr06; Computer
Engineering Department, Engineering Faculty, Erciyes University: Kayseri, Turkey, 2005; Volume 200,
pp. 1–10.