Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 13 of 27
3.2.2. Wireless Sensor Routing Protocols Based on PSO
In [19], a WSN routing optimization algorithm based on PSO and TS was proposed, through
optimizing the number of clusters formed and the number of nodes that should exist in a single cluster
to prolong the network lifetime and energy e ciency with energy-saving and responsive manners.
The routing optimization algorithm can e ectively reduce the average packet loss rate and average
end-to-end delay, by increasing the number of clusters and improving the survival rate of nodes.
Reference [ 20] proposed a PSO-based WSN routing algorithm named EMSP , which mainly
combined virtual clustering and mobile sink technology in the routing process. The EPMS deﬁnes three
packet formats: hello packet is used to determine which cluster send data to mobile sink; messages-c
is the message directly sent by CH to mobile sink; message-h packet is the message sent by member
node to CH. The sink node begins to collect information from the cluster with the highest residual
energy. Only when the sink determines the CH, will the member node transmit data to CH. In this
case, the member node is very likely to die before the data is transmitted.
Reference [ 24] improved the routing mode for energy conservation and energy balance because
excessive forwarding near CH can result in the energy hole and unbalanced energy consumption,
as well as premature death of nodes. In such a case, a low energy protection mechanism is adopted to
avoid the weak node becoming a relay node, and a mobile data collector was introduced to collect data.
The PSO is used to search the energy center of the network, and nodes that are nearest to the energy
center are selected as CHs. The uncertainty of the moving data collector however may cause data loss.
Reference [ 30] proposed a new method to extend the network life cycle for cluster-based WSN.
An optimization method was applied for selecting target nodes of interest. The protocol extends the
network life cycle by selecting the target node optimization method and the relay node to alleviate the
work of CH. In addition, an improved PSO algorithm is proposed to minimize transmission distance
by updating cluster nodes and to optimize network energy consumption. The protocol distributes
nodes evenly across multiple clusters.
Reference [ 31] put forward a kind of bionic PSO fault-tolerant routing algorithm, by extending
the existing multi-objective optimization problem optimization method, fast recovery from the path
to failure. Based on the determined objective function, the e ective value of the objective function
calculated by each selected sensor node is optimized to construct k-disjoint multi-path. A multi-path
routing algorithm is used to balance fault tolerance and communication overhead. Compared with the
canonical PSO, overall energy consumption and average delay are optimized. However, there is a
slight disadvantage at the beginning of the iteration because the method needs a large amount of time
to stabilize the target function.
3.2.3. WSN Routing Protocols Based on ACO
For the WSN, optimal routing algorithms and routing protocol are the keys to save communication
energy and thus prolong the network lifetime. Reference [ 25] presented a routing algorithm that
combines the clustering algorithm, the ACO and mobile sink. The algorithm improves the ACO
by optimizing the heuristic factor (visibility) ij, and uses improved ACO to ﬁnd an optimal sink
movement track, communicate with all CHs, and collect data through a single hop close communication.
Compared with other ACO-based standard algorithms, this method can extend the network life. It is
worth noting that the more nodes there are, the smaller the advantage is.
Reference [ 26] proposed a cross-layer protocol (FAMACROW). This protocol combines the idea of
energy-saving hierarchical cluster routing and media access and improve its energy e ciency and
network life. In this algorithm, the ACO technology was used to carry out multi-hop routing between
clusters from CH to MS, and the fuzzy logic and ACO is used to select CH and route paths between
clusters. The reliability of protocols is improved by using link quality indicators to select CH and
transfer the probability of routes between clusters. FAMACROW is better than the other unequal
clustering routing in terms of throughput, goodput, latency, and the network life.