Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 18 of 27
speciﬁc application, and we also analyze some factors that should be considered for each problem,
which are illustrated in Figure 6.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16 of 25 
 [30] N N N N Y Y Y Throughput  
[31] N Y N N Y N N - 
[32] N N N N Y Y N Path length, 
Packet deliver  
[33] Y N N N Y N N Routing load,  
Throughput  
[35] N Y N N Y N N - 
[36] N N N N Y N N Coverage rate,  
Sensing radius 
of nodes  
[38] N N N N N N N Deployment 
cost 
[40] N N N N N N N Target nodes, 
Convergence 
behavior, 
Location  
[41] N N N N N N N Node 
localization  
From Table 5, it can be seen that most WSN applications take into account the energy 
consumption problem. For routing protocols in WSN, there are some crucial parameters, such as 
energy -saving, delay, fault tolerance, and QoS.  However, these kinds of literature generally only 
consider two or three factors, and none of them has considered all factors comprehensively. In 
future protocols, readers can refer to these parameters shown in Table 5 to provide an optimal 
routing protocol by considering comprehensive indicators.  
4. Application of Swarm Intell igence Algorithms in UAV -Aided  Wireless Networks  
According to previous literature, the UAV application in the wireless network can be divided 
into three conditions: (1) in the base station or network congestion problem, the UAV as a temporary 
base station (DBS); (2) when two or more users distance is far, the UAV can be used as a relay with a 
wireless connection; (3) as the application of the sensor, the UAV can be used for collecting sensory 
information. According to these three applications, we further di scuss what problems are more 
inclined to solve in a specific application, and we also analyze some factors that should be 
considered for each problem, which are illustrated in Figure 6.  
 
Location acuracy
Energy
Overhead
Intervals
UAV node 
localization
Flying time
Energy
Optimal flight 
path
UAV assisted 
information collection
UAV -aided 
wireless 
communicationUAV as relay
UAV as base 
station(DBS)
Drone 
collaboration
Anti-interference
Communication 
link
DBSs 
deployment
Total transmit
Served user 
Capacity
Fairness
  
Figure 6. UAV -aided wireless networks.  
For improving the flexibilit y of the network, the UAV can be integrated into the wireless 
network as a flight base station (BSs) named DBSs. DBSs are a promising application in the wireless 
network. However, the deployment of DBSs can face several challenges. First, a 3D -DBSs layout is 
Figure 6. UAV-aided wireless networks.
For improving the ﬂexibility of the network, the UAV can be integrated into the wireless network
as a ﬂight base station (BSs) named DBSs. DBSs are a promising application in the wireless network.
However, the deployment of DBSs can face several challenges. First, a 3D-DBSs layout is needed to
meet the dynamic requirements of the system. Second, the availability and related resource allocation
issues of reliable wireless backhaul links. The ﬁnal problem is the association between the users and
BSs [46].
Literature [ 47] put forward an algorithm to ﬁnd an e cient 3D layout of DBSs in addition to the
user-BS associations and wireless backhaul bandwidth allocations to maximize the sum logarithmic
rate of the users. This is the ﬁrst time to consider the 3D layout of backhaul resource allocation,
user associations, user types, and DBSs simultaneously. User-BS association and wireless back trip
bandwidth allocation are found by the decomposition method, and the location of DBSs is updated by
the PSO algorithm.
Reference [ 48] presented a fair-sense multi-DBS 3D deployment based on PSO, which maximizes
the logarithmic sum of user accessibility. The PSO algorithm is adopted in which the stop criterion is
selected as the condition for the particle to converge to a certain point. The method achieves optimal
fairness with the least number of DBSs deployments. Also, the proposed algorithm can work in
networks with di erent user distributions.
Reference [ 49] studies the problem of providing wireless coverage when a UAV is used to
distribute users on each ﬂoor of a high-rise building evenly. PSO algorithm is adopted to ﬁnd an
ecient three-dimensional layout of UAV . When the same number of users is evenly distributed on
each ﬂoor, the total emission power required to cover all indoor users is minimized. The convergence
speed of the algorithms for di erent building are considered as the evaluation criterion. However, this
algorithm is only based on equally distributed users.
Reference [50] proposed an SI-based 3D positioning algorithm (SIL) and SI-based energy saving
clustering algorithm (SIC). SIL algorithm follows the boundary-based optimization method and uses
the PSO algorithm to detect the location of target UAV nodes. The use of boundary box technology
reduces the initial search space and speeds up the convergence rate; bounding box technology was
used to reﬁne the position estimation further. The SIC adopts an improved PSO to select CH. The SIL
algorithm improves convergence speed and positioning accuracy at a lower computational cost.
Comparably, the SIC algorithm is superior to typical routing protocols in packet transfer rate, average
end-to-end delay, routing overhead, and energy consumption.
The UAV-assisted wireless network is a direction of future network and IoT. As the DBS and UAV
can assist network coverage and act as temporary networks in disaster situations. they can be used as