Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 19 of 27
relay, auxiliary information collection, and so on in many kinds of IoTs. The key issues of UAV-aided
wireless network are deployment and path optimization. For deployment issues, it consists: (1) joint
optimization of deployment and bandwidth allocation to reduce communication delay; (2) deployment
of perceived obstacles to improve network coverage; (3) association between users and DBSs. Such issues
should be evaluated with regard to user coverage, robustness, and power consumption. With respect
to path optimization, energy constraints, obstacles, and perceived information value maximization
should be considered, as well as collaboration issues for multiple UAVs. With the development of
edge computing, future UAVs should also take into account the data analysis.
5. Application of Swarm Intelligence Algorithms in Other IoTs
The VANET is a special form of MANET (mobile ad-hoc network). Multicast routing under QoS
constraint is proven to be NP-complete. Therefore, reference [ 51] transformed the QoS constrained
multicast routing problem of VANETs into an SMT (Steiner minimum tree) search problem, and designed
a micro-ABC (MABC) [ 52] method based on binary representation to solve the SMT problem e ectively.
The method consists of a tiny colony, saving computation time per cycle compared to using a normal
swarm size. Simulation results showed that the MABC can ﬁnd the optimal solution under four destiny
nodes, and the increase of destiny nodes has little e ect on run time.
Reference [ 52] proposed an e cient ant colony based routing algorithm for the IoT. The algorithm
is more e cient, scalable, and adaptable to network parameter changes, taking energy into account.
In this paper, considering the IoT systems as a graph G and turning the IoT routing problem into a
TSP-like problem, they use ACO to solve the problem. Simulation results showed that the proposed
method can reduce energy consumption, end-to-end delay, and extend node life.
Reference [ 53] presented a multi-objective PSO (MOPSO) cloud agent scheme. This scheme
optimizes resource selection in cloud computing by optimizing the cloud agent (the middle layer
between the client and the cloud service provider in cloud computing), using multi-objective PSO to ﬁnd
Pareto optimal solution of cloud agent problem. Compared with GA and a random search algorithm,
MOPSO reduces response time, and energy consumption and improves proﬁts. However, as iteration
increases, the proﬁt of MOPSO is almost the same as the random search algorithm.
Reference [ 54] showed an optimization model for virtual machine selection in cloud IoT health
service applications to e ectively manage and integrate a large amount of data in industry 4.0. The GA,
PSO, and PPSO are both considered for optimization of virtual machine selection. The proposed
model can optimize data storage requirements by reducing the stakeholders’ request execution time,
turnaround time, and waiting time of medical requests (tasks). The simulation result showed the
proposed model demonstrated its superior to the existing model in terms of overall execution time and
real-time data retrieval e ciency.
When the IoT devices transmit and exchange data, attackers can easily get detailed information
about shared data. Based on the MOPSO [ 54], literature [ 55] proposed a security processing method
adopting hierarchical clustering and PSO. Its purpose is to ﬁnd the optimal particle as Pareto solution
and hide the secret information innocently. The main idea is that each particle is given a probability,
thus increasing the diversity of global optima and preventing it from falling into local optima.
Compared with other multi-objective algorithms and GA—based algorithms, the HCMPSO can have
the lowest hiding failure in most cases.
Reference [ 56] proposed a PSO-based non-invasive load scheduling method for the residential
user center. It is characterized by edge computing and drives the computing power of the Internet edge
and IoT data sources to optimize cloud computing technology. The model is based on the historical
power consumption trend, and user satisfaction data in the smart home environment and the constraint
PSO is used to load the data. It not only considers the load dispatching of the state grid but also
considers the local renewable resources, which is beneﬁcial to the safe development of the power grid.
An important problem in the IoT is to reduce the number of hops from the sensor to the sink.
Reference [ 57] studied the modeling problem of small-world networks with multiple convergence