Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 21 of 27
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW  19 of 25 
 jMetal  2.9 
CloudSim package  2.9 
QT Creator 2.4.0  2.9 
Table 7. Experimental simulation scene selections analysis.  
Number of Scenarios  Percentage  
One or two  61.8 
Three or four  17.6 
At least five  20.6 
These statistics point out: (1) A third of the papers  does not address the simulation platform, so 
it is hard to recreate the experiment; (2) Experimental results are often compared to earlier methods 
such as LEACH, not compared to the existing outstanding method; (3) Most of the methods for the 
simulation e nvironment, only consider the result of a case, or there are only one scene change 
conditions (e.g., only change the number of nodes). There is hard to know if its approach would 
have an advantageous outcome in other scenarios ; (4) In general, most experim ents are carried out 
on the Matlab platform, and castalia3.2 under omnet4.6 is also used as a simulation framework 
based on wireless body area network and sensor network.  
7. Current Situation and Development Trend  
7.1. Current Statuses  
In this section, we  conduct a statistical analysis in two aspects. On the one hand, we analyze 
the number of related literature using PSO, ACO, and ABC in wireless, WSN and UAV in the past 
three years (2017 –2019) and further analyzed the specific applications of the three al gorithms in 
WSNs. On the other hand, we analyze the measures considered by these SI algorithms in 
optimization.  
Figure 7 presents related works where SI algorithms (PSO, ACO, and ABC) are applied in 
wireless network applications in the past three years (20 17–2019) (this data comes from Scopus' 
search results).  
 
(a)  
(b)  
(c) 
Figure 7. Numbers of SI literatures about wireless, WSN and UAV in Scopus (by October, 2019). The 
search results  by the keywords:  (a) PSO, ACO, ABC, and wireless; ( b) PSO, ACO, ABC, and WSN; ( c) 
PSO, ACO, ABC, and UAV.  
We can see that the PSO has the largest number of applications in the field of wireless network, 
even up to two or three times than ACO and ABC literature. The PSO relies on its optimization 
ability wit h simple parameters and fast convergence to find the optimal solution to solve the 
continuity problem, so it is most widely used in function optimization, neural network training, 
fuzzy system control, and other aspects because of its advantages with fewer  and simpler 
parameters. It is suitable for solving continuous functions. In UAV application, there is a 
requirement for the positional design between each individual in the flock because the PSO 
algorithm originally generated to simulate the movement of b ird groups. For example, to prevent 
collisions between individuals, the distance between individuals should not be too close to 0200400
2017 2018 2019Paper numberAlgorithm +wireless
0100200
2017 2018 2019Algorithm +WSN
050100
2017 2018 2019Algorithm +UAV
PSO
ACO
ABC
Figure 7. Numbers of SI literatures about wireless, WSN and UAV in Scopus (by October, 2019).
The search results by the keywords: ( a) PSO, ACO, ABC, and wireless; ( b) PSO, ACO, ABC, and WSN;
(c) PSO, ACO, ABC, and UAV .
We can see that the PSO has the largest number of applications in the ﬁeld of wireless network,
even up to two or three times than ACO and ABC literature. The PSO relies on its optimization ability
with simple parameters and fast convergence to ﬁnd the optimal solution to solve the continuity
problem, so it is most widely used in function optimization, neural network training, fuzzy system
control, and other aspects because of its advantages with fewer and simpler parameters. It is suitable
for solving continuous functions. In UAV application, there is a requirement for the positional design
between each individual in the ﬂock because the PSO algorithm originally generated to simulate the
movement of bird groups. For example, to prevent collisions between individuals, the distance between
individuals should not be too close to convenience of communication, individuals should not be too
far apart. It is similar to the ﬂight patterns of UAVs, so the PSO can be used in path planning, UAV
positioning, task assignment, multi-UAV cooperation. The ACO is originally from ant path-ﬁnding,
so it is widely used in path planning. The ABC is originally from bee collaboration, so it can be used
for multi-UAV cooperation.
As Figure 8 shows, the applications of SI in WSNs mainly lies in CH selection (about 41%) and
routing protocol (about 47%). On one hand, many WSN studies focuses on these two problems.
On other hand, most SI algorithms can be applied to these two problems. The applications of PSO
in WSN is more about CH selection, routing algorithm, and node location. Among them, SI-based
node location algorithm adopts PSO more. The ACO has the characteristics of distribution, adaptive
optimization, and strong scalability to residual pheromones. Therefore, it is often used to solve routing
protocol problems in WSNs. The algorithm has few parameters and high precision. In the optimization,
only ﬁtness functions are used as an evolutionary basis. In WSN applications, the ABC has been widely
used to solve CH selection, sensor deployment, node location, and other related problems.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW  20 of 25 
 convenience of communication, individuals should not be too far apart. It is similar to the flight 
patterns of UAVs, so the PSO  can be used in path planning, UAV positioning, task assignment, 
multi -UAV cooperation.  The ACO is originally from ant path -finding, so it is widely used in path 
planning.  The ABC is originally from bee collaboration, so it can be used for multi -UAV 
coopera tion.  
As figure 8 shows, t he applications of SI in WSNs mainly lies in CH selection (about 41%) and 
routing protocol (about 47%). On one hand, many WSN studies focuses on these two problems. On 
other hand, most SI algorithms can be applied to these two pro blems. The applications of PSO in 
WSN is more about CH selection, routing algorithm, and node location. Among them, SI -based 
node location algorithm adopts PSO more. The ACO has the characteristics of distribution, adaptive 
optimization, and strong scalabi lity to residual pheromones. Therefore, it is often used to solve 
routing protocol problems in WSNs. The algorithm has few parameters and high precision. In the 
optimization, only fitness functions are used as an evolutionary basis. In WSN applications, th e 
ABC has been widely used to solve CH selection, sensor deployment, node location, and other 
related problems.  
PSO ACO ABC0%20%40%60%80%100%
 node localization
 senseor deployment
 routing protocol
 CH selection
 
Figure 8. Different applications for PSO/ACO/ABC in WSNs.  
There are various problems in traditional SI algorithms. Tw o examples are that the PSO is easy 
to fall into the local optimal, and the ACO’s early convergence speed is very slow. The optimization 
of SI algorithms has been considered in the literature we studied.  As figure 9 shows, most kinds of 
the literatures (61 %) currently select improved parameters. For example, the PSO adjusts the inertia 
factor to adjust the global optimization and local optimization ability. The ACO adjusts the 
pheromone update factor to improve the convergence rate. Most SI algorithms are e asy to 
implement, so combining them with other algorithms is a good way to improve. For example, many 
SI algorithms are used in conjunction with other SI (17%), SI is combined with machine learning 
related technologies (e.g., k -means [5 8]) and FCM [ 59]. Ot her technologies (e.g., LP) can also be 
combined with SI.  
 
Figure 9. SI algorithm optimization methods.  
7.2. Development Trend  Modify the 
parameters
61% Combined with 
other SI
17%Combined with 
machine learning
12%Other
5%
Figure 8. Dierent applications for PSO /ACO /ABC in WSNs.