Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 2 of 27
the possibility of solving complex nonlinear problems with advanced capabilities in terms of
self-adaptability, robustness, and search ability. Up to now, there are many SI-inspired optimization
algorithms, such as classical particle swarm optimization (PSO) [ 2] and ant colony optimization
(ACO) [ 3]. In recent years, there exist many improvements—such as artiﬁcial bee colony (ABC) [ 4],
bacterial foraging algorithm (BFO) [ 5], and butterﬂy optimization algorithm (BOA) [ 6]. SI algorithms
search the optimized solution based on heuristic information. It can be applied to a wide variety of
optimization problems (e.g., dynamic optimization problems, multi-objective optimization problems)
and NP problems. With the ever-increasing development of IoT, SI exhibits great applicational prospect
in IoT-related applications.
IoT is a powerful Internet based on advanced technologies, such as radio frequency identiﬁcation
devices (RFID), sensor technology, cloud computing, and wireless sensor network (WSN) [ 7]. It allows
users to connect any physical object to the Internet for information exchange, communications,
and decision-making. However, the development of IoT still faces some challenges. For example,
plenty of smart devices from heterogeneous sources can be connected, so security is one of the key
challenges in IoT. Also, the vast number of devices in the IoT will cause energy consumption problems
and ‘spam’ problems. Furthermore, the IoT system is complex and dynamic; thus, many SI algorithms
are developed to compute such complex activities with simple individuals. By modeling the IoT system
as a group of simple devices, the SI-based algorithm can be adopted to achieve global optimization.
Besides, cloud computing plays an important role in data analysis based on the huge amount of data
acquired from IoT systems. SI also applies to the applications of cloud computing, facilitating solving
multi-objective optimization problems. In general, the category of IoT can be classiﬁed into four parts
according to its hot topics and the latest research directions, as shown in Figure 1.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 25 
 In nature, many creatures —such as fishes, birds, and bees —have group behaviors. The abilities 
of individual members in a group are limited, but the whole group has a strong vitality. The strong 
vitality is not only a simple superposition of individual abilities but also an adjustment of 
individual behaviors through exchanging information, cooperating, and finally reflecting group 
intelligence.  
Swarm intelligence (SI) [1] algorithm is a simulation method to simulate biological group 
intelligence. The potential parallelism and distributed cha racteristics of SI algorithms enable the 
possibility of solving complex nonlinear problems with advanced capabilities in terms of 
self-adaptability, robustness, and search ability. Up to now, there are many SI -inspired optimization 
algorithms, such as clas sical particle swarm optimization (PSO) [2] and ant colony optimization 
(ACO) [3]. In recent years, there exist many improvements —such as artificial bee colony (ABC) [4], 
bacterial foraging algorithm (BFO) [5], and butterfly optimization algorithm (BOA) [6 ]. SI 
algorithms search the optimized solution based on heuristic information. It can be applied to a wide 
variety of optimization problems (e.g., dynamic optimization problems, multi -objective 
optimization problems) and NP problems. With the ever -increasi ng development of IoT, SI exhibits 
great applicational prospect in IoT -related applications.  
IoT is a powerful Internet based on advanced technologies, such as radio frequency 
identification devices (RFID), sensor technology, cloud computing, and wireless sensor network 
(WSN) [7]. It allows users to connect any physical object to the Internet for information exchange, 
communications, and decision -making. However, the development of IoT still faces some 
challenges. For example, plenty of smart devices from h eterogeneous sources can be connected, so 
security is one of the key challenges in IoT. Also, the vast number of devices in the IoT will cause 
energy consumption problems and ‘spam’ problems. Furthermore, the IoT system is complex and 
dynamic; thus, many S I algorithms are developed to compute such complex activities with simple 
individuals. By modeling the IoT system as a group of simple devices, the SI -based algorithm can 
be adopted to achieve global optimization. Besides, cloud computing plays an importan t role in 
data analysis based on the huge amount of data acquired from IoT systems. SI also applies to the 
applications of cloud computing, facilitating solving multi -objective optimization problems. In 
general, the category of IoT can be classified into f our parts according to its hot topics and the latest 
research directions, as shown in Figure 1.  
IoTIndustrial monitoring
Supply chain 
management
Smart health
Environmental 
monitoring
Smart agricultural
Public safety
Smart city
 Application
Cloud computing
AI
Datamining
Embedded system
 SupportWLAN
Bluetooth
NFC
ZigBee
 Transmission
WSN
GPS
RFID
QR-code
 Perceptive
 
Figure 1. Essential IoT technologies.  
WSN is an advanced technology in the IoT, which consists of a large number of nodes that 
have capabilities of sensing, computing, processing, and communicating [8 ]. Nevertheless, for each 
sensor, its battery capacity and sensing ability are limited; thus, there are still some crucial 
problems in WSN, such as routing protocol planning, node localization, and cluster head se lection. 
The SI algorithm emerges from the foraging behavior of the insect community and attempts to find 
the optimal path of insects. These algorithms have adaptability, robustness, distribution, and 
Figure 1. Essential IoT technologies.
WSN is an advanced technology in the IoT, which consists of a large number of nodes that have
capabilities of sensing, computing, processing, and communicating [ 8]. Nevertheless, for each sensor,
its battery capacity and sensing ability are limited; thus, there are still some crucial problems in WSN,
such as routing protocol planning, node localization, and cluster head selection. The SI algorithm
emerges from the foraging behavior of the insect community and attempts to ﬁnd the optimal path
of insects. These algorithms have adaptability, robustness, distribution, and extensibility, which is
compatible with WSN’s routing protocol requirements. Therefore, many SI-based algorithms have
been developed for WSN routing protocols. Among these, the cluster routing protocol is a commonly
used WSN routing protocol, in which the cluster head (CH) selection is one of the key problems.
Speciﬁcally, the CH selection problem is an NP-hard problem. As SI is suitable to solve NP problems,
it is applicable to be implemented with few parameters. Also, its multi-objective optimization ability
can ﬁnd CH in multiple clusters at the same time. GPS is often used to solve the positioning problem,