Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 9 of 27
3.1.2. CH Selection Algorithms Based on PSO
Literature [ 19] proposed a hybrid algorithm of PSO and Tabu named Tabu-PSO to select the
CH with the lowest energy consumption in the cluster and to improve the ability to select CH in the
WSN. Clusters are formed by the distance from the node to the BS and the energy level of the node.
Tabu search was used to improve the racial diversity of PSO to avoid local minimum problems by
increasing the number of clusters and improving the survival rate of nodes. Compared with LEACH
and PSO, their proposed algorithm can e ectively reduce the average packet loss rate and average
end-to-end delay.
Reference [ 20] proposed a PSO based WSN routing algorithm named EPMS, which combines
virtual cluster and mobile reception technology. Compared with Tabu-PSO, this algorithm considers
not only residual energy but also node position (distance from a node to the center of gravity) for
selecting CH. After the mobile sink visits the entire cluster heads, selecting the node whose residual
energy is larger than the average residual energy of all nodes in the cluster as a new CH. The results
demonstrated the improvement in prolonging the network life and reducing the average delivery delay.
Reference [ 21] proposed a PSO-based CH selection algorithm and a cluster formation based on
weight function. Di erent from the general cluster formation method that only considers the distance
from non-CH to CH, this method uses the weight function (e.g., parameters include the distance to CH,
the residual energy of CH, the distance from CH to BS) to form the cluster. Although the algorithm takes
into account the WSN capacity balance and fault tolerance, it only applies to isomorphic networks.
In [22], a method based on fuzzy clustering and PSO was proposed to reduce the number of
sensors that cannot connect to the CH and the number of CHs that cannot connect to the BS in 3D-WSN.
In their method, a function of the total number of unconnected sensors in all clusters is designed as the
objective function of the PSO algorithm to ﬁnd CH, and then the optimal CH is used in the improved
FCM (fuzzy c-means) algorithm.
Reference [ 23] proposed an algorithm using BFO to overcome the premature convergence of
PSO. The algorithm minimizes the distance between CH and cluster members compared with the
LEACH algorithm, their proposed algorithm can improve the network life by reducing the total
energy consumption.
The literature [ 24] proposed a clustering method using PSO (EC-PSO) in a square heterogeneous
network. It is to avoid the generation of energy hole and to select CHs by searching the energy center.
Their method assumes that the nodes near CH also require a lot of energy, so CH should be located in
the energy center. The algorithm adopts a mobile data collector to avoid hot spot problem, but it may
result in packet losses. Also, the method has good performance in energy consumption and network
life, but the data transfer needs to be improved.
3.1.3. Cluster Head Selection Algorithm Based on ACO and ABC
Reference [ 25] proposed an improved ACO algorithm to optimal mobile sink movement track.
The movement of mobile sink between CHs is regarded as a TSP problem, and the improved ACO is
used to ﬁnd the optimal path to access all CHs through a single-hop physically close communications.
To save energy, rotate CH only when any CH residual energy falls below the energy threshold.
This method improves the network lifetime and data delivery, but only grid partition is used for cluster
partition, without considering the uniform distribution of cluster nodes.
Reference [ 26] proposed a hybrid MAC, routing and unequal clustering cross-layer protocol
(FAMACROW) based on fuzzy and ant colony algorithm. The model used the Mamdani fuzzy
reasoning system (FIS) to select CH. Input parameters: residual energy, neighborhood proximity,
and link quality indicator. The reliability of the protocol has improved with the use of link quality
indicator (LQI) to select CH and transfer the probability of route between clusters. Simulation results
showed that the energy consumption of CH is reduced and the node survival time is extended.
Reference [ 27] proposed a multi-path routing in the WSN by using the Fractional ABC (FABC)
and the exponential ACO (EACO). The ﬁrst step is to use the FABC to ﬁnd the CH by considering