Sensors 2020 ,20, 1420 16 of 27
3.3. SI Applications in Sensor Deployment
Reference [ 22] proposed a method based on fuzzy clustering and PSO to reduce network
interruption. Compared with the traditional FCM method, GA and PSO algorithms were introduced
to optimize FCM. The hybrid FCM-PSO algorithm is repeatedly executed until the optimal topology of
the sensor is determined. Simulation results showed that this method can reduce energy consumption
and improve the connection rate of CH to BS, non-CH to CH.
Literature [ 36] proposed a PSO-based coverage algorithm in static WSNs with randomly deployed
sensors. This method partitions networks into grids and calculates the coverage rate of each grid.
Constructing a wireless sensor network to fully cover critical grids by deploying minimum sensors on
grid points is NP-complete [ 37]. Then, it adjusts the node sensing range until the coverage rate is higher
than 90% and also adjusts the sensing radius with PSO. Compared with traditional PSO-based coverage
algorithm methods, this method improves coverage and reduces energy consumption. However, this
method may not be suitable for networks where obstacles exist.
In [38], an ACO deployment problem-solving method combined with local search (LS) was
proposed. This approach considers the deployment of a WSN that meets the speciﬁed minimum
reliability level within the task time at the minimum network deployment cost. In their paper,
it proposes the problem of a minimum cost reliability constraint for node deployment, proves that
the problem is NP-complete, and proposes a local search algorithm. It proved that the ACO solution
exhibits better quality than the greedy algorithm.
3.4. SI Applications in Node Localization
In WSN, location information can be used for target tracking, network topology construction.
Positioning technology is the basic technology of WSNs, which plays a critical role in supporting the
follow-up work and application of WSNs [39].
Reference [ 40] proposed dimension-based PSO (DPSO) and hybrid DPSO (HDPSO) for node
positioning in a 3D environment. The DPSO adopts dimension-based optimization technology to
determine the location of the target node by considering each dimension, which works well in all
applications. HDPSO adopts the grouping technology based on dimension estimation to realize rapid
convergence, and it is suitable for the network scene of intensive deployment. The simulation scenario
considers noise measurement, signal irregularities, and other interference factors. Compared with
conventional PSO-based methods, the DPSO and HDPSO have better positioning accuracy and
average time.
Reference [41] proposed a butterﬂy optimization algorithm (BOA) for node positioning in WSN.
The BOA algorithm is used to ﬁnd the optimal position of the local node. By comparing this method with
the PSO algorithm and FA algorithm in terms of positioning error, positioning node, and calculation
time. The results showed that the BOA based node positioning scheme has better calculation time
and accuracy.
3.5. SI Applications in UAV-Aided WSNs
For WSN, the UAV can assist the communication between sensor nodes and assist the positioning
of mobile network nodes. UAVs have been widely applied to the WSNs. To minimize the energy
consumption and maximize the network life, it is necessary to determine the optimal ﬂight path of
UVAs, maximize the value of collected sensing information, and minimize the total cost of ﬂight time,
energy consumption and operational risks of UAV under given environmental conditions.
Reference [ 42] proposed a multi-objective utility function to obtain the optimal UAV ﬂight path
and a dynamic VSI updating mechanism. This method combines the GA and ACO to select the optimal
path from the possible ﬂight path according to sense, energy, time, and risk-utility. The combination
of GA and ACO algorithm divided the whole sensor ﬁeld into cell regions, and ﬁrst considered
sensor information acquisition (SIG) units. The value of sensing information collected by this path