1693 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
1 3
be applied to pilot or experimental projects. Care is car -
ried out by “all the hospital”, by the networks of material, 
semiotic and social fluxes that occur every day among 
all the actors in which technologies participate. If care 
relations and care practices are placed at the centre of the 
debate, and the whole hospital is in charge of giving care, 
then we need to put mechanisms in place that encompass 
hospitals and other healthcare settings, mechanisms that 
ensure that the introduction of these devices responds to 
medical and care values and priorities and not, for exam-
ple, to commercial or prestige interests. This process of 
monitoring relations and care processes particularly 
needs public entities to ensure that the introduction of 
AI and robotic systems to healthcare settings responds to 
collective health and well-being needs; and to guarantee 
that market or innovation interests in AI and robotics are 
not detrimental to the ethical and social criteria govern-
ing public health systems.
• Considering stakeholders’ opinions  The development 
of inclusiveness and public participation strategies to 
establish a prioritisation strategy for the development of 
IA in health, as well as to identify the main concerns 
around its introduction. In view of this need, multiple 
strategies are traditionally developed from STS and what 
is known as the “participatory turn” in science and tech-
nology (hybrid forums, citizen conferences, etc.). The 
idea of heterogeneity is central to these types of propos-
als, using diverse mechanisms to integrate the knowl-
edge and expertise of multiple actors (engineers, medical 
practitioners, formal and informal caregivers, patients or 
relatives). But it is not enough to speak of heterogeneous 
assemblies, because in these assemblies not all the agents 
involved are the same, nor do they participate in the same 
way, nor are uncertainties distributed equally. Different 
groups are not equal in their capacity to impose their 
logic and some groups represent more than others the 
dominant economic-instrumental interpretation of care 
inscribed in technology (Hergesell and Maibaum 2018). 
The limitations of participatory processes to address 
these inequalities are well-known, so there is a need to 
develop complementary strategies to allow for alternative 
forms of inclusion and representation in matters related 
to the introduction of AI and robotics systems to health-
care. In this sense, we propose the need to explore sys-
tematic methods to integrate informal and spontaneous 
popular movements and expression of the population’s 
fears and hopes (also viewed as potential patients, rela-
tives, and caregivers of the health system).
• Making fears and hopes commensurable The choice of 
progressive, small actions to “keep under control” the 
effects or consequences of a development, small actions 
based on progressive feedback loops with monitoring 
systems and constant debate with all the stakeholders of each hospital or healthcare setting. Such feedback loops 
will ensure that the introduction of AI devices is in line 
with care procedures in a specific hospital or healthcare 
setting and integrates the concerns of all the different 
actors involved. Undoubtedly, the introduction of forms 
of feed-back loops also implies slowing down the pro-
cesses of designing and implementing AI systems in 
healthcare. We understand that a slowdown is necessary 
as a prerequisite for radically integrating responsiveness 
into the design of healthcare technologies.
From this perspective, then, the responsibility to intro-
duce robotic and AI devices in accordance with ethical cri-
teria and societal needs and priorities does not only refer to 
the technical design process of such devices, nor is it lim-
ited to establishing strong legal frameworks to regulate their 
use. The development of robotics and AI in consideration of 
ethical and social concerns requires public engagement and 
institutional changes to health systems on the path towards 
more responsible technologies. Monitoring relations and 
caring processes, considering the opinions of stakeholders 
and making fears and hopes commensurable are, as a whole, 
a way to introduce democratic mechanisms to technological 
development. And, it is no doubt impossible to talk about 
responsible AI and robotics if technology and democracy do 
not go together. It is also impossible to talk about democracy 
in AI and robotics if care is not integrated as a central ethi-
cal and political proposition in all processes and relations 
involved in the development of healthcare technologies, 
what we call “caring in the in-between”.
7  Conclusions
Just as a single technology cannot undertake all care or cure 
alone, studies of AI and robotics in healthcare cannot be 
focused only on a particular device. In this paper, we develop 
an approach grounded on the uncertainty surrounding AI 
and robotics, on the heterogeneity and mediations that the 
robot makes possible (what we call the REN approach) and 
on the ethical and social debate regarding its context of use. 
Within this framework, we propose a method for responsible 
introduction of AI and robotics based on an ethical–political 
proposal called “Caring in the In-Between.” This proposal 
for action looks into the eyes of uncertainties to collectively 
discuss ways to design and use technological devices in 
healthcare settings, while respecting the values that guide 
public health practice and its networks of care. Using the 
ethics of care and the notion of measured action developed 
from the STS, we propose responsible AI and robotics by 
focusing on the mediations of concrete devices in their inter -
action with a network of healthcare relations. We articulate 
AI and responsible robotics around the action that occurs in