1691 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
1 3
Wynsberghe (2013). This issue can be seen, for example, in 
the scarce attention given to the tensions that might arise 
between commercial or business interests and issues linked 
to the needs and organization of care, in the various guide-
lines and regulatory mechanisms for AI systems, including 
robots (Hagendorff 2020).
From this approach, it is understood that the ethical 
debate surrounding AI and robotics cannot focus solely on 
major philosophical issues, but must also consider aspects 
linked to healthcare management and everyday practices. 
Thus, in the case of care robots, the interest should not 
only lie in questions such as whether it is appropriate to 
replace humans with robots (Sharkey 2008), whether it is 
desirable to establish affective bonds (Sharkey and Sharkey 
2012; Sparrow and Sparrow 2006), or liability in the event 
of harm or damage (Matsuzaki and Lindemann 2016). The 
debate from the ethics of care also looks at identifying the 
practices, fears and hopes that shape care relationships when 
robots are introduced to specific contexts and situations. For 
example, how a nurse in a pediatric ward gets the children 
in the different rooms to go out into the corridor to feed the 
pet robot; or how it might be decided at a meeting that from 
now on, therapies with autistic children will use robots that 
have been donated by a large robotics company.
From a REN approach, we turn away from the standard 
discussion about utopian or dystopian scenarios based on 
the risks and benefits of promised care robots, an approach 
that seems addressed at building trust and anticipation of 
objections and reticence (Nordmann and Rip 2009). The 
possibilities for mediation with regard to care robots are con-
figured by the technical elements of a concrete AI device in 
its interaction with a network of healthcare relations. Thus, 
it is in that network of social relations that the robot medi-
ates; specific mediations with a particular device within a 
particular social context (Feng and Feenberg 2008). Andrew 
Feenberg (1999) illustrates this idea in his instrumentaliza-
tion theory. The technical dispositions of a robot for care 
determine the conditions of the robot’s functional possibili-
ties in the network, and these have to do with its design and 
production history. However, these features are reoriented 
when they are integrated into a given environment. Robots 
have their (instrumental) rationality, but when they enter a 
children’s hospital, what they are and the mediations they 
make possible depend on their use in that hospital, and in 
a particular Care Unit with specific protocols and actors 
(Feenberg 2010).
Next to the door to the operating theatre, a mother strokes 
a robot pet that her child was holding 10 min before and that 
calms her down while her child is being operated, it is then 
when the robot becomes a robot for care for the mother. 
In that situation, controversies and ethical discussions arise 
about, for example, the dangers of establishing emotional 
ties with artificial objects. It is in the specific daily practices of different actors involved in healthcare relations in a hos-
pital (patients, relatives, medical staff, volunteers, protocols, 
units, tests, etc.) that the problems and the rules to solve 
such problems emerge. Thus, the point of reference of our 
research is not the robot, but the relationships in which it 
participates. There is no prominent actor in analysis of and 
reflection on ethical and social controversies, but rather 
various actors that are involved in healthcare relations in a 
children’s hospital.
It is in the collective network of care relations in a par -
ticular environment where we situate research on social and 
ethical issues on medical AI, approaching the topic from 
a notion close to the empirical ethics of care in which the-
ory around “good care” is localized in practices, and not 
just underlying them or guiding actions (Willems and Pols 
2010). Consequently, the results of this type of approach 
are not prescriptive solutions. They do not give answers to 
questions such as whether or not to install a robot with a 
webcam in order to monitor paediatric patients in the ICU 
at all times but to offer suggestive proposals in relation to 
specific problems. Continuing with the example, what are 
the arguments for and against installing a webcam, what 
are the views of relatives, patients, medical staff, innovation 
departments, etc., and how can we tweak the robot to fit 
routines, needs and concerns in this context? (Vallès-Peris 
and Domènech 2020).
6  Caring in the in‑between
The heuristics of research on ethical and social issues around 
care robots, from the three defined movements, could be 
summarized in three assumptions: (1) if a robot is a network 
of actors and processes making up an assembly, then the 
identification of such actors and processes, as well as knowl-
edge of their relations and forms of negotiation, becomes the 
starting point of any ethical reflection. (2) Since the robot is 
not only the artefact, but is inscribed within a full network 
of care, the ethical implications are specific to each context 
of application, to the way in which the robot changes or 
modifies the articulation of specific care relationships. (3) 
Therefore, a responsible framework guiding the introduction 
of robots to hospitals or other healthcare settings must be 
particularly linked to these contexts and their ethical prin -
ciples and values.
As explained in the previous sections, if our conception 
of robots from the ethics of care assumes heterogeneity, the 
focus of ethics shifts to the healthcare relationships that are 
interactively constituted when a robot for care is introduced, 
and debates on how to introduce responsible robots come to 
revolve around REN. From a REN perspective, the focus of 
the analysis is on the network of care relationships in which 
the robot participates, not on the specific functionalities or