1692 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695
1 3
characteristics of a robot taken as an isolated entity, nor in 
the dyadic interaction between individual entities. The net-
work of relationships between multiple agents (the robot, 
the child, family members, hospital protocols, healthcare 
staff, etc.) constitutes the only framework for discussion. It 
is within this framework of particular and specific everyday 
practices, imaginaries, narratives, etc., that the problems and 
rules for solving these problems emerge.
From this approach, for example, it is possible to analyze 
how the introduction of certain robotic devices can change 
the care relationship between the hospital and the patient, or 
how the diagnosis or treatment skills of healthcare staff are 
transformed (Vallès-Peris et al. 2021a). Focusing attention 
on REN, we can identify those elements that are considered 
necessary to ensure that the introduction of a robot does not 
undermine the ethical values that shape medical practice and 
care relationships in a particular context. So, it will not be 
the same to introduce a robot to make a remote diagnostic 
visit to a child in hospital, while the doctor is elsewhere, as 
it will be to perform the same visit while the patient is at 
home. Similarly, it will not be the same when the same robot 
is used in the hospital to make a follow-up visit to a pediatric 
patient admitted to the trauma unit, as it is to a patient admit-
ted to the mental health unit.
6.1  An ethical–political proposal to ensure 
responsible introduction of AI and robotics 
to healthcare
Focusing on the multiple possibilities for action that emerge 
in the realm of uncertainty, we propose an ethical and 
responsible framework focused on care actions in between 
fears and hopes. From this idea, we take the notion of meas-
ured action from an ethics of care. According to Callon et al 
(2009), measured action occurs through three interrelated 
dimensions: (1) a surveillance system: precaution is only 
possible when formalised socio-technical devices are used to 
collect information and thereby enable us to move from sur -
veillance to alarm; (2) the deepening of knowledge, through 
the exploration and identification of excesses. Precaution 
requires a preliminary assessment of the associated risks 
and dangers in order to evaluate their severity and (3) the 
choice of temporary measures to be taken, which must be 
adapted to each of the situations to which they are applied, 
guaranteeing their follow-up and update according to the 
constant polemics that arise. In each of these three dimen-
sions, there may be specific actors, with particular modes of 
action and different levels of responsibility. Measured action 
replaces clear and forceful decisions with a series of “small” 
decisions in each of the three dimensions. Small decisions 
represent gradual advances, but none of them entails irrevo-
cable commitments.We adapt the measured action proposed from the ethics 
of care to discuss care robots and thereby define a responsi-
ble framework for introducing these technologies based on 
“caring in the in-between”. The primary argument regard -
ing the ethics of care is that in order for interdependent 
living to be conceivable, care is the common element that 
makes the relationships we establish between our lives and 
our environment possible. Thus, if we take care seriously, it 
represents a necessary ethical and political proposition for 
thinking about the technologies that surround us. This idea 
problematises a deontological approach according to which 
ethical standards can only be realised through the declaration 
of principles. These principles describe moral aspirations, 
but do not make it possible to think critically or to develop 
transformative practices (Tronto and Kohlen 2018). Thus, 
responsible robotics, from its conceptualisation as REN, 
requires institutional changes to the framework in which 
robotic care is organised, managed and practised. From the 
integration of measured action and the ethics of care, car -
ing in the in-between is defined as a triadic process or rela-
tionship: (a) between the nodes, in the threads of the web; 
actions as movements of care relations and care processes 
in which healthcare technologies participate; (b) between 
the different actors in a network; actions as an exercise of 
listening to the voices and different concerns of all the actors 
involved in healthcare settings and integrating their formula -
tions of problems and solutions into the ethical debate; and 
(c) between fears and hopes, in the realm of uncertainty; 
actions as a tool for overcoming the polarization between 
the promises and the dangers of medical AI, thus offering 
an alternative to abysmal uncertainty.
This proposal focuses on the possibilities for mediation 
inscribed in the robot, configured by the design of a specific 
AI device in its interaction with a network of healthcare 
relations. Thus, broadening and complexifying the process 
of responsible development of care robots, caring in the in-
between is a complement to other proposals that focus on the 
design process of the artefacts that also integrate the ethics 
of care -such as the Care Centered Value-Sensitive Design 
proposed by van Wynsberghe (2013). From these bases, car -
ing in the in-between is a proposal of responsible robotics 
that implies institutional challenges, as well as new practices 
in healthcare systems. It is articulated around three simul-
taneous processes, each of them related to practical actions 
in one of the in-between dimensions considered: monitor -
ing relations and caring processes; considering stakeholders’ 
opinions; and making fears and hopes commensurable. Each 
of these processes could be defined as:
• Monitoring relations and caring processes The creation 
of local public health systems to monitor the design and 
introduction of medical AI technologies. This implies the 
creation of follow-up and assessment procedures to also