1690 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695
1 3
when in the ICU, etc. Knowing how to manage and solve 
these uncertainties requires alternative ethical frameworks 
that go beyond “big” philosophical issues about robotics for 
care; issues that, in turn, are based on “hypothetical” devel-
opments of robots for care, not on “real” functionalities and 
tasks that they can perform nowadays.
5  From an ethical general framework 
to the context of use, using the ethics 
of care
This conceptualization of technological innovation raises 
questions about the traditional ethical approach to AI while 
delving deeper into the relational theory in bioethics that 
includes a more-than-human-approach (Lupton 2020). Rela-
tional theory reshapes the notion of autonomy, emphasizing 
the patients’ social and contextual circumstances, highlight-
ing that people are always part of social networks and all 
ethical considerations have to take such networks of relation-
ships into account (Sherwin and Stockdale 2017). Deborah 
Lupton (2020) proposes consideration of the role of techno-
logical artefacts in such networks for a better understanding 
of digital health and bioethical considerations. In her view, 
this more-than-human analysis highlights the complexities 
involved when robots for care or other digital health tech-
nologies are introduced to medical settings (Lupton 2020). 
In this same line of thought, we situate ethical and social 
controversies around care robotics in the network made up 
by a diverse range of actors: technology designers, health-
care professionals, relatives, patients and robots. Our focus 
would not be on AI technologies, but on identifying the rel-
evant variables that shape healthcare relationships when AI 
technologies are introduced.
To develop an ethical framework, together with the STS 
tradition, we use the notion of the ethics of care. From the 
different approaches to this field, our proposal is based on 
the perspective developed by Joan C. Tronto that seeks to 
understand care from political philosophy. The starting point 
of Tronto’s approach is that the core definition of the human 
is its relational involvement with others, in a network of rela-
tionships in which each individual has to reconcile different 
forms of care responsibilities (Vallès-Peris and Domènech 
2020). In these relationships, the morality of care is bound 
to concrete situations rather than being abstract and based on 
principles (Cockburn 2005). From these bases, analysis of 
care processes provides us with a useful guide for thinking 
about how we perform a particular care task and its ethical 
dimensions (Tronto 1998). Likewise, and in line with the 
idea that not all collectives face uncertainty under the same 
conditions, the perspective of the ethics of care engages with 
those who have difficulties voicing their concerns (Puig de la 
Bellacasa 2011 ). In medical AI and robotics, this also means identifying prevailing care issues in technological develop-
ment, what power relations the artefacts generate and what 
relations they contribute to.
Care experiences and practices can be identified, 
researched and understood concretely and empirically. 
However, “care” is ambivalent in its meaning and ontol-
ogy (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017). Assuming this complex-
ity and diversity in its understanding, Fisher and Tronto 
(1990) propose it should be viewed from a heterogeneous 
perspective, inseparable from the economic, political, sym-
bolic and material considerations that shape it. For them, 
care includes: the practices of care, what is usually consid-
ered domestic work; the affections and emotional meaning 
involved in care; and the organisational and political concep-
tion that involves managing and regulating everything that 
sustains care relationships. In STS focused on health tech-
nologies, this perspective has been included in the notion of 
“empirical ethics of care” (Vallès-Peris 2021a), from which 
the analysis of care relationships implies rejecting the logic 
according to which there is prior and true knowledge about 
how care should be provided. Thus, the empirical ethics of 
care revolve around the idea that it is located in the prac-
tices of people who, with the help of processes, protocols, 
routines or machines, act to achieve good care (Willems and 
Pols 2010).
From the idea of heterogeneity, the emergence of any 
artefact has to do with the diverse biases, values or politi -
cal and economic relations existing during its creation and 
design process, conditions that are inscribed in that artefact 
(Bijker 2009; Callon 1998). Hence, the creation and design 
of care robots cannot be disassociated from the neoliberal 
logic in which we live, from the low social and political 
value attributed to care, nor from the sexual division of labor 
that organizes care in an unequal way between women and 
men (Tronto 2018). It is in a similar vein that Maibaum et al. 
(2021) propose that robotics should be approached from its 
political reality. It is commonplace to say that we are living 
a care crisis, which has to do with the pressure caused by 
the lack of nurses, teachers, carers and domestic staff, aggra-
vated by demographic change and the ageing of the popu -
lation (Vallès-Peris et al. 2021b). In the neoliberal model, 
the solution to the so-called care crisis is articulated by the 
market: after years of state downsizing promoted precisely 
by this neoliberal model, the solution proposed is that the 
market should be set up to meet human needs (Tronto 2018).
In this context, the growth of robotics in the field of 
healthcare cannot be separated from its powerful economic 
impact on the technological innovation market. Despite 
the fact that the care crisis is one of the arguments that are 
most often used to explain the need to develop care robotics 
(Maibaum et al. 2021), the issue of care tends to be vir -
tually absent from the debates surrounding it—although 
there are some exceptional proposals, such as those by van