Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-021-01330-w
OPEN FORUM
Caring in the in‑between: a proposal to introduce responsible AI 
and robotics to healthcare
Núria Vallès‑Peris1  · Miquel Domènech1 
Received: 26 June 2021 / Accepted: 24 November 2021 / Published online: 16 December 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
In the scenario of growing polarization of promises and dangers that surround artificial intelligence (AI), how to introduce 
responsible AI and robotics in healthcare? In this paper, we develop an ethical–political approach to introduce democratic 
mechanisms to technological development, what we call “Caring in the In-Between”. Focusing on the multiple possibilities 
for action that emerge in the realm of uncertainty, we propose an ethical and responsible framework focused on care actions 
in between fears and hopes. Using the theoretical perspective of Science and Technology Studies and empirical research, 
“Caring in the In-Between” is based on three movements: the first is a change of focus from the world of promises and 
dangers to the world of uncertainties; the second is a conceptual shift from assuming a relationship with robotics based on 
a Human–Robot Interaction to another focused on the network in which the robot is embedded (the “Robot Embedded in a 
Network”); and the last is an ethical shift from a general normative framework to a discussion on the context of use. Based 
on these suggestions, “Caring in the In-Between” implies institutional challenges, as well as new practices in healthcare 
systems. It is articulated around three simultaneous processes, each of them related to practical actions in the “in-between” 
dimensions considered: monitoring relations and caring processes, through public engagement and institutional changes; 
including concerns and priorities of stakeholders, with the organization of participatory processes and alternative forms 
of representation; and making fears and hopes commensurable, through the choice of progressive and reversible actions.
Keywords Ethics of care · Science and technology studies · Robot embedded in a network (REN) · Measured action · Care 
robots
1 Introduction
In the landscape of imaginaries that surround artificial intel-
ligence (AI) and robotics in healthcare, there is a prominent 
debate regarding utopian and dystopian scenarios, whereby 
social and ethical discussions are polarized between the 
promises and the dangers of AI. This paper is grounded in a 
realm that is far removed from the so-called ‘abyss’ between 
utopias and dystopias, and is instead situated in the terrain 
that lies between the fears and hopes, and where the multiple 
possibilities are experienced (de Sousa Santos 2016). Using the theoretical approach of Science and Technology Stud-
ies (STS), we propose a set of actions in these in-between 
spaces to introduce responsible AI and robotics to health-
care. However, we do not propose any kind of action, but 
actions based on the ethics of care. We do so by exploring 
a particular case that could exemplify some of the common 
dynamics of medical AI, namely that of care robots in a 
children’s hospital (i.e., socially assistive robots).
1.1  The narrative of promises and dangers in AI
There is an increasing narrative in public and academic 
domains that assumes that the solution to the main clinical, 
economic, and general well-being problems that healthcare 
systems are facing around the world will come from AI 
(Morley et al. 2020; Topol 2019). Medical AI offers plenty 
of promise: early diagnosis using image analysis in radiol-
ogy, pathology, and dermatology, with excellent diagnostic 
speed and accuracy when working in parallel with medical  * Núria Vallès-Peris 
 nuria.valles@uab.cat
 Miquel Domènech 
 miquel.domenech@uab.cat
1 Barcelona Science and Technology Studies Group (STS-B), 
Department of Social Psychology, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain