1689 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
1 3
Most STS approaches, such as the Actor Network Theory 
and social constructivism of technology, postulate a more 
or less open ontological universe in which it is difficult to 
establish rigid boundaries between the social, the human, 
the natural and the technological (Karakayali 2015). With 
the abandonment of the notions of nature and society as 
separate entities, a new entity emerges: a heterogene-
ous network (Callon and Latour 1992). In this view, any 
technological innovation is explained by its relational and 
contextual nature, i.e. how it makes sense in its network 
of relationships (Domènech and Tirado 2009). Therefore, a 
technological innovation is not only an artefact, but a whole 
network of devices, processes and actors (Latour 1999). 
From this perspective, care robots are a conglomerate of 
material, social and semiotic relations in which technical, 
scientific, political, economic, social and ethical considera-
tions are intimately entwined within a single actor (Latour 
1999). This idea of heterogeneity can be accompanied by 
relational materialism, according to which the elements do 
not exist for reason of any essence but are constituted from 
the networks of which they are part. This approach could be 
carried to its logical conclusion by assuming that objects, 
entities or actors are nodes in a network. These nodes are 
also constituted interactively, and do not exist outside their 
interactions. Artefacts, people, institutions, protocols… eve-
rything is an effect or a product (Law and Mol 1995).
Some authors use the concept of interpretive flexibility to 
classify robots for care. According to this concept, a robot 
could be classified by its context of use, the function for 
which it is used, and the user (Howcroft et al 2004). This 
notion highlights the impossibility of separating the defini-
tion of technical problems from the socio-economic frame-
work to which they are associated (Bijker 2009). Therefore, 
a robot can be called a care robot when it is used in a hospi-
tal to reduce children’s anxiety in preoperative spaces, but 
the same robot can also be classified as an entertainment 
robot when it is used by engineering students to compete in 
international robot soccer leagues. Likewise, a robot that is 
used by nursing staff to lift patients with little or no mobility 
can be classified as a robot for care, but when it is used by 
workers in a factory to lift heavy objects, it can be consid-
ered an industrial robot (van Wynsberghe 2015).
When technologies are used, they always help to shape 
the context in which they fulfil their function. They help to 
shape human actions and perceptions, and create new prac-
tices and ways of living. Latour ( 1999 ) calls this phenom -
enon “technological mediation”: technologies mediate the 
experiences and practices of their users. Such mediations 
have at least as much moral relevance as technological risks 
and disaster prevention (Ihde 1999; Verbeek 2006). Tech-
nologies help to shape the quality of our lives and, more 
importantly, they help to shape our moral actions and deci-
sions. Robots for care can help medical staff in healthcare settings, for example, by monitoring vital signs and thus 
preventing certain situations in critical paediatric patients, 
or by personalizing and adjusting therapies with autistic 
children. However, some studies have warned us that the 
introduction of telemedicine devices (technologies that are 
often built into AI robots) has changed healthcare practices 
and knowledge (Mort et al 2003). The heterogeneity of care, 
as well as robot heterogeneity, implies that the practices and 
values of care are transformed when new nodes are intro -
duced to healthcare networks. When a robot is introduced to 
a network of care relations in a hospital, it and the network 
are transformed. Technologies enable certain relationships 
between human beings and the world that would not oth -
erwise be possible. However, technologies are not neutral 
intermediaries, but active mediators that contribute to the 
formation of human perceptions and interpretations of real-
ity (Verbeek 2006). Robots mediate the way we understand 
and practice care processes, just as the robot is reconstructed 
from the assemblage of social relations in which it partici-
pates (Law and Mol 1995).
Following the idea that, in the use of technologies, forms 
of mediation are performed that are pre-inscribed in the 
artefact—what Peter-Paul Verbeek (2006) called the mate-
rialized morality—, we analysed how children performed 
when designing a robot for care (Vallès-Peris et al. 2018). 
Children’s representations of well-being in healthcare set -
tings typically include the presence of their relatives or other 
people. Their representation of themselves alone while hos-
pitalized or sick is a sad one, while that of being surrounded 
by relatives, siblings or medical personnel is a happy one. 
Prospective interactions with a robot that produce a feeling 
of well-being are imagined in a network with other people. 
In the same manner, assessment of a robot made by those 
responsible for care in a hospital (in this case, the focus 
groups of nurses and volunteers who evaluated the risks and 
benefits of a dinosaur-shaped robot introduced to the hos-
pital in a pilot phase) is based on the robot’s capacity to be 
integrated into the relationship network that accompanies 
the child during his or her hospitalization.
Going beyond the conceptualization of human–robot 
relationships in a binary model represented by the HRI, 
the interest of the Robot Embedded in a Network approach 
(REN) lies in the uncertainties and controversies that appear 
in daily care in children’s hospitals, such as: how tasks are 
distributed between nurses and robots, for example, if the 
nurse is accompanied by a robot that takes the patient's vital 
signs; how a hospital integrates the psychology staff’s opin -
ions when deciding whether to take part in a pilot program 
to introduce this type of device to therapies for children with 
autism; how nurses take advantage of the presence of a robot 
to entertain a child when trying to insert an IV (intravenous 
line); how parents and doctors can assess whether it is nec-
essary to collect facial expression data to monitor a child