1688 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695
1 3
In the dreamscape of promises and dangers that surround 
medical AI, we defend the need for ethical and social discus -
sion to move away from a speculative scenario that consid-
ers an abyss between utopias and dystopias. In contrast, we 
situate ourselves in the terrain that lies in between fears and 
hopes, where multiple possibilities arise (de Sousa Santos 
2016). In this terrain, uncertainty is situated and negoti-
ated, embedded in the actors that participate in healthcare 
relations. So, in order to develop more responsible AI in 
healthcare, which is particularly addressed at social needs 
and guaranteeing individual and collective well-being, we 
propose a focus on care (caring as action) in the spaces in 
between that are opened by a particular artifact (i.e. robots 
for care in paediatric hospitals).
The literature on ethics and robots primarily addresses 
the interests of what the community focused on study in 
this field considers important, while the opinions of other 
stakeholders, such as robotics researchers, health profession-
als and patients, are not directly discussed. In the public 
debate, questions about whether humans are replaceable by 
robots or whether robots should have rights seem to take 
precedence over the current and more real challenges that 
could arise from their use in specific applications (van der 
Plat et al. 2010). This “a priori” philosophical approach has 
some limitations (Stahl and Coeckelbergh 2016), including 
the difficulty of establishing a normative framework to guide 
and orient everyday problems that may arise in hospitals or 
other health settings when care robots are introduced.
Our proposal to go beyond a discussion centred on the 
promises of AI is based on an analysis of how fears and 
hopes are articulated and negotiated with different actors. 
While looking into the controversies that the several actors 
involved in care processes with robots have to deal with, 
we came to study the practices and values of the different 
actors that participate in healthcare relations in a children’s 
hospital. Callon et al (2009) maintain that the controversies 
over the use of certain technologies create uncertainty and 
bring about unforeseen concerns. Instead of simply seeking 
consensus or general principles, if we wish to enrich the 
debate around technologies, it is important to call attention 
to the importance of collective discussion of the matter. As 
observed by Epstein (1995), the participation of non-special-
ists in the development of knowledge that actually concerns 
them may lead to problems being formulated and research 
results being disseminated and implemented in a different 
way. Following this view, what we try do here with regard to 
care robots is to reflect the importance of collective discus-
sion of the controversies surrounding medical AI to thereby 
enrich the formulation of problems and propose alternative 
frameworks.
Given that the level of innovation in robotics and AI is 
accelerating and surpassing our capacity to anticipate its 
consequences and influences on our lives, the responsible introduction of these technologies to healthcare is situated 
in the realm of uncertainty that lies between fears and hopes. 
In these contexts of the uncertain impact of technologies, 
Callon et al (2009) call for precaution with regard to the 
potential harm, impact or causal relation of a technological 
innovation. The action that may better represent precaution 
is the so-called “measured action”, meaning a progressive 
action motivated by feedback and constant debate that con-
siders the consequences of that action. “Measured action 
implies an active, open, contingent and revisable approach, 
exactly the opposite of a clear final decision. And then, this 
approach rests on a deepening of knowledge, but not only 
of the knowledge provided by the scientific disciplines of 
isolated research. The proportionality of actions for soci-
ety, acceptability and economic cost also have their place in 
deliberation” (Callon et al. 2009: 210).
This position leads us away from the realm of abysmal 
uncertainties between utopian promises and dystopian dan-
gers. This is uncertainty about desired futures, about what 
a care robot is, about the risk of introducing such devices 
to children’s care, and so on. In our proposal, uncertainty 
and precaution are the most relevant characteristics of AI 
and robotics, and are thus a privileged space for responsi-
ble introduction of these technologies to healthcare. This 
idea is grounded on an STS theoretical background and on 
a particular way of understanding robots, as well as on the 
centrality of the ethics of care when considering responsible 
technologies. In the following sections, we develop each of 
these issues.
4  From human–robot interaction (HRI) 
to a robot embedded in a network (REN)
Care robots are used to perform a number of specific tasks-
such as facilitating the relationship between patients and 
places outside the hospital, reducing distress in pre-operative 
care, and modifying the ways that healthcare staff perform 
certain actions—such as measuring vital signs, perform-
ing detailed interventions, etc. When thinking about and 
designing a robot’s agency in medical settings, as well as 
its ability to interact with children, it is relevant to take into 
account how artefacts or devices are embedded in a network 
of caring relationships that involves several actors(López-
Gómez 2015). Children’s well-being is not only defined by 
the robot’s ability to interact with them, but also by its ability 
to interact with the whole social system of care relationships. 
However, in engineering and the related ethical debates, the 
relationship between children and AI robots is often concep-
tualized by the notion of Children-Robot Interaction (CHRI), 
which is the children’s equivalent of Human–Robot Interac -
tion (HRI), and which describes two isolated entities inter -
acting with each other: a human and a robot.