1687 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695 
1 3
we refer in this paper are usually included in the field of so-
called “socially assistive robotics”. In general terms, this 
field is focused on providing artificially intelligent robotic 
systems to aid end-users with special physical or cognitive 
needs in their daily activities (Pareto Boada et al. 2021).
Since 2015, we have been involved in the research being 
done by a children’s hospital in Barcelona to design and 
introduce care robots. As social scientists, our work together 
with an interdisciplinary team of physicians, nurses and 
engineers involved identifying the ethical and social implica-
tions of introducing such robots to the hospital. Throughout 
the process, we conducted three empirical research projects 
that shared the common objective of exploring the fears and 
hopes of the different actors that, in one way or another, 
established or would have to establish a relationship with a 
robot for care.
Some details of these research projects are the following:
– A participatory process with children to design a robot 
for care for a children’s hospital. For three months, we 
conducted a participatory process in a school with 60 
six-year-old children. Children were organized into two 
large groups of 30, and 12 sessions were held with each 
group (24 sessions in total). The participatory process 
employed design-thinking techniques.
– A Vision-Assessment process to identify the risks and 
benefits associated with future visions of robots for care 
among the different categories of people involved in care 
at a children’s hospital. We organized: three focus groups 
with nurses, with a total of 22 people; three focus groups 
with hospital volunteers, also with 22 people taking part; 
one focus group with the relatives of hospitalized chil-
dren—after previously holding a workshop with them on 
robotic technologies in care—with 10 people participat-
ing; and three interviews with physicians who were heads 
of units at a children’s hospital.
– A set of interviews with roboticists to identify their con-
cerns regarding robots for care. Eleven face-to-face semi-
structured interviews were conducted with roboticists 
working in the field of care robots.
The framework of reference for the various participants 
and the fieldwork carried out during the investigations, 
was the robots that were being implemented in that hospi-
tal (already introduced or in pilot/prospective phases): pet 
robots used to reduce anxiety in pre-operative and diagnostic 
tests, as well as to make the hospital stay more pleasant for 
children with long admissions; therapy robots for children 
with autism and; tele-communication robotic systems, for 
diagnostic visits by doctors or to facilitate communication 
with their school in the case of hospitalised children. This 
does not mean that our proposal refers only to this type of 
robot, but that our proposal is nurtured by a study of the implementation of these artefacts. The fact that our study 
was carried out on robots used with hospitalised children 
meant we could identify particularly sensitive issues and 
highly delicate situations more easily.
We analysed the collected data using qualitative tech -
niques, i.e. thematic analysis for the interviews and focus 
groups (Clarke and Braun 2014) and thick description for the 
participatory process (Ponterotto 2006). However, the goal 
of this paper is not to present the analysis and results of these 
three research projects, but to build a responsible approach 
to AI and robotics that embraces the practices and concerns 
of the different groups of actors identified in those projects.
3  From the world of promises and dangers 
to the world of uncertainties
As explained in the introduction, the social and ethical 
debates surrounding AI and robotics are often articulated 
around utopian or dystopian scenarios (Shatzer 2013), or 
focused on the identification of risks and benefits (Verbeek 
2006), which contributes to a growing polarization of prom-
ises and dangers. As sociologist de Sousa Santos (2016) 
warns, in our technologically modified world, fear and hope 
are collapsing in the face of the growing polarization of hope 
without fear (the health innovation sector and markets with 
exponential benefits) and fear without hope (anyone who 
believes that technological progress cannot be stopped and 
that we will need to adapt to whatever changes may come 
about). In this situation, uncertainties become abysmal, and 
leave no room for action.
Inspired by Spinoza's notions, de Sousa Santos (2016) 
examines the unequal epistemological and experiential dis-
tribution of fear and hope. In addition to the idea of abysmal 
uncertainties, uncertainty is also the experience of the pos-
sibilities that arise from the multiple relationships that can 
exist between fear and hope. Since the relationships between 
different groups and actors are different, the types of uncer -
tainty are also different. Fear and hope are not equally dis-
tributed among all social groups or historical epochs. In rela-
tion to technologies, fear and hope are defined by parameters 
that tend to benefit social groups that have greater access to 
scientific knowledge and technology. For these groups, the 
belief in scientific progress and innovation is strong enough 
to neutralise any fear regarding the limitations of current 
knowledge. For those who have less access to scientific and 
technological knowledge, this is experienced as inferiority 
that generates uncertainty. For them, uncertainty is gener -
ated by their place in a world that is defined and legislated 
by powerful and alien knowledge that affects them and over 
which they have little or no control. This knowledge is pro-
duced about them and eventually against them, but never 
with them (de Sousa Santos 2016).