1686 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1685–1695
1 3
experts; personalized treatments that optimize the care tra-
jectory of chronically ill patients; precision therapies for 
complex illnesses; reduction of medical errors; and greater 
enrolment for clinical trials (Miller and Brown 2018). Lead-
ing healthcare and computer scientists have argued that AI 
will help healthcare systems achieve greater efficiency in 
two ways: on the one hand by improving the timeframe 
and accuracy of patient diagnosis and treatment and, when 
possible, helping with early prevention; and, on the other 
hand, streamlining the workload, using staff more efficiently 
(Kerasidou 2020). Robotics is considered to be a specific 
sub-category of medical AI (Shoham et al 2018). In the time 
of so-called New Robotics, a new family of robots devoted 
to healthcare applications has become particularly prolific 
(Schaal 2007). This new era of robotics enables safe robot 
interactions with humans, easy programming and adjustment 
to particular needs, and the possibility for robots to func-
tion as mobile, interactive information systems in hospitals, 
nursing homes and other healthcare settings. Due to their 
capacity to interact with humans, these robots open up an 
interesting scenario for working on the emotional and social 
dimensions of health.
The impetus of AI and robotics science, and the deep 
learning subtype in particular, facilitated by the use of 
so-called big data, along with highly enhanced comput-
ing power and cloud storage, enables greater automation 
in a variety of sectors. However, although automation has 
a long-standing impact on employment, productivity and 
the economic performance of companies and nations, the 
introduction of AI systems to healthcare environments has 
had an unprecedented impact on the automation of care. 
(Vallès-Peris and Domènech 2020; Sampath and Khargon-
ekar 2018). Thus, along with the narrative on the promises 
of AI, these innovative technologies are also the source of 
many of the uncertainties of our time.
The field is certainly high on promise and relatively low 
on data and proof. Moreover, many problems have been 
associated directly to AI and robotics, such as social bias, 
privacy and security, and lack of transparency (Topol 2019). 
The possibility of machines performing activities that are 
traditionally associated with the exclusively human condi -
tion -such as abstract problem-solving, perceptual recog-
nition, social interaction and natural language (Vallor and 
Bekey 2017)-generates many dangers. These dangers relate 
to a hypothetical scenario of future AI functionalities, rather 
than real, current ones, and are associated with the “sup-
posed” possibility of humans being replaced by technologi-
cal systems or of care for dependent and ill persons becom-
ing "dehumanised" (Vallès-Peris et al. 2021a).
Although it is undeniable that the development of AI and 
robotics is exponentially real, there is a gap between the ethi-
cal concerns around its supposed functionalities and the real 
possibilities of contemporary AI (Hagendorff 2020). If the debate focuses only on a utopian or dystopian development 
of robotics, some issues are exaggerated, while the identi-
fication of contexts, situations and controversies regarding 
artefacts that do not respond to this promised future remains 
unclear. At the same time, it is difficult to identify problems 
and generate an ethical debate around some robots that are 
already in use (that do not integrate the complex functionali-
ties and capabilities expected of highly intelligent autono -
mous robots).
As a proposal to go beyond this scenario of promises/
dangers, we develop an approach to introduce responsible 
AI and robotics to healthcare based on three movements: 
(a) the first is a change of focus from the world of promises 
and dangers to the world of uncertainties; (b) the second is 
a conceptual shift from assuming a relationship with robot-
ics based on a Human–Robot Interaction (HRI) to another 
focused on the network in which the robot is embedded (the 
“Robot Embedded in a Network-REN”); and the last is (c) 
an ethical shift from a general normative framework to a 
discussion on the context of use, from the logic of the eth-
ics of care. Based on these suggestions, we define a new 
ethical–political proposal for introducing responsible AI and 
robotics, what we call “Caring in the In-Between”.
In order to develop our proposal, this paper is organized 
in seven sections. The one that follows contextualizes our 
research on care robots; we then develop the three move-
ments on which we base our proposal: in Sect.  3 we focus on 
the movement from the world of promises and dangers to the 
world of uncertainties, in Sect.  4 we explore the movement 
from HRI to a REN relation and, in Sect.  5 we explain the 
movement from an general ethical framework to the context 
of use, from the ethics of care; in Sect.  6 we outline our 
ethical–political proposal to introduce responsible robotics 
and AI to healthcare and; finally, we summarize the main 
conclusions.
2  Empirical research on care robots 
in a children’s hospital
Our proposal for responsible AI and robotics is based on a 
series of empirical studies that we carried out on the intro-
duction of care robots to a children’s hospital in Barcelona. 
In children’s health settings, robots for care are typically 
considered to be those that are used in specific therapeu-
tic interventions, e.g., with autistic children (Heerink et al 
2016) or in rehabilitation processes (Meyer-Heim and van 
Hedel 2013). Care robots are also those involved in the 
extensive line of research and application of robots to reduce 
pain and anxiety when children are subjected to some type 
of intervention (Crossman et al 2018) or simply to make 
hospital stays more pleasant (Díaz-Boladeras et al 2016). In 
engineering and computer science, the care robots to which