4:20 K. Fischer
Fig.2. Attentiontobase,proximalanddistalscenebythe8participantsinthespeechcondition(represented
by alineeach) over thecourseof theinteraction(thenineactions of the robot).
Figure3showsthatwhentheverbalgreetingbytherobotisreplacedbyabeepseries,responses
at the distal level occur later in the interaction, if at all. While some participants do not respond
to the robot’s depictions at the distal level at all, five participants do, but at different moments
in the interaction. In fact, like the analysis of participants’ behavior in the speech condition, the
analysis of the beep condition indicates unique patterns and frequent switches between levels by
theparticipants.
The different distributions of responses at the base, proximal and distal level in the two con-
ditions can now be quantitatively compared. An independent sample Chi-Square test was used
to compare participants’ behaviors in the speech versus the beep condition; the results ( X2=
12.94,df=2, p=.00155) show a significantly different distribution in the extent to which peo-
pletreattherobotasamachinecomparedtotheextenttowhichtheyshowanthropomorphizing
behavior,basedonthepresenceorabsenceoftheverbalframingutteranceatthebeginningofthe
interaction.
5 DISCUSSION
In this paper, I have proposed a qualitative methodology that addresses people’s observable be-
haviorsinresponsetoarobot’sactionsintermsofdisplaysoftheirunderstandingsofitsactions,
following conversation analytic principles. The data analyzed were particularly well suited for
that purpose since each robot behavior had been carefully crafted with all three levels in mind:
The‘puppetinterface’bymeansofwhichtherobot’sbehaviorsaredefined[Pantofaruetal. 2013]
allowstheencodingoftheproximalscene(e.g.robotliftingitsarm)intermsofitsphysicalprop-
erties,suchasconfigurationsofitsmotorsandjoints(basescene);theproximalsceneinturnhad
beencreatedwiththedistalsceneinmind:havingtherobotaskforhelpnon-verbally(seeTable 3).
Theencodingofparticipants’behaviorsthenjustneededtocheckforeachoftherobot’sbehaviors
to whichofthethreescenesparticipantsare oriented.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.