TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:3
anthropomorphismtorobotsinfirstencountersbutcometotreatthemasmoremachine-likelater
[cf. however Turkle et al. 2006; Paetzel et al. 2020for suggestions of different time courses]. Fur-
thermore, besides anthropomorphism, behaviors not typical of human face-to-face interactions,
suchasflaming,challengingorswearing,canbeobservedinhuman-robotinteractions[e.g.Kopp
2006; Brščić et al. 2015]. Moreover, the amount of anthropomorphism observable has been found
to depend to some degree on the method of analysis and on the time participants have available
to reflect on their behavior [Fussell et al. 2008]. For instance, the amount of cognitive load a user
isexperiencinghasbeenproposedtoinfluenceanthropomorphism[e.g.Leeetal. 2010;Hametal.
2012].
Whilethereisrobustevidenceforcertainpsychologicalresponsestoanthropomorphicdesign,
and while anthropomorphizing behavior is observable across domains and using a plethora of
differentmethods,itisstillnotclearhowthedifferentfindingscanbebroughttogether.Onereason
couldbethatstilllittleisknownaboutwhathappensdynamicallyoverthecourseofaninteraction
(and beyond). So far, anthropomorphism has been studied mostly either post hoc or in highly
controlled studies that focus on one isolated behavioral measure; very few studies have looked
at the progression of the expression of anthropomorphism over time in interaction. However, if
we could describe and track anthropomorphizing behavior in human-robot interactions directly,
wemaybeabletoshedlightonhowtheanthropomorphizingbehaviorobservedandthefindings
on interpersonal variation, anti-social behaviors and effects of time courses come together. Such
a method would constitute a useful addition to the methods to study anthropomorphism that are
already available. In the remainder of the paper, I therefore present a method for the description
of the dynamics of anthropomorphizing behavior in interaction, and illustrate its use in a case
study. In the last section, I discuss how analyses of anthropomorphizing responses to robots in
interactionmay affectexplanatorymodels of anthropomorphism.
2 PREVIOUS WORK: METHODS FOR DESCRIBING ANTHROPOMORPHISM
Anthropomorphizingresponsestorobotshavebeendemonstratedusingabroadrangeofdifferent
methodstoanalyzetheeffectsofrobotappearance,robotbehaviorsandtheframingofrobots.The
methodologicalspectrumcomprises,mostimportantly,questionnaires,experimentalelicitationof
behavioralresponses,brainimaging techniquesand reactiontime studies.
2.1 Questionnaires
Questionnaireshavebeenusedubiquitouslyinthestudyofanthropomorphism,forinstance,toin-
vestigatetheeffectsofrobots’appearanceanddesign[e.g.Hegel 2012;Philippsetal. 2017;Reeves
& Hancock 2020]. Questionnaires allow the researcher to ask explicitly or implicitly about the
effects of certain design decisions regarding robots’ appearance or the implementation of so-
cial behaviors, such as gaze following, presence or absence of gestures, body postures and the
like [e.g. Ham et al. 2012]. The questions asked may concern anthropomorphism directly by ad-
dressingtopicsliketheattributionofmind,intentionandsocialcharacteristics;forinstance,Sims
etal.[2005]hadparticipantsrateimagesthatvariedaccordingtorobotcharacteristics(movement
method,bodyshape,presenceoflimbs,etc.)inaquestionnaireaddressingthedegreeofperceived
aggression, intelligence, and animacy. Another study using questionnaire data is Rosenthal-von
der Pütten & Kramer [ 2014], in which questionnaire responses to 40 robot pictures were elicited
andclustered.Theauthorsfoundsixclustersemerged,dependingonhowthreatening,submissive,
likable and unfamiliar the robots were perceived. More recently, Mieczkowski et al. [ 2019]a s k e d
peopletorate342imagesofrobotsconcerningwarmthandcompetence,andtheyelicitedbehav-
ioraltendencies,suchasparticipants’willingnesstohelporharmtherobot.Severalstandardized
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.