4:14 K. Fischer
Table 3. Analysisof theRobot’s Behavior inTerms of Depiction
base proximal distal
turnsupper part60 degrees turnsheadtowards participant attends toparticipant
playscannedspeec h initiatescontact,produce shumanspeech g reetsparticipant,opensconversation
playscannedspeech politeutterance politewelcome
keeps upper partturned extends gaze continuedattention
plays beep series typicalrobotbehavior aims togetparticipant’sattention
turnsupper part moves head towards shelf attends ostensively to shelf
liftsand lowers arm reachesfor object ostensively attempts toreach forobjecton shelf
lowers upper part looksdown indicatessadness
moves upper part toprevious position lookstowards participant asks participant forhelp
thedistalsceneevoked),therobotfirstattemptstoattracttheparticipant’sattention,thengestures
towardsanobjectontheshelfthatisoutofitsreach,andfinallylooksbackandforthbetweenthe
objectand theparticipantin orderto gethelp.
Eightparticipantssawtherobotinthespeechcondition,whileelevensawitinthebeepcondi-
tion,inwhichtherobot’sgreetingwasreplacedbyabeepseries;thus,inthesecondcondition,the
robotleavesthepolitewelcomemessageawayandinsteadsimplyusesaseriesofbeepstoattract
theparticipant’sattention;inaddition,itlooksbackandforthbetweenthedesiredobjectandthe
participantonemore time thanin thespeechcondition.
4.3 AnalysisoftheInteractions
Theinteractionswereanalyzedconcerningthesceneattended-toinresponsetoeachoftherobot’s
behaviors. That is, we investigated whether each participant displays an orientation to the base
scene, the proximal scene or the distal scene and encode each response as one of the three. In
particular, we code a user’s behavior as attention to the basescene (see Table 3) if there is no
reactiontotherobot’sbehavioratall(becauseininteractionsbetweenhumans,sinceinteractants
need to signal to each other how they understand each others’ behaviors, lack of response to a
partner’sactionisrare),2orwhentheparticipantsdrawattentiontothematerialpropertiesofthe
robot, for example, by pointing out that it cannot do anything, or by walking around it, reading
postersbehindit,etc.
In contrast, we code as attention to the proximal scene when people attend to the robot (e.g.
by watching it) and thus display an understanding of the robot being in the course of carrying
out an extended activity, i.e. when they observe it for longer periods of time. Another example
of attention to the proximal scene is when participants assume that the robot is doing something
meaningful, but do not attribute emotions or its own agenda into it, for instance, when the robot
is turning to the shelf to get help while participants wave at it to make it perceive them and thus
display theirinterpretationof therobot’smovement asan attemptto scantheroom.
2As one anonymous reviewer pointed out, there may be intercultural differences concerning what behaviors are conven-
tionallyexpectedandalsohowtheyareinterpretedacrosscultures,andtheremaybeculturesinwhichitisacceptableor
even normatively expected not to respond to another person’s verbal statements, possibly also depending on social roles
or social status. This is of course possible and would have to be taken into account in the analysis. That is, when analyz-
ing what understandings people display of the robot’s behavior, we have to base our analysis on our knowledge of the
social meanings of the cultural community in which the interaction occurs. The method proposed relies on people’s own
sense-making processes, which are always shaped by socio-cultural norms and expectations. The current analysis relies
ontheconventionalpracticesuncoveredintheconversationanalyticliterature[e.g.Sacksetal. 1974]forthesamecultural
contextin whichthe datawereelicited,namelytheU.S. [cf.Fischer etal. 2014].
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.