4:24 K. Fischer
Furthermore, people’s anthropomorphizing behaviors do not seem to be ‘triggered’ by certain
robot behaviors or its appearance, as suggested, for instance, by Nass [ 2004], since behaviors on
theproximalanddistalleveloccuratvariousplacesintheinteractionsandnotdirectlyinreaction
to specificrobot behaviors,as theconceptof a’trigger’ wouldsuggest.
Moreover, we have seen that even if people do not interpret a robot’s behavior as mechan-
ical movement, they still do not necessarily expect the robot to have its own agenda. Thus,
anthropomorphismcomesindifferentdegrees,whichisreflectedinourdistinctionbetweenprox-
imalanddistalscenes(Clark&Fischerunderrevision).AnexampleisparticipantH101’sresponse
to the robot’s gesturing towards the shelf; while recognizing the robot’s behavior as attention to
theshelf,hedidnotexpecttherobottohaveitsownintentionforreachingupsinceherepeatedly
provided the robot with the instruction to pick a book. (The failure to attribute intention into the
robot in this situation does not keep him, however, from offering the robot a glass of water a few
seconds later, even though robots are not particularly good with water and certainly don’t need
any.) The example illustrates that anthropomorphism is not an all-or-none phenomenon. This is
in accordance with the suggestion by Ruijten et al. [ 2019] that some traits are more difficult to
attribute to a robot than others. However, approaches that see anthropomorphizing responses to
robots as based on a psychological disposition [e.g. Epley et al. 2007,2008; Epley2018; Ruijten
et al.2019] will also have problems explaining the intrapersonal variation over time. That is, if
a general disposition caused anthropomorphizing behaviors, people should either anthropomor-
phize the robot and treat it as if it was a person, or they should not. In contrast, what we can
observe is that people treat robots as if they had human-like characteristics in one second and as
iftheyhadnotin thenext.
Similarly, social constructivist approaches [e.g. Edwards 1994] do not necessarily explain the
interpersonaldifferencesandthechangesintheattributionofhuman-likecharacteristicstorobots,
either. Edwards [ 1994,2001], for instance, assumes intention attribution to be a common social
practice, which is used to make sense of other people’s behavior, as much as for making sense of
animals’androbots’behaviors,sinceintentionsandotherpsychologicalprocessesalwaysneedto
beinferred.Fromthisperspective,onemightexpectpeopletotreatrobotsinahuman-likemanner
throughout.
The method has furthermore some practical implications; for instance, it cannot only be used
to track subtle effects of certain social cues in the robot’s behavior and thus support the analysis
of the effects of certain design choices in the robot behavior development, it could also serve to
check at specific points in interaction to which depiction level the respective user is oriented and
to decide on that basis between different courses of future action, as suggested by Simmons et al.
[2011].Itcanthusbeusedto adapttherobot’sbehaviorinrealtime.
Tosumup,Ihavepresentedamethodtodescribethedynamicsofanthropomorphizingbehavior
in HRI. This method complements the set of methods already available to shed light on the dif-
ferent facets of anthropomorphism. The application of the method proposed here in a case study
revealed that people respond to different social ‘triggers’ differently and move between anthro-
pomorphizing and non-anthropomorphizing responses with apparent ease. These findings have
consequencesforexplanatoryaccountsofanthropomorphism(cf.Clark&Fischerunderrevision);
futureworkwillhavetodeterminetherelationshipbetweenpeople’santhropomorphizingbehav-
ior inresponseto therobotandtheirconceptsoftheserobots.
REFERENCES
S. Andrist, E.Spannan,andB.Mutlu.2013.Rhetoricalrobots: Makingrobots moreeffective speakers using linguisticcues
of expertise.In Proceedings of the2013 Human-Robot Interaction Conference pp.341–348.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.