TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:9
symbolisasignwithanarbitrary,conventionalrelationshipbetweenformandinterpretation,the
prime example being language, where the sequence of the letters c-a-t are conventionally taken
tomean ‘cat’.Whena robotsays“hello,”it conventionally symbolizes agreeting.
In contrast, the distal scene goes beyond the encoded meaning and concerns the pragmatic
interpretationofanaction.Thedefinitionofthedistalsceneisthusalsorelativelyunproblematic
since it concerns the completely fictional, live-like character evoked by the robot, for instance,
as a companion, friend or collaborator.For example, the robot moving its hand encodesa waving
gesture, but the interpretation that it sees me, recognizes me, wants to attract my attention and
initiate an interaction by waving at me is an interpretation that goes beyond what is encoded.
Both the proximal and the distal scene thus involve anthropomorphizing behavior; however,
whilethedistalsceneevokestherobotasacharacter,i.e.asasocialactor,theproximalsceneonly
assumesthattherobot isengaged in meaningfulaction,i.e.thatitsbehavior means something .
The two levels of depictions assumed thus differ in the underlying processes: whereas the
proximal scene relies on semiotic processes, i.e. on the interpretation of signs, the distal scene
is essentially fictional and relies on imagination [e.g. Walton 1993] and thus involves a certain
degree of pretending on the side of the recipient [Clark 1999]. The distinction is useful for our
analysisbecauseithelpsdistinguishbetweenfeaturesthatareencodedinthe(behavior)designof
therobotandfeaturesthatgobeyondthis;forinstance,usingavoicewithfeaturescharacteristic
of a human female, for example, indexes a female speaker; that is, there is an objective, indexical
relationship between certain voice characteristics and human gender. In contrast, if people
associate gender stereotypes to a (human or robotic) speaker with these voice characteristics,
then these stereotypes are not encoded in, but associated with the voice [e.g. Tay et al. 2014;
Bryant et al. 2020; Law et al. 2020]. That is, by means of its speech characteristics, the robot is
depicted as female, but an expected higher competence in a certain occupation is not part of the
robot’s(behavior)design, butrather“in theeye ofthebeholder”,i.e.in thedistalsceneevoked.
Inourmodel(Clark&Fischerunderrevision),arobotisthussimilartoMickeyMouseinDisney
Land: The man in the costume constitutes the basis for the depiction; the mouse-shaped costume
evokesthedepictionproper,alargemousewitheyes,earsandamouth.Thedistalsceneisthenthat
MickeyMouse,acharacteroneisfamiliarwithfromnumerouscomics,ispresentinthehereand
now.RegardingMickeyMouse,kidscanorienttothemaninthecostume(e.g.“isithotinthere?”),
tothedepictionofthemouse(e.g.“youhavealargehead!”)ortothecharacter(e.g.“Mickey,where
isMinnie?”).Towhichof thethreescenestheyorientcanthusbeidentifiedfromtheirbehavior.
Similarly, the robot has a mechanical base that enables the robot’s functionality; the robot’s
design,functionalityandpresentationincontextsuggestthatitcanbeinteractedwithbytalking
to it. And finally, the staging of the robot evokes a distal scene in which the robot can be under-
stood as a human-like character. Like kids’ interactions with Mickey Mouse, people’s behavior in
responsetoa robot’sactionsis revealingregardingto whichof thethreescenestheyorient.
Table1illustrateshowthedepictionmodelappliestovariousdifferentkindsofdepictions[see
alsoClark 2016].
Thus, the depiction model assumes that depictions allow attention to three different perspec-
tivesorscenes,whichexistinparallel,andallthreecanbeinfocusatdifferentpointsintime.For
instance,concerning the conversationaldepiction of the angry boss, the listener can focus on the
basescenebysaying‘notsoloud’,ontheproximalscenebysaying‘yousoundmorecynicalthan
angry’,or on thedistalscenebysaying‘yourbossis reallynot a niceperson’.
Thus, what we are proposing is the anatomy of a ‘social cue’, where on the side of the robot,
weunderstandasocialcueasthestagingofadesignchoiceorbehaviorthatisintendedtosignal
a certain human-like behavior, which is meant to evoke a particular character or fictional being
(for the explanatory power of this model, see Clark & Fischer under revision). In a second step, I
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.