TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:19
Table 6. Participant H112
H112: filling out form
Pr2: turns head towards participant. (base) no response
Pr2: ‘‘Hello, my name is Pr2. How are you?’’
(6secs) base delayed response
understands robot as
producing a friendly
greetingH112: looks at robot, smiles, looks down at form distal
Pr2: ‘‘It’s great to meet you. Enjoy your visit
at Willow Garage.’’
H112: nods, looks up at robot, waves at robot distal understands robot to
be in the process of
doing something
directed at the shelfPr2: ‘‘beep beep - beep beep’’ base
Pr2: turns head towards shelf. proximal
H112: smiles, looks at shelf
Pr2: lifts and lowers arm, lifts and lowers and
lifts armproximal interprets robot’s
head movement as
directed towards her,
but without intentionPr2: looks down
Pr2: looks at participant. proximal
H112: smiles, waves at robot
Pr2: turns head towards shelf.
Pr2: looks at participant.
Pr2: turns head towards shelf.
H112: looks towards shelf, then back to robot proximal understands that the
robot’s behavior is
directedPr2: looks at participant.
Pr2: turns head towards shelf.
(31secs)
H112: looks away, looks around, glances briefly
at robot twice, then looks down at form.base treats robot as one
aspect of context
The variability in participants’ behaviors towards the robot is reflected in Figure 2, which rep-
resents the eight participants’ responses to the robot’s nine different behaviors (on the x-axis) in
the speech condition. As Figure 2illustrates, the eight participants in the speech condition em-
ploy a wide range of behaviors in unique combinations in interaction with the robot. That is, no
robot behavior is responded to in the same way by all participants. It shows that most, but not
all,participantsrespondtothedistalsceneevokedwhentherobotproducesapolitegreeting,and
again many but not all participants attend to the distal scene after the robot’s gesturing for help.
However, as Figure 2additionally illustrates, all participants also produce behaviors in between
that indicate their interpretation of the robot as machine-like, and in general the time courses of
their responses to the base, proximal and distal scene vary considerably. The analysis shows that
no direct correspondence between robot behavior and participant responses is emerging, so that
participants’actionsarenot ‘triggered’bytherobot’sactionsin similar ways.
Comparing the behavior of the participants in the speech condition now with the participants
inthe‘beep’-condition,inwhichtherobotdidnotgreettheparticipantsbutattractedtheiratten-
tion by means of a series of beeps, shows that even though much intrapersonal variation can be
observedhere,too,andnosinglerobotbehaviorisrespondedtobytheparticipantsinawaythat
would appropriately be described as ‘triggered’, the overall distribution indicates that the initial
useofspeechinthespeechconditionhasanimpactonpeople’soverallbehavior.Thus,whilethe
robot’sbehaviorsdonottriggeranyspecificresponses,theanthropomorphicdesignofitsbehav-
iorinCondition1,i.e.thechoiceofhumanlanguage,hasaneffectonhowtherobotisresponded
toin general.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.