4:2 K. Fischer
(a) First,anthropomorphismisdiscussedasaparticular psychological phenomenon,inwhich
peopleattributehuman-liketraitstorobots[e.g.Nass&Moon 2000].Forinstance,Ruijten
[2015: 13] defines anthropomorphism as “an automatic cognitive process of attributing
humannatureorhumanuniquenesscharacteristicstononhumantechnological,spiritual
or natural objects and entities, causing a mixture of affective, behavioral and cognitive
responses”.NassandMoon[ 2000]distinguishbetweenthreetypesofeffects:1)over-use
ofhumansocialcategories,like,forinstance,attributingfemalecharacteristicstoarobot
withafemalevoice;2)over-learnedsocialbehaviors,forinstance,applyingpolitenessand
reciprocitymaximstointeractionswithrobots,and3)prematurecognitivecommitments,
for instance,whenrobotsaretrustedblindly iflabelled ‘specialists.’
(b) Second,anthropomorphismcanbeunderstoodasa property ofrobots,suchthattheymay
carryhuman-likedesignfeatures[e.g.Rosenthal-vonderPütten 2014].Thesepropertiesof
robotsmaybeunderstoodascertain‘triggers’,suchasvoice,face,emotion,interactivity,
engagement with and attention to the user, unpredictability and the filling of traditional
roles [see Nass 2004].
(c) Third, anthropomorphism can refer to the description of people’s behaviors towards
robotsassimilar to responsesto humanactors.
From a terminological perspective, I therefore distinguish between a) anthropomorphism ,t h e
socio-cognitive phenomenon to be explained, i.e. the psychological mechanisms that determine
people’s behavior towards robots; b) anthropomorphic design , which I use here to describe the
social cues and ‘triggers’ built in by robot designers [cf. Fink 2012]; and c) anthropomorphizing
behavior,i.e.theobservablebehaviorbymeansofwhichpeoplerespondtorobotsinwayssimilar
to waysin whichtheyrespondtohumans.
Differentmethodshavebeenusedtoshedlightondifferentaspectsofanthropomorphism,such
as on the relationship between anthropomorphic design and trait attribution; for instance, brain
imaging techniques show activations in similar brain regions for human and robotic partners de-
pending on the degree of anthropomorphic design [e.g. Krach et al. 2008]; reaction time studies
showthatanthropomorphicrobotsmaygiverisetosimilarinhibitionsasotherhumans[e.g.Sten-
zeletal.2012;Klapperetal. 2014];questionnairestudiesshowthathuman-likecharacteristicsare
attributedtorobots[Bartnecketal. 2009]andthatrobotsaresubjectedtohumanstereotypes[e.g.
Nass & Moon 2000] and to in-group versus out-group biases, for example [e.g. Eyssel & Kuchen-
brandt2012];and analyses of people’slinguistic behavior show that people describe robots using
the same linguistic expressions and intentionalist language as when they describe other people
[Fusselletal. 2008](more onthedifferent approachesbelow).
At the same time, however, people do not interact with robots exactly like with other people.
For instance, Kory Westlund et al. [ 2016], who tested the effects of framing a robot as machine
versusassocialactoronchild-robotinteractions,foundthatincomparisonwithinteractionswith
the experimenter, children asked fewer questions and made fewer comments and laughed less in
both robot conditions. There is also brain imaging research that reports different responses to
human and robotic actors [Chaminade et al. 2010; Kuz et al. 2015]. In addition, not all people an-
thropomorphize robots to the same extent [Fischer 2011]; for instance, lonely people have been
found to anthropomorphize robots more [Lee et al. 2006; Epley et al. 2007]. Ruijten et al. [ 2019]
havealsodevelopedaquestionnairethatallowsthemtoidentifydifferentdegreesortypesoftrait
attributions; in particular, they find that traits that are unique to humans are more difficult to
attribute than traits that also other beings may have. It is also possible that anthropomorphism
changesovertime;Lemaignanetal.[ 2014],forinstance,suggestedthatpeoplemayrespondwith
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.