4:8 K. Fischer
Now,aminimalisticclassificationwouldmeantoclassifypeople’sbehavioraseitheranthropo-
morphizingornot,whereasamaximalistversionofsuchaclassificationmightclassifythetypeor
extentofanthropomorphization.Onemight,forinstance,identify,basedoneachofaperson’sob-
servablebehaviors,whatkindoftraitisattributed,howuniquelyhumanitisandcorrespondingly,
how easy or difficult it is to attribute this trait to the artifact in question [cf. Ruijten et al. 2019].
This would however mean that specific attributions can be identified and intersubjectively clas-
sified, given that all we have is how people behave. The question is whether such a classification
is feasible and how the relevant judgements can be made based on what is observable; it seems
thereforesaferto(a)keepthenumberofdistinctionssmall,and(b)toallowaneasyidentification
ofthelevelorientedto.
The proposal made here is to use a model of depiction [Clark 2016] because it allows us to
describe people’s responses to robots without presupposing that we know what this behavior is
causedby.Forinstance,Nass&Moon[ 2000]suggestthatpeoplerespondtotechnologicalartifacts
likerobotsliketootherhumansoutofmindlessness;Nass[ 2004]arguesthatanthropomorphizing
behavior is basically a mistake, based on our human evolution in which we were only faced with
human social actors. In contrast, Ruijten et al. [ 2019], for instance, regard anthropomorphism to
be a predisposition instead, whereas social-constructivist approaches may take it as an instance
of social practice, so that anthropomorphizing behavior would just be ‘how things get done’ [cf.
Edwards 1994; Hutchby 2001]. In order to avoid circularity, a model that describes observable
behaviors should not presuppose the one or other explanation and should thus be largely theory
neutral.Therefore,Ianalyzetherobot’sbehaviorbasedonClark’sthreelevelsofdepiction[Clark
2016], and the person’s behavior in terms of orientation to these levels. From this perspective
(Clark & Fischer under revision), the robot’s design is viewed as an act of staging, in which the
robotis depictedas asocialactor.
Weunderstandbydepictionaverycommonstrategyofhumaninteractioninwhichoneperson
stages a behavior for another person to evoke a temporally and spatially removed situation. This
strategyismostobviousinplaysandotherkindsoffictionalstaging(inmovies,videogames,pre-
tendplayetc.),butalsooccursfrequentlyinconversationingeneralwhenpeoplereportonevents
involvingotherpeople,forinstance,apersontellingherfriendabouthertyrannicalboss.Clark’s
model involves (a) a base scene, which consists of the concrete means by which the depiction is
carriedout,e.g.gesture,mimics,loudvoiceetc.,i.e.therespective‘trigger’,(b)theproximalscene,
which comprises the scene depicted, e.g. an angry person with a loud voice and exaggerated ges-
tures, and (c) the distal scene, for instance, the speaker’s boss getting outraged about a mistake
someone made. Robots are special kinds of depictions since the scene evoked is not necessarily
spatially or temporally removed, but rather concerns a fictitious being (cf. Clark & Fischer under
revision formore details onthefull model).
Concerning human-robot interaction, the base scene is relatively straight-forward to define: it
concernsthemechanicalpropertiesofarobotasamachine.Lessstraight-forwardisthedefinition
oftheproximalscene,whichcanbeunderstoodastheencodedmeaningofarobot’sbehavior.That
is,therelationshipbetweenbaseandproximalscenecanbeunderstoodasoneofsignaling[Peirce
1998],suchthatthebasescene(e.g.arobotmovingitsactuators)mayevokeaparticularmeaning
(e.g.therobotwaving)bymeansofindexical,iconicorsymbolicrelationsbetweenthemovement
and the interpretation. An index is a sign in which the form consists of a pointer to a particular
referent;anexampleistheEnglishword“I,”whichindexesthespeaker,butitdoesnot‘mean’John,
Mary,HerborKerstinitself.Forinstance,directingtherobotheadtowardsaparticipant’sposition
indicatesattentiontowardshimorher.Aniconisasignwheretheformisconnectedtoitsmeaning
by means of similarity; for instance, the robot moving its gripper from left to right and back is
similar to a human waving gesture, i.e. it can be taken to iconically represent waving. Finally, a
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.