TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:15
Finally,wecodeasattentiontothe distalscenewhenparticipantsindicatethattheyexpectthe
robot to have its own agenda (for instance, by asking what it wants), when they suspect human
wishes,suchashopingtogetaglassofwater,orwhentheyrespondpolitelyandreciprocatesocial
behavior[Nass& Moon 2000].
Below is an informal rendering of an example interaction; because of spatial constraints only
one analysis is presented in detail, and to make it as random as possible, the analysis presented
concernsthefirstinteractionelicited(participantH101)3(see Table 4).Theparticipant’sbehavior
cannow beanalyzed accordingtowhichsceneitis orientedto.
Therobot’sfirstactionistomoveitsupperpart,whichwasintendedtoindicatethattherobot
sees the participant and thus turns its head towards him or her. The participant does not notice
thisaction,however.Whilewecannotbecertainthatparticipantswouldhavenoticedsuchamove
fromahumaninthesameposition,therobotisstilltreatedlikeanyotherpieceoffurnitureinthe
roombynot beingattendedto (i.e.at baselevel).
Therobot’snextactionistoplaycannedspeech,namelyapolitegreeting.Duringthegreeting,
the participant briefly looks up and down again. After a pause of about two seconds, the partic-
ipant responds to the robot’s greeting by reciprocating it, thus attending to the distal scene in
which two equals participate in a polite exchange. At the same time, he does not look at the ro-
bot while it is speaking (which is unlike communication among humans, since listeners usually
look at speakers while they are speaking [cf., for instance, Andrist et al. 2014]), and also the long
pause before the greeting would indicate trouble in human interaction [e.g. Levinson 1983]–t h e
usual response time in conversation is about 300 to 500 milliseconds [Jefferson 2004], with some
slightinterculturalvariation[cf.Stiversetal. 2009].Thus,whiletheparticipant’sgreetingitselfis
oriented towards the distal scene, other interactional behaviors are rather oriented at a commu-
nication partner that does not require attention to the social norms of human conversation (and
thus relate more to the base scene). To sum up, the participant’s looking at the robot during the
greeting is encoded as attention to the proximal scene, the long pause is understood as oriented
tothebasescene,while thereciprocalgreetingis codedasorientationtothedistalscene.
Inresponsetotherobot’snextutterance,theparticipantdoesnotreactatall,thuswithholding
feedbacknecessaryforthejointmanagementofinteraction[cf.Sacksetal. 1974]bynotproviding
evidence of his understanding of the partner’s utterance. This behavior is consequently coded as
attentiontothebasescene.
The robot produces a series of beeps then, which the participant repeats after he finishes his
questionnaire;hethusdisplaysthatherecognizesitasattention-getting,buttreatsitasnon-social
(comparethistothewaysR2D2’sbeepsarerespondedtoinStarWars).Wethereforesuggestthis
behaviortorespondto theproximalscene:a robotsignalingto get attention.
Therobot’sturningtotheshelfistheninterpretedas‘looking,’ascanbeseenfromthewaving
gesture and the question “do you see me?”, i.e. it is treated as a very basic, but directed behavior;
thus,theparticipantrespondstotheproximalscene.Similarly,hedoesnotunderstandtherobot’s
gesturetowardstheshelfasbasedonitsownagenda;instead,heprovidestherobotwithareason
to move the arm towards the shelf by giving an instruction (“pick a book”). This means that he
doesnotattributeintentionorvolitiontotherobot,whichcorrespondstoattentiontotheproximal
scene.
However,hethenofferstherobot,notjustthecup,but“aglassofwater,”i.e.addressingahuman
need,hencerespondingtothedistalscene.Inthenextstep,theparticipantexaggeratestheaction,
squeezing the cup into the robot’s gripper and indicating the futility of the operation. Thus, he
responds first to the proximal and then to the base scene. Finally, he walks away, indicating no
3Transcription conventions: “word” =verbalutterance; <par>word </par>=parallelspeech; <P>=pause.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.