4:10 K. Fischer
Table 1. Examples of Depictions
base proximal distal
conversational depiction speaker’s voiceandbody someone withloud,
agitatedvoicethespeaker’s tyrannicalboss
puppetshow wooden puppet,speaker’s
voice andmovementpuppetmovingaboutand
talkingcharacter
Hamlet(on stage) Kenneth Branagh young maninconflict princein16thcentury Denmark
Mickey Mouse maninco s tume human-size mouse MickeyMouse character
human-robot interaction robot movesgripperleft
andrightrobot wavesits hand robotgreets participant
Table 2. Examples of Human-Robot Interactions as Depictions
base proximal distal
Nakataetal.[ 1998]the robot liftsits‘head’ when
sensing human touchrepellingtactile
reactionrebellious
Tielmannetal.[ 2014]robot speaks withloud, high pitched
voice withhigher speech ratearousal the robotis asexcitedabout
something asthe child
Huang &Mutlu [ 2013]robot produces recorded gesture robotmakes an
iconic handgesturerobot iscompetent
employqualitativemethodstoanalyzetowhichofthesethreelevelspeople’sbehaviorisoriented
(seeSection 3.3below).
3.2 Describing RobotBehavior
For the description of robots’ behavior, we can use the depiction model to account for the dis-
crepancy between their mechanical nature as artefacts, the behaviors designed and the intended
effects. In particular, the base scene corresponds to the fact that robots are artefacts that operate
mechanically or are preprogrammed or remotely controlled and describes the robot’s actions on
the mechanical level, such as moving its joints. Responses to the base scene are thus clearly non-
anthropomorphic.Theproximalscenecorrespondstotherecognitionofthissceneasapurposeful
actionbytherobot,suchasliftingitsarm.Responsestothissceneareanthropomorphicsincethey
relyontheattributionofcertainpropertiesthattherobotdoesnothave,butwhicharesignaledby
thedesignorbehavioroftherobot,suchashavingeyesorlookingatsomething.Thedistalscene
finallyaccountsforthepossiblefunctionoftherespectivebehaviorincontext,whichmayinthis
case be that the robot is trying to reach for something. It concerns a fictional scene in which the
robotis acharacter,for instance,a human-likebeing.
Letusconsidersomeexamplesfromhuman-robotinteraction(seeTable 2);forinstance,Nakata
et al. [1998] introduced subjects to a fish-shaped experimental robot which is sensitive to touch.
In one of the three behaviors implemented, the robot lifts its ‘head’ when sensing human touch.
Theauthorsdefinethisbehavioras“arepellingtactilereaction”andlabelit“rebellious.”Usingthe
depictionmodel,wecandistinguishbetweenthebasescene,inwhichtherobot’smotorspushup
the upper part of the robot when the input to the touch sensor exceeds a threshold; the proximal
scene, in which the robot ‘pushes back;’ and the distal scene, in which the robot’s behavior is
understoodas expressinga rebelliousintention.
As another example consider Tielmann et al.’s [ 2014] model of robot emotional expression in
child-robot interaction, in which the robot’s behavior differs concerning features like speechvol-
ume, pitch height, speech rate, head pose, eye color, arm and trunk pose. The robot is designed
tomatchthechild’smeasuredemotionalstate,whichisanalyzedintermsofarousal,valenceand
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.