TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:13
understandingsofrobots,i.e.thepsychologicalbasisfortheobservablebehavior.Forinstance,the
method proposed does not make assumptions about psychological mechanisms such as mindless
transfer [Nass & Moon 2000], automatic trait attribution [Roebroek 2014], or the real belief
that the robot under consideration has a set of human-like characteristics. That is, our study is
neutral with respect to possible explanations for the anthropomorphizing behavior observable.
Nevertheless, as we shall see (Section 6), the results of tracking people’s anthropomorphizing
behaviors in interaction over time will have considerable consequences for explanatory models
of anthropomorphism in human-robot interaction. Bridging the gap between people’s cognitive
processes and their observable behavior goes unfortunately far beyond the limits of this paper
(but see Clark & Fischer under revision). What the method proposed here however does allow us
to do is to describe people’s responses to robotic action and track anthropomorphizing behavior
dynamically over thecourseofan interaction.
4 CASESTUDY
Inthefollowing,Iillustratethemethodproposedinanexampleanalysisofhuman-robotinterac-
tionsbasedonClark’s[ 2016]modelofdepiction;thatis,Iillustratetheapplicationofthemethod-
ology on a case.
4.1 Data
The data re-used here are spontaneous interactions gathered in the lobby of Willow Garage for
another study [Fischer et al. 2014]. In these interactions, participants were left alone in the lobby
to fill out an initial questionnaire. While participants were busy filling out the form, a PR2 robot,
placeddirectlyoppositetheparticipantsacrossthecounteronwhichtheywerewriting,addressed
them eitherwith speechor with a beep,and performed a series of gestures intended to be under-
stoodasgesturingforhelp.
Thedatasetcomprises19interactions(ninemen,ninewomen,oneunreportedgender)ofpar-
ticipantsbetween19and63yearsoldandfromvariousoccupationsandeducationalbackgrounds.
Theyhadbeenrecruitedtoparticipateinhuman-robotinteractionexperimentsbutdidnotknow
at the time of the interaction that it was part of the experiment (but were debriefed later). They
were on average not very acquainted with robots (3.4 on a 7-item scale), and they scored M =82
out of 110 on other-oriented empathy (sd =7.3) and M =25.5 out of 40 (sd =4.3) for helpfulness
[ cf.Fischeretal. 2014]in astandardized questionnaireonprosocialpersonality[Penner 2002].
The robot’s behaviors were all prerecorded and were initiated by the experimenter remotely
fromanotherroomaccordingtoafixedscript.Robotbehaviorwasnotfullyautomatizedinorder
to ensure participants’ safety. The experimenter came back into the lobby when the participants
hadstoppedinteractingwiththerobotforat least30seconds.
4.2 Analysisof theRobot’sBehavior
In Table3, we analyze the robot’s behavior in the speech condition on the basis of our depic-
tion model; the robot behaviors were implemented by the engineer using the so-called ‘puppet-
interface’[cf.Pantofaruetal. 2013].Thisinterfaceallowstheresearchertoprogramdifferentrobot
movements and to store them in sequence. These actions constitute the base scene, which com-
prises the concrete means by which the depiction is carried out, such as gesture, head orienta-
tionorpresynthesized,cannedspeech.Thisbehaviorismeanttoevokeaproximalscene,suchas
the robot reaching for something or turning towards the participant. The third level is the distal
scene evoked, such as the robot intending to collect a plastic cup from the shelf or turning to the
participant for help. The distal scene evoked thus corresponds to the robot behavior designer’s
intentions (see Table 3). That is, from a social interaction perspective (i.e. from the perspective of
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.