4:6 K. Fischer
theinteraction,noronitsdevelopmentovertime,butonthepervasivenessofanthropomorphism
in participants’verbalbehavior.
Participants’ (mostly) verbal behaviors also form the basis of ethnographic analyses of anthro-
pomorphism [cf. Chun & Knight 2020]. Specifically, participants’ verbal behavior observed and
documented in field notes or elicited in interviews can be analyzed for traces of anthropomor-
phism; for instance, Forlizzi [ 2007] reports instances of social attributions to a Roomba robot.
Chun & Knight [ 2020] additionally asked the participants in their study, employees at a robot
manufacturing company, directly for reports or stories about “interesting interactions” with the
robots,aswellasabouttherobots’genderandpersonality,inadditiontoasurveyinwhichsocial
attributions were elicited in open and Likert-scale questions. These analyses target stakeholders’
“holisticunderstandingsofintegratedtechnologies”[Chun&Knight 2020,p.16:5],i.e.howpartic-
ularsocialgroupsofpeople,suchasfamiliesorthedifferentteamsinthemanufacturingcompany,
makesenseofrobotsdependingontheirculturalsituatedness,andthusaimatunderstandingthe
general concepts and practices of groups, rather than at the dynamic unfolding of anthropomor-
phizingbehaviorin interaction.
Another type of behavioral study measures how quickly people answer questions about so-
cial attributions to robots in comparison with attributions to people [e.g. Fussell et al. 2008]
or how quickly they respond when primed with images of either humans or robots (Złotowski
et al. [2018]). A variant of this type of investigations is to study the conditions that slow reaction
timesdown,inparticular,interferenceeffects,suchasthe‘SocialSimonEffect.’Thisphenomenon
describes the motor interference from observing another person carrying out a slightly different
behavior.Thatis,ifapersontriestodrawastraightlineorhitabuttonasquicklyaspossible,she
maybemoreinaccurateorslowerwhenwatchinganotherpersoncarryingoutaslightlydifferent
task[cf.Försteretal. 2020].Stenzeletal.[ 2012]investigatedtowhatextentrobotsareperceivedas
similarenoughtocausesuchaninterference.Intheseexperiments,participantswereseatednext
toaquitemechanicallylooking,humanoidrobot,wheretheyhadtohittheleftkeywhenasquare
appearedonthescreen,whereastherobothittherightkeywhenadiamondappeared.Participants
weretoldeitherthattherobotwasactiveandintelligentandrespondingautonomously,orthatit
was completely controlled by the computer, and thus mechanically executing motor commands.
Theresultsshowedthatonlywhenparticipantsbelievedthattherobotwasactiveandintentional,
their own behavior was influenced by the robot’s behavior. In contrast, if they believed the robot
to bean unintelligentmachine,no interferencewasobserved.
Similarly, Klapper et al. [ 2014] investigated the degree to which anthropomorphic design and
beliefs about the robot interferes with participants’ own finger movements. They found that hu-
man form and the belief to be observing a human hand together created inhibition effects, but
not if only one of them is present. The two reaction time studies thus suggested that while au-
tomatic responses to anthropomorphic design can be observed, these responses are mediated by
participants’mentalmodels.
To sum up, behavioral measures provide indirect evidence for the extent to which people an-
thropomorphize a robotic interaction partner. Usually the baseline is the human communication
partner; for instance, if people’s reaction times, degrees of interference, ways of speaking or re-
sponses to a particular cue (like the request to lie for the robot) are similar to those observable
in interactions with humans, then these behaviors are taken as evidence for anthropomorphism.
Thisapproachproducesinformationaboutanthropomorphisminthemoment,butstudiesusually
measure only a single behavior and only once. This approach thus cannot inform us about the
timecourseofanthropomorphismininteractiondynamicallybecausenotenoughdatapointsare
elicited.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.