TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:23
could easily imagine that a learning algorithm is applied to classify people’s behaviors automati-
cally. While we cannot simply classify a human action, say waving at the robot, as an instance of
abehavioratanyofthethreelevelsingeneralbecauseitmayhavedifferentfunctionsindifferent
contexts, to what level waving at the robot is oriented in response to a specific action could be
automatically assigned. For instance, when the robot is gesturing for help, waving can be auto-
matically assigned to the proximal level (the robot is in the course of scanning its environment),
whereasinothersituations,suchasinresponsetoagreeting,itcanbeautomaticallyclassifiedas
aresponseonthedistalscene.Thus,whilethemethodcanbecarriedoutmanually,anautomatic
analysisis principallypossible.
The fact that our student assistant could encode the data in highly similar ways without pre-
vious training and only on the basis of the current text furthermore indicates that the method is
easily learnable and replicable; this particular dataset may seem to have been easier to analyze
withthemethodproposedthanothersbecausetheintentionallycraftedrobotbehaviorsprovided
natural ways of segmenting the interaction and because of the three levels attended to in the ro-
botbehaviordesignusingthe‘puppet’interface,whichprovidedanintuitiveanchorpointforthe
analysis of the human participants’ behaviors. Still, as my brief analysis of the three studies by
Nakataetal.[ 1998],Tielmannetal.[ 2014]andHuang&Mutlu[ 2013]inSection 3.2indicates,itis
relatively straightforward to identify these three levels even post hocin all kinds of robot behav-
iors. An additional tutorial for the functional encoding and segmentation of the interactions can
bedownloaded a linkto thetutorialtobepublishedwiththemain article.
6 IMPLICATIONS
In this study, we have analyzed participants’ responses to a robot’s behaviors based on whether
they attend to the robot’s mechanical properties, the proximal scene evoked or the distal scene.
Thus, we have described people’s behaviors, not their mental models or mental attributions of
human-like properties to the robot; consequently, we cannot make assertions about what people
believeabouttherobot.4However,theresultsdoshowconsiderableintra-andinterpersonalvaria-
tioninthewaypeoplerespondtoidenticalrobotbehaviors,whichhastheoreticalimplicationsfor
ourunderstandingofanthropomorphism.Forinstance,wehavefoundthatparticipantsrespondto
therobot’sactionswithanthropomorphizingbehaviors,suchasreciprocatingagreeting,offering
help,askingwhatitwantsetc.,inonemoment,butthatinthenextmoment,theymayalsotreatit
like a machine. That is, even if some of the robot’s actions, such as the polite verbal greeting, are
often responded to in an anthropomorphizing manner at the distal level, this does not mean that
the robot is responded to with anthropomorphism with regard to other actions. Instead, people
shiftbetweentreatingtherobotlikeanotherhumanandtreatingitlikeamachinewithnoappar-
entdifficulty.Consequently,oneimplicationofthisstudyisthatpeopledonotanthropomorphize
robotsingeneral, butrespondanthropomorphicallytoindividualaspectsor behaviorsof robots.
From this perspective, it is misleading to assume that robots aresocial actors: People rather
seemtotreatrobotsassocialactorstemporarily.Thesefindingscastdoubtontheassumptionthat
people mindlessly attribute social characteristics to robots, as suggested in the media equation
hypothesis [Reeves & Nass 1996], which was further developed into the Computers Are Social
Actorsparadigm[Nass&Moon 2000].Instead,peopledonotseemtoconfuserobotswithhumans
sincetheyregularlyreturntotreatingtherobotasamachineinbetweentheiranthropomorphizing
behaviors.
4Similarly,becauseitreliesonpeople’sobservablebehavior,themethodcannotsafeguardagainstexperimentalbias,such
thatparticipantsmaybehaveinawaytopleasetheexperimenter,becauseitdoesnotaddressmotivationsandintentions,
just whatcanbeobserved.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.