TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:11
levelofextroversion.Theauthorsdescribetherelationshipasfollows:“Thevoiceoftherobotwill
beinfluencedbyitsarousal.Thehigherarousal,theloudertherobotwillspeak,thehigherpitched
itsvoicewillbeandthehigherthespeechrate.Speechvolumeisalsoinfluencedbyextroversion,
thehighertheextroversion,thelouderthevoice.”Thus,accordingtoourmodel,thebasesceneis
constituted by a machine producing speech in a loud and high-pitched voice, the proximal scene
istosignalarousal,andthedistalsceneistoindicatetothechildthattherobotisasexcitedabout
somethingas thechildis.
Asalastexample,considertheimplementationofdifferenttypesofgesturesinanarratingrobot
[Huang & Mutlu 2013]. The robot’s gestures were carefully modeled after human gestures previ-
ously elicited in human narrations and coordinated with particular lexical material in the robot’s
speechstream.Theauthorsfind,forinstance,thatthe“robot’suseoficonicgesturessignificantly
predictedmales’perceptionsoftherobot’scompetence”.Usingourmodel,wecandistinguishbe-
tween the robot producing a previously demonstrated and recorded posture of its ‘hand’ at the
same time as a particular word is used, which constitutes the base scene; the interpretation of
the hand posture as iconic gesture, which constitutes the proximal scene, and the impression of
a competent robot that can accompany its words with appropriate gestures that indicate that it
understandswhatit issaying, whichconstitutesthedistalscene.
By conceptualizing the robot’s behavior as an act of depiction, we can analyze in the next step
what level of the robot’s behavior users rely on while interacting with the robot, moment by
moment. We thus apply the depiction model for describing the robot’s behavior, and in a second
stepuseitto describethewaysin whichpeoplerespondtotherobot’sactions.
3.3 Describing Human Behavior in Interaction with Robots
For the analysis of participants’ responses to the robot in interaction, we take the micro-analytic
perspective on participants’ actions developed in the framework of ethnomethodological conver-
sation analysis [cf. Garfinkel 1972; Sacks1992]. In this methodological framework [cf. Sacks et
al.1974], like in other collaborative models of communication [such as Clark 1996; Bangerter &
Mayor2013],itisassumedthatinorderforinteractiontosucceed,participantsneedtodisplayto
eachothercontinuouslyhow theyunderstandeachothers’contributionsand whatthey consider
therelevantcontextofthecurrentactiontobe[cf.Clark&Schaefer 1989].Forinstance,ifspeaker
A says “sit down”, this utterance per seis highly ambiguous; it could be a suggestion, an invita-
tion, or a command, among many other things. However, once speaker B has responded to it, for
instancebysaying“thankyou”,theinterpretationofA’sutteranceisspecifiedasaninvitation.In
thenextturn,speakerAmayrejectthisinterpretation,forinstance,bysaying“thiswasanorder!”;
however, if she does not challenge speaker B’s interpretation, ‘invitation’ is the intersubjectively
established interpretation of A’s utterance [cf. Sacks et al. 1974]. Because speakers in interaction
need to display to each other the interpretations of each others’ utterances in order to arrive at
intersubjectively available common ground [cf. Clark & Schaefer 1989], their interpretations of
eachothers’behaviorsarealso availableto theobserver[seeSacks 1984].
Correspondingly,inthemethodproposed,welookatthewaysinwhichtheparticipantsdisplay
how they make sense of the robot’s behavior.1Our micro-analysis of the users’ responses to the
robot’sdepictionofhumansocialbehaviorcanindicatetowhichscenetheuserattendsinthesense
1Obviously, in most current human-robot interactions, robots are not designed to display their interpretation of a user’s
utterance,especiallynotifthedialogisscriptedorevendeterministic.Nevertheless,eventhenon-verbalcompliancewith
the request to move forward constitutes such a display of the interpretation of the user’s behavior – to the user. That is,
if the robot complies, the user will take her instruction to be understood and processed successfully, and she will move
on to the next instruction, which she will design based on what she assumes has previously been successful, i.e. what she
takes tobecommonground (for detailsandfurther discussion, pleaseseeFischer [ 2016]).
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.