4Tracking Anthropomorphizing Behaviorin
Human-Robot Interaction
KERSTINFISCHER, Universityof Southern Denmark, Sønderborg, Denmark
Existing methodologies to describe anthropomorphism in human-robot interaction often rely either on spe-
cificone-timeresponsestorobotbehavior,suchaskeepingtherobot’ssecret,oronposthocmeasures,suchas
questionnaires.Currently,thereisnomethodtodescribethedynamicsofpeople’sbehavioroverthecourseof
aninteractionandinresponsetorobotbehavior.Inthispaper,Iproposeamethodthatallowstheresearcher
to trace anthropomorphizing and non-anthropomorphizing responses to robots dynamically moment-by-
moment over the course of human-robot interactions. I illustrate this methodology in a case study and find
considerable variation between participants, but also considerable intrapersonal variation in the ways the
robot is anthropomorphized. That is, people may respond to the robot as if it was another human in one
moment and to its machine-like properties in the next. These findings may influence explanatory models of
anthropomorphism.
CCSConcepts:• Human-centered computing →HCI theory, concepts and models ;Empirical studies
in HCI;
AdditionalKeyWordsandPhrases:Anthropomorphism,interactionanalysis,methodology,mindlesstransfer,
computers-are-social-actors
ACM Reference format:
Kerstin Fischer. 2021. Tracking Anthropomorphizing Behavior in Human-Robot Interaction. ACM Trans.
Hum.-Robot Interact. 11, 1, Article 4(October 2021), 28 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3442677
1 INTRODUCTION
Overthepastdecades,ithasbeenwidelydocumentedthatpeoplemayrespondtorobotslikethey
respond to other humans. This phenomenon has been discussed under the headings anthropo-
morphism, mindless transfer or media equation,or as the ‘computers are socialactors paradigm.’
Thephenomenoncanbeunderstoodfromatleastthreedifferentperspectives,andthusaninitial
terminologicalclarificationisin order:
The research presented here rests to a large extent on a fruitful collaboration with Herbert H. Clark, supported through
a research stay at Stanford University funded by the Carlsberg Foundation. I am also much indebted to Jaap Ham and
AndreasMatthiasformanyinterestingquestionsandcommentsonapreviousversionofthispaper,andtotheanonymous
reviewers of this paper,who made many very useful suggestions. Remainingerrors and inconsistencies are self-evidently
myown.
Authors’ addresses: K. Fischer, Department of Design and Communication, University of Southern Denmark, Alsion 2,
DK-6400Sonderborg, Denmark;email:kerstin@sdu.dk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2021Copyright held bytheowner/author(s). Publicationrights licensed toACM.
2573-9522/2021/10-ART4$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3442677
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.