4:4 K. Fischer
questionnaires have been developed to investigate anthropomorphism; very common is the God-
speed questionnaire developed by Bartneck et al. [ 2009]. More recent proposals are the Robotic
Social Attributes Scale [Carpinella et al. 2017], Ruijten et al.’s [ 2019] survey that distinguishes
between different types of attributions, and Damgaard et al.’s [ 2020] questionnaire, which dis-
tinguishes between anthropomorphing and sociomorphing. Thus, the first use of questionnaires
is to understand what features people attribute to robots (and to what extent), based on design
propertiesoftherobotor basedonthewaysin whichitisintroducedorpresented.
Arelateduseofquestionnairesistotestforsocialcategorization.Forexample,Eyssel&Kuchen-
brandt[2012]presentedarobottoparticipantsaseitheranin-grouporanout-groupmemberand
askedthemtoratetherobotregardinganthropomorphism(mindattribution,warmth),psycholog-
icalcloseness,contactintentions,anddesign.Participantsratedthein-grouprobotmorefavorably
and anthropomorphizedit more strongly.
Questionnaires are also used to measure the effects of certain robot behaviors or properties of
behaviors.Forinstance,NassandBrave[ 2005]investigatedwhetherpeoplerespondtocharacter-
isticsof robotvoicesin similar waysasto humanvoices.
Anotheruseofquestionnairesistostudyeffectsofrobotframingontheextenttowhichpeople
anthropomorphizerobots;Paepke&Takayama[ 2009],forinstance,presentedparticipantswitha
Pleorobot,introducingiteitherashighlysophisticatedorasratherbasic.Theyfoundthatpeople’s
experienceoftheinteractionasmeasuredbyapost-experimentalquestionnairewasinfluencedby
the way the robot was framed. A slightly different use of questionnaires is not to ask people for
evaluations of the robot, but instead to have them assess the robot’s suspected knowledge. Lee
et al. [2005], for instance, presented participants with a robot that was introduced to them as ei-
ther built in China or in the US. Participants furthermore witnessed a brief interaction between
the experimenter and the robot in either Mandarin or English, before they had to rate the like-
lihood that the robot knew landmarks from China, the US and other regions of the world in a
questionnaire. The results showed that participants assumed the robot to know more landmarks
ofthecountryinwhichitwasbuilt,andthusthatparticipantsoverusedsocialcategories,likethe
assumptionof common ground [Clark 1996].
Besides asking about trait attributions, attributions of group membership and cultural knowl-
edgetorobotsbasedontheirdesign,descriptionorbehavior,questionnairesmayalsoelicitother
kindsofattributions,suchasmoralcapability.Forinstance,theymayaskabouttheextenttowhich
participants hold robots morally accountable for their actions and the consequences of these ac-
tions[e.g.Arnold&Scheutz 2017],whichthenprovidesindirectevidenceforanthropomorphism.
Ifquestionnairesareusedtostudyanthropomorphicdesign,theyoftenmakeuseofimagesorof
videos of robots [e.g. Philipps et al. 2017; Rosenthal-von der Pütten & Kramer 2014; Hegel2012].
If questionnaires are used in human-robot interactions, they are usually administered post hoc,
duetothefactthatfillingthemoutconstitutesanactivitybyitself.Sometimesquestionnairesare
administered between different phases of an experiment [e.g. Ham et al. 2012], yet they do not
capturepeople’sresponsesinthehereandnowoftheinteraction.
2.2 BehavioralMeasures
Another methodology for studying anthropomorphism is to elicit behavioral effects of robot de-
sign, robot behavior or robot framing. In comparison with questionnaires, studies targeting be-
havioraleffectshavetheadvantageofstudyinganthropomorphisminthemoment,i.e.duringthe
interactions in which they arise. A considerable body of work rests on previous findings on the
effects of social cues in human interaction, which can be replicated in human-robot interaction
suchthatwhenproducedbyarobot,socialcuesaresimilarlyrespondedtoaswhensuchcuesare
produced by humans. Nass [ 2010, page 12] describes the method he and his collaborators have
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.