4:12 K. Fischer
thatthehumanisdisplayinganorientationtoacertainaspectofthesituation;forinstance,inthe
exampleabove,bysaying“thankyou,”speakerBdisplaysherorientationtospeakerA’sutterance
as an invitation. While in this example, the display concerns the interpretation of the function of
theutterance,peoplealsodesigntheirbehaviorsspecificallyfortheircurrentinteractionpartners.
That is, each utterance is so designed that the particular recipient can understand it [Levinson
2006]; who the speaker takes the recipient of the utterance to be, for example, whether he or she
assumestobetalkingtoamachineortoalive-likecharacter,canthusalsobeidentifiedfromthe
way the utterance is designed [i.e. by means of ‘reverse recipient design’, cf. Fischer et al. 2012].
Using this approach, we can analyze participants’ behaviors towards robots by classifying them
according to (a) whether they display an orientation to the base scene by treating the robot as a
mechanical tool; (b) whether they display an orientation to the proximal scene by displaying an
understanding of the robot’s behavior as being intentional and meaningful; or (c) whether they
attendto thedistalsceneby displayingan understandingof therobot’sbehaviorashuman-like.
Inparticular,foreachresponsetoarobot’sactions,weidentifytowhichofthethreescenespro-
poseditisaresponseto.Forinstance,arobot’sgreeting“Hello,howareyou?”,canberesponded
to in several different ways [see Fischer 2011]: One possibility is to reciprocate the greeting by
replying “I’m fine, thanks, how are you?”. This is a response at the distal level, where two people
arehavingapoliteconversation.Asecondpossibilityistorespondtotherobot’sutteranceasthe
productionofcannedspeechbyamachineinordertoindicatethebeginningoftheinteraction.In
this case, people may say “drive forward”. This utterance signals an orientation towards the base
scene.Furthermore,peoplemayacknowledgethattherobotwasaskingaquestionandproducing
agreetingbyresponding“fine”or“hello”.Inthiscase,peopleorienttowardstheproximalscene,in
which the robot is taken to produce some type of social action. However, the human interlocutor
doesnotenterintothejointpretense[cf.Clark 1999]ofhavingapoliteconversation,butacknowl-
edgesthattherobot’sbehaviormayhaveasocialfunction,suchasopeningtheinteraction(‘hello’)
and askingaquestion(‘fine’).Theseresponseswould thereforebelocatedat theproximal level.
We can thus classify people’s behavior as being oriented to the base, proximal or distal scene,
where responses to the proximal and distal scene are anthropomorphizing since they involve
sense-makingbydrawingonthehumandomain.Whilethedistalsceneclearlyevokesafictional,
human-likebeing,theproximalscenealsoinvolveshuman-likecategories,suchastheattribution
of human functions (e.g. the robot “sees” something), and can be (and has been) considered as
anthropomorphism [e.g. Fussell et al. 2008], yet the mechanisms underlying these two scenes are
most likely quite different (that is, semiotic versus inferential processes, [cf. Fischer 2016]), and
thusweratherkeepthemdistinctinourclassification.
Given the multimodal nature of interaction, users’ displays of how they understand the
partner’s actions may potentially comprise a very broad range of signals. For instance, on the
one hand, we can look at what people say, on the other, also the timely response to the partner’s
behavior, i.e. attending to the response time typical of human interaction, about 300msecs, [see
Jefferson 2004], can indicate to the analyst that the person is orienting to the robot in similar
ways as to a human communication partner [cf. Hutchby 2001]. Similarly, people may or may
notgazetowardsrobotsattimeswhentheywouldalsogazetowardshumaninteractionpartners
[e.g. Andrist et al. 2014]. Anthropomorphizing responses may consequently become evident in
all kinds of communicativebehaviors.
The method proposed thus targets anthropomorphism in terms of anthropomorphizing
behavior, i.e. behavior that attributes human-like qualities to a robot. It is consequently in line
with work investigating behavioral responses, such as keeping a robot’s secret [e.g. Kahn et al.
2015],savingacomputer’sface[Nass 2004]ordescribingarobotinintentionalisticways[Fussell
et al.2008]. However, the method proposed does not make claims regarding people’s subjective
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.