TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:17
Fig. 1. Progression of H101’s responses to the robot’s actions (y-axis) in terms of orientation to the base,
proximal anddistallevel.
social obligation to negotiate the end of the interaction [cf. Schegloff & Sacks 1973in contrast],
thusorientingtowardsthebasesceneagain.
Theparticipant’sbehaviorisvisualizedinFigure 1,whichillustrateshowhisbehaviorchanges
between the base, proximal and distal scenes (y-axis) in response to the different robot behaviors
(x-axis).Alinediagramwaschosentohighlighttheprogressionofanthropomorphizingbehavior
overtime(eventhoughtherearenotransitionsbetweenthethreelevelsastheconnectionsmight
suggest), because the novelty of the method proposed here is that it can document the dynamic
unfoldingof anthropomorphizingbehavioroverthecourseof theinteraction.
As the diagram summarizes, the participant switches back and forth between attention to the
distal,proximaland basescenewithinthisone minuteof interaction(59seconds).
4.4 Analysisof thewholedataset
All19interactionswereanalyzedbasedonthedepictionmodelinthesamewayasdescribedabove.
Inordertomeasuretheinterraterreliabilityofthecodingschemepresented,fourinteractionswere
analyzed by an independent coder, a master student in an IT program on web communication
design, on the basis of the text in section 3and the example analyses in section 4,w h i c hs e r v e d
as his only instruction. The comparison of the analyses by the first author and the independent
coderreveals 93.74%agreementand a Cohen’skappaof 0.874.
Data analysis shows that every single interaction is unique in terms of attending to the robot,
following therobot’sattentiontotheshelf,moving towardstherobot,andhelping.
Forexample,participantH111behavedverydifferentlyfromparticipantH101byfirstignoring
the robot (base scene – the robot is a machine that needs no attention) and then by trying to
make sense of the robot’s actions (proximal scene – the robot’s actions indicate something) (see
Table5).
AnotherexampleshowinganothertypeofresponseisproducedbyH112,whorespondstothe
robotin socialwaysinitially,butthenlargely ignores it(seeTable 6):
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.