TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:21
Fig. 3. Attention to base (1), proximal (2) and distal (3) scene by the 11 participants in the beep condition
(representedbyaline each) over thecourseof theinteraction (thetenactions of therobot).
The results show high intra- and interpersonal variation in the response to each of the robot’s
actions, such that no two participants acted in similar ways over the course of these interactions.
Thus, participants differ with respect to what they respond to at what level. This is in line with
previousworkshowinginterpersonalvariationintreatingrobotsassocialactors[Epleyetal. 2007;
Fischer2011,2016;L e ee ta l . 2010]. Furthermore, not a single user responded to the distal scene
only, which means that not a single participant treated the robot as a social actor over the course
of the whole interaction. Moreover, some participants did not respond to the robot’s behavior at
theproximalor distallevelat alland thusdid not treatitin ananthropomorphicway.
Towhatextentdotheresultscorrespondtoothermethodsofmeasuringanthropomorphism?In
theoriginalstudy[Fischeretal. 2014],weusedaquestionnairetoassesspeople’sperceptionsofthe
robot after the experiment. Table 6reports the questionnaire results from the original study for
the questions, how appealing, competent, intelligent, superior, safe, approachable, and confident
the robot was perceived on a 7-point Likert scale in the two conditions. The results show mean
ratings from 2.91 to 5.88, suggesting that the robot is attributed with human-like characteristics
to a medium degree on average. This medium degree of ascription of human-like characteristics
maycorrespondtothebackandforthbetweenthebase,proximalanddistalscenesobservedinthe
current analysis. Similarly, the standard deviations between 1.13 and 2.66 for the two conditions
maycorrespondtotheinterpersonalvariationthatwecanseeinFigures 3and4.Asignificantdif-
ferencebetweenthetwoconditionswasfoundonlyfortheattribute friendly(F(1,17) =7.42,p <.05,
η2=.30[cf.Fischeretal. 2014]),whichmaycorrespondtotheoveralldifferencesbetweenthetwo
conditionswithrespecttoresponsesattheproximalanddistallevelapparentfrom Figures 3and
4. However, since the questionnaire results present people’s post hocimpressions, the statistical
results do not replace the detailed analysis of people’s responses to the robot’s actions over the
courseoftheinteraction;thequantitativecomparisonofpeople’sorientationtothebase,proximal
and distal scene in the two condition shows that the method proposed can not only track partici-
pants’ anthropomorphizing behaviors over time, but also provide a more fine-grained analysis of
theeffectsofparticulardesign choices,suchasaddinga socialframingutterance.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.