Molecules 2020 ,25, 3446 2 of 16
(TS) is commonly used [ 4] as a metric (between zero and one). One means for obtaining such a
vector for a molecule is to calculate from the structure (or measure) various properties of the molecule
(“descriptors” [ 5–7]), such as clogP or total polar surface area, and then to concatenate them. However,
a more common strategy for obtaining the encoding vector of numbers is simply to use structural
features directly and to encode them as so-called molecular ﬁngerprints [ 8–17]. Well-known examples
include MACCS [ 18], atom pairs [ 19], torsion [ 20], extended connectivity [ 21], functional class [ 22],
circular [ 23], and so on. The similarities so encoded can also then be compared as their Jaccard or
Tanimoto similarities. Sometimes a “di erence” or “distance” is discussed and formulated as 1-TS (a
true metric). An excellent and widely used framework for performing all of this is RDKit (Pathon v3.6.8)
(www.rdkit.org /) [24], that presently contains nine methods for producing molecular ﬁngerprints.
The problem comes from the fact that the “most similar” molecules to a target molecule often
dier wildly both as judged by their structures observable by eye and quantitatively in terms of the
value of the TS of the di erent ﬁngerprints [ 25]. As a very small and simple dataset, we take the set
of molecules observed by Dickens and colleagues [ 26] to inhibit the transporter-mediated uptake of
the second-generation atypical antipsychotic drug clozapine. These are olanzapine, chlorpromazine,
quetiapine, prazosin, lamotrigine, indatraline, verapamil and rhein. Of the FDA-approved drugs,
we assessed the top 50 drugs in terms of their structural similarity to clozapine using the nine RDKit
encodings, with the results shown in Table 1 and Figure 1 (see also Supplementary Figure S1). Only the
ﬁrst four of these are even within the top 50 for any encoding, and only olanzapine appears for each
of them. By contrast, the most potent inhibitor is prazosin (which is not even wholly of the same
drug class, being both a treatment for anxiety and a high-blood-pressure-lowering agent); however,
it appears in the top 50 in only one encoding (torsion) and then with a Tanimoto similarity of just
0.37. That said, visual inspection of their “Kekularised” structures does show a substantial common
substructure between prazosin and clozapine (marked in Figure 1). It is clear that the similarities, as
judged by standard ﬁngerprint encodings, are highly variable , and are prone to both false negatives and
false positives when it comes to attacking the question as set down above. What we need is a di erent
kind of strategy.
Molecules 2020 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 17 
 is commonly used [4] as a metric (between zero and one). One means for obtaining such a vector for 
a molecule is to calculate from the structure (o r measure) various properties of the molecule 
(“descriptors” [5–7]), such as clogP or total polar surface area, and then to concatenate them. 
However, a more common strategy for obtaining the encoding vector of numbers is simply to use 
structural features directly and to encode them  as so-called molecular fingerprints [8–17]. Well-
known examples include MACCS [18], atom pairs [19], torsion [20], extended connectivity [21], functional class [22], circular [23], and so on. The similarities so encoded can also then be compared as their Jaccard or Tanimoto similarities. Sometime s a “difference” or “distance” is discussed and 
formulated as 1-TS (a true metric). An excellent and widely used framework for performing all of this is RDKit (Pathon v3.6.8) (www.rdkit.org/) [24], that presently contains nine methods for producing 
molecular fingerprints. 
The problem comes from the fact that the “most similar” molecules to a target molecule often 
differ wildly both as judged by their structures ob servable by eye and quantitatively in terms of the 
value of the TS of the different fi ngerprints [25]. As a very small an d simple dataset, we take the set 
of molecules observed by Dickens and colleagues [26] to inhibit the transporter-mediated uptake of the second-generation atypical antipsychotic drug clozapine. These are olanzapine, chlorpromazine, quetiapine, prazosin, lamotrigine, indatraline, verapamil and rhein. Of the FDA-approved drugs, we 
assessed the top 50 drugs in terms of their structur al similarity to clozapine using the nine RDKit 
encodings, with the results shown in Table 1 and Fi gure 1 (see also Supplementary Figure S1). Only 
the first four of these are even within the top 50  for any encoding, and only olanzapine appears for 
each of them. By contrast, the most potent inhibitor is prazosin (which is not even wholly of the same 
drug class, being both a treatment for anxiety an d a high-blood-pressure-lowering agent); however, 
it appears in the top 50 in only one encoding (torsion) and then with a Tanimoto similarity of just 0.37. That said, visual inspection of their “Kekularised” structures does show a substantial common 
substructure between prazosin and clozapine (marked in Figure 1). It is clear that the similarities, as 
judged by standard fingerprint encodings, are highly variable , and are prone to both false negatives 
and false positives when it comes to attacking the question as set down above. What we need is a different kind of strategy. 
 
Figure 1. Tanimoto similarities of various molecules to clozapine using the Torsion encoding from 
RDKit. 
Figure 1. Tanimoto similarities of various molecules to clozapine using the Torsion encoding from RDKit.