Molecules 2020 ,25, 3446 5 of 16
that we suspect may be of general utility. We might refer to this encoding as the “essence of molecules”
(EM) encoding, but here, we refer to it as VAE-Sim.
Molecules 2020 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 17 
Molecules 2020 , 25, x; doi: FOR PEER REVIEW www.mdpi.com/journ al/molecules The typical structure of a QSAR type of problem is provided in Figure 2A, where a series of 
molecules represented as SMILES st rings [27] are encoded as molecular fingerprints and used to learn 
a nonlinear mapping to produce an output in the fo rm of a classification or  regression estimation. 
The architecture of this is implicitly in the form of  a multilayer perceptron (a classical neural network 
[28–31]), in which weights are mo dified (“trained”) to provide a mapping from input SMILES to a 
numerical output. Our fundamental problem stems fr om the fact that these types of encoding are 
one-way: the SMILES string can generate the molecular fingerprin t but the molecular fingerprint 
cannot generate the SMILES. Put another way, it is the transition from a world of discrete objects 
(here molecules) with categorica l representations (here SMILES strings) to one of a continuous 
representation (vectors of weights) that is seem ingly irreversible in this representation. One key 
element is the means by which we can go from a non-numerical representati on (such as SMILES or 
similar [32]) to a numerical representation or “embedding” (this, as we shall see, is typically constituted by vectors of numbers in the nodes an d weights of multilayer ne ural networks) [33–38]). 
Deep learning has also been used for the encodi ng step of 2D chemical structures [39,40]. 
 
 
Molecules 2020 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 17 
  
Figure 2. Two kinds of neural architecture. ( A) A classical multilayer perceptron representing a 
supervised learning system in which molecules encoded as SMILES strings can be used as paired inputs with outputs of interest (w hether a classification or a regre ssion). The trained model may then 
be interrogated with further molecu les and the output ascertained. ( B) A variational autoencoder, is 
a supervised means of fitting distributions of discre te models in a way that reconstructs them via a 
vector in a latent space. ( C) The variational autoencoder (VAE) architecture used in the present work. 
More recently, it was recognised that various ki nds of architectures could, in fact, permit the 
reversal of this numerical encoding so as to return  a molecule (or its SMILES string encoding a unique 
structure). These are known as generative methods [41–55], and at heart their aim to generate a 
suitable and computationally useful representation [56] of the input data. It is common (but cf. [57,58]) to contrast two main flavours: generati ve adversarial networks [59–66] and (especially 
variational) autoencoders (VAEs) [41,42,67–76]. We fo cus here on the latter, illustrated in Figure 2B. 
VAEs are latent-variable generative models that define a joint density p
θ(x,z) between some 
observed data x ∈ Rdx and unobserved or latent variables z ∈ Rdz [77], given some model parameters 
θ. They use a variational posterior (also referred to as an encoder), q ϕ(z|x), to construct the latent 
variables with variational parameters ϕ, and a combination of p(z) and p(x|z) to create a decoder that 
has the opposite effect. Learning th e posterior directly is computationally intractable, so the generic 
deep learning strategy is to train a neural network to approximate it. The original “error” 
backpropagated was based on the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the desired (log 
likelihood reconstruction error) and the predicte d output distributions [6 7]. A very great many 
variants of both architectures and divergence me trics have been proposed since then (not all 
discernibly better [78]), and it is a very active fiel d (e.g., [63,64,79–83]). Si nce tuning is necessarily 
domain-specific [84], and most work is in the processing of images and natural languages rather than in molecules, we merely mention a couple, such as transformers (e.g., [85,86]) and others (e.g., [87,88]). Crucial to such autoencoders (that can also be used for data visualisation [89]) is the concept 
of a bottleneck layer, that as a series of nodes of lower dimensionality than its predecessors or 
successors, serves to extract or represent [56] th e crucial features of the input molecules that are 
nonetheless sufficient to admit th eir reconstruction. Indeed, such strategies are sometimes referred 
to as representational learning. 
A higher-level version of the above might state th at a good variational autoencoder will project 
a set of discrete molecules into a continuous late nt space represented for any given molecule by the 
vector representing the values of  the outputs of the nodes in the bottleneck layer when it (or its 
SMILES representation) is applied to the encoder as an input. As with the commonest neural net 
training system (but cf. [90–94]), we use backprop agation to update the network so as to minimise 
the difference between the predicted and the desired output, subject to any other constraints that we 
Figure 2. Two kinds of neural architecture. ( A) A classical multilayer perceptron representing a
supervised learning system in which molecules encoded as SMILES strings can be used as paired
inputs with outputs of interest (whether a classiﬁcation or a regression). The trained model may then
be interrogated with further molecules and the output ascertained. ( B) A variational autoencoder, is a
supervised means of ﬁtting distributions of discrete models in a way that reconstructs them via a vector
in a latent space. ( C) The variational autoencoder (VAE) architecture used in the present work.