Molecules 2020 ,25, 3446 4 of 16
The typical structure of a QSAR type of problem is provided in Figure 2A, where a series
of molecules represented as SMILES strings [ 27] are encoded as molecular ﬁngerprints and used
to learn a nonlinear mapping to produce an output in the form of a classiﬁcation or regression
estimation. The architecture of this is implicitly in the form of a multilayer perceptron (a classical
neural network [ 28–31]), in which weights are modiﬁed (“trained”) to provide a mapping from input
SMILES to a numerical output. Our fundamental problem stems from the fact that these types of
encoding are one-way: the SMILES string can generate the molecular ﬁngerprint but the molecular
ﬁngerprint cannot generate the SMILES. Put another way, it is the transition from a world of discrete
objects (here molecules) with categorical representations (here SMILES strings) to one of a continuous
representation (vectors of weights) that is seemingly irreversible in this representation. One key
element is the means by which we can go from a non-numerical representation (such as SMILES or
similar [ 32]) to a numerical representation or “embedding” (this, as we shall see, is typically constituted
by vectors of numbers in the nodes and weights of multilayer neural networks) [ 33–38]. Deep learning
has also been used for the encoding step of 2D chemical structures [39,40].
More recently, it was recognised that various kinds of architectures could, in fact, permit the
reversal of this numerical encoding so as to return a molecule (or its SMILES string encoding a unique
structure). These are known as generative methods [ 41–55], and at heart their aim to generate a
suitable and computationally useful representation [ 56] of the input data. It is common (but cf. [ 57,58])
to contrast two main ﬂavours: generative adversarial networks [ 59–66] and (especially variational)
autoencoders (VAEs) [41,42,67–76]. We focus here on the latter, illustrated in Figure 2B.
VAEs are latent-variable generative models that deﬁne a joint density p (x,z) between some
observed data x2Rdxand unobserved or latent variables z 2Rdz[77], given some model parameters .
They use a variational posterior (also referred to as an encoder), q '(z|x), to construct the latent variables
with variational parameters ', and a combination of p(z) and p(x |z) to create a decoder that has the
opposite e ect. Learning the posterior directly is computationally intractable, so the generic deep
learning strategy is to train a neural network to approximate it. The original “error” backpropagated
was based on the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the desired (log likelihood reconstruction
error) and the predicted output distributions [ 67]. A very great many variants of both architectures
and divergence metrics have been proposed since then (not all discernibly better [ 78]), and it is a very
active ﬁeld (e.g., [ 63,64,79–83]). Since tuning is necessarily domain-speciﬁc [ 84], and most work is in
the processing of images and natural languages rather than in molecules, we merely mention a couple,
such as transformers (e.g., [ 85,86]) and others (e.g., [ 87,88]). Crucial to such autoencoders (that can
also be used for data visualisation [ 89]) is the concept of a bottleneck layer, that as a series of nodes of
lower dimensionality than its predecessors or successors, serves to extract or represent [ 56] the crucial
features of the input molecules that are nonetheless su cient to admit their reconstruction. Indeed,
such strategies are sometimes referred to as representational learning.
A higher-level version of the above might state that a good variational autoencoder will project
a set of discrete molecules into a continuous latent space represented for any given molecule by the
vector representing the values of the outputs of the nodes in the bottleneck layer when it (or its SMILES
representation) is applied to the encoder as an input. As with the commonest neural net training
system (but cf. [ 90–94]), we use backpropagation to update the network so as to minimise the di erence
between the predicted and the desired output, subject to any other constraints that we may apply.
We also recognise the importance of various forms of regularisation, that are all designed to prevent
overﬁtting [49,95–98].
Because the outputs of the nodes in the bottleneck layer both (i) encode the molecule of interest and
(ii) eectively represent where molecules are in the chemical space on which they have been trained,
a simple metric of similarity between two molecules is clearly the Euclidean or other comparable
distance (e.g., cosine distance) between these vectors. This thus provides for a novel type of similarity
encoding, that in a sense relates the whole chemical space on which the system has been trained and