Molecules 2020 ,25, 3446 9 of 16
Finally, we used our new metrics to determine the similarity to clozapine of other drugs. Figure 5
shows the two similarity scores based on VAE-Sim, calculated as in Figure 3. Gratifyingly, and while
structural similarity is, in part, in the eye of the beholder, a variety of structurally and functionally
related antipsychotic drugs such as loxapine, mirtazapine and quetiapine were indeed among the
most similar to clozapine, while others not previous considered (such as the antihistamines ketotifen
and alcaftadine, and the anti-inﬂammatory COX inhibitor ketorolac) were also suggested as being
similar, providing support for the orthogonal utility of the new VAE-Sim metric. However, the rather
promiscuous nature of clozapine binding (e.g., [ 108,109]), along with that of many of the other drugs
(e.g., [110–116]), means that this is not the place to delve deeper.
Molecules 2020 , 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 17 
 Finally, we used our new metrics to determine the similarity to clozapine of other drugs. Figure 
5 shows the two similarity scores based on VAE-Sim, calculated as in Figure 3. Gratifyingly, and while structural similarity is, in part, in the eye of the beholder, a variety of structurally and 
functionally related antipsychotic drugs such as loxapine, mirtazapine and quetiapine were indeed 
among the most similar to clozapine, while ot hers not previous cons idered (such as the 
antihistamines ketotifen and alcaftadine, and the anti-inflammatory COX inhibitor ketorolac) were also suggested as being similar, providing support for the orthogonal utility of the new VAE-Sim metric. However, the rather promiscu ous nature of clozapine binding (e.g., [108,109]), along with that 
of many of the other drugs (e.g., [110–116]), mean s that this is not the place to delve deeper. 
 
 
Figure 5. Similarity of drugs to clozapine as judged by the VAE. ( A) Rank order of Euclidean similarity 
in 100 dimensions (E-Sim) or two UMAP dimensions (EU-Sim) as in Figure 3. Some of the “most 
similar” drugs are labelled, as are some of those in Table 1. ( B) Structures of some of the drugs 
mentioned, together with their Euclid ean distances as judged by VAE-Sim. 
3. Methods 
We considered and tested grammar-based and junction-tree methods such as those used by 
Kajino [35], that exploited some of the ideas develo ped by Dai [117], Kusner [118] and by Jin and their 
colleagues [34]. However, our preferred method as described here used one-hot encoding as set out 
Figure 5. Similarity of drugs to clozapine as judged by the VAE. ( A) Rank order of Euclidean similarity
in 100 dimensions (E-Sim) or two UMAP dimensions (EU-Sim) as in Figure 3. Some of the “most similar”
drugs are labelled, as are some of those in Table 1. ( B) Structures of some of the drugs mentioned,
together with their Euclidean distances as judged by VAE-Sim.