58    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7turing lecture
RESEARCH ON ARTIFICIAL neural networks was 
motivated by the observation that human intelligence 
emerges from highly parallel networks of relatively 
simple, non-linear neurons that learn by adjusting 
the strengths of their connections. This observation 
leads to a central computational question: How is it 
possible for networks of this general kind to learn 
the complicated internal representations that are 
required for difficult tasks such as recognizingobjects or understanding language? 
Deep learning seeks to answer this 
question by using many layers of activ -
ity vectors as representations and 
learning the connection strengths that 
give rise to these vectors by following 
the stochastic gradient of an objective 
function that measures how well the 
network is performing. It is very sur -
prising that such a conceptually simple 
approach has proved to be so effective 
when applied to large training sets us -
ing huge amounts of computation and 
it appears that a key ingredient is 
depth: shallow networks simply do not 
work as well.
We reviewed the basic concepts 
and some of the breakthrough 
achievements of deep learning several 
years ago.63 Here we briefly describe 
the origins of deep learning, describe 
a few of the more recent advances, and 
discuss some of the future challenges. 
These challenges include learning with 
little or no external supervision, coping 
with test examples that come from a 
different distribution than the training 
examples, and using the deep learning 
approach for tasks that humans solve 
by using a deliberate sequence of steps 
which we attend to consciously—tasks 
that Kahneman56 calls system 2  tasks as 
opposed to system 1  tasks like object 
recognition or immediate natural lan -
guage understanding, which generally 
feel effortless.
From Hand-Coded Symbolic 
Expressions to Learned Distributed 
Representations
There are two quite different para -
digms for AI. Put simply, the logic-in -
spired paradigm views sequential rea -
soning as the essence of intelligence 
and aims to implement reasoning in 
computers using hand-designed rules 
of inference that operate on hand-de -
signed symbolic expressions that for -
malize knowledge. The brain-inspired 
paradigm views learning representa -
tions from data as the essence of in -
telligence and aims to implement 
learning by hand-designing or evolv -
ing rules for modifying the connec -Deep 
Learning 
for A IDOI:10.1145/3448250
How can neural networks learn the rich 
internal representations required  
for difficult tasks such as recognizing  
objects or understanding language? 
BY YOSHUA BENGIO, YANN LECUN, AND GEOFFREY HINTON
TURING LE CTURE
Yoshua Bengio, Yann LeCu n, and Geoffrey Hinton are recipients  
of the 2018 ACM A.M. Turing Award for breakthroughs that have  
made deep neural networks a critical component of computing.