JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7  |  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM     61turing lecture
tecture in many applications, stacks 
many layers of ”self-attention” modules. 
Each module in a layer uses a scalar 
product to compute the match be -
tween its query vector and the key vec -
tors of other modules in that layer. The 
matches are normalized to sum to 1, 
and the resulting scalar coefficients are 
then used to form a convex combina -
tion of the value vectors produced by 
the other modules in the previous layer. 
The resulting vector forms an input for 
a module of the next stage of computa -
tion. Modules can be made multi-
headed so that each module computes 
several different query, key and value 
vectors, thus making it possible for 
each module to have several distinct in -
puts, each selected from the previous 
stage modules in a different way. The 
order and number of modules does not 
matter in this operation, making it pos -
sible to operate on sets of vectors rather 
than single vectors as in traditional 
neural networks. For instance, a lan -
guage translation system, when pro -
ducing a word in the output sentence, 
can choose to pay attention to the cor -
responding group of words in the input 
sentence, independently of their posi -
tion in the text. While multiplicative 
gating is an old idea for such things as 
coordinate transforms44 and powerful 
forms of recurrent networks,52 its re -
cent forms have made it mainstream. 
Another way to think about attention 
mechanisms is that they make it possi -
ble to dynamically route information 
through appropriately selected mod -
ules and combine these modules in po -
tentially novel ways for improved out-
of-distribution generalization.38
Transformers have produced dra -
matic performance improvements that 
have revolutionized natural language 
processing,27,32 and they are now being 
used routinely in industry. These sys -
tems are all pre-trained in a self-super -
vised manner to predict missing words 
in a segment of text.
Perhaps more surprisingly, trans -
formers have been used successfully to 
solve integral and differential equa -
tions symbolically.62 A very promising 
recent trend uses transformers on top 
of convolutional nets for object detec -
tion and localization in images with 
state-of-the-art performance.19 The 
transformer performs post-processing 
and object-based reasoning in a differ -across many uses of that weight. Pure 
online stochastic gradient descent 
which uses each weight once converges 
faster and future hardware may just 
use weights in place rather than fetch -
ing them from memory. 
The deep convolutional neural net 
contained a few novelties such as the 
use of ReLUs to make learning faster 
and the use of dropout to prevent over -
fitting, but it was basically just a feed -
forward convolutional neural net of the 
kind that Yann LeCun and his collabo -
rators had been developing for many 
years.64,65 The response of the computer 
vision community to this breakthrough 
was admirable. Given this incontro -
vertible evidence of the superiority of 
convolutional neural nets, the commu -
nity rapidly abandoned previous hand-
engineered approaches and switched 
to deep learning.
Recent Advances
Here we selectively touch on some of 
the more recent advances in deep 
learning, clearly leaving out many im -
portant subjects, such as deep rein -
forcement learning, graph neural net -
works and meta-learning.
Soft attention and the transformer 
architecture. A significant development 
in deep learning, especially when it 
comes to sequential processing, is the 
use of multiplicative interactions, par -
ticularly in the form of soft atten -
tion.7,32,39,78 This is a transformative ad -
dition to the neural net toolbox, in that 
it changes neural nets from purely vec -
tor transformation machines into ar -
chitectures which can dynamically 
choose which inputs they operate on, 
and can store information in differen -
tiable associative memories. A key 
property of such architectures is that 
they can effectively operate on different 
kinds of data structures including sets 
and graphs.
Soft attention can be used by mod -
ules in a layer to dynamically select 
which vectors from the previous layer 
they will combine to compute their 
outputs. This can serve to make the 
output independent of the order in 
which the inputs are presented (treat -
ing them as a set) or to use relation -
ships between different inputs (treat -
ing them as a graph).
The transformer architecture,85 
which has become the dominant archi -We believe that 
deep networks 
excel because 
they exploit a 
particular form of 
compositionality 
in which features 
in one layer are 
combined in many 
different ways 
to create more 
abstract features  
in the next layer.