60    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7turing lecture
the task, it makes sense to start by using 
some other source of information to cre -
ate layers of feature detectors and then 
to fine-tune these feature detectors us -
ing the limited supply of labels. In trans -
fer learning, the source of information is 
another supervised learning task that 
has plentiful labels. But it is also possi -
ble to create layers of feature detectors 
without using any labels at all by stack -
ing auto-encoders.15,50,59
First, we learn a layer of feature de -
tectors whose activities allow us to re -
construct the input. Then we learn a 
second layer of feature detectors whose 
activities allow us to reconstruct the ac -
tivities of the first layer of feature detec -
tors. After learning several hidden lay -
ers in this way, we then try to predict 
the label from the activities in the last 
hidden layer and we backpropagate the 
errors through all of the layers in order 
to fine-tune the feature detectors that 
were initially discovered without using 
the precious information in the labels. 
The pre-training may well extract all 
sorts of structure that is irrelevant to 
the final classification but, in the re -
gime where computation is cheap and 
labeled data is expensive, this is fine so 
long as the pre-training transforms the 
input into a representation that makes 
classification easier.
In addition to improving generaliza -
tion, unsupervised pre-training initial -
izes the weights in such a way that it is 
easy to fine-tune a deep neural network 
with backpropagation. The effect of 
pre-training on optimization  was his -
torically important for overcoming the 
accepted wisdom that deep nets were 
hard to train, but it is much less rele -
vant now that people use rectified lin -
ear units (see next section) and residu -
al connections.43 However, the effect of 
pre-training on generalization  has 
proved to be very important. It makes it 
possible to train very large models by 
leveraging large quantities of unla -
beled data, for example, in natural lan -
guage processing, for which huge cor -
pora are available.26,32 The general 
principle of pre-training and fine-tun -
ing has turned out to be an important 
tool in the deep learning toolbox, for 
example, when it comes to transfer 
learning or even as an ingredient of 
modern meta-learning.33
The mysterious success of rectified 
linear units. The early successes of deep networks involved unsupervised 
pre-training of layers of units that used 
the logistic sigmoid nonlinearity or the 
closely related hyperbolic tangent. Rec -
tified linear units had long been hy -
pothesized in neuroscience29 and al -
ready used in some variants of RBMs70 
and convolutional neural networks.54 It 
was an unexpected and pleasant sur -
prise to discover35 that rectifying non -
linearities (now called ReLUs, with 
many modern variants) made it easy to 
train deep networks by backprop and 
stochastic gradient descent, without 
the need for layerwise pre-training. 
This was one of the technical advances 
that enabled deep learning to outper -
form previous methods for object rec -
ognition,60 as outlined here.
Breakthroughs in speech and object 
recognition. An acoustic model con -
verts a representation of the sound wave 
into a probability distribution over frag -
ments of phonemes. Heroic efforts by 
Robinson72 using transputers and by 
Morgan et al.69 using DSP chips had al -
ready shown that, with sufficient pro -
cessing power, neural networks were 
competitive with the state of the art for 
acoustic modeling. In 2009, two gradu -
ate students68 using Nvidia GPUs 
showed that pre-trained deep neural 
nets could slightly outperform the SOTA 
on the TIMIT dataset. This result reig -
nited the interest of several leading 
speech groups in neural networks. In 
2010, essentially the same deep network 
was shown to beat the SOTA for large vo -
cabulary speech recognition without re -
quiring speaker-dependent training28,46 
and by 2012, Google had engineered a 
production version that significantly 
improved voice search on Android. This 
was an early demonstration of the dis -
ruptive power of deep learning.
At about the same time, deep learn -
ing scored a dramatic victory in the 
2012 ImageNet competition, almost 
halving the error rate for recognizing a 
thousand different classes of object in 
natural images.60 The keys to this vic -
tory were the major effort by Fei-Fei Li 
and her collaborators in collecting 
more than a million labeled images31 
for the training set and the very effi -
cient use of multiple GPUs by Alex 
Krizhevsky. Current hardware, includ -
ing GPUs, encourages the use of large 
mini-batches in order to amortize the 
cost of fetching a weight from memory The Rise of Deep Learning
Deep learning re-energized neural net -
work research in the early 2000s by in -
troducing a few elements which made 
it easy to train deeper networks. The 
emergence of GPUs and the availability 
of large datasets were key enablers of 
deep learning and they were greatly en -
hanced by the development of open 
source, flexible software platforms 
with automatic differentiation such as 
Theano,16 Torch,25 Caffe,55 Tensor -
Flow,1 and PyTorch.71 This made it easy 
to train complicated deep nets and to 
reuse the latest models and their build -
ing blocks. But the composition of 
more layers is what allowed more com -
plex non-linearities and achieved sur -
prisingly good results in perception 
tasks, as summarized here.
Why depth?  Although the intuition 
that deeper neural networks could be 
more powerful pre-dated modern deep 
learning techniques,82 it was a series of 
advances in both architecture and 
training procedures,15,35,48 which ush -
ered in the remarkable advances which 
are associated with the rise of deep 
learning. But why might deeper net -
works generalize better for the kinds of 
input-output relationships we are in -
terested in modeling? It is important 
to realize that it is not simply a ques -
tion of having more parameters, since 
deep networks often generalize better 
than shallow networks with the same 
number of parameters.15 The practice 
confirms this. The most popular class 
of convolutional net architecture for 
computer vision is the ResNet family43 
of which the most common represen -
tative, ResNet-50 has 50 layers. Other 
ingredients not mentioned in this arti -
cle but which turned out to be very use -
ful include image deformations, drop -
out,51 and batch normalization.53
We believe that deep networks excel 
because they exploit a particular form 
of compositionality in which features 
in one layer are combined in many dif -
ferent ways to create more abstract fea -
tures in the next layer.
For tasks like perception, this kind 
of compositionality works very well and 
there is strong evidence that it is used 
by biological perceptual systems.83
Unsupervised pre-training.  When the 
number of labeled training examples is 
small compared with the complexity of 
the neural network required to perform