62    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7turing lecture
ment is large and complex and repre -
senting the distribution of plausible 
continuations properly is essentially 
an unsolved problem.
Contrastive learning.  One way to ap -
proach this problem is through latent 
variable models that assign an energy 
(that is, a badness) to examples of a 
video and a possible continuation.a
Given an input video X and a pro -
posed continuation Y , we want a mod -
el to indicate whether Y is compatible 
with X by using an energy function 
E(X, Y) which takes low values when 
X and Y are compatible, and higher 
values otherwise.
E(X, Y) can be computed by a deep 
neural net which, for a given X, is 
trained in a contrastive way to give a 
low energy to values Y that are compat -
ible with X (such as examples of ( X, Y) 
pairs from a training set), and high en -
ergy to other values of Y that are incom -
patible with X. For a given X, inference 
consists in finding one Yˇ that minimizes 
E(X, Y) or perhaps sampling from the Y s 
that have low values of E(X, Y). This en -
ergy-based approach to representing 
the way Y depends on X makes it possi -
ble to model a diverse, multi-modal set 
of plausible continuations.
The key difficulty with contrastive 
learning is to pick good “negative” 
samples: suitable points Y whose ener -
gy will be pushed up. When the set of 
possible negative examples is not too 
large, we can just consider them all. 
This is what a softmax does, so in this 
case contrastive learning reduces to 
standard supervised or self- supervised 
learning over a finite discrete set of 
symbols. But in a real-valued high-di -
mensional space, there are far too 
many ways a vector Yˆ could be different 
from Y and to improve the model we 
need to focus on those Ys that should 
have high energy but currently have low 
energy. Early methods to pick negative 
samples were based on Monte-Carlo 
methods, such as contrastive divergence 
for restricted Boltzmann machines48 and 
noise-contrastive estimation.41
Generative Adversarial Networks 
(GANs)36 train a generative neural net to 
produce contrastive samples by apply -
a As Gibbs pointed out, if energies are defined 
so that they add for independent systems, they 
must correspond to negative log probabilities 
in any probabilistic interpretation.entiable manner, enabling the system 
to be trained end-to-end.
Unsupervised and self-supervised 
learning.  Supervised learning, while 
successful in a wide variety of tasks, 
typically requires a large amount of 
human-labeled data. Similarly, when 
reinforcement learning is based only 
on rewards, it requires a very large 
number of interactions. These learn -
ing methods tend to produce task-spe -
cific, specialized systems that are often 
brittle outside of the narrow domain 
they have been trained on. Reducing 
the number of human-labeled samples 
or interactions with the world that are 
required to learn a task and increasing 
the out-of-domain robustness is of cru -
cial importance for applications such 
as low-resource language translation, 
medical image analysis, autonomous 
driving, and content filtering.
Humans and animals seem to be 
able to learn massive amounts of back -
ground knowledge about the world, 
largely by observation, in a task-inde -
pendent manner. This knowledge un -
derpins common sense and allows hu -
mans to learn complex tasks, such as 
driving, with just a few hours of prac -
tice. A key question for the future of AI 
is how do humans learn so much from 
observation alone?
In supervised learning, a label for 
one of N categories conveys, on aver -
age, at most log 2(N) bits of information 
about the world. In model-free rein -
forcement learning, a reward similarly 
conveys only a few bits of information. 
In contrast, audio, images and video 
are high-bandwidth modalities that 
implicitly convey large amounts of in -
formation about the structure of the 
world. This motivates a form of predic -
tion or reconstruction called self-su -
pervised learning which is training to 
“fill in the blanks” by predicting 
masked or corrupted portions of the 
data. Self-supervised learning has been 
very successful for training transform -
ers to extract vectors that capture the 
context-dependent meaning of a word 
or word fragment and these vectors 
work very well for downstream tasks.
For text, the transformer is trained 
to predict missing words from a dis -
crete set of possibilities. But in high-
dimensional continuous domains 
such as video, the set of plausible con -
tinuations of a particular video seg -A key question  
for the future  
of AI is how do 
humans learn 
so much from 
observation  
alone?