JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7  |  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM     63turing lecture
ties with current AI suggests several di -
rections for improvement: 
1. Supervised learning requires too 
much labeled data and model-free rein -
forcement learning requires far too 
many trials. Humans seem to be able to 
generalize well with far less experience.
2. Current systems are not as robust 
to changes in distribution as humans, 
who can quickly adapt to such changes 
with very few examples.
3. Current deep learning is most 
successful at perception tasks and gen -
erally what are called system 1 tasks. 
Using deep learning for system 2 tasks 
that require a deliberate sequence of 
steps is an exciting area that is still in 
its infancy.
What needs to be improved.  From 
the early days, theoreticians of ma -
chine learning have focused on the iid 
assumption, which states that the test 
cases are expected to come from the 
same distribution as the training ex -
amples. Unfortunately, this is not a re -
alistic assumption in the real world: 
just consider the non-stationarities 
due to actions of various agents chang -
ing the world, or the gradually expand -
ing mental horizon of a learning agent 
which always has more to learn and 
discover. As a practical consequence, 
the performance of today’s best AI sys -
tems tends to take a hit when they go 
from the lab to the field.
Our desire to achieve greater robust -
ness when confronted with changes in 
distribution (called out-of-distribution 
generalization) is a special case of the 
more general objective of reducing 
sample complexity (the number of ex -
amples needed to generalize well) when 
faced with a new task—as in transfer 
learning and lifelong learning81—or 
simply with a change in distribution or 
in the relationship between states of 
the world and rewards. Current super -
vised learning systems require many 
more examples than humans (when 
having to learn a new task) and the situ -
ation is even worse for model-free rein -
forcement learning23 since each re -
warded trial provides less information 
about the task than each labeled exam -
ple. It has already been noted61,76 that 
humans can generalize in a way that is 
different and more powerful than ordi -
nary iid generalization: we can correctly 
interpret novel combinations of exist -
ing concepts, even if those combina -ing a neural network to latent samples 
from a known distribution (for exam -
ple, a Gaussian). The generator trains 
itself to produce outputs Yˆ  to which the 
model gives low energy E(Yˆ). The gen -
erator can do so using backpropagation 
to get the gradient of E(Yˆ) with respect 
to Yˆ. The generator and the model are 
trained simultaneously, with the model 
attempting to give low energy to train -
ing samples, and high energy to gener -
ated contrastive samples.
GANs are somewhat tricky to opti -
mize, but adversarial training ideas 
have proved extremely fertile, produc -
ing impressive results in image synthe -
sis, and opening up many new applica -
tions in content creation and domain 
adaptation34 as well as domain or style 
transfer.87
Making representations agree using 
contrastive learning.  Contrastive learn -
ing provides a way to discover good fea -
ture vectors without having to recon -
struct or generate pixels. The idea is to 
learn a feed-forward neural network that 
produces very similar output vectors 
when given two different crops of the 
same image10 or two different views of 
the same object17 but dissimilar output 
vectors for crops from different images 
or views of different objects. The squared 
distance between the two output vectors 
can be treated as an energy, which is 
pushed down for compatible pairs and 
pushed up for incompatible pairs.24,80
A series of recent papers that use 
convolutional nets for extracting repre -
sentations that agree have produced 
promising results in visual feature 
learning. The positive pairs are com -
posed of different versions of the same 
image that are distorted through crop -
ping, scaling, rotation, color shift, blur -
ring, and so on. The negative pairs are 
similarly distorted versions of different 
images which may be cleverly picked 
from the dataset through a process 
called hard negative mining or may 
simply be all of the distorted versions of 
other images in a minibatch. The hid -
den activity vector of one of the higher-
level layers of the network is subse -
quently used as input to a linear 
classifier trained in a supervised man -
ner. This Siamese net approach has 
yielded excellent results on standard 
image recognition bench -
marks.6,21,22,43,67 Very recently, two Sia -
mese net approaches have managed to eschew the need for contrastive sam -
ples. The first one, dubbed SwAV, quan -
tizes the output of one network to train 
the other network,20 the second one, 
dubbed BYOL, smoothes the weight 
trajectory of one of the two networks, 
which is apparently enough to prevent a 
collapse.40
Variational auto-encoders. A popu -
lar recent self-supervised learning 
method is the Variational Auto-Encoder 
(VAE).58 This consists of an encoder 
network that maps the image into a la -
tent code space and a decoder network 
that generates an image from a latent 
code. The VAE limits the information 
capacity of the latent code by adding 
Gaussian noise to the output of the 
encoder before it is passed to the de -
coder. This is akin to packing small 
noisy spheres into a larger sphere of 
minimum radius. The information ca -
pacity is limited by how many noisy 
spheres fit inside the containing 
sphere. The noisy spheres repel each 
other because a good reconstruction 
error requires a small overlap between 
codes that correspond to different 
samples. Mathematically, the system 
minimizes a free energy obtained 
through marginalization of the latent 
code over the noise distribution. How -
ever, minimizing this free energy with 
respect to the parameters is intracta -
ble, and one has to rely on variational 
approximation methods from statisti -
cal physics that minimize an upper 
bound of the free energy.
The Future of Deep Learning
The performance of deep learning sys -
tems can often be dramatically im -
proved by simply scaling them up. 
With a lot more data and a lot more 
computation, they generally work a lot 
better. The language model GPT-318 
with 175 billion parameters (which is 
still tiny compared with the number of 
synapses in the human brain) gener -
ates noticeably better text than GPT-2 
with only 1.5 billion parameters. The 
chatbots Meena2 and BlenderBot73 also 
keep improving as they get bigger. 
Enormous effort is now going into scal -
ing up and it will improve existing sys -
tems a lot, but there are fundamental 
deficiencies of current deep learning 
that cannot be overcome by scaling 
alone, as discussed here.
Comparing human learning abili -