64    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7turing lecture
because their activity vector in the 
higher-level call can be reconstructed 
later using the information in the fast 
weights. Multiple time scales of adap -
tion also arise in learning to learn, or 
meta-learning.12,33,75
Higher-level cognition.  When think -
ing about a new challenge, such as driv -
ing in a city with unusual traffic rules, 
or even imagining driving a vehicle on 
the moon, we can take advantage of 
pieces of knowledge and generic skills 
we have already mastered and recom -
bine them dynamically in new ways. 
This form of systematic generalization 
allows humans to generalize fairly well 
in contexts that are very unlikely under 
their training distribution. We can 
then further improve with practice, 
fine-tuning and compiling these new 
skills so they do not need conscious at -
tention anymore. How could we endow 
neural networks with the ability to 
adapt quickly to new settings by mostly 
reusing already known pieces of knowl -
edge, thus avoiding interference with 
known skills? Initial steps in that direc -
tion include Transformers32 and Recur -
rent Independent Mechanisms.38
It seems that our implicit (system 1) 
processing abilities allow us to guess 
potentially good or dangerous futures, 
when planning or reasoning. This rais -
es the question of how system 1 net -
works could guide search and plan -
ning at the higher (system 2) level, 
maybe in the spirit of the value func -
tions which guide Monte-Carlo tree 
search for AlphaGo.77
Machine learning research relies on 
inductive biases or priors in order to en -
courage learning in directions which 
are compatible with some assumptions 
about the world. The nature of system 2 
processing and cognitive neuroscience 
theories for them5,30 suggests several 
such inductive biases and architec -
tures,11,45 which may be exploited to de -
sign novel deep learning systems. How 
do we design deep learning architec -
tures and training frameworks which 
incorporate such inductive biases?
The ability of young children to per -
form causal discovery37 suggests this 
may be a basic property of the human 
brain, and recent work suggests that 
optimizing out-of-distribution gener -
alization under interventional changes 
can be used to train neural networks to 
discover causal dependencies or causal variables.3,13,57,66 How should we struc -
ture and train neural nets so they can 
capture these underlying causal prop -
erties of the world?
How are the directions suggested by 
these open questions related to the 
symbolic AI research program from the 
20th century? Clearly, this symbolic AI 
program aimed at achieving system 2 
abilities, such as reasoning, being able 
to factorize knowledge into pieces 
which can easily recombined in a se -
quence of computational steps, and 
being able to manipulate abstract vari -
ables, types, and instances. We would 
like to design neural networks which 
can do all these things while working 
with real-valued vectors so as to pre -
serve the strengths of deep learning 
which include efficient large-scale 
learning using differentiable computa -
tion and gradient-based adaptation, 
grounding of high-level concepts in 
low-level perception and action, han -
dling uncertain data, and using distrib -
uted representations. 
References
1. Abadi, M. et al. Tensorflow: A system for large-
scale machine learning. In Proceedings of the 12th 
USENIX Symp. Operating Systems Design and 
Implementation , 2016, 265–283.
2. Adiwardana, D., Luong, M., So, D., Hall, J., Fiedel, N., 
Thoppilan, R., Yang, Z., Kulshreshtha, A., Nemade, 
G., Lu, Y., et al. Towards a human-like open-domain 
chatbot 2020; arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977 .
3. Arjovsky, M., Bottou, L., Gulrajani, I., and Lopez-Paz, 
D. Invariant risk minimization, 2019; arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1907.02893 .
4. Ba, J., Hinton, G., Mnih, V., Leibo, J., and Ionescu, 
C. Using fast weights to attend to the recent past. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 
2016, 4331–4339.
5. Baars, B. A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1993.
6. Bachman, P., Hjelm, R., and Buchwalter, W. Learning 
representations by maximizing mutual information 
across views. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems , 2019, 15535–15545.
7. Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. Neural machine 
translation by jointly learning to align and translate, 
2014; arXiv:1409.0473 .
8. Bahdanau, D., Murty, S., Noukhovitch, M., Nguyen, T., 
Vries, H., and Courville, A. Systematic generalization: 
What is required and can it be learned? 2018; 
arXiv:1811.12889 .
9. Bahdanau, D., de Vries, H., O’Donnell, T., Murty, S., 
Beaudoin, P., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. Closure: 
Assessing systematic generalization of clever models, 
2019; arXiv:1912.05783 .
10. Becker, S. and Hinton, G. Self-organizing neural 
network that discovers surfaces in random dot 
stereograms. Nature 355 , 6356 (1992), 161–163.
11. Bengio, Y. The consciousness prior, 2017; 
arXiv:1709.08568 .
12. Bengio, Y., Bengio, S., and Cloutier, J. Learning a 
synaptic learning rule. In Proceedings of the IEEE 
1991 Seattle Intern. Joint Conf. Neural Networks 2 .
13. Bengio, Y., Deleu, T., Rahaman, N., Ke, R., Lachapelle, 
S., Bilaniuk, O., Goyal, A., and Pal, C. A meta-
transfer objective for learning to disentangle 
causal mechanisms. In Proceedings of ICLR’2020; 
arXiv:1901.10912 .
14. Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., and Vincent, P. A neural 
probabilistic language model. NIPS’2000 , 2001, 932–938.
15. Bengio, Y., Lamblin, P., Popovici, D., and Larochelle, 
H. Greedy layer-wise training of deep networks. In tions are extremely unlikely under our 
training distribution, so long as they 
respect high-level syntactic and se -
mantic patterns we have already 
learned. Recent studies help us clarify 
how different neural net architectures 
fare in terms of this systematic general -
ization ability.8,9 How can we design fu -
ture machine learning systems with 
these abilities to generalize better or 
adapt faster out-of-distribution?
From homogeneous layers to groups 
of neurons that represent entities. Evi-
dence from neuroscience suggests that 
groups of nearby neurons (forming what 
is called a hyper-column) are tightly con -
nected and might represent a kind of 
higher-level vector-valued unit able to 
send not just a scalar quantity but rather 
a set of coordinated values. This idea is 
at the heart of the capsules architec -
tures,47,59 and it is also inherent in the 
use of soft-attention mechanisms, 
where each element in the set is associ -
ated with a vector, from which one can 
read a key vector and a value vector (and 
sometimes also a query vector). One way 
to think about these vector-level units is 
as representing the detection of an ob -
ject along with its attributes (like pose 
information, in capsules). Recent pa -
pers in computer vision are exploring 
extensions of convolutional neural net -
works in which the top level of the hier -
archy represents a set of candidate ob -
jects detected in the input image, and 
operations on these candidates is per -
formed with transformer-like architec -
tures.19,84,86 Neural networks that assign 
intrinsic frames of reference to objects 
and their parts and recognize objects by 
using the geometric relationships be -
tween parts should be far less vulnerable 
to directed adversarial attacks,79 which 
rely on the large difference between the 
information used by people and that 
used by neural nets to recognize objects.
Multiple time scales of adaption. 
Most neural nets only have two times -
cales: the weights adapt slowly over 
many examples and the activities adapt 
rapidly changing with each new input. 
Adding an overlay of rapidly adapting 
and rapidly, decaying “fast weights”49 
introduces interesting new computa -
tional abilities. In particular, it creates 
a high-capacity, short-term memory,4 
which allows a neural net to perform 
true recursion in which the same neu -
rons can be reused in a recursive call