1.1 History of TTS Technology
People have tried to build machines to synthesize human speech dating back to the 12th century [ 388].
In the 2nd half of the 18th century, the Hungarian scientist, Wolfgang von Kempelen, had constructed
a speaking machine with a series of bellows, springs, bagpipes and resonance boxes to produce
some simple words and short sentences [ 72]. The ﬁrst speech synthesis system that built upon
computer came out in the latter half of the 20th century [ 388]. The early computer-based speech
synthesis methods include articulatory synthesis [ 53,300], formant synthesis [ 299,5,171,172], and
concatenative synthesis [ 253,241,297,127,26]. Later, as the development of statistics machine
learning, statistical parametric speech synthesis (SPSS) is proposed [ 416,356,425,357], which
predicts parameters such as spectrum, fundamental frequency and duration for speech synthesis.
From 2010s, neural network-based speech synthesis [ 426,284,78,424,375,191,254,382] has
gradually become the dominant methods and achieved much better voice quality.
Articulatory Synthesis Articulatory synthesis [ 53,300] produces speech by simulating the behav-
ior of human articulator such as lips, tongue, glottis and moving vocal tract. Ideally, articulatory
synthesis can be the most effective method for speech synthesis since it is the way how human gener-
ates speech. However, it is very difﬁcult to model these articulator behaviors in practice. For example,
it is hard to collect the data for articulator simulation. Therefore, the speech quality by articulatory
synthesis is usually worse than that by later formant synthesis and concatenative synthesis.
Formant Synthesis Formant synthesis [ 299,5,171] produces speech based on a set of rules that
control a simpliﬁed source-ﬁlter model. These rules are usually developed by linguists to mimic
the formant structure and other spectral properties of speech as closely as possible. The speech
is synthesized by an additive synthesis module and an acoustic model with varying parameters
like fundamental frequency, voicing, and noise levels. The formant synthesis can produce highly
intelligible speech with moderate computation resources that are well-suited for embedded systems,
and does not rely on large-scale human speech corpus as in concatenative synthesis. However, the
synthesized speech sounds less natural and has artifacts. Moreover, it is difﬁcult to specify rules for
synthesis.
Concatenative Synthesis Concatenative synthesis [ 253,241,297,127,26] relies on the concate-
nation of pieces of speech that are stored in a database. Usually, the database consists of speech
units ranging from whole sentence to syllables that are recorded by voice actors. In inference,
the concatenative TTS system searches speech units to match the given input text, and produces
speech waveform by concatenating these units together. Generally speaking, concatenative TTS can
generate audio with high intelligibility and authentic timbre close to the original voice actor. However,
concatenative TTS requires huge recording database in order to cover all possible combinations of
speech units for spoken words. Another drawback is that the generated voice is less natural and
emotional, since concatenation can result in less smoothness in stress, emotion, prosody, etc.
Statistical Parametric Synthesis To address the drawbacks of concatenative TTS, statistical para-
metric speech synthesis (SPSS) is proposed [ 416,356,415,425,357]. The basic idea is that instead
of direct generating waveform through concatenation, we can ﬁrst generate the acoustic parame-
ters [ 82,355,156] that are necessary to produce speech and then recover speech from the generated
acoustic parameters using some algorithms [ 132,131,155,238]. SPSS usually consists of three
components: a text analysis module, a parameter prediction module (acoustic model), and a vocoder
analysis/synthesis module (vocoder). The text analysis module ﬁrst processes the text, including
text normalization [ 317], grapheme-to-phoneme conversion [ 24], word segmentation, etc, and then
extracts the linguistic features, such as phonemes, duration and POS tags from different granularities.
The acoustic models (e.g., hidden Markov model (HMM) based) are trained with the paired linguistic
features and parameters (acoustic features), where the acoustic features include fundamental fre-
quency, spectrum or cepstrum [ 82,355], etc, and are extracted from the speech through vocoder
analysis [ 132,155,238]. The vocoders synthesize speech from the predicted acoustic features. SPSS
has several advantages over previous TTS systems: 1) naturalness, the audio is more natural; 2)
ﬂexibility, it is convenient to modify the parameters to control the generate speech; 3) low data cost,
it requires less recordings than concatenative synthesis. However, SPSS also has its drawbacks: 1)
the generated speech has lower intelligibility due to artifacts such as mufﬂed, buzzing or noisy audio;
2) the generated voice is still robotic and can be easily differentiated from human recording speech.
2