TTS SurveySec. 2: Key Components in TTSSec. 2.1: Main Taxonomy
Sec. 2.2: Text Analysis
Sec. 2.3: Acoustic Model
Sec. 2.4: V ocoder
Sec. 2.5: Towards Fully E2E TTS
Sec. 2.6: Other Taxonomies
Sec. 3: Advanced Topics in TTSSec. 3.1: Background and Taxonomy
Sec. 3.2: Fast TTS
Sec. 3.3: Low-Resource TTS
Sec. 3.4: Robust TTS
Sec. 3.5: Expressive TTS
Sec. 3.6: Adaptive TTS
Figure 2: Organization of this survey paper.
Advanced Topics in TTS Besides the key components of neural TTS, we further review several
advanced topics in neural TTS, which push the frontier of TTS research and address practical
challenges in TTS product. For example, as TTS is a typical sequence to sequence generation task
and the output sequence is usually very long, how to speed up the autoregressive generation and
reduce the model size for fast speech synthesis are hot research topics (Section 3.2). A good TTS
system should generate both natural and intelligible speech and a lot of TTS research works aim
to improve the intelligibility and naturalness of speech synthesis. For example, in low-resource
scenarios where the data to train a TTS model is insufﬁcient, the synthesized speech may be of both
low intelligibility and naturalness. Therefore, a lot of works aim to build data-efﬁcient TTS models
under low-resource settings (Section 3.3). Since TTS models are facing robustness issues where
word skipping and repeating problems in generated speech affect the speech quality, a lot of works
aim to improve the robustness of speech synthesis (Section 3.4). To improve the naturalness and
expressiveness, a lot of works model, control, and transfer the style/prosody of speech in order to
generate expressive speech (Section 3.5). Adapting a TTS model to support the voice of any target
speakers is very helpful for the broad usage of TTS. Therefore, efﬁcient voice adaptation with limited
adaptation data and parameters is critical for practical TTS applications (Section 3.6).
To further enrich this survey, we summarize TTS related resources including open-source implemen-
tations, corpora, and other useful resources in Section 4. We summarize this survey and discuss future
research directions in Section 5.
2 Key Components in TTS
In this section, we review the research works from the perspective of the key components (text
analysis, acoustic models, and vocoders) in neural TTS. We ﬁrst introduce the main taxonomy
under this perspective in Section 2.1, and then introduce the three TTS components in Section 2.2,
Section 2.3, and Section 2.4, respectively. Furthermore, we review the works towards fully end-to-
end TTS in Section 2.5. Besides the main taxonomy, we also introduce more taxonomies such as
autoregressive/non-autoregressive sequence generation, generative model, network structure, as well
as the timeline of representative research works on TTS in Section 2.6.
4