2.1 Main Taxonomy
We categorize the works on neural TTS mainly from the perspective of basic TTS components:
text analysis, acoustic models, vocoders6, and fully end-to-end models, as shown in Figure 3a. We
ﬁnd this taxonomy is consistent with the data conversion ﬂow from text to waveform: 1) Text
analysis converts character into phoneme or linguistic features; 2) Acoustic models generate acoustic
features, from either linguistic features or characters/phonemes; 3) V ocoders generate waveform
from either linguistic features or acoustic features; 4) Fully end-to-end models directly convert
characters/phonemes into waveform.
We re-organize the TTS works according to the data ﬂow from text to waveform, as shown in
Figure 3b. There are several data representations in the process of text to speech conversion: 1)
Characters, which are the raw format of text. 2) Linguistic features, which are obtained through text
analysis and contain rich context information about pronunciation and prosody. Phonemes are one
of the most important elements in linguistic features, and are usually used alone to represent text
in neural based TTS models. 3) Acoustic features, which are abstractive representations of speech
waveform. In statistical parametric speech synthesis [ 416,356,415,425,357], LSP (line spectral
pairs) [ 135], MCC (mel-cepstral coefﬁcients) [ 82], MGC (mel-generalized coefﬁcients) [ 355], F0
and BAP (band aperiodicities) [ 156,157] are used as acoustic features, which can be easily converted
into waveform through vocoders such as STRAIGHT [ 155] and WORLD [ 238]. In neural based end-
to-end TTS models, mel-spectrograms or linear-spectrograms are usually used as acoustic features,
which are converted into waveform using neural based vocoders. 4) Waveform, the ﬁnal format of
speech. As can be seen from Figure 3b, there can be different data ﬂows from text to waveform,
including: 1) character !linguistic features !acoustic features!waveform; 2) character !
phoneme!acoustic features!waveform; 3) character !linguistic features !waveform; 4)
character!phoneme!acoustic features!waveform; 5) character !phoneme!waveform, or
character!waveform.
2.2 Text Analysis
Text analysis, also called frontend in TTS, transforms input text into linguistic features that contain
rich information about pronunciation and prosody to ease the speech synthesis. In statistic parametric
synthesis, text analysis is used to extract a sequence of linguistic feature vectors [ 357], and contains
several functionalities such as text normalization [ 316,439], word segmentation [ 400], part-of-speech
(POS) tagging [ 298], prosody prediction [ 51], and grapheme-to-phoneme conversion [ 410]. In
end-to-end neural TTS, due to the large modeling capacity of neural based models, the character or
phoneme sequences are directly taken as input for synthesis, and thus the text analysis module is
largely simpliﬁed. In this scenario, text normalization is still needed to get standard word format
from character input, and grapheme-to-phoneme conversion is further needed to get phonemes
from standard word format. Although some TTS models claim fully end-to-end synthesis that
directly generates waveform from text, text normalization is still needed to handle raw text with any
possible non-standard formats for practical usage. Besides, some end-to-end TTS models incorporate
conventional text analysis functions. For example, Char2Wav [ 315] and DeepV oice 1/2 [ 8,87]
implement the character-to-linguistic feature conversion into its pipeline, purely based on neural
networks, and some works[ 321] explicitly predict prosody features with text encoder. In the remaining
of this subsection, we ﬁrst introduce the typical tasks for text analysis in statistic parametric synthesis,
and then discuss the development of text analysis in end-to-end TTS models.
We summarize some typical tasks in text analysis in Table 1, and introduce some representative works
for each task as follows.
•Text normalization. The raw written text (non-standard words) should be converted into spoken-
form words through text normalization, which can make the words easy to pronounce for TTS
models. For example, the year “1989” is normalized into “nineteen eighty nine”, “Jan. 24” is
normalized into “Janunary twenty-fourth”. Early works on text normalization are rule based [ 317],
6Note that some neural TTS models such as WaveNet [ 254] and WaveRNN [ 150] are ﬁrst introduced
to directly generate waveform from linguistic features. From this perspective, WaveNet can be regarded as
a combination of an acoustic model and a vocoder. Following works usually leverage WaveNet and Wav-
eRNN as a vocoder by taking mel-spectrograms as input to generate waveform. Therefore, we categorize
WaveNet/WaveRNN into vocoders and introduce in Section 2.4.
6