In near 2010s, as neural network and deep learning have achieved rapid progress, some works ﬁrst
introduce deep neural network into SPSS, such as deep neural network (DNN) based [ 426,284]
and recurrent neural network (RNN) based [ 78,422,424]. However, these models replace HMM
with neural networks and still predict the acoustic features from linguistic features, which follow
the paradigm of SPSS. Later, Wang et al. [375] propose to directly generate acoustic features from
phoneme sequence instead of linguistic features, which can be regarded as the ﬁrst exploration for
end-to-end4speech synthesis. In this survey, we focus on neural based speech synthesis, and mostly
on end-to-end models. Since later SPSS also uses neural networks as the acoustic models, we brieﬂy
describe these models but do not dive deep into the details.
Acoustic Model Vocoder WaveformAcoustic 
FeaturesText Text AnalysisLinguistic 
Features
Figure 1: The three key components in neural TTS.
Neural Speech Synthesis As the development of deep learning, neural network-based TTS (neural
TTS for short) is proposed, which adopts (deep) neural networks as the model backbone for speech
synthesis. Some early neural models are adopted in SPSS to replace HMM for acoustic modeling.
Later, WaveNet [ 254] is proposed to directly generate waveform from linguistic features, which
can be regarded as the ﬁrst modern neural TTS model. Other models like DeepV oice 1/2 [ 8,87]
still follow the three components in statistical parametric synthesis, but upgrade them with the
corresponding neural network based models. Furthermore, some end-to-end models (e.g., Tacotron
1/2 [ 382,303], Deep V oice 3 [ 270], and FastSpeech 1/2 [ 290,292]) are proposed to simplify text
analysis modules and directly take character/phoneme sequences as input, and simplify acoustic
features with mel-spectrograms. Later, fully end-to-end TTS systems are developed to directly
generate waveform from text, such as ClariNet [ 269], FastSpeech 2s [ 292] and EATS [ 69]. Compared
to previous TTS systems based on concatenative synthesis and statistical parametric synthesis, the
advantages of neural network based speech synthesis include high voice quality in terms of both
intelligibility and naturalness, and less requirement on human preprocessing and feature development.
1.2 Organization of This Survey
In this paper, we mainly review research works on neural TTS, which consists of two parts, as shown
in Figure 2.
Key Components in TTS A modern TTS system consists of three basic components5: a text
analysis module, an acoustic model, and a vocoder. As shown in Figure 1, the text analysis module
converts a text sequence into linguistic features, the acoustic models generate acoustic features from
linguistic features, and then the vocoders synthesize waveform from acoustic features. We review
the research on the three components of neural TTS in Section 2. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst introduce
the main taxonomy for the basic components of neural TTS in Section 2.1, and then introduce the
works on text analysis, acoustic models, and vocoders in Section 2.2, Section 2.3, and Section 2.4
respectively. We further introduce the research towards fully end-to-end TTS in Section 2.5. Although
we mainly review the research works according to the taxonomy of key components in neural TTS,
we also describe several other taxonomies, including the way of sequence generation (autoregressive
or non-autoregressive), different generative models, and different network structures in Section 2.6.
Besides, we also illustrate the time evolution of some representative TTS works in Section 2.6.
4The term “end-to-end” in TTS has a vague meaning. In early studies, “end-to-end” refers to that the
text-to-spectrogram model is end-to-end, but still uses a separate waveform synthesizer (vocoder). It can also
broadly refer to the neural based TTS models which do not use complicated linguistic or acoustic features. For
example, WaveNet [ 254] does not use acoustic features but directly generate waveform from linguistic features,
and Tacotron [ 382] does not use linguistic features but directly generate spectrogram from character or phoneme.
However, the strict end-to-end model refers to directly generating waveform from text. Therefore, in this paper
we use “end-to-end”, “more end-to-end” and “fully end-to-end” to differentiate the degree of end-to-end for TTS
models.
5Although some end-to-end models do not explicitly use text analysis (e.g., Tacotron 2 [ 303]), acoustic
models (e.g., WaveNet [ 254]), or vocoders (e.g., Tacotron [ 382], and some systems only use a single end-to-end
model (e.g., FastSpeech 2s [ 292]), using these components are still popular in current TTS research and product.
3