2.3.2 Acoustic Models in End-to-End TTS
Acoustic models in neural-based end-to-end TTS have several advantages compared to those in SPSS:
1) Conventional acoustic models require alignments between linguistic and acoustic features, while
sequence to sequence based neural models implicitly learn the alignments through attention or predict
the duration jointly, which are more end-to-end and require less preprocessing. 2) As the increasing
modeling power of neural networks, the linguistic features are simpliﬁed into only character or
phoneme sequence, and the acoustic features have changed from low-dimensional and condensed
cepstrums (e.g., MGC) to high-dimensional mel-spectrograms or even more high-dimensional linear-
spectrograms. In the following paragraphs, we introduce some representative acoustic models in
neural TTS8, and provide a comprehensive list of acoustic models in Table 2.
RNN-based Models (e.g., Tacotron Series) Tacotron [ 382] leverages an encoder-attention-
decoder framework and takes characters as input9and outputs linear-spectrograms, and uses Grifﬁn-
Lim algorithm [ 95] to generate waveform. Tacotron 2 [ 303] is proposed to generate mel-spectrograms
and convert mel-spectrograms into waveform using an additional WaveNet [ 254] model. Tacotron 2
greatly improves the voice quality over previous methods including concatenative TTS, parametric
TTS, neural TTS such as Tacotron.
Later, a lot of works improve Tacotron from different aspects: 1) Using a reference encoder and
style tokens to enhance the expressiveness of speech synthesis, such as GST-Tacotron [ 383] and
Ref-Tacotron [ 309]. 2) Removing the attention mechanism in Tacotron, and instead using a duration
predictor for autoregressive prediction, such as DurIAN [ 418] and Non-attentative Tacotron [ 304]. 3)
Changing the autoregressive generation in Tacotron to non-autoregressive generation, such as Parallel
Tacotron 1/2 [ 74,75]. 4) Building end-to-end text-to-waveform models based on Tacotron, such as
Wave-Tacotron [385].
CNN-based Models (e.g., DeepVoice Series) DeepV oice [ 8] is actually an SPSS system enhanced
with convolutional neural networks. After obtaining linguistic features through neural networks,
DeepV oice leverages a WaveNet [ 254] based vocoder to generate waveform. DeepV oice 2 [ 87]
follows the basic data conversion ﬂow of DeepV oice and enhances DeepV oice with improved
network structures and multi-speaker modeling. Furthermore, DeepV oice 2 also adopts a Tacotron +
WaveNet model pipeline, which ﬁrst generates linear-spectrograms using Tacotron and then generates
waveform using WaveNet. DeepV oice 3 [ 270] leverage a fully-convolutional network structure for
speech synthesis, which generates mel-spectrograms from characters and can scale up to real-word
multi-speaker datasets. DeepV oice 3 improves over previous DeepV oice 1/2 systems by using a more
compact sequence-to-sequence model and directly predicting mel-spectrograms instead of complex
linguistic features.
Later, ClariNet [ 269] is proposed to generate waveform from text in a fully end-to-end way.
ParaNet [ 268] is a fully convolutional based non-autoregressive model that can speed up the mel-
spectrogram generation and obtain reasonably good speech quality. DCTTS [ 332] shares similar
data conversion pipeline with Tacotron, and leverages a fully convolutional based encoder-attention-
decoder network to generate mel-spectrograms from character sequence. It then uses a spectrogram
super-resolution network to obtain linear-spectrograms, and synthesizes waveform using Grifﬁn-
Lim [95].
Transformer-based Models (e.g., FastSpeech Series) TransformerTTS [ 192] leverages Trans-
former [ 368] based encoder-attention-decoder architecture to generate mel-spectrograms from
8We mainly review the acoustic models according to different network structures such as RNN, CNN
and Transformer (self-attention), while review the vocoders according to different generative models such as
autoregressive-based, ﬂow-based, GAN-based, Diffusion-based, as shown in Section 2.4. However, it is not
the only perspective, since acoustic models also cover different generative models while vocoders also cover
different network structures.
9Although either characters or phonemes are taken as input in neural TTS, we do not explicitly differentiate
them mainly for two considerations: 1) To ensure high pronunciation accuracy for product usage, phonemes are
necessary especially for those languages (e.g., Chinese) where graphemes and phonemes have large difference.
2) For the models directly taking characters as input, there is no speciﬁc design for characters input, and thus one
can easily change characters into phonemes. It is worth to mention that there are some works [ 270,268,154]
using mixed representations of characters and phonemes as input to address the data sparsity problem.
10