We point out some future research directions on neural TTS, mainly in two categories according to
the end goals of TTS.
High-quality speech synthesis The most important goal of TTS is to synthesize high-quality
speech. The quality of speech is determined by many aspects that inﬂuence the perception of
speech, including intelligibility, naturalness, expressiveness, prosody, emotion, style, robustness,
controllability, etc. While neural approaches have signiﬁcantly improved the quality of synthesized
speech, there is still large room to make further improvements.
•Powerful generative models . TTS is a generation task, including the generation of waveform and/or
acoustic features, which can be better handled by powerful generative models. Although advanced
generative models based on V AE, GAN, ﬂow, or diffusion have been adopted in acoustic models,
vocoders and fully end-to-to models, research efforts on more powerful and efﬁcient generative
models are appealing to further improve the quality of synthesized speech.
•Better representation learning . Good representations of text and speech are beneﬁcial for neural
TTS models, which can improve the quality of synthesized speech. Some initial explorations on text
pre-training indicate that better text representations can indeed improve the speech prosody. How
to learn powerful representations for text/phoneme sequence and especially for speech sequence
through unsupervised/self-supervised learning and pre-training is challenging and worth further
explorations.
•Robust speech synthesis . While current TTS models eliminate word skipping and repeating issues
caused by incorrect attention alignments, they still suffer from robustness issues when encountering
corner cases that are not covered in the training set, such as longer text length, different text
domains, etc. Improving the generalizability of the TTS model to different domains is critical for
robust synthesis.
•Expressive/controllable/transferrable speech synthesis . The expressiveness, controllability and
transferability of TTS models rely on better variation information modeling. Existing methods
leverage reference encoder or explicit prosody features (e.g., pitch, duration, energy) for varia-
tion modeling, which enjoys good controllability and transferrability in inference but suffering
from training/inference mismatch since ground-truth reference speech or prosody features used
in training are usually unavailable in inference. Advanced TTS models capture the variation
information implicitly, which enjoy good expressiveness in synthesized speech but perform not
good in control and transfer, since sampling from latent space cannot explicitly and precisely
control and transfer each prosody feature (e.g., pitch, style). How to design better methods for
expressive/controllable/transferrable speech synthesis is also appealing.
•More human-like speech synthesis . Current speech recordings used in TTS training are usually in
formal reading styles, where no pauses, repeats, changing speeds, varying emotions, and errors
are permitted. However, in casual or conversational talking, human seldomly speaks like standard
reading. Therefore, better modelling the casual, emotional, and spontaneous styles is critical to
improve the naturalness of synthesized speech.
Efﬁcient speech synthesis Once we can synthesize high-quality speech, the next most important
task is efﬁcient synthesis, i.e., how to reduce the cost of speech synthesis including the cost of
collecting and labeling training data, training and serving TTS models, etc.
•Data-efﬁcient TTS . Many low-resource languages are lack of training data. How to leverage
unsupervised/semi-supervised learning and cross-lingual transfer learning to help the low-resource
languages is an interesting direction. For example, the ZeroSpeech Challenge [ 432] is a good
initiative to explore the techniques to learn only from speech, without any text or linguistic
knowledge. Besides, in voice adaptation, a target speaker usually has little adaptation data, which
is another application scenario for data-efﬁcient TTS.
•Parameter-efﬁcient TTS . Today’s neural TTS systems usually employ large neural networks with
tens of millions of parameters to synthesize high-quality speech, which block the applications
in mobile, IoT and other low-end devices due to their limited memory and power consumption.
Designing compact and lightweight models with less memory footprints, power consumption and
latency are critical for those application scenarios.
•Energy-efﬁcient TTS . Training and serving a high-quality TTS model consume a lot of energy and
emit a lot of carbon. Improving energy efﬁciency, e.g., reducing the FLOPs in TTS training and
34