INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
to ﬁndfandgso that the autoencoder learns to reconstruct the output
perfectly, thus learning the identity function. This is not very useful, as we
discussed at the beginning of the article, and to avoid this possibility, two
main strategies can be used: creating a bottleneck and add regularization in
some form.
NoteWe want the autoencoder to reconstruct the input well enough.
Still, at the same time, it should create a latent representation (the
output of the encoder) that is useful and meaningful.
Adding a "bottleneck," (more on that later) is achieved by making the latent
feature’s dimensionality lower (often much lower) than the input’s. That is
the case that we will look in detail in this article. But before looking at this
case, let’s brieﬂy discuss regularization.
1.1 Regularization in autoencoders
We will not discuss regularization at length in this article, but we should at
least mention it. Intuitively it means enforcing sparsity in the latent feature
output. The simplest way of achieving this is to add a l1orl2regularization
term to the loss function. That will look like this for the l2regularization
term:
argmin
f;g(E[(xi;g(f(xi))] +X
i2
i) (5)
In the formula the iare the parameters in the functions f()andg()(you
can imagine that in the case where the functions are neural networks, the
parameters will be the weights). This is typically easy to implement as the
derivative with respect to the parameters are easy to calculate. Another trick
that is worth mentioning is to tie the weights of the encoder to the weights
of the decoder5(in other words make them equal). Those techniques, and
a few others that go beyond the scope of this book, have fundamentally the
same eﬀect: add sparsity to the latent feature representation.
We turn now to a speciﬁc type of autoencoders: those that build fandg
with feed-forward networks that use a bottleneck. The reason for this choice
is that they are very easy to implement and are very eﬀective.
5For an example in Keras you can check the following page: http://adl.toelt.ai/C
hapter25/Your_first_autoencoder_with_Keras.html
4