INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
3.4 Denoising autoencoders
Denoising autoencoders19are developed to auto-correct errors (noise) in the
input observations. As an example, imagine the hand-written digits we con-
sidered before where we added some noise (for example Gaussian noise) in
the form of changing randomly the gray values of the pixels. In this case
the autoencoders should learn to reconstruct the image without the added
noise. As a concrete example, consider the MNIST dataset. We can add
to each pixel a random value generated by a normal distribution scaled by
a factor (you can check the code at https://adl.toelt.ai in article 25).
We can train an autoencoder using as input the noisy images, and as output
the original images. The model should learn to remove the noise, since it is
random in nature and have no relationship with the images. In Figure 12
you can see the results. In the left column you see the noisy images, in the
middle the original ones and on the right the de-noised images. It is quite
impressive how well it works. Figure 12 has been generated by training a
FFA autoencoder with 3 layers and 32 neurons in the middle layer.
4 Beyond FFA – autoencoders with convolu-
tional layers
In this article we have described autoencoders with a feed-forward architec-
ture. There is no rule and autoencoders with convolutional layers works as
well, and often (especially when dealing with images) are much more eﬃ-
cient. For example, in Figure 13 you can see a comparison of the results
of a FAA (with architecture (784,32,784)) and of a Convolutional Autoen-
coder (CA) (with architecture ((28x28), (26x26x64), (24x24,32), (26x26x64),
(28x28); keep in mind the layers are convolutions, so the ﬁrst two numbers
indicate the tensor dimensions and the third the number of kernels, that in
this example had a size of 3x3). The two autoencoders have been trained
with the same parameters (epochs, mini-batch size, etc.). You can see how a
CA gives better results than a FAA, since we are dealing with images. To be
fair, note that the feature generating layer is only marginally smaller than
19Vincent, P., Larochelle, H. Bengio, Y. Manzagol, P.A.: Extracting and composing
robust features with denoising autoencoders. In: Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’08, pp. 1096-1103. ACM, New York, NY USA
(2008)
23