INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
3 Autoencoders Applications
3.1 Dimensionality Reduction
As we mentioned in this article, using the bottleneck method, the latent
features will have a dimension qthat is smaller than the dimensions of the
input observations n. Theencoderpart (once trained) does naturally (by de-
sign) dimension reduction producing qreal numbers. One can use the latent
features for various tasks, such as classiﬁcation (as we will see in the next
section) or clustering. We would like to point out some of the advantages of
dimensionality reduction with an autoencoder compared to a more classical
PCA approach. The autoencoder has one main beneﬁt from a computational
point of view: it can deal with a very big amount of data eﬃciently since its
training can be done with mini-batches, while PCA, one of the most used
dimensionality reduction algorithms, needs to do its calculations using the
entire dataset. PCA is an algorithm that projects a dataset on the eigenvec-
tors of its covariance matrix12, thus providing a linear transformation of the
features. Autoencoders are more ﬂexible and consider non-linear transforma-
tions of the features. The default PCA method uses O(d2)space for data in
Rd. This is, in many cases, not computationally feasible, and the algorithm
does not scale up with increasing dataset size. This may seem irrelevant,
but in many practical applications, the amount of data and the number of
features is so big that PCA is not a practical solution from a computational
point of view.
NoteThe use of an autoencoder for dimensionality reduction has one
main advantage from a computational point of view: it can deal with a
very big amount of data eﬃciently since its training can be done with
mini-batches.
Equivalence with PCA It is not a very known results, but one worth
to mention, that a FFA is equivalent to PCA if the following conditions are
met:
12Akshay Balsubramani, Sanjoy Dasgupta, and Yoav Freund. The fast convergence of
incremental pca. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 3174–3182,
2013.
15