INTRODUCTION TO AUTOENCODERS
to reconstruct the input observations xiwith the lowest error possible2.
Why would one want to learn to reconstruct the input observations? If
you have problems imagining what that means, think of having a dataset
made of images. An autoencoder would be an algorithm that can give as
output an image that is as similar as possible to the input one. You may be
confused, as there is no apparent reason of doing so. To better understand
why autoencoders are useful we need a more informative (although not yet
unambiguous) deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 1 An autoencoder is a type of algorithm with the primary
purpose of learning an "informative" representation of the data that
can be used for diﬀerent applicationsaby learning to reconstruct a set
of input observations well enough.
aBank, D., Koenigstein, N., and Giryes, R., Autoencoders, https://arxiv.or
g/abs/2003.05991
To better understand autoencoders we need to refer to their typical ar-
chitecture, visualized in Figure 1. The autoencoders’ main components are
three: an encoder, a latent feature representation, and a decoder. The en-
coder and decoder are simply functions, while with the name latent feature
representation, one typically intends a tensor of real numbers (more on that
later). Generally speaking, we want the autoencoder to reconstruct the input
well enough. Still, at the same time, it should create a latent representation
(the output of the encoder part in Figure 1) that is useful and meaningful.
For example, latent features on hand-written digits3could be the number of
lines required to write each number or the angle of each line and how they
connect. Learning how to write numbers certainly does not require to learn
the gray values of each pixel in the input image. We humans do not certainly
learn to write by ﬁlling pixels with gray values. While learning, we extract
the essential information that will allow us to solve a problem (writing dig-
its, for example). This latent representation ( howto write each number)
can then be very useful for various tasks (for instance feature extraction that
can be then used for classiﬁcation or clustering) or simply understanding the
essential features of a dataset.
2In this article we will discuss at length what we mean with error here.
3Consider for example the MNIST dataset: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
2