ShelfNet for Fast Semantic Segmentation
Juntang Zhuang1, Junlin Yang1, Lin Gu2Nicha C. Dvornek1
1Yale University, USA
2National Institute of Infomatics, Japan
{j.zhuang; junlin.yang; nicha.dvornek; }@yale.edu, ling@nii.ac.jp
Abstract
In this paper, we present ShelfNet, a novel architec-
ture for accurate fast semantic segmentation. Differ-
ent from the single encoder-decoder structure, ShelfNet
has multiple encoder-decoder branch pairs with skip con-
nections at each spatial level, which looks like a shelf
with multiple columns. The shelf-shaped structure can
be viewed as an ensemble of multiple deep and shallow
paths, thus improving accuracy. We signiﬁcantly reduce
computation burden by reducing channel number, at the
same time achieving high accuracy with this unique struc-
ture. In addition, we propose a shared-weight strategy
in the residual block which reduces parameter number
without sacriﬁcing performance. Compared with popu-
lar non real-time methods such as PSPNet, our ShelfNet
achieves 4 ×faster inference speed with similar accuracy
on PASCAL VOC dataset. Compared with real-time seg-
mentation models such as BiSeNet, our model achieves
higher accuracy at comparable speed on the Cityscapes
Dataset, enabling the application in speed-demanding tasks
such as street-scene understanding for autonomous driv-
ing. Furthermore, our ShelfNet achieves 79.0% mIoU
on Cityscapes Dataset with ResNet34 backbone, outper-
forming PSPNet and BiSeNet with large backbones such
as ResNet101. Through extensive experiments, we vali-
dated the superior performance of ShelfNet. We provide
link to the implementation https://github.com/
juntang-zhuang/ShelfNet-lw-cityscapes .
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the key to image understand-
ing [ 8,26], and is related to other tasks such as scene pars-
ing, object detection and instance segmentation [ 20,47].
The task of semantic segmentation is to assign each pixel
a unique class label, and can be viewed as a dense classi-
ﬁcation problem. Recently many convolutional neural net-
works (CNN) have achieved remarkable results on seman-
tic segmentation tasks [ 23,3,44]. However, the successof most deep learning models for semantic segmentation
comes at a price of heavy computation burden. The training
of CNNs on a large dataset such as PASCAL VOC [ 8] and
Cityscapes [ 6] typically takes several days on a single GPU,
and the running time during test phase is usually hundreds
of milliseconds (ms) or more, which hinders their applica-
tion in time-efﬁciency demanding tasks.
Real-time semantic segmentation has important appli-
cations, e.g., street scene understanding and autonomous
driving. Prior research on accelerating semantic segmenta-
tion includes removing redundancy of deep neural networks
through pruning [ 10,11,13] and distillation [ 30,15,35].
However, the running speed of these methods is typically
insufﬁcient for fast semantic segmentation. Another way to
get faster running speed is to use a smaller model keeping
the same structure, but this strategy would inevitably yield
lower accuracy [ 45]. Therefore, we aim to propose a new
architecture for fast segmentation while maintaining satis-
fying accuracy.
Most state-of-the-art semantic segmentation models be-
long to the family of single “encoder-decoder” structure,
where the image is progressively down-sampled then up-
sampled. Here, we propose ShelfNet, which employs a
different structure like a multi-column shelf. As illus-
trated in Fig. 1(a), multi-scale features encoded by differ-
ent stages of a CNN backbone ( e.g. ResNet) are fed into
the “ segmentation shelf ”. The segmentation shelf com-
prises of multiple encoder-decoder pairs with skip connec-
tions at each spatial resolution level. The unique structure
increases the number of paths to improve information ﬂow
in the network, thus increasing the segmentation accuracy.
We demonstrate the high accuracy and fast running speed
of our ShelfNet on PASCAL VOC, PASCAL Context and
Cityscapes datasets.
Our main contributions are listed as follows:
1. We propose a novel architecture, ShelfNet (Fig. 1),
for accurate and fast semantic segmentation. Our ShelfNet
has a shelf structure of multiple encoder-decoder pairs to
improve information ﬂow in the network.
2. In the segmentation shelf, we propose to share the