Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
As ar&ﬁcial intelligence becomes an increasingly powerful force, some of the world’s biggest companies are worrying about how the technology will be used ethically, and how the public will perceive its spread. To combat these problems (among others), ﬁve tech companies — Google, Amazon, MicrosoD, Facebook, and IBM — set up a research group called the Partnership on AI. … New trustees joining include Dario Amodei of OpenAI — another industry AI research group founded by Elon Musk and Y Combinator president Sam Altman — and Carol Rose of the ACLU. … AI taking white collar jobs, eroding trust in public media, becoming embedded in public ins&tu&ons like the courts and hospitals: these are the sorts of problems facing the industry in the future.Context
Prompt: List the ﬁve tech companies that ini6ally set up the Partnership on AI.Answer: Google, Amazon, MicrosoD, Facebook and IBM.Prompt: What are poten6al challenges the AI industry might face in the future?Answer: Challenges include AI taking white collar jobs, eroding trust in public media, and becoming embedded in public ins&tu&ons like courts and hospitals..Prompt: Which organiza6on did Dario Amodei previously work for?Answer: OpenAI……
Figure 9: Construction of the PWCdataset: we use the GPT-4 to generate a variety of prompt-answer
pairs according to contexts. The resulting dataset is used for instruction fine-tuning (240k for training)
and evaluation (18k for testing) in this work.
aspects (e.g., topic, genre, structure, style, polarity, key information
and details) of the text as possible. The first half of these prompts
should be like an instruction, the other should be like a question. In
addition to the prompts specified to the above text, please also design
5 general prompts like "rephrase the above text", "summarize the above
text", "write a title for the above text", "extract a few keywords for
the above text" and "write a paragraph (i.e., continuation) that follows
the above text". Each prompt should be outputted in the following
format: [{"prompt": your generated prompt, "answer": the answer to the
prompt}]
D GPT-4 E VALUATION
According to Mu et al. (2023), we formulate an evaluation prompt to be used with the GPT-4 API. The
prompt, as illustrated in Listing 2, consists of a task description along with three specific examples.
We supply GPT-4 with a text, a prompt, and two distinct model-generated responses. The task for
GPT-4 is to determine the superior answer or recognize a tie. The chosen examples encompass
scenarios where Assistant A performs better, Assistant B performs better, and when a tie occurs. This
methodology enables us to effectively assess7the model’s quality. Specially, the orders where the
model responses are presented to the GPT-4 are swapped randomly to alleviate bias, as Touvron et al.
(2023b) did.
Listing 2: Prompt for the GPT-4 evaluation. This prompt consists of a description of the task and
three specific examples.
Given a piece of text, an instruction for this text, and two AI
assistant answers, your task is to choose the better answer and provide
reasons. Evaluate the answers holistically, paying special attention to
7We find the GPT-4 rater tends to prefer longer responses, aligning with observations from recent work such
as Zhao et al. (2024). Given that ICAE’s responses are generally short (due to instruction fine-tuning with the
PwC dataset), its actual performance should be better than the numbers reported in the evaluation.
14