Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 2: 1 example showing how the pretrained ICAE ( k= 128 ) restores the original context.
Origin Context Restoration
Large pretrained language models have shown surprising In-
Context Learning (ICL) ability. With a few demonstration
input-label pairs, they can predict the label for an unseen in-
put without additional parameter updates. Despite the great
success in performance, the working mechanism of ICL still
remains an open problem. In order to better understand how
ICL works, this paper explains language models as meta-
optimizers and understands ICL as a kind of implicit finetun-
ing. Theoretically, we figure out that the Transformer attention
has a dual form of gradient descent based optimization. On
top of it, we understand ICL as follows: GPT first produces
metagradients according to the demonstration examples, and
then these meta-gradients are applied to the original GPT to
build an ICL model. Experimentally, we comprehensively
compare the behavior of ICL and explicit finetuning based
on real tasks to provide empirical evidence that supports our
understand ing. The results prove that ICL behaves similarly
toexplicit finetuning at the prediction level, the representation
level, and the attention behavior level. Further, inspired by our
understanding of meta-optimization, we design a momentum-
based attention by analogy with the momentum-based gradient
descent algorithm. Its consistently better performance over
vanilla attention supports ourunderstand ing again from an-
other aspect, and more importantly, it shows the potential to
utilize our understanding for future model designing.Large pretrained models have shown surprising In-Context
Learning (ICL) ability. With a few demonstration input-label
pairs, they can predict the label for an unseen input without
additional parameter updates. Despite the great success in per-
formance, the working mechanism of ICL still remains an open
problem. In order to better understand how ICL works, this
paper explains how language models as meta-optimizers and
understands ICL as a kind of implicit finetuning. Theoretically,
we figure out that the Transformer attention has a dual form
of gradient descent based on optimization. On top of it, we
understand ICL as follows: GPT first produces metagradients
according to the demonstration examples, and then these meta-
gradients are applied to the original GPT to build an ICL model.
Experimentally, we comprehensively compare the behavior of
ICL and explicit finetuning based on real tasks to provide em-
pirical evidence that supports our findings. The experimental
evidence proves that ICL behaves likeustothesame extent.
Prediction at the explicit finetuning level, the representation
level, and the attention behavior level. Further, inspired by our
understanding of meta-optimization, we design a momentum-
based attention by analogy with the gradientdescent -based
momentumgradient algorithm. Its consistently better perfor-
mance against vanilla attention supports us again from another
aspect, and more importantly, it shows the potential to use our
understanding for future modelingtasks.
Table 3: Restoration performance for different types of 512-token content with 128 memory slots.
Patterned random text is obtained by adding 1 to each token_id in a normal text.
Content type Loss BLEU
Normal text 0.01 99.3
Patterned random text 1.63 3.5
Completely random text 4.55 0.2
Based on this intuition, it is very likely that a more powerful LLM may support a higher compression
ratio without significant forgetting. We will discuss it in Section 3.3.1.
3.2.2 F INE-TUNED ICAE
In order to evaluate the fine-tuned ICAE’s performance, we evaluate on the PWCtest set. We use
the GPT-4 to compare the outputs of the two systems to determine which one performs better or if
they are on par with each other, following Mu et al. (2023). Table 4 shows the comparison of results
of the LLMs conditioned on memory slots and original contexts. For Llama-7b (fine-tuned ICAE),
we compare with Alpaca and StableLM-tuned-alpha-7b since there is no official instruction-tuned
Llama-1 model. The Llama-7b (ICAE) conditioned on 128 memory slots largely outperforms both
Alpaca and StableLM which can access original contexts ( ∼512 tokens), with a win rate of 56.7%
and 74.1% respectively and a win+tie rate of 73% ∼81%. However, when compared to the GPT-4
(we regard it as the gold standard), there is still a significant gap, with around 70% of the cases
underperforming the GPT-4’s results, and a win+tie ratio of about only 30%.
When we switch the base model to Llama-2-chat, we observe ICAE’s performance becomes much
better than its counterpart based on Llama-1: when k= 128 , its win+tie rate can reach around 75%
againt the GPT-4 although it still lags behind its counterpart conditioning on the original context as
the compression is lossy. As kincreases, the win+tie rate further improves while the compression rate
decreases. We perform the same comparative studies on Llama-2-13b-chat and observe better results
of ICAE, supporting our assumption in Section 3.2.1 that the ICAE can benefit more on larger LLMs.
We investigate the impact of memory length on results. Table 5 shows pairwise comparisons between
ICAE models with varying memory slot lengths. A higher compression ratio makes it harder to ensure
response quality, but a larger ratio doesn’t always lead to worse performance. Table 5 highlights
that a pretrained ICAE with 8×compression ( k=64) can match a non-pretrained ICAE with 4×
compression ( k=128). Under the same ratio, the pretrained ICAE performs much better than its
6