Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
2 I N-CONTEXT AUTOENCODER
2.1 M ODEL ARCHITECTURE
Like a typical autoencoder (Kramer, 1991), ICAE consists of an encoder and a decoder. Similar to the
design of Gisting (Mu et al., 2023) and AutoCompressor (Chevalier et al., 2023), the ICAE performs
both the encoding and decoding processes in an in-context manner, as illustrated in Figure 3.
e(w1)e(w2)e(wL)em(m1)em(mk)LLM/uni02DCm1/uni02DCmk…
Original	ContextMemory	tokense(wi)………Memory	SlotsLLMe(w1)e(w2)e(wL−1)e(wi)……Teacher-forcingw1w2wi+1w3……wL
LoRAEncoderDecoderOriginal	Context
[AE]
Figure 3: The encoder of the ICAE is a LoRA-adapted LLM, which is used for encoding the original
context c= (w1, w2, . . . , w L)into a few memory slots (fm1, . . . ,fmk). The decoder of the ICAE is
the target LLM itself that can condition on the memory slots produced by the encoder for various
purposes (e.g., the autoencoding task as in this figure). e(·)denotes the word embedding lookup in
the target LLM and em(·)denotes the learnable embedding lookup of memory tokens that are used
for producing memory slots.“[AE]” is a special token to indicate the autoencoding pretraining task.
Given the intuition, we propose to use a LoRA-adapted LLM as the encoder of the ICAE, as
illustrated in Figure 3. When encoding a context c= (w1, . . . , w L)with the length L, we first append
k(k << L ) memory tokens (m1, . . . , m k)to the context cto obtain their outputs (fm1, . . . ,fmk)as
the memory slots for the context c. Therefore, the ICAE encoder is very lightweight – it only adds a
LoRA adapter and an embedding lookup for memory tokens compared with the target LLM.
As introduced above, we expect the memory slots (fm1, . . . ,fmk)to be conditioned on by the target
LLM on behalf of the original context c. Therefore, we use the untouched target LLM as the decoder
of the ICAE to ensure the compatibility of memory slots within the target LLM.
2.2 P RETRAINING
2.2.1 A UTOENCODING
Like a typical autoencoder, one of the ICAE’s pretraining objectives is to restore the original input
textcof the length Lfrom its produced memory slots (fm1, . . . ,fmk)of the length k:
LAE= max
gm1,...,gmkP(c|fm1, . . . ,fmk; ΘLLM) = max
ΘLoRA ,emP(c|m1. . . m k; ΘLLM,ΘLoRA, em)
To indicate the autoencoding task, we append a special token “[AE]” to (fm1, . . . ,fmk)in the decoder,
as Figure 3 shows. As this pretraining objective does not need any extra annotation, we can use
massive text data to train the In-context Autoencoder.
2.2.2 T EXT CONTINUATION
While autoencoding pretraining offers a straightforward learning objective to encode a context, its
inherent simplicity and exclusive focus on the single objective may lead to suboptimal generalization.
To address this issue, we incorporate an additional objective during the pretraining phase: text contin-
uation, as illustrated in Figure 7 in Appendix A. This self-supervised task is widely acknowledged to
facilitate the learning of more generalizable representations in language models:
LLM= max
gm1,...,gmkP(o|fm1, . . . ,fmk; ΘLLM) = max
ΘLoRA ,emP(o|m1. . . m k; ΘLLM,ΘLoRA, em)
3