Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
where o= (wL+1, . . . , w L+N)denotes the continuation of context c. This objective helps improve
generalization and circumvent excessive reliance on, and overfitting to, the autoencoding task.
2.3 I NSTRUCTION FINE-TUNING
After pretraining, the memory slots produced by the pretrained ICAE are expected to represent
the original context. However, for LLMs, the purpose of providing a context extends beyond rote
memorization or continuation; instead, the more common use scenario is using the provided context
as a basis for accurately and appropriately responding to various prompts, ultimately accomplishing
the tasks we want it to perform (Wei et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022).
To enhance the interaction of memory slots produced by the ICAE with diverse prompts, we further
fine-tune the ICAE with the PWCdataset ( Prompt-with- Context), a dataset1introduced in this paper
consisting of thousands of (context, prompt, response) samples (as shown in Figure 1).
Formally, the ICAE is fine-tuned for learning to encode the context into the memory slots based on
which the decoder (i.e., the target LLM) can produce a desirable response r1. . . rnaccording to a
given prompt p1. . . pm, as shown in Figure 8 in Appendix A:
LFT= max
gm1...gmkP(r1. . . rn|fm1. . .fmk, p1. . . pm; ΘLLM)
= max
ΘLoRA ,emP(r1. . . rn|m1. . . m k, p1. . . pm; ΘLLM,ΘLoRA, em)
3 E XPERIMENTS
3.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETTING
Data We pretrain the ICAE with the Pile (Gao et al., 2020). For instruction fine-tuning, we use the
PWCdataset, as introduced in Section 2.3, which contains 240k (context, prompt, response) samples
for training and 18k samples for testing. The context length distribution of test samples is shown in
Figure 10. By default, the maximal token length (excluding memory slots) we set during training is
512 in both the ICAE’s encoder and decoder in our experiments.
Model Configuration We use the LlaMa (Touvron et al., 2023a;b) as the target LLM to test the
ICAE’s performance in context compression. For the encoder of the ICAE, LoRA is applied to the
query and value projections of the LLM’s multi-head attention. In our default setting, the memory
slot length kis set to 128, and the LoRA rank ris set to 128 unless otherwise specified. The resulting
ICAE only adds about 1% learnable parameters on top of the target LLM.
3.2 R ESULTS
3.2.1 P RETRAINED ICAE
We first evaluate the autoencoding performance of the pretrained ICAE (without instruction fine-
tuning) using the following three metrics to understand how well it restores the original context from
its produced memory slots: BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), Exact-Match (EM)2and cross entropy loss.
Figure 4 presents the autoencoding results of the ICAE based on the Llama-7b. The ICAE demon-
strates a very low overall loss, below 0.05, indicating that the produced memory slots retain almost
all the information of the original context. When the context length is within 300, the ICAE can
almost perfectly reconstruct the original context, achieving nearly 100% BLEU and EM scores. As
the context length increases beyond 400, both BLEU and EM scores start to decline, indicating
insufficient capacity of the 128-length memory slots. However, even at a context length of 500, the
median BLEU remains over 0.98, and the median EM approaches 0.6 (e.g., perfectly reconstructing
about the first 300 words of a 512-token context), showing remarkable performance of ICAE.
We then analyze the effect of the memory size kon the result. According to Figure 5, as the memory
slot length kdecreases, the ICAE’s ability to memorize longer samples significantly deteriorates.
1Despite some (prompt, response) datasets such as Self-Instruct (Wang et al., 2022), most of their samples
either have no context or very short contexts, which are not suitable for evaluation in our setting. Therefore, we
establish the P WC dataset with the help of the GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). We include the details in Appendix C.
2EM denotes the proportion of the exact matching prefix length to the total length. For a context of 512
tokens, if its first 256 tokens are perfectly restored but its 257th token is not, the EM score is 256/512 = 0 .5.
4