Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
IN-CONTEXT AUTOENCODER FOR CONTEXT
COMPRESSION IN A LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL
Tao Ge∗Jing Hu†Lei Wang†Xun Wang Si-Qing Chen Furu Wei
Microsoft Corporation
{tage,v-hjing,v-leiwang7,xunwang,sqchen,fuwei}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
We propose the In-context Autoencoder (ICAE), leveraging the power of a large
language model (LLM) to compress a long context into short compact memory
slots that can be directly conditioned on by the LLM for various purposes. ICAE
is first pretrained using both autoencoding and language modeling objectives on
massive text data, enabling it to generate memory slots that accurately and compre-
hensively represent the original context. Then, it is fine-tuned on instruction data
for producing desirable responses to various prompts. Experiments demonstrate
that our lightweight ICAE, introducing about 1% additional parameters, effectively
achieves 4×context compression based on Llama, offering advantages in both
improved latency and GPU memory cost during inference, and showing an interest-
ing insight in memorization as well as potential for scalability. These promising
results imply a novel perspective on the connection between working memory in
cognitive science and representation learning in LLMs, revealing ICAE’s signifi-
cant implications in addressing the long context problem and suggesting further
research in LLM context management. Our data, code and models are available at
https://github.com/getao/icae .
As	ar&ﬁcial	intelligence	becomes	an	increasingly	powerful	force,	some	of	the	world’s	biggest	companies	are	worrying	about	how	the	technology	will	be	used	ethically,	and	how	the	public	will	perceive	its	spread.	To	combat	these	problems	(among	others),	ﬁve	tech	companies	—	Google,	Amazon,	MicrosoD,	Facebook,	and	IBM	—	set	up	a	research	group	called	the	Partnership	on	AI.	…	AI	taking	white	collar	jobs,	eroding	trust	in	public	media,	becoming	embedded	in	public	ins&tu&ons	like	the	courts	and	hospitals:	these	are	the	sorts	of	problems	facing	the	industry	in	the	future.Long	context
/uni02DCm1…Memory	Slots	/uni02DCmk/uni02DCm1/uni02DCm2…/uni02DCmkContext:Prompt:	List	the	companies	that	set	up	Partnership	on	AI	research	groupLLM	Response:	Google,	Amazon,	MicrosoD,	Facebook	and	IBM./uni02DCm1/uni02DCm2…/uni02DCmkContext:Prompt:	What	are	poten6al	challenges	the	AI	industry	might	face	in	the	future?LLM	Response:	AI	taking	white	collar	jobs,	eroding	trust	in	public	media,	and	becoming	embedded	in	public	ins&tu&ons./uni02DCm2In-context	autoencoding
Figure 1: Compressing a long context into a short span of memory slots . The memory slots can be
conditioned on by the target LLM on behalf of the original context to respond to various prompts.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Long context modeling is a fundamental challenge for Transformer-based (Vaswani et al., 2017)
LLMs due to their inherent self-attention mechanism. Much previous research (Child et al., 2019;
Beltagy et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2019; Choromanski et al., 2020; Bulatov et al., 2022; Zheng et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2022; Bulatov et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2023) attempts to tackle the long context issue
through architectural innovations of an LLM. While they approach long context with a significant
reduction in computation and memory complexity, they often struggle to overcome the notable decline
∗Correspondence to Tao Ge (sggetao@gmail.com)
†Internship at Microsoft Research
1arXiv:2307.06945v4  [cs.CL]  8 May 2024