BoostTree and BoostForest for Ensemble Learning
Changming Zhao1, Dongrui Wu1,∗, Jian Huang1, Ye Yuan1, Hai-Tao Zhang1, Ruimin Peng1, Zhenhua
Shi1and Chenfeng Guo1
1Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Image Proces sing and Intelligent Control, School of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Scien ce and Technology, Wuhan, China.∗e-mail:
drwu@hust.edu.cn
Bootstrap aggregating (Bagging) and boosting are two popul ar ensemble learning approaches,
which combine multiple base learners to generate a composit e model for more accurate and more
reliable performance. They have been widely used in biology , engineering, healthcare, etc. This
article proposes BoostForest, which is an ensemble learnin g approach using BoostTree as base
learners and can be used for both classiﬁcation and regressi on. BoostTree constructs a tree model
by gradient boosting. It achieves high randomness (diversi ty) by sampling its parameters randomly
from a parameter pool, and selecting a subset of features ran domly at node splitting. BoostForest
further increases the randomness by bootstrapping the trai ning data in constructing diﬀerent
BoostTrees. BoostForest outperformed four classical ense mble learning approaches (Random
Forest, Extra-Trees, XGBoost and LightGBM) on 34 classiﬁca tion and regression datasets.
Remarkably, BoostForest has only one hyper-parameter (the number of BoostTrees), which can be
easily speciﬁed. Our code is publicly available, and the pro posed ensemble learning framework can
also be used to combine many other base learners.
Ensemble learning1, 2trains multiple base learners to
explore the relationship between a set of covariates (fea-
tures) and a response (label), and then combines them
to produce a strong composite learner with better gen-
eralization performance. It has been successfully used
in biology3–7, climate prediction8, healthcare9, 10, mate-
rials design11, 12, Moon exploration13, etc.
For example, in biology, Wang et al.4used an en-
semble of neural networks to emulate mechanism-based
biological models. They found that the ensemble is
more accurate than an individual neural network, and
the consistency among the individual models can in-
dicate the error in prediction. In healthcare, Agius et
al.10developed a chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
treatment-infection model, an ensemble of 28 machine
learning algorithms, to identify patients at risk of in-
fection or CLL treatment within 2 years of diagnosis.
To accelerate materials design, Lansford and Vlachos11
used a neural network ensemble to characterize surface
microstructure of complex materials. In Moon explo-
ration, Yang et al.13used ensemble transfer learning and
Chang’E data for automatic Moon surface impact crater
detection and age estimation. They successfully identi-
ﬁed 109,956 new craters from 7,895 training samples.One of the most popular algorithms for constructing
the base learners is the decision tree14–17. Two common
approaches for constructing the composite learner are
bootstrap aggregating (Bagging) and boosting.
Bagging18connects multiple base learners in paral-
lel to reduce the variance of the ensemble. Each base
learner is trained using the same learning algorithm on
a bootstrap replica, which draws N(the size of the orig-
inal training set) samples with replacement from the
original training set. The outputs of these base learn-
ers are then aggregated by majority voting (for classi-
ﬁcation) or averaging (for regression) to obtain the ﬁ-
nal output. To achieve robust performance, the base
learners in an ensemble should be both accurate and
diverse19–21.
Approaches to increase the accuracy of base learn-
ers in an ensemble. Combining the advantages of
tree models and linear models can greatly improve the
model’s learning ability, which is the main idea of
model trees. M522constructs a linear regression func-
tion at each leaf to approximate the target function for
high ﬁtting ability. When a new sample comes in, it
is ﬁrst sorted down to a leaf, then the linear model at
that leaf is used to predict its output. M5P (aka M5′)23
1