Hyper-parameters of the four baselines are summa-
rized in Supplementary Table 2. When the number of
samples was smaller than 10,000, the best parameter
combination was determined by grid-search using inner
5-fold cross-validation; otherwise, 30% samples were
reserved from the training set to form a validation set
for parameter selection. We used early-stopping to con-
trol the number of boosting iterations for XGBoost and
LightGBM, and out-of-bag error to select the parame-
ters of Random Forest and Extra-Trees. After parame-
ter selection, all samples in the training set were used to
train the model.
The number of base learners in BoostForest and its
variants was set to 100. Its parameter pool consisted
of the minimum number of samples on each leaf Min-
SamplesLeaf and the regularization coefﬁcient λ. We
set their candidate set to {5, 6, . . . , 15 }and{0.0001,
0.001, 0.01, 0.1 }, respectively.
Performance measures. We used the classiﬁcation ac-
curacy and the root mean squared error (RMSE) as the
main performance measure for classiﬁcation and re-
gression, respectively. We also computed a rank for
each algorithm on each dataset. For Kalgorithms, the
best one has rank 1, and the worst rank K.
Generalization performance of BoostForest. First,
we compared the generalization performance of Boost-
Forest with the four baselines. Table 1 shows the
results, averaged over ﬁve repeats of 2-fold cross-
validations. BoostForest achieved the best generaliza-
tion performance on 25 out of the 30 datasets, and com-
parable performance with the best baseline on another
dataset (BH).
To validate if BoostForest signiﬁcantly outper-
formed the baselines ( α= 0.05), we ﬁrst calculated the
p-values using the standard t-test, and then performed
Benjamini Hochberg False Discovery Rate (BH-FDR)
correction42to adjust them. The statistically signiﬁ-
cant ones are marked by •in Table 1. BoostForest sig-
niﬁcantly outperformed RandomForest on 25 datasets,
Extra-Trees on 25 datasets, XGBoost on 22 datasets,
and LightGBM on 22 datasets.
Note that BoostForest has only one hyper-parameter
(the number of BoostTrees), which can be easily spec-
iﬁed. Each BoostTree is trained with a different train-
ing set, so BoostForest can be easily parallelized. So,
BoostForest is very easy to use in practice.Generalization performance w.r.t. the number of
base learners. As mentioned above, BoostForest only
needs to specify the number of BoostTrees in it. It is
important to study how its performance changes with
this number.
On each dataset, we gradually increased the number
of base learners from 3 to 100, and tuned other param-
eters of the four baselines by grid-search using inner
5-fold cross-validation.
Figure 2a shows the accuracies of the ﬁve algorithms
on the last four classiﬁcation datasets, averaged over
two repeats of 5-fold cross-validations. Complete re-
sults on all 15 classiﬁcation datasets are shown in Sup-
plementary Figure 1. Generally, as the number of base
learners increased, the performances of all ensemble
learning approaches ﬁrst quickly increased and then
converged. BoostForest achieved the highest classiﬁca-
tion accuracy on 14 of the 15 datasets, and the second
highest on the remaining one (ILP).
Figure 2b shows the RMSEs of the ﬁve algorithms
on the last four regression datasets, averaged over two
repeats of 5-fold cross-validations. Complete results
on all 15 regression datasets are shown in Supplemen-
tary Figure 2. Again, as the number of base learn-
ers increased, generally the performances of all algo-
rithms rapidly increased and then converged. BoostFor-
est achieved the smallest RMSE on 10 datasets, and the
second smallest RMSE on another three (BH, ASN and
EGSS).
Generally, BoostForest converges within 50 Boost-
Trees.
Generalization performance w.r.t. the base learner
model complexity. We also evaluated the generaliza-
tion performance of the ﬁve ensemble approaches, as
the base learner model complexity increases.
Generally, as the model complexity increases, the
bias of the model decreases, but the variance increases.
Between the two popular ensemble learning strategies,
Bagging is suitable for integrating complex base learn-
ers to reduce the variance of the ensemble, whereas
boosting for integrating simple base learners to re-
duce the bias of the ensemble. In this study, the base
learner model complexity was controlled by the max-
imum number of leaves per tree, which was gradually
increased from 2 to 30 for classiﬁcation, and 2 to 256
4