trains linear models at each leaf of a pruned tree to re-
duce the risk of over-ﬁtting. Any regression model, e.g.,
Ridge Regression2(RR), Extreme Learning Machine24
(ELM), Support Vector Regression25(SVR), and Neu-
ral Network, can be used as the node model. These
regression models have some hyper-parameters to tune,
such as the regularization coefﬁcient and the number
of nodes in the hidden layer. It is an NP-hard prob-
lem to simultaneously determine the structure of the
model tree and parameters of each node model. A com-
mon approach is cross-validation, but it is very time-
consuming. It is desirable to develop a strategy that can
make the model tree more compatible with these regres-
sion models.
Approaches to increase the diversity of base learn-
ers in an ensemble. Diversity enhancement strategies
can be divided into three categories26: 1) Sample-based
strategies, which train each base learner on a differ-
ent subset of samples, and thus are scalable to big
data. For example, Bagging uses bootstrap sampling
to obtain different subsets to train the base learners,
and AdaBoost27uses adaptive sample weights (larger
weights for harder samples) in generating a new base
learner. 2) Feature-based strategies, which train each
base learner on different subsets of features, and thus
are scalable to high dimensionality. For example, each
decision tree in Random Forest28–31selects the feature
to be split from a random subset of features, instead
of all available features. Similarly, each decision tree
in Extremely Randomized Trees32(Extra-Trees) splits
nodes by choosing the cut-points completely randomly.
3) Parameter-based strategies. If the base learners are
sensitive to the parameters, setting different parameters
can improve the diversity. For example, different hid-
den layer weights can be used to initialize diverse neu-
ral networks. Interestingly, these three categories of di-
versity enhancement strategies are complementary. So,
their combination may lead to better performance.
Boosting27, 33, 34, the driving force of Gradient Boost-
ing Machine14(GBM), can be used to reduce the bias
of an ensemble. It is an incremental learning process,
in which a new base learner is built to compensate the
error of previously generated learners. Each new base
learner is added to the ensemble in a forward stage-
wise manner. As the boosting algorithm iterates, base
learners generated at later iterations tend to focus on the
harder samples. Mason et al.35described boosting fromthe viewpoint of gradient descent and regarded boost-
ing as a stage-wise learning scheme to optimize differ-
ent objective functions iteratively. Popular implementa-
tions of GBMs, e.g., XGBoost15and LightGBM17, have
been successfully used in many applications36–39.
Friedman et al.40proposed LogitBoost (Supplemen-
tary Algorithm 1) to optimize logistic regression by
maximum likelihood. It generates the ensemble by per-
forming Newton updates iteratively. In each iteration,
LogitBoost ﬁrst computes the working response and
weights using Newton (for two-class) or quasi-Newton
(for multi-class) method, and then the ensemble is up-
dated by adding a new model, which is trained to ﬁt the
working response by a weighted least-squares regres-
sion. However, traditional boosting approaches14, 15, 17
often have many parameters and thus require cross-
validation, which is unreliable on small datasets, and
time-consuming on big data. It is desirable to develop
an algorithm that has very few parameters and is robust
to them.
This article proposes BoostForest, which integrates
boosting and Bagging for both classiﬁcation and regres-
sion. Our main contributions are:
1. We propose a novel decision tree model, Boost-
Tree, that integrates GBMs into a single decision
tree, as shown in Figure 1a. BoostTree trains a
linear or nonlinear function, e.g., RR, ELM, or
SVR, at each node. For a given input, BoostTree
ﬁrst sorts it down to a leaf, then computes the ﬁ-
nal prediction by summing up the outputs of all
node models along the path from the root to that
leaf. BoostTree achieves high randomness (diver-
sity) by selecting a subset of features randomly at
node splitting.
2. We propose a novel diversity enhancement
strategy, random parameter pool sampling,
which makes BoostTree more robust to hyper-
parameters. In this strategy, the parameters of
the BoostTree are not speciﬁc values, but random
samples from candidate sets stored in a parame-
ter pool. Each time a node model is generated,
its parameters are randomly selected from the pa-
rameter pool. This further improves the diversity
of BoostTrees.
3. Using BoostTrees as base learners, we propose
2