Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 8 of 17
all, to make human-machine collaboration more effective and safer, it is necessary
to have systems that adapt to the needs, preferences, and individual requirements
of operators, such as heart rate, operation purpose, and level of experience [ 50]. In
this regard, miniaturization and reduction of costs have increasingly enabled the
adoption of wearable sensors in the industrial context to trace workers’ conditions
and well-being; e.g., eye-trackers can be used to estimate workers’ attention [51].
AI technology is crucial in promoting manufacturing innovation, as smart manufactur-
ing processes or industrial upgrading, especially in the development of new technologies
and materials. AI technologies, once applied to process manufacturing, allow optimizing
the production cycle by automating tasks, predicting outcomes, and improving efficiency.
Specifically, they are used from optimizing the supply chain to predicting equipment fail-
ures, reducing waste, improving production times and quality. The influence of AI on
manufacturing technologies is not limited to the production process, but also to process
and design new raw materials. Papadimitriou et al. studied the recent developments in the
application of AI to materials design and discovery, including ML, deep learning (DL), and
other AI techniques [ 52]. Moreover, other AI techniques such as evolutionary algorithms
(EA) have been used in materials design to optimize the synthesis of materials [53].
Specifically, what this document focuses on is how artificial intelligence is significantly
influencing additive manufacturing (AM), which is already a smart technology in itself,
and how human-centricity plays an important role in it. The role of AI in technologies and
materials is undisputed and the subject of numerous studies
In the field of additive manufacturing, there has been a growing demand for products
and devices oriented towards human well-being, such as biomedical products for ortho-
pedics, sports, and dentistry, due to the significant level of customization required by the
manufacturing process and at the same time high-quality and cost competitiveness. The use
of AI can help overcome challenges for customizing the additive manufacturing process by
integrating AI/ML systems in the design, production, and process and product evaluation
phases [ 48,54]. Enabling AI in the product design phase offers a promising solution to
consider a variety of design variables and their complex interactions in design and thus
achieve desired performance in production. Furthermore, with the integration of AI in the
AM manufacturing and evaluation phases, the manufacturing process of human-centric
customized products can be optimized, and quality performance can be fully and efficiently
evaluated. There are still many open challenges in including AI in additive manufacturing
processes, particularly in quality control, allowing for more efficient, precise, and reliable
product production [ 50], especially in the following areas. (a) Quality prediction: using
machine learning algorithms, critical quality characteristics such as defects, geometric
deviations, and process conditions can be predicted before they actually occur during
production. (b) Prescriptive compensation and correction: AI can be used to automatically
compensate for any defects or deviations during manufacturing, ensuring that the final
product meets the required quality standards [43,55].
3. Development and Perspectives of HCAI for Sustainable Manufacturing Focusing on
Additive Manufacturing
The most recent literature review states that additive manufacturing is playing and
will play a role in the transition to greater sustainability in manufacturing, as the design
and opportunities it offers foster more sustainable production and consumption [ 56]. This
allows substantial economic and environmental benefits, and at the same time promotes
sustainable consumption yet collaborative and human-centric innovation, because they are
based on specific needs. In this way, AM is becoming a production technology tailored to
specific social, environmental, and economic needs, which are therefore the basis of more
sustainable development [ 57,58]. Although additive manufacturing (AM) has provided
unprecedented opportunities in the development of human-centered products, i.e., cus-
tomization, especially in medical applications, there are still many practical challenges