Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 9 of 17
limiting broader adoption, especially in three main areas of industrial production, namely
quality assurance, design optimization, and customization.
For example, the use of AI in design optimization for AM (DfAM) implies the optimiza-
tion of the geometry of AM products to achieve the desired properties or minimize mass or
cost. AI significantly accelerates design by, for example, integrating with support vector
machine (SVM) methods to identify a subset of AM design features [ 59]. In DfAM, AI is also
included in the materials design phase; for example, to be able to modify the materials used
for traditional manufacturing techniques for AM processing [ 60]. The second fundamental
aspect of HCAI in AM is the optimization in the choice of the AM processes and of the
related process parameters. AI-based AM process optimization relies on multi-criteria
approaches such as fuzzy logic operators [ 61] and hybrid schemes integrating multiple
method selection. For optimizing AM parameters, there are several AI approaches that
are based on the chosen variables, constraints, and objective functions. For example, there
are many studies that simultaneously optimize the accuracy and mechanical properties
of the product [ 62,63]. The third aspect directly influenced using AI is quality assessment.
Fundamental, in fact, in the development of personalized human-centered products in AM,
is the assessment, which can be made according to multiple aspects such as metrology,
sustainability, dimensionality and ownership, widely explored in research [64–66].
Quality assurance is a fundamental step in industrial production; for example, in
ensuring the performance of production lines, as well as for optimizing various materials
and designs. AI-based systems can analyze data from IoT sensors within the AM process to
identify anomalies or defects and quickly correct parameters or reprint defective parts. In
design optimization, artificial intelligence can enhance AM in the design process, encourag-
ing and further developing the design for AM (DfAM) and enabling significant progress in
this regard [ 67]. AI algorithms can analyze large amounts of data to establish and adjust the
factors that most affect design. The AM process can, therefore, easily execute enhanced de-
signs that capture the exact specifications of the project. Additionally, artificial intelligence
combined with AM enables manufacturers to create customized products, especially since
AI algorithms can analyze customer data and preferences to create personalized designs,
which can be easily implemented, and 3D printed by AM systems.
In addition to incentivizing an optimized product lifecycle management, AM tech-
nologies can definitely foster better resource efficiency, enhanced supply chains, and new
business models, especially when combined with AI and the human-centered approach.
Indeed, the supply chain can benefit from real-time decision-making, predictive analytics,
and customized on-demand production towards greater sustainability and adaptability.
In [68], key elements of human-centric supply chains are highlighted, placing people at the
center of supply chain management. AI’s ability to analyze vast amounts of data ensures
more accurate forecasting and efficient logistics, while AM provides the flexibility to quickly
respond to market changes and customer demands. Through the use of technology, the
human-centric supply chain aims to create a sustainable society that prioritizes corporate so-
cial and environmental responsibility in supply chain development, while also addressing
customer preferences and requirements throughout sourcing, production, and delivery of
goods and services [ 13,69,70]. This capability not only offers new market opportunities but
also supports innovative business models where manufacturers can offer premium quality
assurance or customized services based on AI-driven insights. The aim of using AI in AM
is to provide and manage intelligent products, services, and experiences while ensuring
higher product standards and reducing waste. By providing enhanced product reliability
and operational efficiency, the manufacturer not only attracts premium clients willing to
pay for superior quality or customized products but also creates new revenue streams
and competitive advantages in the market, and also revolutionizes trade and management
practices towards more competitive and sustainable products and services [33,71].
Persistent challenges and forthcoming research prospects in these AM areas primarily
include: the development of advanced AI methods oriented towards AM to handle data
with high heterogeneity and dimensionality but low availability; the complete use of