Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 2 of 17
At the industrial level, this has led to the development of advanced approaches
to cognitive computing and deep learning for automated applications such as visual
inspection, fault detection, and maintenance in manufacturing systems. Deep learning
approaches are actively used in production systems, from supply chain to manufacturing
programs, ensuring the highest quality and safety in multiple sectors [ 9], including public
policy and public administration.
AI helps to monitor and manage production processes comprehensively and not
only to replace humans in risky operations but also to support them, placing them at
the center of the process through a specific approach called human-centered. Numerous
examples include the adoption of human-centered approaches by major companies such
as Apple, Google, and Microsoft during the development of artificial intelligence soft-
ware [ 10]. Mercedes-Benz has replaced standard robots with AI-based collaborative robots
(cobots), enabling the production of customized cars more efficiently [ 11]. IBM Watson
has proposed a system that could recommend cancer treatments in line with the doctor’s
recommendations most of the time [ 12]. Furthermore, AI and sensors offer real-time tech-
nological advancements that support the shipping industry, enhancing safety, reducing
costs, thereby boosting productivity in international trade and embracing a more intelligent
and sustainable future [13,14].
This underlines the importance of a multidisciplinary approach that allows different
sectors and roles to communicate and highlight positive aspects and diverse perspectives
of AI use. This article explores the key challenges associated with the human-centered
artificial intelligence (HCAI) approach in Industry 5.0 and the circular economy, as well as
the role of decision-makers. The methodological approach will be integrative and compre-
hensive, employing qualitative methods to examine the impact and applications of HCAI
in these fields. This involves conducting an extensive literature review, critically analyzing
major challenges with a focus on smart manufacturing and the role of policymakers, and
identifying future research trends and needs. As a guiding framework for our study, we set
the following research questions (RQs):
1. What does the human-centered AI approach mean in the context of the industrial
sector, in general, and in the manufacturing sector in particular?
2. What is the associated literature of the human-centered AI approach when realizing
the vision of Industry 5.0 and the main challenge to address?
3. What role do decision-makers play in the successful adoption and implementation of
HCAI in Industry 5.0 and the circular economy?
4. How can interdisciplinary collaboration enhance the effectiveness of HCAI applica-
tions in industry?
5. What are the future directions for research and development in the field of HCAI?
The remainder of the paper unfolds as follows: the theoretical framework is outlined
in Section 2, while Section 3 details the HCAI and Industry 5.0 and provides empirical
evidence on the perspectives of HCAI for additive manufacturing (AM). Section 4 discusses
the challenges for Government 5.0 in the light of the HCAI approach. Section 5 proposes
some suggestions for further research.
2. Background
2.1. Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
“Human-centered AI” or “human-centered artificial intelligence” refers to a model of
AI development and implementation that prioritizes human needs, values, and perspec-
tives. Essentially, it is an approach within the field of AI that focuses on engaging people
with active inclusion of users, stakeholders, and industry experts throughout the entire
AI development cycle, from design and development phases to practical implementation.
The aim is to understand and integrate human perspectives into the decision-making and
system creation processes of AI. Facilitating human-machine interaction aims to create AI
systems that are intuitive, understandable, and easily usable by humans, reducing the gap
and improving interaction between people and technology. The goal of human-centered AI