Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 4 of 17
Manufacturing companies gather vast amounts of unstructured data from various sources
such as sensors in machinery, production lines, production execution systems, enterprise
resource planning systems, and systems outside production (customer feedback, supply
chain). Analyzing these data creates a competitive advantage and generates new products
and services. The ability to properly analyze and structure the collected data and derive
value from it through AI and machine learning/deep learning techniques is therefore
a challenge for the global industry and the global economy. Countries worldwide are
implementing strategies and initiatives to keep pace with change through rapid innovation
development and digitalization of production [23].
However, our recent literature review has found that most AI software systems lack
human-centered approaches during the writing and modeling of engineering requirements.
For example, it has highlighted that many initiatives primarily focus on some aspects
to include ethics, trust, and clarity, but lack the human-centered aspects adopted by the
industry, or how they should be addressed. A focus on centrality leads to the develop-
ment and processing of AI-based system requirements in a new and in-depth manner
to address human-centeredness. There are indeed engineering requirements of AI that
raise a number of challenging issues with which it is difficult to interface, such as placing
full trust in AI solutions, specifying various requirements because they are too vague,
limitations of existing techniques to manage AI requirements, as well as the emergence of
new types of requirements, such as data, clarity, transparency, compliance, and difficulties
in understanding the feasibility of AI models.
In the manufacturing industry, AI should not only focus on process optimization but
also on creating safe and ethical work environments, considering issues of privacy and data
security, and actively involving operators and workers in AI-related decisions. Therefore,
in addition to engineering, computer science, and statistical aspects, the issue needs to
be addressed from legal, social, and economic perspectives with appropriate policies and
legislation to support a new vision.
Another field of application of AI is the public sector, which represents the largest
market for AI solutions in developing countries: AI governance becomes important espe-
cially now that open government and digitalization of public services are taking root [ 24].
AI in the public sector is applied, for example, to decisions regarding public procurement,
whose spending represents up to 50% of GDP in most cases in developing countries. There-
fore, public procurement is essentially a critical bridge for the adoption of AI technologies
by the public sector [ 25,26]. However, governments of developing countries have weak
regulatory and governance mechanisms to incentivize solution developers and AI users to
adopt human-centered AI innovations that protect users from abuses, social divisions, and
government suppression.
2.2. HCAI and Industry 5.0
The European Commission proposes a vision of Industry 5.0, where well-being and
technological progress are considered jointly from a sustainability perspective with particu-
lar attention to human centrality [ 27]. The Industry 5.0 revolution requires the intervention
of more sophisticated systems such as network sensor data interoperability, cobots, and
other intelligent systems [ 28]. In this context, it is necessary to consolidate knowledge
about human-technology interaction to bridge the gap between production and societal
needs. AI is not a cold replacement for labor but an opportunity for transformation and
growth [ 29]. In this direction, human-centered AI (HCAI) advocates for a human-centered
approach in realizing the vision of Industry 5.0 to create AI systems that enhance human
capabilities rather than replacing them and ensure greater inclusivity in line with sus-
tainable development [ 30,31]. While several works in the literature show examples of AI
systems with substantial impacts on human activities, there is unanimous agreement on
the need to address all social implications of this technology and how AI can serve social
goals with the worker’s well-being placed at the center of the production process [ 32–34].
With a focus on human-machine interaction, Industry 5.0 interconnects human intelligence