Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 11 of 17
Sustainability  2024 , 16, 5448 11 of 17 
 
latency requires the implementation of speci ﬁc network technologies and architec-
tures and is still an open challenge in the industrial context. 
One possible approach to overcoming the ch allenges of AM discussed in this paper 
is to promote AM customization in the indust rial sector by optimizing IoT sensors con-
nected through high-performance, low-latency networks to improve the interaction be-
tween the customer and the ﬁnalization of the part, both from the design phase and during 
production. Speci ﬁcally, at the 5G/6G network level, the proposed approach involves the 
use of virtualization technologies and sync hronization protocols and low-latency net-
works, also through integration with industri al Ethernet networks to make the most of 
their respective characteristics. For example, to ensure security, a solution of distributed 
monitoring and recording of production data  and machine operation status can be uti-
lized. Additionally, employing a software virtualization technology, such as micro-con-
tainers or virtual machines, properly deployed in edge computing nodes, can ensure low-
latency performance. Fina lly, there must be appropriate in tegration of indu strial Ethernet 
and 5G networks, the former for ﬁxed and wired applications with time-sensitive proto-
cols that prioritize quick and timely packet  scheduling, removing non-deterministic com-
munication characteristics, and the la tter for mobile applications and real-time wireless 
communications requiring precise response times, such as advanced machinery and ro-botics control. 
 
Figure 3. HCAI main challenges in sustainable manufacturing. 
Moreover, to enhance the integration of edge nodes with high-speed networks, an 
intent-based networking approach can be em ployed, which is an advanced approach for 
conﬁguring and managing infrastructure based on de ﬁning user-desired goals and inten-
tions, rather than manually con ﬁguring individual network devices. This can be enriched 
using arti ﬁcial intelligence to address user pro ﬁling to enhance huma n-centered technical 
user‒network interaction. Additionally, data secu rity intents can also be designed to pro-
vide eﬀective yet simpli ﬁed support for network security. Similarly, blockchain technol-
ogy can undoubtedly be useful in enhancing the cryptographic security and immutability 
of data as well as controlling data access. This is crucial for protecting sensitive data re-
lated to production and intellectual property  from unauthorized access or fraudulent 
modi ﬁcations that could compromise both comput er and production systems, potentially 
leading to cybersecurity issues fo r both the systems and workers. 
Figure 3. HCAI main challenges in sustainable manufacturing.
One possible approach to overcoming the challenges of AM discussed in this paper is
to promote AM customization in the industrial sector by optimizing IoT sensors connected
through high-performance, low-latency networks to improve the interaction between the
customer and the finalization of the part, both from the design phase and during produc-
tion. Specifically, at the 5G/6G network level, the proposed approach involves the use of
virtualization technologies and synchronization protocols and low-latency networks, also
through integration with industrial Ethernet networks to make the most of their respective
characteristics. For example, to ensure security, a solution of distributed monitoring and
recording of production data and machine operation status can be utilized. Additionally,
employing a software virtualization technology, such as micro-containers or virtual ma-
chines, properly deployed in edge computing nodes, can ensure low-latency performance.
Finally, there must be appropriate integration of industrial Ethernet and 5G networks, the
former for fixed and wired applications with time-sensitive protocols that prioritize quick
and timely packet scheduling, removing non-deterministic communication characteristics,
and the latter for mobile applications and real-time wireless communications requiring
precise response times, such as advanced machinery and robotics control.
Moreover, to enhance the integration of edge nodes with high-speed networks, an
intent-based networking approach can be employed, which is an advanced approach for
configuring and managing infrastructure based on defining user-desired goals and inten-
tions, rather than manually configuring individual network devices. This can be enriched
using artificial intelligence to address user profiling to enhance human-centered technical
user-network interaction. Additionally, data security intents can also be designed to pro-
vide effective yet simplified support for network security. Similarly, blockchain technology
can undoubtedly be useful in enhancing the cryptographic security and immutability of
data as well as controlling data access. This is crucial for protecting sensitive data related to
production and intellectual property from unauthorized access or fraudulent modifications
that could compromise both computer and production systems, potentially leading to
cybersecurity issues for both the systems and workers.
Different practical approaches or methods can be used to test and confirm, through real
data and observations, the framework proposed. These include experiments, case studies,
statistical analyses, surveys, just to name a few, that allow verifying whether the developed
theories are actually reflected in reality [ 72,73]. As discussed in Section 2.2, various case