Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 6 of 17
ized human-machine interaction, new production and industrial processes enhanced by
interaction with AI and IoT are certainly represented by additive manufacturing. So-called
additive manufacturing (AM) is a smart technique that falls within the fundamentals of
both the fourth and fifth industrial revolutions. Artificial intelligence and machine learning
are becoming increasingly integral to the growth and applicability of AM. The potential of
this manufacturing technology is currently at the forefront of a scientific and technological
revolution. The manufacturing logic is revolutionized, as well as the human role and
human-machine interaction. This extends not only to the actual production phase but also
to pre- and post-production phases, with a complex revolution of the AM supply chain,
as well as the development of new materials, machine improvements, part design, and
workflow optimization. With increased human-machine interaction, future work can also
be done to develop intelligent control by refining current pattern recognition algorithms.
Similarly, Toth et al. have summarized the potential advantages of the human-centered
Industry 5.0 collaboration architecture: improved collaboration, enhanced decision-making,
user-oriented design, flexibility, and continuous innovation. They also identified some
challenges, such as technological complexity, the need for training and adaptation, financial
implications, and the risk of technological redundancy [37].
The core values of Industry 5.0, including human centrality, sustainability, and re-
silience, have stimulated formal and scientific discussions on the topic. Human-centered
smart manufacturing (HSM) fully exploits human flexibility, machine precision, and next-
generation computing technologies to build an ultra-intelligent, sustainable, and resilient
production system. Research on HSM is relatively lacking but is rapidly gaining ground.
For example, Zhang et al. summarized the limitations, barriers, and challenges of key
enabling technologies and the application of HSM based on two aspects: they identified
three promising Industry 4.0 technologies, such as blockchain and IIoT, human-cybernetic
fusion based on DT and AR, and data- and knowledge-assisted intelligent decision sup-
port, which can continue to support the construction and operation of HSM. On the other
hand, challenges remain related to data security in the IIoT network, the efficiency of
collaboration in HCPS (human-centric production service), and model uncertainty in the
decision-making process. Zhang et al. also report new applications in HSM and how HSM
will reshape the product’s lifecycle from the design and production to maintenance phases
of manufacturing. By placing the needs, perspectives, and involvement of human operators
at the center of decisions and processes, each stage can be optimized as described in the
following cases (Figure 2) [38].
Sustainability  2024 , 16, 5448 6 of 17 
 
referred to as the industrial  internet of things (IIoT).  In addition to personalized human ‒
machine interaction, new production and industrial processes enhanced by interaction 
with AI and IoT are certainly represented by additive manufacturing. So-called additive 
manufacturing (AM) is a smart technique that falls within the fundamentals of both the fourth and ﬁfth industrial revolutions. Arti ﬁcial intelligence and machine learning are be-
coming increasingly integral to the growth and applicability of AM. The potential of this 
manufacturing technology is currently at the forefront of a scienti ﬁc and technological 
revolution. The manufacturing logic is revolutionized, as well as the human role and hu-
man‒machine interaction. This extends not only to the actual production phase but also 
to pre- and post-production phases, with a complex revolution of the AM supply chain, 
as well as the development of new material s, machine improvements, part design, and 
work ﬂow optimization. With increased human ‒machine interaction, future work can also 
be done to develop intelligent control by re ﬁning current pa ttern recognition algorithms. 
Similarly, Toth et al. have summarized the potential advantages of the human-cen-
tered Industry 5.0 collaboration architecture: improved collaboration, enhanced decision-
making, user-oriented design, ﬂexibility, and continuous innovation. They also identi ﬁed 
some challenges, such as technological comple xity, the need for training and adaptation, 
ﬁnancial implications, and the risk of technological redundancy [37]. 
The core values of Industry 5.0, including human centrality, sustainability, and resil-
ience, have stimulated formal and scienti ﬁc discussions on the topic. Human-centered 
smart manufacturing (HSM) fully exploits human ﬂexibility, machine precision, and next-
generation computing technologies to build an ultra-intelligent, sustainable, and resilient production system. Research on HSM is relatively lacking but is rapidly gaining ground. 
For example, Zhang et al. summarized the limita tions, barriers, and challenges of key en-
abling technologies and the application of HSM based on two aspects: they identi ﬁed 
three promising Industry 4.0 technologies, such as blockchain and IIoT, human ‒cybernetic 
fusion based on DT and AR, and data- and knowledge-assisted intelligent decision sup-port, which can continue to support the construction and operation of HSM. On the other 
hand, challenges remain related to data  security in the IIoT network, the e ﬃciency of col-
laboration in HCPS (human-centric production  service), and model uncertainty in the de-
cision-making process. Zhang et al. also report new applications in HSM and how HSM 
will reshape the product’s lifecycle from the design and production to maintenance 
phases of manufacturing. By placing the needs, perspectives, and involvement of human 
operators at the center of decisions and proc esses, each stage can be optimized as de-
scribed in the following cases (Figure 2) [38]. 
 
Figure 2. Human-centered AI in smart ma nufacturing (based on [38]). 
Figure 2. Human-centered AI in smart manufacturing (based on [38]).