Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 13 of 17
Specifically, among the key technologies for achieving personalized and high-quality
production, AM plays a fundamental role in modern industrial contexts, especially when
combined with IoT and AI systems to pursue advanced intelligent production in line with
the concept of HCAI towards Industry 5.0 scenarios. Together, IoT and AI technologies
combined with AM can reshape traditional production into a more agile, human-centered,
and data-driven process. Indeed, IoT can play a crucial role by serving as a data infras-
tructure that enhances AM processes, promoting superior quality, reducing material waste,
and enabling rapid and safe production in AM processes. AM is a game-changer for
sustainable production due to its inherent ability to produce almost clean shapes, with very
high efficiency in the use of materials, as well as the customized and flexible production
of complex objects on demand. AM processes integrate AI in different ways, primarily
AI-enabled human-centric AM in terms of each individual phase, i.e., starting from design
customization, optimization of different AM processes, and evaluation of quality. Moreover,
intelligent systems can support humans to enhance the user experience and ensure worker
well-being in the manufacturing sector. A key and significant element in enabling intelligent
and connected production by IoT and AI systems is the contribution of 5G/6G networks:
5G/6G networks provide essential high-speed, low-latency connectivity and reliability for
the seamless integration of AI technologies for data-driven AM, while ensuring precise
control of critical systems, data security, real-time automation and regulation, and collabo-
rative efficiency. There are many application scenarios for the presented approach; specific
focuses have been identified that exemplify and are the subject of further investigation.
The first focus concerns applications in the logistics and supply chain sector, which has
already been greatly impacted by the AM production approach, and where HCAI systems
can completely change the approach and type of human work in such supply flows. A
second focus is on the optimization and especially the customization of AM processes
aimed at bioprinting, both in the biomedical and food sectors. At the same time, specific
challenges need to be addressed, requiring advanced research activities in both the AM field
and the enabling technologies of 5G/6G networks and edge computing. Furthermore, these
challenges are reflected in the corresponding challenges of the 5G/6G network to ensure
the high availability and low-latency data transmission and massive data computation
required by advanced automation and artificial intelligence algorithms.
The latter require computational capabilities to support automated control processes
based on the timely processing of large amounts of data. Therefore, solutions need to be
proposed for network reliability and security, minimal and deterministic latency, network,
and edge computing integration.
In the context of the above challenges, the deployment of private 5G networks can
offer interesting opportunities by providing advanced solutions to address challenges and
improve operational efficiency. Private 5G networks enable dedicated radio coverage,
targeted and guaranteed use of network resources aimed at the offered radio service, and
the ability to use customer cloud infrastructures to realize an effective edge architecture
within a specific production installation or manufacturing plant. These private 5G net-
works are independent of public networks and are created to meet the specific needs and
challenges of advanced manufacturing applications, which represent the most widespread
area of interest.
Looking at Government 5.0, policymaking is a highly intricate process that takes place
in a dynamic environment, influencing the three pillars of sustainable development: society,
economy, and environment. Decision-making processes encompass complex scenarios,
which take place in rapidly changing and uncertain environments, and involve conflicts
among various interests [ 79]. Every political decision triggers social reactions, impacts
economic and financial factors, and has significant environmental consequences. Enhancing
decision-making in this context can lead to substantial benefits across all these areas. In
this sense, the role of public institutions, and their ability to respond to challenges arising
from innovation, represents a focal point to ensure that private actors have an adaptive
and non-burdensome regulatory environment capable of meeting the needs dictated by AI