Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 5 of 17
with the precision and efficiency of machines using artificial intelligence in industrial pro-
duction. Industry 5.0 is developed to overcome the challenges faced by Industry 4.0 by
promoting human centrality and meeting societal needs. Europe has taken a leading role
in the green and digital transitions, which implies that workers, regions, and societies are
facing extremely rapid transformations. While these transformations create opportunities
for inclusive technological and social development, they also pose the risk of increasing
inequalities. The request from the European Commission is to focus efforts on promoting
human centrality in AI as an opportunity for transformation and growth to contribute to
achieving the goals of the Digital Decade program, which aims to lead Europe’s digital
transformation by 2030 [35].
Human-centered AI (HCAI) in Industry 5.0 is a new approach aimed at using artifi-
cial intelligence systems with a focus on the importance of collaboration and interaction
between intelligent machines and human operators. This approach learns from human
inputs and is based on collaborative principles that, in addition to technology, draw on
knowledge from human sciences (from ethics to behavioral disciplines) so that collabo-
ration and synergy between humans and AI can develop in an environment of growing
trust. Examples include machines and processes designed considering the needs, skills,
and preferences of human operators and learning from their behaviors: machines assist
and support human operators, improving productivity and workplace safety; machines
continually learn from human interactions, adapting to the evolving needs of operators
and the work environment [36].
In its policy brief on Industry 5.0, the EU not only defines what Industry 5.0 is but
also outlines the policies to be implemented to support its development. In the same
document, the EU establishes the three axes around which Industry 5.0 develops, namely
human-centricity, sustainability, and resilience [ 35]. In particular, the EU emphasizes
the importance of prioritizing research and innovation as engines for the transition to
Industry 5.0. Now more than ever, it believes it is important to invest to overcome the
economic challenges posed by the coronavirus crisis and to establish a “new normal” with
a more competitive, sustainable, and greener European industry. The role of the EU is to
lead this new wave of innovation, as reflected in the Next Generation EU and Horizon
Europe programs.
This industrial transformation requires a new type of entrepreneur. The entrepreneur
of the future will be someone sensitive to innovation, capable of identifying new opportu-
nities for sustainable business and environmental care, and actively participating within an
ecosystem of industries and public and private entities to be part of a cooperation model
aimed at implementing good practices of the circular economy.
Industry 5.0 aims to revitalize the presence of human labor in factories, where humans
and machines would work together to increase process efficiency by fully leveraging human
intellectual abilities and creativity through their integration with current intelligent systems.
Industry 5.0 includes the interoperability of network sensor data with new added func-
tionalities. Some of these include smart additive manufacturing, predictive maintenance,
hyper-customization in industry, cyber-physical cognitive systems, and the introduction of
collaborative robots. In smart factories inspired by the modern manufacturing industry,
the use of AI facilitates timely decision-making based on both real-time and historical data,
with minimal human involvement [36].
To address these challenges, it is necessary for AI to be properly understood, accepted,
and integrated, also resolving issues related to data security. If these challenges are effec-
tively overcome, they will help organizations grow Industry 5.0. This will also increase
confidence in automation and help workers perform their jobs alongside robots. Better
automation that considers human behavior and needs will help improve human produc-
tivity and contribute to providing meaningful work to humans themselves. Therefore,
Industry 5.0 offers an opportunity to conduct research, particularly in data security and
integration, considered the most significant challenge when things are integrated with the
internet, often referred to as the industrial internet of things (IIoT). In addition to personal-