Citation: Martini, B.; Bellisario, D.;
Coletti, P . Human-Centered and
Sustainable Artificial Intelligence in
Industry 5.0: Challenges and
Perspectives. Sustainability 2024 ,16,
5448. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su16135448
Received: 16 May 2024
Revised: 20 June 2024
Accepted: 22 June 2024
Published: 26 June 2024
Copyright: ©2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Communication
Human-Centered and Sustainable Artificial Intelligence in
Industry 5.0: Challenges and Perspectives
Barbara Martini1
, Denise Bellisario1,*
and Paola Coletti2
1Faculty of Technological & Innovation Sciences, University of Mercatorum, 00186 Rome, Italy;
barbara.martini@unimercatorum.it
2Faculty of Society and Communication, University of Mercatorum, 00186 Rome, Italy;
paola.coletti@unimercatorum.it
*Correspondence: denise.bellisario@unimercatorum.it
Abstract: The aim of this position paper is to identify a specific focus and the major challenges related
to the human-centered artificial intelligence (HCAI) approach in the field of Industry 5.0 and the
circular economy. A first step towards the opening of a line of research is necessary to aggregate
multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary skills to promote and take into consideration the different
aspects related to this topic, from the more technical and engineering aspects to the social ones and
the repercussions in terms of sustainability. The proposal and vision of this preliminary work is to
identify and discuss a suitable field for such interaction. This field has been identified, specifically,
within additive manufacturing (AM) in the context of Industry 5.0. Additive manufacturing (AM), is a
disruptive opportunity for more sustainable production systems that can be better optimized with AI,
becoming an ideal platform for interconnection between different levels of application and integration
of HCAI concepts, and at the same time able to prove them. In this context, two prospective areas with
a high application impact of HCAI are those of AM-oriented supply chain and product customization
in the AM field, enabled by a plethora of recently emerging technologies such as the internet of
things, cloud and edge computing, and next-generation networks (5G). The paper concludes with the
challenges HCAI poses to public policymakers, who face significant policy challenges in regulating
artificial intelligence, and addressing the socioeconomic and technological impacts. Decision-makers
are required to address these challenges by adopting some tentative policy recommendations.
Keywords: human-centered artificial intelligence; Industry 5.0; enabling technologies; additive
manufacturing; customization; regulation; public policy
1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a field of study that focuses on creating systems or
machines capable of performing tasks that require human intelligence. These tasks include
machine learning, problem-solving, pattern recognition, natural language processing, and
more. In general, AI aims to develop systems that can simulate some of the human
capabilities of learning and reasoning, such as visual perception, voice recognition, and
linguistic translation, to perform specific tasks autonomously or semi-autonomously. John
McCarthy specifically described AI as the scientific and technological competence for the
development of intelligent computer programmers [1].
Machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) are two of the most used methods of
artificial intelligence [ 2]. These models rely on data and are used to develop predictive
models by individuals, companies, and governmental organizations. Currently, methods
of automated learning are being developed capable of handling the complexity and un-
predictability of information in various industrial sectors such as food, biomedical, and
aerospace [ 3]. By combining the principles of ML and DL with advanced optimization
techniques into industrial processes, practitioners are empowered to navigate modern
challenges with heightened precision and efficacy [4–8].
Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448. https://doi.org/10.3390/su16135448 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability