Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 7 of 17
1. Design Phase: Enhanced decision-making capacity and a robust knowledge base,
built on real-time and historical data, can significantly benefit the design phase [ 39,40].
In the system requirement gathering, the goal is to iteratively translate customer
needs into practical and applicable solutions. For example, when designing a produc-
tion process for manufacturing automotive components using a data-driven HCAI
approach, requirement gathering can benefit from predictive analytics made about
customer needs and formalization of requirements using data mining techniques [ 41].
Additionally, design activities can be facilitated by advanced AI techniques and data
management methods to analyze collected data, identify patterns, anomalies, and
optimization opportunities in the production process, thereby detecting inefficien-
cies in operator movements or suggesting production parameter changes to enhance
quality. Furthermore, AI-based simulation models can be utilized to assess proposed
changes to the production process before their actual implementation, predicting
any potential negative impacts on performance or worker safety. Additionally, AI
algorithms and historical data can optimize raw material combinations and the ge-
ometry of AM products, accounting for various design variables and their intricate
interactions [42,43].
2. Production Phase: AI plays a crucial role in optimizing human-machine interac-
tions within industrial production settings, enhancing the production phase. Data
and knowledge-driven production systems, such as blockchain IIoT systems, deep
learning, knowledge reasoning, and visualization technologies (dashboards), enable
real-time monitoring of production flow and data collection on performance, cycle
times, and product quality. Deep learning techniques and cognitive reasoning analyze
this data to identify significant patterns and trends, facilitating rapid and informed
decision-making. For instance, data analysis may reveal that a specific configuration
of machines and optimized cycle times can significantly enhance production efficiency
while ensuring better working conditions or reducing worker burdens [ 44,45]. More-
over, workers can benefit from a more detailed and informed perception of the work
environment and production context through AI technologies like digital twins (DT)
and augmented reality (AR), improving their decision-making capacity and ability to
adapt to evolving conditions. For example, workers can wear AR devices providing
real-time information on production process details, such as assembly instructions
overlaid on the piece they are assembling, technical specifications, and safety alerts.
Additionally, collaborative robots equipped with advanced sensors and machine
learning capabilities can detect workers’ emotional, physical, and mental states and
cognitive biases to make adaptive adjustments, maximizing worker well-being and
fundamental rights protection. In terms of workplace safety, this can have significant
implications; for example, if a worker is found to be subject to stress or deficits related
to compensatory recovery, the robot can adapt its work pace to avoid overloads or
risks of accidents [46].
3. Maintenance Phase: AI can significantly enhance the maintenance phase by fostering
collaboration between human operators and intelligent machines (robots) for effec-
tive machinery upkeep. In intelligent planning, maintenance technicians, machine
operators, and engineers collaborate, with AI aiding decision-making and optimizing
maintenance activities according to human needs. Intelligent machines can perform
complex tasks or work in hazardous environments, while technicians handle more
flexible tasks. Additionally, augmented reality (AR) systems can be developed to
provide detailed instructions and virtual visualizations to guide operators through
complex maintenance procedures directly in the field, making it easier to perform
such maintenance more accurately and, above all, safely. AI can power AR systems
with updated and relevant information, improving the efficiency and accuracy of
maintenance activities performed by operators [ 47,48]. Advancements in natural
language processing and gesture recognition enhance machines’ ability to interpret
human actions, facilitating the transfer of human skills to manufacturing [ 49]. Above