Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 10 of 17
physical knowledge of AI methods for personalized AM applications, while ensuring
process safety and data privacy, and human-machine interaction aimed at integrating
humans into the design, manufacturing, and quality control processes, through the use of
interpretable AI, and a human-machine society empowered by IoT, AR/VR, etc.
A fundamental and prominent element for enabling intelligent and connected manu-
facturing through the implementation of sensors and AI is represented by the deployment of
ideal 5G/6G networks for massive IoT implementations. These networks offer high-speed
connectivity, low latency, and reliability, essential elements to ensure optimal integration of
AI technologies in the context of data-driven additive manufacturing. They also ensure pre-
cise control of critical systems, data security, real-time automation, and adjustments, as well
as efficient human-machine collaboration that requires low-latency communication. For
example, AI-driven robots and machinery can work in collaboration with human workers,
with 5G/6G ensuring that communication between these entities is nearly instantaneous.
More importantly, 5G/6G networks are equipped with a powerful paradigm, which is
edge intelligence, a form of distributed network intelligence built cooperatively through
IoT data, wireless communications, edge computing capabilities, and artificial intelligence.
Edge computing (in addition to classic cloud computing) in manufacturing environments is
essential for (i) enabling synergy between users, personal devices, network infrastructure,
and “things” such as cobots, machinery, etc.; (ii) providing computational capabilities to
execute AI artifacts necessary for data-driven decisions and control processes.
The main challenges to address in this area, as summarized in Figure 3, include:
•Network reliability and security : Networks enabled by 5G/6G communication must
be protected and highly configurable to meet AM requirements. For example, 5G
and 6G networks extensively use network virtualization and programmability. This
programmability comes with a cost, namely the centralization of network control.
While there is the advantage that network and traffic control occur through a single
entity, the disadvantage of this approach is the presence of a “single point of vulner-
ability” that can impact network availability, which is a critical concern in the AM
network. If a controller malfunctions, it can affect the entire infrastructure, leading
to a communication blackout. Moreover, in a virtualized infrastructure, there is a
need to unify and synchronize security and access systems for both virtual network
resources (links), cloud (servers, virtual machines, containers), and data storage (disks)
to prevent malicious intrusions.
•Integration of edge computing : Artificial intelligence and AM require high data pro-
cessing activity. Although this activity can be performed using cloud computing
technologies, the bandwidth required to send data to the public or private cloud is
not negligible. To overcome this issue, preprocessing nodes can be positioned at the
edge of the network. Integrating these edge nodes and the impact they can have on
network functionalities, such as latency and security, is an open challenge.
•Deterministic latency : 5G/6G networks and programmable networks can introduce
some latency. For example, packets traversing within a network must be processed
by an entity programmed to make traffic decisions. The path between switches and
the programmed entity can be the source of unforeseen latencies, which can result in
some synchronization losses in AM applications. On the other hand, efficient, secure,
and real-time human-machine collaboration requires communication not only with
low latency but also nearly deterministic latency, meaning a delay in data transfer that
follows a predictable and constant pattern and can thus be predicted based on known
factors or specific conditions within a system. Ensuring low and deterministic latency
requires the implementation of specific network technologies and architectures and is
still an open challenge in the industrial context.