Sustainability 2024 ,16, 5448 12 of 17
studies can be considered for validation across different manufacturing stages, while
assessing the outcomes of applying HCAI in terms of process efficiency, human-machine
collaboration, and sustainability.
4. Research Gap and Challenges for Industry 5.0 and Government 5.0
Beyond the technological challenges, another area of investigation should be devoted
to political and social studies and challenges, particularly regarding improving safety and
health in the workplace, especially in the manufacturing sector [ 74]. The development of
an AI-based policy paradigm aligned with circular economy practices to adapt to Industrial
Revolution 5.0 is critical, to steer the manufacturing sector in a sustainable, equitable, and
unbiased direction.
Industry 5.0 needs Government 5.0 [ 75,76]. There is a significant discrepancy in the
pace of change between businesses and the public sector. The uncertainty, instability, and
rapid advancement of technologies require the public sector to respond with strategic
agility. Just as businesses can achieve systemic transformation in short periods, so too
must the public sector prepare adequate and timely decision-making tools. Given the
complexity and scope of the revolution brought about by AI, it has become crucial to
establish regulations and guidelines to govern its use. This involves issues such as ethics in
AI, model transparency, legal responsibility, privacy protection, and security. In this regard,
it may be necessary to establish standards and protocols for the evaluation and certification
of AI to ensure compliance with ethical, regulatory, and security rules [77,78].
To increase the impact of the proposed solutions, efforts should be directed towards
ensuring greater attention to sector regulation, which cannot be based on outdated and
inflexible tools in the tradition of “command and control”, with a regulatory state imposing
strict limits dictated by norms. New tools are associated with better quality regulation,
such as adaptive and experimental regulation and regulatory sandboxing. In this sense,
regulation should aim to improve how AI can be used to serve social objectives (e.g., reduce
environmental impacts, create a healthy work environment) with the well-being of workers
placed at the center of the production process. That is, AI is now also used to regulate
and improve government oversight of businesses, focusing on their ability to prevent or
mitigate the risk of worker incidents. The economic challenges in implementing HCAI can
be referred to the initial investment costs which can be prohibitive for many companies
and can determine a competitive gap between the bigger enterprises and the smaller ones.
Moreover, there is a growing need for a workforce skilled in both AI technologies and the
principles of human-centered design. Training such talent is both challenging and costly.
Simultaneously, it is increasingly crucial to ensure that actions effectively address the real
challenges brought about by the artificial intelligence complexity.
Decision-makers are required to address these challenges by adopting the following
policy recommendations: (1) fostering innovation and technological advancement, invest-
ing in research and development and digital infrastructure, and encouraging public-private
partnership; (2) relaunching economic policies for sustainable growth by supporting SMEs
and investing in education and training programs to equip the workforce with skills needed
for the digital economy; (3) adapting regulatory frameworks by adopting flexible regulatory
approaches; (4) involving a diverse range of stakeholder in the decision-making process to
ensure comprehensive and inclusive solutions.
5. Conclusions
The reference scenario for this study is therefore that of human-centered AI (HCAI)
centered on the smart manufacturing area in line with the concept of Industry 5.0 and
fostering the essence of the circular economy. Specifically, the focus is on the environment
of data-driven additive manufacturing (AM), aiming to prioritize the well-being of workers
and users through product customization, integration of humans in the production and
quality control process, and improvement of regulations in this area.