112 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
 signals, etc.), generation (of images, texts, spoken words,  faces, signals, etc.), natural language processing 
and translation , and game playing (checkers, chess, go, etc.). Other m ajor AI topics are robot design  -- 
especially in relation to social robots  -- and autonomous systems of many kinds. AI research and 
development have become major topics for businesses and governments around the world.  Business 
applications range from internal management to customer support, while government applications include 
policing and policy making.   
A second central issue is the boundary between automation and autonomy. Some researchers and 
developers believe t hat autonomous systems based on “machine learning”, “deep learning”, and “neural 
nets” enable greater capacity for AI s ystems to be adaptable, resilient, and “intelligent” as compared to 
traditional automated systems. Other researchers and developers believe that there is no clear boundary 
between automation and autonomy, and that  the unpredictability of machine autonomy has dangers.  They 
also believe in the importance of human autonomy, while preferring the language of interdependence. Since 
traditional  automated systems are likely to  be redesigned to include more autonomous features based on 
AI algorithms , the boundary b etween automated and autonomous is likely to become even fuzzier . This 
commentary address es automated and autonomous designs  as if they are  in the same category . 
3 Fresh Ideas to Reframe Old Beliefs  
Reframing old beliefs w ith a fresh vision  is among the most  powerful tools for change. It can liberate 
researchers and designers from old beliefs, allowing them to adopt a different  perspective. This paper 
suggests that  HCAI can liberate researchers and designers to realize t hat there are other ways of thinking 
about future technology. Ancient astronomers , with a few exceptions,  saw the earth a s the center of the 
solar system with the sun an d planets revolving around it. In the 16th century, C opernicus reframed 
astronomy  by ma king a convincing case for  a sun -centered model, which he showed to be  more accurate, 
thus enabling better predictions and further discoveries . Similarly, HCAI reframes AI by replacing  algorithms 
and AI systems with humans  at the center . That is why I have  termed HCAI a Second Copernican Revolution  
(Figure 2). Traditional discussions suggest that humans are “in -the-loop”  around AI , while the HCAI 
reframing suggests that AI is “in -the loop”  around humans, who are now the center of attention . 
 
 
Figure 2. A second Copernican Revolution puts humans at the center of attention  
 
The reframing to HCAI has deeper implications. In the past, researchers and developers focused on building 
AI algorithms and systems, stressing machine autonomy, measuring algorithm perfo rmance, and 
celebrating what AI systems could do. In contrast, HCAI ’s design thinking approach  puts the hum an users