Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  119  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
  
These new strategies guide software team leaders, business managers, and organization leaders in the 
methods to develop HCAI products and services that are driven by three goals:  
1. Reliable  systems based on proven sof tware engineering practices  with a team , 
2. Safety  culture through business management strategies  within an organization , and  
3. Trustworthy  certifi cation by independent oversight across an industry  
These three goals apply to most commercial developments, but the 15 recommendations in Shneiderman 
(2020 c) are tied to HCAI products and services  (Table 1) . These recommendations build on the HCAI 
framework by limiting the dangers of excessive automation and excessive human control, while steering 
practice to  support the goals of reliable, safe and trustworthy products and services.  
 Table 1: Recommendations for Human -Centered AI Systems for teams, organizations, and industry leaders  
 
Technical practices for teams of programmers, designers, and software engineers include audit trails to 
enable analysis of failures, just like the flight data recorders (aviation black boxes, which are really orange 
boxes) that have helped make civil aviat ion a successful industry . Recommended practices include software 
engineering workflows, verification and validation testing of algorithms, bias testing to enhance fairness for 
training data and outcomes, and explainable HCAI user interfaces to enable inqu iry and redress of 
grievances.  
Management strategies for organizations begin by creating a safety culture with leadership commitment to 
safety that leads to better hiring practices and training oriented to safety. Other organizational strategies are 
extens ive reporting of failures and near misses, internal review boards for problems and future plans, and 
alignment with industry standard practices.  These strategies are promoted by internal committees, such as GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES FOR H UMAN -CENTERED AI 
     Reliable Systems Based on Sound Software Engineering Practices for a Team  
  1.  Audit tr ails and analysis tools  
  2.  Software Engineering Workflows  
  3.  Verification and validation testing  
  4.  Bias testing to enhance fairness  
  5.  Explainable user interfaces  
 
     Safety Culture through Business Management Strategies within an Organization  
  6.  Leadership commitment to safety  
  7.  Hiring and training oriented to safety  
  8.  Extensive reporting of failures and near misses  
  9.  Internal review boa rds for problems and future plans  
10.  Alignment w ith industry standard practices  
 
     Trustworthy Certification by Independent Oversight for an Industry  
11.  Government interventions and regulation  
12.  Accounting firms c onduct external audits  
13.  Insur ance companies compensate for AI failures  
14.  Non-governmental and civil society organizations  
15.  Professional organizations and research institutes