116 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
  
Figure 5. The HCAI two -dimensional framework for thinking of new designs, applied to pain control device 
designs  
 
The two -dimensional HCAI framework (Figure 5)  clarifies that there are situations that require  high levels of 
computer automation , such as airbag deployment and embedded pacemakers (lower rig ht quadrant) , and 
other  situations that require high levels of human control , such as piano playing or bicycl ing (upper left 
quadrant). In the case of pain control designs , the non -automated morphine drip bag (lower left) was 
improved by an automated dispe nser (lower  right). Further improvements gi ve patients a trigger to request 
limited additional morphine (upper left), while advanced designs combine a patient -guided system with a 
clinician -monitored system  (upper right). The two -dimensional HCAI framework also recognizes that there 
can be problems with excessive automation (right side), such as the Boeing 737 MAX  crashes, stock market 
flash crashes, and parole or hiring decisions based on machine learning with biased datasets. Th ere can 
also be problems with  excessive human control (top), such as drunk drivers and suicidal pilots. Improved 
systems with well-designed interlocks to prevent excesses must be part of every design process.   
Shift from emulating humans to empowering peop le: The second idea is to show how the t wo central 
goals of AI research -- emulating human behavior (AI science) and developing useful applications (AI 
engineering)  -- are both valuable, but  that designers go astray when the lessons of the first goal are p ut to 
work on the second goal. Often the emulation goal encouraged beliefs that machines should be designed 
to be like people, when the application goal might be better served by providing comprehensible, 
predictable, and controllable designs. While there is an understandable attraction for some researchers and 
designers to make computers that are intelligent, autonomous, and human -like, that desire should be 
balanced by appreciating that many users want to be in control of technologies that support their a bilities, 
raise their self -efficacy, respect their responsibility, and enable their creativity.  
Shneiderman (2020b) describ es four such design tradeoffs  that challenge designers of HCAI  applications, 
and offers combined designs that bring the best of both  (Figure 6 ): 
1. Intelligent Agent and Powerful Tool  
2. Simulated Teammate and Tele -Operated Device  
3. Autonomous System and Supervisory Control  
4. Humanoid Robot and Mechanical -like Appliance