Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  113  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
 at the center , emphasizing user experience design, measuring human performance, and celebrating the 
new powers that people have. Researchers  and developers for HCAI systems focus on user needs, 
explainable systems, and meaningful human control. People come first; serving human needs is the goal.  
Some may see this as an extreme metaphor, but it emphasizes the profound importance of providing an  
appropriate concept for future technologies that will promote human dignity.  
Putting humans a t the center of design thinking  does  not mean  that designers should  mimic  human form 
and behavior. The alternative is to  serve human needs by way of comprehensib le, predictable, and 
controllable tools, appliances, and user experiences.  Lewis Mumford’s  (1934 ) book  Technics and 
Civilization  provides a helpful guide to the evolution of new technologies. He describes “The Obstacle of 
Animism”, which is the tendency of  new technology designers to use humans or animals as a guide to 
design. A key example of the limitation of animism is the shift from using two human legs to four wheels to 
transport heavy loads. Mumford wrote that “the most ineffective kind of machine is the realistic  mechanical 
imitation of a man or other animal.”  He leaves us with an important history lesson: “for thousands of years 
animism has stood in the way of … development.”  
Mumford’s description of technology evolution accurately describes the mo ve away from human forms in 
early smiling simulated bank teller machines to our current form fill -in Automated Transaction Machines and 
the shift from intelligent tutoring machines with human faces or avatars to Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs ) with wel l-designed user interfaces that give students a clear sense of what is happening and what 
their choices are.  This reframing avoids the deception of a simulated human. It puts humans at the center 
by increasing human control, even though there are high leve ls of computer automation and AI algorithms.  
While bio -inspired designs can be helpful starting points, designers should keep in mind other possibilities 
and evaluate performance of multiple alternatives.  
Numerous psychological studies by Clifford Nass and  others (Reeves and Nass, 1996; Nass and Moon, 
2000) showed that when computers a re designed to be like humans, users respond and engage  in socially 
appropriate ways. However , other designs might lead to superior performance. Designing systems to be 
like p eople reduces the chance that designers will take advantage of unique computer features  that have 
no human analog,  including sophisticated algorithms, advanced sensors, information abundant displays, 
and powerful effectors.  
This controversy might be summarized as:  
Nass’s Fallacy:  Since many  people are willin g to respond socially to robots, it is appropriate and 
desirable to design robots to be social or human -like. 
Shneiderman’s Conjec ture:  Successful robots utilize  the distinctive features of machine s. Robots 
will become more tool -like, tele -operated, and under human supervisory control through well -
designed user interfaces that avoid  human -like features.  
Another fallacy lies in  the belief that computers should become our teammates, partners, and coll aborators. 
Psychologists point out the difficulty in accomplishing this goal because human teammates have such 
distinctive ways of coordinating with each other (Klein et al. , 2004):  
Teammate Fallacy : Humans work in teams, so computers should be designed to have the same 
behaviors as humans.  
Computers -in-the-Loop Reality : Humans work with others in teams, crews, and groups, with 
computers best designed as helpful tools that continuously provide information and carry out tasks, 
but do so under human control .  
While a majority of researchers believe that social robots and robot teammates are inevitable (Wang & Siau, 
2019), I think Mumford’s historical perspective and current design successes show that these social and 
teammate views will give way to functiona l designs.  
I belie ve it is helpful to remember that computers are not people and people are not computers. Boden et 
al. (2017) convey a similar idea: “Robots are simply not people.” Humans have legal and moral 
responsibilities over the design  of machines,  including robots . Yes, there are lessons to be learned from 
bio-inspired designs, but the value of such designs should be studied in comparison with interactive visual 
user interfaces, such as with navigation systems, and physical interfaces , such as with  drone and game 
controllers. Human -like speech communication with ap plications like Siri or Alexa has a role  when hands 
and eyes are busy , while  high information capacity of visual user interfaces has many advantages, such as 
with digital cameras or e -comm erce shopping.