Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  123  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
 About the Author  
Ben Shneiderman  is an Emeritus  Distinguished University Professor in the Department of Computer 
Science, Founding Director (1983 -2000) of the Human -Computer Interaction Laboratory 
(http://hcil.umd.edu ), and a Member of the UM Institute for Advanced Computer Studies (UMIACS) at the 
Univers ity of Maryland. He is a Fellow of the AAAS, ACM, IEEE, and NAI, and a Member of the National 
Academy of Engineering, in recognition of his pioneering contributions to human -computer interaction and 
information visualization. His widely -used contributions include the clickable highlighted web -links, high-
precision touchscreen keyboards  for mobile devices , and tagging for photos. Shneiderman’s information 
visualization innovations include dynamic query sliders for Spotfire, development of treemaps  for viewin g 
hierarchical data , novel network visualizations for NodeXL, and event sequence analysis  for electronic 
health records.  He is the lead author  of Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human -
Computer Interaction  (6th ed., 2016).   
 
Photo at : http://www.cs.umd.edu/~ben/Photos/ben_6_10/5.jpg   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2019  by the Association for Information Systems. Permission to make digital or hard copies of 
all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and full citation on 
the first page. Copyright for components of this work owned by others than the Association for Information 
Systems must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permission to publish 
from: AIS Administrative Office, P.O. Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 30301 -2712 Attn: Reprints o r via e -mail from 
publications@aisnet.org .