Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  111  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
 1 Introduction  
Artificial Intelligence (AI) dreams and nightmares, represented in popular culture through  books, games, 
and movies,  evoke images  of startling advances as well as terrifying possibilities. The contrast is often 
between a blissful place where intelligent machines meet all human needs and a dystopian  future in which 
robots control and dominate human ity. In both cases, people  are no longer  in charge; the machines rule. 
However, there is a third possibility; an alternative future filled with computing devices that amplify human 
abilities a thousand -fold, empowering people in remarkable ways  while  ensuring human control . This 
compelling prospect, called Human -Centered AI (HCAI), enables people to see, think, create, and act in 
extraordinary ways, by combining potent user experiences with embedded AI methods to support services 
that users want ( Li, 2018; Robert et al., 2020 ; Shneiderman, 2020a).  
To counter the widespread belief that AI -driven human -like robots will take over, this paper  describes how 
to make successful technologies that augment and enhance humans rather than replace them. This shift in 
thinking  could lead  to a safer, more understandable, and more manageable future. An HCAI approach will 
reduce the  prospects for  out-of-control technologies, calm fears of robot -driven  unemployment, and  give 
users  better control of privacy and security.  
This fresh vision is m eant as a guide for researchers, educators, designers, programmers, managers, and 
policy makers in shift ing toward  language, imagery, and ideas that advance a human -centered approach. 
Putting people at the center will lead to the creation of powerful tools , convenient appliances, and well -
designed products and traditio nal services that empower people, build their self -efficacy, clarify their 
responsibility, and support their creativity.  
2 Related Work  
Numerous books celebrate  AI, and at the same time raise  fears of out -of-control robots and computers 
taking over (Figure 1), including  some by  prominent writers (Marcus & Davis, 2019; O’Neil, 2016; Russell, 
2019).  Some authors raise doubts  about overly optimistic promises, but nevertheless generally push for 
more AI and even Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) , which includes the commonsense reasoning that 
indicates full human abilities . The HCAI approach advances the goals of AI, while ensuring human control.  
 
Figure 1. A sample of the many popular AI-centered books  
 
A central issue is how to  defin e AI. I rely on a definition that suggests that AI systems and algorithms d o 
what people d o: perceive, think, decide, and act. A broade ned definition would include the capacity to 
recognize and respond to emotions, to adapt to new circumstances, and recommend or rank alternatives. 
The products and services of AI systems include pattern recognition (of images, texts , spoken words,  faces,