Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  115  
 
Volume 12   Issue  3  
  
Figure 4. Bloomberg terminal for financial analysts and traders  
 
4 Three Fresh Ideas  
The three ideas, summarized in this commentary, may enable researchers, educators, designers, 
programmers, managers, and policy makers to create new possibilities for future products and services.  
High level s of human control AND  high lev els of automation are possible: The first idea is a fresh way 
to think of technology design, and breaks out of the traditional one-dimensional view that led readers to 
believe that more automat ion meant less human control. This one -dimensional view was first described by 
Sheridan and Verplank (1978), even though Sheridan (1992, 2000) continued to have  strong views about 
the need for supervisory control.  
I accepted this one -dimensional framework  as a way to understand what seemed like a necessary tradeoff .  
I described  it in the first edition of Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Human -Computer Interaction  
(Shneiderman, 1987), with a section titled “Balancing Automation and Human Control”. However, in recent 
years, I became unsettled by this view  as I came to  increasingly  value human control even with high levels 
of automation. That section is now titled: “Ensuring Human Control While Increasing Automation” 
(Shneiderman et al., 2016), whi ch at first may seem perplexing  -- but give it a chance.  
The tw o-dimensional HCAI framework (Shneiderman, 2020a) shows how creative designers can imagine 
highly automated systems that keep people in control. It separates human control (y -axis)  from comput er 
automation (x -axis) (Figure 5 ). The examples of high levels o f human control AND high levels of 
automation  include familiar devices, such as thermostats, elevators, se lf-cleaning ovens, and dishwashers , 
as well as l ife critical applications like highly automated cars and patient controlled pain relief devices. 
Smart phone  cameras exemplify this new possibility of human control and automation, in which AI algorithms 
are used for setting focus and aperture, while compensating for hand shaking movement. However, the 
user is in control of where to point the camera, what z oom level is best, and when to take the photo. They 
have control over filters before they take their photos and can edit, crop, and adjust lighting after ward . Users 
can adjust the aperture setting and exposure level by touching the image location they are interested in, but 
a further helpful user control would be to select the shutter speed to allow longer exposures for creative 
images of waterfalls or intentionally blurred images of swirling dancers.