120 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
 Microsoft’s Office of Responsible AI ( https://www.microsoft.com/en -ca/ai/responsible -ai), or guidelines such 
as Google’s Responsible AI Practices ( https://ai.goog le/responsibilities/responsible -ai-practices/ ).  
Trustworthy certification by industry, though subject to government interventions and regulation, can be 
done in  ways that increase innovation.  Other methods  to increase trustworthiness include  accounting fi rms 
to conduct independent audits, insurance companies to compensate for failures, non -governmental and civil 
society organizations to advance design principles, and professional organizations to develop voluntary 
standards and prudent policies.  
5 Conclusio ns 
The expansion of interest and application of AI research has triggered widespread public and government 
scrutiny of  the ethical and responsible principles to guide designers, managers, and policy makers (Fj eld et 
al., 2020; IEEE, 2019). These principles  are a useful starting point, but bridging the gap between ethics and 
practice requires realistic management processes.  
This commentary endorses  a Human -Centered AI approach for designing and developing systems that 
support s human self -efficacy, encourage creativity, clarify responsibility, and facilitate social participation. 
These foundational principles can help to guide designers  towards vital  technical  goals , including privacy, 
security, fairness, reliability, safety, and trustworthiness . 
The fresh way s of thinking  in this commentary  are based on a second Copernican R evolution that puts 
humans  at the center of systems design thinking. It offer s three ideas:  
1. High level s of human control AND  high levels of automation are possible: a two -dimensional 
HCAI framework  that illustrates  how it is possible to have high levels of human control AND high 
levels of automation . 
2. Shift from emulating h umans to empowering people: a plea to shift language, imagery, and 
metaphors away from portray als of intelligent autonom ous teammates towards descriptions of 
powerful tool -like appliances and tele -operated devices . 
3. Governance structures for HCAI:  a three -level governance structure that describes how software 
engineering teams can develop more reliable systems, how managers can emphasize a safety 
culture across an organization, and how industry -wide certification can promote trustworthy HCAI 
systems.  
Promoting these three ideas is essential , but will not be easy. The entrenched beliefs about the human -like 
abilities of AI sys tems, which are held by some researchers, developers, journalists, and policy makers, 
slow progress towards a human -centered approach to new technologies.  
The ideas in this commentary are meant to launch discussions that will advance global efforts such a s the 
17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals ( https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/ ). Attaining 
these goals will require designers to combine technology devel opments with behavioral changes  in order to  
improv e healthcare and  wellness, end poverty and hunger, and protect the environment. Well -designed 
technologies can support other UN Sustainable Development Goals such as to advance  quality education, 
gender equality,  global peace , and social j ustice.  
 
Acknowledgments  
Thanks to Editor in Chief Fiona Nah for guiding the review process and offering many helpful suggestions  
on writing and content . Thanks also to Gaurav Bansal, Dennis Galletta, Harry Hochheiser, Jonathan Lazar, 
Guru Madhavan, Avi Parush, Catherine Plaisant, Jennifer Preece , Lionel P. Robert, Steven M. Rosen, 
Daniel Shank, Keng Siau, Mark S. Smith, Wei Xu , and the anonymous reviewers  for their  supportive 
comments and  thoughtful suggestions that greatly improved the  draft versions . Thanks to Chris Carroll for 
thoughtful edits.