114 Three Fresh Ideas  
 
Volume 12  Paper  1  
 This bumper sticker (Figure 3 ) emphasizes  centering on the social nature of human collaboration with 
computers in the loop, available to support human efforts.  
 
 
Figure 3. Bumper sticker “Humans in the Group; Computers in the Loop”  
 
Breaking free from the old belief that computers  should be like human teammates  can liberate designers to 
more readily take advantage of the distinctive capabilities of algorithms, databases, sensors, effectors, etc. 
The U.S. Air Force emphasized the disti nction by using the term Remotely Piloted Vehicles to convey that 
a human pilot was responsible. The Mars Rovers have a whole room of human controllers at NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory to operate the Rovers, as the y perform well -designed activities on M ars. The da Vinci 
Surgical Systems website says they “don’t perform surgery. Your surgeon performs surgery with da Vinci 
by using instruments that he or she guides via a console” ( www.davincisurgery.com ).  Remember Mumford’s 
(1934 ) message that successful designs are not based on human forms.  
The challenge for designers is to understand what human -like features are useful, such as a human -like 
voice for virtual assistants like Siri, Alexa, and Cortana , which allow hands -free access to information . 
However, designers mus t also come to understand that  visual display s of long textual lists, a map, or 
diagrams, are sometimes better than a spoken response. For instance, t he information abundance of visual 
displays has many advantages over an ephemeral spoken response that could be drowned out by ambient 
noise. In addition to limiting design choices, humanizing robots can lead to three problems: mistaken usage 
based on emot ional attachment  to the systems , false expectations of robot responsibility, and incorrect 
beliefs about appropriate use of robots (Robert, 2017).  
A frequently successful strategy is to provide interactive visual interfaces that  present abundant informatio n 
in compact , spatially stable , tiled  layouts so users can maintain situational awareness. They  can interpret 
the status, formulate plans, and carry out  tasks  while monitoring performance. Modest highlights can draw 
attention to new information or time sen sitive features. Machine -generated recommendations, alerts, and 
alarms can be place d in stable position s so users can turn to them when they wish. User -controlled 
adaptation of the window  layout s, list sort orders, or featured highlight s enables users to t ailor displays to 
their needs and pass their layouts on to colleagues.  
Users may also sit near other operators so they can mutually monitor what others are doing, ask for 
assistance, and work together  easily when they need  to respond to fast moving events . NASA spacecraft 
control rooms, counter -terrorism centers, police command centers, medical workstations, air traffic control 
centers, and stock market trading rooms are common examples (Figure 4). Many variations on smaller 
interactive dashboards are incr easingly used on laptops, such as the currently common COVID dashboards, 
while  mobile device displays can also provide compact information abundant displays such as in navigation 
apps.