ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
14 
 results wi th other filter numbers .  The sensitivity, specificity, and MCC for c ross-valida tion data 
achieved 90%, 86.6%, and 0. 77, respectively. Therefore, we used this convolutional layer 
structure in  the hidden layer s to develop our model. We then optimized the neural networks 
using a variety of optimizers: rmsprop, adam, nadam, sgd, and adad elta. The model was 
reinitialized, i.e. a new network was built, after each round of optimization so as to provide a fair 
comparison between the different optimizers. Overall, the performance results are shown in Fig. 
3 and we decided to choose Adam , an op timizer with consistent performance , to create our final 
model.  Adam  is also an optimizer chose n in similar work  in this field  [24]. According to  Fig. 3, 
we also realized  that after the 8 0th epoch, our validation accuracy could not increase according to 
the training accuracy. Theref ore, we determined to finish our training process at the 8 0th epoch to 
reduce the training time and prevent overfitting.  Next, we tuned the other hyperparameters in our 
model  (i.e., learning rate, batch size, or dropout rate)  to ac hieve the best performanc e results for 
this dataset. After this step, all of the optimal hyper parameters can be seen  in Table 4 . 
Overfitting is t he most important concern out of all machine learning problems, which means our 
classifier can only perform well in our training set but worse in another unseen dataset. 
Therefore, we also used an independent test to ensure that our model also performs well in a 
blind dataset. As described in the previous part, our independent dataset contained 258 clathrins  
and 227 non-clathrins . None of these samples ha d a certain occurrence in the training set. 
Detailed results are shown  as two confusion matrices  in Fig. 4 , in which our independent test 
result  was consiste nt with the cross -validation result . To detail, our mo del reached t he accuracy 
of 91.8%, sensitivity of 92.2%, specificity of 91.2%, and MCC of 0. 83 in the independent test.  
Compared with the cross -validation result , the differences are not too much and it can show that