ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
16 
 We examined the performances of using different machine learning classifiers for identifying 
clathrin  proteins. We used four different class ifiers  (i.e., nearest neighbor (kNN),  Random 
Forest, support vector machine (SVM) , multi -layer perceptron (MLP) and 1D CNN ) to evaluate 
the model and compared our 2D CNN results with their results. For a fair comparison, we used 
the optimal parameters for all the classifiers in all the experiments. Table 5 shows the 
performance results between our method and other machine learning algorithms. It can be seen 
that our  2D CNN exhibited higher performance than those of the other traditional machine 
learning techniques using the same experimental setup. Especially, our 2D CNN outperformed 
other algorithms when using the independent dataset.  
4. Discussion  
In this study , we presented a computational model  aimed to classify clathrin proteins ' molecular 
functions. We provide biologists with source codes and data for the reproduction of experiments 
and their academic work with a well -assembled protein collection and reliable in formation on 
clathrin sequences. In addition, our work is important in order to better underst and the molecular 
functions of clathrins  in the vesicular transport system.  While previous publications only 
consider ed the identification of clathrin  proteins using biological experiments  [9, 11, 38], our 
study fills a gap in the completion work for clathrin  sequences using machine learning 
techniques. Furthermore, it is the first comp utational study on this data set, which provides 
biologists much  useful information to underst and clathrins‟  molecular functions and to design 
drug targets according to their relevance in human diseases.  
Furthermore, we were able to serve  a profound deep learning  architecture  that achieves high 
performance  in protein sequences. To select the best parameters for efficient optimization,  we 
validated the performance via hyper -parameters tuning. The way to treat PSSM profile s as an