ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
17 
 image and feed into our 2D CNN played a vital role in the classification of clathrin s in particular 
and other proteins in general. Our system  can be applied  to detect hidden information even if 
such information is not known directly within sequences. While most t raditional machine 
learning algorithms and previous works in this field  [17, 18] could only use PSSM  profile s as a 
vector  when entering the network s; our findings serve as a different way to treat PSSM features 
and make them to be suitable for CNN network s. Moreover, o ur two -dimensional CNN model 
uses a number of measurement metrics to outperform alterna tive approaches  [19, 39, 40] at the 
same dataset and level . 
Our approach is totally suitable for real -time systems. For example , we can design a biological 
information retrieval and analysis system based on protein se quences from the internet. 
Moreover, as shown in a series of recent publications in the develo pment of new prediction 
methods [18, 41], user-friendly and publicly accessible web servers will make their co ntributions 
significantly better. Furthermore, it can be used for developing a smart device that will serve the 
purpose of predicting protein functions according to their sequence information. This smart 
device is able to be developed more to discover huma n disease variants or mutations based on 
protein functions.  From that , biologists  can use that information to design drug  targets for 
pharmaceutical research.  
Our contributions take this research a step further and open the doors for further research that 
will enrich the computational biology field . The way to treat PSSM profile s as an image is a very 
important advan tage that helped CNN performed well. Moreover, the use of GPU computing 
plays an important role in training a deep network with many hyper -parameter tunings inside. 
However, it still bears some limitations and there remain s possible approaches to improv e the 
proposed methodology  in the future . Firstly, a huge number of dataset s might increase the