ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
5 
 Most published works on clathrin  proteins achieved high performance, but to our knowledge, no 
researcher conducted the identification  of clathrin  proteins by using machine learning techniques. 
It is challenging and motivates us to create a precise model for this. In earlier years, researchers 
used shallow neural networks for solving problems in computational biology. For instance, Ou 
constructed the QuickRBF package [16] for training radial basis function (RBF) networks and 
applied it on several biological  problems including classifying membrane  transport proteins  [17], 
transporters [17], and FAD binding sites [18]. Next,  (who?)  [19] introduced LibSVM to help 
biologists implement biological models by usi ng support vector machines. Recently, as deep 
learning ha d been successfully applied in various fields, researchers started to use it in 
biomedical  research, e.g., medical imaging prediction [20], cancer prediction [21] and protein 
secondary structures prediction  [22]. Although those studies achieved very good performances, 
we believe that we can obtain superior results by using 2D CNN i n some biological applications.  
Based on the advantages of deep learning, this study consequently proposes the use of a 2D 
convolutional neural network (CNN) constructed from position -specific scoring matrix (PSSM) 
profiles to identify clathrin  proteins. The basic principle has already been successfully applied t o 
identify electron transport  proteins [23], Rab GTPases [24], and motor proteins [25]. Thus, in 
this paper, we extend this approach  with in -depth analysis  to identify the molecular functions of 
clathrin  proteins. The main achievements, including contributions to the field, are presented as 
follows: (i) development of a deep learning framework to identify clathrin s‟ functions from 
protein sequences, in which our model exhibited a significant improvement beyond traditional 
machine learning algorithm s; (ii) first computational study to identify clathrin  proteins and 
provide useful information to biologists to discover  clathrin s‟ molecular functions; (iii) valid 
benchmark dataset to train and test clathrin  proteins with high accuracy, which forms a ba sis for