ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
8 
 protein functions  with remarkable results , i.e., electron transport chains [23], Rab GTPases [24], 
cytoskeleton motor proteins [25], and SNARE proteins [32]. The bottom part of Fig. 1  illustrates 
the layer structure of the simplified convolutional neural network . Our deep learning architecture 
was carried out using the Keras library with TensorFlow  backend  [33]. GPU computing and 
CUDA kernel were also applied to accelerate the performance more efficiently . In general, CNN 
is composed of multiple layers with each layer performing a specific function of transformin g its 
input into a useful representation. All layers were combined using a specific ordering to form the 
architecture of our CNN model. As shown in a sequence of studies on this field  [23, 24], to 
create an effective model, one should follow the hyperparameter optimization step to find the 
good architecture and parameters. Different problems and dataset s need a different set of layers 
and parameters. According to this rule, we performed this process in this study and reported as 
follows.  
2.3.1. Layers  
(1) Input layer: In this study, the input layer parameters were from PSSM profiles converted into 
20x20 matrices. By using these matrices as the input data, we aim to propose a method to 
identify  clathrin  proteins from a set of general proteins . We assumed the 20x20 matrix to be an 
image of 20x20 pixels so that we could train the 2D CNN model with different weights and 
biases to enhance its predictive performance.  The purpose of using a 2D CNN model is to 
capture the hidden features inside the PSSM profiles as opposed to a 1D structure.  
(2) Zero padding layer: In the first few layers of deep neural networks, we would like to preserve 
as many hidden patterns about the original data so we apply the zero padding layers. This layer 
can add rows and columns with zero values at the top, bottom, left and right side of a PSSM 
matrix. When we apply 2x2 strides to a 20x20 matri x, the output volume would  be 22x22. The