4 Actor-Critic with Teacher Ensembles (AC-Teach)
In this section we introduce AC-Teach, an approach to leverage policy advice from a set of uncon-
strained teachers in actor-critic RL algorithms as illustrated in Fig. 1(b) and Algorithm 1. AC-Teach
addresses four key challenges with regards to how to implement an efﬁcient behavioral policy.
1.How to evaluate the quality of the advice from any given teacher in each state for a continuous
state and action space? AC-Teach is based on a novel critic-guided behavioral policy that evaluates
both the advice from the teachers as well as the actions of the learner.
2.How to balance exploitation and exploration in the behavioral policy? AC-Teach uses Thompson
sampling on the posterior over expected action returns provided by a Bayesian critic to help the
behavioral policy to select which advice to follow.
3.How to deal with contradictory teachers ? AC-Teach implements a temporal commitment method
based on the posterior from the Bayesian critic that executes actions from the same policy until the
conﬁdence in return improvement from switching to another policy is signiﬁcant.
4.How to alleviate extrapolation errors in the agent arising from large differences between the
behavioral and the agent policy, the “large off-policy-ness” problem? AC-Teach introduces a
behavioral target into DDPG’s policy gradient update, such that the critic is optimized with the target
Q-value of the behavioral policy rather than the agent policy.
1. Critic-Guided Behavioral Policy. As introduced in Sec. 3, the behavioral policy, bcollects
experience in the environment during training and is typically the output of the actor network 
with added noise. However, when teachers are available, the behavioral policy should take their
advice into consideration. To leverage teacher advice for exploration, we propose to use the critic to
implementbin AC-Teach as follows. Given state s, the agent policy and each teacher policy
i2generate a set of action proposals f(s);1(s);:::;N(s)g. The critic Qevaluates the
set of action proposals and selects the most promising one to execute in the environment. This is
equivalent to selecting between the teachers and the agent, but notice that this selection mechanism is
agnostic to the source of the actions, enabling AC-Teach to scale to large teacher sets.
2. Thompson Sampling over a Bayesian Critic for Behavioral Policy. The behavioral policy
needs to balance between exploration of teachers, whose utility in different states is not known at
the start of training, and the agent policy, whose utility is non-stationary during learning versus
exploitation of teachers that provided highly rewarded advice in the past. Inspired by the similarity
between policy selection and the multi-arm bandits problem, we use Thompson sampling, a well-
known approach for efﬁciently balancing exploration and exploitation in the bandit setting [ 40].
Thompson sampling is a Bayesian approach for decision making where the uncertainty of each
decision is modeled by a posterior reward distribution for each arm. In our multi-step setting, we
model the posterior distribution over action-values using a Bayesian dropout critic network similar to
Henderson et al. [21].
Concretely, instead of maintaining a point estimate of andQ, we maintain a distribution over
weights, and consequently over values by using Bayesian dropout (Sec. 3). To evaluate an action for a
given state-action pair, a new dropout mask is sampled at each layer of Q, resulting in a set of weights
^, and then a forward pass through the network results in a sample Q^(s;a). We then use critic Q^to
evaluate the set of action proposals fa0;a1;:::;aNgand selectsai= arg max a0;a1;:::;a NQ^(s;a)
as the action to consider executing. The choice whether to execute this action depends on our
commitment mechanism, explained next.
3. Conﬁdence Based Commitment. In our problem setup, we consider the possibility of contra-
dictory advice from different teachers that hinders task progress. Therefore, it is crucial to avoid
switching excessively between teachers and commit to the advice from the same teacher for longer
time periods. This is particularly important at the beginning of the training process when the critic
has not yet learned to provide correct evaluations.
To achieve a longer time commitment, we compare the policy selected at this timestep ivia the
Thompson Sampling process to the policy selected at the previous timestep, j. We use the posterior
critic to estimate the probability for the value of aito be larger than the value of aj(see Appendix B.2).
If the probability of value improvement is larger than a threshold  tc, the behavioral policy acts
using the new policy, otherwise it acts with the previous policy. The threshold controls the
behavioral policy’s aversion to switch, and  controls the degree of multiplicative decay, to prevent
5