Contradictory Insufficient Single 
Suf ficient 
Partial 
Multiple 
and 
Suboptimal Optimal 
Suboptimal (a)
Agent Policy 
Actor    
Environment Teacher 1 
Behavioral 
Policy Bayesian 
Critic 
...Teacher 2 
Teacher N 
 (b)
Figure 1: (a) Visual representation of teachers’ attributes, with arrows representing actions and line color
representing different teacher policies. In this ﬁgure each example trajectory has the attributes of all the boxes it
is contained within. Italicized terms apply to single policies, and non-italicized terms refer to sets of policies.
We present formal deﬁnitions of these attributes in Sec. 3. (b) Our method, AC-Teach, (light blue) modiﬁes the
actor-critic architecture to leverage advice from a set of teachers (red) as part of the Behavioral Policy to train
the Agent Policy using the probabilistic q-values of a Bayesian critic.
Policy learning in this setting is not straightforward - the agent needs to collect experience by deciding
between its own on-policy actions or exploiting teacher advice, but also be able to leverage this
heterogeneously generated experience to learn to solve the task. Learning from experience collected
by another agent advocates using off-policy reinforcement learning [ 17], where a behavioral policy is
used to gather the training experience. The main challenge in the teacher ensemble setting is that the
utility of each teacher can vary in different state space regions, while the utility of the agent varies
over time as learning progresses. This adds to the known complications of training an agent from
off-policy experience, which may be unstable and result in poor performance – especially for Deep RL
algorithms – due to the compounding effects of function approximation and bootstrapping [18–20].
To address these challenges, we present Actor-Critic with Teacher Ensembles (AC-Teach) , a
policy learning framework to leverage advice from multiple teachers where individual teachers might
only offer useful advice in certain states, offer advice that contradicts other teacher suggestions, and
where the agent might need to learn behaviors from scratch in states where no teacher offers useful
advice. AC-Teach is a novel behavioral policy mechanism for continuous control domains that is
robust to low-quality teacher ensembles through quantifying uncertainty over the value of actions
based on a probabilistic posterior critic network [ 21] and using the uncertainty to choose between
different action proposals. It is agnostic to the source of action proposals, since it models a single
action-value function (the critic) that is not explicitly conditioned on any teacher, and can therefore
easily scale to settings with larger number of teachers and even to settings with changing teacher sets.
By contrast, most prior work models each teacher independently in some form.
AC-Teach also includes a commitment mechanism that allows the behavioral policy to commit to
actions from a single policy for longer periods of time; the posterior critic is used to estimate the
probability of value improvement from switching the policy choice, and a switch is only enacted under
high conﬁdence. This allows the behavioral policy to collect meaningful experience from partial
teachers without being hindered by contradictory teachers. Lastly, we also mitigate the instability of
off-policy learning by basing the behavioral policy on the critic, and training the critic network using
a target value that is generated by the behavioral policy. This helps reduce the off-policyness of the
experience being used to train the critic by coupling the critic and the behavioral policy together.
Summary of Contributions . (a) we present a collection of teacher attributes that comprehensively
characterizes the quality of a set of teachers for guiding agent training; (b) we propose Actor-Critic
with Teacher Ensembles (AC-Teach), a policy learning framework to leverage advice from multiple
teachers that is robust to low-quality teacher sets where individual teachers might only offer useful
advice in certain states, offer advice that contradicts other teacher suggestions, and where the agent
might need to learn behaviors from scratch in states where no teacher offers useful advice; (c) Our
experiments demonstrate that AC-Teach is able to leverage such teacher ensembles to solve multi-step
tasks while signiﬁcantly improving sample efﬁciency over baselines; and (d) we also show that
AC-Teach is not only able to generate policies using low-quality teacher sets but also surpasses
baselines when using higher quality teachers, hence providing a uniﬁed algorithmic solution to a
broad range of teacher attributes.
2