AC-Teach: A Bayesian Actor-Critic Method for Policy
Learning with an Ensemble of Suboptimal Teachers
Andrey Kurenkov], Ajay Mandlekar], Roberto Martin-Martin], Silvio Savarese], Animesh Gargy
]Stanford University,yUniversity of Toronto,yVector Institute
Abstract: The exploration mechanism used by a Deep Reinforcement Learning
(RL) agent plays a key role in determining its sample efﬁciency. Thus, improving
over random exploration is crucial to solve long-horizon tasks with sparse rewards.
We propose to leverage an ensemble of partial solutions as teachers that guide the
agent’s exploration with action suggestions throughout training. While the setup of
learning with teachers has been previously studied, our proposed approach – Actor-
Critic with Teacher Ensembles (AC-Teach) – is the ﬁrst to work with an ensemble
of suboptimal teachers that may solve only part of the problem or contradict other
each other, forming a uniﬁed algorithmic solution that is compatible with a broad
range of teacher ensembles. AC-Teach leverages a probabilistic representation of
the expected outcome of the teachers’ and student’s actions to direct exploration,
reduce dithering, and adapt to the dynamically changing quality of the learner. We
evaluate a variant of AC-Teach that guides the learning of a Bayesian DDPG agent
on three tasks – path following, robotic pick and place, and robotic cube sweeping
using a hook – and show that it improves largely on sampling efﬁciency over a set
of baselines, both for our target scenario of unconstrained suboptimal teachers and
for easier setups with optimal or single teachers. Additional results and videos at
https://sites.google.com/view/acteach/home .
1 Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have recently demonstrated impressive results in challenging
problem domains such as robotic manipulation [ 1,2], planning [ 3], Go [ 4], and Atari games [ 5].
However, RL algorithms typically require a large number of interactions with the environment to
train policies that solve new tasks, which is particularly problematic for physical domains such as
robotics, where gathering experience from interactions is slow and expensive. A possible approach to
alleviate this problem is to train the agent to reproduce or bootstrap from the behavior demonstrated
by an expert using either ofﬂine or online Imitation Learning (IL) [ 6–11]. However, IL has its own
limitations: applying ofﬂine IL for long horizon tasks is costly and time consuming because large
amounts of expert interactions are necessary to cover corner-cases the agent may encounter. Online
IL may overcome this limitation by allowing the agent to query experiences on-demand, but requiring
an online expert that can solve the entire long-horizon task may be an even stricter limitation.
We argue that, in domains like robotics, a useful alternative to collecting demonstration data or
providing full solutions is to encode knowledge into an ensemble of heuristic solutions (controllers,
planners, previously trained policies, etc.) that address parts of the task. Leveraged properly, these
heuristics act as teachers guiding agent exploration, leading to faster convergence during training
and better asymptotic performance. Notably, the agent can also learn to outperform its teachers and
learn parts of a task for which no teacher offers adequate advice. While prior work has addressed
the problem of policy learning with teachers [ 12–16], in this work we discuss a collection of teacher
attributes that characterize a single teacher’s behavior compared to the optimal policy, as well as the
combined behavior of the teachers in the ensemble, and propose a unifying algorithmic framework
that efﬁciently exploits the set of teachers during the agent’s training regardless of the teachers’
attributes.
Speciﬁcally, we assume that the set of teachers can have the following attributes: (i) partial – teachers
may recommend useful actions only in a part of the state space, (ii) insufﬁcient – the agent cannot solve
the task by only using actions suggested by the set of teachers, and (iii) contradictory – performing
actions from different teachers in succession would hinder task completion (see Fig. 1).
3rd Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2019), Osaka, Japan.arXiv:1909.04121v3  [cs.LG]  13 Dec 2019