Intermediate-Task Transfer Learning with Pretrained Models for Natural
Language Understanding: When and Why Does It Work?
Yada Pruksachatkun1Jason Phang1Haokun Liu1Phu Mon Htut1
Xiaoyi Zhang1Richard Yuanzhe Pang1Clara Vania1Katharina Kann2
Samuel R. Bowman1
1New York University
2University of Colorado Boulder
fyp913,bowmang@nyu.edu
Abstract
While pretrained models such as BERT have
shown large gains across natural language un-
derstanding tasks, their performance can be
improved by further training the model on a
data-rich intermediate task , before ﬁne-tuning
it on a target task. However, it is still poorly
understood when and why intermediate-task
training is beneﬁcial for a given target task. To
investigate this, we perform a large-scale study
on the pretrained RoBERTa model with 110
intermediate–target task combinations. We
further evaluate all trained models with 25
probing tasks meant to reveal the speciﬁc
skills that drive transfer. We observe that
intermediate tasks requiring high-level infer-
ence and reasoning abilities tend to work best.
We also observe that target task performance
is strongly correlated with higher-level abil-
ities such as coreference resolution. How-
ever, we fail to observe more granular corre-
lations between probing and target task per-
formance, highlighting the need for further
work on broad-coverage probing benchmarks.
We also observe evidence that the forgetting
of knowledge learned during pretraining may
limit our analysis, highlighting the need for
further work on transfer learning methods in
these settings.
1 Introduction
Unsupervised pretraining—e.g., BERT (Devlin
et al., 2019) or RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019b)—has
recently pushed the state of the art on many nat-
ural language understanding tasks. One method
of further improving pretrained models that has
been shown to be broadly helpful is to ﬁrst ﬁne-
tune a pretrained model on an intermediate task,
before ﬁne-tuning again on the target task of inter-
est (Phang et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019a; Clark
et al., 2019a; Sap et al., 2019), also referred to as
Equal contribution.
Figure 1: Our experimental pipeline with intermediate-
task transfer learning and subsequent ﬁne-tuning on tar-
get and probing tasks.
STILTs. However, this approach does not always
improve target task performance, and it is unclear
under what conditions it does.
This paper offers a large-scale empirical study
aimed at addressing this open question. We per-
form a broad survey of intermediate and target task
pairs, following an experimental pipeline similar to
Phang et al. (2018) and Wang et al. (2019a). This
differs from previous work in that we use a larger
and more diverse set of intermediate and target
tasks, introduce additional analysis-oriented prob-
ing tasks, and use a better-performing base model
RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019b). We aim to answer
the following speciﬁc questions:
What kind of tasks tend to make good inter-
mediate tasks across a wide variety of target
tasks?
Which linguistic skills does a model learn
from intermediate-task training?
Which skills learned from intermediate tasks
help the model succeed on which target tasks?
The ﬁrst question is the most straightforward: it
can be answered by a sufﬁciently exhaustive search
over possible intermediate–target task pairs. The
second and third questions address the whyrather
than the when , and differ in a crucial detail: AarXiv:2005.00628v2  [cs.CL]  9 May 2020