on low-level syntactic probing tasks uniformly
across intermediate tasks; we observe little to no
improvement for the SentEval probing tasks and
higher improvement for acceptability judgment
probing tasks, except for AJ-CoLA. This is also
consistent with Phang et al. (2018), who ﬁnd
negative transfer with CoLA in their experiments.
Variation across Intermediate Tasks There is
variable performance across higher-level syntactic
or semantic tasks such as the Edge-Probing and
SentEval tasks. SocialIQA and QQP have nega-
tive transfer for most of the Edge-Probing tasks,
while CosmosQA and QA-SRL see drops in per-
formance only for EP-Rel. While we do see that
intermediate-task trained models improve perfor-
mance on EP-SRL and EP-DPR across the board,
there is little to no gain in SentEval probing tasks
from any intermediate tasks. Additionally, tasks
that increase performance in the most number of
probing tasks perform well as intermediate tasks.
Degenerate Runs We ﬁnd that the model may
not exceed chance performance in some training
runs. This mostly affects the baseline (no interme-
diate training) runs on the acceptability judgment
probing tasks, excluding AJ-CoLA, which all have
very small training sets. We include these degener-
ate runs in our analysis to reﬂect this phenomenon.
Consistent with Phang et al. (2018), we ﬁnd that
intermediate-task training reduces the likelihood
of degenerate runs, leading to ostensibly positive
transfer results on those four acceptability judg-
ment tasks across most intermediate tasks. On
the other hand, extremely negative transfer from
intermediate-task training can also result in a higher
frequency of degenerate runs in downstream tasks,
as we observe in the cases of using QQP and So-
cialIQA as intermediate tasks. We also observe
a number of degenerate runs on the EP-SRL task
as well as the EP-Rel task. These degenerate runs
decrease positive transfer in probing tasks, such
as with SocialIQA and QQP probing performance,
and also decrease the average amount of positive
transfer we see in target task performance.
4.2 Correlation Between Probing and Target
Task Performance
Next, we investigate the relationship between target
and probing tasks in an attempt to understand why
certain intermediate-task models perform better on
certain target tasks.We use probing task performance as an indica-
tor of the acquisition of particular language skills.
We compute the Spearman correlation between
probing-task and target-task performances across
training on different intermediate tasks and mul-
tiple restarts, as shown in Figure 3. We test for
statistical signiﬁcance at p= 0:05and apply Holm-
Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. We omit
correlations that are not statistically signiﬁcant. We
opt for Spearman and not Pearson correlation be-
cause of the wide variety of metrics used for the
different tasks.3
We ﬁnd that acceptability judgment probing task
performance is generally uncorrelated with the tar-
get task performance, except for AJ-CoLA. Simi-
larly, many of the SentEval tasks do not correlate
with the target tasks, except for Bigram Shift (SE-
BShift), Odd-Man-Out (SE-SOMO) and Coordi-
nation Inversion (SE-CoordInv). These three tasks
are input noising tasks—tasks where a model has to
predict if a given input sentence has been randomly
modiﬁed—which are, by far, the most similar tasks
we study to the masked language modeling task
that is used for training RoBERTa. This may ex-
plain the strong correlation with the performance
of the target tasks.
We also ﬁnd that some of these strong correla-
tions, such as with SE-SOMO and SE-CoordInv,
are almost entirely driven by variation in the de-
gree of negative transfer, rather than any positive
transfer. Intuitively, ﬁne-tuning RoBERTa on an
intermediate task can cause the model to forget
some of its ability to perform the MLM task. Thus,
a future direction for potential improvement for
intermediate-task training may be integrating the
MLM objective into intermediate-task training or
bounding network parameter changes to reduce
catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2016;
Chen et al., 2019).
Interestingly, while intermediate tasks such as
SocialIQA, CCG and QQP, which show negative
transfer on target tasks, tend to have negative trans-
fer on these three probing tasks, the intermedi-
ate tasks with positive transfer, such as Common-
senseQA tasks and MNLI, do not appear to ad-
versely affect the performance on these probing
tasks. This asymmetric impact may indicate that,
beyond the similarity of intermediate and target
tasks, avoiding catastrophic forgetting of pretrain-
3Full correlation tables across all target and probing tasks
with both Spearman and Pearson correlations can be found in
the Appendix.