cover question answering, entailment, word sense
disambiguation, and coreference resolution and
have been shown to be easy for humans but dif-
ﬁcult for models like BERT. Although we offer a
brief description of the tasks below, we refer read-
ers to the SuperGLUE paper for a more detailed
description of the tasks.
CommitmentBank (CB; de Marneffe et al.,
2019) is a three-class entailment task that con-
sists of texts and an embedded clause that ap-
pears in each text, in which models must determine
whether that embedded clause is entailed by the
text. Choice of Plausible Alternatives (COPA ;
Roemmele et al., 2011) is a classiﬁcation task that
consists of premises and a question that asks for the
cause or effect of each premise, in which models
must correctly pick between two possible choices.
Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC ; Levesque
et al., 2012) is a sentence-level commonsense rea-
soning task that consists of texts, a pronoun from
each text, and a list of possible noun phrases from
each text. The dataset has been designed such that
world knowledge is required to determine which
of the possible noun phrases is the correct referent
to the pronoun. We use the SuperGLUE binary
classiﬁcation cast of the task, where each example
consists of a text, a pronoun, and a noun phrase
from the text, which models must classify as being
coreferent to the pronoun or not. Recognizing Tex-
tual Entailment (RTE ; Dagan et al., 2005, et seq)
is a textual entailment task. Multi-Sentence Read-
ing Comprehension (MultiRC ; Khashabi et al.,
2018) is a multi-hop QA task that consists of para-
graphs, a question on each paragraph, and a list
of possible answers, in which models must distin-
guish which of the possible answers are true and
which are false. Word-in-Context (WiC ; Pilehvar
and Camacho-Collados, 2019) is a binary classiﬁ-
cation word sense disambiguation task. Examples
consist of two text snippets, with a polysemous
word that appears in both. Models must determine
whether the same sense of the word is used in both
contexts. BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019a) is a QA task
that consists of passages and a yes/no question as-
sociated with each passage. Reading Comprehen-
sion with Commonsense Reasoning (ReCoRD ;
Zhang et al., 2018) is a multiple-choice QA task
that consists of news articles. For each article, mod-
els are given a question about each article with one
entity masked out and a list of possible entities
from the article, and the goal is to correctly identifythe masked entity out of the list.
Additionally, we use CommonsenseQA and
Cosmos QA as target tasks, due to their unique
combination of small dataset size and high level of
difﬁculty for high-performing models like BERT
from our set of intermediate tasks.
2.2.3 Probing Tasks
We use well-established datasets for our probing
tasks, including the edge-probing suite from Ten-
ney et al. (2019b), function word oriented tasks
from Kim et al. (2019), and sentence-level probing
datasets (SentEval; Conneau et al., 2018).
Acceptability Judgment Tasks This set of bi-
nary classiﬁcations tasks was designed to inves-
tigate if a model can judge the grammatical ac-
ceptability of a sentence. We use the following
ﬁve datasets: AJ-CoLA is a task that tests for
a model’s understanding of general grammatical-
ity using the Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability
(CoLA ) (Warstadt et al., 2019b), which is drawn
from 22 theoretical linguistics publications. The
other tasks concern the behaviors of speciﬁc classes
of function words, using the dataset by Kim et al.
(2019): AJ-WH is a task that tests a model’s
ability to detect if a wh-word in a sentence has
been swapped with another wh-word, which tests
a model’s ability to identify the antecedent associ-
ated with the wh-word. AJ-Def is a task that tests
a model’s ability to detect if the deﬁnite/indeﬁnite
articles in a given sentence have been swapped. AJ-
Coord is a task that tests a model’s ability to detect
if a coordinating conjunction has been swapped,
which tests a model’s ability to understand how
ideas in the various clauses relate to each other.
AJ-EOS is a task that tests a model’s ability to
identify grammatical sentences without indicators
such as punctuation marks and capitalization, and
consists of grammatical text that are removed of
punctuation.
Edge-Probing Tasks The edge probing (EP)
tasks are a set of core NLP labeling tasks, collected
by Tenney et al. (2019b) and cast into Boolean
classiﬁcation. These tasks focus on the syntactic
and semantic relations between spans in a sentence.
The ﬁrst ﬁve tasks use the OntoNotes corpus (Hovy
et al., 2006): Part-of-Speech tagging (EP-POS )
is a task that tests a model’s ability to predict the
syntactic category (noun, verb, adjective, etc.) for
each word in the sentence. Named entity recog-
nition (EP-NER ) is task that tests a model’s abil-