model might learn skills by training on an inter-
mediate task, but those skills might not help it to
succeed on a target task.
Our search for intermediate tasks focuses on nat-
ural language understanding tasks in English. In
particular, we run our experiments on 11 interme-
diate tasks and 10 target tasks, which results in a
total of 110 intermediate–target task pairs. We use
25probing tasks —tasks that each target a narrowly
deﬁned model behavior or linguistic phenomenon—
to shed light on which skills are learned from each
intermediate task.
Our ﬁndings include the following: (i) Natural
language inference tasks as well as QA tasks which
involve commonsense reasoning are generally use-
ful as intermediate tasks. (ii) SocialIQA and QQP
as intermediate tasks are not helpful as a means to
teach the skills captured by our probing tasks, while
ﬁnetuning ﬁrst on MNLI and CosmosQA result in
an increase in all skills. (iii) While a model’s abil-
ity to learn skills relating to input-noising correlate
with target task performance, low-level skills such
as knowledge of a sentence’s raw content preser-
vation skills and ability to detect various attributes
of input sentences such as tense of main verb and
sentence length are less correlated with target task
performance. This suggests that a model’s abil-
ity to do well on the masked language modelling
(MLM) task is important for downstream perfor-
mance. Furthermore, we conjecture that a portion
of our analysis is affected by catastrophic forgetting
of knowledge learned during pretraining.
2 Methods
2.1 Experimental Pipeline
Our experimental pipeline (Figure 1) consists
of two steps, starting with a pretrained model:
intermediate-task training , and ﬁne-tuning on a
target orprobing task.
Intermediate Task Training We ﬁne-tune
RoBERTa on each intermediate task. The training
procedure follows the standard procedure of
ﬁne-tuning a pretrained model on a target task, as
described in Devlin et al. (2019). We opt for single
intermediate-task training as opposed to multi-task
training (cf. Liu et al., 2019a) to isolate the effect
of skills learned from individual intermediate
tasks.
Target and Probing Task Fine-Tuning After
intermediate-task training, we ﬁne-tune our modelson each target and probing task individually. Target
tasks are tasks of interest to the general commu-
nity, spanning various facets of natural language,
domains, and sources. Probing tasks, while poten-
tially similar in data source to target tasks such as
with CoLA, are designed to isolate the presence
of particular linguistic capabilities or skills. For
instance, solving the target task BoolQ (Clark et al.,
2019a) may require various skills including coref-
erence and commonsense reasoning, while prob-
ing tasks like the SentEval probing suite (Conneau
et al., 2018) target speciﬁc syntactic and metadata-
level phenomena such as subject-verb agreement
and sentence length detection.
2.2 Tasks
Table 1 presents an overview of the intermediate
and target tasks.
2.2.1 Intermediate Tasks
We curate a diverse set of tasks that either represent
an especially large annotation effort or that have
been shown to yield positive transfer in prior work.
The resulting set of tasks cover question answer-
ing, commonsense reasoning, and natural language
inference.
QAMR The Question–Answer Meaning Repre-
sentations dataset (Michael et al., 2018) is a crowd-
sourced QA task consisting of question–answer
pairs that correspond to predicate–argument re-
lationships. It is derived from Wikinews and
Wikipedia sentences. For example, if the sentence
is “Ada Lovelace was a computer scientist. ”, a po-
tential question is “ What is Ada’s last name? ”, with
the answer being “ Lovelace. ”
CommonsenseQA CommonsenseQA (Talmor
et al., 2019) is a multiple-choice QA task derived
from ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) with the help
of crowdworkers, that is designed to test a range of
commonsense knowledge.
SciTail SciTail (Khot et al., 2018) is a textual en-
tailment task built from multiple-choice science
questions from 4th grade and 8th grade exams,
as well as crowdsourced questions (Welbl et al.,
2017). The task is to determine whether a hypothe-
sis, which is constructed from a science question
and its corresponding answer, is entailed or not
(neutral) by the premise.
Cosmos QA Cosmos QA is a task for a
commonsense-based reading comprehension task