Coenen et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2019a; Htut et al.,
2019), and testing the linguistic generalizations of
BERT across runs (McCoy et al., 2019). How-
ever, relatively little work has been done to analyze
ﬁne-tuned BERT-style models (Wang et al., 2019a;
Warstadt et al., 2019a).
6 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presents a large-scale study on when
and why intermediate-task training works with
pretrained models. We perform experiments on
RoBERTa with a total of 110 pairs of intermedi-
ate and target tasks, and perform an analysis using
25 probing tasks, covering different semantic and
syntactic phenomena. Most directly, we observe
that tasks like Cosmos QA and HellaSwag, which
require complex reasoning and inference, tend to
work best as intermediate tasks.
Looking to our probing analysis, intermediate
tasks that help RoBERTa improve across the board
show the most positive transfer in downstream
tasks. However, it is difﬁcult to draw deﬁnite con-
clusions about the speciﬁc skills that drive positive
transfer. Intermediate-task training may help im-
prove the handling of syntax, but there is little to no
correlation between target-task and probing-task
performance for these skills. Probes for higher-
level semantic abilities tend to have a higher corre-
lation with the target-task performance, but these
results are too diffuse to yield more speciﬁc con-
clusions. Future work in this area would beneﬁt
greatly from improvements to both the breadth and
depth of available probing tasks.
We also observe a worryingly high correlation
between target-task performance and the two prob-
ing tasks which most closely resemble RoBERTa’s
masked language modeling pretraining objective.
Thus, the results of our intermediate-task training
analysis may be driven in part by forgetting of
knowledge acquired during pretraining. Our re-
sults therefore suggest a need for further work on
efﬁcient transfer learning mechanisms.
Acknowledgments
This project has beneﬁted from support to SB by
Eric and Wendy Schmidt (made by recommenda-
tion of the Schmidt Futures program), by Samsung
Research (under the project Improving Deep Learn-
ing using Latent Structure ), by Intuit, Inc., and by
NVIDIA Corporation (with the donation of a Titan
V GPU).References
Joachim Bingel and Anders Søgaard. 2017. Identify-
ing beneﬁcial task relations for multi-task learning
in deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 15th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short
Papers , pages 164–169, Valencia, Spain. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Xinyang Chen, Sinan Wang, Bo Fu, Mingsheng Long,
and Jianmin Wang. 2019. Catastrophic forgetting
meets negative transfer: Batch spectral shrinkage for
safe transfer learning. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
A. Beygelzimer, F. d’ Alch ´e-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
nett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 32 , pages 1906–1916. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang,
Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
Toutanova. 2019a. BoolQ: Exploring the surprising
difﬁculty of natural yes/no questions. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers) , pages 2924–2936, Min-
neapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2019b. What does BERT
look at? an analysis of BERT’s attention. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
NLP, pages 276–286, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, Ann Yuan, Been Kim,
Adam Pearce, Fernanda B. Vi ´egas, and Martin Wat-
tenberg. 2019. Visualizing and measuring the geom-
etry of BERT. Unpublished manuscript available on
arXiv.
Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume Lam-
ple, Lo ¨ıc Barrault, and Marco Baroni. 2018. What
you can cram into a single $&!#* vector: Probing
sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 2126–2136, Melbourne, Aus-
tralia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2005. The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges Work-
shop , pages 177–190. Springer.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,