IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 2
augmentation-based and MPC-based methods suffer deeply
from intractable importance sampling problems in inaccurate
models [10]. Hence, in the context of model inaccuracy, the
too-visible drawbacks of these three routes make Dyna-style
RL a promising choice. Nonetheless, the model inaccuracy
issue still remarkably affects the performance and should be
appropriately processed in designing the Dyna-style RL-based
autonomous driving strategy.
The model inaccuracy is evaluated by its uncertainty, which
refers to the uncertainty of outputs of the environment model
in facing various inputs. We quantify the output uncertainty
by the model ensemble technique. Based on that, we establish
a truncation mechanism to rule out the over unreliable data
by querying the model uncertainty for Dyna-style RLs. Three
main contributions of this paper are introduced as follows.
First, an uncertainty-aware environment model architecture is
proposed to predict the state transition dynamics and reward of
autonomous driving environments. Second, leveraging model
uncertainty, a novel adaptive prediction truncation method is
put forward to solve the performance degradation caused by
the inaccurate environment model in model-based RL algo-
rithms. Third, the developed MBRL method is implemented
in end-to-end autonomous driving tasks, and its performance is
validated to be advantageous against those of existing model-
based and model-free RL-based strategies across varying test-
ing scenarios.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
high-level uncertainty-aware model-based RL framework is
introduced in Section II. Then, the environment modeling ap-
proach is proposed in Section III. The model-based RL method
is developed based on the uncertainty-aware environment
model in Section IV. Section V introduces the implementation
detail of autonomous driving tasks. Section VI provides the
validation, results, and discussions. Finally, conclusions are
drawn in Section VII.
II. T HEUNCERTAINTY -AWARE MODEL -BASED
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FRAMEWORK
In this section, the high-level framework of the proposed
uncertainty-aware model-based RL for autonomous driving
is introduced. As illustrated in Fig. 1, An off-policy actor-
critic RL agent interacts with the actual driving environment.
The generated actual interaction data is stored in the experi-
ence buffer DEfor the update of RL. Besides, in our pro-
posed framework, an additional virtual environment model is
uniquely designed and evolved using actual interaction data to
map the transition dynamics of the actual driving environment.
In this way, we can generate more virtual experience DMvia
predictions by the environment model, and therefore expedite
the learning process of RL with fewer actual interactions and
iterations.
The virtual environment model starts its prediction from
an actual state and conducts a consecutive iteration process.
The virtual environment model is an ensemble of five sub
models, each of which has the same structure, receives the
same inputs, and conducts an independent prediction. This
ensemble environment model averages the five predictions as
Fig. 1. High-level architecture of the proposed uncertainty-aware MBRL
method with application in the autonomous driving task.
the adopted output and computes the ensemble variance, which
is used as an uncertainty estimation. The basic purpose of
using an ensemble model is to estimate the epistemic uncer-
tainty through the variance of predictions of sub-models. This
way, the number of iteration steps and unreliable predicted
experience can be adaptively determined and truncated based
on the assessed model uncertainty. The truncation threshold is
inversely related to the variance with proper parameters.
With a focus on autonomous driving tasks, traffic scenarios
are designed to validate the proposed method. The RL agent is
expected to conduct end-to-end lateral motion control without
violating designed constraints. And its training efficiency and
execution performance in autonomous driving scenarios are
studied in this work.
III. V IRTUAL ENVIRONMENT MODELING WITH
UNCERTAINTY ASSESSMENT
Under the developed RL framework, first, an environment
model is established for realizing rapid and uncertainty-aware
prediction of the agent-environment virtual interactions. A
parameterized model Mwith parameter ψis established
to predict the transition dynamics of autonomous driving
scenarios. This expected functionality can be realized through
an action-conditioned predictive model [31]. With the encoder-
decoder framework, the environment model takes the concate-
nation of state and prospective action as inputs, and outputs
the predicted next-step state and reward. The above mapping
relationship is expressed as:
st+1, rt← M ψ(st,at), (1)
where stdenotes the input state, atthe input action, rtthe
predicted reward, and st+1the predicted next-step state.
To achieve an accurate prediction, it is important to pro-
vide sufficient state information to the environment model.
Here situations of the ego vehicle and surrounding objects
are described by a perception-based state space. Specifically,
images are obtained from a camera view and processed into
semantic images, which are compressed to the state variable.
Predicting image states is challenging since it requires a
powerful high-dimensional representation as well as inferring