IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 1
Uncertainty-Aware Model-Based Reinforcement
Learning: Methodology and Application in
Autonomous Driving
Jingda Wu, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Zhiyu Huang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Chen Lv, Senior
Member, IEEE
Abstract —To further improve learning efficiency and per-
formance of reinforcement learning (RL), a novel uncertainty-
aware model-based RL method is proposed and validated in
autonomous driving scenarios in this paper. First, an action-
conditioned ensemble model with the capability of uncertainty
assessment is established as the environment model. Then, a novel
uncertainty-aware model-based RL method is developed based on
the adaptive truncation approach, providing virtual interactions
between the agent and environment model, and improving RL’s
learning efficiency and performance. The proposed method is
then implemented in end-to-end autonomous vehicle control
tasks, validated and compared with state-of-the-art methods
under various driving scenarios. Validation results suggest that
the proposed method outperforms the model-free RL approach
with respect to learning efficiency, and model-based approach
with respect to both efficiency and performance, demonstrating
its feasibility and effectiveness.
Index Terms —Model-based reinforcement learning, uncer-
tainty awareness, adaptive truncation, autonomous driving.
I. I NTRODUCTION
AS a crucial component of future mobility systems, au-
tonomous vehicles (A Vs) have been attracting great at-
tention from both academia and industry [1]–[3]. Developing
a safe, smart, and smooth autonomous driving strategy is of
great importance for promoting the deployment of A Vs in the
real world. Compared to rule-based strategies, learning-based
approaches are believed to be more advantageous in dealing
with challenging driving tasks, due to their powerful nonlinear
reasoning ability [4]–[8]. Among learning-based approaches,
reinforcement learning (RL) is very promising for solving
complex autonomous driving problems [9]. RL exhibits a
distinguished offline optimization ability which saves devel-
opers from heavy-duty rules design, and in the meantime, its
computational efficiency also relieves the harsh requirements
on onboard computing devices in real-time applications [10]–
[12].
For RL methods, the optimized policy is learned from
the interaction between the environment and the RL agent
[13]. Substantial RL-based applications in A Vs have been
J. Wu, Z. Huang, and C. Lv are with the School of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
639798. (e-mails: {jingda001,zhiyu001) }@e.ntu.edu.sg, lyuchen@ntu.edu.sg)
Corresponding author: C. Lv.
This work was supported in part by the Agency for Science, Technology
and Research (A*STAR) under Advanced Manufacturing and Engineering
(AME) Young Individual Research under Grant A2084c0156, and in part by
the Start-Up Grant, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.reported, and the main tasks include the optimization of
intelligent traffic flows [14], decision making [15], and control
of autonomous vehicles [16], [17]. Although these works show
a great post-training ability of RL in real-time applications,
they also reveal a crucial drawback that the offline training is
computationally intensive and time-consuming [18]. A reason
behind this is that the interactions between the agent and
environment are inefficient, and every single iteration can only
generate limited data [19].
To mitigate the abovementioned problem, the concept of
model-based RL (MBRL) has been proposed. Using data-
driven techniques, the characteristics, behaviors, and relation-
ships of the interactions between the actual environment and
the agent can be virtually modeled with acceptable accuracy.
The virtual environment model, which can predict the state
transitions according to the RL agent’s actions, generates ad-
ditional interaction data and accelerate the training process. In
this context, recently the MBRL method has attracted intensive
research interest from both theoretical and application aspects.
Model-based approaches can be divided into four types
following their different usage of the model [20]. The first
type is Dyna-style methods, in which interactions between RL
and the virtual environment are used to generate additional
data for improving RL efficiency [21]–[23]. The second type
refers to approaches incorporating model predictive control
(MPC) [24]. In these methods, an MPC controller optimizes
the RL agent’s behavior policy by predicting and planning
within the virtual environment at each training step. The
third type is the value augmentation scheme, which leverages
the iterative data generated from the virtual environment to
construct an intensified value function [25]–[27]. And the RL
training process is expected to be accelerated by facilitating
the convergence of the value function. The fourth type is the
analytic-gradient scheme. It constructs a differentiable model
to optimize the RL’s policy function through the gradient
value, which is the gradient of the model’s feedback with
respect to the policy function [20], [28].
Although the abovementioned MBRLs have validated fea-
sibility in simple environments, most of them can hardly be
transferred to autonomous driving tasks, since it is challenging
to accurately model the complex driving environment. An
inaccurate model will inevitably degrade the performances of
MBRLs to different extents [29]. Among candidates, analytic-
gradient approaches bear the brunt of model sensitivity since
they rely fully on the imaginary environment [30]. Value