IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 6
use the frontal-view output by a semantic camera as the state
variable. State space Sis expressed as:
S={p|p∈[0,255]}64×64, (25)
where pdenotes the value of the 8-bit pixel. Since nowa-
days A Vs are usually equipped with multi-modal sensors for
environment perception, it is feasible to use multi-source
information fusion to synthesize a graphic environmental
representation. Based on this consideration, an image with a
suitable field of view, that can provide sufficient information
for the RL-based strategy design, is used as the state variable
in this study.
Since RL controls lateral behaviors of the ego vehicle,
action space Ais given by:
A={δ|δ∈[−π/2, π/2]}, (26)
where δdenotes the steering wheel angle. A negative value
means turning left, while a positive one refers to turning right.
In addition, longitudinal dynamics of the vehicle is con-
trolled by a proportional-integral controller, which is omitted
for brevity.
Hyperparameters of the UA-MBRL-based autonomous driv-
ing strategy are provided in Table I. We utilize neural networks
to construct function approximators of RL and virtual environ-
ment model. The network details are provided in Appendix
Tables A1-A3.
TABLE I
HYPERPARAMETERS OF THE MBRL- BASED AV S TRATEGY
Symbol Meaning Value
CDMBuffer size of virtual model experience 2e15
BM Batch size of model training 128
lM Initial learning rate of model training 5e-4
CDEBuffer size of practical experience 2e15
BRL Batch size of RL training 64
lRL Initial learning rate of RL training 1e-4
Nepi Maximum episode of RL training 500
α Temperature coefficient of RL training 5e-3
γ Discount factor of Qequation 0.97
VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Experimental Set-up
In this section, we validate the proposed method in terms
of training process and RL testing. Then, we provide more
discussions and analysis on the method mechanism.
To achieve a high-fidelity validation, the CARLA simulator
is used to develop the driving environment [38]–[40]. Town10
of CARLA is used to establish driving scenarios. Simulations
are conducted on a computer with a CPU of intel i9-9900K and
a graphic card of Nvidia RTX 2080S. The control frequency
is 20 Hz. All associated learning algorithms and scripts are
programmed in python.
B. Training Results
The proposed virtual environment model and MBRL-based
autonomous driving strategy are trained according to Algo-
rithm 1. Thus, first, we evaluate the training performance ofthe constructed virtual environment model, as its quality is
crucial for the subsequently MBRL. Then, we evaluate training
efficiency and asymptotic performance of the proposed UA-
MBRL method.
Fig. 4 provides multiple metrics in training the environment
model. For a typical sub-model from the ensemble, its training
losses are provided in Fig. 4(a), where gradually declined
losses suggest being-improved model accuracy. In Fig. 4(b),
standard deviations of outputs of sub-models are calculated,
where the declining curve shows the decreased uncertainty
of the ensemble model. The synchronized declines of model
uncertainty and prediction error suggest that model uncertainty
can indeed reveal model accuracy.
Neutral 
Command
Right-turn 
Command
Time step=1 Time step=3 Time step=5(a)
(c)(b)
Fig. 4. An example of the prediction of the parameterized environment model.
(a) the loss value of the predicted reward and state suggested by the mean
squared error (MSE), (b) the standard deviation of predicted state variable of
the ensemble models, (c) a typical demonstration of the action-conditioned
iterative prediction processes starting from the same practical state. The three
consecutive images in the upper row indicate a predicted state transition
process under the continual and identical neutral command, and the images in
the bottom row correspond to the situations under the continual and identical
right-turn command. The images are with the format of model outputs and
RL inputs.
Furthermore, we visualize a typical process of the action-
conditioned prediction in Fig. 4(c) to illustrate the effective-
ness of model predictions. The inputs and outputs of the model
are the action and the predicted image state, respectively.
Two situations are evaluated according to different action
inputs, wherein our model starts from the same practical
initial state and executes iterative predictions. In all image
states, the ego vehicle appears at the bottom center, and
one adjacent vehicle appears on the right. In both situations,
the adjacent vehicle moves backward, validating the model’s
ability in predicting the longitudinal motion of the ego vehicle.
Additionally, two actions lead to distinct lateral behaviors of
the ego vehicle in predictions: 1) the neutral command leads
to a straight forward situation, 2) the right-turn instruction
causes a collision that makes the ego vehicle decelerate in