IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 7
time steps 3 and 5. According to the observations above, our
environment model can make predictions to be in line with
human expectations, indicating its feasibility. Nonetheless,
there are inevitably inaccuracies, such as the blurring of the
position of the adjacent vehicle. These prediction inaccuracies
would impair the performance of the RL training process.
Then we assess the RL training performance in autonomous
driving tasks using the episodic average reward. State-of-the-
art methods are used as benchmarks for comparative evalua-
tion. First, we use the model-assisted bootstrapped (MAB) [29]
approach to establish the instantiation of the SAC algorithm,
where the formed MAB-SAC can describe the capability of
current Dyna-style MBRLs. Then, the Vanilla-SAC is em-
ployed to represent the ability of the model-free RL scheme.
The comparison of rewards by different RL algorithms is
illustrated in Fig. 5. The training session repeats five times for
each algorithm. It is observed that our algorithm is superior
to all baselines in learning efficiency. Vanilla-SAC fails to
converge in the counted episodes, whereas our algorithm
achieves stable performance after around 300 episodes. More
specifically, our algorithm uses 280 episodes to reach the
termination reward of Vanilla-SAC, which saves 44.0% of the
time needed. The advantageous efficiency of our algorithm
against Vanilla-SAC is in line with expectations given the
existence of the environment model. However, the model-
based RL baseline, i.e., MAB, fails to achieve comparable
performance, even compared to Vanilla-SAC.
Model inaccuracy is responsible for the underperformance
of the model-based baseline. MAB-SAC is hindered from
improving its performance in real-world environments as a
result of the inaccurate prediction illustrated in Fig . 4(c). This
idea is supported by Fig. 5 where MAB with a short prediction
horizon outperforms that of a longer prediction horizon, given
that short iterative predictions are more accurate. By contrast,
our algorithm can adaptively truncate the prediction horizon to
mitigate the model inaccuracy issue, and effectively enhance
the learning capability. Overall, the above validation in the
training process highlights the superiority of the proposed
algorithm in learning performance.
050100150200250300350400450500
Training episode-8-6-4-20246RewardProposed
Vanilla-SAC
MAB-SAC(1)
MAB-SAC(2)
Fig. 5. The curves of the training reward of the proposed algorithm and
baselines. The solid lines represent the mean values of training curves, and
the error bands refer to 1- σintervals. The two schemes of MAB-SAC: (1)
and (2) denote using the environment model to iteratively predict 5 and 10
steps, respectively.C. Testing Results
In addition to the above-discussed training efficiency, the
implementation of well-trained RL-based autonomous driv-
ing strategies needs to be assessed. In this phase, strategies
generated by different RL algorithms are evaluated across
all three designed driving scenarios. Apart from foregoing
RL baselines, imitation learning (IL) is also introduced for
a more comprehensive comparison of learning-based au-
tonomous driving strategies. By using a PI controller with prior
knowledge, we can create demonstration control sequences for
IL training.
First, we test the effectiveness of different strategies in
completing tasks. In Fig. 6, the episode duration is used to
evaluate different strategies by measuring the distance the
driver travels until a collision occurs or the task is completed.
For the trained scenario, both the proposed algorithm and the
model-free algorithm, i.e., Vanilla-SAC, can generate well-
performed strategies to achieve high levels. In untrained sce-
narios, the proposed strategy and Vanilla-SAC can maintain
their capabilities, whereas IL deteriorates significantly. This
indicates the better adaptability of RL-based strategies. When
comparing only among RLs, our strategy and Vanilla-SAC
reach comparably good results. It is particularly satisfying
given the fact that MBRL algorithms are trained with inaccu-
rate prediction data. As a comparison, the other state-of-the-art
MBRL, i.e., MAB-SAC, has difficulty in controlling the ego
vehicle toward success in tasks.
Fig. 6. Barplots of the episode duration of the proposed strategy and baselines
in different testing scenarios, wherein the error bars represent the standard
deviations.
510 15 20 25 30 35-2024Lateral position (m)
510 15 20 25 30 35-3-2-10123Lateral velocity (m/s)Proposed Vanilla-SAC IL
510 15 20 25 30 35
Time (s)-0.6-0.4-0.200.20.4Yaw rate (deg/s)
Fig. 7. Results of the lateral velocities of the ego vehicle on the straight-line
driving scenario without surrounding obstacles under different strategies. The
positive value in the y-axis represents the leftward displacement relative to the
initial position, and the negative value represents the rightward displacement.
Next, driving smoothness as a second optimization target is
evaluated using the vehicle’s lateral velocity. In this regard, a