IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 8
driving task on a flat road without nearby obstacles is designed
in which a straight trajectory is expected to be pursued by the
ego vehicle. The zero lateral velocity is taken as the center and
the average absolute deviation (AAD) of the lateral velocity
of different strategies is calculated; a smaller AAD indicates a
smoother driving. The lateral velocities of three strategies are
shown in Fig. 7, while the MAB-SAC is discarded here since
it cannot complete the task. The proposed strategy achieves an
AAD of 0.2501 on average lateral speed deviation, which is
comparable to that of Vanilla-SAC (0.2494) and remarkably
better than IL (0.3386).
Lastly, we evaluate robustness of all the obtained strategies.
We re-conduct the experiments of Fig. 6 but impose an
additional noise (10% of the control domain) to the output of
the strategy, where the episode duration can be undermined by
noise injections. Gaussian noise is adopted since it can better
represent unknown compound noises coming from various
sources in real world applications. Episode durations under
noise are compared to non-noise ones (Fig. 6) using confronta-
tional barplots in Fig. 8. The roughly even divided bars indi-
cate that RL-based strategies achieve favorable robustness in
autonomous driving tasks. It is noted that this anti-noise ability
can be derived from the robust learning characteristic of the
maximum entropy RL algorithm, i.e., SAC algorithm, which is
not directly linked to the environment model. Nonetheless, the
proposed strategy enjoys good robustness, showing its great
potential in applications to autonomous driving.
0%50%100%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15Episode Duration (100% stacked)Original Noise-injected
Proposed Vanilla-SAC MAB-SAC IL
Fig. 8. Robustness testing of the proposed algorithm and baselines in different
scenarios. Three bars in one cluster represent three testing scenarios defined
in Fig. 3.
0 100 200 300 400 500
Training episode0246Truncate step
02468
Fig. 9. Distribution of the truncating-step value of one typical state in the
training process. Gray points are actual truncating points, at which iterative
prediction is terminated. The distribution map is calculated based on the scatter
density.
050100150200250300350400450500
Training episode-8-6-4-20246RewardProposed
1-Step
5-Step
20-StepFig. 10. Curves of the training reward of the proposed algorithm and fix-
step baselines. Baselines adopt the same MBRL architecture but use fix-step
prediction instead of the truncation-based one.
-6-4-2024Average episode reward
*****
Proposed 1-Step 5-Step 20-Step-6-4-20246
1Average episode reward
Proposed 1-Step 5-Step 20-Step****
Fig. 11. Statistical results (examined by the t-test) of the training reward of
the proposed algorithm and fix-step baselines. Each bar represents the mean
value of rewards in 500 episodes of a candidate.
Overall, our algorithm achieves the same-level performance
as the model-free one. We remind that conventional MBRLs
suffer from inferior post-training performance to model-free
schemes due to prediction errors of the environment model.
In this regard, the comparable results shown in this section
demonstrated the superiority of our algorithm, since it provides
a considerable improvement in training speed compared to
Vanilla-SAC without compromising the ultimate performance.
D. Analysis and Discussion on the Truncation Mechanism
In this section we investigate the essence of the proposed
method. UA-MBRL is established on the adaptive truncation
of predicting horizon with referring to uncertainties of the
environment model. Thus, we first examine if the truncating
function works well with ever-changing model uncertainties,
and then check if the adaptive prediction truncation is indeed
the crucial point for improving the performance of MBRL.
We observe one specific state of the actual environment
and record the iterative prediction horizon starting from this
state during the whole training process. The prediction horizon
essentially reflects the utilization extent of the virtual environ-
ment model, which is expected to be varied with the uncer-
tainty of the model. The scatter density map of the prediction
horizon is plotted in Fig. 9. We find prediction horizons are
significantly decentralized at the early stage, which exactly
corresponds to the high uncertainty of the virtual environment
model. As the model uncertainty, i.e., output prediction error,
decreases with the training process, the prediction horizon is
increased and converged to the specified maximum value (6