ProGAN StyleGAN StyleGAN2
AP 100. 99.6 99.1
Table 3: Out-of-the box evaluation on recently released Style-
GAN2 [ 21] model . We used our Blur+JPEG (0.1) model and
tested on StyleGAN2. We observed that our model generalizes to
detecting StyleGAN2 images. Numbers for ProGAN and Style-
GAN are included for comparison.
our model is learning subtle low-level features generated
by CNN architectures, or high-level features such as visual
quality. Taking the similar approach as previous image real-
ism works [ 22,47], we rank synthesized images from each
dataset by the model’s prediction, and visualize images in
the 0th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 100thpercentile of the “fakeness”
score from our model’s output.
In most datasets, we observe little noticeable correlation
between the model predictions and the visual quality of the
synthesized images. However, there is a weak correlation
in the BigGAN and StarGAN datasets; qualitative examples
are shown in Figure 6. As the “fakeness” scores are higher,
the images tend to contain more visible artifacts which dete-
riorate the visual quality. This implies that our model might
learn to capture perceptual realism under this task. How-
ever, since the correlation is not observed in other datasets,
it is more likely that the model learns features more towards
low-level CNN artifacts. Examples across all datasets are
provided in the supplemental material.
Artifacts of CNN image synthesis Inspired by Zhang et
al. [44], we visualize the average frequency spectra from
each dataset to study the artifacts generated by CNNs, as
shown in Figure 7. Following prior work, we perform
a simple form of high-pass ﬁltering (subtracting the im-
age from its median blurred version) before calculating the
Fourier transform, as it provides a more informative visual-
ization [ 25]. For each dataset, we average over 2000 ran-
domly chosen images (or the entire set, if it is smaller).
We note that there are many interesting patterns visi-
ble in these visualizations. While the real image spectra
generally look alike (with minor variations due to differ-
ences in the datasets), there are distinct patterns visible in
images generated by different CNN models. Furthermore,
the repeated period patterns in these spectra may be consis-
tent with aliasing artifacts, a cue considered by [ 44]. In-
terestingly, the most effective unconditional GANs (Big-
GAN, ProGAN) contain relatively few such artifacts. Also,
DeepFake images does not contain obvious artifacts. We
note that DeepFake images have gone through various pre-
and post-processing, where the synthesized face region is
resized, blended, and compressed with MPEG. These op-
erations perturbs the low-level image statistic, which may
cause the frequency patterns to not emerge with this visual-ization method.
5. Discussion
Despite the alarm that has been raised by the rapidly im-
proving quality of image synthesis methods, our results sug-
gest that today’s CNN-generated images retain detectable
ﬁngerprints that distinguish them from real photos. This
allows forensic classiﬁers to generalize from one model to
another without extensive adaptation.
However, this does not mean that the current situation
will persist. Due to the difﬁculties in achieving Nash equi-
libria, none of the current GAN-based architectures are
optimized to convergence, i.e. the generator never wins
against the discriminator. Were this to change, we would
suddenly ﬁnd ourselves in a situation when synthetic im-
ages are completely indistinguishable from real ones.
Even with the current techniques, there remain practi-
cal reasons for concern. First, even the best forensics de-
tector will have some trade-off between true detection and
false-positive rates. Since a malicious user is typically look-
ing to create a single fake image (rather than a distribu-
tion of fakes), they could simply hand-pick the fake image
which happens to pass the detection threshold. Second, ma-
licious use of fake imagery is likely be deployed on a social
media platform (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, etc.), so the
data will undergo a number of often aggressive transforma-
tions (compression, resizing, re-sampling, etc.). While we
demonstrated robustness to some degree of JPEG compres-
sion, blurring, and resizing, much more work is needed to
evaluate how well the current detectors can cope with these
transformations in-the-wild . Finally, most documented in-
stances of effective deployment of visual fakes to date have
been using classic “shallow” methods, such as Photoshop.
We have experimented with running our detector on the
face-aware liquify dataset from [ 38], and found that our
method performs at chance on this data. This suggests that
shallow methods exhibit fundamentally different behavior
than deep methods, and should not be neglected.
We note that detecting fake images is just one small piece
of the puzzle of how to combat the threat of visual disinfor-
mation. Effective solutions will need to incorporate a wide
range of strategies, from technical to social to legal.
Acknowledgements We’d like to thank Jaakko Lehtinen,
Taesung Park, Jacob (Minyoung) Huh, Hany Farid, and Matthias
Kirchner for helpful discussions. We are grateful to Xu Zhang,
Lakshmanan Nataraj, and Davide Cozzolino for signiﬁcant help
with comparisons to [ 44,26,12], respectively. This work was
funded, in part, by DARPA MediFor, Adobe gift and grant from
the UC Berkeley Center for Long-Term Cybersecurity. The views,
opinions and/or ﬁndings expressed are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing the ofﬁcial views or poli-
cies of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government.
8702