BigGAN
 StarGAN
0th percentile 25th percentile 50th percentile 75th percentile 100th percentile
Figure 6: Does our model’s conﬁdence correlate with visual quality? We have found that for two models, BigGAN and StarGAN, the
images on the left (considered more real) tends to look better than the images on the right (considered more fake). However, this does not
seem to hold for the other models. More examples on each dataset are provided in the supplemental material.
synthetic real
ProGAN StyleGAN BigGAN CycleGAN StarGAN GauGAN CRN IMLE SITD SAN DeepFake
Figure 7: Frequency analysis on each dataset. We show the average spectra of each high-pass ﬁltered image, for both the real and fake
images, similar to Zhang et al. [44]. We observe periodic patterns (dots or lines) in most of the synthetic images, while BigGAN and
ProGAN contains relatively few such artifacts.
Zhang et al. [44], each trained from one of the two image
sources (CycleGAN and AutoGAN), and one of the two im-
age representations (images and spectrum) respectively. All
four variants included JPEG and resize data augmentation
during training to improve the robustness of each model.
We found that our models generalized signiﬁcantly better
to other architectures, except on CycleGAN (which is the
model architecture used by [ 44]), StarGAN (where both
methods obtain near 100.0 AP). The comparison results are
shown in Table 2and Figure 4. We also include compar-
isons to other baseline models in the supplemental material.
4.5. New CNN models
We hope that as new deep synthesis models arrive, our
system will detect them out-of-the-box. One such an evalu-
ation scenario has naturally arisen, with the recent release of
StyleGAN2 [ 21], a state-of-the-art unconditional GAN ap-
pearing in these proceedings. The StyleGAN2 model makesseveral changes to StyleGAN, including redesigned normal-
ization, multi-resolution, and regularization methods. In
Table 3, we test our detector on publicly available Style-
GAN2 generators. We used our Blur+JPEG (0.1) model
and tested on the LSUN car ,cat,church , and horse variants.
Despite these changes, our technique performs at 99.1 %AP.
These results reinforce the notion that training on today’s
generators can generalize well to future generators, given
that they use similar underlying building blocks.
4.6. Qualitative Analysis
To understand how the network is able to generalize to
unseen CNN models, we study what possible cues the clas-
siﬁer might be using by visualizing its ranking on the “fak-
eness” over the synthetic dataset. In addition, we analyze
the difference between the frequency responses of both real
and synthetic images across datasets.
“Fakeness” ranking by the model We study whether
8701