image forensics approaches. For example, several recent
works [ 44,12,37] observe that that classiﬁers trained on
images produced by one GAN architecture perform poorly
when tested on others, and in many cases they also fail
to generalize when only the dataset (and not the architec-
ture or task) is changed [ 44]. This makes sense, as image
generation methods are highly varied: they use different
datasets, network architectures, loss functions, and image
pre-processing.
In this paper, we show that, contrary to this current un-
derstanding, classiﬁers trained to detect CNN-generated im-
ages canexhibit a surprising amount of generalization abil-
ity across datasets, architectures, and tasks. We follow con-
ventions and train our classiﬁers in a straightforward man-
ner, by generating a large number of fake images using a
single CNN model (we use ProGAN, a high-performing un-
conditional GAN model [ 19]), and train a binary classiﬁer
to detect fakes, using the model’s real training images as
negative examples.
To evaluate our model, we create a new dataset of CNN-
generated images, the ForenSynths dataset, consisting of
synthesized images from 11 models, that range from from
unconditional image generation methods, such as Style-
GAN [ 20], to super-resolution methods [ 13], and deep-
fakes [ 33]. Each model is trained on a different image
dataset appropriate for its speciﬁc task. We have also
continued evaluating our detector on models that were re-
leased after our paper was originally written, ﬁnding that
it works out-of-the-box on the very recent unconditional
GAN, StyleGAN2 [ 21].
Underneath the apparent simplicity of this approach, we
have found that there are a number of subtle challenges
which we study through a set of experiments and a new
dataset of trained image generation models. We ﬁnd that
data augmentation, in the form of common image post-
processing operations, is critical for generalization, even
when the target images are not post-processed themselves.
We also ﬁnd that diversity of training images matters; large
datasets sampled from CNN synthesis methods lead to clas-
siﬁers that outperform those trained on smaller datasets, to
a point. Finally, it is critical to examine the effect of post-
processing on the model’s generalization ability which of-
ten occur downstream of image creation ( e.g., during stor-
age and distribution). We show that when the correct steps
are taken, classiﬁers are indeed robust to common opera-
tions such as JPEG compression, blurring, and resizing.
In summary, our main contributions are: 1) we show that
forensics models trained on CNN-generated images exhibit
a surprising amount of generalization to other CNN synthe-
sis methods; 2) we propose a new dataset and evaluation
metric for detecting CNN-generated images; 3) we exper-
imentally analyze the factors that account for cross-model
generalization.2. Related work
Detecting CNN-based Manipulations Several recent
works have addressed the problem of detecting images gen-
erated by CNNs. R ¨ossler et al . [33] evaluated methods
for detecting face manipulation techniques, including CNN-
based face and mouth replacement methods. While they
showed that simple classiﬁers could detect fakes generated
by the same model, they did not study generalization be-
tween models or datasets. Marra et al. [24] likewise showed
that simple classiﬁers can detect images created by an image
translation network [ 17], but did not consider cross-model
transfer.
Recently, Cozzolino et al. [12] found that forensics clas-
siﬁers transferred poorly between models, often obtaining
near-chance performance. They propose a new represen-
tation learning method, based on autoencoders, to improve
transfer performance in zero- and low-shot training regimes
for a variety of generation methods. While their ultimate
goal is similar to ours, they take an orthogonal approach.
They focus on new learning methods for improving transfer
learning, and apply them to a diverse assortment of models
(including both CNN and non-CNN). In contrast, we em-
pirically study the performance of simple “baseline” clas-
siﬁers under different training and testing conditions for
CNN-based image generation. Zhang et al. [44] ﬁnds that
classiﬁers generalize poorly between GAN models. They
propose a method called AutoGAN for generating images
that contain the upsampling artifacts common in GAN ar-
chitectures, and test it on two types of GANs. Other work
has proposed to detect GAN images using hand-crafted co-
occurrence features [ 26], or by anomaly detection models
built on pretrained face detectors [ 37]. Researchers have
also proposed methods for identifying which, of several,
known GANs generated a given image [ 25,41].
Image forensics Researchers have proposed a variety of
methods for detecting more traditional manipulation tech-
niques, such as those made by image editing tools. Early
work focused on hand-crafted cues [ 14] such as com-
pression artifacts [ 3], resampling [ 31], or physical scene
constraints [ 27]. More recently, researchers have applied
learning-based methods to these problems [ 45,16,11,32,
38]. This line of work has found, like us, that simple, su-
pervised classiﬁers are often effective at detecting manipu-
lations [ 45,38].
Artifacts from CNN-based Generators Researchers
have shown, recently, that common CNN designs contain
artifacts that reduce their representational power. Much of
this work has focused on the way networks perform upam-
pling and downsampling. A well-known example of such
an artifact is the checkerboard artifact produced by decon-
volutional layers [ 28]. Azulay and Weiss [ 4] showed convo-
lutional networks ignore the classical sampling theorem and
8696