Interaction Embeddings for Prediction and Explanation in
Knowledge Graphs
Wen Zhang
College of Computer Science,
Zhejiang University
China
wenzhang2015@zju.edu.cnBibek Paudel
Department of Informatics,
University of Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
paudel@ifi.uzh.chWei Zhang
Alibaba Group
AZFT Joint Lab of Knowledge Engine
China
lantu.zw@alibaba-inc.com
Abraham Bernstein
Department of Informatics,
University of Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
bernstein@ifi.uzh.chHuajun Chen∗
College of Computer Science,
Zhejiang University
AZFT Joint Lab of Knowledge Engine
huajunsir@zju.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Knowledge graph embedding aims to learn distributed represen-
tations for entities and relations, and is proven to be effective in
many applications. Crossover interactions — bi-directional effects
between entities and relations — help select related information
when predicting a new triple, but haven’t been formally discussed
before. In this paper, we propose CrossE , a novel knowledge graph
embedding which explicitly simulates crossover interactions. It not
only learns one general embedding for each entity and relation as
most previous methods do, but also generates multiple triple spe-
cific embeddings for both of them, named interaction embeddings .
We evaluate embeddings on typical link prediction tasks and find
that CrossE achieves state-of-the-art results on complex and more
challenging datasets. Furthermore, we evaluate embeddings from a
new perspective — giving explanations for predicted triples, which
is important for real applications. In this work, an explanation for a
triple is regarded as a reliable closed-path between the head and the
tail entity. Compared to other baselines, we show experimentally
that CrossE, benefiting from interaction embeddings , is more capable
of generating reliable explanations to support its predictions.
KEYWORDS
knowledge graph embedding; crossover interactions; link predic-
tion; explanation
ACM Reference Format:
Wen Zhang, Bibek Paudel, Wei Zhang, Abraham Bernstein, and Huajun
Chen. 2019. Interaction Embeddings for Prediction and Explanation in
Knowledge Graphs. In The Twelfth ACM International Conference on Web
Search and Data Mining (WSDM ’19), February 11–15, 2019, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3289600.3291014
1 INTRODUCTION
Knowledge graphs (KGs) like Yago [ 32], WordNet [ 21], and Free-
base [ 1] have numerous facts in the form of ( head entity ,relation ,
∗Corresponding author.
WSDM ’19, February 11–15, 2019, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
2019. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5940-5/19/02. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3289600.3291014tail entity ), or ( h,r,t) in short. They are useful resources for many
AI tasks such as web search [33] and question answering [43].
Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) learns distributed represen-
tations [ 11] for entities and relations, called entity embeddings
andrelation embeddings . The embeddings are meant to preserve
the information in a KG, and are represented as low-dimensional
dense vectors or matrices in continuous vector spaces. Many KGEs,
such as tensor factorization based RESCAL [ 26], translation-based
TransE [ 4], neural tensor network NTN [ 30] and linear mapping
method DistMult [ 41], have been proposed and are proven to be
effective in many applications like knowledge graph completion,
question answering and relation extraction.
Despite their success in modeling KGs, none of existing KGEs has
formally discussed crossover interactions , bi-directional effects
between entities and relations including interactions from relations
to entities andinteractions from entities to relations . Crossover in-
teractions are quite common and helpful for related information
selection, related information selection is necessary when predict-
ing new triples because there are various information about each
entity and relation in KGs.
X
ZKDV:LIH
MKDV&KLOGLV)DWKHU2I
YLV)DWKHU2I
Q
TZRQ3UL]HIRU5ROHVWDUUHG,Q
SKDV:LIHKDV&KLOGIDWKHU,V
Figure 1: A hypothetical knowledge graph. Nodes and edges repre-
sent entities and relations. Solid lines represent existing triples and
dashed lines represent triples to be predicted.
We explain the notion of crossover interactions with a running
example in Figure 1. During the prediction of ( X, isFatherOf, ? ),
there are six triples about entity X, but only four of them — ( X,
hasWife, Z ), (X, fatherIs, Y ), (Y, isFatherOf, X ), (S, hasChild, X ) —
are related to this prediction, because they describe family rela-
tionships and will contribute to infer the father-child relationship.
The other two triples describing the career relationship of Xdo
not provide valuable information for this task. In this way, the rela-
tion isFatherOf affects the information of entities to be selected for
inference. We refer this as interaction from relations to entities .arXiv:1903.04750v1  [cs.AI]  12 Mar 2019