(3)Combination Operator. The third step is to get the com-
bined representation and we formulate it in a nonlinear way:
qhr=tanh(hI+rI+b) (5)
, where b∈R1×dis a global bias vector. tanh(z)=ez−e−z
ez+e−z, in
which the output is bounded from −1to1. It is used to ensure the
combined representation share the same distribution interval (both
negative values and positive values) with the entity representation.
(4)Similarity Operator. The fourth step is to calculate the
similarity between the combined representation qhrand the general
tail entity representation t:
f(h,r,t)=s(h,r,t)=σ(qhrt⊤) (6)
, where dot product is used to calculate the similarity and σ(z)=
1
1+e−zis a nonlinear function to constrain the score s(h,r,t)∈[0,1].
The overall score function is as follows:
f(h,r,t)=σ(tanh(cr◦h+cr◦h◦r+b)t⊤) (7)
To evaluate the effectiveness of the crossover interactions, we
devise a simplified CrossE called CrossE Sby removing the inter-
action embeddings and using only the general embeddings in the
score function:
fS(h,r,t)=σ(tanh(h+r+b)t⊤) (8)
Loss function. We formalize a log-likelihood loss function with
negative sampling as the objective for training:
L(K)=−Õ
(h,r,t)∈KÕ
x∈B(h,r,t)
l(x)loд(f(x))
+(1−l(x))loд(1−f(x))
+λÕ
∥θ∥2
2
Here,B(h,r,t)is the bag of positive examples with label 1and
negative examples with label 0generated for(h,r,t). The label
of example xis given by l(x). For(h,r,t), positive examples are
(h,r,e)∈K and negative examples are (h,r,e)<K, where e∈E.
The factor λcontrols the L2 regularization of model parameters
θ={E,R,C,b}. The training objective is to minimize L(K), and
we applied a gradient-based approach during training.
Number of Parameters. The total number of parameters for
CrossE is(ne+2nr+1)×d, as there are ne+nrgeneral embeddings,
nradditional embeddings from the interaction matrix, and one bias
term. Note that interaction embeddings are fully specified by these
parameters. While predicting head entities, we model the task as
the inverse of tail entity prediction, e.g., ( t,r−1,h). In such cases, we
need 2nrmore embeddings for inverse relations. Since nr≪nein
most knowledge graphs, this does not add a lot of extra parameters.
The main benefits of CrossE. Compared to existing KGEs,
CrossE’s benefits are as follows: (1) For an entity and a relation,
the representations used during a specific triple inference are inter-
action embeddings (not general embeddings), which simulate the
selection of different information for different triple predictions.
(2) Multiple interaction embeddings for each entity and relation
provide richer representations and generalization capability. We
argue that they are capable of capturing different latent proper-
ties depending on the context of interactions. This is because each
interaction embedding can select different similar entities and rela-
tions when involving different triples. (3) CrossE learns one general
embedding for each entity and relation, and uses them to generate
interaction embeddings. This results in much less extra parametersthan learning multiple independent embeddings for each entity and
relation.
4 EXPLANATIONS FOR PREDICTIONS
In this section, we describe how we generate explanations for pre-
dicted triples. Explanations are valuable when KGEs are imple-
mented in real applications, as they help improve the reliability of
and people’s trust on predicted results. The balance between achiev-
ing high prediction accuracy and giving explanations has already
attracted research attention in other areas, such as recommender
systems [10, 37].
We first introduce the motivation of our explanation scheme,
followed by our embedding-based path-searching algorithm.
4.1 Background
Similar to inference chains and logical rules, meaningful paths from
htotcan be regarded as explanations for a predicted triple (h,r,t).
For example, in Figure 1, the fact that X is father of M can be inferred
by(X,hasW i f e ,Z)and(Z,haschild ,M).
XhasW if e−−−−−−−−→ ZhasChild−−−−−−−−→ M⇒XisFatherOf−−−−−−−−−−−→ M (9)
The right-hand side of the implication " ⇒" is called conclusion
and the left-hand side is premise . The premise is an explanation
for the conclusion . In the above example, the path XhasW if e−−−−−−−−→
ZhasChild−−−−−−−−→ Mis one explanation for the triple (X,isFatherO f ,M).
Searching paths between head entity and tail entity is the first
step for giving explanations for a triple. There are multiple works
focusing on mining such paths as rules or features for prediction,
e.g., AMIE+ [ 6] and PRA [ 17], in which the paths are searched
and pruned based on random walks and statistical significance. An
important aspect of efficient path searching is the volume of search
space. Selecting candidate start entities and relations is the key
point of reducing search space. Good embeddings can be useful
for candidate selection with less effects on path searching results,
because they are supposed to capture the similarity semantics of
entities and relations. Thus giving explanations for predicted triples,
by searching for reliable paths based on embeddings, not only
improves the reliability of predicted results, but also provides a new
perspective of evaluating embedding qualities.
In this paper, the explanation reliability for triple (h,r,t)is eval-
uated with the number of similar structures in knowledge graph,
on which the inferences are mainly based, as noted by [ 24]. Similar
structures contain same relations but different specific entities.
X
Y
SLV)DWKHU2IKDV:LIHKDV&KLOG
ZKDV:LIH
MKDV&KLOGLV)DWKHU2I
Figure 3: Similar structures for the example subgraph in Figure 1.
For example, the left and right subgraph in Figure 3 have similar
structures, as they both contain three entities e1,e2,e3, a triple
e1isFatherOf−−−−−−−−−−−→ e3, and a path e1hasW if e−−−−−−−−→ e2hasChild−−−−−−−−→ e3. Thus
the left subgraph is a support for(X,isFatherO f ,M)with path