In Figure 1, there are two inference paths about the relation
isFatherOf , but only one of them — ( XhasW if e−−−−−−−−→ ZhasChild−−−−−−−−→
M) — is available for predicting ( X, isFatherOf, ? ). In this way, the
information of entity Xaffects the inference path to be chosen for
inference. We refer this as interactions from entities to relations .
Considering crossover interactions in KGE, the embeddings
for both entities and relations in specific triples should capture
their interactions, and be different when involving different triples.
However, most previous methods like TransE [ 4] learn a general
embedding, which is assumed to preserve all the information for
each entity and relation. They ignore interactions for both entities
and relations. Some methods like TransH [ 38] and TransG [ 39]
learn either multiple entity or relation embeddings but not both.
They ignore that crossover interactions are bi-directional and affect
both entities and relations at the same time.
In this paper, we propose CrossE , a novel KGE which explicitly
simulates crossover interactions . It not only learns one general em-
bedding for each entity and relation, but also generates multiple
triple specific embeddings, called interaction embeddings , for both
of them. The interaction embeddings are generated via a relation
specific interaction matrix. Given an (h,r,t), there are mainly four
steps in CrossE: 1) generate interaction embeddings hIfor head
entity h; 2) generate interaction embeddings rIfor relation r; 3)
combine interaction embeddings hIandrItogether; 4) compare
the similarity of combined embedding with tail entity embedding t.
We evaluate embeddings on canonical link prediction tasks. The
experiment results show that CrossE achieves state-of-the-art re-
sults on complex and more challenging datasets and exhibits the
effectiveness of modeling crossover interactions in a KGE.
Furthermore, we also propose an additional evaluation scheme
for KGEs from the perspective of explaining their predictions. Link
prediction tasks only evaluate the accuracy of KGEs at predicting
missing triples, while in real applications, explanations for pre-
dictions are valuable, as they will likely improve the reliability of
predicted results. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
to address both link prediction and its explanation of KGE.
The process of generating explanations for one triple (h,r,t)
is modeled as searching for reliable paths from htotand similar
structures to support path explanations. We evaluate the quality of
explanations based on Recall andAverage Support .Recall reflects
the coverage of triples that a KGE can generate explanations for
andAverage Support reflects the reliability of the explanation. Our
evaluation on explanations show that CrossE, benefiting from inter-
action embeddings , is more capable of giving reliable explanations
than other methods, including TransE [4] and ANALOGY [20].
In summary, our contributions in this paper are the following:
•We propose CrossE, a new KGE which models crossover inter-
actions of entities and relations by learning an interaction matrix.
•We evaluate CrossE compared with various other KGEs on
link prediction tasks with three benchmark datasets, and show
that CrossE achieves state-of-the-art results on complex and more
challenging datasets with a modest parameter size.
•We propose a new evaluation scheme for embeddings — search-
ing explanations for predictions, and show that CrossE is able togenerate more reliable explanations than other methods. This sug-
gests that interaction embeddings are better at capturing similarities
between entities and relations in different contexts of triples.
This paper is organized as follows. We review the literature in
Section 2. We describe our model in Section 3 and explanation
scheme in Section 4. We present the experimental results in Sec-
tion 5 before concluding in Section 6.
2 RELATED WORK
Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) aims to embed a knowledge
graph into a continuous vector space and learns dense low dimen-
sional representations for entities and relations. Various types of
KGE methods have been proposed and the majority of them learn
the relationship between entities using training triples in a knowl-
edge graph. Some methods also utilize extra information, such as
logical rules, external text corpus and hierarchical type information
to improve the quality of embeddings. Since our work focuses on
learning from triples in a knowledge graph without extra informa-
tion, we mainly summarize those methods learning with triples
and briefly summarize methods using extra information in the end.
Considering the requirement of multiple representations for en-
tities and relations from crossover interactions, prior KGEs learning
with triples can be classified into two classes: (1) methods learning
a general embedding for each entity and relation, and (2) methods
learning multiple representations for either of them.
KGEs with general embeddings. Existing embedding meth-
ods with general embeddings all represent entities as low-dimensional
vectors and relations as operations that combine the representa-
tion of head entity and tail entity. Most methods are proposed
with different assumptions in vector space and model the knowl-
edge graph from different perspectives. The first translation-based
method TransE [ 4] regards relations as translations from head enti-
ties to tail entities and assumes that the relation-specific translation
of head entity should be close to the tail entity vector. It repre-
sents each relation as a single vector. RESCAL [ 26] regards the
knowledge graph as a multi-hot tensor and learns the entity vector
representation and relation matrix representation via collective
tensor factorization. HOLE [ 25], which is a compositional vector
space model, utilizes interactions between different dimensions
of embedding vectors and employs circular correlation to create
compositional representations. RDF2Vec [ 27] uses graph walks and
Weisfeiler-Lehman subtree RDF kernels to generate entity sequence
and regards the entity sequence as sequence of words in natural lan-
guage, then follows word2vec to generate embeddings for entities
but not relations. NTN [ 30] represents each relation as a bilinear
tensor operator followed by a linear matrix operator. ProjE [ 29] uses
a simple but effective shared variable neural network. DistMult [ 41]
learns embeddings from a bilinear objective where each relation is
represented as a linear mapping matrix from head entities to tail
entities. It successfully captures the compositional semantics of
relations. ComplEx [ 35] makes use of complex valued embeddings
to handle both symmetric and antisymmetric relations because
the Hermitian dot product of real values is commutative while for
complex values it is not commutative. ANALOGY [ 20] is proposed
from the analogical inference point of view and based on the linear
mapping assumption. It adds normality and commutatively con-
strains to matrices for relations so as to improve the capability of