modeling analogical inference, and achieves the state-of-the-art
results on link prediction task.
All these methods learn a general embedding for each entity and
relation. They ignore crossover interactions between entities and
relations when inferring a new triple in different scenarios.
KGEs with multiple embeddings. Some KGEs learn multiple
embeddings for entities or relations under various considerations.
Structured Embedding (SE) [ 5] assumes that the head entity and
the tail entity in one triple should be close to each other in some
subspace that depends on the relation. It represents each relation
with two different matrices to transfer head entities and tail en-
tities. ORC [ 44] focuses on the one-relation-circle and proposes
to learn two different representations for each entity, one as a
head entity and the other as a tail entity. TransH [ 38] notices that
TransE has trouble dealing with 1-N, N-1, and N-N relations. It
learns a specific hyperplane for each relation and represents the
relation as a vector close to its hyperplane. Entities are projected
onto the relation hyperplane when involving a triple with this rela-
tion. TransR [ 19] considers that various relations focus on different
aspects of entities. It represents different aspects by projecting en-
tities from entity space to relation space and gets various relation
specific embeddings for each entity. CTransR [ 19] is an extension
of TransR that considers correlations under each relation type by
clustering diverse head-tail entity pairs into groups and learning
distinct relation vectors for each group. TransD [ 13] is a more fine-
grained model which constructs a dynamic mapping matrix for
each entity-relation pair considering the diversity of entities and
relations simultaneously. TranSparse [ 14] is proposed to deal with
the heterogeneity and imbalance of knowledge graph for relations
and entities. It represents transfer matrices with adaptive sparse
matrices and sparse degrees for transfer matrices are determined
by the number of entities linked by this relation.
These methods mostly consider the interaction from relations
to entities and learn multiple representations for entities. But they
learn general embeddings for relations and ignore the interaction
from entities to relations.
KGEs that utilize extra information. Some KGEs learn em-
beddings utilizing not only training triples in a knowledge graph,
but also extra information. RTransE [ 7], PTransE [ 18] and CVSM [ 22]
utilize the path rules as additional constrains to improve embed-
dings. [ 36] considers three types of physical rules and one logical
rule, and formulates the inference in knowledge graph as an integer
linear programming problem. [ 16] and TKRL [ 40] propose that the
hierarchical type information of entities is of great significance for
the representation learning in knowledge graphs. [ 16] regards en-
tity types as hard constraints in latent variable models for KGs and
TKRL regards hierarchical types as projection matrices for entities.
3 CrossE: MODEL DESCRIPTION
In this section we provide details of our model CrossE. Our model
simulates crossover interactions between entities and relations by
learning an interaction matrix to generate multiple specific interac-
tion embeddings.
In our method, each entity and relation is represented by multiple
embeddings: (a) a general embedding , which preserves high-level
properties, and (b) multiple interaction embeddings , which preservespecific properties as results of crossover interactions. The interac-
tion embeddings are obtained through Hadamard products between
general embeddings and an interaction matrix C.
We denote a knowledge graph as K={E ,R,T}, whereE,R
andTare the set of entities, relations and triples respectively. The
number of entities is ne, the number of relations is nr, and the
dimension of embeddings is d. Bold letters denote embeddings.
E∈Rne×dis the matrix of general entity embeddings with each
row representing an entity embedding. Similarly, R∈Rnr×dis the
matrix of general relation embeddings. C∈Rnr×dis the interaction
matrix with each row related to a specific relation.
The basic idea of CrossE is illustrated in Figure 2. The general
embeddings ( Efor entities and Rfor relations) and interaction
matrix Care represented in the shaded boxes. The interaction
embeddings EcandRcare results of crossover interactions between
entities and relations, which are fully specified by the interaction
operation on general embeddings. Thus E,R, and Care parameters
that need to be learned, while EcandRcare not.
𝑬𝑪𝑹General embedding of entityGeneral embedding of relationInteraction matrix
𝑬𝒄𝑹𝒄Interaction embedding of entityInteraction embedding of relationInteraction operation
Figure 2: Overview of CrossE. Crossover interactions between gen-
eral embeddings (E and R) and interaction matrix (C) resulting in
interaction embeddings (unshaded boxes).
We now explain the score function and training objective of
CrossE. Head entity h, tail entity t, and relation rcorrespond to
high dimensional ‘one-hot’ index vectors xh,xtandxrrespectively.
Learned general embeddings of h,randtare written as:
h=x⊤
hE,t=x⊤
tE,r=x⊤
rR (1)
In CrossE, we define a score function for each triple such that valid
triples receive high scores and invalid triples receive low scores.
The score function has four parts and we describe them next.
(1)Interaction Embedding for Entities. To simulate the ef-
fect from relations to head entities, we define the interaction oper-
ation applied to a head entity as:
hI=cr◦h (2)
, where◦denotes Hadamard product , an element-wise operator that
has been proved to be effective and widely used in previous methods,
such as [ 25] and [ 35]. We call hIthe interaction embedding of h.
Here, cr∈R1×dis a relation specific variable which we get from
the interaction matrix Cas in (3). Ascrdepends on relation r, the
number of interaction embeddings of hare the same as relations.
cI=x⊤
IC (3)
(2)Interaction Embedding for Relations. The second inter-
action operation is applied to relations so as to simulate the effects
from head entities. This interaction operation is defined in (4). Sim-
ilar to (2), this is the Hadamard product of hIandrand we call rI
the interaction embedding of r. For each head entity, there is an
interaction embedding of r.
rI=hI◦r (4)