Page 14 of 25 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
academic and research ethics should be strengthened. ” Explicitly stipulating the areas 
where AI is allowed and the procedures for handling suspected cases of misuse will help 
maintain a transparent and equitable learning environment.
(2) Addressing governance of AI: data privacy, transparency, accountability and security
Universities must take responsibility for decisions made regarding the use of gen -
erative AI in teaching and learning, which includes being transparent about data 
collection and usage, and being receptive to feedback and criticism. By disclosing 
information about the implementation of generative AI, including the algorithms 
employed, their functions, and any potential biases or limitations, universities can 
foster trust and confidence among students and staff in AI technology usage. Teach -
ers emphasize the importance of addressing ethical concerns, privacy, security, and 
other related issues when using generative AI technologies. Teachers commented 
“In general, its impact is inevitable. It may negatively affect social consciousness and 
responsibility. Depending on climate change management and its consequences, it may 
contribute to the demise of a significant portion of humanity. It may also protect and 
advance the interests of those who benefit from chaos.”
Privacy and Security: AI technologies rely on vast amounts of data, which raises 
concerns about privacy and security if the data is not adequately protected. “Institu -
tions should ensure that the data used by generative AI technologies is kept private and 
secure. This includes ensuring that any data used in training or testing the technology 
is de-identified, and that appropriate security measures are in place to prevent unau -
thorized access or use of data.”
Transparency and Accountability: Universities should be transparent about the 
use of generative AI in teaching and learning, which includes disclosing information 
about the algorithms and their functions, as well as any potential biases or limitations 
of the AI tools. “It is essential to recognize ethical dilemmas and consider privacy, 
security, and related issues when employing generative AI technologies.”
The complexity of AI technologies can make it difficult to hold organizations and 
individuals accountable for their decisions and actions. Institutions should address 
ethical issues, such as potential discrimination, bias, and stereotypes, while ensuring 
data privacy and security.
(3) Monitoring and evaluating AI implementation
To ensure the success of AI integration in university teaching and learning, con -
tinuous monitoring and evaluation of its implementation are necessary. Teachers rec -
ommend conducting longitudinal experiments in different areas to better understand 
how AI affects students’ learning processes and outcomes. Regular assessments of 
AI’s impact on teaching practices and student performance will help identify areas for 
improvement and ensure that the technology is being used effectively and ethically. 
One student mentioned, “The plan should include more experiments on conducting 
the AI technologies on teaching.” By regularly collecting feedback from both teach -
ers and students, universities can make informed decisions about how to improve AI