Page 8 of 25 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
4. Pilot testing, monitoring and evaluation, and building an evidence base: This rec -
ommendation highlights the importance of testing and evaluating the use of AI in 
education through pilot projects to build an evidence base for its effectiveness. For 
example, policymakers could fund pilot projects that test the use of AI tools in spe -
cific educational contexts or with specific learner populations.
5. Fostering local AI innovations for education: This recommendation suggests that 
policymakers should encourage the development of local innovations in AI for edu -
cation to ensure that it meets the specific needs of their communities. For example, 
policymakers could provide funding or support to local startups or research institu -
tions working on developing new AI tools or applications specifically designed for 
their region’s educational needs.
Using UNESCO’s recommendations as a basis, this study aims to examine higher edu -
cation stakeholders’ perceptions of text generative AI technology. Based on their ideas, 
recommendations, and concerns, an AI education policy framework will be developed 
to promote ethical and effective integration of AI technologies in higher education.
Methodology
In this study, a survey design was utilized to gather data from students, teachers, and 
staff in Hong Kong to develop AI education policy framework for university teaching 
and learning. The survey was administered through an online questionnaire, featuring a 
mix of closed-ended and open-ended questions. The questionnaire was designed based 
on a review of current literature on AI use in higher education. Topics covered in the 
survey were major issues concerning the use of AI in higher education, which included 
the use of generative AI technologies like ChatGPT, the integration of AI technologies 
in higher education, potential risks associated with AI technologies, and AI’s impact on 
teaching and learning.
Data were collected via an online survey from a diverse group of stakeholders in the 
education community, ensuring that the results reflect the needs and values of all par -
ticipants. A convenience sampling method was employed for selecting the respondents, 
based on their availability and willingness to participate in the study. Participants were 
recruited through an online platform and provided with an informed consent form prior 
to completing the survey.
The survey was completed by 457 undergraduate and postgraduate students, as well 
as 180 teachers and staff members across various disciplines in Hong Kong. Descrip -
tive analysis was used to analyse the survey data, while a thematic analysis approach was 
applied to examine the responses from the open-ended questions in the survey.
Quantitative data (survey data) and descriptive analysis
A range of survey items was included to capture different aspects of participants’ usage 
and perception of generative AI technologies like ChatGPT. For example, participants 
were asked whether they have used ChatGPT or similar generative AI technologies 
before and how they envision using these technologies in their teaching and learning 
practices.