Page 17 of 25
 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
 
complementary tools to support learning rather than relying on them as a substitute for 
traditional teaching methods. Students should be encouraged to use AI as an aid to their 
learning process and not solely depend on it for academic success.
(9) Preparing students for the AI-driven workplace
Preparing students for an AI-driven workplace involves teaching them how to use 
AI responsibly, ethically, and effectively. Universities should develop curricula that 
reflect the increasing prominence of AI in various industries, ensuring that students 
are equipped with the skills and knowledge to navigate the evolving workplace land -
scape. This includes teaching students how to integrate AI into their workflows, 
evaluate the effectiveness of AI tools, and understand their role in professional set -
tings. As one teacher notes, “Teaching students how to use it properly and under -
standing its limitations and strengths would be useful. ”
Integrating AI technologies into teaching and learning involves familiarizing stu -
dents with AI tools they will likely encounter during their university studies and in 
the workplace, as mentioned by a student who said, “Teach students how to best use 
AI tools and make AI tools a common part of education, just like PowerPoint and 
Excel.” Teachers suggest guiding students to recognize ethical issues and helping 
them self-appropriate AI in study and work settings.
As the workplace increasingly adopts AI technologies, universities should prepare 
students for this shift. One student stated, “Plans should be implemented to assist 
students in making better and more constructive use of AI in learning, career plan -
ning, and personal development.”
 (10) Developing student holistic competencies/generic skills
Teachers have highlighted the importance of enhancing critical thinking, digital 
literacy, information literacy, and professional ethics among students to help them 
make effective and ethical use of AI technologies. To harness the potential of gen -
erative AI technologies, teachers advocate for an emphasis on teaching students to 
assess the reliability of content, understand biases, and evaluate the accuracy and 
relevance of AI-generated information. One teacher suggests that “Enhancement on 
critical thinking among students is definitely a must, in order to make good use of 
such AI technologies.” Another teacher emphasizes the importance of “Teaching stu -
dents how to use the technology, and how to critique it, is probably central to success -
fully planning for the integration of AI in education.”
To successfully embrace generative AI technologies, universities should prioritize 
fostering critical thinking among students. One student suggested, “Plans on how to 
maintain students’ interest and motivation to engage in deep and critical thinking, 
diversify perspectives and expand horizons.”
Developing holistic competencies and generic skills in students is an essential goal 
of education. “However there are many things, even far more important things, to 
education…: the education of character; rhetoric and analytical skills; public speak -
ing; creativity; memorisation; all embodied skills, ” a teacher argued. Incorporating 
AI technologies into teaching and learning may hinder students’ development of