Page 15 of 25
 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
 
implementation. Evaluating the effectiveness of AI tools in enhancing learning out -
comes is vital in determining their value and making adjustments as needed.
(4) Ensuring equity in access to AI technologies
Ensuring equitable access to AI technologies is crucial for fostering an inclusive 
learning environment. Universities should work to provide resources and support 
to all students and staff, regardless of their background or access to technology. This 
may involve the procurement of AI tools, including AI detectors, for use by the entire 
university community. By promoting equal access to AI technologies, universities can 
help level the playing field and ensure that all students and staff have the opportunity 
to benefit from the advantages offered by AI integration.
Equal access to AI technologies is essential for maintaining fairness in the educa -
tional environment. One teacher commented, “Same as all other resources, to incor -
porate this into current industries (especially education), fairness should be a top 
priority. If the usage involves any kind of competition, e.g. access to ChatGPT should be 
equal for all involved parties.” Another student highlights “Ethical dilemma includes 
ensuring that the technology is not used to discriminate against individuals or groups, 
and that it does not reinforce bias or stereotypes.” Universities should consider how to 
ensure that all students have access and training to AI tools and resources, regardless 
of their socio-economic backgrounds, in order to level the playing field and promote 
inclusivity.
(5) Attributing AI technologies
Attribution is an important aspect of AI policy in university teaching and learn -
ing. One student remarked, “They are welcome to use AI for academic purposes while 
requiring students to state clearly which part was helped by AI. This is similar to the 
references and citation of current academic practice.” By requiring students to attrib -
ute AI-generated content, universities can promote academic integrity and ensure 
that AI technologies are used ethically in the learning process. Furthermore, there 
is a need for guidelines on how to fairly attribute generative AI’s contribution to stu -
dent work. “Ethics of use, knowledge of affordances, effective use, critique/evaluation of 
outputs, and role/integration in workflows/product in study and professional settings” 
may be included in the attribution.
(6) Providing training and support for teachers, staff and students in AI literacy
To ensure successful integration of AI in teaching and learning, universities must 
provide adequate training and support for teachers, staff, and students. Teachers 
express concerns about coping with this new trend, helping students use AI effec -
tively, and learning from student usage. As one teacher puts it, “Staff and students 
need an educative approach to its ethical use.” Investing in training and resources 
can help educators feel more confident and capable in navigating the complexities of 
AI in their classrooms. This is supported by many students and teachers who believe 
that institutions should provide training to faculty and staff on the appropriate use