Page 9 of 25
 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
 
Descriptive analysis was employed to analyse the survey data collected from students 
and teachers in Hong Kong, in order to gain a better understanding of the usage and 
perception of generative AI technologies like ChatGPT in higher education. Descriptive 
analysis is an appropriate statistical method for summarizing and describing the main 
characteristics of the sample and the data collected. It is particularly useful for analysing 
survey data and can provide an overview of the distribution, central tendency, and vari -
ability of the responses.
Qualitative data (open‑ended data) and thematic analysis
Aside from the quantitative part of the survey, respondents were also asked about their 
apprehensions regarding the integration of generative AI technologies and their rec -
ommendations for university strategic plans through open-ended questions. Different 
perspectives and experiences were gathered from the respondents across various disci -
plines. The data from the open-ended questions were analysed using a thematic analy -
sis approach, which involved identifying patterns and themes in the data. An inductive 
approach was used to analyse the responses, where the themes emerged from the data 
rather than being predetermined by the researcher.
The combination of the quantitative and qualitative data enabled a more holistic 
understanding of the usage and perception of generative AI technologies in higher edu -
cation. This allowed for the pinpointing of potential requirements, recommendations, 
and strategies for AI policy in university teaching and learning. This understanding is 
essential for ensuring that the use of these technologies is both beneficial and ethical.
Results
Findings from the quantitative data
The survey was conducted among 457 students and 180 teachers and staff from different 
disciplines in Hong Kong universities. The goal was to explore the kinds of requirements, 
guidelines and strategies necessary for developing AI policies geared towards university 
teaching and learning. The findings reveal valuable insights into the perception of gen -
erative AI technologies like ChatGPT among students and teachers (refer to Table 2).
Regarding the usage of generative AI technologies, both students (mean = 2.28, 
SD = 1.18) and teachers (mean = 2.02, SD = 1.1) reported relatively low experience, sug -
gesting that there is significant room for growth in adoption. Both groups demonstrated 
a belief in the positive impact of integrating AI technologies into higher education (stu -
dents: mean = 4, SD = 0.891; teachers: mean = 3.87, SD = 1.32). This optimism was also 
reflected in the strong agreement that institutions should have plans in place associ -
ated with AI technologies (students: mean = 4.5, SD = 0.854; teachers: mean = 4.54, 
SD = 0.874).
Both students and teachers were open to integrating AI technologies into their 
future teaching and learning practices (students: mean = 3.93, SD = 1.09; teachers: 
mean = 3.92, SD = 1.31). However, there were concerns among both groups about other 
students using AI technologies to get ahead in their assignments (students: mean = 3.67, 
SD = 1.22; teachers: mean = 3.93, SD = 1.12). Interestingly, both students and teachers 
did not strongly agree that AI technologies would replace teachers in the future (stu -
dents: mean = 2.14, SD = 1.12; teachers: mean = 2.26, SD = 1.34).