Page 4 of 25 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
in education. Its blend of Eastern and Western educational philosophies and practices 
offers a fertile ground for examining the impacts and opportunities of AI integration in 
varied educational contexts. Furthermore, as Hong Kong is actively striving to enhance 
its digital learning capabilities and infrastructure, studying AI policy could provide val -
uable insights into the challenges and best practices of implementing AI in education, 
thereby potentially informing AI education strategies not only in Hong Kong but also in 
other global contexts.
The study employed a comprehensive approach to data collection, gathering rich 
quantitative and open-ended survey data from a diverse range of stakeholders in the 
education community to ensure that it reflects the needs and values of all those involved. 
The combination of these data sources allowed for a holistic understanding of the topic 
under investigation, providing a nuanced and multifaceted view of the issues at hand. By 
doing so, we can help to ensure that the use of generative AI in education is both benefi -
cial and ethical.
Existing policy on artificial intelligence
The aim of this study is to investigate the education policy related to AI, however, it is 
essential to also scrutinize the existing policies governing AI as a whole. As AI expands 
its sphere of influence to various sectors in our society, there are increasing concerns 
over the risks of its usage and how it might impact human activities (AI regulation, 
2023; World Economic Forum [WEF], 2023). Some of the major issues of concern that 
have drawn the attention of governments around the world include discrimination and 
bias of AI, loss of privacy, violation of human rights, and malicious use of AI (Greiman, 
2021; Hogenhout, 2021). Federspiel et al. (2023) caution that misuse of AI could encour -
age manipulation of people, create social division, and exacerbate inequalities, posing 
existential threats to the human race. In view of this, countries have been working on 
national policies and strategies to provide clearer guidance on AI usage in order to maxi -
mize its benefits while mitigating the threats brought by it.
To advocate the responsible and proper management of AI technologies, the centre 
of focus for most national policies on AI have fallen on the discussion of ethics, which 
deals with “the standards of right and wrong, acceptable and not acceptable” (Hogen -
hout, 2021, p. 11). Floridi (2021)’s framework for the ethical use of AI, which proposed 
the 5 core principles of “beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice and explica -
bility” , is referred to by most national policies on AI as a foundation to further develop 
on. In addition, Dexe and Franke (2020) summarized the AI strategy documents from 
the Nordic countries and identified various ethical principles as the implicit foundation 
for further developing policies. The official AI governance framework from Singapore 
also recognized the “explainable, transparent and fair usage of AI in decision-making 
process” and “human-centric AI solutions” as the guiding principles of ethical use of AI 
(IMDA & PDPC, 2020). Apart from individual countries, ethics has been the empha -
sis of the AI policies published by regional and international bodies. UNESCO devel -
oped its guidelines on the ethical use of AI technologies by emphasizing the key idea 
of human-centeredness and hence, human rights and values laid out in the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) are advised to be adopted as the necessary foun -
dation to further promote beneficial and appropriate use of AI technologies (UNESCO,