Page 18 of 25 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
competencies such as teamwork, leadership, empathy, and creativity skills. There -
fore, universities need to continuously find opportunities for students to develop 
these skills, preparing them for the AI-driven workplace where they need to be 
adaptable, resilient, and transformational.
Discussion
Triangulating quantitative and qualitative data
The quantitative findings support the key areas found in the qualitative data for AI 
integration in education. The quantitative data reveals that both students and teach -
ers share concerns about the potential misuse of AI technologies, such as ChatGPT, 
in assignments (students: mean 3.67, teachers: mean 3.93). This emphasizes the need 
for guidelines and strategies to prevent academic misconduct. Furthermore, there is 
significant agreement among students and teachers on the necessity for higher educa -
tion institutions to implement a plan for managing the potential risks associated with 
using generative AI technologies (students: mean 4.5, teachers: mean 4.54), highlight -
ing the importance of addressing data privacy, transparency, accountability, and secu -
rity. The overall positive perception of AI technologies integration within education 
implies that proper policies should be in place to ensure responsible AI incorporation 
in higher education.
The concern that some students might use generative AI technologies to gain an 
advantage in their assignments (students: mean 3.67, teachers: mean 3.93) under -
scores the importance of ensuring equal access to AI technologies for all students. 
Moreover, the consensus that students must become proficient in using generative AI 
technologies for their careers (students: mean 4.07, teachers: mean 4.1) highlights the 
need for AI literacy and training for all stakeholders in the educational process, pre -
paring students for the AI-driven workplace.
Interestingly, teachers and students are unsure if teachers can accurately identify a 
student’s use of generative AI technologies to partially complete an assignment (stu -
dents: mean 3.02, teachers: mean 2.72), yet they also believe that AI technologies can 
provide unique insights and perspectives and personalized feedback. This suggests 
that rethinking assessment methods may be necessary.
Data indicating that neither students nor teachers believe AI technologies will 
replace teachers in the future (students: mean 2.14, teachers: mean 2.26) supports the 
need for a balanced approach to AI adoption, utilizing AI technologies as comple -
mentary tools rather than substitutes for traditional teaching methods. Finally, con -
cerns that generative AI technologies could hinder students’ development of generic 
or transferable skills, such as teamwork, problem-solving, and leadership (students: 
mean 3.3, teachers: mean 3.74), emphasize the importance of focusing on students’ 
holistic competencies and generic skills in preparation for the AI-driven workplace.
Key areas versus UNESCO’s recommendations on AI education policy
The original plan for the study was to use UNESCO’s recommendations as a basis 
for developing AI education policy framework for university teaching and learning 
through inputs from various stakeholders to identify any gaps in the framework and