Page 13 of 25
 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
 
students about the rule set are needed.” They also suggested, “Clearly stipulate in which 
areas generative AI technologies are allowed and which are not. What are the procedures 
to handle suspended cases? What are the consequences?” Another student mentioned 
that “the level of restriction should be clarified.” Both teachers and students have also 
suggested the use of assessments that minimize opportunities for AI misuse, such as oral 
examinations or controlled settings where internet access is limited, to help maintain 
academic integrity. Both teachers and students have also questioned “what is the defini -
tion of cheating?” in this AI era.
Teachers highlight the importance of identifying ethical dilemmas and recommend 
familiarizing students with ethical issues, such as the boundaries between plagiarism 
and inspiration and appropriate situations for seeking help from AI. Establishing clear 
policies around AI use, including ethical guidelines and legal responsibilities, will help 
students and staff navigate these complex issues. One teacher noted, “The education on Table 3 Main themes and subthemes of qualitative data
Main themes Subthemes
1. Understanding, identifying and preventing aca-
demic misconduct and ethical dilemmasDevelop guidelines and strategies for detecting and 
preventing the misuse of generative AI
Identify ethical dilemmas
Familiarize students with ethical issues
2. Addressing governance of AI: Data privacy, transpar -
ency, accountability and securityBe transparent about decisions concerning AI use
Ensure data privacy and security
Address ethical issues such as bias and stereotypes
3. Monitoring and evaluating AI implementation Conduct longitudinal experiments to examine the 
effects of AI use
Collect feedback from teachers and students to make 
informed decisions
4. Ensuring equity in access to AI technologies Provide resources and support to all students and staff
Ensure all students have access and training to AI tools
5. Attributing AI technologies Promote academic integrity in AI use
Develop guidelines on how to attribute generative AI’s 
contribution to student work
6. Providing training and support for teachers, staff 
and students in AI literacyEnhance staff confidence and competence through 
adequate training
Teach students how to use and critique the use of AI 
technologies
Provide education on ethics; knowledge of the affor -
dances, use, and limitations; and capability to evaluate 
AI outputs
7. Rethinking assessments and examinations Design assessments that integrate AI technologies to 
enhance learning outcomes
Develop assessment strategies that focus on students’ 
critical thinking and analysis
8. Encouraging a balanced approach to AI adoption Recognize the potential benefits and limitations of 
generative AI technologies
Avoid over-reliance on AI technologies
Use AI technologies as complementary tools
9. Preparing students for the AI-driven workplace Teach students how to use AI responsibly
Develop curricula that equip students with AI skills and 
knowledge
Familiarize students with AI tools they will encounter for 
university studies and future workplace
10. Developing student holistic competencies/generic 
skillsEnhance students’ critical thinking to help them use AI 
technologies effectively
Provide opportunities for developing competencies that 
are impeded by AI use such as teamwork and leadership