Page 2 of 25 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
students had used a form of AI, such as essay-generating software, to complete their 
coursework (Intelligent.com, 2023). About one-third of college students surveyed (sam -
ple size 1000) in the US have utilized the AI chatbot such as ChatGPT to complete writ -
ten homework assignments, with 60% using the programme on more than half of their 
assignments. ChatGPT types of generative AI tools is capable of imitating human writ -
ing, with some students using it to cheat. The study found that 75% of students believe 
that using the programme for cheating is wrong but still do it, and nearly 30% believe 
their professors are unaware of their use of the tool. The study also noted that some pro -
fessors are considering whether to include ChatGPT in their lessons or join calls to ban 
it, with 46% of students saying their professors or institutions have banned the tool for 
homework. This has led to calls for stricter regulations and penalties for academic mis -
conduct involving AI.
Another concern is that the use of generative AI may lead to a decline in students’ 
writing and critical thinking skills (Civil, 2023; Warschauer et al., 2023), as they become 
more reliant on automated tools to complete their work. Some academics argue that 
this could have a negative impact on the quality of education and ultimately harm the 
students’ learning outcomes (Chan & Lee, 2023; Korn & Kelly, 2023; Oliver, 2023; Zhai, 
2022).
These concerns have led some universities to ban the use of generative AI in their aca -
demic programmes. Eight out of 24 universities in the prestigious UK Russell Group 
have declared the use of the AI bot for assignments as academic misconduct including 
Oxford and Cambridge. Meanwhile, many other universities around the world, are rush -
ing to review their plagiarism policies citing concerns about academic integrity (Wood, 
2023; Yau & Chan, 2023). Some Australian universities have had to alter their exam and 
assessment procedures back to pen- and paper-based (Cassidy, 2023; Cavendish, 2023).
However, there are also those who argue that generative AI has the potential to revolu -
tionize education and enhance the learning experience for students. For example, some 
experts suggest that generative AI could be used to provide personalized feedback and 
support to students,  helping them to identify areas of weakness and improve their skills 
in an adaptive manner (Kasneci et al, 2023; Sinhaliz et al., 2023).
Generative AI and generative pre‑trained transformers
Generative AI is a subset of artificial intelligence (AI) that focuses on creating new data 
or content rather than analysing and interpreting existing data (McKinsey Consultant, 
2023). Generative Pre-trained Transformers (GPT) are a type of generative AI model 
that use deep learning techniques to generate natural language text. The latest versions 
of GPT, GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, large language models which are trained on a large cor -
pus of text data, are capable of producing human-like text with high levels of coherence, 
complexity, and diversity. GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 are both examples of artificial general 
intelligence (AGI), which is the ability of AI systems to perform any intellectual task that 
a human can do. Unlike artificial narrow intelligence (ANI), which is designed to per -
form a specific task, AGI is designed to perform multiple tasks and generalize knowl -
edge across different domains. While GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 are not true AGI systems, they 
represent significant progress towards achieving AGI by demonstrating the ability to