Page 7 of 25
 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
 
encouraged to engage further with policymakers through their work on ethics in the use 
of AI in education (Sam & Olbrich, 2023; Schiff, 2022). In view of this gap, this research 
intends to propose a policy framework for integrating AI in higher education, taking into 
consideration aspects of teaching and learning as well as ethical and practical concerns.
In this research, we will employ the guidelines put forth by UNESCO (2021a) as 
the starting point for crafting a more accurate AI policy for university teaching and 
learning. The rationale for employing UNESCO recommendations as the basis is mul -
tifaceted. First, UNESCO is an esteemed international organisation with significant 
expertise in education, their recommendations are supported by thorough research 
and knowledge from experts worldwide. These recommendations are designed to be 
relevant and flexible for a variety of educational systems and cultural settings, making 
them suitable for diverse institutions. UNESCO’s guidelines also take a comprehen -
sive approach to incorporating AI in education, addressing important ethical, social, 
economic, and technological aspects essential for creating effective policies. Using an 
existing framework like UNESCO’s recommendations saves time and resources and 
provides a well-organized starting point for examining specific AI policy issues in 
university teaching and learning. Finally, anchoring the study in UNESCO’s recom -
mendations enhances the credibility of the research.
The UNESCO framework for AI in education is centred around a humanistic 
approach, which aims to safeguard human rights and provide individuals with the 
necessary skills and values for sustainable development, as well as effective human–
machine collaboration in life, learning, and work. The framework prioritizes human 
control over AI and ensures that it is utilized to improve the capabilities of both 
teachers and students. Moreover, the framework calls for ethical, transparent, non-
discriminatory, and auditable design of AI applications. From the UNESCO’s AI and 
Education: Guidance for Policy-Makers document, the following recommendations 
are provided:
1. Interdisciplinary planning and inter-sectoral governance: This recommendation 
suggests that AI and education policies should be developed through collaboration 
between different sectors and disciplines to ensure a comprehensive approach. For 
example, policymakers could work with experts in education, technology, ethics, and 
other relevant fields to develop policies that take into account all aspects of AI in 
education.
2. Policies on equitable, inclusive, and ethical use of AI: This recommendation empha -
sizes the importance of ensuring that AI is used in an ethical and inclusive man -
ner that benefits all learners. For example, policymakers could develop policies that 
address issues such as bias in AI algorithms or access to AI tools for learners from 
disadvantaged backgrounds.
3. Develop a master plan for using AI for education management, teaching, learning, 
and assessment: This recommendation suggests that policymakers should develop a 
comprehensive plan for using AI in various aspects of education to ensure its effec -
tive implementation. For example, a master plan could include specific goals for 
using AI in areas such as personalized learning or teacher professional development.