Page 16 of 25 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
of generative AI technologies in teaching and learning. “This training should include 
information on selecting appropriate technologies, using them effectively, and manag -
ing the risks associated with their use, ” they say. In addition, “teaching students how 
to use the technology and how to critique it is probably central to successfully plan -
ning for the integration of AI in education.” Students suggest that “teaching students 
the potential of using generative AI properly and critically can benefit from students 
using AI hiddenly” and “relying on tools able to detect the use of a generative language 
model, while being aware of the limits of such tools.”
AI literacy is crucial for both students and staff as they navigate the use of genera -
tive AI in teaching and learning. Teachers emphasize the need for education on eth -
ics, knowledge of AI tool affordances, effective use (e.g., prompt engineering), critique 
and evaluation of outputs, and the role of AI in study and professional settings. A com -
prehensive AI literacy programme will help students and staff better understand and 
responsibly utilize AI technologies in their academic and professional lives. By providing 
training and resources on AI technologies, universities can empower students and staff  
to make informed decisions about their use and potential applications in teaching and 
learning.
(7) Rethinking assessments and examinations
The integration of generative AI in education calls for a re-evaluation of assessments 
and examinations. Teachers suggest designing assessments that allow AI technologies 
to enhance learning outcomes, rather than solely producing outputs. For example, one 
teacher recommends “Promote assessments and activities where students can by them -
selves discover the limits of such techniques—and relativize the idea that they could be 
useful to ‘cheat’ .” This shift may necessitate the development of new assessment methods 
that balance the benefits of AI with the need to maintain academic integrity. A student 
stated, “Change of assessment methods to measure the true ‘understanding’ of students 
instead of the ability to collect information (which can easily be done with AI tools).” 
Universities may need to develop new assessment strategies that focus on students’ 
understanding, critical thinking, and analysis to prevent AI-generated content from 
compromising the assessment process. A teacher noted that “… it is hard to assess most 
of them, so we fall back on regurgitation” , a change is necessary.
(8) Encouraging a balanced approach to AI adoption
A balanced approach to AI adoption in university teaching and learning involves rec -
ognizing both the potential benefits and limitations of generative AI technologies. One 
teacher suggests, “Be positive about this technological evolution and incorporate it to 
develop new assignments and assessment. ” This approach requires flexibility, striking a 
balance between embracing new technology for its potential to enhance efficiency and 
productivity while maintaining a focus on critical thinking and ethical considerations. 
It is also important to encourage a balanced approach to AI adoption to avoid over-
reliance on these technologies. “We should learn how AI can assist us, but not replace 
schoolwork, ” one teacher advised. This approach involves using AI technologies as