Page 19 of 25
 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
 
modified accordingly. Although the recommendations from UNESCO can provide a 
high-level guideline for this study, it was clear that there are several key differences 
between UNESCO recommendations and the ten key areas that were identified for 
integrating AI in university teaching and learning.
As the UNESCO’s AI and Education: Guidance for Policy-Makers was written 
before the availability of GPT 3.5 and 4, the recommendations would not have fully 
addressed the current opportunities and threats of the advances in the GPT technolo -
gies for education.
Moreover, the UNESCO recommendations are intended for education in general and 
do not specifically cater to the needs of university teaching and learning. The UNESCO 
recommendations are high-level and general aimed at helping policy-makers better 
understand the possibilities and implications of AI for teaching and learning to help 
achieve Sustainable Development Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality educa -
tion and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all (UNESCO, 2021a), while the ten 
key areas are more specific, practical, and tailored to university teaching and learning. 
Furthermore, most of the existing AI education policies tend to emphasize the instru -
mental role of AI for workforce development (Schiff, 2022), but the key areas based on 
the findings of this study also address the transformative potential and ethical considera -
tions relating to AI use in higher education in addition to its instrumental purposes.
The ten key areas were developed based on direct input from stakeholders who have 
vested interests in university teaching and learning, which makes them more relevant 
and grounded in practice. For example, UNESCO’s recommendation to develop a mas -
ter plan for using AI for education management, teaching, learning, and assessment 
emphasizes the need for a comprehensive and strategic approach to integrating AI in 
various aspects of education. This includes not only teaching and learning but also the 
broader aspects of education management, such as administration, resource allocation, 
and policy development. The focus here is on creating an overarching framework that 
guides the implementation of AI in education as a whole. On the other hand, the key 
area derived from the qualitative findings of rethinking assessments and examinations 
delves deeper into a specific aspect of education: the evaluation of students’ learning. 
This area acknowledges that the integration of generative AI in education necessitates a 
re-evaluation of traditional assessment methods. The focus here is on designing assess -
ments that allow AI technologies to enhance learning outcomes while maintaining 
academic integrity. This involves developing new assessment strategies that focus on stu -
dents’ understanding, critical thinking, and analysis rather than just their ability to col -
lect information. In short, UNESCO’s recommendations highlight the “what” , whereas 
the ten key areas of this study detail the “how” of AI education policy.
In essence, the difference between these two areas lies in their scope and focus. 
UNESCO’s recommendation is broader, encompassing various aspects of education 
and advocating for a comprehensive master plan. Its primary target is policymakers. In 
contrast, the key area on rethinking assessments and examinations is more specific and 
user centred, catering for various higher education stakeholders including students and 
teachers as well as addressing the challenges and opportunities associated with AI inte -
gration in university teaching and learning.