Page 5 of 25
 Chan  Int J Educ Technol High Educ           (2023) 20:38 
 
2021b, 2023). AI strategy in the European Union, as Renda’s (2020) analysis pointed out, 
also focused on ethics and highlighted a human-centric approach to AI. In order to pro -
tect EU citizens from the danger of abusive use of advanced technologies, EU proposed 
its own pillars (legal compliance, ethical alignment and sociotechnical robustness) to 
ensure the trustworthiness of AI and established a specific AI expert group to work on 
specific policy recommendations and guidelines.
The heavy focus that these national and regional policies has placed on ethics dem -
onstrates how limited they can do for the implementation of AI technologies. On the 
one hand, difficulty to lay down a universal definition on ethical principles becomes a 
hinderance for certain countries in formulating policies on the use of AI (Dexe & Franke, 
2020). On the other hand, as AI can weave into the fabrics of everyday human activi -
ties, the resulting wide coverage of policy areas ranging from governance to education 
and even to environment makes it a challenging task for government to establish specific 
policies on AI usage (UNESCO, 2021b). Thus, as the Singaporean AI governance frame -
work highlighted, model framework or ethical guidelines were in themselves directional 
and for reference only, and AI practitioners need to consider them with flexibility and 
according to the relevance of particular situations (IMDA & PDPC, 2020).
Moving forward, the ongoing efforts of national and international organizations to 
ensure the positive implementation of AI technologies will continue to prioritize discus -
sions and the formulation of legal and ethical principles (AI regulation, 2023; UNESCO, 
2023). However, until these principles are validated by real-time implementation of AI 
technologies, they will remain primarily predictive and prescriptive in nature (Chatter -
jee, 2020). Over time, it may become necessary for countries to establish institutional 
support systems to effectively manage AI practices in accordance with validated legal 
and ethical guidelines (Renda, 2020).
Table 1 Compilation of fundamental ethical principles (IMDA &PDPC, 2020)
Fundamental ethical principles for AI
1. Accountability: Ensure AI actors are held responsible for the AI systems’ functioning and adherence to ethical 
principles
2. Accuracy: Recognize and communicate sources of error and uncertainty in algorithms and data to inform 
mitigation procedures
3. Auditability: Allow third parties to examine and review algorithm behavior through transparent information 
disclosure
4. Explainability: Ensure that algorithmic decisions and underlying data can be explained in layman’s terms
5. Fairness: Prevent discriminatory impacts, include monitoring mechanisms, and consult diverse perspectives 
during system development
6. Human Centricity and Well-being: Prioritize the well-being and needs of humans in AI development and 
implementation
7. Human rights alignment: Ensure technologies do not violate internationally recognized human rights
8. Inclusivity: Make AI accessible to everyone
9. Progressiveness: Favour projects with significantly greater value than their alternatives
10. Responsibility, accountability, and transparency: Build trust through responsibility, accountability, and fairness, 
provide avenues for redress, and maintain records of design processes
11. Robustness and Security: Ensure AI systems are safe, secure, and resistant to tampering or data compromise
12. Sustainability: Favour implementations that provide long-lasting, beneficial insights and can predict future 
behavior