target and the input content, respectively. When we use nat-
ural images for content, tsrcis simply set as “Photo”.
PatchCLIP loss: Although the proposed Ldirshows good
performance in modifying the pre-trained generative model,
it does not perfectly match to ours because our goal is to
apply the semantic texture of tstyto a given content image.
It is also shown in our result that solely using Ldirin our
framework decreased the quality of the output.
To overcome the shortcomings of existing CLIP losses,
we propose a novel PatchCLIP loss for texture transfer. In-
spired by the idea of the original style loss in Gatys et al. [7],
which is to deliver the spatially invariant information, we
found that a similar effect can be obtained by minimizing
CLIP loss functions with respect to group of patches that
are extracted from Icsin arbitrary locations.
Specifically, we randomly crop sufficient number of
patches from Ics. At this stage, the size of the cropped im-
age is fixed. For all of Ncropped patches ˆIN
cs, we apply
random geometrical augmentation to the cropped patches
before calculating the CLIP directional loss. Inspired by
Frans et al. [5], we found that using augmentations on each
patch assist the network to represent more vivid and diverse
textures.
Although there are many possible types of augmenta-
tions, we propose to use perspective augmentation. With
using perspective augmentation, all patches are guided to
have the same semantic when viewed in multiple points so
that the semantic information of the CLIP model can be re-
constructed as more 3D-like structures.
Threshold rejection: Due to the stochastic randomness of
patch sampling and augmentations, our method often suffer
from over-stylization in which the style network fis opti-
mized on specific patches that are easy to minimize the loss
scores. To alleviate the problem, we include regularization
to reject the gradient optimization process for high-scored
patches. With a given threshold value τ, we simply nullify
the calculated loss of corresponding patches. Therefore, our
proposed patch-wise CLIP loss is defined as:
∆T=ET(tsty)−ET(tsrc),
∆I=EI(aug(ˆIi
cs))−EI(Ic),
li
patch = 1−∆I·∆T
|∆I||∆T|,
Lpatch =1
NNX
iR(li
patch, τ) (3)
where R(s, τ) =(
0,ifs≤τ
s, otherwise
where ˆIi
csis the i-th cropped patch from the output image,
augis random perspective augmentation, and R(·,·)repre-
sents the threshold function.Total loss: For overall loss function, we use four differ-
ent losses. First, we use standard directional CLIP loss
Ldirto modulate the whole part of the content image (e.g.
color tone, global semantics). Second, we add our proposed
PatchCLIP loss Lpatch for local texture stylization. On top
of CLIP loss functions, to maintain the content information
of input image, we include the content loss Lcwith calcu-
lating the mean-square error between the features of content
and output images extracted from the pre-trained VGG-19
networks similar to the existing work by Gatys et al. [7]. Fi-
nally, to alleviate the side artifacts from irregular pixels, we
include the total variation regularization loss Ltv. There-
fore, our total loss function is formulated as:
Ltotal=λdLdir+λpLpatch+λcLc+λtvLtv (4)
4. Results
4.1. Experiment settings
Our content image can have any resolution sizes, but
considering the resource capacity, we use 512 ×512 reso-
lution for all content images. For training, we set λd,λp,
λc, andλtvas5×102,9×103,150, and2×10−3, respec-
tively. For the content loss, similar to Gatys et al. [7], we
use the features of layers “conv4 2” and “conv5 2” for the
content loss.
For the neural network f, we use lightweight U-net [22]
architecture which has three downsample and three upsam-
ple layers, in which the channel sizes are 16,32 and 64 for
each downsample layers. For stable training, we include
sigmoid function at the last layer of f, so that the pixel value
range is within the range of [0,1]. For training the network,
we use Adam optimizer with learning rate of 5×10−4. The
total training iteration is set as 200, and we decreased the
learning rate to half at the iteration of 100. The training
time is about 40 seconds per text on a single RTX2080Ti
GPU.
For patch cropping, we use the patch size of 128 as our
default setting since it shows best perceptual quality. We
can obtain various effects with varying the crop size. The
total number of cropped patches is set as n= 64 . For per-
spective augmentation, we use the function provided by Py-
torch library. Detailed implementation is in Supplementary
Materials. For threshold rejection, we set τas 0.7 in which
the result has the best visual quality.
In order to reduce the noise of text embedding, we use
a prompt engineering technique proposed by Radford et al.
[21]. Specifically, we make several texts with same mean-
ing, and feed them to the text encoder. Then we use the
averaged embedding instead of original single text condi-
tions. Finally, for better visualization for readers, we ap-
ply same contrast enhancement techniques for all outputs
including baselines. Please refer to our Github repository:
https://github.com/cyclomon/CLIPstyler.
18065