Figure 3. Style transfer results on various query text conditions. Our method can synthesize realistic textures which reflect the text
conditions. Additional results are in our Supplementary Materials.
4.2. Qualitative evaluations
Figure 1 and 3 show representative style transfer results
from our methods. With corresponding text conditions, we
can successfully convert image style that matches the text
condition without changing the content of the image. In the
result images, we can do style transfer not only for artistic
styles, but also for a wide range of general texture styles. In
particular, since we give conditions through text conditions,
it is possible to control not only the texture type, but also
the detailed conditions of each style. For example, we can
give additional information of color with textures in using
text conditions such as “white wool” and “green crystal”.
We can also choose which kind of ‘object’ to use as target
texture. In the results of Figure 1, we can choose the texture
type (“oil painting”) and pattern object (“flowers”) simulta-
neously, so that more abundant effects can be obtained by
our method.
4.3. Comparison with baselines
Comparison with existing style transfer: Although our
method does not follow the conventional framework of styletransfer which require style images, we can indirectly com-
pare our results with existing style transfer methods. Since
the CLIP model is trained on a wide range of natural im-
ages as well as artistic images, we can transfer the styles
of famous artworks with corresponding text conditions and
compare them with the existing methods. For baselines, we
choose various state-of-the-art artistic style transfer meth-
ods which includes arbitrary style transfer (AdaAttn [18],
SANet [19], CST [23], and AdaIN [9]), and pixel optimiza-
tion [7].
In Fig. 4, the results from our method show similar style
transfer results to the baseline method in spite of using only
text conditions. In the first to third rows, we compare the
artistic style transfer performance of our text-guided style
transfer with those of the baselines. For the case of early
baseline models of AdaIN [9] and Gatys et. al. [7], the out-
puts show limitation in expressing the target texture style
with only concentrating on major color changes. The re-
sults by the recent style transfer methods of AdaAttn [18],
SANet [19], and CST [23] have complex texture informa-
tion with preserving the structure of content images. Our
18066