Figure 9. Results from our fast style transfer methods.
high-resolution texture images of DIV2k [1]. For faster
training, we employ a pre-trained VGG encoder-decoder
network rather than the U-Net as the style network f, and
only the decoder network is fine-tuned. In training step,
we used the same loss functions, but we did not crop the
sub-patches because the input patches are already cropped
from large images. We update the model for 200 steps with
Adam optimizer using learning rate of 1×10−4. The over-
all training time is ∼40 seconds. For inference, it take less
than 0.5sec per content image. Further details are in Sup-
plementary Material.
Fig. 9 is the results from our fast style transfer method.
Since we trained the model with diverse texture inputs, we
can conduct style transfer on arbitrary content images in
real-time. We can see that the result images reflected the
semantic texture of the text condition. Comparing with our
results trained with single content image in Figs. 1 and 3,
we can obtain similar texture transfer quality in our faster
style transfer settings. Also, the results can adapt to any
kind of content inputs with different structural diversities.
However, in some cases (e.g. “Neon Light”,“Fire”), the
images have textures on unnecessary regions such as back-
ground. Still, the results show that our fast transfer enables
high-quality style transfer for arbitrary content images.
Figure 10. High-resolution style transfer results from our fast style
transfer methods. Left: content image. Right: style transfer output
with text condition of “A sketch with black pencil”. Image resolu-
tion is 3000 ×2000. It takes about 4 seconds to process the image.
5.2. High-resolution style transfer
Since our fast style transfer can be adapted to any kinds
of content images with patch-based training, we can transfer
the style with higher resolution content images. The train-
ing scheme is same as our fast style transfer method. After
training the VGG model, we can feed the high-resolution
image to trained network for style transfer. In Figure 10,
we can change the style of input to given text conditions
while maintaining the details of the content. More results
are in Supplementary Materials.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a novel image style transfer
framework to transfer the semantic texture information
only using text condition. Using novel patchCLIP loss and
augmentation scheme, we obtained realistic style transfer
results by simply changing the text conditions without ever
requiring any style images. Experimental results demon-
strated that our framework produced the state-of-the-art
image style transfer. For the discussions on limitations and
social impacts, please refer to our Supplementary Materials.
Acknowledgement: This research was supported by Field-
oriented Technology Development Project for Customs
Administration through National Research Foundation of
Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science & ICT and
Korea Customs Service(NRF-2021M3I1A1097938), and
supported by Institute of Information & communications
Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by
the Korea government(MSIT) (No.2019-0-00075, Artificial
Intelligence Graduate School Program(KAIST))
18069