the methods require style images in order to make the con-
tent image to follow the texture of the target style.
2.2. Text-guided synthesis
In the existing text-guided image synthesis, the encoders
for text embedding work as guide conditions for generative
models. Zhang et al. [28, 29] integrated text conditions to
multi-scale generative model for high-quality image syn-
thesis. AttnGAN [25] further improved the performance
with attention mechanism on text and image features. Mani-
GAN [14] proposed a modules for simultaneously embed-
ding the text and image features.
Recently, OpenAI introduced CLIP [21] which is a
high-performance text-image embedding models trained on
400M text-image pairs. CLIP model have shown a state-
of-the-art performance on connecting text and image do-
main. With powerful representation embedding of CLIP,
there are several approaches which can manipulate the im-
age with text conditions. StyleCLIP [20] performed at-
tribute manipulation with exploring learned latent space of
StyleGAN [12]. They successfully controlled the genera-
tion process by finding an appropriate vector direction to-
wards the given text condition. However, StyleCLIP has
limitation as the latent exploration can manipulate images
within the trained domain. Therefore, StyleGAN-NADA
[6] proposed a model modification method with using text
condition only, and modulates the trained model into a novel
domain without additional training images.
Although these models could manipulate the images
with text conditions, they are heavily dependent on pre-
trained generative models. Therefore, the generated images
are confined to trained image domains. In our model, we
can transfer the texture of text conditions to the source im-
age regardless of the domain of images, which was not con-
sidered in the aforementioned generative model based ma-
nipulations.
3. Method
3.1. Basic framework of CLIPstyler
As emphasized before, the purpose of our framework is
to transfer the semantic style of target text tstyto the con-
tent image Icthrough the pre-trained text-image embedding
model CLIP [21]. The major difference from the existing
methods is that in our model, there is no style image Isto
use as a reference.
Since our model aims to obtain semantically transformed
images with a sole supervision from CLIP, we have several
technical issues to solve: 1) how to extract the semantic
‘texture’ information from CLIP model and apply the tex-
ture to the content image, and 2) how to regularize the train-
ing so that the output image is not qualitatively impaired.
The specified architecture of our method is shown in
Figure 2. Overall schematics of our proposed patch-wise CLIP
loss. We optimize the neural network fusing the loss functions.
Fig. 2. When a content image Icis given, we aim to ob-
tain the style transfer output Ics. Unfortunately, we experi-
mentally found that the desired texture is not reflected when
using traditional pixel optimization method. To solve the
problem, we introduced a CNN encoder-decoder model f
that can capture the hierarchical visual features of the con-
tent image and simultaneously stylize the image in deep fea-
ture space to obtain a realistic texture representation. There-
fore, our stylized image Icsisf(Ic), and our final goal is to
optimize the parameter of fso that it can make the output
to have target texture.
3.2. Loss function
CLIP loss: To guide the content image to follow the se-
mantic of target text, the simplest CLIP-based image ma-
nipulation approach [20] is to minimize the global clip loss
function which is formulated as:
Lglobal =DCLIP(f(Ic), tsty), (1)
where DCLIP is the CLIP-space cosine distance. This loss
function transforms the output image of the whole frame
to follow the semantic of the textual condition. However,
when such global CLIP loss is used, often the output qual-
ity is corrupted, and the stability is low in the optimization
process.
To solve the problem, StyleGAN-NADA [6] proposed a
directional CLIP loss that aligns the CLIP-space direction
between the text-image pairs of source and output. So, we
also employ the directional CLIP loss, which can be defined
in our case as:
∆T=ET(tsty)−ET(tsrc),
∆I=EI(f(Ic))−EI(Ic),
Ldir= 1−∆I·∆T
|∆I||∆T|, (2)
where EIandETare the image and text encoders of CLIP,
respectively; and tsty,tsrcare the semantic text of the style
18064