by calculating the style loss that matches the Gram matrices
of the content and style features. Their style loss has be-
come a standard in later works including stylization through
pixel optimization for a single content image [3], arbitrary
style transfer which operates in real-time for various style
images [9, 16, 18, 27], and optimizing feedforward network
for stylizing each image [10, 24].
Although these approaches for style transfer can success-
fully create visually pleasing new artworks by transferring
styles of famous artworks to common images, they require
a reference style image to change the texture of the content
image. However, in many practical applications, reference
style images are not available to users, but the users are still
interested in ‘imitiating’ the texture of the style images. For
example, users can imagine being able to convert their own
photos into Monet or Van Gogh styles without ever owning
paintings by the famous painters. Or you can convert your
daylight images into night images by mere imagination. In
fact, to overcome this limitation of the existing style trans-
fer and create a truly creative artwork, we should be able to
transfer a completely novel style that we imagine.
Toward this goal, several methods have attempted to ma-
nipulate images with a text condition which conveys the de-
sired style. Using pre-trained text-image embedding mod-
els, these method usually deliver semantic information of
text condition to the visual domain. However, these meth-
ods often have disadvantages in that semantics are not prop-
erly reflected due to the performance limitations of the em-
bedding model [28, 29], and the manipulation is restricted
to a specific content domain (such as human face) as the
method heavily rely on pre-trained generative models [20].
To address this, here we propose a novel image style
transfer method to deliver the semantic textures of text
conditions using recently proposed text-image embedding
model of CLIP [21]. Specifically, rather than resorting to
pixel-optimization or manipulating the instance normaliza-
tion layer as in AdaIN [9], we propose to train a lightweight
CNN network that can express the texture information with
respect to text conditions and produce realistic and color-
ful results. More specifically, the content image is trans-
formed by the lightweight CNN to follow the text condition
by matching the similarity between the CLIP model output
of transferred image and the text condition. Furthermore,
when the network is trained for multiple content images,
our method enables text-driven style transfer regardless of
content images.
Our method comes from several technical innovations in
the implementation. First, instead of optimizing the loss
by using the image directly, we propose to use a patch-
wise CLIP loss to guide the network to function as a brush-
stroke. Specifically, to calculate the proposed loss, we first
sample patches of the output image and apply augmenta-
tion with different perspective views. Afterwards, we ob-tain the CLIP loss by calculating the similarity between the
query text condition and the processed patches. By apply-
ing this patch-wise CLIP loss, we found that we can transfer
styles to each local area of the content image. Furthermore,
the augmentation induces the patch style to be more vivid
and diverse. Additionally, to overcome the patch-dependent
over-stylization problem, we propose a novel threshold reg-
ularization so that the patches with abnormally high scores
do not affect the network training.
Extensive experimental results show that our model can
transfer a variety of unique styles based on text conditions,
which enable a wider range of style transfer than the exist-
ing methods using style images.
2. Related works
2.1. Style Transfer
Inspired by Gatys et al. [7] who proposed an iterative
pixel-optimization by jointly minimizing content and style
losses, Johnson et al. [10] and Ulyanov et al. [24] proposed
to train a stylization feed-forward network with using the
same loss function by Gatys et al. [7]. By extending the
aforementioned single-content style transfer approaches, Li
et al. [16, 17] proposed the whitening and coloring trans-
form (WCT) method to transform the content features to
follow the statistic of style features. Huang et al. [9] pro-
posed Adaptive Instance Normalization (AdaIN) in which
the mean and standard deviation of the style image features
are applied to normalized feature statistics of content im-
ages. Li et al. [15] proposed a linear transformation between
content and style features for fast style transfer on images
and videos.
Recently, Yoo et al. [27] proposed a wavelet transform
based WCT for better preservation of content information
for photo-realistic style transfer. Park et al. [19] proposed
a style attentional network (SANet) so that the style can
refer the content feature information. Svoboda et al. [23]
proposed style transfer with graph convolutional network to
combine style and content in latent spaces. Deng et al. [2]
suggested multiple adaptation module which use spatial at-
tention as content feature and channel attention as style fea-
tures.
More recently, Liu et al. [18] proposed adaptive attention
normalization as a improved attention-based style transfer
of SANet [19]. Xu et al. [26] proposed a new framework
of dynamic residual block to integrate style and content
features of generative models. Hong et al. [8] introduce
a domain-aware style transfer method in which the model
transfer the domain-aware information along with style.
Kotovenko et al. [13] focused on the brushstroke property
of Bezier curves, and proposed to optimize parameters of
modelled quadratic Bezier curves instead of pixels.
Although these methods have shown successful results,
18063