Figure 4. Comparison results with baseline style transfer methods. In contrast to the baselines, the results from our method is stylized only
using a text condition without any style image. Although our method does not have style reference, the output image has complex texture
which follows the semantics of the text conditions.
result has also vivid texture patterns of artworks in various
locations, without damaging the structure of original con-
tent shape.
For further comparison with non-artistic styles, we in-
clude style transfer result in the last row of Fig. 4. Since the
baseline style transfer methods are mostly trained on art-
works, we can see that the baseline style transfer methods
have difficulty in transferring the texture of the non-artistic
styles. However, our method can successfully extract the
semantic textures from the query text and apply them to the
content image.
Comparison with text-guided manipulation models:
Figure 5 shows the result of comparison between our model
and the baseline text-guided manipulation methods. As for
baselines, we choose state-of-the-art methods which use
CLIP model and a pre-trained StyleGAN. Since the base-
line models are trained on human face, we experimented
with images of CelebA-HQ [11]. In the results, our method
can express realistic textures on the content images, which
are matched to the query text conditions.
Specifically, in the result of StyleGAN-NADA [6], the
content images are modified to follow the text condition,
but only a part of the content image can be changed, or the
changes do not sufficiently reflect the semantics of the text
condition. The result in the last row of Figure 5 shows how
our approach and StyleGAN-NADA differ in the way they
accept text conditions. Since our model focus on textures,
the model apply artistic style (e.g. Van Gogh style) to the
entire image, but Style-NADA changed the face identity as
it focused on the text condition itself. In the results of Style-
Figure 5. Comparison with other text-guided manipulation mod-
els. Our results have more realistic textures on the entire location.
Baseline models show limited change, and in some cases the con-
tents of the image are modified.
CLIP [20], since the method can manipulate images within
the learned latent domain, all of the results except for the
third row failed to transform the images.
For further comparison, as our method is based on the
network weight optimization (or fine-tuning) using CLIP
loss, we also investigate whether other manipulation ap-
proaches can produce better style transfer by combining
with CLIP loss. First, we combine CLIP-loss with the pixel
optimization similar to Gatys et al. [7]. Second, we only
18067