Figure 6. Ablation study results. Each columns annotated with alphabets are the style transfer outputs (a) with using entire losses, (b) with
removing Ldir, (c) with removing threshold rejection, (d) with removing augmentation, (e) with replacing perspective augmentation to
random affine transformation, (f) with removing our proposed Lpatch .
Figure 7. Comparison study on various manipulation approaches.
Top: outputs with “A fauvism style painting”. Bottom: outputs
with “Leather”.
apply AdaIN code optimization using CLIP-loss on a pre-
trained style transfer network by Huang et al. [9]. Finally,
we also compare with the latent code optimization on a pre-
trained VQGAN [4] using CLIP-loss by using the source
code of VQGAN-CLIP1. The results in Fig. 7 show that
our method of optimizing network fshows superior quality
compared to baselines. More specifically, with pixel opti-
mization, the image could not reflect the semantic of text
conditions. In case of VQGAN+CLIP and AdaIN+CLIP,
the textures are applied to the contents, but the content
structures are severely deteriorated. In Supplementary Ma-
terials, we additionally show comparison results with two
different baselines of 1) applying the existing style transfer
method by using the text- retrieved image as a style im-
age, and 2) using the image generated by the text-to-image
generation model as a style image. More comparisons with
quantitative user study are also included in our Supplemen-
tary Materials.
4.4. Ablation studies
In order to verify the necessity of each component in our
method, we conducted ablation studies. Figure 6 shows our
ablation study results. When we use all the proposed loss
functions (Fig. 6(a)), we can obtain the best results in per-
1https://github.com/nerdyrodent/VQGAN-CLIP
Figure 8. Training framework of our fast style transfer methods.
We use cropped patches as content images, and used the same pro-
posed loss functions to train the decoder of VGG19 networks.
ceptual domain. In particular, as well as three-dimensional
texture, we could obtain a clean image without artifacts in
terms of color. If the whole image CLIP loss Ldiris not
used (Fig. 6(b)), the global semantic cannot be captured, so
we can see the color mapped in irregular patterns. When
the threshold rejection is removed (Fig. 6(c)), the image is
over-focused on a specific patch and an over-stylized image
is derived. When augmentation was not used (Fig. 6(d)), the
three-dimensional realistic texture was not reflected. When
using the commonly used affine transform instead of our
proposed perspective augmentation (Fig. 6(e)), there are un-
wanted artifacts. Finally, when only directional CLIP Loss
which is a loss function for the whole image was used, there
is only little change in texture except for color (Fig. 6(f)).
For further evaluation, we show user study results on vari-
ous ablation experiments in Supplementary Materials.
5. Further Extensions
5.1. Fast style transfer
In our default framework, we should train the style net-
work ffor single content image to apply a given style. To
overcome this, we are interested in a method that trains f
using various texture patches instead of single content im-
age. Once the network is trained in such a way, the trained
network can be used in various content images.
Our proposed fast training scheme is illustrated in Fig. 8.
As a training set, we randomly cropped the patches from
18068