Figure 1: Machine Learning and Constrained Optimization.
strategies [Gagliolo and Schmidhuber, 2007], learn rules to
ignore some optimization variables leveraging the expected
sparsity of the solutions and consequently leading to faster
solvers, [Ndiaye et al. , 2017], and learning active constraints
[Nget al. , 2018; Prat and Chatzivasileiadis, 2020] to reduce
the size of the problem to be fed into a CO solver .
6 E2E-COL: Predicting CO Solutions
A diverse body of work within the end-to-end CO learning
literature has focused on developing ML architectures to pre-
dict fast, approximate solutions to predeﬁned CO problems
end-to-end without the use of CO solvers at the time of in-
ference, by observing a set of solved instances or execution
traces. These approaches contrasts with those that use ML
to augment search-based CO solvers and conﬁgure their sub-
routines to direct the solver to ﬁnd solutions efﬁciently. This
survey categorizes the literature on predicting CO solutions
into(1)methods that incorporate constraints into end-to-end
learning, for the prediction of feasible or near-feasible solu-
tions to both continuous and discrete constrained optimiza-
tion problems, and (2)methods that learn combinatorial solu-
tions on graphs, with the goal of producing outputs as com-
binatorial structures from variable-sized inputs. These two
categories, referred to as learning with constraints andlearn-
ing CO solutions , respectively, are reviewed next.
6.1 Learning with Constraints
The methods below consider datasets txi;yiuN
i1whose
inputsxidescribe some problem instance speciﬁcation, such
as matrixAand vectorbdescribing linear constraints in
MILPs, and the labels yidescribe complete solutions to prob-
lemOwith inputxi. Notably, each sample may specify a
different problem instance (with different objective function
coefﬁcients and constraints).
An early approach to the use of ML for predicting CO
problem solutions was presented by Hopﬁeld and Tank
[1985], which used Hopﬁeld Networks (Hopﬁeld [2018])
with modiﬁed energy functions to emulate the objective of
a traveling salesman problem (TSP), and applied Lagrange
multipliers to enforce feasibility to the problem’s constraints.
It was shown in Wilson and Pawley [1988] however, that this
approach suffers from several weakness, notably sensitivity
to parameter initialization and hyperparameters. As noted inBello et al. [2017] , similar approaches have largely fallen out
of favor with the introduction of practically superior methods.
Frameworks that exploit Lagrangian duality to guide the
prediction of approximate solutions to satisfy the problem’s
constraints have found success in the context of continuous
NLPs including energy optimization [Fioretto et al. , 2020b;
Velloso and Van Hentenryck, 2020] as well as constrained
prediction on tasks such as transprecision computing and fair
classiﬁcation [Fioretto et al. , 2020a; Tran et al. , 2020].
Other end-to-end learning approaches have demonstrated
success on the prediction of solutions to constrained prob-
lems by injecting information about constraints from targeted
feasible solutions. Recently, Detassis et al. [2020] presented
an iterative process of using an external solver for discrete or
continuous optimization to adjust targeted solutions to more
closely match model predictions while maintaining feasibil-
ity, reducing the degree of constraint violation in the model
predictions in subsequent iterations.
6.2 Learning Solutions on Graphs
By contrast to approaches learning solutions to unstructured
CO problems, a variety of methods learn to solve CO cast
on graphs. The development of deep learning architectures,
such as sequence models and attention mechanisms, as well
as GNNs, has provided a natural toolset for these tasks.
The survey categorizes these modern approaches broadly
based on whether they rely supervised learning or reinforce-
ment learning. It observes that: (1)Supervised learning con-
cerns training models that take as input a representation of a
problem instance and output a solution. Target solutions must
be provided for this training task; this is often problematic
as it entails solving, typically, NP-hard problems. (2)Opti-
mization problems have a native objective function, which in
principle can be used in lieu of a loss function in supervised
learning (possibly obviating the need for training labels) and
can serve as a natural reward function in reinforcement learn-
ing.
Supervised Learning
Vinyals et al. [2017] introduced the pointer network , in which
a sequence-to-sequence model uses an encoder-decoder ar-
chitecture paired with an attention mechanism to produce per-
mutations over inputs of variable size. Noting that certain CO
problems provide a compelling use case for their architecture,