then be computed for its regularized QP approximation as in
Wilder et al. [2019]. Although the LP approximation to MILP
improves with solving time, practical concerns arise when the
MILP problem cannot be solved to completion. Each instance
of the NP-Hard problem must be solved in each forward pass
of the training loop, which poses clear obstructions in terms
of runtime. A disadvantage of the approach is that cutting-
plane methods are generally considered to be inferior in efﬁ-
ciency to staple methods like branch and bound. Improved re-
sults were obtained on portfolio optimization and diverse bi-
partite matching problems, when compared to LP-relaxation
models following the approach of Wilder et al. [2019].
Mandi et al. [2020] investigates the application of the same
SPO approach to NP-Hard combinatorial problems. Primary
among the challenges faced in this context is, as in [Ferber
et al. , 2020], the computational cost of solving hard prob-
lems within every iteration of the training. The authors found
that continuous relaxations of common MILP problems (e.g.
knapsack) often offer subgradients of comaparable quality to
the full mixed-integer problem with respect to the SPO loss,
so that training end-to-end systems with hard CO problems
can be simpliﬁed in such cases by replacing the full problem
with an efﬁciently solvable relaxation, an approach termed
SPO-relax . The authors put continuous relaxations into the
broader category of “weaker oracles” for the CO solver,
which also includes approximation algorithms (e.g. greedy
approximation for knapsack). The main results showed that
SPO-relax achieves accuracy competitive with the full SPO
approach but with shorter training times on a handful of dis-
crete problems. The SPO-relax approach was compared also
against the formulation of Wilder et al. [2019] on equivalent
relaxations, but no clear winner was determined.
Pogan ˇci´cet al. [2019] introduced a new idea for approxi-
mating gradients over discrete optimization problems for end-
to-end training, which relies on viewing a discrete optimiza-
tion problem as a function of its deﬁning parameters (in this
context coming from previous layers), whose range is piece-
wise constant. The only requirement is that the objective be
linear. The gradient calculation combines the outputs of two
calls to an optimization solver; one in the forward pass on ini-
tial parameters y, and one in the backward pass on perturbed
parameters y. The results are used to construct a piecewise
linear function which approximates the original solver’s out-
put space, but has readily available gradients. Because the
gradient calculation is agnostic to the implementation of the
solver, it is termed ”black-box differentiation”. As such, in-
put parameters to the solver do not correspond explicitly to
coefﬁcients in the underlying optimization problem. Results
on end-to-end learning for the shortest path problem, TSP and
min-cost perfect matching are shown. In each case, the dis-
crete problem’s speciﬁcation is implicitly deﬁned in terms of
images, which are used to predict parameters of the appro-
priate discrete problem through deep networks. The optimal
solutions coming from blackbox solvers are expressed as bi-
nary indicator matrices in each case and matched to targeted
optimal solutions using a Hamming distance loss function.
Finally, Wang et al. [2019] presented a differentiable solver
for the MAXSAT problem, another problem form capable of
representing NP-Hard combinatorial problems. Approximategradients are formed by ﬁrst approximating the MAXSAT
problem as a related semideﬁnite program (SPD), then dif-
ferentiating its solution analytically during a specialized co-
ordinate descent method [Wang et al. , 2018] which solves the
SDP. The successful integration of MAXSAT into deep learn-
ing is demonstrated with a model trained to solve sudoku puz-
zles represented only by handwritten images.
8 Challenges and Research Directions
The current state of the art in integrating combinatorial op-
timization with end-to-end machine learning shows promise
on challenging tasks for which there was previously no viable
approach. Further, it has been demonstrated that a variety of
non-overlapping approaches can be effective. Despite these
encouraging results, a number of challenges remain that must
be addressed to allow an integration that lives up to its full po-
tential. (1)Despite the variety of approaches, the success of
the predict-and-optimize paradigm has been demonstrated on
a relatively limited set of optimization problems and a major-
ity of reported experimental results focus on linear program-
ming formulations. Challenges posed by the parametrization
of constraints stand in the way of broader applications, but
have not been yet been addressed. (2)Issues associated with
the runtime of combinatorial solvers in-the-loop still make
some potential applications impractical. (3)Additionally, de-
spite being possible in theory, the role of the CO model in-
the-loop has not been generalized successfully beyond being
applied as the ﬁnal layer of a deep model. The use of addi-
tional layers beyond the solver, or even compositions of CO
solving layers, could potentially lead to new applications if
the practical challenges were to be overcome. (4)In pre-
dicting solutions to CO problems, the current methods can-
not reliably guarantee the problem constraints to be satisﬁed.
This critical shortcoming may be addressed by integrating
ML approaches with methods from the robust optimization
literature or by developing ad-hoc layers to project the predic-
tions onto the feasible space. (5)While it has been observed
in limited contexts Demirovi ´cet al. [2019] that predict-and-
optimize frameworks based on optimization layers are com-
petitive only when the underlying constrained problem is con-
vex, this area still lacks theoretical results providing guaran-
tees on their viability or performance. Finally, (6)the need for
uniform benchmark experiments and systematic comparisons
between each predict-and-optimization framework is appar-
ent. Demirovi ´cet al. [2019] provided a study comparing
the approaches of Wilder et al. [2019] and Elmachtoub and
Grigas [2020], along with problem-speciﬁc approaches, on
knapsack problems but did not conclude strongly as to which
method should be preferred. Further, Mandi et al. [2020] re-
ports that for knapsack problems, SPO performs comparably
on the knapsack problem whether the LP relaxation or the full
problem is used, but does not show that this effect generalize
to other NP-Hard problems. This signals a need for compre-
hensive studies that test performance on a variety of hard CO
problems.
Although the approaches surveyed are still in an early stage
of their development, and have been adopted mainly for aca-
demic purposes, we strongly believe that the integration be-