the authors test it for solving the Traveling Salesman (TSP),
Delaunay Triangulation, and Convex Hull problem variants.
In each, the solution to a problem instance can be expressed
as a single permutation. They develop a pointer network
model to predict approximately optimal solutions by learning
from previously solved instances in a supervised manner, and
demonstrate some ability to generalize over variable-sized
problem instances. For example, in the 2DEuclidean TSP,
the pointer network’s inputs are the 2Dcoordinates of each
city that must be visited. A predicted permutation represents
a tour over all cities, and each target label is a permutation
representing the pre-computed minimum-length tour over its
corresponding input coordinates. Any city is directly reach-
able from any other—by a straight line whose length is equal
to the euclidean distance. In general, the approach introduced
in this work applies only to problems whose solutions take
the form of a single permutation and where all permutations
are feasible (e.g., the problem does not feature constraints on
which tours are allowed in the TSP).
Despite the subsequent trend toward RL-oriented frame-
works, as discussed in the next section, Nowak et al. [2018]
studied a purely supervised learning method for the general
Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP). The proposed solu-
tion was based on the use of simple graph neural networks
trained on representations of individual problem instances
and their targeted solutions. The TSP is chosen as a test prob-
lem, along with two graph matching problems (all instances
of the QAP). Inferences from the model take the form of
approximate permutation matrices, which are converted into
feasible tours by a beam search. The authors note promis-
ing accuracy results on small instances, but the ability for
trained models to generalize their performance to larger-sized
instances was not shown.
Joshi et al. [2019] built on this concept by applying a
Graph Convolutional Network model to the 2DEuclidean
TSP. Aside from the enhanced deep learning architecture,
most aspects of the approach remain similar. However, ac-
curate results are reported on problem instances much larger
than in Nowak et al. [2018]. The authors observe that com-
pared to contemporary reinforcement learning approaches,
their training method is more sample-efﬁcient, but results in
models that do not generalize nearly as well to problem in-
stances larger than those used in training.
Reinforcement Learning
The pointer network architecture of Vinyals et al. [2017] was
adopted by Bello et al. [2017], who proposed to train an
approximate TSP solver with reinforcement learning rather
than supervised learning. The transition to RL was motivated
partly by the difﬁculties associated with obtaining target solu-
tions that are optimal, and the existence of nonunique optimal
solutions to TSP instances. Rather than generating and target-
ing precomputed solutions, the authors present an actor-critic
RL framework using expected tour length Lp|gqas the re-
ward signal, where gandrepresent a graph (problem in-
stance) and a permutation (a tour over the graph):
Jp|gqEpp|gqLp|gq: (6)
A policy, represented by the underlying pointer network
with parameters , is optimized using the well-known RE-INFORCE rule for computing policy gradients [Williams,
1992]:
rJp|gqEpp|gqrpLp|gqbpgqrlogpp|gqs
(7)
The total training objective is then the expectation of Jp|gq
over a distribution of graphs. The policy gradient calculation
requires a baseline function bwhich estimates the expected
reward. In this work, an auxiliary critic network with its own
set of parameters is trained to predict the expected tour length
for any graph in supervised fashion, using empirically ob-
served tours from the most recent policy as training labels.
At the time of inference, two methods are available for pro-
ducing tours from a trained model: (1)A set of tours can be
sampled from the stochastic policy by varying the softmax
temperature parameter, from which the shortest is selected
or(2)an active search method which modiﬁes the stochastic
policy based on solutions sampled during inference.
Nazari et al. [2018] departed from the RNN encoder
scheme used in Bello et al. [2017] and Vinyals et al. [2017]
arguing that when a problem’s deﬁning data do not adhere to
a natural order (e.g. city coordinates in the TSP), it need not
be modeled sequentially. This provides motivation to leave
out the encoder RNN and consider combinatorial problems
whose state changes over time, replacing the role of encoder
hidden states with representations of the problem in each time
frame. The authors consider a capacitated vehicle routing
problem (VRP/CVRP) in which demands are associated to
points in space and change over time; a vehicle with limited
capacity must satisfy all the demands by delivering supply
from a central depot while minimizing total tour length. This
setting also diverges from those previously discussed in that
solutions no longer take the form of permutations, since an
optimal tour may now include several trips to the supply de-
pot or a demand sink. The static (location coordinates) and
dynamic (demand value) data deﬁning the problem are con-
catenated into a single embedding vector xtfor each time
framet. In each decoder step, the attention layer computes a
context vector ctbased only on xtand the previous decoder
statedt. A ﬁnal prediction at time tindicates the next visited
located based on xtandct, and the embeddings xtcan then
be updated based on the resulting state-changes. The training
consists of an actor-critic method similar to that of Bello et
al.[2017].
Several improvements of these approaches exists. Notably,
Kool et al. [2019] developed a general reinforcement learning
framework based on a Graph Attention Network architecture
[Veli ˇckovi ´cet al. , 2017] and trained with the REINFORCE
policy gradients, and present signiﬁcant improvements in ac-
curacy on 2D euclidean TSP over Vinyals et al. [2017], Bello
et al. [2017], Dai et al. [2018], and Nowak et al. [2018].
Differently from previous approaches, Ma et al. [2019] fo-
cused on CO instances with hard constraints and consider
TSP variants in which certain tours are considered infeasi-
ble. A mutil-level RL framework is proposed in which each
layer of a hierarchy learns a different policy, from which ac-
tions can be sampled. Lower layers learn policies that result
in feasible solutions by using reward functions that bias fea-
sibility, and provide latent variables to higher layers which
learn to optimize a given objective while sampling actions