Image Segmentation Keras : Implementation of Segnet, FCN, UNet, PSPNet and
other models in Keras
Divam Gupta
Carnegie Mellon University
divamg@alumni.cmu.edu
Abstract
Semantic segmentation plays a vital role in computer
vision tasks, enabling precise pixel-level understanding of
images. In this paper, we present a comprehensive library
for semantic segmentation, which contains implementations
of popular segmentation models like SegNet, FCN, UNet,
and PSPNet. We also evaluate and compare these models
on several datasets, offering researchers and practitioners
a powerful toolset for tackling diverse segmentation chal-
lenges.
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, an essential task in the ﬁeld of
computer vision, aims to assign precise labels to every pixel
in an image. Semantic segmentation has wide-ranging ap-
plications in autonomous driving, image and video analysis,
medical imaging, scene understanding etc. Over the years,
deep learning approaches have achieved remarkable success
in semantic segmentation.
In this paper, we present a comprehensive library for
semantic segmentation1, aimed at the machine learning
community. We also compare various semantic segmenta-
tion models on multiple datasets. The library provides an
easy to use interface and is built using the TensorFlow and
Keras framework. The library offers an extensive collec-
tion of easy-to-use models, including SegNet [ 1], FCN [ 6],
UNet [ 8], and PSPNet [ 10], which are widely used networks
for semantic segmentation.
The primary objective behind the development of this
library is to provide a user-friendly and accessible plat-
form for machine learning researchers and practitioners in-
terested in semantic segmentation. Our library promotes
modular and extensible design principles, allowing users to
easily integrate, customize, and extend existing segmenta-
tion models to meet their speciﬁc needs.
1The code is available at https:
//github.com/divamgupta/image-segmentation-keras
To ensure ease of use, we have extensively documented
the library, providing clear instructions and code exam-
ples. This documentation includes architectural details and
training procedures Additionally, we provide pre-trained
weights, enabling users to quickly ﬁne-tune the models on
their datasets.
2. Networks for Semantic Segmentation
Like most of the other applications, using a CNN for se-
mantic segmentation is the obvious choice. When using a
CNN for semantic segmentation, the output is also an image
rather than a ﬁxed length vector.
2.1. Fully Convolutional Network
Usually, the architecture of the model contains several
convolutional layers, non-linear activations, batch normal-
ization, and pooling layers. The initial layers learn the low-
level concepts such as edges and colors and the later level
layers learn the higher level concepts such as different ob-