Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 21
applied in various generation tasks. BLEU- 𝑛measures the precision of the co-occurrences of 𝑛-
grams between the generated and real text and conducts length penalty on shorter generated text.
Specially, SacreBLEU [ 149] is recommended for use in machine translation to avoid inconsistency
issue. Several smoothing methods [20] are also proposed to evaluate short sentences.
ROUGE. Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) [ 115] is a set of metrics
for measuring automatic summarization of long texts consisting of multiple sentences. ROUGE- 𝑛
counts the F1 score of the overlapping 𝑛-grams between generated and ground-truth texts.
METEOR. The Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering (METEOR) [ 4] is
proposed to address some issues found in BLEU. Compared to BLEU, METEOR is computed based
on the harmonic mean of the unigram precision and recall, and measures word-to-word matches
between generated and real text based on WordNet.
ChrF++. Character𝑛-gram F-score (ChrF++) [ 148] is an automatic evaluation metric for machine
translation. Different from the word level co-occurrence of BLEU, ChrF++ is mainly focused on the
character-level matching so as to consider morpheme overlapping.
7.1.2 Diversity Metrics. Lexical diversity is desirable in many text generation tasks, such as dialogue
systems and story generation. For these tasks, it is necessary to conduct diversity evaluation on
generated texts.
Distinct. Distinct-𝑛measures the degree of diversity by calculating the number of distinct
𝑛-grams in generated text [ 100]. This metric is scaled by total number of generated tokens to avoid
favoring long sentences.
7.1.3 Semantic Similarity Metrics. The above metrics are focused on the literal word comparison.
Many studies also proposed to compare the implicit semantics between generated text and ground-
truth text. A typical approach is to map both generated text and ground-truth text into sentence
vectors and then compare their embedding similarity.
BERTScore. Given the excellent performance of BERT across many tasks, BERTScore [ 213]
leverages the pre-trained contextual embeddings from BERT and compares words in candidate
and reference texts by cosine similarity. BERTScore has proven to correspond well with human
judgments on sentence-level and system-level evaluations [19].
7.1.4 Logit-Based Metrics .In text generation, the probability of a generated text 𝑦=⟨𝑦1,...,𝑦 𝑛⟩
can be formulated as Pr(𝑦)=Î𝑛
𝑗=1Pr(𝑦𝑗|𝑦1:𝑗−1;𝑥), where𝑥denotes the input data, and 𝑦1:𝑗−1
denotes the previous tokens ⟨𝑦1,...,𝑦 𝑗−1⟩. Logit-based metrics evaluate the generated text from a
probabilistic view.
PPL. In information theory, perplexity (PPL) is a measurement of how well a probability distribu-
tion or probability model predicts a sample compared with the ground-truth [ 12]. A low perplexity
indicates the probability distribution is good at predicting the sample. Therefore, the perplexity of
the discrete probability distribution Pr (·)is defined as:
PPL(Pr(𝑦))B𝑒H(Pr(𝑦))=𝑒−Í
𝑦Pr(𝑦)lnPr(𝑦)=Ö
𝑦Pr(𝑦)−Pr(𝑦), (3)
where H(Pr(𝑦))is the entropy of the distribution Pr (·).
7.2 Resources
In this section, we will introduce some available open-source libraries and benchmarks.
7.2.1 Open-Source Libraries. There are a number of public text generation libraries that can be
used to implement PLM-based text generation models. Transformers [ 188] is an all-featured library
for Transformer-based PLMs, and Fairseq [ 137] is a library to train custom models for translation,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.