20 Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen
Controllability. In text generation, many applications need a good control over the output text.
For example, to generate reading materials for kids, we would like to guide the output stories to
be safe, educational and easily understandable by children. The Plug and Play Language Model,
also known as PPLM [ 33], is an example of a controllable PLM that combines a PLM with one or
more simple attribute classifiers that direct text generation without further PLM training. Several
studies achieved controllablility from a distributional view [ 91,141]. Pascual et al. [141] described
a plug-and-play decoding approach in a single sentence: given a topic or keyword, the model adds
a shift to the probability distribution over the vocabulary towards semantically similar words.
6.3.2 Mitigating Tuning Instabilities. Due to the catastrophic forgetting nature of PLMs and small
size of text generation datasets, tuning PLMs for text generation is usually unstable i.e.,fine-tuning
the model with different random seeds results in a wide variance of performance. The possible
solutions include intermediate fine-tuning, mixout and using supervised contrastive loss.
Intermediate Fine-Tuning. Recent studies have shown that first training PLMs on data-rich
intermediate labeled datasets ( e.g.,a similar NLP task from the same target domain) before fine-
tuning them on data-scarce target text generation tasks can achieve better performance in target
tasks [ 126,146]. For example, Liu et al. [126] constructed an intermediate monolingual corpus of
the target language ( e.g.,Kazakh) and fine-tuned mBART to reconstruct the corrupted monolingual
text for improving the translation quality of the low-resource target language.
Mixout Strategy. When fine-tuning PLMs, dropout [ 169] has been used as a regularization
method to prevent performance degeneration if there are only a small number of training instances.
Leeet al. [97] introduced a variant of dropout, mixout, which stochastically mixes parameters of
two PLMs. The mixout strategy can regularize learning by minimizing the deviation from one of
the two PLMs and the strength of regularization adapts along the optimization trajectory.
Contrastive Learning. The most used cross-entropy loss in text generation, i.e.,the KL-divergence
between one-hot vectors of labels and the distribution of model’s outputs, lacks robustness to noise
labels [ 219] or adversarial examples [ 41]. Thus, fine-tuning PLMs with cross-entropy loss tends to
be unstable, especially when labeled data is limited. An effective solution is to capture the similarity
between examples in one class and contrast them with examples in other classes [ 67]. To this end,
Gunel et al. [67] combined the cross-entropy loss with a supervised contrastive learning loss that
pushes the words from the same class close and the words from different classes further apart.
7 EVALUATION AND RESOURCES
In this section, we will discuss several commonly used evaluation metrics and resources with
respect to PLMs for text generation.
7.1 Evaluation
With the growing variety of text generation applications and datasets, there are several advantages
of automatic evaluation: it is potentially much cheaper and quicker than human evaluation, and
it is repeatable [ 8]. Therefore, we mainly concentrate on automatic evaluation metrics for text
generation in this part. Following Celikyilmaz et al. [19], we present four categories of metrics, i.e.,
𝑛-gram overlap metrics, diversity metrics, semantic similarity metrics, and logit-based metrics. We
list the metrics used in each text generation task in Table 2.
7.1.1 N-Gram Overlap Metrics. These metrics measure the degree of word “matching” between
machine-generated and ground-truth texts at the word level.
BLEU. The Bilingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU) [ 140] is one of the first metrics used to
compare the similarity of two sentences. This metric was originally proposed for machine translation
by comparing a candidate translation of text with one or more reference translations and now
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.