Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 11
However, due to the discrepancy between the pre-training task of masked LMs and the down-
stream generation function, masked LMs are rarely utilized for text generation tasks [ 198]. It is
more common to use masked LMs as the encoder part for text generation, allowing to leverage the
excellent bidirectional encoding capacities. For example, Rothe et al. [161] proposed to initialize
both the encoder and decoder of the generation model with BERT [ 35], which yields comparable
performance with other PLMs specially designed for text generation.
4.1.2 Causal Language Models. Similar to Transformer decoder, causal LMs adopt the diagonal
mask matrix. Causal LMs are designed for language modeling, which is to determine the probability
of a given sequence of words occurring in a sentence. Causal LMs are straightforward for text
generation, predicting the next word conditioned on all previous words.
In the literature, GPT [ 152] was the first causal LM for the text generation task. Then, GPT-2 [ 153]
explored the transfer capacity of language models for zero-shot generation task, highlighting the
significance of sufficient data. Furthermore, GPT-3 [ 14] showed that massive model parameters can
significantly improve the downstream generation tasks, with a few examples or prompts. CTRL [ 90]
is proposed as a conditional causal LM to generate text based on control codes that govern style,
content, and task-specific behavior. Causal LMs are simple and straightforward for text generation,
but they have several structural and algorithmic limitations: Causal LMs encode the tokens just
from left to right, thus ignore the bidirectional information on the input side. Moreover, causal LMs
are not specially designed for the sequence-to-sequence generation tasks, thus in practice they do
not achieve high performance in tasks such as summarization and translation [153].
4.1.3 Prefix Language Models. Upon a single Transformer, prefix LMs adopt bidirectional encoding
scheme in the input side and natural left-to-right generation pattern in the output side. By utilizing
the mixture attention mask, the tokens in the input text 𝑥can attend to each other, while the tokens
in the target text 𝑦can only attend to all input tokens and previous generated tokens.
UniLM [ 36] was the first prefix LM. Compared to causal LMs, UniLM used prefix attention mask
to solve conditional generation tasks, similar to the encoder-decoder architecture. UniLMv2 [ 5] and
GLM [ 39] improved vanilla prefix masking strategy by introducing permuted language modeling
in XLNet [ 198]. Although prefix LMs have several advantages, Raffel et al. [154] compared single-
Transformer prefix LMs to Transformer-based encoder-decoder LMs and concluded that adding
explicit encoder-decoder attention is more effective to capture conditional dependencies.
4.1.4 Encoder-Decoder Language Models. Encoder-decoder LMs follow the standard Transformer
architecture for text generation, consisting of stacks of both encoder and decoder layers. During
pre-training, MASS [ 168] and ProphetNet [ 150] took the sequence with one masked segment as
the input of encoder and then the decoder generates the masked tokens in an auto-regressive way.
T5 [154] randomly replaced several spans in the source text with different special tokens, and then
the decoder predicted every replaced span in turn. BART [ 99] was pre-trained with denoising
auto-encoder (DAE), i.e.,the model learns to recover the original text from corrupted text, which is
corrupted with different noising methods, such as sentence permutation and token deletion.
4.2 Architecture Extensions
To derive performant PLMs for text generation, many studies proposed to improve the Transformer
backbone of PLMs. In this part, we will introduce two major improved techniques, i.e.,extended
input embeddings and improved attention mechanism.
4.2.1 Extended Input Embeddings. Besides (sub-)word embeddings, almost all PLMs use position
embeddings to indicate the indices of input words. Compared to CNN and RNN, the self-attention
operation is usually order-independent. Hence, it is essential to provide explicit position information
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.