Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 9
information [ 60,105,130]. One kind of objectives is to reconstruct the semantic structure of the
input data. For example, Gong et al. [60] utilized the attribute names of input tables as the labels to
reconstruct table structure based on the attribute value representations from PLMs, which enforces
PLMs to embed table structure into table representations. Another method is to adjust the output
text based on the structural information. Mager et al. [130] proposed cycle-consistency based losses
to assess the quality of output text based on how well it can reconstruct the input structure.
Adding Structural Information as Input. As opposed to prior studies that implicitly capture
structural information with training losses, several studies explicitly took structural information
as input [43, 158]. Ribeiro et al. [158] directly prepended “ 〈H〉”, “〈R〉”, and “ 〈T〉” tokens before the
head entity, relation and tail entity of a KG triple to reveal the relations between entities. Besides,
Fanet al. [43] used the graph embedding of an Abstract Meaning Representation (AMR) graph as
input. The graph embedding provides the graph structure information by encoding the depth of
each node (from the node to the root node) and the subgraph each node belongs to.
Employing Structural Encoding Module. Since PLMs are originally developed for sequential
input, it makes sense to incorporate additional modules to encode the structured input. A represen-
tative example is StructAdapt [ 159], which adds layer-wise graph convolution modules to learn
representations built upon the graph connectivity over the PLM encoder. Similarly, Li et al. [105]
employed GNN to encode KG relations as embeddings, which will be taken as input of PLMs.
3.2.3 Maintaining Text Fidelity. In the literature of linguistics [ 18], fidelity means the generated
text adheres to the content in the structured data. Generating high-fidelity text that correctly
describes the information of structured input is the key to data-to-text generation algorithms.
Incorporating Additional Training Objectives. To generate high-fidelity text adhereing to
input, Gong et al. [60] introduced an Optimal-Transport based content matching loss that measures
the distance between the input information and the output text. Harkous et al. [72] employed a
semantic fidelity classification loss to detect and avoid generation errors such as hallucination.
Utilizing Copy Mechanism. The pointer-generator [ 164] is a typical method to ensure the
faithfulness of generated text about input data by copying important words from input into output.
For example, Li et al. [105] adopted pointer-generator to copy entities from input knowledge data to
output text, and Suadaa et al. [172] copied table values into general placeholders to avoid producing
hallucinated phrases that do not appear in the input table.
Adding Target Information as Input. To combat with the low-fidelity problem, Chen et al. [28]
argued that it is important to leverage intermediate meaning representations to achieve faithful
generation. Therefore, the authors enhanced the generation module with a logical form representing
the semantics of the target text.
3.3 Multimedia Input
In addition to the above textual data, multimedia data ( e.g.,image, video, and speech) has also been
utilized as input of text generation algorithms, e.g.,image captioning and speech recognition.
3.3.1 Image Captioning. Image captioning, which aims to generate a textual description for an
image, has been extensively studied in the field of computer vision (CV). Many studies have
proposed multi-modal PLMs to combine textual and visual modalities. A well-known multi-modal
PLM is XGPT [ 191]. Inspired by text-based GPT, XGPT takes images as inputs and uses the image
captioning task as the pre-training task in the pre-training stage. Chen et al. [21] also proposed an
image captioning PLM, called VisualGPT . They designed a self-resurrecting attention mechanism to
learn how to encode the visual information and adapt it to the PLM decoder. However, traditional
vision-language pre-training fails to capture the relationship between the visual and text modalities.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.