14 Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen
monolingual summarization task to improve the primary cross-lingual summarization task in a
low-resource language.
Hybrid Multi-Task Fine-Tuning. Hybrid MTFT incorporates auxiliary tasks that are different
from the primary text generation task. These diverse auxiliary tasks can enhance the primary
generation task in different aspects. For example, Liu et al. [118] and Jin et al. [86] fine-tuned PLMs
with auxiliary tasks ( e.g.,coherence detection, style-carrying text reconstruction) to control the
content of the generated text according to the topic change and text style (humor, romance, and
clickbait). Besides, to improve the faithfulness of the generated text, Li et al. [105] and Gong et al. [60]
introduced auxiliary input reconstruction tasks to reconstruct KG triples and table values for
aligning the input information with the generated content.
5.1.4 Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning. As the above fine-tuning methods require updating all PLM
parameters, it is time-consuming to perform the entire fine-tuning in resource-limited scenarios.
Many studies developed parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) for text generation tasks.
Adapter-based Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning. Adapter is a special neural layer proposed
by Houlsby et al. [77] to fine-tune PLMs in a parameter-efficient way. The adapter module projects
the input vector into a small vector and then projects back into the original dimension using
two feed-forward layers and a non-linear layer. Specifically, the adapters first project the original
𝑑-dimensional features into a smaller dimension, 𝑚, apply a non-linearity, then project back to
𝑑dimensions. The total number of parameters added per layer, including biases, is 2𝑚𝑑+𝑑+𝑚.
By setting𝑚≪𝑑, we can limit the number of additional parameters per task. Thus, it is highly
efficient to fix the parameters of original PLMs but only fine-tune the adapters [ 27,170]. To address
the inefficiency and overfitting issues in low-resource abstractive summarization, Chen et al. [27]
inserted adapters into both encoder and decoder of PLMs and only fine-tuned the adapters. A number
of studies have shown that adapters can help PLMs efficiently capture some input characteristics
for generating more accurate output text with a low extra cost in terms of parameters [ 95,159].
For example, Ribeiro et al. [159] utilized adapters to model the input graph structure effectively
when fine-tuning PLMs on graph input.
Freezing-based Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning. This approach refers to freezing most
parameters and only updating a small proportion of PLM parameters. Recent studies have shown
that not all parameters of PLMs are necessary to be fine-tuned for text generation tasks, and some
of them can be fixed during fine-tuning without large impact on the model performance. Several
studies also revealed that cross-attention (or encoder-decoder attention) layers are more important
than self-attention layers when fine-tuning PLMs for machine translation [ 55,203]. Therefore,
Gheini et al. [55] only fine-tuned cross-attention layers while kept the encoder and decoder fixed.
This approach achieved comparable translation performance to fine-tuning all parameters.
Distillation-based Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning. Another parameter-efficient fine-tuning
approach is to distill large teacher PLMs into small student models. By distilling the knowledge
in PLMs for text generation into small generative models ( e.g.,LSTM), the student models can be
efficiently fine-tuned for better generation performance [ 26,167]. As a representative example,
Chen et al. [26] leveraged BERT as the teacher model that generates sequences of word probability
logits and treated the Seq2Seq model as the student network, which can effectively learn from the
teacher’s outputs.
5.2 Prompt-Tuning for Text Generation
Most generative PLMs are pre-trained using language modeling objectives and then fine-tuned on
text generation tasks with task-specific objectives. Such a discrepancy between pre-training and
fine-tuning affects the performance of PLMs on text generation tasks. As a new learning paradigm,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.