Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 3
achieved state-of-the-art performance. With the emergence of Transformer [ 180] and higher
computational power, the architecture of PLMs has evolved from shallow to deeper architectures,
such as BERT [ 35] and OpenAI GPT [ 153]. Substantial work has shown that PLMs can encode
massive amounts of linguistic knowledge from the pre-training corpora into their large-scale
parameters and learn universal and contextual representations of the language with specially
designed objectives such as masked token prediction. Therefore, PLMs are generally beneficial for
downstream tasks and can avoid training a new model from scratch. Following the success of PLMs
in other NLP tasks, researchers have proposed to apply PLMs to text generation tasks with several
steps (see Figure 1) [ 14,99,154]. Pre-trained on large-scale corpora, PLMs can understand natural
language accurately and further express in human language fluently, both of which are critical
abilities to fulfill text generation tasks. Grounding text generation on PLMs is seen as a promising
direction in both academia and industry, which has much advanced the state of the art in this field.
Thus, in this survey, we focus on text generation based on large PLMs.
There are a number of survey papers on text generation and on PLMs. For example, Qiu et al. [151]
summarized two generations of PLMs for the whole NLP domain and introduced various extensions
and adaption approaches of PLMs. Kalyan et al. [88] gave a brief overview of the advances of
self-supervised learning in Transformer-based PLMs. Han et al. [70] took a deep look into the
history of pre-training, especially its special relation with transfer learning and self-supervised
learning. Besides, El-Kassas et al. [40] focused on the current application of PLMs to the field of
text summarization. Zaib et al. [206] discussed the application of PLMs to dialog systems with a
special emphasis on question answering systems. These surveys focused on specific applications,
e.g.,summarization and dialogue systems, but did not go deep into the core technique, i.e.,text
generation. As text generation is a key component in various applications, it is useful to provide a
comprehensive survey on the topic of text generation based on PLMs. Differenbt from the existing
surveys, this survey is intended to provide a more general description on this common task, rather
than limiting it to a specific type of application. It is worth noting that this survey is an extended
version of the short survey [ 106]. The extensions include: (1) This paper covers a wider range of
existing studies, evaluation protocols, open-source libraries, and common applications of PLMs-
based text generation. This goes far beyond the scope of the previous short survey; (2) This paper
provides a new schematic view involving three key aspects ( i.e.,input data, model architecture,
parameter optimization) about applying PLMs to text generation, which constitute the main content
of this paper; (3) To provide a better picture of the existing solutions for various challenges, this
paper includes more detailed descriptions and discussions about the their technical contributions.
The remainder of this survey is organized as follows. We first present the task formulation
and an overview of PLMs in Section 2. Given the encoded input data, the goal of text generation
is to optimize the generation function ( i.e.,PLMs) for generating satisfactory output text. Thus,
three key points are involved when applying PLMs to text generation: 1) how to encode the input
data into representations preserving input semantics which can be fused into PLMs (Section 3);
2) how to design an effective PLM to serve as the generation function (Section 4); and 3) how to
optimize PLMs given the reference text and to ensure that the generated texts satisfy special text
properties (Section 5). Then, we discuss several typical non-trivial challenges and solutions within
each key point in Section 6. We present a summary of various useful resources to work with PLMs
in Section 7 and common applications in Section 8. Finally, we summarize the contribution of this
survey and describe future directions in Section 9.
2 PRELIMINARY
In this section, we first give a general task definition of text generation, then describe the background
of PLMs, and finally introduce the three key aspects on PLM-based text generation methods.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.