10 Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen
Yang et al. [200] proposed three pre-training tasks to effectively learn better aligned representations
among three kinds of input data: text word, visual object, and scene text.
3.3.2 Video Captioning. Video captioning focuses on generating natural language text that can
describe the video content. VideoBERT [ 174] and CBT [ 173] are two early attempts to investigate
video-language pre-training with regard to the video captioning task. However, previous studies
usually adopted one single encoder-decoder framework, which is not flexible for diverse downstream
tasks. UniVL [ 129] employed two single-modal encoders to encode text and video separately and a
sentence decoder to generate video captions.
3.3.3 Speech Recognition. In practice, speech recognition is hungry for human-transcripted su-
pervised data. Thus, a number of unsupervised and semi-supervised methods were developed to
integrate PLMs for weakly-supervised learning. For example, Fan et al. [45] proposed an unsu-
pervised approach to pre-training encoder-decoder model with unpaired speech and transcripts.
Liao et al. [114] proposed a speech recognition post-processing model that attempts to transform
the incorrect and noisy recognition output into natural language text for humans and downstream
tasks by leveraging the Metadata Extraction (MDE) corpus to construct a small task-specific dataset.
4 DESIGNING PLMS FOR TEXT GENERATION
After encoding the input data into low-dimensional representations, the next step is to develop an
effective PLMMas the text generation function 𝑓M. Based on such an architecture of PLM, the
text generation objective can be modeled as the conditional probability of the output text 𝑦given
the input data 𝑥, which can be formally factorized by tokens:
PrM(𝑦|𝑥)=𝑛Ö
𝑖=1PrM(𝑦𝑖|𝑦<𝑖,𝑥), (2)
where𝑦𝑖denotes the 𝑖-th output token, and 𝑦<𝑖denotes the previous tokens 𝑦1,...,𝑦 𝑖−1.
To compute the conditional probability, traditional neural models mainly adopt the RNN archi-
tecture [ 177] with several variants [ 164]. In recent years, solely based on attention mechanisms,
Transformer [ 180] can better capture long-range dependency in texts, which is beneficial for mod-
eling and generating texts. With the excellent parallelization capacities, Transformer has become
the backbone for developing very large PLMs. When trained on large-scale unlabeled corpora [ 124],
PLMs built on the Transformer architecture can encode rich semantic or linguistic knowledge.
Furthermore, it has been shown that PLMs can be effectively fine-tuned to different text generation
tasks [ 99,168]. All these make PLMs the first choice to implement the text generation function 𝑓M.
4.1 Standard Architecture
Existing PLMs for text generation adopt either a single Transformer or a Transformer-based encoder-
decoder as the backbone. PLMs, such as GPT-3 [ 14] and UniLM [ 36], use a single Transformer
encoder/decoder to simultaneously implement the process of input encoding and output decoding.
This includes three major variants: masked LMs, causal LMs, and prefix LMs, with different attention
mask strategies. In contrast, PLMs built upon Transformer encoder-decoder perform input encoding
and output decoding separately. In the following, we describe these four variants in detail.
4.1.1 Masked Language Models. Masked LMs use a full-attention Transformer encoder. Equipped
with the full attention, models are usually pre-trained with masked language modeling (MLM) task,
i.e.,predicting the masked tokens using the bidirectional information. The most representative
model is BERT [35], which is used extensively in natural language understanding (NLU).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.