Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 5
consist of billions or trillions of parameters. In addition, PLMs are designed for other tasks such
as named entity recognition [ 147], programming [ 49], and networking [ 127]. According to the
pre-training objectives, PLMs for text generation can be categorized as masked LMs, causal LMs,
prefix LMs, and encoder-decoder LMs, which will be detailed in Section 4.
2.3 PLM-based Text Generation Methods
To effectively leverage PLMs for downstream text generation tasks, we need to consider three key
aspects from the perspectives of data, model, and optimization, respectively:
•Input Data :How to encode the input 𝑥into a representation preserving the input semantics that
can be fused into the PLM M?For text generation, the input data, containing critical semantic
information for the target output, often appears in various data types for different tasks ( e.g.,
sequential text, structured table, multimedia), whereas most PLMs are typically pre-trained on the
sequential text data. Therefore, it is a major challenge to develop effective, flexible representation
learning approaches for PLMs to capture semantic information from various types of input data.
•Model Architecture :How to design an effective PLM Mto serve as the generation function
𝑓Mand adapt to various text generation tasks? In the literature, a number of PLMs have been
developed with generalized architectures for general purposes ( e.g.,denoised auto-encoder [ 99] or
auto-regressive decoder [ 153]), While these general architectures cannot cope with some special
text generation cases. Therefore, it is important to make specific designs on the underlying PLMs
for achieving good task performance when adapting to different text generation tasks.
•Optimization Algorithm :How to optimize the text generation function (i.e., PLMs) 𝑓Mgiven
the reference text 𝑦and ensure that the generated text satisfies special text properties P?In order to
produce satisfactory text, it is critical to learn the text generation function by developing effective
optimization algorithms. A major challenge stems from the fact that some desired properties for
output text are difficult to be formulated or optimized.
In the following sections, we will present recent research efforts on PLM-based text generation,
with an emphasis on the three aforementioned aspects. The overall organization of our description
follows the schema shown in Figure 2.
3 ENCODING INPUT REPRESENTATIONS
As discussed in Section 2, the first aspect is the encoding of input data 𝑥into meaningful represen-
tations preserving input semantics for PLMs. In this section, we will present three main types of
input data for text generation, i.e.,unstructured input, structured input, and multimedia input.
3.1 Unstructured Input
In text generation, most studies focus on modeling unstructured text input ( e.g.,sentence, para-
graph, and document), which requires to accurately understand the input information and derive
meaningful text representations. The aim of text representation learning is to condense the input
text into low-dimensional vectors that can preserve the core semantic meanings. In what follows,
we will discuss how to derive effective semantic representations for three kinds of unstructured
text data, namely paragraphs, documents and multi-lingual texts.
3.1.1 Paragraph Representation Learning. A paragraph usually consists of multiple sentences
describing different topics and each sentence contains a sequence of words. To capture both
low-level word meanings and high-level topic semantics in a paragraph, many studies proposed
hierarchy-based or graph-based methods to learn the paragraph representation.
Hierarchy-based Representation Learning. For a multi-sentence paragraph such as a multi-
turn dialogue, a typical approach is to concatenate sentences as a whole text and predict the output
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.