Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 23
method in both academic research and commercial use [ 32]. Machine translation can be classified
into two types: unsupervised machine translation and supervised machine translation, depending
on whether parallel corpora are available for fine-tuning PLMs.
8.1.1 Unsupervised Machine Translation. Unsupervised Machine Translation (UMT) refers to the
use of solely monolingual corpora without any parallel data for both pre-training and fine-tuning
PLMs. UMT enables machine translation to no longer rely on large-scale annotated corpora, and
also brings remarkable advances in low-resource language translation. When using PLMs for UMT,
there are typically two steps involved [ 94]: 1) PLMs are pre-trained on monolingual corpora in a
variety of languages, learning word embeddings and modeling probabilities for each sentence in
each language; 2) Iterative back-translation is then leveraged to combine the source-to-target and
target-to-source model with the denoising auto-encoding and back-translation objectives.
Pre-training on Monolingual Corpora. Recent PLM-based research has mainly focused on
the first step of UMT. Specifically, XLM [ 31] and mBERT [ 35] were pre-trained on multiple mono-
lingual data using MLM task, and then the PLM was used to initialize both the encoder and the
decoder for machine translation. mBART [ 122] followed the pre-training scheme of BART [ 99] on
multiple languages, while these PLMs just performed the original pre-training task with mixed
monolingual corpora, without considering the relationship between languages. CMLM [ 157] further
proposed cross-lingual MLM to randomly mask tokens in monolingual sentences and predicted
corresponding translation candidates. Therefore, CMLM was able to align the embeddings of differ-
ent languages. CSP [ 199] shared the similar idea, replacing some words in the source sentences
with their translation words and then predicting the replaced words.
Leveraging Iterative Back-translation. In the back-translation stage, Garcia et al. [53] pro-
posed using multi-task learning. They investigated multilingual UNMT , which involved the use
of a third language when translating one language into another. The extra language can provide
auxiliary monolingual data or parallel data containing only one language in the source or target
language. They aggregated back-translation loss and introduced a cross-translation term to incor-
porate the auxiliary corpus. Li et al. [113] also applied the cross-translation term and additionally
included a knowledge distillation objective for the third (intermediate) language.
8.1.2 Supervised Machine Translation. Supervised machine translation (SMT) refers to fine-tuning
PLMs based on parallel corpora. Here, we will discuss how to utilize existing self-supervised PLMs
and how to design PLMs for parallel corpora.
Directly Fine-tuning Unsupervised PLMs. Almost all PLMs mentioned above using unsuper-
vised (self-supervised) pre-training, such as XLM [ 31] and mBART [ 122], can be directly fine-tuned
with bilingual pairs. Moreover, considering the excellent encoding capability of BERT, BERT-fused
model [ 226] leveraged BERT to extract contextual embedding for the source sentence, and fused the
representations with each layer of the encoder and decoder. CTNMT [ 197] leveraged asymptotic
distillation and dynamic switching gate to integrate the BERT embedding. Graformer [ 176] grafted
mBERT as the encoder and mGPT as the decoder, and then trained a cross-attention module to
combine them. Tang et al. [178] proposed to fine-tune mBART on multiple language pairs, which is
called multilingual fine-tuning .
Designing PLMs for Parallel Corpora. Most of PLMs are pre-trained on monolingual corpora
using self-supervised pre-training tasks such as MLM and DAE. Nevertheless, these pre-training
objectives are different from the downstream translation task. Hence, mRASP [ 116] pre-trained
the model on bilingual pairs with supervised Seq2Seq loss by randomly replacing the words in the
source sentence with the words which have the same meaning in other languages. As a result, words
with similar meaning across different languages are encouraged to share similar representations.
mRASP2 [ 139] applied contrastive learning to minimize the representation gap of similar sentences
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.