24 Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen
and maximize that of unrelated sentences. Despite significant success, pre-training on parallel data
requires massive labour and financial resources to create vast amounts of bilingual pairs.
8.2 Text Summarization
Text summarization is the process of condensing text into a brief summary that retains key informa-
tion from the source text [ 40]. The mainstream approaches to text summarization based on PLMs
are either extractive or abstractive. Extractive summarization selects a subset of sentences from
the source text and concatenates them to form the summary [ 123,214]. In contrast, abstractive
summarization generates the summary automatically from the abstract representation of input
texts [ 164,211]. As abstractive summarization is more related to text generation, we only discuss
abstractive summarization in this section.
8.2.1 Document Summarization. Document is a widely-used literary form, such as news, opinions,
reviews, and scientific papers. PLMs, such as UniLM [ 5,36], MASS [ 168], T5 [ 154], BART [ 99]
and PEGASUS [ 211], can be directly fine-tuned for document summarization. During pre-training,
these models learn to predict the masked important sentences in the input document based on the
remaining ones, which shares the similar idea of summarization.
Without directly generating summaries, several studies first extracted keywords, key sentences
or relations as guidance and then combined these with PLMs for generation. CIT [162] employed
RoBERTa [ 124] to extract the important words and sentences from the input document. In addition,
topic models are used to capture the global topic semantics of the document, which can be integrated
into the summarization model [ 136]. GSum [ 38] proposed a general framework taking different
kinds of guidance signals into the generation model, including keywords, triples, highlighted
sentences and retrieved summaries. Apart from external guidance, several tricks can be applied to
document summarization. Cao et al. [16] improved the attention mechanism to emphasize salient
content in the document. Refactor [ 121] first generated multiple summaries under different setups
and then scored them and finally selected an optimal candidate summary.
8.2.2 Dialogue Summarization. Dialogues, such as chat and medical conversation, consist of multi-
turn utterances by two or more individuals. Hence, it is critical to capture the semi-structured
dialogue content and users’ interactions in dialogue [ 47]. For dialogue summarization, it is straight-
forward to direclty reuse document summarization models. Zhang et al. [212] first truncated the
dialogue text into several chunks, then summarized each chuck into partial summaries, and finally
rewrote these partial summaries into a complete summary.
Meanwhile, several studies also explored some specific characteristics of dialogue for improving
dialogue summarization. Chen et al. [22] first extracted different topic views from conversations, and
then utilized a multi-view decoder to combine these views for generating summaries. Furthermore,
Chen et al. [24] constructed discourse relation graphs and action graphs of conversations, in order
to concentrate on the most salient utterances and understand concrete details of users’ action. Con-
sidering the low information density, topic drifts and frequent coreferences of dialogue [ 47], some
researchers conducted auxiliary tasks to extract intrinsic information of dialogue. Feng et al. [48]
utilized DialoGPT [ 215], a PLM specially designed for dialogue, to automatically extract keywords,
detect redundant utterances and divide a dialogue into topically coherent segments.
8.3 Dialogue System
Dialogue system ( a.k.a., conversational agent) aims to make machines communicate with human
fluently. Technically, machines are required to generate a response conditioned on history contexts.
According to downstream applications, dialogue systems are commonly categorized into open-
domain and task-oriented dialogue systems. The former intends to converse with humans engaged
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.