8 Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen
3.1.3 Multi-lingual Representation Learning. Existing PLMs are mainly pre-trained on English text
while ignoring other low-resource languages. It is difficult to apply English-based PLMs to solve
multi-lingual text generation tasks ( e.g.,multi-lingual machine translation). Several approaches
have been proposed to cope with multilingual texts.
Cross-lingual Representations. The core idea of cross-lingual representation learning is to
learn a shared embedding space for two languages, in order to improve PLMs’ ability to translate
between them. A well-known cross-lingual PLM is XLM [ 31], which leveraged both monolingual
and parallel data to learn cross-lingual representations. However, these learned representations on
shared Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) spaces is implicit and limited. Therefore, Ren et al. [157] further
computed cross-lingual 𝑛-gram embeddings and derived an 𝑛-gram translation table based on them
for providing explicit representation learning signals.
Multi-lingual Representations. Given more than two languages, multi-lingual PLMs aim to
learn representations for any of the languages. Based on English PLMs, BART and T5, Liu et al. [122]
and Xue et al. [194] proposed mBART and mT5, respectively, which are pre-trained once for all lan-
guages. Considering the differences across languages ( e.g.,syntactic rules), several studies utilized
contrastive learning to learn multi-lingual representations [ 139,185]. In particular, Wang et al. [185]
proposed two training objectives: contrastive sentence ranking (CSR) and sentence aligned substi-
tution (SAS). CSR creates positive and negative sentence pairs based on their saliency scores, while
SAS replaces sentences with those in another language. By contrastively learning these languages
in a common text, the model can learn shared representation spaces across languages.
3.2 Structured Input
Structured data ( e.g.,table, graph, and tree) is a critical kind of input for text generation in many
real-world applications, such as medical report [ 73] and weather report [ 57] generation. However,
it is non-trivial to model structured input for PLMs due to three major challenges: (1) there exists a
semantic gap between structured data and PLMs, since PLMs are typically pre-trained on natural
language texts; (2) it is non-trivial to encode the structural information in the input data; (3) it
requires to maintain fidelity of the generated text with respect to the input.
3.2.1 Bridging the Semantic Gap. In general, PLMs are pre-trained on unstructured text, which
differs in form from the structured data. Several methods have been proposed to bridge this gap.
Structured Data Linearization. In order to fit the structured input for PLMs, a simple approach
is to linearize the input data into a sequence [43,130,158]. Specifically, Ribeiro et al. [158] linearized
knowledge graph (KG) into a sequence of triples by concatenating the relational triples. Besides,
some studies adopted template-based heuristic methods to serialize the input data [ 60]. For example,
the attribute-value pair “ name: james beattie ” will be serialized as a sentence “ name is james beattie ”.
Representation Alignment. The semantic gap makes it difficult to effectively inject structured
data representations into PLMs while directly serializing structured data. Therefore, some people
proposed to align the structured data representations with PLM-based word embeddings in semantic
spaces. For example, Li et al. [105] utilized graph neural networks (GNN) to project KG entities into
embeddings, and then performed representation alignment by minimizing the Euclidean distance
between the GNN-based and PLM-based entity embeddings.
3.2.2 Capturing the Structural Information. An important feature of structured data is that it repre-
sents data in a structural way, such as the ⟨𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒,𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒⟩pair in table or the⟨ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑,𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛,𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑙⟩
triple in KB. Such structural information can be used to help generate faithful text by modeling the
input in a more accurate way.
Incorporating Additional Training Objectives. To enhance the preservation of structural
information, a typical approach is to incorporate auxiliary training objectives related to structural
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.