Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 19
Third, by replicating attention distributions between input data and output text, the student can
also learn the contextual dependency between input and output [85].
6.2.2 Model Enhancement. Although PLMs have achieved great success nowadays, they are still
far from our expectations. Recently, there has been a surge of interest in the research community
to strengthen existing PLMs to improve the performance of text generation.
Large-scale PLMs. Kaplan et al. [89] have shown that the performance of PLMs can be boosted
by scaling up the amount of PLMs’ parameters. This observation sparked the development of
large-scale PLMs in text generation [ 14,207]. The most representative large-scale PLMs for text
generation is GPT-3 [ 14], which contains 175 billion parameters, 10x more than any previous
non-sparse PLMs. With a large number of parameters, GPT-3 can achieve strong performance in
various text generation tasks without any gradient updates or fine-tuning.
Knowledge-Enriched PLMs. Recent research has found that integrating knowledge from exter-
nal knowledge sources can enhance the text generation performance of PLMs [ 175,225]. Specifically,
ERNIE 3.0 [ 175] was pretrained on a 4TB corpus consisting of plain texts and a large-scale knowledge
graph for both language understanding and generation tasks. Without incorporating explicit knowl-
edge, CALM [ 225] can encode commonsense knowledge into parameters by teaching PLMs to write
and reason with common concepts through pre-training strategies, yielding better performance on
text generation tasks.
Efficient PLMs. Pre-training PLMs on large-scale text data is prohibitively expensive. Recently,
it has been demonstrated that by meticulously structuring the model architecture, it is possible to
obtain equivalent or higher text generation performance with less pre-training data [ 225] or lower
pre-training costs [ 84]. For example, CALM [ 225] developed a mutually reinforced pre-training
framework with generative and contrastive objectives, thus achieving comparable results to other
larger PLMs such as T5 while only being pre-trained on a small corpus for a few steps.
6.3 Optimization Aspect
In this part, we discuss challenges and solutions about the optimization of PLMs for text generation.
6.3.1 Satisfying Special Text Properties. In Section 5.3, we introduced three basic text properties. In
this section, we will present three more difficult properties for text generation tasks, i.e.,coherence,
factuality, and controllability.
Coherence. In linguistics [ 101], language coherence is what makes a multi-sentence text mean-
ingful, both logically and syntactically. An essential technique to improving coherence is to elab-
orately plan the generated content, which is known as text planning [ 78,107]. For example,
Liet al. [107] designed a text generation model based on a two-level text plan: (1) the document
plan is modeled as a sequence of sentence plans in order, and (2) the sentence plan is modeled as an
entity-based subgraph from KG. The local coherence is naturally enforced by KG subgraphs, and the
global coherence can be improved by generating a coherent sequence of subgraphs. Wang et al. [186]
proposed a two-stage planning, i.e.,the first stage is to organize the story outline which illustrates
the story plots and events, and the second stage is to expand the outline into a complete story.
Factuality. The input data ( e.g.,infobox) for text generation tasks ( e.g.,table-to-text generation)
usually contains some factual information. In such cases, the generated content should adhere to
the original input facts. However, lacking direct access to the input facts or explicit supervision
makes PLMs unable to retain text factuality in generation process. For data-to-text generation,
the pointer generator [ 164] is usually adopted to copy the input facts into output for preserving
factuality [ 29,105]. Furthermore, to make summarization models produce more factual summaries,
some studies proposed evaluation metrics or correction methods to measure and revise the generated
text for preserving factuality [37, 135].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.