Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 13
5.1.1 Vanilla Fine-Tuning. Vanilla fine-tuning directly updates PLMs using downstream text gener-
ation datasets with task-specific losses ( e.g.,cross-entropy loss [ 153]). Zhang et al. [215] trained
the DialoGPT model on the basis of the GPT-2 architecture by modeling a multi-turn dialogue
session as a long text and optimizing the generation model with language modeling objective.
Ribeiro et al. [158] investigated two recent PLMs, BART and T5, for graph-to-text generation and
fine-tuned them using the typical auto-regressive cross-entropy loss. A major issue of vanilla fine-
tuning is that it is often not sufficiently optimized on small datasets, which is prone to overfitting.
5.1.2 Intermediate Fine-Tuning. The basic idea of intermediate fine-tuning is to incorporate an
intermediate dataset consisting of sufficient labeled instances. The intermediate dataset can focus
on the same target text generation task but from a different domain, or a similar NLP task from the
same target domain. It is helpful to infuse domain- or task-specific knowledge from the intermediate
dataset to alleviate the overfitting issue and enhance the performance on small target text generation
datasets [ 146]. According to the relatedness between the intermediate dataset and the target text
generation dataset [ 88], intermediate fine-tuning can be divided into two categories, i.e.,domain
adaptive intermediate fine-tuning (DAIFT) and task adaptive intermediate fine-tuning (TAIFT).
Domain Adaptive Intermediate Fine-Tuning. According to Kalyan et al. [88], DAIFT utilizes
an intermediate dataset, which focuses on a similar NLP task (not text generation tasks) from the
same target domain, consisting of sufficient labeled instances. By leveraging such an intermediate
dataset, PLMs can be enriched with domain-specific knowledge, which is helpful to improve the
performance of the target text generation task within the same domain. DAIFT is commonly used
in machine translation to eliminate the issue of unseen languages in translation pairs. For example,
to improve the translation quality of the low-resource target language ( e.g.,Kazakh), Liu et al. [126]
constructed a large-scale intermediate monolingual corpus of the target language and fine-tuned
mBART by reconstructing the corrupted target-language text. The intermediate dataset comes from
the same language domain as the target dataset ( e.g.,Kazakh), which can impart language-related
linguistic knowledge to PLMs for a better translation performance.
Task Adaptive Intermediate Fine-tuning. In contrast with DAIFT, TAIFT incorporates an
intermediate dataset on the same target text generation task but from a different domain. It aims
to infuse task-specific knowledge from the massive intermediate labeled dataset for improving
the same target text generation task. It has been shown that the additional training with general-
purpose text corpora ( e.g.,Wikipedia, WebText) on the same text generation task can improve the
performance on a specific domain ( e.g.,Movie) [ 42,134]. For example, Fabbri et al. [42] performed
summarization on intermediate pseudo-summaries created from Wikipedia to improve the zero-
shot and few-shot performance of abstractive summarization, and Mao et al. [134] conducted
generation on intermediate BookCorpus dataset (built from WebText) to improve commonsense
story generation on the target WritingPrompts dataset.
5.1.3 Multi-Task Fine-Tuning. Multi-task fine-tuning can exploit cross-task knowledge to improve
the primary text generation task by incorporating auxiliary tasks. Furthermore, by obtaining
knowledge from related NLP tasks, multi-task fine-tuning can enhance the robustness of PLMs and
reduce the need for large amounts of labeled instances in the text generation task. According to
the similarity between the primary text generation task and auxiliary tasks, multi-task fine-tuning
(MTFT) can be divided into two categories, i.e.,pure MTFT and hybrid MTFT.
Pure Multi-Task Fine-Tuning. Pure MTFT incorporates auxiliary tasks that are the same as the
primary text generation task but from different domains. Previous studies mainly utilized additional
datasets to eliminate the data scarcity issue of the primary text generation task [ 3,61]. Specifically,
Goodwin et al. [61] leveraged twenty-one additional summarization datasets to improve zero-shot
summarization on previously unseen datasets. Besides, Bai et al. [3] incorporated an auxiliary
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.