16 Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen
example, in dialogue systems, the generated responses should be relevant to the historical utterances
and other conditions, such as speaker persona and discourse topic.
Compared with traditional neural generative models, PLMs utilize more powerful multi-layer
cross-attention mechanism to model the semantic associations between input and output, which
can enhance the relevance of generated text to the input data ( e.g.,the dialogue systems [ 189,215]).
A good example is DialoGPT [ 215] based on an auto-regressive language model GPT-2. Specially,
DialoGPT was first trained on large-scale dialogue pairs/sessions, which could enable DialoGPT
to capture the joint distribution of Pr(ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦,𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒)in conversational flow for generating
relevant responses to the history utterance. Furthermore, Zeng et al. [208] utilized the masked
language modeling objective to solve generate responses based on various types of dialogue context.
Specifically, they proposed a TF-IDF based masking which selects more condition-related tokens
to be masked, so that PLMs can generate condition-related expressions rather than the general
language patterns. Besides, they adopted a non-parametric attention-based gating mechanism to
switch between generating a general word or a condition-related word at each position.
5.3.2 Faithfulness. Faithfulness is also an important language property to consider for text genera-
tion, which means the generated content should adhere to the semantics of input text. For example,
text summarization aims to generate faithful text conveying the salient information of the input
text. Faithfulness sometimes refers to the fact that the generated text is in accord with world facts.
To generate faithful texts, PLMs should be able to accurately understand the core semantics of
input and acquire sufficient world knowledge for solving the downstream task. It has been shown
that PLMs have excellent natural language understanding capacities in capturing core semantics
from plain text [ 35], and they indeed encode a large amount of world knowledge [ 83], which is
potentially beneficial to generate faithful summary by injecting background knowledge into text.
For example, Kryscinski et al. [93] utilized a contextual network in the PLM decoder to retrieve
the most salient parts from the source document to improve the level of faithfulness of generated
summaries. Besides, several studies proposed to generate faithful texts by introducing additional
losses besides the text generation loss [ 161,202]. Specifically, Yang et al. [202] fine-tuned PLMs
through a theme modeling loss which aims to make the generated summary semantically close to
the original article for achieving faithful generation.
5.3.3 Order-Preservation. In the NLP field, order-preservation is a special property that refers that
the order of semantic units (word, phrase, etc.) in both input and output text is consistent. Such a
property is key to several important text generation tasks, such as text paraphrasing and machine
translation. In machine translation, when translating from source language to target language,
it often requires preserving some order of phrases in the source and target text for ensuring the
accuracy of the translation results.
In machine translation, word alignment is an extensively studied approach to achieve the order-
preservation property. A representative study is Code-Switching Pre-training (CSP) [ 199]. CSP
first automatically extracted the word-pair alignment information from the source and target
monolingual corpora. Then, to enhance the order-preservation property during translation, CSP
continually pre-trained PLMs by predicting the sentence fragment on the source side given the
aligned fragment in the target language. Moreover, to relax the restriction of discrete word alignment,
another line of research aims to conduct continuous representation alignment to improve the order-
preservation property. Wada et al. [182] focused on aligning word representations of each language
by mapping word embeddings of each language into a common latent space. Lin et al. [116] proposed
mRASP to enforce words and phrases that have similar meanings across multiple languages, to be
aligned in the representation space.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.