Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 7
vectors, respectively. However, when encoding each individual utterance, it does not consider the
history information, which is essential for understanding dialogue utterances. Thus, Li et al. [112]
employed a Transformer to encode each utterance into a dense vector, upon which a left-to-right
flow module was designed to capture the utterance-level dynamic information flow.
Graph-based Representation Learning. A long paragraph is likely to contain repeated, redun-
dant or contradictory information. How to exploit the key semantics and remove minor information
from the intricate paragraph text is critical to promote paragraph-based generation performance.
Compared with sequences, by explicitly representing words or phrases as nodes and their rela-
tions ( e.g.,similarity) as edges, graphs can easily aggregate relevant but disjoint context in the
text [ 138,190]. As a representative example, Wu et al. [190] leveraged a phrase-level unified seman-
tic graph, where nodes are phrases extracted by dependency parsing and relations are dependency
relations. This graph can be used to aggregate co-referent phrases that are scattered in context for
better capturing the long-range relations and global paragraph structures. Besides, in conversational
machine reading, Ouyang et al. [138] formulated the input text as two complementary graphs, i.e.,
explicit and implicit discourse graphs, to fully capture the discourse relations and latent vector
interactions among all the elementary discourse units.
3.1.2 Document Representation Learning. In many text generation tasks such as document transla-
tion and document summarization, the input text might be a long document consisting of multiple
paragraphs. When encoding the documents, it is challenging to model cross-sentence (paragraph)
semantics and capture the most critical semantics.
Modeling Inter-Sentential Semantics. Most of PLMs are trained as masked language models.
They mainly focus on learning token-level representations instead of sentence-level ones. Although
segment embeddings are used to represent different sentences separately, they cannot capture
the cross-sentence semantics. To encode inter-sentential semantics, several studies [ 123,214,222]
proposed to learn document representations in a hierarchical way. For example, Liu et al. [123]
inserted the “[CLS]” token at the beginning of each sentence to aggregate sentence-level features in
lower layers and then combine them with self-attention in higher layers. Besides, Zhang et al. [214]
proposed HIBERT for learning document representations in a hierarchical fashion by using a
sentence encoder to map sentences into sentence vectors and a document encoder to further learn
context-sensitive sentence representations given their surrounding sentence vectors as context.
Capturing Critical Semantics. In practice, sentences or paragraphs in long documents will
inevitably complement, overlap, or conflict with one another. Therefore, it is necessary to retain the
most critical contents and verbalize them in the generated text. To address the issue of key points
missing in output text, Nguyen et al. [136] introduced a topic model to capture the global topic
semantics of the document and a gate mechanism to control the amount of global semantics provided
to the text generation module. Similarly, Liu et al. [118] proposed two topic-aware contrastive
learning objectives, among which the coherence detection objective identifies topics of a dialogue
by detecting the coherence change among topics and the sub-summary generation objective forces
the model to capture the most salient information and generate a sub-summary for each topic.
Representation Learning Efficiency. Efficiency is a crucial aspect for modeling long docu-
ments, especially when generating long text. Since the self-attention mechanism grows quadrat-
ically with sequence length, a number of studies aimed to improve the encoding efficiency of
self-attention [ 79,133]. A representative example is Manakul et al. [133], which proposed local
self-attention, allowing longer input spans during training; and explicit content selection, reducing
memory and compute requirements. Furthermore, several researchers adopted divide-and-conquer
encoding methods. By splitting the long document into short sentences, it is easier to summarize
each short part of the document separately [56], reducing the computational complexity.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.