Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey 27
systems. However, PLMs are usually pre-trained in universal corpora, which is difficult to control
the multi-grained attributes of the generated text ( e.g.,sentiment, topic, and coherence). Keskar et al .
[90] has explored text generation with control codes that govern style, content and task-specific
behavior. However, these control codes are preset and coarse-grained. Future work can explore
multi-grained control and develop PLMs that are sufficiently steerable.
Optimization Exploration. Fine-tuning is the predominant optimization way to distill the
linguistic knowledge stored in PLMs to downstream generation tasks. Now, prompt-based learning
has become a performant and lightweight optimization method [ 119]. Future work can explore a
broader range of optimization approaches that can combine the advantages of current methods.
Language-agnostic PLMs. Nowadays, almost all the PLMs for text generation are mainly for
English. These PLMs will encounter challenges when dealing with non-English generation tasks.
Therefore, language-agnostic PLMs are worthy to be investigated. This requires us to capture
universal linguistic and semantic features across different languages. An interesting direction is
explore how to reuse existing English-based PLMs for text generation in non-English languages.
Ethical Concern. Currently, PLMs are pre-trained on large-scale corpora crawled from web
without fine-grained filtering, potentially causing ethical issues such as generating private content
about users. Therefore, researchers should try their best to prevent misusing PLMs. Besides, the text
generated by PLMs might be prejudiced, which is in line with the bias in training data along the
dimensions of gender, race, and religion [ 14]. As a result, we should intervene PLMs for preventing
such biases. The research on the general approach is extensive but still preliminary for PLMs.
In conclusion, text generation based on PLMs has greatly contributed to the advance of the state
of the art in this field. However, the current state of the art in different text generation tasks is still
far from what one could expect. Extensive research efforts are needed to better adapt PLMs to text
generation tasks.
REFERENCES
[1]Daniel Adiwardana, Minh-Thang Luong, David R. So, Jamie Hall, Noah Fiedel, Romal Thoppilan, Zi Yang, Apoorv
Kulshreshtha, Gaurav Nemade, Yifeng Lu, and Quoc V. Le. 2020. Towards a Human-like Open-Domain Chatbot.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977 (2020).
[2]Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to
Align and Translate. In ICLR .
[3]Yu Bai, Yang Gao, and Heyan Huang. 2021. Cross-Lingual Abstractive Summarization with Limited Parallel Resources.
InACL.
[4]Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR: An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with Improved
Correlation with Human Judgments. In IEEvaluation@ACL .
[5]Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Furu Wei, Wenhui Wang, Nan Yang, Xiaodong Liu, Yu Wang, Jianfeng Gao, Songhao Piao,
Ming Zhou, and Hsiao-Wuen Hon. 2020. UniLMv2: Pseudo-Masked Language Models for Unified Language Model
Pre-Training. In ICML .
[6]Siqi Bao, Huang He, Fan Wang, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang. 2020. PLATO: Pre-trained Dialogue Generation Model
with Discrete Latent Variable. In ACL.
[7]Siqi Bao, Huang He, Fan Wang, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang, Wenquan Wu, Zhen Guo, Zhibin Liu, and Xinchao Xu. 2021.
PLATO-2: Towards Building an Open-Domain Chatbot via Curriculum Learning. In ACL/IJCNLP Findings .
[8] Anja Belz and Ehud Reiter. 2006. Comparing Automatic and Human Evaluation of NLG Systems. In EACL .
[9]Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Zhe Zhao, and Ed H. Chi. 2017. Data Decisions and Theoretical Implications when Adversarially
Learning Fair Representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.00075 (2017).
[10] Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y. Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam Tauman Kalai. 2016. Man is to
Computer Programmer as Woman is to Homemaker? Debiasing Word Embeddings. In NIPS .
[11] Peter F. Brown, John Cocke, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Frederick Jelinek, John D. Lafferty, Robert L.
Mercer, and Paul S. Roossin. 1990. A Statistical Approach to Machine Translation. Comput. Linguistics 16, 2 (1990).
[12] Peter F. Brown, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Jennifer C. Lai, and Robert L. Mercer. 1992. An Estimate
of an Upper Bound for the Entropy of English. Comput. Linguistics (1992).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.