Pre-trained Language Models for Text Generation: A Survey
JUNYI LI∗,Renmin University of China, China and Université de Montréal, Canada
TIANYI TANG∗,Renmin University of China, China
WAYNE XIN ZHAO†,Renmin University of China, China
JIAN-YUN NIE, Université de Montréal, Canada
JI-RONG WEN, Renmin University of China, China
Text Generation aims to produce plausible and readable text in a human language from input data. The
resurgence of deep learning has greatly advanced this field, in particular, with the help of neural generation
models based on pre-trained language models (PLMs). Text generation based on PLMs is viewed as a promising
approach in both academia and industry. In this paper, we provide a survey on the utilization of PLMs in
text generation. We begin with introducing three key aspects of applying PLMs to text generation: 1) how
to encode the input into representations preserving input semantics which can be fused into PLMs; 2) how
to design an effective PLM to serve as the generation model; and 3) how to effectively optimize PLMs given
the reference text and to ensure that the generated texts satisfy special text properties. Then, we show the
major challenges arisen in these aspects, as well as possible solutions for them. We also include a summary of
various useful resources and typical text generation applications based on PLMs. Finally, we highlight the
future research directions which will further improve these PLMs for text generation. This comprehensive
survey is intended to help researchers interested in text generation problems to learn the core concepts, the
main techniques and the latest developments in this area based on PLMs.
CCS Concepts: •General and reference →Surveys and overviews ;•Computing methodologies →
Natural language generation .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Pre-trained Language Models, Natural Language Processing
ACM Reference Format:
Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2022. Pre-trained Language Models
for Text Generation: A Survey. 1, 1 (May 2022), 35 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
Text generation, also known as natural language generation , has been one of the most important
sub-fields in natural language processing (NLP). It aims to produce plausible and readable text in a
human language, from the input data in various forms including text, image, table and knowledge
base. In the last decades, text generation techniques have been extensively applied to a wide range
of applications. For example, they have been used in dialog systems to generate responses to user
∗Equal Contribution
†Corresponding author
Authors’ addresses: Junyi Li, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China and Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada,
lijunyi@ruc.edu.cn; Tianyi Tang, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China, steventianyitang@outlook.com; Wayne Xin
Zhao, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China, batmanfly@gmail.com; Jian-Yun Nie, Université de Montréal, Montréal,
Canada; Ji-Rong Wen, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2022/5-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.arXiv:2201.05273v4  [cs.CL]  13 May 2022