2 Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen
Input DataOutput TextPre-trained Language ModelsUnstructured TextStructured DataMultimedia Data
...
Dialog System
Machine TranslationText Summarization...Input RepresentationLearningModel ParametersOptimizationData ResourceModel ArchitectureDesign and SelectionApplicatione.g.,BART, GPT-3, T5
Fig. 1. An illustrative process of applying PLMs to text generation. We divide the process into three main
steps: input representation learning, model architecture design and selection, model parameters optimization.
utterances in a conversation [ 224], in machine translation to translate a text from one language into
another [ 31]; and in text summarization to generate an abridged summary of the source text [ 40].
The primary goal of text generation is to automatically learn an input-to-output mapping from
the data to construct an end-to-end solution with minimal human intervention. This mapping
function allows the generation system to generalize in a broader field and to generate free text under
the given conditions. Earlier approaches usually adopt statistical language models for modeling
the conditional probabilities of words given an 𝑛-gram context [ 11,13]. Such a statistical approach
is known to suffer from the data sparsity issue, and a number of smoothing methods have been
developed to alleviate this problem so as to better estimate unobserved term occurrences [ 179,210].
Still, word tokens are used as the basic representation units in these approaches, which leads to the
issue that similar tokens cannot be easily mapped with each other.
With the emergence of deep learning techniques [ 96], neural network models have dominated the
mainstream methods in text generation and make exceptional success in generating natural language
texts. Deep neural generation models usually adopt the sequence-to-sequence framework [ 177]
based on the encoder-decoder scheme: the encoder first maps the input sequence into fix-sized low-
dimensional vectors (called input embeddings ), and then the decoder generates a target text based
on the input embeddings. The representation by embeddings makes a key difference from earlier
statistical approaches, which makes it easier to cope with the possible relations between inputs
and outputs. Various neural models have been proposed with different designs for the encoder-
decoder architecture, such as graph neural networks (GNN) for encoding graph inputs [ 102] and
recurrent neural networks (RNN) for decoding texts [ 108]. Besides, the attention mechanism [ 2]
and copy mechanism [ 164] are widely used to improve the performance of text generation models.
An important merit of deep neural networks for text generation is that they enable end-to-end
learning of semantic mappings from the input data to output texts without labor-intensive feature
engineering. Moreover, deep neural models employ low-dimensional semantic representations [ 82]
to capture linguistic features of language, which is useful to alleviate data sparsity.
Despite the success of deep neural models for text generation, a major performance bottleneck
lies in the availability of large-scale labelled datasets. Most of text generation methods require
substantial amounts of manually labelled parallel data, which restricts their applicability in many
domains that suffer from a dearth of annotated examples. To date, most of existing labelled datasets
for text generation tasks are usually small. In such cases, deep neural networks are likely to overfit
on these small datasets and do not generalize well in practice. Moreover, the early neural models for
text generation were still relatively shallow with only 1~3 neural layers. Therefore, these models
have difficulties in modeling intricate relationships between the context and word meanings and
deriving contextual word representations for better generation [151].
In recent years, the paradigm of pre-trained language models (PLMs) is thriving in NLP [ 151].
The basic idea is to first pre-train the models on large-scale unsupervised corpora and then fine-
tune these models in downstream supervised tasks. Such a pretraining-finetuning framework
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2022.