xAI Methods - Overview 27
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/nredell/shapFlex
Discussion: In order to use the ASV, a causal graph for the variables is needed.
Such a graph is usually created based on domain knowledge. Examples include
applications in bioinformatics with signalling pathways data for which the under-
lying causal structure is experimentally veriﬁed or application in social sciences,
where sociodemographic data in which the direction of the relationship can bedetermined based on expert knowledge (e.g., age aﬀects income rather than
income aﬀects age).
A particular application of the ASV value is the model fairness analysis. If
a protected attribute, such as age or sex, does not directly aﬀect the model’s
score, its SHAP attribute will be zero. But if the protected attribute is the cause
for other proxy variables, then the ASV values will capture this indirect eﬀecton the model.
2.11 Break-Down
Idea: Variable contribution analysis is based on examining the change in e
S
values along with a growing set of variables described by a speciﬁc order (see
Fig.3B). If the model fhas interactions, diﬀerent orderings of the variables
may lead to diﬀerent contributions. The SHAP values average over all possible
orderings (see Eq. 6), thus leads to additive contributions and neglecting the
interactions.
An alternative is to analyze diﬀerent orderings to detect when one variable
has diﬀerent contributions depending on what other variables precede it. This is
a sign of interaction. The Break-Down method (see [ 16,17]) analyzes the various
orders to identify and visualize interactions in the model. The ﬁnal attributions
are determined based on a single ordering which is chosen based on greedy
heuristics.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/ModelOriented/DALEX
Discussion: Techniques such as SHAP generate explanations in the form of
additive contributions. However, these techniques are often used in the analysisof complex models, which are often not additive. [ 26] shows that for many tabular
datasets, an additive explanation may be an oversimpliﬁcation, and it may lead
to a false belief that the model behaves in an additive way.
2.12 Shapley Flow
Idea: Like for Asymmetric Shapley Values (ASV), Shapley Flow [ 84] also allows
the use of the dependency structure between variables in the explanation pro-
cess. As in ASV, the relationship is described by a causal graph. However, unlike
ASV and other methods, attribution is assigned not to the nodes (variables) but