28 A. Holzinger et al.
the edges (relationships between variables). An edge in a graph is signiﬁcant if its
removal would change the predictions of the model (see Fig. 3E). The edge attri-
bution has the additional property that for each explanation, boundaries hold the
classical Shapley values. The most extreme explanation boundary corresponds
to the ASV method. The Shapley Flow method determines the attributions foreach edge in the causal graph.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/nathanwang000/Shapley-Flow
Discussion: Shapley Flow attribution analysis carries a lot of information about
both the structure of the relationship between variables and its eﬀect of particu-lar groups of variables (explanation boundaries) on the predictions. On the rather
disadvantageous side is that it requires knowledge of the dependency structure
in the form of a directed causal graph, which limits the number of problems inwhich it can be applied. For readability reasons, it is limited to small numbers
of variables. Also it requires deﬁnition of a background case, i.e. reference obser-
vation. Potential explanations may vary depending on the reference observation
chosen.
2.13 Textual Explanations of Visual Models
Idea: The generation of textual descriptions of images is addressed by sev-
eral machine learning models that contain both a part that processes the input
images - typically a convolutional neural network (CNN) - and one that learns
an adequate text sequence, usually a recurrent neural network (RNN). Thosetwo parts cooperate for the production of image descriptive sentences that pre-
supposes that a classiﬁcation task is successfully accomplished. One of the ﬁrst
benchmark datasets that contained image descriptions was already invented in2014, the Microsoft COCO (MS-COCO) [ 48]. The models that achieve a good
performance classiﬁcation, ﬁrst detect components and concepts of the image
and then construct sentences where objects, subjects as well as their character-istics are connected by verbs. The problem of semantic enrichment of images
for language-related tasks is addressed in a number of ways (see, for example,
the Visual Genome project [ 45]); however, in most cases, such descriptions are
not directly tied to visual recognition tasks. Nevertheless, an advantage is that
textual descriptions are easier to analyze and validate than attribution maps.
It is important to note that the mere description of the image’s content is not
equivalent to an explanation of the decision-making process of the neural net-
work model. Unless the produced sentences contain the unique attributes thathelp diﬀerentiate between the images of each class, the content of the words
should not be considered class-relevant content. A solution to this problem is
proposed in [ 31]. This method’s main goal is to do exactly that; to ﬁnd those
characteristics that are discriminative, since they were used by the neural net-
work models to accomplish the task - those exactly need to be present in the
generated text. To achieve this, the training does not just use the relevance