16 A. Holzinger et al.
One prominent representative of this class of explanation techniques is the
Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) method [ 67]. The main
idea of LIME is to explain a prediction of a complex model fM, e.g., a deep neural
network, by ﬁtting a local surrogate model fS, whose predictions are easy to
explain. Therefore, LIME is also often referred to as surrogate-based explanationtechnique [ 70]. Technically, LIME generates samples in the neighborhood N
xiof
the input of interest xi, evaluates them using the target model, and subsequently
approximates the target model in this local vicinity by a simple linear function,i.e., a surrogate model which is easy to interpret. Thus, LIME does not directly
explain the prediction of the target model f
M(xi), but rather the predictions
of a surrogate model fS(xi), which locally approximates the target model (i.e.,
fM(x)≈fS(x)f o rx∈N xi).
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/marcotcr
Discussion: There are meanwhile many successful applications of LIME in
diﬀerent application domains which demonstrates the popularity of this model
agnostic method. As a limitation can be seen that LIME only indirectly solves
the explanation problem by relying on a surrogate model. Thus, the quality ofthe explanation largely depends on the quality of the surrogate ﬁt, which itself
may require dense sampling and thus may result in large computational costs.
Furthermore, sampling always introduces uncertainty, which can lead to non-deterministic behaviours and result in variable explanations for the same input
sample.
2.2 Anchors
Idea: The basic idea is that individual predictions of any black-box classiﬁca-
tion model are explained by ﬁnding a decision rule that suﬃciently “anchors”
the prediction - hence the name “anchors” [ 68]. The resulting explanations are
decision rules in the form of IF-THEN statements, which deﬁne regions in thefeature space. In these regions, the predictions are ﬁxed (or “anchored”) to the
class of the data point to be explained. Consequently, the classiﬁcation remains
the same no matter how much the other feature values of the data point that
are not part of the anchor are changed.
Good anchors should have high precision and high coverage. Precision is the
proportion of data points in the region deﬁned by the anchor that have the same
class as the data point being explained. Coverage describes how many data points
an anchor’s decision rule applies to. The more data points an anchor covers, thebetter, because the anchor then covers a larger area of the feature space and thus
represents a more general rule. Anchors is a model-agnostic explanation method,
i.e., it can be applied to any prediction model without requiring knowledge aboutthe internals. Search and construction of decision rules is done by reinforcement
learning (RL) [ 32,81] in combination with a modiﬁed beam search, a heuristic
search algorithm that extends the most promising nodes in a graph. The anchors