26 A. Holzinger et al.
In some situations, this is a very desirable property, e.g. if a pricing model pre-
dicts the value of a certain product, it is desirable to decompose this predictionadditively into components attributable to individual variables. SHAP draws
from a rich theoretical underpinning in game theory and fulﬁls desirable axioms,
for example, that features that did not contribute to the prediction get an attri-bution of zero. Shapley values can be further combined to global interpretations
of the model, such as feature dependence plots, feature importance and interac-
tion analysis.
One large drawback of Shapley values is their immense computational com-
plexity. For modern models such as deep neural networks and high dimensional
inputs, the exact computation of Shapley values is intractable. However, model-speciﬁc implementations exist for tree-based methods (random forest, xgboost
etc.) or additive models [ 49]. With care, one should use certain estimation ver-
sions of SHAP, such as KernelSHAP, because those are slow to compute. Fur-
thermore, when features are dependent, Shapley values will cause extrapolation
to areas with low data density. Conditional versions exist [ 50] (for tree-based
models only), but the interpretation changes which is a common pitfall [ 57].
SHAP explanations are not sparse since to each feature that changes the predic-
tion, a Shapley value diﬀerent from zero is attributed, no matter how small theinﬂuence. If sparse explanations are required, counterfactual explanations might
be preferable.
2.10 Asymmetric Shapley Values (ASV)
Idea: SHAP values are symmetrical. This means that if two variables have the
same eﬀect on the model’s behaviour, e.g. because they take identical values, they
will receive equal attributions. However, this is not always a desirable property.For example, if we knew that one of the variables has a causal eﬀect on the
other, then it would make more sense to assign the entire attribution to the
source variable.
Asymmetric Shapley values (ASV) [ 22,23] allow the use of additional knowl-
edge about the causal relations between variables in the model explanation pro-cess. A cause-eﬀect relationship described in the form of causal graph allows the
attribution of variables to be redistributed in such a way that the source vari-
ables have a greater attribution, providing eﬀect on both the other dependentvariables and the model predictions (see Fig. 3D). SHAP values are a special case
of ASV values, where the casual graph is reduced to a set of unrelated vertices
(see Fig. 3C).
The ASV values for variable iare also calculated as the average eﬀect of
adding a variable to a coalition of other variables, in the same way as expressed
in Eq. ( 6). The main diﬀerence is that not all possible orders of variables are
considered, but only the orders are consistent with the casual graph. Thus, a
larger eﬀect will be attributed to the source variables.