xAI Methods - Overview 15
XAI method developers in noting the shortcomings of currently available meth-
ods. Figure 2gives an overview of the chronology of development of successive
explanatory methods. Methods such as LRP and LIME were among the ﬁrst1
generic techniques to explain decisions of complex ML models. In addition tothe overview of explanation techniques, we would also like to hint the inter-ested reader at work that developed methods and oﬀered datasets to objectively
evaluate and systematically compare explanations. To mention here is Quantus
2
[30], a new toolbox oﬀering an exhaustive collection of evaluation methods and
metrics for explanations, and CLEVR-XAI3[8], a benchmark dataset for the
ground truth evaluation of neural network explanations.
2018 2015 2016 2017 2019 2020 2021LIME 
KDDAnchors 
AAAI
Integrated Gradients 
ICMLSHAP 
NIPSASV 
NIPSShapFlow 
AISTATS
XGNN 
KDDGraphLIME 
AAAI
LRP 
PlosONETCAV 
ICMLuse graph-like 
dependency structure 
between variablesuse interpretable 
feature space and local 
approximation with 
sparse K-LASSOadditive, use Shapley 
values (game theory)
unies DeepLIFT, LRP , 
LIMEfor gradient based 
models, use concepts 
learned from 
annotated samples
model agnostic and 
rule based, sparse, 
with interactionsAsymmetric Shapley 
values use variable 
distributions and 
dependency structure
interpretable model 
for graph networks
 from N-hop 
neighbourhood
post-hoc global-level 
explanations for graph 
neural networksaggregates gradients 
through the path 
between baseline and 
observation of interestLayer-wise Relevance 
Propagation 
heatmapping method 
based on Deep Taylor 
Decomposition
Fig. 2. Chronology of the development of successive explanatory methods described in
this paper. Initially, the methods were focused on model analysis based on the model
itself or on sample data. Subsequent methods used more and more information aboutthe structure and relationships between the analysed variables.
2 Explainable AI Methods - Overview
2.1 LIME (Local Interpretable Model Agnostic Explanations)
Idea: By treating the machine learning models as black-box functions, model
agnostic explanation methods typically only have access to the model’s output.The fact that these methods do not require any information about the model’s
internals, e.g., in the case of neural networks the topology, learned parameters
(weights, biases) and activation values, makes them widely applicable and veryﬂexible.
1We are aware that gradient-based sensitivity analysis and occlusion-based techniques
have been proposed even earlier [ 11,62,75,89]. However, theses techniques have var-
ious disadvantages (see [ 61,70]) and are therefore not considered in this paper.
2https://github.com/understandable-machine-intelligence-lab/quantus .
3https://github.com/ahmedmagdiosman/clevr-xai .