xAI Methods - Overview 29
loss, which generates descriptions relevant to the predicted class based on con-
text borrowed from a ﬁne-grained image recognition model through conditionalprobabilities. A discriminative loss is invented to generate sentences rich in class-
discriminative features. The introduced weight update procedure consists of two
components, one based on the gradient of relevance loss and the second basedon the gradient of discriminative loss, so that descriptions that are both relevant
to the predicted class and contain words with high discriminative capacity are
rewarded. The reinforcement learning method REINFORCE [ 85] is used for the
backpropagation of the error through sampling during the training process.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/LisaAnne/ECCV2016
Discussion: High METEOR [ 13]a n dC I D E r[ 82] scores for relevant explana-
tions were measured for the generated sentences. It is necessary to compare the
resulting explanations with experts since they only know the diﬀerence betweensentences that correctly describe the visual content and ones that concentrate
on what occurs only in the class the images belong. This is positive and nega-
tive at the same time; unfortunately, there is no way to check how much of thegenerated explanation is consistent without domain knowledge. Furthermore,
data artefacts can also inﬂuence both the performance and explanation quality
negatively. Overall though, even ablation studies where parts of the model were
tested separately, showed that the components individually had a higher per-
formance than when trained alone. That indicates that the common training ofvisual processing and textual explanation generation is beneﬁcial for each part
individually.
2.14 Integrated Gradients
Idea: The Integrated Gradients method [ 80] is based on two fundamental
axioms, sensitivity and implementation invariance. Sensitivity means that non-zero attributions are given to every input and baseline that diﬀer in one fea-
ture but have diﬀerent predictions. Implementation invariance means that if two
models behave identical/are functionally equivalent, then attributions must beidentical. Although these two axioms sound very natural, it turns out that many
attribution methods do not have these properties. In particular, when a model
has ﬂattened predictions for a speciﬁc point of interest, the gradient in the pointof interest zeroes out and does not carry information useful for the explanation.
The approach proposed by the Integrated Gradients method for model f
aggregates the gradients
∂f(x)
∂x icomputed along the path connecting the point of
interest xto the highlighted observation - the baseline x∗(for computer vision
this could be a black image and for text an empty sentence).
More formally, for ith feature, Integrated Gradients are deﬁned as
IntegratedGrads i(x)=(xi−x∗
i)/integraldisplay1
α=0∂f(x∗+α(x−x∗))
∂xidα.