xAI Methods - Overview 17
algorithm cycles through diﬀerent steps: produce candidate anchors, select the
best candidates, then use beam search to extend the anchor rules. To select thebest candidate, it is necessary to call the model many times, which can be seen
as an exploration or multi-armed bandit problem.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/marcotcr/anchor
Discussion: The anchors are model-independent and can be applied to diﬀerent
domains such as tabular data, images and text, depending on the perturbation
strategy. However, in the current Python implementation, anchors only supports
tabular and text data. Compared to LIME, the scope of interpretation is cleareras the anchors specify the boundaries within which they should be interpreted.
The coverage of an anchor decision rule can be used as a measure of the model
ﬁdelity of the anchor. Furthermore, the decision rules are easy to understand, butthere are many hyper-parameters in the calculation of anchors, such as the width
of the beam and the precision threshold, which need to be tuned individually.
The perturbation strategies also need to be carefully selected depending on the
application and model. The calculation of anchors requires many calls to the
prediction function, which makes the anchors computationally intensive. Datainstances that are close to the decision boundary of the model may require more
complex rules with more features and less coverage. Unbalanced classiﬁcation
problems can produce trivial decision rules, such as classifying each data pointas the majority class. A possible remedy is to adapt the perturbation strategy
to a more balanced distribution.
2.3 GraphLIME
Idea: GraphLIME [ 38] is a method that takes the basic idea of LIME (see
Sect.2.1) but is not linear. It is applied to a special type of neural network
architecture, namely graph neural networks (GNN). These models can process
non-Euclidean data as they are organised in a graph structure [ 9]. The main
tasks that GNNs perform are node classiﬁcation, link prediction and graph clas-
siﬁcation. Like LIME, this method tries to ﬁnd an interpretable model, which
in this case is the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) Lasso model,
for explaining a particular node in the input graph. It takes into account the
fact that during the training of the GNN, several nonlinear aggregation andcombination methods use the features of neighbouring nodes to determine the
representative embedding of each node. This embedding is used to distinguish
nodes into diﬀerent classes in the case of node classiﬁcation and to collectivelydistinguish graphs in graph classiﬁcation tasks.
Since for this type of model a linear explanation as LIME would return
unfaithful results, the main idea of GraphLIME is to sample from the N-hopneighbourhood of the node and collect features w.r.t. to the node prediction.
Those are used to train the HSIC Lasso model, which is a kernel method -
thereby interpretable - that can compute on which node features the output