14 A. Holzinger et al.
lack of transparency of these black-box approaches, which do not foster trust
and acceptance of AI in general and ML in particular. Increasing legal anddata protection aspects, e.g., due to the new European General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR, in force since May 2018), complicate the use of black-box
approaches, particularly in domains that aﬀect human life, such as the medicalﬁeld [56,63,73,76].
The term explainable AI (xAI) was coined by DARPA [ 28] and gained mean-
while a lot of popularity. However, xAI is not a new buzzword. It can be seenas a new name for a very old quest in science to help to provide answers to
questions of why [ 66]. The goal is to enable human experts to understand the
underlying explanatory factors of why an AI decision has been made [ 64]. This
is highly relevant for causal understanding and thus enabling ethical responsible
AI and transparent veriﬁable machine learning in decision support [ 74].
The international community has developed a very broad range of diﬀerent
methods and approaches and here we provide a short concise overview to help
engineers but also students to select the best possible method. Figure 1shows
the most popular XAI toolboxes.
EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
GGGGGGGGGGGGGGG
CCCCCCCCCCCCCCC
HHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
IIIIIIIIIIII
10100100010000
2016 2018 2020 2022
datestarslibrary
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Islundberg/shap
marcotcr/lime
Trusted-AI/AIX360
ModelOriented/DALEX
albermax/innvestigatemarcotcr/anchor
tensorflow/tcav
nredell/shapFlex
nathanwang000/Shapley-FlowNumber of stars over time
Fig. 1. Number of stars on GitHub for the most popular repositories presented in this
paper. While these repositories focus on the explanation task, the new Quantus toolbox
[30] oﬀers a collection of methods for evaluating and comparing explanations.
In the following we provide a short overview of some of the most popu-
lar methods for explaining complex models. We hope that this list will help
both practitioners in choosing the right method for model explanation and