22 A. Holzinger et al.
data), as well as medical images (MRI brain scans). A good discussion can be
found in: https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJ5UeU9xx
2.7 TCAV (Testing with Concept Activation Vectors)
Idea: TCAV [ 41] is a concept-based neural network approach that aims to
quantify how strongly a concept, such as colour, inﬂuences classiﬁcation. TCAV
is based on the idea of concept activation vectors (CAV), which describe howneural activations inﬂuence the presence or absence of a user-speciﬁc concept. To
calculate such a CAV, two data sets must ﬁrst be collected and combined: One
dataset containing images representing the concept and one dataset consistingof images in which this concept is not present. Then a logistic regression model
is trained on the combined dataset to classify whether the concept is present
in an image. The activations of the user-deﬁned layer of the neural network
serve as features for the classiﬁcation model. The coeﬃcients of the logistic
regression model are then the CAVs. For example, to investigate how much theconcept “stripped” contributes to the classiﬁcation of an image as “zebra” by
a convolutional neural network, a dataset representing the concept “stripped”
and a random dataset in which the concept “stripped” is not present must beassembled. From the CAVs, the conceptual sensitivity can be calculated, which
is the product of the CAV and the derivative of the classiﬁcation (of the original
network) with respect to the speciﬁed neural network layer and class. Conceptualsensitivity thus indicates how strongly the presence of a concept contributes to
the desired class.
While the CAV is a local explanation as it relates to a single classiﬁcation,
the TCAV combines the CAVs across the data into a global explanation method
and thus answers the question of how much a concept contributed overall to
a given classiﬁcation. First, the CAVs are calculated for the entire dataset forthe selected class, concept and level. Then TCAV calculates the ratio of images
with positive conceptual sensitivity, which indicates for how many images the
concept contributed to the class. This ratio is calculated multiple times, each
time using a diﬀerent “negative” sample where the concept is not present, and a
two-tailed Student t-test [ 77] is applied to test whether the conceptual sensitivity
is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero (the test part is where the “T” in TCAV comes
from).
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/tensorﬂow/tcav
Discussion: TCAV can be applied to detect concept sensitivity for image clas-
siﬁers that are gradient-based, such as deep neural networks. TCAV can also
be used to analyze fairness aspects, e.g. whether gender or attributes of pro-
tected groups are used for classiﬁcation. Very positive is that TCAV can beused by users without machine learning expertise, as the most important part
is collecting the concept images, where domain expertise is important. TCAV
allows to test a classiﬁcation model for arbitrary concepts, even if the model