30 A. Holzinger et al.
The integral can be replaced by a sum over a set of alpha values in the
interval [0,1].
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/ankurtaly/Integrated-Gradients
Discussion: Integrated Gradients is a widespread technique for explaining deep
neural networks or other diﬀerentiable models. It is a theoretically sound app-
roach based on two desirable properties: sensitivity and implementation invari-
ance. In addition, it is computationally eﬃcient and uses gradient information
at a few selected points α. The three main drawbacks are: (1) need for the base-
line observation, selection of which signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the attributions, (2)works only for diﬀerentiable models, suitable for neural networks but not, e.g.,
for decision trees, (3) by default, gradients are integrated along the shortest path
between the baseline and the point of interest. Depending on the topology of thedata, this path does not always make sense and cover the data. Furthermore,
deep models usually suﬀer from the gradient shattering problem [ 12], which may
negative aﬀect the explanation (see discussion in [ 70]). Extensions to this method
are proposed to overcome the above drawbacks.
2.15 Causal Models
Description: In the work of Madumal et al. [ 53] a structural causal model
[29] is learned, which can be considered an extension of Bayesian Models [ 44,71]
of the RL environment with the use of counterfactuals. It takes into account
events that would happen or environment states that would be reached under
diﬀerent actions taken by the RL agent. Ultimately, the goal of any RL agentis to maximize a long-term reward; the explanation provides causal chains until
the reward receiving state is reached. The researchers pay attention to keep
the explanations minimally complete, by removing some of the intermediatenodes in the causal chains, to conform to the explanation satisfaction conditions
according to the Likert scale [ 33]. The counterfactual explanation is computed by
comparing causal chain paths of actions not chosen by the agent (according to thetrained policy). To keep the explanation as simple as possible, only the diﬀerences
between the causal chains comprise the returned counterfactual explanation.
GitHub Repo: No Github Repo
Discussion: Model-free reinforcement learning with a relatively small state
and action space has the advantage that we can explain how the RL agent
takes its decisions in a causal way; since neural networks base their decisions on
correlations, this is one of the ﬁrst works towards causal explanations. The userhas the ability to get answers to the questions “why” and “why not” an action
was chosen by the agent. The provided explanations are appropriate according
to satisﬁability, ethics requirements and are personalized to the human mental