xAI Methods - Overview 23
was not explicitly trained on them. The technique can be used to study whether
a network learned “ﬂawed” concepts, such as spurious correlations. Detectingﬂawed concepts can help to improve the model. For example, it could be studied
how important the presence of snow was for classifying wolves on images, and
if it turns out to be important, adding images with wolves without snow mightimprove the robustness of the model. One drawback can be seen in the eﬀort for
labeling and collecting new data. Some concepts might also be too abstract to
test, as the collection of a concept dataset might be diﬃcult. How would one,for example, collect a dataset of images representing the concept“happiness”?
Furthermore, TCAV may not work well with shallower neural networks, as only
deeper networks learn more abstract concepts. Also, the technique is also notapplicable to text and tabular data, but mainly to image data
5(last accessed:
21-Feb-2022). A practical example from the medical domain can be found in [ 19].
2.8 XGNN (Explainable Graph Neural Networks)
Idea: The XGNN method [ 88] is a post-hoc method that operates on the model
level, meaning that it does not strive to provide individual example-level expla-nations. RL drives a search to ﬁnd an adequate graph starting by a randomly
chosen node or a relatively small graph, as deﬁned by prior knowledge. The RL
algorithm follows two rewards at the same time: ﬁrst, it tries to increase theperformance of the GNN, but secondly to keep generating valid graphs, depend-
ing on the domain requirements. The action space contains only edge addition
for edges in the existing graph or an enhancement with a new node. In the casewhere the action has a non-desirable contribution, a negative reward is provided.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/divelab/DIG/tree/dig/benchmarks/xgra
ph/supp/XGNN and pseudocode in the paper.
Discussion: This explanation method is invented particularly for the task of
graph classiﬁcations. The returned graphs are the ones that were the most rep-resentative for the GNN decision and usually have a particular property that
is ingrained to make the validation possible. It is worth to mention that this is
the only method that provides mode-level explanations for GNN architectures.The use of RL is justiﬁed by the fact that the search for the explanation graph
is non-diﬀerentiable, since it is not only driven by the performance but also
by the plausibility and validity of the generated graph. Because the training ofGNNs involves aggregations and combinations, this is an eﬃcient way to over-
come the obstacle of non-diﬀerentiation. The provided explanation is considered
to be more eﬀective for big datasets, where humans don’t have the time to checkeach example’s explanation individually. A disadvantage can be seen by the fact
that the research idea is based on the assumption that network motifs that are
the result of this explanation method are the ones on which the GNN is most
5For discussion see: https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1viikbCW .