Explainable AI Methods - A Brief
Overview
Andreas Holzinger1,2,3(B), Anna Saranti1,2, Christoph Molnar4,
Przemyslaw Biecek5,6, and Wojciech Samek7,8
1Human-Centered AI Lab, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences,
Vienna, Austria
andreas.holzinger@human-centered.ai
2Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria
3xAI Lab, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Edmonton, Canada
4Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research and Epidemiology - BIPS GmbH,
Bremen, Germany
5Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland
6University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
7Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute,
Berlin, Germany
8BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Data and Learning,
Berlin, Germany
Abstract. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (xAI) is an established
ﬁeld with a vibrant community that has developed a variety of very
successful approaches to explain and interpret predictions of complex
machine learning models such as deep neural networks. In this article, webrieﬂy introduce a few selected methods and discuss them in a short, clear
and concise way. The goal of this article is to give beginners, especially
application engineers and data scientists, a quick overview of the stateof the art in this current topic. The following 17 methods are covered
in this chapter: LIME, Anchors, GraphLIME, LRP, DTD, PDA, TCAV,
XGNN, SHAP, ASV, Break-Down, Shapley Flow, Textual Explanationsof Visual Models, Integrated Gradients, Causal Models, Meaningful Per-
turbations, and X-NeSyL.
Keywords: Explainable AI
·Methods ·Evaluation
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has a long tradition in computer science. Machine
learning (ML) and particularly the success of “deep learning” in the last decade
made AI extremely popular again [ 15,25,90].
The great success came with additional costs and responsibilities: the most
successful methods are so complex that it is diﬃcult for a human to re-trace,
to understand, and to interpret how a certain result was achieved. Conse-
quently, explainability/interpretability/understandability is motivated by the
c/circlecopyrtThe Author(s) 2022
A. Holzinger et al. (Eds.): xxAI 2020, LNAI 13200, pp. 13–38, 2022.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04083-2
_2