xAI Methods - Overview 21
of root point are recommended for diﬀerent types of layers (conv layer, fully
connected layer, input layer) and lead to diﬀerent LRP redistribution rules [ 58].
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/chr5tphr/zennit
https://github.com/albermax/innvestigate
Discussion: DTD is a theoretically motivated explanation framework, which
redistributes relevance from layer to layer in a meaningful manner by utilizing
the concept of Taylor expansion. The method is highly eﬃcient in terms of com-
putation and can be adapted to the speciﬁc properties of a model and its layers
(e.g., by the choice of root point). As for LRP, it is usually not straight for-ward to adapt DTD to novel model architectures (see e.g. local renormalization
layers [ 18]).
2.6 Prediction Diﬀerence Analysis (PDA)
Idea: At the 2017 ICLR conference, Zintgraf et al. [ 91] presented the Prediction
Diﬀerence Analysis (PDA) method. The method is based on the previous ideapresented by [ 69] where, for a given prediction, each input feature is assigned a
relevance value with respect to a class c. The idea of PDA is that the relevance of
a feature x
ican be estimated by simply measuring how the prediction changes
when the feature is unknown, i.e., the diﬀerence between p(c|x)a n d p(c|x\i),
where x\idenotes the set of all input features except xi. Now to evaluate the
prediction, speciﬁcally to ﬁnd p(c|x\i) there are three possibilities: (1) label the
feature as unknown, (2) re-train the classiﬁer omitting the feature, or (3) simu-
late the absence of a feature by marginalizing the feature. With that a relevancevector (WE
i)i=1...m(whereby mrepresent the number of features) is generated,
that is of the same size as the input and thus reﬂects the relative importance of
all features. A large prediction diﬀerence indicates that the feature contributedsigniﬁcantly to the classiﬁcation, while a small diﬀerence indicates that the fea-
ture was not as important to the decision. So speciﬁcally, a positive value WE
i
means that the feature contributed to the evidence for the class of interest and
much more so that removing the feature would reduce the classiﬁer’s conﬁdence
in the given class. A negative value, on the other hand, means that the feature
provides evidence against the class: Removing the feature also removes poten-tially contradictory or disturbing information, and makes the classiﬁer more
conﬁdent in the class under study.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/lmzintgraf/DeepVis-PredDiﬀ
Discussion: Making neural network decisions interpretable through visualiza-
tion is important both to improve models and to accelerate the adoption of
black-box classiﬁers in application areas such as medicine. In the original paper
the authors illustrate the method in experiments on natural images (ImageNet