32 A. Holzinger et al.
they produce output that is more interpretable, such as mathematical equations
or Domain-Speciﬁc Languages (DSL) [ 55].
A research work that is dedicated to using symbolic knowledge of the domain
experts, expressed as a knowledge graph (KG), to align it with the explanations
of a neural network is the EXplainable Neural-Symbolic Learning (X-NeSyL)[20]. The researchers start with the goal to encourage the neural network that
performs classiﬁcation to assign feature importances to the object’s parts in a
way that corresponds to the compositional way humans classify. After usingstate-of-the-art CNN architectures and applying methods such as SHAP (see
Sect.2.9) to quantify the positive and negative inﬂuence of each detected feature,
a graph is built that encompasses constraints and relations elicited from thecomputed importances. This graph is compared to the KG provided by human
experts. A designated loss that punishes non-overlap between these two has been
shown to boost explainability and in some cases performance.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/JulesSanchez/X-NeSyL ,
https://github.com/JulesSanchez/MonuMAI-AutomaticStyleClassiﬁcation
Discussion: This method can be seen as an explainability-by-design approach.
That means that at each step of the training process, it is made sure that the end
result will be interpretable. This is not an ad-hoc method; the training containsa loss to guide the neural network towards explanations that have a human-
expert like structure. Furthermore, SHAP values provide intermediate feature
relevance results that are straightforward to understand. Disadvantageous is thatthe same thing that fosters explainability, contributes to the negatives of this
approach, namely that it needs domain-speciﬁc knowledge. This is not always
easy to gather, it may be contradicting if several experts are involved and inthat way constraints the network to compute in a speciﬁc way. The researchers
comment on that particular issue and exercise their method with many datasets,
test several CNN architectures and provide performance results with established
as well as newly invented methods to see where and how the human-in-the-loop
[37] works in practice.
3 Conclusion and Future Outlook
In the future, we expect that the newly invented xAI methods will capture causal
dependencies. Therefore, it will be important to measure the quality of explana-
tions so that an xAI method achieves a certain level of causal understanding [ 65]
for a user with eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency and satisfaction in a given context of use[34]. Successful xAI models in the future will also require new human-AI inter-
faces [ 36] that enable contextual understanding and allow a domain expert to ask
questions and counterfactuals [ 35] (“what-if” questions). This is where a human-
in-the-loop can (sometimes - not always, of course) bring human experience and
conceptual knowledge to AI processes [ 37]. Such conceptual understanding is