18 A. Holzinger et al.
prediction depends on. This is similar to the perturbation method that LIME
uses, while the comparison, in this case, is based on HSIC estimation betweenthe random variables representing the features and the prediction distributions.
This method learns correlations between the features of the neighbours which
also underline its explanation capabilities.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/WilliamCCHuang/GraphLIME
Discussion: The developers compared GraphLIME with one of the ﬁrst xAI
methods for GNNs at the time, namely GNNExplainer, w.r.t. three criteria:(1) ability to detect useless features, (2) ability to decide whether the pre-
diction is trustworthy, and (3) ability to identify the better model among two
GNN classiﬁers. They show that for synthetic data and human-labelled anno-
tations, GraphLIME exceeds the GNNExplainer by far in the last two crite-
ria. They arrive at a very interesting insight, namely that models that havefewer untrustworthy features in their explanation have better classiﬁcation per-
formance. Furthermore, GraphLIME is shown to be computationally much more
eﬃcient than GNNExplainer. It would be beneﬁcial - and is considered futurework - if GraphLIME was also trying to ﬁnd important graph substructures
instead of just features, if it was compared with other methods like PGExplainer
[52], PGMExplainer [ 83], GNN-LRP [ 72], and if it were extended to multiple
instance explanations. Finally, it is important to note that GraphLIME is suc-
cessfully used for the investigation of backdoor attacks on GNNs by uncovering
the relevant features of the graph’s nodes [ 86].
2.4 Method: LRP (Layer-wise Relevance Propagation)
Idea: Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [ 10] is a propagation-based
explanation method, i.e., it requires access to the model’s internals (topology,
weights, activations etc.). This additional information about the model, however,
allows LRP to simplify and thus more eﬃciently solve the explanation problem.More precisely, LRP does not explain the prediction of a deep neural network in
one step (as model agnostic methods would do), but exploits the network struc-
ture and redistributes the explanatory factors (called relevance R)l a y e rb yl a y e r ,
starting from the model’s output, onto the input variables (e.g., pixels). Each
redistribution can be seen as the solution of a simple (because only between two
adjacent layers) explanation problem (see interpretation of LRP as Deep TaylorDecomposition in Sect. 2.5).
Thus, the main idea of LRP is to explain by decomposition, i.e., to iteratively
redistribute the total evidence of the prediction f(x), e.g., indicating that there
is a cat in the image, in a conservative manner from the upper to the next lower
layer, i.e.,
/summationdisplay
iR(0)
i=...=/summationdisplay
jR(l)
j=/summationdisplay
kR(l+1)
k=...=f(x). (1)