xAI Methods - Overview 31
model by the use of a dedicated user interface. On the rather negative side is
that this explanation method is evaluated on problems with very small stateand action space (9 and 4 correspondingly). Current RL problems have much
larger state and action spaces and the solution can be found with the use of
Deep Reinforcement Learning [ 27,32]. The reason is, that the structural model
of the environment dynamics are not known a priori and must be discovered and
approximated during exploration. Furthermore, this work applies only to the
ﬁnite domain, although the authors note that it will be part of their researchwork to extend it to continuous spaces.
2.16 Meaningful Perturbations
Idea: This approach was proposed by Fong and Vedaldi [ 21] and can be regarded
as model-agnostic, perturbation-based explanation method. Thus, the explana-
tion is computed solely based on the reaction of the model to a perturbed (oroccluded) input sample. For a given sample x, the method aims to synthesize a
sparse occlusion map (i.e., the explanation) that leads to the maximum drop of
the model’s prediction f(x), relative do the original prediction with the unper-
turbed x. Thus, compared to simple occlusion-based techniques which naively
perturb a given sample by sequentially occluding parts of it, the Meaningful Per-
turbation algorithm aims to directly learn the explanation by formulating theexplanation problem as a meta-prediction task and using tools from optimiza-
tion to solve it. Sparsity constraints ensure that the search focuses on ﬁnding the
smallest possible perturbation mask that has the larger eﬀect on the certaintyof the classiﬁcation performance.
GitHub Repo: https://github.com/ruthcfong/perturb
explanations
Discussion: As other model agnostic approaches, Meaningful Perturbations is
a very ﬂexible method, which can be directly applied to any machine learning
model. The approach can be also interpreted from a rate-distortion perspec-tive [43]. Since the Meaningful Perturbations method involves optimization, it
is computationally much more demanding than propagation-based techniques
such as LRP. Also it is well-known that the perturbation process (occlusion ordeletion can be seen as a particular type of perturbation), moves the sample
out of the manifold of natural images and thus can introduce artifacts. The
use of generative models have been suggested to overcome this out-of-manifoldproblem [ 1].
2.17 EXplainable Neural-Symbolic Learning (X-NeSyL)
Idea: Symbolic AI is an emerging ﬁeld that has been shown to contribute
immensely to Explainable AI. Neuro-Symbolic methods [ 24] incorporate prior
human knowledge for various tasks such as concept learning and at the same time