Least squares binary quantization of neural networks
Hadi Pouransari, Zhucheng Tu, Oncel Tuzel
Apple Inc.
Cupertino, CA 95014, USA
{mpouransari,zhucheng tu,ctuzel }@apple.com
Abstract
Quantizing weights and activations of deep neural net-
works results in signiﬁcant improvement in inference efﬁ-
ciency at the cost of lower accuracy. A source of the ac-
curacy gap between full precision and quantized models is
the quantization error. In this work, we focus on the bi-
nary quantization, in which values are mapped to -1 and 1.
We provide a uniﬁed framework to analyze different scaling
strategies. Inspired by the pareto-optimality of 2-bits versus
1-bit quantization, we introduce a novel 2-bits quantization
with provably least squares error. Our quantization algo-
rithms can be implemented efﬁciently on the hardware us-
ing bitwise operations. We present proofs to show that our
proposed methods are optimal, and also provide empirical
error analysis. We conduct experiments on the ImageNet
dataset and show a reduced accuracy gap when using the
proposed least squares quantization algorithms.1
1. Introduction
A major challenge in the deployment of Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) is their high computational cost. Find-
ing effective methods to improve run-time efﬁciency is still
an area of research. We can group various approaches taken
by researchers into the following three categories.
Hardware optimization : Speciﬁcally designed hard-
wares are deployed to efﬁciently perform computations
in ML tasks. Compiler optimization : Compression and
fusion techniques coupled with efﬁcient hardware-aware
implementations, such as dense and sparse matrix-vector
multiplication, are used. Model optimization : Run-time
performance can also be gained by modifying the model
structure and the underlying arithmetic operations. While
hardware and compiler optimization are typically lossless,
model optimization trades-off computational cost (memory,
runtime, or power) for model accuracy. For example, by
scaling the width of the network [53]. The goal of model
1Code will be available.optimization is to improve the trade-off between computa-
tional cost and model accuracy. This work falls into this
category. We brieﬂy explain different model optimization
techniques here.
Architecture optimization One strategy to construct ef-
ﬁcient DNNs is to deﬁne a template from which efﬁcient
computational blocks can be generated. SqueezeNet [29],
MobileNets [27, 45], ShufﬂeNets [39, 55], and ESPNets
[40, 41] fall into this category. Complementary to these
methods, NASNet [58] and EfﬁcientNet [49] search for an
optimal composition of blocks restricted to a computational
budget (e.g., FLOPS) by changing the resolution, depth,
width, or other parameters of each layer.
Pruning and Compression : Several methods have been
proposed to improve runtime performance by detecting and
removing computational redundancies. Examples of meth-
ods in this category include low-rank acceleration [32], the
use of depth-wise convolution in Inception [48], sparsiﬁca-
tion of kernels in deep compression [20], re-training redun-
dant neurons in DSD [21], depth-wise separable convolu-
tion in Xception [10], pruning redundant ﬁlters in PFA [47],
ﬁnding an optimal sub-network in lottery ticket hypothe-
sis [16], and separating channels based on the features res-
olution in octave convolution [8].
Low-precision arithmetic and quantization: Another
avenue to improve runtime performance, and the focus of
this work, is to use low-precision arithmetic. The idea is to
use fewer bits to represent weights and activations. Some
instances of these strategies already exist in AI compilers,
where it is common to cast weights of a trained model
from 32 bits to 16 or 8 bits. However, in general, post-
training quantization reduces the model accuracy. This can
be addressed by incorporating lower-precision arithmetic
into the training process (during-training quantization), al-
lowing the resulting model to better adapt to the lower pre-
cision [18, 31]. Additionally, to improve utilization, many
works considered mixed-precision quantization, where dif-
ferent number of bits are allowed at different layers of the
network [14, 50, 52].
Using fewer bits results in dramatic memory savings.
1