Deep Learning and Transfer Learning Features for Plankton Classification
Alessandra Lumini1, Loris Nanni2
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, via Pavese 50, 47521, Cesena (FC), Italy.
2 Department of Information Engineering, University of Padua, via Gradenigo 6/B, 35131 Padova, Italy. 
Abstract: Plankton are the most fundamental components of ocean ecosystems, due to their function at many levels 
of the oceans food chain. Studying and monitoring plankton distribution is vital for global climate and environment 
protection. Currently, much research is concentrated on the automated recognition of plankton and several imaging-based 
technologies have been developed for collecting plankton images continuously using underwater image sensors. In this 
paper, we present a study about an automated plankton recognition system, which is based on the fusion of different deep 
learning methods. In this work we study both the fine tuning of several deep learned models and transfer learning from 
the same models with the aim of exploiting their diversity in designing an ensemble of classifiers, we deal with: (i) the 
ability of fine-tuning pre-trained CNN for plankton classification, (ii) the possibility of using pre-trained CNN for transfer 
learning, (iii) the possibility of coupling pre-processing to CNN in order to improve their feature extraction capability. 
The combination of such different descriptors/methods in a heterogeneous ensemble grants a substantial performance 
improvement with respect to other state-of-the-art approaches based on feature selection and classification. The 
experimental evaluation on three large publicly available datasets demonstrates high classification accuracy and f-
measure of our ensemble with respect to other classifiers on the same datasets. One of the main contributions of this work 
is a collection of classification models and a wide experimental evaluation to report performance of both single CNN and 
ensemble of CNNs in different available plankton datasets with a given testing protocol. Moreover, we show how to 
combine different CNN in order to improve the performance. To encourage future comparisons the MATLAB source 
code is available in the GitHub repository: https://github.com/LorisNanni.
Keywords— Convolutional Neural Network, Transfer learning, Plankton Classification.
1. Introduction
Studying marine plankton, i.e. organisms that drift freely in the water, is critical to assessing the health of the world’s 
oceans, since plankton is very sensitive to environment variations, therefore their distribution is a suitable indicator for 
climatic events, such as global warming. Plankton microorganisms form the basis of the food web, play an important 
function at many levels of the oceans food chain, link the atmosphere to the deep ocean, and regulate global-scale 
biogeochemical cycles. 
Studying and monitoring plankton distribution is vital for global climate and environment protection: plankton is the 
main oxygen producer (for about 90% of all oxygen), so low level of plankton is dangerous for the ocean ecosystem; on 
the other hand, its excessive abundance can also result in a devastating effects due to production of toxins [1].
Researchers are increasingly replacing sampling techniques in favor of specially engineered in situ digital imaging 
systems that produce very large data sets (i.e. [2][3][4]). Unfortunately the task of monitoring plankton distribution is 
very challenging due to microscopic size of the organism forming plankton and the dynamic nature of the ocean, moreover 
manual annotation of plankton images is expensive, time consuming, and error prone.   
Many researchers have explored automated methods for performing plankton classification based on computer vision 
techniques. Automatic plankton classification [1][5][6][7] is a difficult task, due to three main reasons: (i) plankton images 
are often acquired at low resolution which make object classification hard even by a human expert; (ii) plankton images 
include a wide range of phylogenetic species which offer specific challenges to taxonomy, (iii) the classes are unbalanced 
among the same and different datasets and data drifts can income between training and test sets. 
Recent works in this area are mainly based on two different classes of approaches: (i) handcrafted approaches [1][7], 
where feature extraction is based on hand-crafted descriptors (such as SIFT and LBP) and classification is often done 
with Support Vector Machines or Random Forests, and (ii) deep learning approaches [5][6], that exploit Convolutional 
Neural Networks (CNN) [8] for image classification. 
One of the first noticeably approach based on handcrafted features is the method of Tang et al. [9], which combines 
invariant moment features and Fourier boundary descriptors with grayscale morphological granulometries. Another