3
The paper is organized as follows. The proposed approach is detailed in Section 2, where both deep learning networks 
and transfer learning approaches are discussed. In Section 3, we describe the three datasets used for experiments, the 
testing protocols and discuss the experimental results. The conclusion is given in Section 4.
2. Methods
In this work the deep learned methods are based on fine-tuning of some well-known CNN architectures according to 
some different training strategies (one and two round training, preprocessing before training). The trained CNNs have 
been used both for classification purposes and as feature extractors to extract features used to train a general purpose 
classifier.
In this section we describe the CNN architecture used for deep learning, the pre-processing approaches tested as pre-
filters before training CNNs and the transfer learning approaches used to extract features from the CNNs. 
2.1 CNN models
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a category of neural networks designed for image recognition and 
classification. CNNs have been successful applied in several image classification task as identifying faces, objects 
recognition, pedestrian and traffic signs recognition. CNNs are designed to work similarly to the human brain in visually 
perceiving the world: they include layers of “neurons” that exclusively respond to neurons in their direct environment. A 
CNN is a  feed-forward neural network including a repeated concatenation of some classes of layers [24]: 
Convolutional layers (CONV), whose aim is to extract features from the input image, by convolving input to filters that 
apply to small squares of input data and preserve the spatial relationship between pixels. The CONV layers substitute 
conventional handcrafted feature extractors.
Activation layers (ACT), which are used to introduce nonlinearity to the system; the most used activation function is 
ReLU, an element wise operation which replaces all negative pixel by zero. Other (less used) ACT layers are sigmoid or 
tanh.
Pool layers (POOL), also called subsampling or down sampling, reduce the dimensionality of each feature map but 
retain the most important information with the purpose of making the input representations smaller and more manageable, 
decreasing the size of the data to be inferred and the risk of over-fitting, making the network invariant to small 
transformations, distortions and translations in the input image. The most used pooling functions are max, average and 
sum.
Fully-connected layers (FC) are layers which connect every neuron in the previous layer to every neuron on the next 
layer. The purpose of a FC layer is to use the features extracted from the previous layers for classifying the input image 
into various classes based on the training dataset. 
Classification layers (CLASS) perform the final classification. They can be implemented as general purpose classifiers 
(i.e. SVM), but generally a SoftMax function is used which takes a vector of arbitrary real-valued scores and squashes it 
to a vector of values between zero and one that sum to one. 
The CNN are trained using backpropagation: first all filters and parameters are initialized with random values, then using 
training images as input, the CNN performs a forward propagation step and finds the output probabilities (and the 
classification errors) for each class, finally backpropagation is used to calculate the gradients of the error with respect to 
all weights in the network and use gradient descent to update all filter and parameter values to minimize the output error. 
The main problem is that often the amount of training images is not enough to adjust all the parameters without incurring 
in overfitting: in such a case transfer learning and fine tuning are used, i.e. the solutions consisting in using a pre-trained 
network where only the parameters of the last classifications levels need to be inferred from scratch using the training set. 
In this work we use 9 different pre-trained model modified in order to fit the new classification problem (i.e. changing 
the last FC and CLASS layers to fit the number of plankton classes, without freezing the weights of the previous layers) 
and “fine-tuned” with the training set of the current problem. In our experiments, we test and combine the following