8 
According to some early work (e.g. [45]), one of the main problems in plankton classification is the so-called dataset 
drift, that occurs when the distribution of a class changes between training and test sets. This phenomenon is related to 
the variation of testing conditions over time: in our experiments in order to imitate the dataset drift condition, the class 
distribution has not been maintained when splitting dataset between training and testing. Moreover our experiments, 
differently from those reported in [7] have been carried out without ad hoc parameter optimization and with no ad-hoc 
preprocessing for each dataset. 
3.1 Evaluation
The evaluation of the proposed approaches and the comparison with the methods proposed in the literature is performed 
according to the most used performance indicators in the plankton recognition problem. Among the several performance 
indicators proposed for multi-label classification problems, the most used measures are the following: F-measure, 
accuracy and AUC. To deal with multi-classes each performance indicator is evaluated as the two-class value (one-vs-
all) averaged on the number of the classes. Given C confusion matrices M c, i.e. 2×2 tables including the number of 
samples true positive samples (TP c), the number of true negatives (TN c), the number of false positives (FP c) and false 
negatives (FN c) for each class c[1..C], the following indicators can be derived as: 
Recall is the true positive rate,    Rc=TPc
TPc+FNcR=1
C∑cRc
Precision is the positive predictive value (1- error rate),   Pc=TPc
TPc+FPcP=1
C∑cPc
F-Measure is the harmonic mean of precision and recall,   Fc=2Pc∙Rc
Pc+RcF=1
C∑cFc
Accuracy is the ratio between the number of true positive samples and the total number of samples.
AUC: the area under ROC curve is a performance indicator for 2-class problems, which can be interpreted as the 
probability that the classifier will assign a higher score to a randomly picked positive sample than to a randomly 
picked negative one. AUC is calculated as the area under the ROC curve, a graphical plot of the sensitivity of a 
binary classifier versus false positives (1-specificity), as its discrimination threshold is varied. In this multiclass 
problem, the average value of one-versus-all AUC is used [46].
3.2 Results
The first experiment is related to the One round fine-tuning of several CNN models: in Table 2 in the results obtained 
using the deep learning approaches are evaluated, by comparing the performance of seven fine-tuned CNN on the three 
datasets. Since CNN require input images with fixed dimensions we evaluate 2 different strategies for resizing: SqR, the 
image is padded to square size and resized to the CNN input size, Pad, if the size of the image is lower than the input 
size, the image is padded to the input size, otherwise it is padded to square size and reduced to the input size. The 
difference is that the second strategy does not perform rescaling for small images.   
In Table 2 the performance of the seven CNN fine tuned (1R) for plankton classification are reported; moreover the 
last two lines includes some ensemble obtained by the fusion of scores of the above approaches: 
Fus_RS: is the sum rule among the eight networks (all except the low performance SqueezeNet) trained using the 
same Resize Strategy.
Fus_1R: is the sum rule among the two Fus_RS fusions, i.e. Fus_1R=Fus_RS SqR + Fus_RS Pad 
From results in Table 2 the best resizing strategy is SqR; Pad performs better only in the Zooscan dataset, maybe due 
to varying resolution of the input images. Since SqR is the best strategy in 2 out 3 datasets we use SqR strategy in the 
following. In the comparison among models, DenseNet is the single best model: it obtains the best results in all the 
datasets.