2 
texture descriptor, the co-occurrence matrices, is used by Hu and Davis [10] to train a Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
as the classifier. Li et al. [11] use a set of shape descriptors concatenated together and reduced to lower dimensionality 
by Principal Component Analysis (PCA), classification is performed by an ensemble of pairwise binary classifiers based 
on nonparametric discriminant analysis technique. Ellen et al. [12] suggest the use of feature selection and test several 
different classifiers: their ensemble is a combination of gradient boosted random forest classifier and SVM. Chang et al. 
[13]  use SURF descriptors and LPB texture operator coupled with PCA for dimensionality-reduction. However their 
method is evaluated on a small dataset with few classes. More recently Zheng et al. [7] propose a system based on the 
combination of features via multiple kernel learning classifier. Images are first pre-processed in order to enhance their 
quality (the pre-processing operations depend on the dataset, to fit to different acquisition devices), then a large set of 
descriptors (i.e. geometric features, texture features and some local features) are extracted and reduced to an optimal 
subset by feature selection (optimized in each dataset). This method is validated on the same datasets selected for this 
work with very valuable performance, therefore it is a baseline for our results. Bi et al. [14] developed a semi-automated 
approach to analyze plankton data from images acquired in turbid estuarine waters: they customized a segmentation 
procedure to locate plankton objects within each image and used handcrafted features for classification. 
The most recent trend in Plankton classification is based on deep learning [15]. CNN [16] are multi-layered neural 
networks inspired by the human visual perception mechanism which incorporates spatial context and weight sharing 
between pixels and are able to learn the optimal image features and classification weights for a given classiﬁcation task. 
A great advantage of CNN vs handcrafted approaches is that since CNN adopt eﬀective representations of the original 
image, they require a very small amount of pre-processing. 
In 2015 the National Data Science Bowl1 has been held to classify the images of plankton, which has been win by an 
ensemble of over 40 convolutional neural networks. The main innovation brought by Dieleman and his team was some 
layers designed to increase the network robustness to cyclic variation [17]. 
Py et al. [18] use the same large dataset for training a CNN inspired to GoogleNet and improved with an inception 
module with a convolutional layer for distortion minimization and maximization of image information extraction. Lee et 
al. [5] use a larger dataset including more than 3 million images: their solution is based on a simpler net inspired by the 
pre-trained model CIFAR10, and the main aim of their study is to overcome the class-imbalance problem by performing 
transfer learning with pre-training the CNN on class-normalized data. Another CNN is proposed by Dai et al. [6]: they 
suggest an ad-hoc model, inspired by AlexNet and VGGNet and named ZooplanktoNet, which is made by 11 layers and 
makes use of data augmentation to overcome the overfitting in their small dataset. A solution including preprocessing is 
proposed by Dai et al. [19]: their Hybrid CNN is a 3-channel network which takes as input the original image, a two 
preprocessed version of it (a global feature image which describe the appearance of plankton and omit the internal texture 
and a local feature image obtained by edge detection). The whole network structure is composed of three AlexNet 
networks that share the final fully-connected layer. A similar idea is exploited by Cui et al. [20] which propose a AlexNet 
CNN trained combining different inputs obtained by image pre-processing (i.e. Gaussian filtering). In our experiments 
we test a similar idea of fusion at feature level, but obtaining lower performance than our fusion at score level.  Bochinski 
et al. [21] propose a Deep Active Learning which requires only a limited amount of labelled images, while the most part 
of training set is made of automatically labelled images. The performance are encouraging, even if obtained on a 
simplified classification problem consisting of only four classes. Cui et al. proposed a transfer learning approach starting 
from model trained on several datasets. They extract features from 2 different CNNs and show that their performance are 
better than other state-of-the-art handcrafted descriptors [22] (similarly to our baseline method in [23]).
In this work we study both deep learned approaches and transfer learning with the aim of exploiting their diversity in 
designing an ensemble of classifiers, we deal with: (i) the ability of fine-tuning pre-trained CNN for plankton 
classification, (ii) the possibility of using pre-trained CNN for transfer learning, (iii) the possibility of coupling pre-
processing to CNN in order to improve their feature extraction capability. The combination of such different 
descriptors/methods in a heterogeneous ensemble grants a substantial performance improvement with respect to other 
state-of-the-art approaches based on feature selection and classification. 
Our ensembles is validated using three well-known plankton datasets and compared with other approaches proposed 
in the literature. Despite of the complexity of the method, one of the main benefit of the proposed system is to work well 
out-of-the-box in different problems, requiring few parameter tuning without specific optimization for each datasets. The 
experimental results reported in section 3 show that the proposed system obtains state-of-the-art performance in all the 
tested datasets.
1 https://www.kaggle.com/c/datasciencebowl