on inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) overcome this issue by training an RL agent not only to
imitate demonstrated actions, but also to visit demonstrated states [Ng et al., 2000, Wulfmeier et al.,
2015, Finn et al., 2016b, Fu et al., 2017]. This is also the core idea behind generative adversarial
imitation learning (GAIL) [Ho and Ermon, 2016], which implements IRL using generative adversarial
networks [Goodfellow et al., 2014, Finn et al., 2016a]. Since the true reward function for the task
is unknown, these methods construct a reward signal from the demonstrations through adversarial
training, making them difﬁcult to implement and use in practice [Kurach et al., 2018].
The main idea in this paper is that the effectiveness of adversarial imitation methods can be achieved
by a much simpler approach that does not require adversarial training, or indeed learning a reward
function at all. Intuitively, adversarial methods encourage long-horizon imitation by providing the
agent with (1) an incentive to imitate the demonstrated actions in demonstrated states, and (2) an
incentive to take actions that lead it back to demonstrated states when it encounters new, out-of-
distribution states. One of the reasons why adversarial methods outperform greedy methods, such as
BC, is that greedy methods only do (1), while adversarial methods do both (1) and (2). Our approach
is intended to do both (1) and (2) without adversarial training, by using constant rewards instead of
learned rewards. The key idea is that, instead of using a learned reward function to provide a reward
signal to the agent, we can simply give the agent a constant reward of r= +1 for matching the
demonstrated action in a demonstrated state, and a constant reward of r= 0for all other behavior.
We motivate this approach theoretically, by showing that it implements a regularized variant of BC
that learns long-horizon imitation by (a) imposing a sparsity prior on the reward function implied by
the imitation policy, and (b) incorporating information about the state transition dynamics into the
imitation policy. Intuitively, our method accomplishes (a) by training the agent using an extremely
sparse reward function – +1for demonstrations, 0everywhere else – and accomplishes (b) by training
the agent with RL instead of supervised learning.
We instantiate our approach with soft Q-learning [Haarnoja et al., 2017] by initializing the agent’s
experience replay buffer with expert demonstrations, setting the rewards to a constant r= +1 in the
demonstration experiences, and setting rewards to a constant r= 0 in all of the new experiences
the agent collects while interacting with the environment. Since soft Q-learning is an off-policy
algorithm, the agent does not necessarily have to visit the demonstrated states in order to experience
positive rewards. Instead, the agent replays the demonstrations that were initially added to its buffer.
Thus, our method can be applied in environments with stochastic dynamics and continuous states,
where the demonstrated states are not necessarily reachable by the agent. We call this method soft Q
imitation learning (SQIL).
The main contribution of this paper is SQIL: a simple and general imitation learning algorithm
that is effective in MDPs with high-dimensional, continuous observations and unknown dynamics.
We run experiments in four image-based environments – Car Racing, Pong, Breakout, and Space
Invaders – and three low-dimensional environments – Humanoid, HalfCheetah, and Lunar Lander
– to compare SQIL to two prior methods: BC and GAIL. We ﬁnd that SQIL outperforms BC and
achieves competitive results compared to GAIL. Our experiments illustrate two key beneﬁts of SQIL:
(1) that it can overcome the state distribution shift problem of BC without adversarial training or
learning a reward function, which makes it easier to use, e.g., with images, and (2) that it is simple to
implement using existing Q-learning or off-policy actor-critic algorithms.
2 Soft Q Imitation Learning
SQIL performs soft Q-learning [Haarnoja et al., 2017] with three small, but important, modiﬁcations:
(1) it initially ﬁlls the agent’s experience replay buffer with demonstrations, where the rewards are set
to a constant r= +1 ; (2) as the agent interacts with the world and accumulates new experiences, it
adds them to the replay buffer, and sets the rewards for these new experiences to a constant r= 0;
and (3) it balances the number of demonstration experiences and new experiences (50% each) in each
sample from the replay buffer.1These three modiﬁcations are motivated theoretically in Section 3,
1SQIL resembles the Deep Q-learning from Demonstrations (DQfD) [Hester et al., 2017] and Normalized
Actor-Critic (NAC) algorithms [Gao et al., 2018], in that it initially ﬁlls the agent’s experience replay buffer with
demonstrations. The key difference is that DQfD and NAC are RL algorithms that assume access to a reward
signal, while SQIL is an imitation learning algorithm that does not require an extrinsic reward signal from the
environment. Instead, SQIL automatically constructs a reward signal from the demonstrations.
2