SQIL: Imitation Learning via Reinforcement
Learning with Sparse Rewards
Siddharth Reddy, Anca D. Dragan, Sergey Levine
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
{sgr,anca,svlevine}@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Learning to imitate expert behavior from demonstrations can be challenging, es-
pecially in environments with high-dimensional, continuous observations and
unknown dynamics. Supervised learning methods based on behavioral cloning
(BC) suffer from distribution shift: because the agent greedily imitates demon-
strated actions, it can drift away from demonstrated states due to error accumulation.
Recent methods based on reinforcement learning (RL), such as inverse RL and
generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL), overcome this issue by training
an RL agent to match the demonstrations over a long horizon. Since the true reward
function for the task is unknown, these methods learn a reward function from the
demonstrations, often using complex and brittle approximation techniques that
involve adversarial training. We propose a simple alternative that still uses RL, but
does not require learning a reward function. The key idea is to provide the agent
with an incentive to match the demonstrations over a long horizon, by encouraging
it to return to demonstrated states upon encountering new, out-of-distribution states.
We accomplish this by giving the agent a constant reward of r= +1 for matching
the demonstrated action in a demonstrated state, and a constant reward of r= 0for
all other behavior. Our method, which we call soft Q imitation learning (SQIL), can
be implemented with a handful of minor modiﬁcations to any standard Q-learning
or off-policy actor-critic algorithm. Theoretically, we show that SQIL can be
interpreted as a regularized variant of BC that uses a sparsity prior to encourage
long-horizon imitation. Empirically, we show that SQIL outperforms BC and
achieves competitive results compared to GAIL, on a variety of image-based and
low-dimensional tasks in Box2D, Atari, and MuJoCo. This paper is a proof of
concept that illustrates how a simple imitation method based on RL with constant
rewards can be as effective as more complex methods that use learned rewards.
1 Introduction
Many sequential decision-making problems can be tackled by imitation learning: an expert demon-
strates near-optimal behavior to an agent, and the agent attempts to replicate that behavior in novel
situations [Argall et al., 2009]. This paper considers the problem of training an agent to imitate an
expert, given expert action demonstrations and the ability to interact with the environment. The agent
does not observe a reward signal or query the expert, and does not know the state transition dynamics.
Standard approaches based on behavioral cloning (BC) use supervised learning to greedily imitate
demonstrated actions, without reasoning about the consequences of actions [Pomerleau, 1991]. As
a result, compounding errors cause the agent to drift away from the demonstrated states [Ross
et al., 2011]. The problem with BC is that, when the agent drifts and encounters out-of-distribution
states, the agent does not know how to return to the demonstrated states. Recent methods based
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:1905.11108v3  [cs.LG]  25 Sep 2019