within an ensemble is not adequate to capture the characteristics
of the entire phenomenon, so long as the models perform better
than they would with random clas s assignment, once combined
they can borrow strength from each other and achieve high
predictive accuracy. Broadly, ensemble methods improve per-
formance by creating a population of models through either
1) training the same underlying algorithm to different versions
of a data set (e.g., bagging and boosting) or 2) training qualita-
tively different models on the same data set (e.g., Bayesian
model averaging, Super Learner) (see Web Figure 1, available
athttps://academic.oup.com/aje ) and then combining results
across these models on the basis of a de ﬁned algorithm. While
the primary objective of bagging and boosting is to minimize
overﬁtting, multiple algorithm ensembles capitalize on different
models ’strengths and avoid the need for model preselection.
These alternative ensemble approaches are often used in combi-
nation, either as part of the same algorithm or through nested
approaches.
Bagging
Bagging (or bootstrap aggregating) ﬁts the same underlying
algorithm to each bootstrapped copy of the original training
data and then creates a ﬁnal prediction based on outputs from
the resulting, parameterized, models ( 51). The ﬁnal prediction
for a quantitative outcome is obtained by averaging the predic-
tions. For a qualitative outcome, the ﬁnal prediction either takes
the majority vote among the classi ﬁers or averages probabilities
across the number of bootstrap ﬁts. Bagging reduces model var-
iance signi ﬁcantly without affecting bias ( 52,53).
Feature bagging attempts to further reduce over ﬁtting. It
trains models on random subsets o f variables/features instead of
all variables in an attempt to reduce correlation between models
i na ne n s e m b l e .W h e na p p l i e dt ot r e e - b a s e dm e t h o d s ,t h er e s u l t -
ing models are called random forests , which force each split to
consider a random subset of predictors ( 54), giving other weak
predictors a greater chance to be selected as split candidates.
Otherwise, when there is a strong predictor for the outcome,
many trees would choose to ﬁrst split on that predictor, creating
highly correlated predictions re gardless of the variables chosen
at the subsequent splits.
Aside from k-fold cross-validation, one way to estimate pre-
diction errors speci ﬁcally for random forests is to compute out-
of-bag error (55). Out-of-bag error is the mean prediction error
for each observation, using only the models that did not include
the observation in their bootstrapped samples. Variable impor-
tance rankings summarize the relative importance of each
predictor across all ﬁtted trees. These rankings re ﬂect the
importance of a variable for predicting outcomes by averaging
the impurity decrease for all node s where the variable is used
across all trees in the forest ( 51). Impurity decrease measures
changes in the accuracy of a tree and can be described by, for
example, Gini impurity (a measure of the probability of mis-
taken categorization within a node) for bagging classi ﬁcation
trees or the residual sum of square s for bagging regression trees.
“Important ”variables change the accuracy of the trees the most.
Importance rankings can be used to assess the relative impact of
individual predictors, as well as t he interaction between predic-
tors, in predicting the outcome ( 56,57).Available software includes caret, randomForest, and adabag
in R; CHAIDFOREST for random forests in Stata; SAS ( 58);
and sklearn.ensemble in Python.
Boosting
Like bagging, boosting also trains models on subsets of data,
but it does it in a sequential fashion and improves the classi ﬁers
by analyzing prediction errors ( 59,60). AdaBoost is a well-
known boosting method that sets weights to both observations
and classi ﬁers (61,62). Observations are given weights, initially
equal, that increase if incorrectly classi ﬁed by the last iteration
of the classi ﬁer; hence, subsequent iterations will prioritize cor-
rectly classifying the se observations. The ﬁnal output classi ﬁer
is a weighted average from the classi ﬁer built in each iteration,
with higher weight given to classi ﬁers with higher predictive
accuracy (i.e., lower error rates on training data). Gradient
boosting is a generalization of AdaBoost that uses gradient
descent to optimize any differentiable loss function (i.e., a mea-
sure of classi ﬁer performance other than simple classi ﬁcation
error) ( 63,64).
Available software include s gbm, adabag, fastAdaboost,
xgboost, ada, and caret in R; Stata ( 65); SAS ( 58); and
sklearn.ensemble in Python.
Bayesian model averaging
Bayesian model averaging (BMA) estimates the posterior
distribution of a predicted value (or the parameters de ﬁning a
parametric relationship) by calculating the weighted average of
model-speci ﬁc estimates, where the weights are driven by how
much the data support each competing model ( 66). BMA has
been applied to many statistical models, including linear regres-
sion, generalized linear models , and Cox proportional hazards
models, and it provides better predictive ability than using any
single model ( 66). Its variants, such as Bayesian model combi-
nation , have emerged to further tackle the issue of over ﬁtting,
as BMA has a tendency to place too much weight on the most
probable model ( 67). Bayesian model combination creates a set
of ensembles, each representing a combination of individual
models, and weights the ensemble-speci ﬁc estimate of the effect
size (as opposed to estimates based on the most probable model
in BMA) by the probability that the ensemble is correct given
the data ( 67,68).
Available software includes BMS/BAS/BMA in R; SAS ( 69);
and pyBMA in Python.
Super Learner
Super Learner is a prediction algorithm that uses cross-
validation to determine the optimal weighted combination of
predictions from a group of candidate learners ( 70–72). Building
on the “stacked generalization ”approach proposed by Wolpert
(72), this approach allows the use of machine learning algo-
rithms (e.g., random forests) in addition to standard parametric
algorithms (e.g., logistic regression). K-fold cross-validation
(Web Figure 1) is used to assign weights to each of a user-
deﬁned pool of component algorithms based on out-of-training
set performance, and then the component models are ﬁtt ot h e
entire data set. Model outputs are based on the predictions of2230 Bi et al.
Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023