become less labile as the model “learns ”more ( 15). Medical
and epidemiologic applications of reinforcement learning have
included modeling the effect of se quential clinical treatment
decisions on disease progression ( 17) (e.g., optimizing ﬁrst-
and second-line therapy decisions for schizophrenia manage-
ment ( 18)) and personalized, adaptive medication dosing strat-
egies. For example, Nemati et al. ( 19) used reinforcement
learning with arti ﬁcial neural networks in a cohort of intensive-
care-unit patients to develop individualized heparin dosing
strategies that evolve as a patient ’s clinical phenotype changes,
in order to maximize the amount of time that blood drug levels
remain within the therapeutic window.
MACHINE LEARNING ALGORITHMS
In this section, we introduce 5 common machine learning al-
gorithms: arti ﬁcial neural networks, decision trees, support vec-
tor machines, naive Bayes, and k-means clustering. For each, we
include a brief description, summarize strengths and limita-
tions, and highlight implementations available on common sta-
tistical computing platforms. T his section is intended to provide
a high-level introduction to these algorithms, and we refer inter-
ested readers to the cited references for further information.
Artiﬁcial neural networks
Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) are inspired by the signal-
ing behavior of neurons in biological neural networks. ANNs,
which consist of a population of neurons interconnected through
complex signaling pathways, use this structure to analyze com-
plex interactions between a group of measurable covariates in
order to predict an outcome. ANNs possess layers of “neurons ”
connected by “axons ”(20)( F i g u r e 1A). These layers are grouped
into 1) an input layer, 2) one or more middle “hidden ”layers,
and 3) an output layer. The neurons in the input and output
layers correspond to the indepe ndent and dependent variables,
respectively. Neurons in adjacent layers communicate with each
other through activation functions, which convert the weighted
sum of a neuron ’s inputs into an output (Figure 1B). Depending
on the type of activation function, the output can be dichoto-
mous ( “1”when the weighted sum exceeds a given threshold
and“0”otherwise) or continuous. The weighted sum of a neu-
ron’s inputs is somewhat analogous to coef ﬁcients in linear or
logistic regression.
Figure 1illustrates a simple neural network with a single hid-
den layer and a feed-forward structure (i.e., signals progressunidirectionally from input to output layers). For supervised
learning applications, once the numbers of layers and neurons
are selected, the connection weights of the ANN are ﬁto na
training set of labeled data through a reinforcement learning
approach. Initial connection weights are generally selected ran-
domly, and network output is compared with the correct output
(class labels) using a loss function, which is based on the differ-
ence between the predicted and true values of the outcome. The
goal is to reduce the loss function to zero —that is, to make the
ANN ’s predicted output match truth as closely as possible,
albeit while also protecting against over ﬁtting. In response,
1) resulting error values are distributed backwards through the
network, from output to input, in order to assign an error value
contribution to each hidden and input layer neuron (called
“back-propagation ”; for additional technical information on this
process, see, for example, Rumelhart et al. ( 21)), and 2) connec-
tion weights are updated in order to minimize the loss function
(“weight adjustment ”). This 2-fold optimization process repeats
for a number of “epochs ”or iterations until the network meets a
prespeci ﬁed stopping rule or error rate threshold ( 22,23).
Strengths and limitations. Strengths of ANNs include their
ability to accommodate variable interactions and nonlinear
associations without user speci ﬁcation ( 22). The primaryTable 2. Matrix of Joint Probabilities for Body Mass Indexa(x) and
Diabetes Mellitus ( y) in a Data Set With 4 Dichotomized
Observations: (0, 1), (0, 1), (0, 1), and (0, 0)
Diabetes StatusBMI Status
Overweight BMI =1 Overweight BMI =0
D=1 0/4 1/4
D=0 2/4 1/4
Abbreviation: BMI, body mass index.
aWeight (kg)/height (m)2.A)
Output1
2
3W1
W2
W3SumActivation
Function
Weights Inputs
B)
NeuronsAxonsOutput Layer Hidden Layer Input Layer
BMI
Age
SES
Race
SexFasting Blood
Sugar, mg/dLA
B
C
Figure 1. A single arti ﬁcial neuron, also called a perceptron (panel A),
and a feed-forward neural network (a collection of multiple neurons orga-
nized in layers) that examines the hy pothetical relationship between clini-
cal and demographic predictors and a numerical outcome, fasting blood
sugar level (panel B). Line (axon) thickness re ﬂects input weight, and
line type indicates direction of effect (solid =excitatory or positive;
dashed =inhibitory or negative). Lack of a line (e.g., connecting “sex”to
neuron C) indicates no input. Connections between input and output
layers are exclusively mediated through the hidden layer (more complex
artiﬁcial neural networks can have multiple hidden layers). At hidden
layer neuron A, we observe that both body mass index (BMI; weight
(kg)/height (m)2) and age exert positive inputs, and they demonstrate
interactive effects with each other and race (the latter ’s input is negative,
as indicated by the dashed line). The weighted sum of these inputs re-
sults in activation of neuron A and positive output. In contrast, neuron B
converts inputs from age, socioeconomic status (SES), and race into
negative output (inversely correlated with fasting blood sugar), while
neuron C ’s inputs fail to surpass the activation function threshold; that is,
there is no effect on the outcome mediated through neuron C.Machine Learning for Epidemiologists 2225
Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023