covariate effects and can incor porate higher-order interactions
between covariates ( 27,33). Trees may lose information by
dichotomizing or categorizing v ariables where associations are
continuous, and they can be unstable to even small data changes.
Because most decision tree algorithms are “greedy ”(splitting
decisions are locally optimized at nodes), through a domino
effect, dramatically different trees can result if even a single
higher-level node shifts to a different variable ( 34). Hence, deci-
sion trees can be highly sensitive to small perturbations in data.
Perhaps most fundamentally, d ecision trees are prone to over ﬁt-
ting, and their ultimate utility depends heavily on appropriately
implemented pruning and/or sto pping criteria. Ensemble-based
decision trees (e.g., random forests) can address some of these
concerns (see “Ensemble Methods ”section), but they do not
produce a single, easily interpretable tree.
Sample statistical packages and modules. Available soft-
ware includes rpart, caret, ctree, and randomForest (ensemble
decision trees) in R; CART (failure-time data only), CHAID, and
CHAIDFOREST (ensemble decision trees) in Stata (StataCorp
LLC, College Station, Texas); Enterprise Miner Decision Tree
in SAS; and sklearn in Python.
Support vector machines
Support vector machines (SVMs) are a set of supervised
learning methods used for classi ﬁcation and regression prob-
lems ( 35,36). SVMs construct an optimal boundary, called a
hyperplane, that best separates obse rvations of different classes.
In 1 dimension, this boundary is a point; in 2 dimensions, a line;
and in 3, a plane (Figure 3). However, many observations often
need to be transformed before they can be separated by a hyper-
plane. SVMs address this problem by applying a data transforma-
tion called a “kernel function ”to the data ( 3). Kernel functions
project the data into a higher-dimensional space where the input
variables are separable (Figure 3). The optimal kernel function is
usually chosen from a set of commonly used kernel functions
selected through cross-validation. Popular kernel functions
include polynomial kernel, gaussian kernel, and sigmoid kernel.
Following kernel function trans formation, the best hyperplanemaximizes the separation between t he different classes (i.e., the
margin, de ﬁned as the distance from the hyperplane to the clos-
est data point), while tolerating a speci ﬁed level of misclassi ﬁ-
cation. SVMs are traditiona lly used for binary classi ﬁcation,
but multiple pairwise comparison can be applied for multiclass
classiﬁcation ( 36). Extensions to SVM techniques have also
been developed that can be used to predict continuous out-
comes (called support vector regression) ( 37).
In Figure 3, persons with and without diabetes cannot be sep-
arated by a line in the 2-dimens ional space based upon the pre-
dictors, age and BMI (Figure 3A). However, when we project
the data into a 3-dimensional s pace by applying a kernel given
byφ((age, BMI) =(age, BMI, (BMI −a)×(age−b)), where a
andbareﬁxed parameters estimated from the data, the data are
now separable in the 3-dimensional space by a plane (Figure 3B).
Strengths and limitations. SVMs generally demonstrate
low misclassi ﬁcation error and scale well to high-dimensional
data ( 38). SVMs have reasonable inte rpretability, especially
when a kernel function is not used. Where a kernel function is
necessary, however, selecting the optimal kernel function typi-
cally requires experimenting wit h a set of standard functions.
This approach can be time-consuming and does not guarantee
that the set of standard kernel functions that were evaluated
included the optimal function, and in some cases hand-crafted
kernel functions are used instead.
Sample statistical packages and modules. Available soft-
ware includes e1071, kernlab, and caret in R; svmachines ( 39)
in Stata; PROC SVM in SAS; and sklearn in Python.
Naive Bayes algorithms
Anaive Bayes algorithm is a simple probabilistic classi ﬁ-
cation algorithm based upon Bayes ’theorem that makes the
“naive ”assumption of independence between predictive vari-
ables ( 40). Naive Bayes calculates the probability associated
with each possible class cond itional on a set of covariates —that
is, the product of the prior probability and the likelihood func-
tion. The classi ﬁer then selects the class with the highest proba-
bility as the “correct ”class (Figure 4). The prior probability
BMIAge,
years B)
BMIAge, years
ab A)
Figure 3. An illustration of data transformation with a support vector machine for predicting diabetes status. A) Hypothetical age and body mass
index (BMI; weight (kg)/height (m)2) distribution of diabetic (black dots) and nondiabetic (gray dots) patients in 2-dimensional space. aand bare
ﬁxed parameters estimated from the data (see text). B) After transformation, these dots/patients who are not linearly separable in 2-dimensional
space become linearly separable in 3-dimensional space. A hyperplane in 3-dimensional space is shown as a surface.Machine Learning for Epidemiologists 2227
Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023