limitation of ANNs is that, although it is arguably not completely
a“black box ”(23, p. 1112), the underlying model nevertheless
remains largely opaque. Effects are mediated exclusively through
hidden layer(s), making interpreting relationships between input
and output layers challenging, especially for “deep ”ANNs,
which include multiple hidden layers. This lack of transparency
complicates commonsense or etiological interpretation of indi-
vidual variable effects and conne ction weights, although there
are continuing efforts to enhance ANN interpretability ( 20,24,
25). ANN training parameters can also be complex, and setting
a n dt u n i n gt h e s ep a r a m e t e r sg e nerally necessitates technical
expertise. Moreover, complex ANNs, including deep networks,
can require large data sets (potentially in the tens or hundreds of
thousands, although there is no hard-and-fast rule) in order to
achieve optimal model performance, which may be prohibitive
for some epidemiologic applications ( 26).
Sample statistical packages and modules. Available
software includes neuralnet, nnet, deepnet, and TensorFlow in
R (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria);
Enterprise Miner Neural Network and AutoNeural in SAS
(SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North Carolina); and sklearn and
TensorFlow in Python (Python Software Foundation, Wilming-
ton, Delaware).
Decision trees
Decision trees (i.e., classi ﬁcation and regression trees
(CART)) create a series of deci sion rules based on continuous
and/or categorical input variables to predict an outcome ( 5,27).Classi ﬁcation trees predict categorical outcomes, and regression
trees predict continuous outco mes. CART analysis has been
popularized as an umbrella term for any decision tree learning
method ( 27). However, “CART ”is also a common implemen-
tation algorithm in the epidemi ologic and medical literature,
although a number of other decisi on tree algorithms have also
been developed (e.g., ID3, CHAID) ( 28–30).
Figure 2presents a hypothetical classi ﬁcation tree for a
binary outcome, diabetes. To derive a decision tree, the algo-
rithm applies a splitting rule on successively smaller partitions
of data, with each partition being a node on the tree. The parti-
tion consisting of all dat a is the root node; in Figure 2this node
is split on the basis of BMI. Splits are selected to minimize
some measure of node impurity (i.e., diversity of classes)
or heterogeneity (i.e., variance) in each resulting partition (the
“daughter nodes ”)(5,27). The splitting process repeats on each
branch of the tree until additional splits yield no further reduc-
tions in node impurity, or some other stopping criterion is
reached (e.g., a speci ﬁed minimum number of observations in
terminal nodes or the value at which error is minimized in
cross-validation ( 31)). In many algorithms, this splitting is often
followed by a “pruning ”step in which partitions are remerged
(i.e., some bottom nodes are removed, making the ﬁnal tree
smaller) based on some criterion designed to increase generaliz-
ability ( 32).
Strengths and limitations. Decision trees are generally easy
to understand —its having been said that “[o]n interpretability,
trees rate an A +”(4,p .2 0 6 ) —making their output ideal for a
range of target audiences. They are also ﬂexible to nonlinear
Age >45 Years
Physical
Activity Level
HighNo YesRoutine Consumption
of Sweetened
Beverages/Sodas
Age >55
YearsNoNo Yes
Yes
No Yes
IntermediateLowBMI >32
No
DiabetesNo
DiabetesNo
DiabetesNo
DiabetesRoot Node
Daughter
Nodes
Terminal or
“Leaf” NodesDiabetes Diabetes Diabetes
Figure 2. A hypothetical classi ﬁcation decision tree for predicting a binary outcome, type 2 diabetes mellitus. Body mass index (BMI; weight (kg)/
height (m)2) occupies the root node (the most discriminatory variable in the data set); age, consumption of sweetened beverages, and physical
activity occupy daughter nodes; and predicted diabetes status (yes/no) is re ﬂected in the terminal or “leaf”nodes. Terminal node predictions pro-
ceed on the basis of simple majority rule (e.g., if 60% of patients in a terminal node are diabetes-positive, the entire terminal node will be classi ﬁed
as“Diabetes ”). The cutpoints for the continuous variables, BMI and age, are algorithm-derived. The presence of age at different cutpoints in 2 differ-
ent daughter nodes re ﬂects likely interaction effects: The relationship between age and diabetes differs in patients with BMI ≤32 compared with pa-
tients with BMI >32 who do not routinely consume sweetened beverages.2226 Bi et al.
Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023