American Journal of Epidemiology
© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Practice of Epidemiology
What is Machine Learning? A Primer for the Epidemiologist
Qifang Bi, Katherine E. Goodman, Joshua Kaminsky, and Justin Lessler *
*Correspondence to Dr. Justin Lessler, Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 N.
Wolfe Street, Room E6545, Baltimore, MD 21231 (e-mail: justin@jhu.edu).
Initially submitted November 16, 2018; accepted for publication August 14, 2019.
Machine learning is a branch of computer science that has the potential to transform epidemiologic sciences. Amid a
growing focus on “Big Data, ”it offers epidemiologists new tools to tackle problems for which classical methods are not
well-suited. In order to critically evaluate the value of integrating machine learning algorithms and existing methods,
however, it is essential to address language and technical barriers between the two ﬁelds that can make it dif ﬁcult for
epidemiologists to read and assess machine learning studies. Here, we provide an overview of the concepts and termi-
nology used in machine learning literature, which encompasses a diverse set of tools with goals ranging from prediction
to classi ﬁcation to clustering. We provide a brief introduction to 5 common machine learning algorithms and 4
ensemble-based approaches. We then summarize epidemiologic applications of machine learning techniques in the
published literature. We recommend approaches to incorporate machine learning in epidemiologic research and dis-
cuss opportunities and challenges for integrating machine learning and existing epidemiologic research methods.
Big Data; ensemble models; machine learning
Abbreviations: ANN, arti ﬁcial neural networks; BMA, Bayesian model averaging; BMI, body mass index; CART, classi ﬁcation and
regression trees; SVM, support vector machine.
Machine learning is a branch of computer science that broadly
aims to enable computers to “learn ”without being directly pro-
grammed ( 1). It has origins in the arti ﬁcial intelligence movement
of the 1950s and emphasizes practical objectives and appli-
cations, particularly prediction and optimization. Computers
“learn ”in machine learning by improving their performance
at tasks through “experience ”(2, p. xv). In practice, “experi-
ence ”usually means ﬁtting to data; hence, there is not a clear
boundary between machine learning and statistical approaches.
Indeed, whether a given methodology is considered “machine
learning ”or“statistical ”often re ﬂects its history as much as
genuine differences, and many algorithms (e.g., least absolute
shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), stepwise regres-
sion) may or may not be considered machine learning depend-
ing on who you ask. Still, despite methodological similarities,
machine learning is philosophic ally and practically distin-
guishable. At the liberty of (considerable) oversimpli ﬁcation,
machine learning generally emphasizes predictive accuracy
over hypothesis-driven inference, usually focusing on large,
high-dimensional (i.e., having many covariates) data sets ( 3,
4). Regardless of the precise distinction between approaches,in practice, machine learning offers epidemiologists important
tools. In particular, a growing focus on “Big Data ”emphasizes
problems and data sets for which machine learning algorithms
excel while more commonly used statistical approaches struggle.
This primer provides a basic introduction to machine learn-
ing with the aim of providing readers a foundation for critically
reading studies based on these methods and a jumping-off point
for those interested in using mac hine learning techniques in epi-
demiologic research. The “Concepts and Terminology ”section
of this paper presents concepts and terminology used in the
machine learning literature. The “Machine Learning Algo-
rithms ”section provides a brief introduction to 5 common
machine learning algorithms: arti ﬁcial neural networks, deci-
sion trees, support vector machines, naive Bayes, and k-
means clustering. These are important and commonly used
algorithms that epidemiologists are likely to encounter in
practice, but they are by no means comprehensive of this
large and highly diverse ﬁeld. The following two sections,
“Ensemble Methods ”and “Epidemiologic Applications, ”
extend this examination to ensemble-based approaches and
epidemiologic applications in the published literature. “BriefVol.188,No.12
DOI:10.1093/aje/kwz189
AdvanceAccesspublication:
October 21, 2019
2222 Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023