operations research is also common. ANNs have been used in
emergency room populations, for example, to predict death
among sepsis patients ( 117) and prolonged hospital stays
among the elderly ( 118), and random forests have been used to
build electronic triage models for risk-stratifying patients ( 119,
120). Because many machine learning methods can accommo-
date complex variable interactions without a priori speci ﬁca-
tion, they may also uncover previously unknown prognostic
subgroups ( 121). For example, Brims et al. ’s(121) application
of CART algorithms to a data set of malignant pleural meso-
thelioma cases revealed 4 distinct prognostic groups based
upon clinical characteristics.
Conversely, machine learning methodologies can also be
helpful where manual use, rather than automation, is contem-
plated. In particular, decision trees are popular clinical predic-
tion tools for both diagnosis and prognosis due to their simplicity
and interpretability. Because their output uses branching logic
rather than calculations, decision tr ees are generally user-friendly
for clinicians to apply at the bedside (e.g., to predict the like-
lihood that an infection is drug -resistant while awaiting micro-
biological con ﬁrmation ( 122,123)).
Genome-wide association studies
Genome-wide association stud ies seek to identify genetic
variants that in ﬂuence disease risk. Genome data sets generally
contain large numbers of genes and single nucleotide poly-
morphisms of interest but, because of sequencing costs and
other practical constraints, are of limited sample size. These
high-dimensional data are the types of data on which machine
learning algorithms perform well. Hence, ensemble machine
learning approaches such as random forests are commonly
used. Random forests can rank the most important single nucle-
otide polymorphisms for a disease outcome. For example, they
have been used to predict drug r esponse in epilepsy patients
based on clinical and genetic information ( 124); to identify
genetic variants associated wit h Parkinson disease and other
neurological disorders ( 125); and to “data-mine ”high-density
genetic data to predict Alzheimer disease risk ( 126).
Other, nonensemble algorithms are also popular in genome-
wide association studies. Researchers have applied SVMs with
Bayesian model averaging to genome-wide data to predict late-
onset Alzheimer disease ( 127)a n d k-nearest neighbors (a rela-
tively simple unsupervised classi ﬁcation algorithm ( 128)) to pre-
dict the heritable genetic sus ceptibility of common cancers ( 129).
Microbiome studies, which also i nvolve high-dimensional (albeit
bacterial) genetic data, have like wise utilized machine learning to
identify disease risk factors among microbiota/microbiome signa-
tures ( 130). Moreover, because interactions do not require a priori
speciﬁcation under many machine learning algorithms, machine
learning approaches are well-suited to identi ﬁcation of complex
gene-gene ( 131) and gene-environment interactions that may
modulate disease risk (e.g., use of ANNs to explore interactions
between nutrient intake and metabolic pathway polymorphisms
in breast cancer susceptibility ( 132)).
Geospatial applications
Machine learning can help to pr edict and map disease occur-
rence and health indicators in areas where data are limited. Itsa b i l i t yt oe f ﬁciently process high-dimensional data sets from
heterogeneous contexts and multiple geographic scales makes
it particularly suitable for this task. A major focus is the devel-
opment of the WorldPop Project ( www.worldpop.org ), which
is an open-source archive of demographic parameters on ﬁne
spatial scales ( 133). It uses random forests to map the global
population distribution on a per-pixel scale by combining
remote sensing data (e.g., satellite) across multiple geospa-
tial scales ( 133). Beyond WorldPop ’s use of random forests,
another type of ensemble machine learning algorithm, boosted
regression trees, has also been widely used to map environmen-
tal suitability for disease transmission, including dengue ( 134),
leishmaniasis ( 135), Ebola ( 136), Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic
fever ( 137), and Zika virus ( 138,139). In general, investigators
in these studies 1) chose a set of known or proposed environ-
mental and socioeconomic covari ates, 2) incorporated global
assessments regarding whether the disease(s) of interest was cir-
culating in the country or region, and 3) with these data, built
boosted regression tree models. The resulting models were
used to predict infection probabilities on a pixel-by-pixel scale.
Text mining
Electronic health records pro vide an unprecedented amount
of clinical information for resear ch, but utilization of these data
sources effectively in studies o r for surveillance is generally
cost-prohibitive without som e form of automated data extrac-
tion. Machine learning offers au tomated tools for extracting
unstructured information from textual clinical documents. For
example, i2b2 (Informatics for Integrating Biology and the
Bedside) Challenges address a range of projects aiming to
develop and evaluate informatio n extraction methods for clini-
cal text ( 140). The 2009 Medication Challenge focused on pro-
viding a schema with which to extract information including
medications, dosages, modes (routes) of administration, fre-
quencies, durations, and reasons for administration from dis-
charge summaries ( 141).
Other applications include deidentifying personal health
information, research subject r ecruitment, coding, and surveil-
lance. Machine learning has been used to remove personal
health information from clinical records, such that deidenti ﬁed
records may be made public for research purposes without ob-
taining individual informed consent ( 142). Studies have also
used textual data and machine l earning algorithms to identify
patients who may qualify for and bene ﬁt from participation in
clinical studies ( 143). Furthermore, text mining can improve
the ef ﬁciency of systematic reviews by facilitating the identi ﬁ-
cation, rapid categorization, an d summarization of relevant lit-
erature ( 144). Finally, natural language processing of clinical
documents can supplement manual surveillance and has been
used to identify a range of reportable postoperative complica-
tions ( 145).
In addition to clinical settings, text mining algorithms have
been incorporated into automated i nfectious disease surveillance
systems that acquire, classify, and process Web-accessible data.
These algorithms can improve detection of early outbreaks and
complement traditional surveillance efforts performed by govern-
ment and international organizations. For example, HealthMap
graphically displays areas where diseases are circulating by
combining search query data, social media data, validated of ﬁcial2232 Bi et al.
Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023