Table 1. Glossary of Machine Learning and Epidemiology Terminology
Machine Learning
Term(s)Epidemiology Term(s) De ﬁnition and Notes Example
Attribute, feature,
predictor, or
ﬁeldIndependent variable Machine learning uses various terms to
reference what epidemiologists would
consider an “independent variable, ”
including attribute ,feature ,predictor , and
ﬁeld.In a data set with 4 independent variables
(BMIa, age, race, and SES) and a
dependent variable (diabetes mellitus),
BMI, age, race, and SES are attributes.
Domain Range of possible variable
valuesThe domain is the set of possible values of
an attribute. It can be continuous or
categorical/binary.If race is recorded in a data set as “1=
Caucasian, 2 =African-American, and
3=other, ”its domain is categorical and
includes only the 3 referenced categories.
Input and output Independent (exposure)
and dependent
(outcome) variablesIn machine learning, “input ”refers to all of
the predictors or independent variables
that enter the model, and “output ”
generally refers to the predicted value
(whether a number, classi ﬁcation, etc.) of
the dependent variable or outcome.BMI, age, race, and SES are model input.
In a binary classi ﬁcation algorithm, the
model output is a prediction of whether a
subject does ( D=1) or does not ( D=0)
have diabetes.
Classi ﬁer,
estimatorModel “Classi ﬁers”or“estimators ”are used
generally in the machine learning
literature to refer to algorithms that
perform a prediction or classi ﬁcation of
interest. Their less common, though more
technical, usage speci ﬁcally refers to fully
parameterized models that are used to
predict or classify.A decision tree is one type of machine
learning classi ﬁer (general usage). The
more speci ﬁc usage of this term would
refer only to a parameterized decision tree
that has been ﬁt in a data set (e.g., that
predicts diabetes outcomes from BMI, age,
sex, and SES).
Learner Model- ﬁtting algorithm A learner inputs a training set and outputs a
classi ﬁer. Usually, but not always, learner
refers to the ﬁtting algorithm, while
classi ﬁerrefers to the ﬁtted model.In decision tree learning, the classi ﬁcation
and regression trees (CART) algorithm,
developed by Breiman et al. ( 27) in 1984,
is one of multiple available learners for
developing a decision tree classi ﬁer.
Dimensionality No. of covariates No. of independent variables under
consideration in a model.A data set with 4 independent variables (BMI,
age, race, and SES) and a dependent
variable (diabetes) has 4 dimensions.
Label Value of dependent
variables, outcomesA variable ’s label is its value for each
observation (e.g., 0 or 1). Although labels
can technically describe any variable,
common shorthand is that “labeled data ”
refers to data in which the dependent
variable assumes a value for all
observations.In a data set for which an investigator has
collected information on diabetes status
(outcome) for all subjects, this is “labeled ”
data. The label for diabetes is 0 or 1.
Partially labeled data would have diabetes
status missing for some subjects.
Imbalanced data Data set in which some
cases or risk categories
occur much less
frequently than the othersIn imbalanced machine learning data sets,
the outcome or another risk category of
interest occurs much less frequently,
either because of the intrinsic nature of
the problem (e.g., a rare disease in a
database of medical records) or because
of the sampling strategy (e.g., prevalence
of cases in the study population is much
lower than that in the target/source
population). Heavily imbalanced data may
pose challenges in some classi ﬁcation
algorithms and require tuning parameters
in order to correct for or otherwise address
this imbalance. One method for
addressing imbalanced data sets is to
“balance ”them arti ﬁcially, either by
oversampling instances of the minority
class or undersampling instances of the
majority class.Assume a hypothetical data set of pediatric,
normal-weight patients in which the
prevalence of diabetes is 2%. This data set
is imbalanced because the outcome is
very rare, which can lead to poor sensitivity
of classi ﬁcation algorithms without
parameter tuning or other corrective
methods. This imbalance is due to the
intrinsic nature of the population we are
evaluating (i.e., healthy children) and not
due to the sampling strategy or other bias.
Loss function Error measure In machine learning, a loss function is
generally considered a penalty for
misclassi ﬁcation when assessing a
model ’s predictive performance.A simple loss function may be the absolute
value of (predicted value minus true value).
If a model predicts that a subject has
diabetes ( D=1) and the subject does not
(D=0), the value of the loss function for
this prediction is “1.”
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; SES, socioeconomic status.
aWeight (kg)/height (m)2.2224 Bi et al.
Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023