reports, and expert-curated accounts (e.g., ProMED-mail) ( 146,
147). Similarly, the BioCaster system tracks infectious disease out-
breaks on Google maps (Google, Inc., Mountain View, California)
on the basis of residual sum-of-squares feeds ( 148).
Prediction and forecasting of infectious disease
Machine learning methods have been incorporated into pre-
diction and forecasting models for infectious disease. For exam-
ple, SVMs have been used to predict whether dengue incidence
exceeded a chosen threshold using Google search terms ( 149).
Researchers have also used SVMs to predict levels of in ﬂuenza-
like illness from Twitter data (Twitter, Inc., San Francisco,
California) 1 –2 weeks before of ﬁcial reports ( 150). In addition,
infectious disease forecasters have adopted ensemble-based
methods traditionally used for meteorological and oceano-
graphic predictions. For exampl e, climate forecasting from mul-
timodel ensembles has been adapted to produce early malaria
warning systems ( 151). Moreover, ensemble-based forecasting
methods based on sequential data assimilation approaches are
increasingly common infectiou s disease forecasting tools,
because of their ability to correct for various sources of uncer-
tainty in mathematical simulati ons as compared with traditional
linear time-series models such as negative binomial models and
autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models.
One type of sequential ensemble ﬁltering, the ensemble adjust-
ment Kalman ﬁlter, has been used to forecast seasonal outbreaks
of inﬂuenza ( 152), to reconstruct the transmission network of
the 2014 –2015 Ebola epidemic in Sierra Leone ( 153), and to ret-
rospectively “forecast ”cases of West Nile virus ( 154)a n dr e s p i -
ratory syncytial virus ( 155).
BRIEF RECOMMENDATIONS
In this primer, we have discussed several important algo-
rithms, but this is only the tip of the iceberg. We refer readers
to the machine learning textbooks referenced herein for a more
comprehensive review ( 2,5,31). The choice of an algorithm is
highly tied to the research goals associated with its use, and
there is no single recommendation for all projects. However,
epidemiologists interested in adopting machine learning meth-
odologies will often be most interested in accurate prediction
in the context of a large number of covariates. In these cases,
we encourage them to start with ensemble-based boosting or
bagging approaches. Through re ﬁtting the same underlying
model to different versions of a data set, these ensembles are
less susceptible to over ﬁtting and less sensitive to tuning param-
eters. They are also easy to implement with many commonly
available tools and packages, with random forests analysis
being a popular choice. The Super Learner approach, which
ﬁts many different models to a data set, is also attractive since
it allows simultaneous consideration of multiple algorithms
and automates many of the best practices for ﬁtting and vali-
dating machine learning models. However, as with traditional
epidemiologic or statistical approaches, a rigorous approach
to assessing performance and appropriate matching of a model
to its use are more important than the speci ﬁc algorithm used.
Despite the bene ﬁts of boosting and bagging, as a general
rule, these ensemble approaches add another stage to modeling,
making their results harder to interpret. Investigators shouldcarefully consider their primary objective: Is it predictive accuracy
or interpretability? Where interpretability is important, as in many
clinical applications, researchers might consider single, more eas-
ily understandable algorithms su ch as decision trees. However,
many machine learning algorithms, particularly nonensemble ap-
proaches, are prone to over ﬁtting.
Measures of ﬁt alone (e.g., R2) should be interpreted with cau-
tion, as they can be effectively meaningless for some machine
learning applications ( 156). Without a likelihood function, tech-
niques such as Akaike Information Criterion evaluation are not
available metrics for assessing the generalizability of machine
learning models; hence, cr oss-validation (whether k-fold, leave-
one-out, or another approach) is a critical tool for evaluating
model performance. These methods must be used appropriately,
however, or they can fool the researcher. The testing and valida-
tion plan should be speci ﬁed a priori and must be applied to the
full algorithm: For example, if there is a data-based variable
selection step, it should be executed in each data partition used
in cross-validation, not in the full data set prior to the cross-
validation. It is important that re searchers understand clearly that
these cross-validation approaches give expected out-of-data-set
performance given the algorithm used, not an assessment of the
particular ﬁtted model, and that they recognize that the quality of
these measures depends on the representativeness of the popula-
tion and the correlation between observations in the training and
testing sets (i.e., if there is high correlation, cross-validated per-
formance will be deceptively high).
OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
Theﬁeld of machine learning is rapidly developing and can
make any technical review seem obsolete within months. Grow-
ing interest in the ﬁeld from the general public, as re ﬂected in
extensive coverage of self-drivi ng cars and AlphaGo (Alphabet,
Inc., Mountain View, California) in the mainstream media, is
accompanied by efforts from the machine learning community
to make advanced machine learning technologies more acces-
sible. Educational companies such as Udacity (Udacity, Inc.,
Mountain View, California) and Coursera (Coursera, Inc.,
Mountain View, California) have partnered with companies
like Google and academic institutions to create online and
freely available courses on machine learning and deep
learning.
In addition to the growing educational resources, large tech-
nological companies, including Google, IBM (International
Business Machines Corporation, Armonk, New York), and
Amazon Web Services (Amazon Web Services, Inc., Seattle,
Washington), are heavily investing in open-source machine learn-
ing that uses data- ﬂow graphs to build models (e.g., TensorFlow
(Google, Inc.) ( 157)). The use of data- ﬂow graphs in TensorFlow
enables developers and data scientists to focus on the high-level
overall logic of the algorithms rather than the technical coding
details, which greatly increases the reproducibility and optimiz-
ability of the models. Models built with TensorFlow can be inte-
grated into mobile devices, making on-device/bedside diagnosis
practical when combined with mobile sensors. The ability of
TensorFlow to build and run models on the cloud also dramat-
ically increases processing power and storage ability, which is
particularly helpful for analyzing large data sets with complexMachine Learning for Epidemiologists 2233
Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023