Recommendations ”provides some recommendations for
incorporating machine learning into epidemiologic practice,
and the last section discusses opportunities and challenges.
CONCEPTS AND TERMINOLOGY
For epidemiologists seeking to i ntegrate machine learning
techniques into their research, language and technical barriers
between the two ﬁelds can make reading source materials and
studies challenging. Some machin e learning concepts lack sta-
tistical or epidemiologic parallels, and machine learning termi-
nology often differs even where the underlying concepts are the
s a m e .H e r ew eb r i e ﬂy review basic machine learning principles
and provide a glossary of machine learning terms and their sta-
tistical/epidemiologic equivalents (Table 1).
Supervised, unsupervised, and semisupervised learning
Machine learning is broadly classi ﬁable by whether the com-
puter ’s learning (i.e., model- ﬁtting) is “supervised ”or“unsu-
pervised. ”Supervised learning is akin to the type of model-
ﬁtting that is standard in epidem iologic practice: The value
of the outcome (i.e., the dependent variable), often called
its“label ”in machine learning, is k nown for each observation.
Data with speci ﬁed outcome values are called “labeled data. ”
Common supervised le arning techniques include standard epi-
demiologic approaches such as li near and logistic regression, as
well as many of the most popular machine learning algorithms
(e.g., decision trees, support vector machines).
Inunsupervised learning , the algorithm attempts to identify
natural relationships and groupings within the data without ref-
erence to any outcome or the “right answer ”(5, p. 517). Unsu-
pervised learning approaches share similarities in goals and
structure with statistical appr oaches that attempt to identify
unspeci ﬁed subgroups with similar characteristics (e.g., “latent ”
variables or classes) ( 6). Clustering algorithms, which group ob-
servations on the basis of similar data characteristics (e.g., both
oranges and beach balls are round), are common unsupervised
learning implementations. Examples may include k-means clus-
tering and expectation-maximizat ion clustering using Gaussian
mixture models ( 7,8).
Semisupervised learning ﬁts models to both labeled and
unlabeled data. Labeling data (outcomes) is often time-
consuming and expensive, partic ularly for large data sets. Semi-
supervised learning supplemen ts limited labeled data with an
abundance of unlabeled data with the goal of improving model
performance (studies show that unlabeled data can help build a
better classi ﬁer, but appropriate model selection is critical) ( 9).
F o re x a m p l e ,i nas t u d yo fW e bp a g ec l a s s i ﬁcation, Nigam et al.
(10)ﬁt a naive Bayes classi ﬁer to labeled data and then used
the same classi ﬁer to probabilistically label unlabeled observa-
tions (i.e., ﬁll in missing outcome data). They then retrained a
new classi ﬁer on the resulting, fully labeled data set, thereby
achieving a 30% increase in Web page classi ﬁcation accuracy
on data outside of the training set. Semisupervised learning can
bear some similarity to statistical approaches for missing data
and censoring (e.g., multiple imputation), but as an approach
that focuses on imputing missing outcomes rather than missing
covariates.Classi ﬁcation versus regression algorithms
Within the domain of supervised learning, machine learning
algorithms can be further divided into classi ﬁcation or regres-
sion applications, depending upon the nature of the response
variable. In general, in the machine learning literature, classi ﬁ-
cation refers to prediction of categorical outcomes, while
regression refers to prediction of continuous outcomes. We use
this terminology throughout this primer and are explicit when
referring to speci ﬁc regression algorithms (e.g., logistic regres-
sion). Many machine learning algorithms that were developed
to perform classi ﬁcation have been adapted to also address
regression problems, and vice versa.
Generative versus discriminative algorithms
Machine learning algorithms, both supervised and unsuper-
vised, can be discriminative or generative ( 11,12).Discrimina-
tive algorithms directly model the conditional probability of an
outcome, Pr( y|x) (the probability of ygiven x), in a set of
observed data —for example, the probability that a subject has
type 2 diabetes mellitus given a certain body mass index (BMI;
weight (kg)/height (m)2). Most statistical approaches familiar to
epidemiologists (e.g., linear and logistic regression) are discrim-
inative, as are most of the algorithms discussed in this primer.
In contrast, while generative algorithms c a na l s oc o m p u t e
the conditional probability of an outcome, this computation oc-
curs indirectly. Generative algorithms ﬁrst model the joint prob-
ability distribution, Pr( x,y) (the probabilities associated with all
possible combinations of xandy), or, continuing our example,
a probabilistic model that acco unts for all observed combina-
tions of BMIs and diabetes outcomes (Table 2). This joint prob-
ability distribution can be transformed into a conditional
probability distribution in order to classify data, as Pr( y|x)=
Pr(x,y)/Pr(x). Because the joint probabi lity distribution models
the underlying data-generating process, generative models can
also be used, as their name suggests, for directly generating
new simulated data points re ﬂecting the distribution of the co-
variates and outcome in the modeled population ( 11). However,
because they model the full joint distribution of outcomes and
covariates, generative models a re generally more complex and
require more assumptions to ﬁt than discriminative algorithms
(12,13). Examples of generative algorithms include naive
Bayes and hidden Markov models ( 11).
Reinforcement learning
In reinforcement learning, systems learn to excel at a task over
time through trial and error ( 14). Reinforcement learning tech-
niques take an iterative approach to learning by obtaining positive
or negative feedback based on performance of a given task on
some data (whether prediction, classi ﬁcation, or another action)
and then self-adapting and attempting the task again on new data
(though old data may be reencountered) ( 15). Depending on how
it is implemented, this approach can be akin to supervised learn-
ing, or it may represent a semisupervised approach (as in genera-
tive adversarial neural networks ( 16)). Reinforcement learning
algorithms often optimize the use of early, “exploratory ”versions
of a model —that is, task attempts —that perform poorly to gain
information to perform better on future attempts, and thenMachine Learning for Epidemiologists 2223
Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023