these candidate models weighted by the cross-validation –derived
weights. It has been applied to predict the drug susceptibility of
human immunode ﬁciency virus as a function of its mutations
(71), and it has been used as part of procedures to estimate causal
effects (see “Epidemiologic Applications ”section).
Available software includes SuperLearner in R and scikit-
learn in Python.
EPIDEMIOLOGIC APPLICATIONS
In this section, we give an overview of the way in which
machine learning algorithms have been used in various applica-
tions related to epidemiologic practice. While this is not a compre-
hensive review and we do not inte nd to discuss every limitation
and nuance of these approaches, we hope to direct readers to
areas of active research in the literature.
Causal inference
Relative to classical statistical or epidemiologic approaches,
machine learning algorithms have historically placed less
emphasis on causal inference. Indeed, machine learning has
been described as a “black box ”method because it is dif ﬁcult to
draw etiological inferences from the output of some algorithms
(e.g., ANNs). However, machine learning techniques can still
be an important component of approaches to estimating causal
effects in observational studies, w ith sometimes superior perfor-
mance for reducing bias and controlling for confounding ( 73).
Propensity score weighting is a common approach for esti-
mating causal effects in observational studies ( 74). Propensity
scores have traditionally been es timated with logistic regres-
sion, but this approach requires assumptions that, if unmet, may
render biased effect estimates despite propensity score condi-
tioning. Machine learning algor ithms often deal implicitly with
interactions and nonlinearitie s, whereas such high-order terms
must be explicitly speci ﬁed (and are commonly ignored) in
logistic regression. Machine lea rning algorithms also perform
well in estimating propensity scores in the presence of high-
dimensional data and can reduce underlying model misspeci ﬁ-
cation ( 75). Although these machine learning bene ﬁts may exist
at the expense of easy interpretability, these concerns are not
pertinent to propensity score estimation, as the interpretability
of propensity scores is not relevant to their performance. Multi-
ple studies have empirically dem onstrated bias reductions where
propensity scores are generated w ith machine learning methods,
particularly ensemble-based approaches ( 75–78). Under cer-
tain conditions, however, bias may persist or be exacerbated
by machine learning methods ( 79–81). Studies in which re-
searchers calculated propensity scores with machine learning
approaches have included those assessing the effects of early
sexual initiation on young adult health ( 82), vaccination on
birth outcomes ( 83), and combination antibiotic treatment on
Gram-negative bacteremia ( 84).
Likewise, machine learning algorithms can be used as a com-
ponent of any causal inference framework where an estimate of
the likelihood (or distribution) of an outcome is an important
component of the inferential process but need not be directly
interpretable. For example, the Super Learner algorithm has
been used as a component of targeted maximum likelihood
estimation and marginal structural model approaches ( 85).Examples include investigations of the relationship between
alcohol outlet density and alcohol consumption patterns ( 86)
and the relationship between childhood adversity and mental
disorders by race/ethnicity ( 87).
Machine learning methods have been used more directly to
attempt to understand heterogeneity in treatment effects across
subpopulations. For example, Athey et al. ( 88) have developed
an approach to building “casual trees ”that create decision trees
where groupings are based on treat ment effect and provide prin-
cipled estimates of treatment effe cts within these strata using an
approach they call “honest estimation. ”This approach has been
extended to apply the random forest algorithm to these trees, cre-
ating so-called “casual forests ”that can be used to estimate treat-
ment effects in persons with particular covariate pro ﬁles (89).
Another application of machine learning more directly
related to problems of causal inference is causal structure learn-
ing, which has grown as a distinct branch of machine learning.
Causal structure learning encompasses a group of exploratory
techniques that identify an optimal directed acyclic graph con-
sistent with conditional independ ence relationships in the data
and provided background knowledge. Approaches to causal
structure learning include Bayesian network approaches (see
Scutari and Denis ( 90) for an overview) and linear, nongaus-
sian, acyclic models (LiNGAMs) ( 91–93). The former have
b e e na p p l i e dt od e r i v ec a u s a li n ﬂuences in cellular signaling
pathways ( 94) and to infer causal associations between gene
expression and disease ( 95), while the latter have been used to
estimate causal directionalit y between sleep disorders and
depression ( 96) and to explore causality between television
viewing habits and weight change ( 97).
Diagnostics, prognostic predictive models, and other
clinical decision support tools
Disease diagnosis and prognosis are perhaps the oldest clini-
cal utilizations of machine learning techniques ( 98)a n dr e m a i n
common applications in the epide miologic literature. Machine
learning is particular ly well-suited to certain diagnostic ques-
tions (e.g., those that involve im aging and/or high-dimensional
data), and it can enhance prognostic models and clinical decision
support tools through, for example , automation and ease of use.
Diagnostics that involve imaging, where each pixel can be
conceptualized as a feature, and other high-dimensional data
are problems well suited for machine learning approaches.
SVMs have been utilized extensively in oncology for diagnosis
and disease staging from radiological and tissue data ( 99–107).
They have also been utilized for tumor typing from tissue
microarray gene expression data, which, because of their high
dimensionality, can be problematic for traditional statistical
models ( 108–111). Outside of oncology, SVMs have shown
promise for neuroimaging diagnostics, including for dementia
(112) and autism spectrum disorder ( 113–115).
Machine learning techniques are also well-suited to prognostic
models and other clinical decision support tools where accurate
diagnosis (i.e., low classi ﬁcation error) is the primary objective,
or where automation is desired. For example, Palaniappan and
Awang ( 116) employed a combination of methods (ANNs, naive
Bayes, and decision trees) in order to develop an automated,
Web-based prediction tool, the Intelligent Heart Disease Predic-
tion System. Incorporation into hospital and emergency roomMachine Learning for Epidemiologists 2231
Am J Epidemiol. 2019;188(12):2222 –2239Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aje/article/188/12/2222/5567515 by guest on 17 May 2023