Figure 2: Overview of a S TAR-CAPSlayer.
through estimator based on Gumbel-Softmax [ 10] to implement the binary routers. Differently from
our approach, Guo et al. [ 5] and Viet et al. [ 27] uses Gumbel-Softmax [ 10], to decide which layers in
a CNN to ﬁne-tune during transfer learning, and for adaptive inference in CNNs, respectively.
3 S TAR-CAPSArchitecture
STAR-CAPSis a capsule-based network that utilizes a straight-through attentive routing mechanism.
We opt to formulate each capsule as a matrix rather than a vector to save parameters [ 8]. Given the
pose features from the lower-level capsules, we transform the pose through shared trainable weight
matrices, i.e. a single weight matrix between each lower-level capsule and all the higher-level capsules.
We call the output of this transformation the pre-vote . The routing between the lower-level and higher-
level capsules takes place through two components: the Attention Estimator and the Straight-through
Router . Given the pre-vote, each Attention Estimator estimates an attentive coefﬁcient matrix that
acts as a soft relevance signal for each higher-level capsule. Additionally, each Attention Estimator is
sequentially augmented by a Straight-through Router, a differentiable binary router that acts as a gate.
This router estimates a binary signal that decides whether to connect or disconnect the current route
between the lower-level capsule and the higher-level capsule. The binary signal estimated by the
router can be seen as a hard-attention coefﬁcient, albeit differentiable. Conceptually, each route can
be seen as a double-attention (soft & hard) mechanism. Between each lower-level capsule and all the
higher-level capsules, we build a tree of double-attentions; thus, creating a forest of double-attentions
in each capsule layer. During training, each double-attention component learns the connectivity
between capsules in a stochastic dynamic manner, yet differentiable, which can be a seen as an
attention-based connectivity search mechanism. Next, we give an overview of the overall architecture
(§3.1), then we discuss the Attention Estimator (§ 3.2) and the Straight-through Router (§ 3.3).
3.1 Overview
Our architecture starts with a regular convolutional layer ( Conv ) with kernel ( kk),cchannels and
ReLU non-linearity, followed by a sequence of capsule layers. The ﬁrst capsule layer is a primary
capsule type ( PrimaryCaps ) [8], followed by a set of mconvolutional capsule type ( ConvCaps ).
PrimaryCaps andConvCaps layers have kernel size of ( kk). The ﬁnal layer ( ClassCaps ) predicts
the classes, where each class is represented by one capsule, i.e. the number of capsules is equal to the
number of classes. Each capsule layer `2f0;:::;m;m + 1gcontainsn`capsules. Each capsule is
composed of a pose matrix deﬁned explicitly, whereas the activation is implicitly encoded as we will
discuss later. We use the following notation to deﬁne a capsule network:
4