STAR-CAPS: Capsule Networks with
Straight-Through Attentive Routing
Karim Ahmed
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
karim@cs.dartmouth.eduLorenzo Torresani
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
LT@dartmouth.edu
Abstract
Capsule networks have been shown to be powerful models for image classiﬁcation,
thanks to their ability to represent and capture viewpoint variations of an object.
However, the high computational complexity of capsule networks that stems from
the recurrent dynamic routing poses a major drawback making their use for large-
scale image classiﬁcation challenging. In this work, we propose STAR-CAPS a
capsule-based network that exploits a straight-through attentive routing to address
the drawbacks of capsule networks. By utilizing attention modules augmented
bydifferentiable binary routers , the proposed mechanism estimates the routing
coefﬁcients between capsules without recurrence, as opposed to prior related
work. Subsequently, the routers utilize straight-through estimators to make binary
decisions to either connect ordisconnect the route between capsules, allowing stable
and faster performance. The experiments conducted on several image classiﬁcation
datasets, including MNIST, SmallNorb, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet
show that S TAR-CAPSoutperforms the baseline capsule networks.
1 Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved successful performance on different computer
vision tasks [ 7,14,25,6,22]. By using local receptive ﬁelds and shared weights, CNNs can identify
the existence of entities regardless of their spatial locations (translation invariance). CNNs use a
deep sequence of convolutional layers or max pooling operations which downsample the spatial size.
Max-pooling is considered a primitive form of routing in which the output only attends to the most
active neuron in the pool. By throwing away information about the precise position of an entity, max-
pooling achieves some translation invariance. To mitigate the viewpoint variations of an entity, CNNs
combine the activities of the pool, i.e., overlapping the sub-sampling pools. However, CNNs fail to
represent the part-whole relationships of the entities, thus they cannot detect radically new viewpoints
due to losing the precise spatial relationships in the max-pooling operations. Contrarily, capsule
networks [ 23,8] utilize trainable viewpoint-invariant transformations that learn to represent part-
whole relationship of the entities. Although, capsule models have been shown to be powerful models
to detect viewpoint variations compared to the traditional convolutional neural networks [ 23,8], the
computational complexity of these models during training and inference is a major drawback which
limits utilizing these networks efﬁciently on large-scale image classiﬁcation datasets. This poses a
dilemma: choosing between capsule networks and convolutional neural networks requires sacriﬁcing
either the computational efﬁciency or the mechanism to detect viewpoint variations, respectively.
In this work, we present STAR-CAPS, a capsule-based architecture that utilizes a straight-through
attentive routing to address the drawbacks of the recurrent dynamic routing. The proposed routing
mechanism is based on efﬁcient attention modules augmented by differentiable binary routers , which
make routing decisions utilizing a set of straight-through gradient estimators [ 10,1]. We outline the
motivation and the contributions of our work, next.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.