1.1 Motivation and Contributions
The computational complexity of the capsule networks during the training stage as well as the
inference, stems from the complex mechanisms of the voting and the routing steps. In the voting step,
the lower-level ncapsules cast votes for the higher-level mcapsules. This is achieved by transforming
the lower-level pose matrices using distinct ( nm) transformation matrices. For a capsule layer
with kernel size of k, the voting step in one forward pass requires ( k2nm) matrix-matrix
multiplications. In the routing step, the recurrent dynamic routing algorithms [ 8,23] depend on
multiple iterations to update the agreements. Each iteration requires additional expensive operations
such as matrix multiplications or exponential functions. The routing complexity gets intensiﬁed in the
EM routing algorithm [ 8] that requires two steps (E-step and M-Step) per iteration. Though a capsule
network architecture has a ﬁxed number of parameters, training and inference time can increase
dramatically according to the number of routing iterations deﬁned a priori as a hyperparameter.
To address the computational complexity of capsule networks, we replace the recurrent dynamic rout-
ing by a non-recursive attention-based routing mechanism. The motivation of our routing mechanism
stems from the relation between the non-recurrent self-attention employed in the Transformer [ 26]
and the recurrent dynamic routing [ 8,23]. Compared to the recurrent neural networks, the self-
attention [ 26] has been shown to be faster and more powerful. In fact, the recurrent dynamic routing
can been seen as an attention mechanism, but in the opposite direction [ 8]. As an additional advantage
of our proposed routing mechanism, the capsule network avoids the underﬁtting/overﬁtting caused by
the improper setting of the number of routing iterations [ 23]. The experiments conducted by Sabour
et al. [ 23] showed that fewer routing iterations may lead to underﬁtting, whereas large number of
iterations cause overﬁtting; thus, training a capsule network often require trial and error to identify a
satisfactory number of routing iterations for a speciﬁc task and dataset. Furthermore, compared to
the baseline capsule network [ 8], our approach shows a stable and better performance without being
sensitive to the predeﬁned number of capsules in each layer and their initializations.
Ourmain contributions can be summarized as follows.
To enable faster training and inference, we replace the recurrent dynamic routing mechanism by
efﬁcient attention modules augmented by differentiable binary routers, which exploit a group of
straight-through gradient estimators to make routing decisions.
As an additional beneﬁt of the proposed routing mechanism, the capsule network avoids the
underﬁtting/overﬁtting that occurs in the recurrent dynamic routing mechanisms, caused by
choosing an improper number of iterations. Furthermore, our approach allows more stable
performance without being sensitive to the predeﬁned number of capsules and their initializations.
We conducted different experiments on several image classiﬁcation datasets, including MNIST,
SmallNorb, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet. Our results show that STAR-CAPSoutperforms
the baseline capsule networks.
2 Background
2.1 Capsule Networks
A capsule neural network consists of capsule layers, where each layer is constructed from a set of
capsules. A capsule is a unit that represents a group of neurons formulated as a vector [ 23] or a
matrix [ 8] that reﬂects properties of an entity such as pose. Figure 1 shows traditional neural layers
vs. capsule layers. In traditional neural networks, the neurons are connected through a set of weights
learned during training. In capsule networks, the information ﬂow between the lower-level and the
higher-level capsules can be described in two steps: (1) voting , in which lower-level capsules cast
votes for the higher-level capsules, and (2) routing , where lower-level and higher-level capsules are
connected via routing coefﬁcients learned by a dynamic routing algorithm. In DynamicCaps [23]
the capsule is a vector that represents the pose, and its length indicates the existence of an entity. In
EMCaps [8] the capsule has a pose matrix, and an activation scalar.
In general, the architecture of capsule networks [ 8,23] consists of: (i) a traditional convolutional
layer, (ii) a PrimaryCaps , a special convolutional capsule layer that converts activities into vector
capsules [ 23] or matrix capsules [ 8], (iii) a set of convolutional capsule layers ( ConvCaps layers)
that learn the part-whole relationships of entities, (iv) the ﬁnal capsule layer is ClassCaps which
outputs the ﬁnal class predictions. During voting , the pose of a lower-level capsule is multiplied
by trainable weights (transformation matrix) to cast a vote for each higher-level capsule. Capsules
2