Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Figure 2: The initial chromosome (Phase 0). In the chromosom e, what type of activation function to be used for the
whole model is encoded. It also includes hyperparameter inf ormation for the ﬁrst two convolutional layers: the size
of the convolutional windows, number of output channels, an d whether or not to include batch normalization for the
layer. For the whole two-layer block, there are three additi onal hyperparameters: whether to add a pooling layer after
the ﬁrst convolutional layer, what is the pooling type, and i f a skip connection should be included.
Figure 3: An example of a skip connection. This block contain s two convolutional layers: Layer a and Layer b. The
skip connection performs a 1x1 convolution on the input, and its output is added with the output of Layer b. Stride size
and number of ﬁlters of the skip connection is setup such that its output tensor has the same shape as that of Layer b.
example can be found in Figure 5. Assume to the left is the best model discovered in Phase 0. The part in the
dashboard box is encoded in Phase 0 chromosome. When the algo rithm enters Phase 1, the chromosomes grows
longer, and the corresponding CNN models are deeper. The dee per models share some common properties: part of
their hyperparameter settings come from the best model in Ph ase 0. See the right part in Figure 5 for an example of
Phase 1 model. The part bounded by dashed box is being searche d in Phase 1, and the gray part above is from Phase 0.
Figure 6 shows the corresponding chromosomes for the two mod els in Figure 5. In Figure 6, the yellow ﬁelds indicate
hyperparameters that are being searched in that phase, and g ray ﬁelds indicate hyperparameters from previous phases.
3.3 Fitness of individuals
The ﬁtness of an individual is its accuracy on the validation dataset. One way is to train the models to converge, and
then compare. While this is more accurate in terms of compari ng the models’ performance on the test set, this process
takes very long time and needs a great amount of computing pow er. To save time, models can be trained for just a few
epochs to compare their relative ﬁtness with each other. Mod els that are ﬁtter in the ﬁrst few training epochs tend to
also perform better later. In the experiments, the number of training epochs for comparing relative ﬁtness is set to be
5.
This way of evaluation is unfair when the size of the model dif fers greatly. A deeper model might have similar or
even worse test accuracy compared with a shallower model whe n both are only trained for a small number of epochs
such as ﬁve. To solve this problem, we introduce weight trans fer from shallow models to deeper ones. In Figure 7,
when the algorithm enters a new phase, it searches for deeper models (the right part). New layers are added to the best
model from the previous phase (the left part). Instead of ini tializing all the weights randomly in the new models, some
of their weights are transferred from the previous best mode l, and some are done through random initialization. This
takes advantage of the previous trained models and saves som e training time. To evaluate its ﬁtness, the deeper model
is simply trained for ﬁve epochs, since part of it already rec eived some training.
6