Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
space grows exponentially large as the model depth increase s, and the access to GPU resources is limited – many
researchers only have access to one or a few GPUs. Given the ab ove mentioned reasons, it is certainly not practical to
traverse every single possibility to ﬁnd the best model.
Evolutionary algorithms have been used in hyperparameter o ptimization of deep learning models. Young et al. [1] used
a genetic algorithm (GA) to optimize the hyperparameter of a 3-layer CNN. The algorithm is not suitable for situations
where we do not know the how many layers are needed there. Real et al. [2] used a mutation only evolutionary
algorithm, and gradually grows the deep learning model to ﬁn d a good set of combinations. The evolutionary process
is slow due to the mutation only nature.
Inspired by the work of [1] and [2], we propose a variable leng th genetic algorithm to efﬁciently optimize the hyper-
parameters in CNNs. Models of various hyperparameters sett ings are ﬁrst created and evolved using the algorithm.
We do not put a constraint on the model depth, and various tech niques such as crossover operation in the evolving
process makes the algorithm more efﬁcient. Experimental re sults show that our method can efﬁciently ﬁnd good hy-
perparameter combinations even when the search space becom es exponentially large. Hyperparameter optimization is
itself a time consuming process. Having an efﬁcient algorit hm is especially helpful when the access to GPU hardware
is limited and the search space is very large. The major contr ibution of this work is as follows:
•Our method can efﬁciently discover deep learning models wit h variable depths. It makes hyperparameter
optimization more feasible for researchers with limited co mputing resources.
•Our algorithm does not have a constraint on the depth of deep l earning models, which means our method can
handle problems of different sizes.
•We incorporated crossover operation in our model evolution process along with efﬁcient model evaluation
techniques to make the model discovering process more effec tive.
The rest of the work is organized as follows: Section II descr ibes related work in hyperparameter optimization. Section
III introduces our method in searching for the best hyperpar ameter combinations. Section IV includes experiment
details and settings. Section V is conclusion and possible f uture research directions.
2 Background
2.1 Convolutional Neural Networks
A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a type of deep artiﬁc ial neural network and it is assumed to be used for
images. Classical CNNs contain convolutional layers, pool ing layers, ReLU activations, and fully connected layers.
Convolutional layers have convolutional windows that can e xtract features from images. These windows are usually
called ﬁlters or kernels. The kernels move through the image s, performing convolutions on local image data and
produce feature maps.
Pooling is used to reduce the number of parameters in a CNN, it is also called downsampling or subsampling. It can
help reduce computation complexity. If a feature map is of si ze 2020, using pooling of size 22 and step of size 2, the
dimension can be reduced to 1010 .There are different types o f pooling layers: max pooling, average pooling, fractional
max pooling and so on. Max pooling takes the pixel of the bigge st value in the pooling window, whereas average
pooling calculates the average of all the pixels in the windo w. These are the two commonly used pooling methods in
convolutional neural networks. Activation function ReLU s tands for Rectiﬁed Linear Unit, it introduces nonlinearity
into the network. ReLU activation keeps all positive input a nd makes negative input to be zero: f(x)=Max(0,x). Some
of the other types of activation functions include tanh, Exp onential Linear Unit (ELU) [3], Scaled Exponential Linear
Unit (SELU) [4] and so on. Fully connected layer has full conn ections to neurons in the previous layer.
2.2 Genetic Algorithms
Genetic algorithms are biologically inspired. It learns fr om Darwin’s evolutionary theory. In Darwin’s theory of natu ral
selection, the ﬁttest individuals are selected and they pro duce offsprings. The characteristics of these individuals are
passed on the next generations. If the parents have higher ﬁt ness, their offsprings tend to be ﬁtter and have more
chances of survival.
Genetic algorithms learn from this idea. They can be used to s olve optimization and search problems. In genetic
algorithms candidate solutions are evolved to generate bet ter ones. A set of solutions form a search space and the goal
is to ﬁnd the best ones among them. This is similar to ﬁnding th e ﬁttest individual in a population. Genetic algorithms
start with a population that contains random solutions with in the search space.
2