Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Figure 6: The corresponding chromosomes for models in Figur e 5. Chromosomes grows longer when a new phase is
entered. The chromosome in the new phase is extended from the best chromosome in the previous phase.
4.2 Search Space
The search space deﬁnes all the possible solutions that can b e searched. A relatively small search space may take the
algorithm less time to ﬁnd a satisfying CNN model, but may be c onstrictive due to the limited number of possible mod-
els included in this space. A larger one, on the other hand, is more time consuming and requires more computational
power.
In our experiments, the search space includes the number of o utput feature maps in each convolutional layer, convo-
lutional ﬁlter size, activation function type, pooling typ e, whether to have a skip connection, whether to include batc h
normalization in a layer, and total number of layers. Most of the hyperparameters, such as number of output feature
maps and convolutional ﬁlter sizes need to be decided in ever y convolutional layer. Thus as the model grows deeper,
the search space becomes exponentially larger, and the sear ching more difﬁcult. Most of the previous works do not
include pooling types in their search space. In our work howe ver, various pooling layers can exist in a single model.
Table 1 describes the default search space of our experiment s. The left column are the types of hyperparameters and
the right column are their choices. Unless otherwise noted, our variable length genetic algorithm uses this space. Fig-
ure 8 shows how the search space of algorithm grows as the numb er of layer increases. Initially models have two
layers and the search space contains 156,800 different comb inations of hyperparameters. When the the number of
layers increases to 14, the search space grows to about 1035.
The possible options of each hyperparameter type are carefu lly chosen. ReLU, Tanh, ELU and SELU are possible
choices for the activation functions. Tanh is chosen in favo r of Sigmoid because it is zero centered.
4.3 Experiment Setup
Our proposed method is implemented in Python, and CNN model a re created using Keras. Experiments were run on
a single GPU. To save time, the ﬁtness of each individual is ma de to be the test accuracy after ﬁve training epochs.
Weight transfer is also used to save the experiment running t ime. If a model survives into a new generation, it does
not need to be trained again because all of its weights are sav ed. If the algorithm enters a new phase where the new
population with longer chromosomes are built on top of previ ous stage’s best individuals, the old best model’s trained
weights are transferred into the new models, and the new ones are trained for another ﬁve epochs to get their ﬁtness
value.
8