Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Each solution has a chromosome, which contains properties a bout the solution. These chromosomes can be altered.
A typical genetic algorithm has three bio-inspired operato rs that can be used on a chromosome: selection, crossover,
and mutation. Selection means to select a portion of the popu lation as candidates to produce offsprings and generate
more solutions. Usually the ﬁtter individuals are selected . The ﬁtness of a solution can be calculated using a ﬁtness
function, and it reﬂects how good the solution is. Crossover combines the chromosomes of two parents, and produces
a chromosome for the offspring. The offspring’s chromosome inherits the properties from both parents. The Mutation
operator is like biological mutation: it changes one or more values in the chromosome. This introduces more diversities
in the population.
Genetic algorithms are simple yet effective. They have been applied on various research problems such as vehicle
routing problems [5], dynamic channel-assignment problem s [6], neuroscience search problems [7] [8], deep learning
hyperparameter optimizations [1] [2], neural network weig ht optimizations [9] [10] and so on. Genetic algorithms
with variable chromosome length have also been applied to ma ny problems [11] [12].
2.3 Hyperparameter Optimization Algorithms
Grid search and random search [13] are two popular methods fo r hyperparameter optimization. Grid search selects the
best model among many models built on predeﬁned hyperparame ter settings. It evaluates all the models to guarantee
the best one is found. As the number of hyperparameters grow, and search space gets increasingly larger, the amount
of time it takes for grid search grows exponentially, making it impractical to be used. Random search [13]takes less
time than grid search, because unlike grid search, it does no t search all possibilities exhaustively. Instead of trying out
all possibilities, it randomly selects models with differe nt hyperparameter combinations. There is a trade-off betwe en
search time and quality of discovered models. It is not guara nteed that the optimal hyperparameter combination within
the search space will be found. It turns out random search can achieve similar results compared with grid search, while
being more efﬁcient.
Besides grid search and random search there are other approa ches, such as Bayesian optimization, gradient based
methods, reinforcement learning based methods, and evolut ionary algorithms. Bayesian optimization methods [14]
[15] [16] use an acquisition function to smartly decide wher e should the algorithm explore next in the search space. A
probabilistic model is built to balance exploration and exp loitation. Gradient based methods can be used if the hyper-
parameters are continuous. Luketina et al.[17] and Fu et al. [18] used gradient descent to optimize hyperparameters.
Reinforcement learning based methods are used to automatic ally discover CNN architectures. Zoph et al. [19] used
a Recurrent Neural Network to generate CNN model structure, and applied reinforcement learning to improve the
generated architecture. Baker et al. [20] used a Q-learning agent to discover a network layer by layer.
Another large category of hyperparameter optimization met hod is based on evolutionary algorithms. Research work
under this category differs in their evolutionary algorith ms used, the search space, the encoding scheme for CNN
model architecture, ways of reducing computational cost an d so on. Young et al. [1] performed genetic algorithms to
optimize hyperparameters in CNNs. A three layer ﬁxed-archi tecture CNN is used, and only six hyper parameters are
tuned. The problem with a ﬁxed layer architecture is that the models may be too small to ﬁt the problem, leading to a
high bias. Real et al.[2] evolved complex CNN architectures from very simple individuals by applying different kinds
of mutation operations. Model structures are encoded as gra phs in [2]. While the method by Real et al.[2] can ﬁnd
accurate models for challenging tasks, the computational c ost is very high: 250 workers are used and the searching
time is over 250 hours. A mutation only algorithm can contrib ute to high computational cost since the evolutionary
process is very slow. Many hyperparameter optimization met hods use the model’s accuracy on the held out validation
dataset as an evaluation of the model. Albelwi et al.[21] too k a different approach of evaluating how good a CNN
model is. Images are reconstructed from the learned ﬁlters u sing deconvnet, and the similarity between the original
image and the reconstructed image is used as the ﬁtness of a CN N architecture. There are various ways of deﬁning
models’ structures too. Suaganuma et al.[22] used Cartesia n genetic programming encoding scheme to deﬁne CNN
models. It enables them to incorporate modules such as tenso r concatenation into the model architecture. Baldominos
et al.[23] used backus-naur form to deﬁne a grammar for model topologies, allowing more ﬂexible representations of
CNN architectures.
3 Method
Evolutionary algorithms (EA) are inspired by the process of natural selection. They are commonly used to produce
high-quality solutions when the search space is large. The i dea of EA is to produce an initial population that is made
up of diverse solutions, and evolve them for many generation s to produce better ones. The genes of the better solutions
will survive and pass on to further generations, whereas the worse solutions die off.
3