Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Both Young et al. and Real et. al use EA, and there are limitati ons. For the purpose of optimizing hyperparameters
for deep learning models, no constraints should be put on the network layers. Limiting the number of layers could
make the network size too small for the problem, leading to un derﬁtting. Young et. al used a classical ﬁxed length
genetic algorithm (GA), the most popular type of GA, to optim ize a CNN model for the CIFAR-10 dataset [24]. A
ﬁxed length GA means the CNN model has predeﬁned ﬁxed number o f layers. However, for a given problem, one
never knows how many layers are enough before experiments ar e done. Having a too large network on the other hand,
can lead to overﬁtting. Thus it makes sense to start from a sma ll network, and gradually grow it as needed. Real et. al
do so by using a mutation only EA. Although high accuracies ar e obtained on the CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 dataset,
the computational cost of their method is very high. The whol e process takes 250 parallel computers and over 250
hours to complete. Those who rely on automatic hyperparamet er optimization tools usually do not have that kind of
computational resource.
Because of the above mentioned limitations, we propose a var iable length genetic algorithm for deep learning hyper-
parameter optimization. It starts from a small network mode l and gradually builds on top of it. Crossover operation
along with other techniques are used in this EA to accelerate the optimization process, making it affordable for those
with limited resources.
3.1 Variable Length Genetic Algorithms
Classical GA requires ﬁxed chromosome length. Since the num ber of convolutional layers varies in different CNN
models, and more hyperparameters are involved as the model g rows deeper, a variable length GA is more suitable for
the purpose of our task.
A chromosome in the variable length GA contains parameters t hat deﬁne a solution, in this case, a hyperparameter
conﬁguration for a network model. How the solution is encode d in the chromosome is discussed in section 3.2.
Figure 1 describes the overall procedure for the variable le ngth GA. The initial population with two convolutional
layers is ﬁrst produced, and the individuals/solutions are initialized with random hyperparameters. The individuals are
then evaluated and sorted based on how ﬁt they are. The ﬁtness of an individual is made to be the corresponding CNN
model’s accuracy on the validation dataset. Then the ﬁtter i ndividuals gets directly picked, and survive into the next
generation. The rest of the next generation are produced by i ndividuals from the current generation using crossovers
and mutations, common operations of a GA. In crossover, two i ndividuals are selected as parents to produce a child
that inherits the parents’ properties. In mutation, some pr operties of the individual are changed to other values. Afte r
the 2-layer models have been evolved for some generations, t he algorithm enters the next phase that enables more
layers and hyperparameters.
A new phase in the algorithm simply means the chromosome leng th increases, bringing more hyperparameters in, and
the corresponding CNN models have more layers.
The steps of our hyperparameter optimization method are as f ollows:
1. Initialize the number of populations pand generations gaccording to user input.
2. Create the initial population. Each individual in the pop ulation has randomized hyperparameters. The size of
the population is pas speciﬁed by the user.
3. Evaluate the ﬁtness of each individual in the current gene ration. The ﬁtness is the accuracy of the individual
on the validation dataset.
4. Sort each individual according to their ﬁtness value, fro m high to low.
5. Select the ﬁttest individuals. Select a portion of the pop ulation that has the highest ﬁtness values, and let them
survive into the next generation. The percentage of this sur vival rate can be set manually.
6. Allow some less ﬁt individuals to survive. For the rest of t he individuals in the current population, give them
a small chance to survive into the next generation. This prob ability is set manually.
7. Randomly mutate some individuals in the next generation. The mutation rate is manually conﬁgured. If an
individual is chosen to mutate, one of its hyperparameter’s value will be changed.
8. Produce new individuals. Randomly select two individual s from the next population to serve as parents, and
perform crossover operation to produce a child. Each hyperp arameter in the child is randomly set to be one
of its parent’s hyperparameter value. Repeat the crossover operation on different random individuals many
times until the next generation has pindividuals. Now the next generation becomes the current ge neration.
9. Repeat Step 3 - 8 until the number of generations has reache d g.
10. Select the best individual from the current population.
4