Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Phase0.450.500.550.600.650.700.750.80Best Individual Fitness
Figure 9: The evolutionary process stops when the stopping c ondition is met. In this example the algorithm stops at
Phase 14 because the ﬁtness drop is larger than the threshold . The best individual, in this case at Phase 13, is picked
to receive further training.
the population, the algorithm will stop in the middle of the s econd generation, and we do not have much beneﬁts from
evolution.
We implemented large scale evolution [2] on top of a public av ailable implementation [25]. We ran the implementation
with different population size: 30, 50, and 80. The ﬁtness of discovered individuals is shown in Figure 12. Large scale
evolution can produce good models when given great amount of computing hardware and time. However, when there
is limited time and computational hardware available, it is not an ideal algorithm to use. As can be told from Figure
12a, when time is restricted to 1 GPU and 30 hours, the ﬁtness o f discovered individuals are relatively low. When the
population size is 30, the ﬁtness starts to plateau. This cou ld be due to the lack of variety in the chromosome because
the population size is small. When the population size is 80, there is still room for the ﬁtness to improve, but because
of a mutation only evolution, it does not grow as fast as our va riable length genetic algorithm shown in Figure 10.
Table 2 shows the comparison between our method and random se arch, traditional genetic algorithm [1], and large
scale evolution [2]. In our method we sample 20 individuals f rom the initial search space and evolve for 5 generations
in each phase. The best model discovered has 88.92% test accu racy and the total time is around 25 hours. We ran
random search, classical genetic algorithm [1], and large s cale evolution [2] with the 30 hour constraint and report
the best result found. When we have limited GPU resources, wi thin similar amount of time, large scale evolution
gives a model with lowest accuracy. This is because large sca le evolution starts with very small models and there
are only mutation operations on chromosomes. Without cross over, the evolution process is much slower. Large scale
evolution gives very good results when hardware and time is n ot a problem. However, it is not practical for the average
research lab. Classical GA gives a model with relatively hig h accuracy. This is because the deﬁned search space is
much smaller: the number of convolutional layers is ﬁxed to b e three according to the paper. It is necessary to ﬁx the
layer number because classical GA has ﬁxed length chromosom es. Setting a predeﬁned number of layers is not very
practical when we encounter a new problem because we usually do not have much idea of how many layers would be
a good ﬁt for the problem. Our method can ﬁnd better models com pared with the other three when there are limited
computational resources available.
11