arXiv:2006.12703v1  [cs.NE]  23 Jun 2020EFFICIENT HYPERPARAMETER OPTIMIZATION IN DEEP
LEARNING USING A VARIABLE LENGTH GENETIC ALGORITHM
A P REPRINT
Xueli Xiao
Computer Science Department
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
xxiao2@student.gsu.eduMing Yan
Institute of High Performance Computing
National University of Singapore
Singapore
yanmingtop@yahoo.comSunitha Basodi
Computer Science Department
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
sbasodi1@student.gsu.edu
Chunyan Ji
Computer Science Department
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
cji2@student.gsu.eduYi Pan
Computer Science Department
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
yipan@gsu.edu
June 25, 2020
ABSTRACT
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have gained great succ ess in many artiﬁcial intelligence
tasks. However, ﬁnding a good set of hyperparameters for a CN N remains a challenging task. It usu-
ally takes an expert with deep knowledge, and trials and erro rs. Genetic algorithms have been used
in hyperparameter optimizations. However, traditional ge netic algorithms with ﬁxed-length chromo-
somes may not be a good ﬁt for optimizing deep learning hyperp arameters, because deep learning
models have variable number of hyperparameters depending o n the model depth. As the depth in-
creases, the number of hyperparameters grows exponentiall y, and searching becomes exponentially
harder. It is important to have an efﬁcient algorithm that ca n ﬁnd a good model in reasonable time.
In this article, we propose to use a variable length genetic a lgorithm (GA) to systematically and
automatically tune the hyperparameters of a CNN to improve i ts performance. Experimental re-
sults show that our algorithm can ﬁnd good CNN hyperparamete rs efﬁciently. It is clear from our
experiments that if more time is spent on optimizing the hype rparameters, better results could be
achieved. Theoretically, if we had unlimited time and CPU po wer, we could ﬁnd the optimized
hyperparameters and achieve the best results in the future.
Keywords Genetic Algorithms ·Hyperparameter Optimization ·Deep Learning ·Convolutional Neural Networks
1 Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has achieved great pe rformance in the area of computer vision. Designing
the architecture of CNNs so that it produces good results on a task is challenging. It involves decisions on various
hyperparameters of the network, such as how many layers are i n the network, how many ﬁlters are in a layer, what
are the sizes of convolutional windows, and so on. All the dif ferent combinations of the hyperparameters create a
huge number of possibilities for CNN models. Traditionally , the selection of hyperparameters is done by hand tuning,
ie. manually testing different sets of parameters that may w ork well. This requires certain level of knowledge and
expertise in deep learning, and the process of trial and erro r is tedious, time-consuming, and may be discouraging
to the novices. It is thus beneﬁcial to automatically search for a CNN architecture that suits the needs of the task.
Searching for a good deep learning model is challenging, ver y computationally intensive, and time consuming. The
lengthy search time is caused by many factors: the evaluatio n time for a single deep learning model is long, the search