Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Figure 7: Weight initialization scheme for deeper models. A deeper model of the current phase is built on top of the
best model from the previous phase. Part of its weights is tra nsferred from the previous best model, part is initialized
randomly.
4.4 Genetic Algorithm Settings
There are parameters that need to be set up in our variable len gth genetic algorithm: the size of the population, number
of generations, number of phases, mutation rate, and surviv al chance of less ﬁt individuals. In the experiments, 50%
of the ﬁttest individual survive into the next generation, t he survival rate of less ﬁt individual is set to be 0.2, and the
mutation rate is set to be 0.2. We do not set a predeﬁned number of phases in our method. Instead, a stopping condition
is set to stop the algorithm. Section 4.5 discusses the stopp ing condition in details.
4.5 Stopping Condition
The evolutionary process stops when there is no more improve ment on validation accuracy when more layers are
added. A threshold value is set for the stopping condition: w hen the best ﬁtness in the new phase is smaller than
the best ﬁtness in the previous phases by more than 0.01, the e volving process stops, and the individual with the best
ﬁtness is returned. This individual then receives further t raining. In Figure 9, the evolutionary process stops at the 1 4th
phase. The best individual ﬁtness at Phase 14 is 0.8070, wher eas the best in the previous phases is 0.8233 (at Phase
13). The evolutionary process thus stops, and the best indiv idual at Phase 13 is picked to receive further training.
4.6 Results
Figure 10 shows the result of 20 individuals evolved for 5 gen erations in each phase. Each individual is trained for
5 epochs to evaluate the ﬁtness. The evolution stops at Phase 14, when the stopping condition is met. The number
of convolutional layers increases in each phase. Initially , when the algorithm enters a new phase, there is a great
improvement in the accuracy of the individuals, this improv ement gradually declines in the later phases. This shows
the increase of convolutional layers can have great inﬂuenc e on the model performance, especially when the model is
9