Efﬁcient Hyperparameter Optimization in Deep Learning Usi ng a Variable Length Genetic Algorithm
Figure 1: The hyperparameter optimization steps using our v ariable length genetic algorithm.
11. Produce population with longer chromosome length. For e ach individual of the population, one part of the
chromosome is from the best individual in Step 10, the other p art is randomly generated.
12. Repeat step 9 - 11 until convergence.
13. Select the best individual and train for more epochs unti l convergence.
3.2 Encoding Scheme
The hyperparameter information of each individual, or CNN m odel, is encoded into what’s called a chromosome in
GA. The chromosome may have different representations, suc h as a bit string that contains 1’s and 0’s. For the purpose
of hyperparameter optimization, the chromosome of our expe riments have many ﬁelds that contain different values. It
deﬁnes the hyperparameters of a CNN architecture, such as th e number of neurons, activation function type, and so
on. Once a chromosome is known, a CNN model can be built accord ing to the chromosome.
In the initial phase (Phase 0) of the algorithm, there are two convolutional layers a and b. Relevant hyperparameters
are encoded in the chromosome as shown is Figure 2. For each co nvolutional layer, the hyperparameters include the
number of output feature maps, the size of the convolutional windows, and whether or not to include batch normaliza-
tion. For this two-layer block, there are three additional h yperparameters: whether to include pooling in this block,
what is the pooling type, and whether or not to include a skip c onnection. If there is a pooling layer for this block, it is
going to be added after the ﬁrst convolutional layer. If a ski p connection exists, it is going to have a 1x1 convolution,
and its output is going to be added with the output of the whole block. Figure 3 is an example of the skip connection.
There is an additional “activation type” ﬁeld in the chromos ome for Phase 0. This deﬁnes what type of activation
function is going to be used for the whole model. Figure 2 is th e encoding scheme of Phase 0, the initial phase that
represents a model with two convolutional layers.
For every phase after Phase 0, we allow the algorithm to still add two convolutional layers (Layer a and Layer b) in
each phase, but we give the ﬂexibility and let the algorithm d ecide whether to add one or two convolutional layers in
the phase. The chromosome encoding for a Phase after Phase 0 i s as shown in Figure 4. New ﬁelds are concatenated
to the chromosome of the previous phase. The new part is very s imilar to the encoding for Phase 0, except that it does
not have an “Activation Type” ﬁeld, and has a new ﬁeld “Includ e Layer?” that can take two values: 0 or 1. If the value
is 1, there will be two convolutional layers in this phase, an d if 0, there will be only one.
Going into a new phase means that the chromosomes are longer, and models being discovered by the algorithm grow
deeper. And part of the hyperparameters in the deeper model c omes from the best model in the previous phase. An
5