Gruber and Jockisch GRU, LSTM, and Motive Classiﬁcation in Text
A- or EF. The failure theme is scored when there is no other HS
categorybutISandatleastNForFisscored.
For each of the six pictures, these 11 categories are scored;
afterward,theyaresummeduptogetherwiththethemestohope
ofsuccess(NS +IS+ES+A++P+ST)orfearoffailure(NF +
IF+EF+A-+F+C+FT). The individual HS and FF scores
for these six pictures are summed up again to the person’s total
HSandFFscore.
Asitisverycomplextoevaluatethosepicturestoryexercises ,
the need for computer evaluation of this test is given since a
long time ( Stone et al., 1966; Seidenstücker and Seidenstücker,
1974; Schultheiss, 2013; Halusic, 2015 ). Therefore, automatizing
the evaluation of this assessment instrument combines two
beneﬁts: ﬁrst, having a task that contains real human langua ge
understandingand,second,providingpracticaluse.
Recurrent neuronal networks are commonly used for
language understanding ( Geron, 2018 ) as they are sequential
data. There are diﬀerent cells to improve neuronal networks
when tracking long-term dependencies for deep sentence
understanding. The ﬁrst technique is the long-short-term-
memory (LSTM) cell ( Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997 ). It
has its own memory, which stores information outside the
learningﬂowoftheneuralnetwork.Thus,problemsoflong-te rm
dependencies, i.e., in this case, for example, rarely frequen ted
word combinations that are far apart, can be better controlle d.
TheLSTMcellcorrespondstoanodeofarecurrentnetworkand
has,inadditiontotheinputandoutput,aforgetgatethatavoi ds
overfeeding of the vanishing gradient. The second techniqu e
or alternative is the so-called gated recurrent unit (GRU; Cho
et al., 2014 ); this function is performed via an update gate and
a reset gate. The advantage of GRU cells is that they are just
as powerful as LSTM cells ( Chung et al., 2014 ) for moderately
spaced word combinations, even with small data sets; but they
need less computing power, so with the same equipment larger
networks are feasible. With its three gates, the LSTM is more
complex than the two-gated GRU cell. The LSTM has an input,
output, and forget gate. The main diﬀerence is the presence or
absence of an output gate, which tells how much of the content
ispresentedtothenextlayerofthenetwork.ForLSTMcells,t he
whole memory can be limited by the output gate; in the GRU
cell, this is not possible. In the GRU cell, this is handled via an
update gate and a reset gate, where the update gate mostly does
what in the LSTM is done by the input and forget gate. The
reset gate handles the candidate activation in the cell. The refore,
in the GRU cell, the previous time step is more important. In
the LSTM, there is no control of information ﬂow in the cell as
there is no reset gate. To put all in a nutshell, the GRU cell doe s
not memorize as much as the LSTM cell, for it needs previous
activationandremainsinthenetwork(see Figure1).TheLSTM
cellcouldmemorizemoreasithasoneadditionalgatetocont rol
theoutputseparately( Ranaetal.,2016;Shen,2017 ).
Some results indicate that GRUs can outperform LSTMs
(Jozefowicz et al., 2015; Liu and Singh, 2016 ); some show
opposite results ( Amodei et al., 2015 ). So the question remains
when to use GRU and when to use LSTM cells. We think
that because of the architecture, the GRU cell is more sensit ive
for data and the LSTM is more speciﬁc. This perhaps could
FIGURE 1 | Gated recurrent unit (GRU; left) r =reset-, z =update gate, h =
activation, ˜h=candidate activation, long short-term memory (LSTM; right )
with input- (i), forget- (f), and output-gate (o), memory ce ll c, new memory cell
˜c; (Schema cited after Rana et al., 2016 , p 3;Chung et al., 2014 , p 3).
explain why in some cases GRUs outperform LSTMs and
vice versa. So the aim of this study is to compare GRU and
LSTM cells for automated motive coding, a special kind of text
classiﬁcation that requires deep text understanding, and l ook at
sensitivity/speciﬁcity rates as well as accuracy rates depend ing
onprevalence.
Basedonthediﬀerentarchitecture,weassumethat
– The GRU cell outperforms the LSTM cell regarding accuracy
inlowprevalentcontent( <0.50).
– The GRU cell has higher speciﬁcity (true negative rate) than
theLSTMcell.
– The LSTM cell should have higher sensitivity (true positive
rate)thantheGRUcell.
METHODS
Data
As labeled data set for the study, 18000 stories (3000 tests, each
one consisting of six picture stories A–F) were coded accordi ng
to the 11 categories of the two components of the achievement
motivehopeforsuccess(HS)andfearoffailure(FF; Heckhausen,
1963). In part, they were received from other researchers and
included archival data, where no information about gender a nd
age is given. Therefore, also no ethical approval was done. The
18000 stories were coded toward the absence or presence of the
11 categories. As resulting labels, which are output by the ne ural
network, we did not take the all-encompassing overall HS- or
FF-scores but the coding regarding the 11 categories for eac h
single picture story, because we wanted to get insights into th e
classiﬁcation performance in diﬀerent categories. We did not
code each sentence separately as this does not comply with the
guidance of Heckhausen (1963) , and we wanted to consider the
meaning of the text across the sentences. As we wanted to be
sure that the coding of the data is consistent, seven students,
who were also involved in data preparation, underwent 5 weeks
of intensive training according to the guidelines of Heckhausen
(1963). Their interrater agreement was calculated on a random
data sample ( N=60), using an ICC ( Shrout and Fleiss, 1979 )
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org 2 June 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 40