Gruber and Jockisch GRU, LSTM, and Motive Classiﬁcation in Text
with a two-way model on absolute agreement. It ranged from
0.70 to 0.73 ( p<0.001), which is an acceptable score ( Meyer
et al., 2002 ). The stories were sorted by person and picture for
theanalysis.
The Network
For analysis, a recurrent neural network was created with an
inputandanoutputlayerintensorﬂow(https://www.tensorﬂow .
org/, derived 06.04.2020). In the input, the text was inserte d as
a.txtﬁle;thetextwaspreprocessedbythenaturallanguageto olkit
(www.ntlk.org,derived06.04.2020).
For analysis, the words of the picture texts were encoded
withthe64dimensionalword-embeddingfrompolyglot,train ed
on German Wikipedia (https://sites.google.com/site/rmyei d/
projects/polyglot, downloaded 06.04.2020). The concatenat ed
wordvectorswerefedintoarecurrentneuralnetwork,builtw ith
the tensorﬂow framework, consisting of an input layer, an inn er
layer,andanoutputlayer.
For the comparison of the cell architectures, the vanilla RNN
was replaced on the one hand by (1) the simple LSTM cell and
on the other hand by (2) the GRU cell provided in tensorﬂow.
The networks were trained in 1000 epochs without dropout,
optimized by an Adam optimizer and a learning rate of 0.005;
1000epochsweretrainedonthedatawitha90%trainingsetand
a 10% testing set. The hyperparameters were chosen according
toGeron (2018) and set by tensorﬂow. No individual tuning
was done for both cell types to make sure that this would not
inﬂuence the results at this stage. The procedure was as follow s.
The data were fed into the network. They were sorted by person
(1–3000)andpicture(1–6)asfollows:Person1,Picture1,sc oring
category1–11,Person1,Picture2,scoringcategory1–11,P erson
1, Picture 3, scoring category 1–11, Person 1, Picture 4, sco ring
category1–11,Person1,Picture5,scoringcategory1–11,P erson
1, Picture 6, scoring category 1–11, Person 2, Picture 1, sco ring
category1–11,...).
The picture text data were fed into the network (X-tensor);
the scoring was set into the Y-tensor. It was sorted by person
(1–3000) and then by picture (1–6). For every picture, the 11
categories were provided as the labels, which have to be learn ed.
Thetrainingepochsweredividedintomini-batchessuchthat the
dataofapersonwerealwaystogetherinthesamemini-batch.
Training and testing sets were split according to this counte r,
so that in both sets, all six pictures were presented and no
diﬀerenceincontentcouldinﬂuencetheresult.Theclassiﬁc atory
was then trained to classify the text regarding the absence o r
presenceofthe11categories.
Afterward, a simple 10-fold cross-validation was performed.
Theresultingvalueswerecalculatedpercategoryandperpictu re
aswellascategoryxpicture.Thescoresfortestingthehypoth esis
that low prevalent content should be much easier to be learned
by GRU and high prevalent content by LSTM, scored had to
be transformed, because the original prevalence was below 0. 50.
Therefore, the sum-scores were dichotomized per picture or
percategory.
In addition to the accuracies, sensitivities and speciﬁties were
calculated (see Figure2). As each category can be given a 1
FIGURE 2 | Classiﬁcation method for the categories.
(content is in category) or a 0 (content is not in category), t here
can be diﬀerent decisions. If the program and the human coder
decide that the speciﬁc content hits a speciﬁc category, this i s
named true positive on; the other hand, if both agree that it is
not, it is true negative. If the program does not code a speciﬁc
content,itisfalsenegative.Iftheprogramcodestheconten tand
it would not be coded by the human, it is false positive. The
sensitivity is calculated as the true positive rate of all deci sions
divided by all positive classiﬁcations, so true positive and fa lse
negative. The speciﬁcity is the true negative rate divided by all
negative classiﬁcations, so false positive and true negative. So a
highsensitivityconcludesthattheprogramismorelikelytoﬁ nd,
for example, a category that is scored. High speciﬁcity means
that the program tends to not make a classiﬁcation when there
is nothing in the data. The prevalence was computed as the
number of occurrences (cases coded as 1) divided by all cases .
Forexample,ifin10stories,thereareﬁvetime-crossedcate gory
NS, the prevalence rate of NS would be 0.50. Prevalence is often
indicatedin%,butweworkedwiththedecimalsinstead.
RESULTS
First the results show an overall testing accuracy of 0.85 fo r the
GRU cell and 0.82 for the LSTM cell. But there were diﬀerences
acrosstheaccuracydependingontheprevalence.
The results show that GRU cells tend to learn content that
is rarely found in the data (low prevalence) better. LSTM cells,
on the other hand, learn content that can be found more
frequently in the data (high prevalence) better. As soon as th e
prevalence is balanced ( ∼0.50), the classiﬁcation performance
adjusts(see Table1).
This is also found for categories. In all cases where the
prevalence is >0.50, the LSTM cell outperformed the GRU cell;
inallothercases,theGRUcelloutperformedtheLSTMcellwith
oneexception:theEFcategory.
Table2shows that the speciﬁcity of the GRU cell is higher
thanthespeciﬁcityoftheLSTMcell.Thiscanbefoundacrossal l
categoriescalculatedforthepictures,regardingtheHS-ca tegories
as well as the FF-categories. On the other hand, the sensitivi ty
of GRU cells is always lower than the sensitivity of LSTM cells
(seeTable2).
Similar results could also be found when separating for
diﬀerent categories (see SupplementaryTable1 ). An exception
could be found when speciﬁc context information is needed
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org 3 June 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 40