Voxelize
Initial Prediction
V oxelRPN RefinerNetCoordinate Feature
Convolution Feature
Voxelizen×4
Raw Point C loud
Figure 1. Overview of our two-stage framework. In the ﬁrst stage, we voxelize point cloud and feed them to V oxelRPN to produce a
small number of initial predictions. Then we generate the box feature for each prediction by fusing interior points’ coordinates and context
feature from V oxelRPN. Box features are fed to ReﬁnerNet for further reﬁnement.
rely on detection results from 2D detector followed by re-
gression of the 3D amodal box for each object. This kind
of pipeline heavily relies on 2D detection results, inheriting
the weakness when detecting cluttered or distant objects in
images. Clearly, directly working on point cloud data is a
better choice if information can be properly made use of.
To this end, our method is new to exploit the hybrid of
voxel and raw point cloud, without relying on RGB im-
ages. The two effective stages are voxel representation input
to V oxelRPN to acquire a set of initial predictions in high
speed, and ReﬁnerNet to fuse raw point cloud and extracted
context feature for better localization quality. These two
components are elaborated on in the following.
3.2. VoxelRPN
V oxelRPN takes 3D voxel input and produces 3D detec-
tion results. It is a one-stage object detector.
Input Representation Input to V oxelRPN is the vox-
elized point cloud, which is actually a regular grid. Each
voxel in the grid contains information of original points ly-
ing in the local region. Speciﬁcally, we divide the 3D space
into spatially arranged voxels. Suppose the region of inter-
est for the point cloud is a cuboid of size (L,W,H)and
each voxel is of size (vl,vw,vh), the 3D space can be di-
vided into 3D voxel grid of size (L/vl,W/vw,V/vh).
There may be more than one points in a voxel. In V ox-
elNet [43], 35points are kept and fed to the VFE layers to
extract features. Our ﬁnding, however, is that simply us-
ing 6 points in each voxel followed a 8-channel MLP layer
is already adequate to achieve reasonable performance em-
pirically. With this representation in a compact shape, we
easily exploit the great power of CNN for informative fea-
ture extraction.
Network Structure Aiming at 3D detection, our network
needs to clearly ﬁlter information from (X,Y,Z)dimen-
sions. In [40, 23], the Zdimension is simply transformedinto the channels when generating the voxel representation.
Then several 2D convolutions are applied. In this way, the
information along Zdimension vanishes quickly. As a re-
sult, detection only on BEV becomes achievable. Differ-
ently, V oxelNet [43] keeps three separate dimensions when
producing voxels followed by three 3D convolutions. It is
noticed that the efﬁciency is decreased.
Along a more appropriate direction, we ﬁnd that a num-
ber of consecutive 3D convolutions are quite effective on
preserving the 3D structure. Based on this observation, our
backbone network is composed of 2D and 3D convolutions,
achieving high efﬁciency as PIXOR [40] and even higher
performance than V oxelNet [43].
We show details of our backbone network in Figure 2.
The ﬁrst part consists of six 3D convolutional layers, which
only possess a small number of ﬁlters to keep time budget.
Instead of aggressively downsampling features in the Zdi-
mension by ﬁlters with stride 2and kernel size 3, we insert
3D convolution layers with kernel size 2 in the Zdimen-
sion without padding, to better fuse and preserve informa-
tion. What follows are three blocks of 2D convolutions for
further abstraction and enlarging the receptive ﬁeld.
Objects of the same category in 3D scene are generally
with similar scales. Thus, different from the popular multi-
scale object detector [21] in 2D images, which assigns ob-
ject proposals to different layers according to their respec-
tive scales, we note that the HyperNet [14] structure is more
appropriate.
Speciﬁcally, we upsample by deconvolution the feature
maps from the last layers of the block 2, 3 and 4, as illus-
trated in Figure 2. Then we concatenate them to gather rich
location information in lower layers and with stronger se-
mantic information in higher layers. Pre-deﬁned anchors
[22] are used with speciﬁc scales and angles on this fused
feature map. Then the classiﬁcation and regression heads
run on this feature map respectively to classify each anchor
and regress the location of existing objects.
9777