•We propose a quick and practical two-stage 3D object
detection framework based on point clouds (without
RGB images), exploiting both volumetric representa-
tion and raw dense input of point clouds.
•Our system consists of both 2D and 3D convolution to
preserve information. We fuse convolutional features
with point coordinate for box reﬁnement.
•Our system runs at 15FPS and achieves state-of-the-
art performance in terms of BEV and 3D detection,
especially for high quality object detection.
2. Related Work
We brieﬂy review recent work on 3D data representation
of point clouds and 3D object detection.
3D Data Representation Representation of point clouds
from 3D LiDAR scanners is fundamental for different tasks.
Generally there are two main ways – voxelization [24, 37]
or raw point clouds [26, 28, 19, 36]. For the ﬁrst type, Mat-
urana et al. [24] ﬁrst applied 3D convolution for 3D object
recognition. For the point-based approaches, PointNet [26]
is the pioneer to directly learn feature representation based
on raw points. It further aggregates global descriptors for
classiﬁcation. Recently, Rethage et al. [6] employed Point-
Net as the low-level feature descriptor in each 3D grid and
applied 3D convolution. There are also other methods that
do not process 3D data directly. For example, most view-
based methods [34, 27, 35] care more about 2D color and
gather information from different views of rendered images.
3D Object Detection Over past a few years, a series of
3D detectors [5, 25, 15, 43, 40, 23, 20, 29, 41, 16] achieved
promising results on KITTI benchmark [8].
Joint Image-LiDAR Detection : Several approaches [5, 15,
20, 25] fused information from different sensors, such as
RGB images and LiDAR. For example, MV3D [5] fused
BEV and front view of LiDAR points as well as images,
and designed a deep fusion scheme to combine region-wise
features from multiple views. A VOD [15] fused BEV and
images in full resolutions to improve prediction quality, es-
pecially for small objects. Accurate geometric information
may be lost in the high-level layers with this scheme. Con-
tfuse [20] compensated the geometric information via com-
bining the convolution feature over LiDAR point cloud with
the nearest image features and LiDAR point coordinates in
the multi-scale scheme. In spite of geometric information
encoded in each voxel, deeper layers have access mostly to
coarse geometric feature. Based on a strong 2D detector on
image, F-PointNet [25] and PointFusion [38] incorporated
PointNet structures to estimate the amodal 3D box. But the
2D detector and PointNet are two separate stages and the
ﬁnal results heavily rely on the 2D detection results.LiDAR-based Detection : Most LiDAR-based detection ap-
proaches process point clouds as voxel-input and apply ei-
ther 2D convolution or 3D convolution to make prediction.
Due to directly encoding coordinates of point clouds into
voxel grid, deep layers may gradually lose this level of in-
formation. Several encoding techniques [32, 33, 17, 18]
provide other representations to preserve more informa-
tion. Chen et al . [5] encoded hand-crafted features for
respective representation of BEV and front view. Instead
of hand-crafted features, V oxelNet [43] applied VFE lay-
ers via a PointNet-like network to learn low-level geomet-
ric feature, by which it shows good performance. However
the network structure is computationally heavy. Recently,
SECOND [39] applied Sparse Convolution [10] to speed
up V oxelNet and produce better results. PointPillars [16]
applied acceleration techniques, including NVIDIA Ten-
sorRT, to achieve high speed. We note they may also accel-
erate our method. PointRCNN [29] and IPOD [41], concur-
rent with our work, generate point-wise proposals on Point
Clouds, which consumes much computation on point-wise
calculation in the similar region or background region.
3. Our Method
In this paper, we propose a simple and fast two-stage
framework for 3D object detection with point cloud data, as
shown in Figure 1. The ﬁrst stage takes voxel representa-
tion as input and produces a set of initial predictions. To
compensate the loss of precise localization information in
the voxelization and consecutive convolution process, the
second stage combines raw point cloud with context feature
from the ﬁrst stage to produce reﬁnement results.
3.1. Motivation
Point cloud, captured by LiDAR, is a set of points with
irregular structure and sparse distribution. It is not straight-
forward to make use of powerful CNN for training and in-
ference on point cloud data. Discretizing points into vox-
elized input [43, 20] or projecting them to BEV with com-
pact shape like RGB images [40, 23] forms a set of solu-
tions, where abstract and rich feature representation can be
produced. However, the discretization process inevitably
introduces quantization artifacts with resolution decreasing
to the number of bins in the voxel map. Moreover, con-
secutive convolution and downsampling operation may also
weaken the precise localization signal that originally exists
in point clouds.
Methods like PointNet [26] are specially designed for
directly processing point cloud data. Directly applying
these methods to entire point cloud, which is with a large
scale in scenarios of autonomous driving, may produce
more position-informative results. But they require a huge
amount of GPU memory and computation, almost impossi-
ble to achieve a high detection speed. Other methods [25]
9776