Fast Point R-CNN
Yilun Chen1Shu Liu2Xiaoyong Shen2Jiaya Jia1,2
1The Chinese University of Hong Kong2Tencent YouTu Lab
{ylchen, leojia }@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {shawnshuliu, dylanshen }@tencent.com
Abstract
We present a uniﬁed, efﬁcient and effective framework
for point-cloud based 3D object detection. Our two-stage
approach utilizes both voxel representation and raw point
cloud data to exploit respective advantages. The ﬁrst stage
network, with voxel representation as input, only consists of
light convolutional operations, producing a small number
of high-quality initial predictions. Coordinate and indexed
convolutional feature of each point in initial prediction are
effectively fused with the attention mechanism, preserving
both accurate localization and context information. The
second stage works on interior points with their fused fea-
ture for further reﬁning the prediction. Our method is eval-
uated on KITTI dataset, in terms of both 3D and Bird’s Eye
View (BEV) detection, and achieves state-of-the-arts with a
15FPS detection rate.
1. Introduction
One challenging task in 3D perception is 3D object de-
tection, which serves as the basic component for perception
in autonomous driving, robotics, etc. Deep convolutional
neural networks (CNN) greatly improve performance of 3D
object detection [5, 43, 25, 15, 40, 23]. Recent approaches
of 3D object detection utilize different types of data, includ-
ing monocular [3] images, stereo images [4] and RGB-D
images [32, 33]. In autonomous driving, point clouds cap-
tured by LiDAR are the more general and informative data
format to help make prediction [5, 25, 15, 23].
Challenges LiDAR point cloud is an essential type of ge-
ometry data for 3D detection. High sparseness and irregu-
larity of point cloud, however, make it not easily tractable
for CNN. One scheme is to transform the sparse point cloud
to the volumetric representation in compact shape by dis-
cretization, which is called voxelization. This representa-
tion enables CNN to perform recognition.
However, volumetric representation is still computation-
ally challenging. One line of solutions is to use a coarse
grid [43, 40, 23, 2, 31, 1]; but coarse quantization pre-vents following CNN from utilizing ﬁne-grained informa-
tion. Several consecutive convolutional layers and subsam-
pling operations in the CNN worsen the problem.
Another line [26, 28, 19, 36] is to process point cloud
directly for 3D object recognition. Different from the vol-
umetric representation, coordinates of point cloud and their
structure are directly fed into the neural network to exploit
precise localization information. We note applying these
methods to large-scale point clouds for autonomous driving
is still computationally very heavy.
Our Contributions In this paper, we propose a uniﬁed,
fast and effective two-stage 3D object detection framework,
making use of both voxel representation and raw point
cloud data. The ﬁrst stage of our network, named V ox-
elRPN, directly exploits the voxel representation of point
clouds. Computationally economical convolutional layers
are adopted for both high efﬁciency and surprisingly high-
quality detection.
In the second stage, we apply a light-weight PointNet
to further reﬁne the predictions. With a small number of
initial predictions, the second stage is also in a very fast
speed. We design the module with attention mechanism to
effectively fuse the coordinates of each interior point with
the convolution feature from the ﬁrst stage. It makes each
point aware of its context information.
One characteristic of our approach is that it beneﬁts from
both representation of point clouds in volumetric represen-
tation and raw dense coordinates. The 3D volumetric rep-
resentation provides a robust way to process point clouds.
The light-weight PointNet in the second stage inspects co-
ordinates of points again to capture more localization in-
formation with enlarged receptive ﬁelds, producing decent
results. Since our method utilizes convolutional feature for
each region on point clouds and is with high efﬁciency, we
name it Fast Point R-CNN.
With this conceptually simple structure, we achieve high
efﬁciency and meanwhile decent 3D detection accuracy,
achieving state-of-the-art results. It is even more effective
than prior methods that take both RGB and point clouds as
input. The main contribution of this paper is threefold.
9775