Cyclist respectively. Like F-PointNet[25], multi-class pre-
diction for ReﬁnerNet is to concatenate predicted class label
of V oxelRPN (one-hot encoding vector) with the feature af-
ter max-pooling operation and then reﬁne box corners for
all classes. We note that training on Pedestrian andCyclist
can improve their performance.
Training Details By default, models are trained on 8
NVIDIA P40 GPUs with batch-size 16 – that is, each GPU
holds 2 point clouds. We apply ADAM [12] optimizer with
an initial learning rate 0.01for training of V oxelRPN and
ReﬁnerNet. We train V oxelRPN for 70 epochs and the
learning rate is decreased by 10 times at 50th and 65th
epochs. Training of ReﬁnerNet lasts for 70 epochs and the
learning rate is decreased by 10 times at 40th, 55th and 65th
epochs.
Batch Normalization is used following each parameter
layer. A weight decay of 0.0001 is used in both networks.
Since the training of ReﬁnerNet requires the convolutional
feature from V oxelRPN, we train it for each frame instead
of on objects, saving a large amount of computation.
Data Augmentation Multiple data augmentation strate-
gies are applied during training in order to alleviate the
overﬁtting problem considering the limited amount of train-
ing data. For each frame of the point cloud, we conduct
left-right random ﬂipping, random scaling with a uniformly
sampled scale from 0.95∼1.05and random rotation with
a degree sampled from −45◦∼45◦around the origin for
entire scene of point clouds.
We also disturb each ground-truth bounding box and
its corresponding interior points by random translation.
Speciﬁcally, the shift is sampled from N(0,1)for bothX
andYaxes and N(0,0.3)forZaxis. Random rotation
aroundZaxis is uniformly sampled from −18◦∼18◦.
Note that there is a collision detection to prevent collision
of different objects.
MIXUP Augmentation Similar to the spirit of [7, 42] in
2D object detection, we also augment input point clouds
with cropped ground-truth from other point sets to greatly
improve the convergence speed and quality. Instead of crop-
ping solely interior points of each ground-truth box, we
crop a larger region with extra 0.3 meters to better preserve
the context information. With this regularization, cropped
points and surrounding points are distributed more coher-
ently with each other, making the network better capture
the property of each object. In our setting, 20 objects are
added in each frame of point clouds.
4.2. Main Results
As shown in Table 1, we compare Fast Point R-CNN
with state-of-the-art approaches in 3D object detection and
BEV object detection on KITTI test dataset. The ofﬁcialKITTI benchmark ranks different methods according to the
performance on the moderate subset. Our model achieves
state-of-the-art performance while accomplishing high efﬁ-
ciency (15FPS on NVIDIA Tesla P40 GPU). Note that SEC-
OND [39] applies SparseConv [10] and PointPillars [16]
used engineering techniques of NVIDIA TensorRT. These
solutions are complementary to ours.
For better comparison, we reproduce V oxelNet [43] as a
strong baseline network. It is noteworthy that our reproduc-
tion even yields much better results than those reported in
[43]. As shown in Table 2, our proposed V oxelRPN outper-
forms V oxelNet in 3D object detection. Accompanied by
ReﬁnerNet, nearly twice as fast as V oxelNet, Fast Point R-
CNN outperforms V oxelNet in both 3D object detection and
BEV object detection. We show qualitative results in Fig-
ure 5. We can make good prediction at several challenging
scenes.
5. Ablation Studies
We conduct extensive ablation study for each component
based on the train/val. split.
5.1. VoxelRPN
To illustrate the effectiveness of V oxelRPN, we start with
a fast and yet simple baseline and gradually add our pro-
posed components. The baseline consists of only 2D con-
volutions and directly processes input voxel by encoding
information along Zaxis into the channel dimension. The
difference with V oxelRPN is that the ﬁrst 6 Conv3D layers
in the ﬁrst block are replaced with 6 Conv2D layers. We
keep the same kernel size in XandYaxes; the channels
are 128 except the ﬁrst layer with 64 channels. Two anchors
with angles 0◦and90◦are used. As shown in Table 3, the
baseline achieves reasonable performance.
More 3D Convolutions (Conv3D) By replacing lower
layers to 3D convolutions as illustrated in Figure 2 and pro-
cessing the 3D voxels, we improve the baseline by nearly 1
point, manifesting the effectiveness of 3D convolutions on
preserving the information, especially along Zdimension.
With this modiﬁcation, the time cost only increases 5ms.
Higher Resolution Input (HRI) We also introduce the
ﬁner voxel, producing higher resolution grid input with size
800×704×20, as described in Figure 2. Accordingly, we
modify the stride of the ﬁrst layer to 2 to effectively reduce
the computation overhead. This technique can signiﬁcantly
improve the results without adding much computation.
MIXUP Augmentation (MIXUP) With MIXUP aug-
mentation, we improve the performance with around 0.5
point. With MIXUP augmentation, we achieve comparable
performance with only half of the original training epochs.
9780