Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 4 of 29
architecture can be seen in Figure 3. The input data was preprocessed to reshape it for the embedding
matrix. The ﬁgure shows an input embedding matrix processed by four convolution layers and two
max pooling layers. The ﬁrst two convolution layers have 64 and 32 ﬁlters, which are used to train
dierent features; these are followed by a max pooling layer, which is used to reduce the complexity of
the output and to prevent the overﬁtting of the data. The third and fourth convolution layers have
16 and 8 ﬁlters, respectively, which are also followed by a max pooling layer. The ﬁnal layer is a fully
connected layer that will reduce the vector of height 8 to an output vector of one, given that there are
two classes to be predicted (Positive, Negative).
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 29 
 making use of feature selection methods. However, in deep learning models, features are learned and 
extracted automatically, achieving better accuracy and performance. In general, the hyper parameters  
of classifier models are also measured automatically . Figure 1  shows the differences in sentiment 
polarity classification between the two approaches: traditional machine learning ( Support Vector 
Machine ( SVM), Bayesian network s, or decision tree s) and deep learning. Artificial neural networks 
and deep learning currently provide the best solutions to many problems in the fields of image and 
speech recognition , as well as in natural language processing. Several types of deep learning  
techniques  are discussed in this section.  
 
Figure 1.  Differences between two classification approaches of sentiment polarity, machine learning 
(top), and deep learning (bottom).  Part of Speech (POS); Named Entity Recognition (NER);  Term 
Frequency -Inverse Document Frequency  (TF-IDF). 
2.1.1. Deep Neural Networks (DNN)  
A deep neural network [21] is a neural network with more than two layers, some of which are  
hidden layers ( Figure 2). Deep neural networks use sophisticated mathematical modeling to process 
data in many different ways. A neural network is an adjustable model of outputs as functions of 
inputs, which consists of several layers: an input layer , including input data; hidden layers, including 
processing nodes called neurons; and an output layer , including one or several neurons, whose 
outputs are the network outputs.  
 
Figure 2.  Deep neural network (DNN). 
Figure 2. Deep neural network (DNN).
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 29 
 2.1.2. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)  
A convolutional neural network is a special type of feed -forward neural network originally 
employed in areas such as computer vision, recommender systems, and natural language processing. 
It is a deep neural network architecture [22], typically compos ed of convolutional and pool ing or 
subsampling layers to provide inputs to  a fully-connected classification layer. Convolution layers 
filter their inputs to extract features; the outputs of multiple filters can be combined. Pooling  or 
subsampling layers reduce the resolution of featu res, which can increase the CNN’s robustness to 
noise and distortion. Fully connected layers perform classification tasks. An example of a CNN 
architecture can be seen in Figure 3. The input data was preprocessed to reshape it for the embedding 
matrix. The  figure shows an input embedding matrix processed by four convolution layers and two 
max pooling layers. The first two convolution layers have 64 and 32 filters, which are used to train 
different features; these are followed by a max pooling layer, which i s used to reduce the complexity 
of the output and to prevent the overfitting of the data. The third and fourth convolution layers have 
16 and 8 filters , respectively, which are also followed by a max pooling layer. The final layer is a fully 
connected laye r that will reduce the vector of height 8 to an output vector of one , given that  there are 
two classes to be predicted (Positive, Negative).  
 
Figure 3.  A convolutional neural network . 
2.1.3. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)  
Recurrent neural networks [23] are a class of neural networks whose connections between 
neurons form a directed cycle, which creates feedback loops within the RNN. The main function of 
RNN is the processing of sequential information on the basis of  the internal memory captured by the 
directed cycles. Unlike traditional neural networks, RNN can remember the previous computation  
of information  and can reuse it  by applying it to the next element in the sequence of inputs. A special 
type of RNN is long short-term memory (LSTM), which is capable of using long memory as the input 
of activation functions in the hidden layer. This was introduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 
(1997) [24]. Figure 4 illustrates an example of the LSTM architecture. The input data is preprocessed 
to reshape data for the embedding matrix ( the process is similar to the one described for  the CNN). 
The next layer is the LSTM , which includes 200 cells. The final layer is a fully connected layer , which 
includes 128 cells for text classification. The last layer  uses the sigm oid activation function to reduce 
the vector of height 128 to an output vector of one , given that t here are two classes to be predicted 
(positive, negative).  
Figure 3. A convolutional neural network.
2.1.3. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
Recurrent neural networks [ 23] are a class of neural networks whose connections between neurons
form a directed cycle, which creates feedback loops within the RNN. The main function of RNN is the
processing of sequential information on the basis of the internal memory captured by the directed cycles.
Unlike traditional neural networks, RNN can remember the previous computation of information and
can reuse it by applying it to the next element in the sequence of inputs. A special type of RNN is
long short-term memory (LSTM), which is capable of using long memory as the input of activation
functions in the hidden layer. This was introduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) [ 24]. Figure 4
illustrates an example of the LSTM architecture. The input data is preprocessed to reshape data for
the embedding matrix (the process is similar to the one described for the CNN). The next layer is the
LSTM, which includes 200 cells. The ﬁnal layer is a fully connected layer, which includes 128 cells for
text classiﬁcation. The last layer uses the sigmoid activation function to reduce the vector of height 128
to an output vector of one, given that there are two classes to be predicted (positive, negative).