Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 2 of 29
analysis continue to face theoretical and technical issues that hinder their overall accuracy in polarity
detection [ 3,4]. Hussein et al. [ 4] studied the relationship between those issues and the sentiment
structure, as well as their impact on the accuracy of the results. This work veriﬁes that accuracy is a
matter of high concern among the latest studies on sentiment analysis and proves that it is a ected by
some challenges, such as addressing negation or domain dependence.
Social media are important sources of data for SA. Social networks are continuously expanding,
generating much more complex and interrelated information.
In this context, Thai et al. suggested not to focus solely on the structure and correlations of data,
but on a lifelong learning approach to dealing with data presentation, analysis, inference, visualization,
search and navigation, and decision making in complex networks [2].
Several studies focus on building powerful models to solve the continuously increasing complexity
of big data, as well as to expand sentiment analysis to a wide range of applications, from ﬁnancial
forecasting [ 5,6] and marketing strategies [ 7] to medicine analysis [ 8,9] and other areas [ 10–18].
However, few of them pay attention to evaluating di erent deep learning techniques in order to
provide practical evidence of their performance [5,17,19,20].
When examining the performance of a single method on a single dataset in a particular domain,
the results show a relatively high overall accuracy [ 15,19,20] for Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). Hassan and Mahmood [ 15] proved that CNN and
RNN models can overcome shortcoming of short text in deep learning models. Qian et al. [ 10]
showed that Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) behaves e ciently when used on di erent text levels
of weather-and-mood tweets.
Li et al. [ 17] studied the impact of data quality on sentiment classiﬁcation performance.
They considered three criteria, namely informativeness, readability, and subjectivity, to assess the
quality of online product reviews. The study highlighted two factors that a ect the level of accuracy of
sentiment analysis—readability and length of the reviews. Higher readability and shorter text datasets
yielded higher quality of sentiment classiﬁcation. However, when the size or domain of the data varies,
the reliability of the proposed method is questionable
In comparison studies, most papers focus on reliability metrics, such as overall accuracy or F-score,
and leave out processing time. In addition, the evaluations of the models are conducted on a small
number of datasets. This research addresses that gap by means of a comprehensive comparison of
sentiment analysis methods in the literature, and an experimental study to evaluate the performance of
deep learning models and related techniques on datasets about di erent topics. Our research question
aims to determine whether it is possible to present outperforming methods for multiple types and sizes
of datasets. We build upon on previous studies of improvement of SA performance by evaluating the
results from the viewpoint of a combination of three criteria: overall accuracy, F-score, and processing
time. The purpose of this comparative study is to give an objective overview of di erent techniques
that can guide researchers towards the achievement of better results
In recent years, several studies have proposed deep-learning-based sentiment analyses, which have
diering features and performance. This work looks at the latest studies that have used deep learning
models, such as deep neural networks (DNN), recurrent neural networks (RNN), and convolutional
neural networks (CNN), to solve di erent problems related to sentiment analysis (e.g., sentiment
polarity and aspect-based sentiment). We applied deep learning models with TF-IDF and word
embedding to Twitter datasets and implemented the state-of-the-art of sentiment analysis approaches
based on deep learning.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background knowledge on this
research area. Section 3 discusses related work. Section 4 describes the comparative study. Section 5
outlines the experimental results, followed by the conclusions in Section 6.