Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 7 of 29
frequency in the other documents of the corpus. The higher the frequency of a word in a target
document and the lower its frequency in other documents, the greater its importance. The vectorizer
class in the scikit-learn library is usually used to compute TF-IDF.
Both word embedding and TF-IDF are used as input features of deep learning algorithms in NLP .
Sentiment analysis tasks transform collections of raw data into vectors of continuous real numbers.
There are di erent kinds of tasks, such as objective or subjective classiﬁcation, polarity sentiment
detection, and feature- or aspect-based sentiment analysis. The subjectivity of words and phrases may
depend on their context and an objective document may contain subjective sentences. Aspect-based
sentiment analysis refers to sentiments expressed towards speciﬁc aspects of entities (e.g., value, room,
location, cleanliness, or service). Polarity and intensity are two components used to score sentiment
analysis. Polarity indicates whether the sentiment is negative, neutral, or positive. Intensity indicates
the relative strength of the sentiment.
2.3. Application of Sentiment Analysis
It is widely accepted that sentiment analysis is very useful in a wide range of application domains,
such as business, government, and biomedicine.
In the ﬁelds of business intelligence and e-commerce, companies can study customers’ feedback to
provide better customer support, build better products, or improve their marketing strategies to attract
new customers. Sentiment analysis can be used to infer the users’ opinions on events or products.
The results of SA help to gain greater insight into the customers’ interests or opinions on industrial
trends. In this context, Jain and Dandannavar [ 43] proposed a fast, ﬂexible, and scalable SA framework
for sentiment analysis of Twitter data that involves the use of some machine learning methods and
Apache spark.
As pointed out in the introduction, the area of recommender systems has also beneﬁted from
sentiment analysis. A sample of this can be found in the work of Preethi et al. [ 12], where recursive
neural networks were applied to analyze sentiments in reviews. The output was used to improve
and validate the restaurant and movie recommendations of a cloud-based recommender system.
Along with behavioral analysis, sentiment analysis is also an e cient tool for commodity markets [ 7].
The medical domain is another ﬁeld of potential interest. The applications of opinion mining in
health-related texts on social media and blogs were explored in [ 8]. In addition to traditional machine
learning and text processing techniques, the author o ers new approaches and proposes a medical
lexicon to support experts and patients in the varied methodology that is used to describe symptoms
and diseases. In the ﬁeld of mental health, sentiment analysis is performed on texts written by patients’
posts on social media as a means of supplementing or replacing the questionnaires they usually ﬁll
in [9].
3. Related Work
The purpose of this study is to review di erent approaches and methods in sentiment analysis that
can be taken as a reference in future empirical studies. We have focused on key aspects of research, such
as technical challenges, datasets, the methods proposed in each study, and their application domains.
Recently, deep learning models (including DNN, CNN, and RNN) have been used to increase the
eciency of sentiment analysis tasks. In this section, state-of-the-art sentiment analysis approaches
based on deep learning are reviewed.
Beginning in 2015, many authors have since evaluated this trend. Tang et al. [ 44] introduced
techniques based on deep learning approaches for several sentiment analyses, such as learning word
embedding, sentiment classiﬁcation, and opinion extraction. Zhang and Zheng [ 35] discussed machine
learning for sentiment analysis. Both research groups used part of speech (POS) as a text feature
and used TF-IDF to calculate the weight of words for the analysis. Sharef et al. [ 45] discussed
the opportunities of sentiment analysis approaches for big data. In papers [ 13,18,46], the latest