Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 6 of 29
results than traditional models. Di erent kinds of deep learning models can be used for sentiment
analysis, including CNN, DNN, and RNN. Such approaches address classiﬁcation problems at the
document level, sentence level, or aspect level. These deep learning methods will be discussed in the
following section.
Thehybrid approaches [40] combine lexicon- and machine-learning-based approaches. Sentiment
lexicons commonly play a key role within a majority of these strategies. Figure 5 illustrates a taxonomy
of deep-learning-based methods for sentiment analysis.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 29 
 problems at the document  level, sentence  level, or aspect level. These deep learning methods will be 
discussed in the following section.  
The hybrid approaches  [40] combine lexicon - and machine -learning-based approaches. 
Sentiment lexicons commonly play a key role within a majority of these strategies. Figure 5 illustrates 
a taxonomy of deep -learning-based methods for sentiment analysis.  
 
Figure 5.  Taxonomy of sentiment analysis techniques. Source:  [30,41]. 
Sentiment analysis, whether performed by  means of  deep learning or traditional machine 
learning, requires that text training data be cleaned before being used to induce the classification 
model. Tweets usually contain white spaces, punctuation marks, n on-characters,  Retweet ( RT), “@ 
links”, and stop words. These characters could be removed using libraries such as BeautifulSoup 
because they do not contain  any information  that would be  useful for sentiment analysis. After 
cleaning, tweets can be split int o individual words , which are transformed into their base form by 
lemmatization, then converted into numerical vectors by using methods  such as word embedding or 
term frequency -inverse document frequency  (TF-IDF).   
Word embedding  [42] is a technique for language modeling and feature learning, where each 
word is mapped to a vector of real values in such a way that words with similar meanings  have a 
similar representation. Value learning can be done using neural networks. A commonly used  word 
embedding system is Word2 vec (GloVe, or Gensim), which contains models such as skip-gram and 
continuous bag -of-words (CBOW). Both models are based on the probability of words occurring in 
proximity to each other. Skip -gram makes it possible  to start with a word and predict the word s that 
are likely to surround it. Continuous bag -of-words reverses that by predicting a word that is likely 
to occur on the basis of specific  context words.  
TF-IDF is a statistical measure reflecting how important a word is to a document in a collection 
or corpus. This metric considers the frequency of the word in the target document , as well as the 
frequency in the other documents of the corpus. The higher the frequency of a word in a target 
document and the lower its freque ncy in other documents, the greater its importance. The vectorizer 
class in the scikit-learn library is usually used to compute TF-IDF.  
Figure 5. Taxonomy of sentiment analysis techniques. Source: [30,41].
Sentiment analysis, whether performed by means of deep learning or traditional machine learning,
requires that text training data be cleaned before being used to induce the classiﬁcation model.
Tweets usually contain white spaces, punctuation marks, non-characters, Retweet (RT), “@ links”,
and stop words. These characters could be removed using libraries such as BeautifulSoup because they
do not contain any information that would be useful for sentiment analysis. After cleaning, tweets can
be split into individual words, which are transformed into their base form by lemmatization, then
converted into numerical vectors by using methods such as word embedding or term frequency-inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF).
Word embedding [ 42] is a technique for language modeling and feature learning, where each
word is mapped to a vector of real values in such a way that words with similar meanings have a
similar representation. Value learning can be done using neural networks. A commonly used word
embedding system is Word2vec (GloVe, or Gensim), which contains models such as skip-gram and
continuous bag-of-words (CBOW). Both models are based on the probability of words occurring in
proximity to each other. Skip-gram makes it possible to start with a word and predict the words that
are likely to surround it. Continuous bag-of-words reverses that by predicting a word that is likely to
occur on the basis of speciﬁc context words.
TF-IDF is a statistical measure reﬂecting how important a word is to a document in a collection
or corpus. This metric considers the frequency of the word in the target document, as well as the