Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 18 of 29
CNN layer. We will again deﬁne 32 di erent ﬁlters to be trained on this level. Following the same
logic as the ﬁrst layer, the output matrix will measure 40 32.
The maximum pooling layer is often used after a CNN layer in order to reduce the complexity of
the output and prevent overﬁtting of the data. In our case, we choose a size of three. This means that
the size of the output matrix of this layer is 13 32.
The third and fourth 1D CNN layers are in charge of learning higher level features. The outputs
of those two layers are a 13 16 matrix and a 13 8 matrix.
The average pooling layer is a pooling layer used to further avoid overﬁtting. We will use the
average value instead of the maximum value because it will give better results in this case. The output
matrix has a size of 1 8 neurons.
The fully connected layer with sigmoid activation is the ﬁnal layer that will reduce the vector of
height 8 to 1 for prediction (“positive”, “negative”).
5. Experimental Results
To conduct the tests, we used a GeForce GTX2070 GPU card, and the Keras (https: //keras.io) and
Tensorﬂow (https: //www.tensorﬂow.org /) libraries. DNN, CNN, and RNN models were applied to
perform experiments with the di erent datasets described above, in order to analyze the performance
of those algorithms using both word embedding and TF-IDF feature extraction.
In all the experiments, we conﬁgure the parameter for our code, such as echoes =5, batch size =4096,
and k-fold =10.
Accuracy, AUC, and F-score were the metrics used to evaluate the performance of the models
through all experiments. Since F-score is derived from recall and precision, we also show these two
measures for reference purposes.
Sentiment140 was the ﬁrst dataset to be processed. Its contents were labeled as positive or negative.
Since this dataset contains a much larger number of tweets than the other datasets, we ﬁrst analyzed
the performance of the models induced from di erent subsets formed with di erent percentages
of the initial data, ranging from 10% to 100%. As shown in Figures 10–15, the combinations of
feature extractors and deep learning techniques applied to those subsets produced di erent results for
Sentiment140 data.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  17 of 29 
 vocabulary is 15,000, the output dim is 300 , and the maximum length is 40. The results are in a 40  × 
300 matrix.  
The first 1D CNN layer defines a filter of kernel size 3. For this, we will define 64 filters. This 
allows us to train 64 different features on the first layer of the network. Thus, the output of the first 
neural network layer is a 40 × 64 neuron matrix, and the result from the first CNN will be fed into the 
second CNN  layer. We will again define 32 different filters to be trained on this level. Following the 
same logic as the first layer, the output matrix will measure  40 × 32. 
The maximum pooling layer is often used after a CNN layer in order to reduce the complexity 
of the output and prevent overfitting of the data. In our case , we choose a size of three. This means 
that the size of the output matrix of this layer is 13  × 32. 
The third and fourth 1D CNN layers are in charge of learning higher  level features. The outpu ts 
of those two layers are a 13 × 16 matrix and a 13  × 8 matrix.  
The average pooling layer is a pooling layer  used to further avoid overfitting. We will use the 
average value instead of the maximum value because it will give better results in this case. Th e output 
matrix has a size of 1 x 8 neurons.  
The fully connected layer with sigmoid activation is the final layer that will reduce the vector of 
height 8 to 1 for prediction (“positive”, “negative”).  
5. Experimental  results  
To conduct the tests, we used a  GeForce GTX2070 GPU card, and the Keras  (https://keras.io)  and 
Tensorflow  (https://www.tensorflow.org/)  libraries. DNN, CNN , and RNN models were applied to 
perform experiments with the different datasets described above, in order to analyze the performanc e 
of those algorithms using both word embedding and TF -IDF feature extraction.  
In all the experiments, we configure the parameter for our code , such as echoes = 5, batch size = 
4096, and k-fold = 10. 
Accuracy, AUC , and F-score were the metrics used to evaluate the performance of the models 
through all experiments. Since F -score is derived from recall and precision, we also show these two 
measures for reference purpose s.  
Sentiment140 was the first dataset to be proc essed. Its contents were labeled as positive or 
negative. Since this dataset contains a much larger number of tweets than the other datasets, we fir st 
analyzed the performance of the models induced from different subsets formed with different 
percentages o f the initial data, ranging from 10% to 100%. As shown in Figure 10  to Figure 15 , the 
combinations of feature extractors and deep learning techniques applied to those subsets produced 
different results for Sentiment140 data.  
 
Figure 10.  Accuracy values o f deep-learning models with TF-IDF and word embedding for different 
numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
Figure 10. Accuracy values of deep-learning models with TF-IDF and word embedding for di erent
numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset).