Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 15 of 29
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 29 
 Boom Boxes, and Blenders: Domain Adaptation for Sentiment Classification [74] contains 
user comments about books and music. Each has 2,000 samples with two classes —negative 
and positive.  
Figure 6 shows an original sample of tweets in one of the datasets. It contains information on 
each of the following fields:  
 “target” is the polarity of the tweet;  
 "id" is the uni que ID of each tweet;  
 "date" is the date of the tweet;  
 "query_string" indicates whether the tweet has been collected with any particular query 
keyword (for this column, 100% of the entries labeled are with the value "NO_QUERY");  
 "user" is the Twitter handle name of the user who tweeted;  
 “text” is the verbatim text of the tweet.  
We used the “text” and “target” fields to perform the experiment.  
 
Figure 6.  Examples of the Sentiment140 dataset.  
4.2. Methodological Approach 
After reviewing the proposed sentiment analysis methods in Section 3,  we identified three 
popular approaches that have been used frequently in recent studies , namely DNN, CNN , and RNN. 
These models have been employed in the majority of the 32 reviewed pape rs, have been widely 
tested, and provide highly accurate results when working with different t ypes of dataset s [75]. 
However,  no comparative study involving those algorithms has been conducted.  
The focus of this research was the deep learning approach ; therefore , we performed a 
comparative study of the performance of the  three most popular  deep learning models (DNN, CNN , 
and RNN) on eight datasets. Moreover, two text processing techniques  (word embedding  and TF-
IDF) were employed in data preprocessing. The objective of the experiment s is to compare the 
performance of these techniques , contributing in this way to the  state-of-the-art literature on 
sentiment analysis tasks.  These algorithms were applied to predict the sentiment polarity of the text 
and classify it according to that polarity.  The performance of those methods was evaluated by means 
of the most suitable metrics used for classification problems : overall accuracy, recall, F-score, and 
Area Under Curve ( AUC). We used k -fold cross validation with k = 10 in the application of th e 
metrics. More details about the application of DNN, CNN , and RNN algorithms with word 
embedding and TF -IDF are given  in Section 2. 
4.3. Sentiment Classification  
The process of sentiment analysis is discussed below. Data cle aning and feature extraction were 
performed in the preprocessing stages. In the training stage, several deep learning models were used . 
Detailed results are presented in the next section.  
The main objective of our study is to evaluate the deep learning mod els. We used k -fold cross 
validation with k  = 10 to determine the performance of the algorithms. All of them were tested with 
word embedding and TF -IDF. 
Text cleaning is a preprocessing step that removes words or other components that do not 
contain releva nt information , and thus may reduce the effectiveness of sentiment analysis. Text or 
Figure 6. Examples of the Sentiment140 dataset.
4.2. Methodological Approach
After reviewing the proposed sentiment analysis methods in Section 3, we identiﬁed three
popular approaches that have been used frequently in recent studies, namely DNN, CNN, and RNN.
These models have been employed in the majority of the 32 reviewed papers, have been widely
tested, and provide highly accurate results when working with di erent types of datasets [ 75].
However, no comparative study involving those algorithms has been conducted.
The focus of this research was the deep learning approach; therefore, we performed a comparative
study of the performance of the three most popular deep learning models (DNN, CNN, and RNN)
on eight datasets. Moreover, two text processing techniques (word embedding and TF-IDF) were
employed in data preprocessing. The objective of the experiments is to compare the performance of
these techniques, contributing in this way to the state-of-the-art literature on sentiment analysis tasks.
These algorithms were applied to predict the sentiment polarity of the text and classify it according
to that polarity. The performance of those methods was evaluated by means of the most suitable
metrics used for classiﬁcation problems: overall accuracy, recall, F-score, and Area Under Curve (AUC).
We used k-fold cross validation with k =10 in the application of the metrics. More details about
the application of DNN, CNN, and RNN algorithms with word embedding and TF-IDF are given in
Section 2.
4.3. Sentiment Classiﬁcation
The process of sentiment analysis is discussed below. Data cleaning and feature extraction were
performed in the preprocessing stages. In the training stage, several deep learning models were used.
Detailed results are presented in the next section.
The main objective of our study is to evaluate the deep learning models. We used k-fold cross
validation with k =10 to determine the performance of the algorithms. All of them were tested with
word embedding and TF-IDF.
Text cleaning is a preprocessing step that removes words or other components that do not contain
relevant information, and thus may reduce the e ectiveness of sentiment analysis. Text or sentence
data include white space, punctuation, and stop words. Text cleaning has several steps for sentence
normalization. All datasets were cleaned using the following steps:
 Cleaning the Twitter RTs, @, #, and the links from the sentences;
 Stemming or lemmatization;
 Converting the text to lower case;
 Cleaning all the non-letter characters, including numbers;
 Removing English stop words and punctuation;
 Eliminating extra white spaces;
 Decoding HTML to general text.
A certain processing method was then performed depending on the dataset to facilitate model
formation. For example, for the Sentiment140 dataset, we dropped the columns that are not useful