Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 25 of 29
was not considered. Regarding the continuously expanding size and complexity of big data in the
future, it is crucial to consider both reliability and time, especially in critical systems requiring a fast
response [ 77]. In this work, two techniques (TF-IDF and word embedding) are examined on three deep
learning algorithms, which give an extended overview of performances of sentiment analysis using
deep learning techniques.
Finally, general summaries of the results archived in the experiments referenced earlier are
explained below:
 Three deep learning models (DNN, CNN, and RNN) were used to perform sentiment analysis
experiments. The CNN model was found to o er the best tradeo between the processing time
and the accuracy of results. Although the RNN model had the highest degree of accuracy when
used with word embedding, its processing time was 10 times longer than that of the CNN model.
The RNN model is not e ective when used with the TF-IDF technique, and its far higher processing
time leads to results that are not signiﬁcantly better. DNN is a simple deep learning model that has
average processing times and yields average results. Future research on deep learning models can
focus on ways of improving the tradeo between the accuracy of results and the processing times.
 Related techniques (TF-IDF and word embedding) are used to transfer text data (tweets, reviews)
into a numeric vector before feeding them into a deep learning model. The results when TF-IDF
is used are poorer than when word embedding is used. Moreover, the TF-IDF technique used
with the RNN model takes has a longer processing time and yields less reliable results. However,
when RNN is used with word embedding, the results are much better. Future work can explore
how to improve these and other techniques to achieve even better results.
 The results from the datasets containing tweets and IMDB movie review datasets are better than
the results from the other datasets containing reviews. Regarding tweets data, the models induced
from the Tweets Airline dataset, focused on a speciﬁc topic, show better performance than those
built from datasets about generic topics.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we described the core of deep learning models and related techniques that have
been applied to sentiment analysis for social network data. We used word embedding and TF-IDF
to transform input data before feeding that data into deep learning models. The architectures of
DNN, CNN, and RNN were analyzed and combined with word embedding and TF-IDF to perform
sentiment analysis. We conducted some experiments to evaluate DNN, CNN, and RNN models on
datasets of di erent topics, including tweets and reviews. We also discussed related research in the
ﬁeld. This information, combined with the results of our experiments, gives us a broad perspective on
applying deep learning models for sentiment analysis, as well as combining these models with text
preprocessing techniques.
After the analysis of 32 papers, DNN, CNN, and hybrid approaches were identiﬁed as the
most widely used models for sentiment polarity analysis. Another conclusion extracted from the
analysis was the fact that common techniques, such as CNN, RNN, and LSTM, are individually tested
in these studies on di erent datasets, however there is a lack of a comparative analysis for them.
In addition, the results presented in most papers are given in terms of reliability, without considering
computational time.
The experiments conducted in this work were designed to help ﬁll the gaps mentioned above.
We studied the impacts of di erent types of datasets, feature extraction techniques, and deep learning
models, with a special focus on the problem of sentiment polarity analysis. The results show that it is
better to combine deep learning techniques with word embedding than with TF-IDF when performing
a sentiment analysis. The experiments also revealed that CNN outperforms other models, presenting a
good balance between accuracy and CPU runtime. RNN reliability is slightly higher than CNN
reliability with most datasets but its computational time is much longer. One last conclusion derived
from the study is the observation that the e ectiveness of the algorithms depends largely on the