Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 14 of 29
4.1. Datasets
Studies that perform sentiment analyses either generate their own data or use available datasets.
Generating a new dataset makes it possible to use data that ﬁts the problem the analysis is targeted at;
moreover, the use of personal data ensures that no privacy laws are violated [ 67]. However, the main
drawback is having to label the dataset, which is a challenging task. Moreover, it is not always easy to
generate a large volume of data. Our approach to selecting datasets was based on their availability
and accessibility. Respecting personal privacy was another factor that was considered, given that it
appears in the regulations of most journals as a requirement for article publication.
Thus, we carefully chose datasets that are widely accepted by the research community.
In addition, one of our main concerns was the extensibility of the results obtained in the study.
Therefore, the datasets were obtained from di erent sources and they cover di erent topics in order
to perform a wide range of experiments. In this way, the results have made it possible to make a
comprehensive comparison of the performance of deep learning models in sentiment analysis. We also
considered the size of the datasets; the larger they are, the more possibilities they o er, even though
this also increases their complexity. We worked with labeled datasets from which personal information
was removed, since this information was not needed to test the performance of sentiment analysis
models. These datasets are described below:
 Sentiment140 was obtained from Stanford University [ 68]. It contains 1.6 million tweets about
products or brands. The tweets were already labeled with the polarity of the sentiment conveyed
by the person writing them (0 =negative, 4 =positive).
 Tweets Airline [ 69] is a tweet dataset containing user opinions about U.S. airlines. It was crawled in
February 2015. It has 14,640 samples, and it was divided into negative, neutral, and positive classes.
 Tweets SemEval [ 70] is a tweet dataset that includes a range of named geopolitical entities.
This dataset has 17,750 samples, and it was divided into positive, neutral, and negative classes.
 IMDB Movie Reviews [ 71] is a dataset of comments from audiences about the stories in ﬁlms.
It has 25,000 samples divided into positive and negative.
 IMDB Movie Reviews was obtained from Stanford University [ 72]. This dataset contains comments
from audiences about the story of ﬁlms. It has 50,000 samples, which are divided into positive
and negative.
 Cornell Movie Reviews [ 73] contains comments from audiences about the stories in ﬁlms.
This dataset includes 10,662 samples for training and testing, which are labeled negative or positive.
 Book Reviews and Music Reviews is a dataset obtained from the Multidomain Sentiment of the
Department of Computer Science of Johns Hopkins University. Biographies, Bollywood, Boom
Boxes, and Blenders: Domain Adaptation for Sentiment Classiﬁcation [ 74] contains user comments
about books and music. Each has 2,000 samples with two classes—negative and positive.
Figure 6 shows an original sample of tweets in one of the datasets. It contains information on
each of the following ﬁelds:
 “target” is the polarity of the tweet;
 “id” is the unique ID of each tweet;
 “date” is the date of the tweet;
 “query_string” indicates whether the tweet has been collected with any particular query keyword
(for this column, 100% of the entries labeled are with the value “NO_QUERY”);
 “user” is the Twitter handle name of the user who tweeted;
 “text” is the verbatim text of the tweet.
We used the “text” and “target” ﬁelds to perform the experiment.