Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 3 of 29
2. Background
2.1. Deep Learning
Deep learning adapts a multilayer approach to the hidden layers of the neural network.
In traditional machine learning approaches, features are deﬁned and extracted either manually
or by making use of feature selection methods. However, in deep learning models, features are
learned and extracted automatically, achieving better accuracy and performance. In general, the hyper
parameters of classiﬁer models are also measured automatically. Figure 1 shows the di erences in
sentiment polarity classiﬁcation between the two approaches: traditional machine learning (Support
Vector Machine (SVM), Bayesian networks, or decision trees) and deep learning. Artiﬁcial neural
networks and deep learning currently provide the best solutions to many problems in the ﬁelds of
image and speech recognition, as well as in natural language processing. Several types of deep learning
techniques are discussed in this section.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 29 
 making use of feature selection methods. However, in deep learning models, features are learned and 
extracted automatically, achieving better accuracy and performance. In general, the hyper parameters  
of classifier models are also measured automatically . Figure 1  shows the differences in sentiment 
polarity classification between the two approaches: traditional machine learning ( Support Vector 
Machine ( SVM), Bayesian network s, or decision tree s) and deep learning. Artificial neural networks 
and deep learning currently provide the best solutions to many problems in the fields of image and 
speech recognition , as well as in natural language processing. Several types of deep learning  
techniques  are discussed in this section.  
 
Figure 1.  Differences between two classification approaches of sentiment polarity, machine learning 
(top), and deep learning (bottom).  Part of Speech (POS); Named Entity Recognition (NER);  Term 
Frequency -Inverse Document Frequency  (TF-IDF). 
2.1.1. Deep Neural Networks (DNN)  
A deep neural network [21] is a neural network with more than two layers, some of which are  
hidden layers ( Figure 2). Deep neural networks use sophisticated mathematical modeling to process 
data in many different ways. A neural network is an adjustable model of outputs as functions of 
inputs, which consists of several layers: an input layer , including input data; hidden layers, including 
processing nodes called neurons; and an output layer , including one or several neurons, whose 
outputs are the network outputs.  
 
Figure 2.  Deep neural network (DNN). 
Figure 1. Dierences between two classiﬁcation approaches of sentiment polarity, machine
learning (top), and deep learning (bottom). Part of Speech (POS); Named Entity Recognition (NER);
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF).
2.1.1. Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
A deep neural network [ 21] is a neural network with more than two layers, some of which
are hidden layers (Figure 2). Deep neural networks use sophisticated mathematical modeling to
process data in many di erent ways. A neural network is an adjustable model of outputs as functions
of inputs, which consists of several layers: an input layer, including input data; hidden layers,
including processing nodes called neurons; and an output layer, including one or several neurons,
whose outputs are the network outputs.
2.1.2. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
A convolutional neural network is a special type of feed-forward neural network originally
employed in areas such as computer vision, recommender systems, and natural language processing.
It is a deep neural network architecture [ 22], typically composed of convolutional and pooling or
subsampling layers to provide inputs to a fully-connected classiﬁcation layer. Convolution layers
ﬁlter their inputs to extract features; the outputs of multiple ﬁlters can be combined. Pooling or
subsampling layers reduce the resolution of features, which can increase the CNN’s robustness to
noise and distortion. Fully connected layers perform classiﬁcation tasks. An example of a CNN