Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 9 of 29
Although sentiment analysis is not performed in this work, it can be considered the precursor of
other studies combining both approaches in which sentiment analysis is used to obtain implicit user
feedback. A recent study from Wang et al. [ 56] presents a hybrid approach in which sentiment analysis
of reviews about movies is used in order to improve a preliminary recommendation list obtained from
the combination of collaborative ﬁltering and content-based methods. In the same application domain,
Singh et al. propose the use of a sentiment classiﬁer induced from movie reviews as a second ﬁlter
after collaborative ﬁltering [57].
In addition, one advanced machine learning paradigm is the so-called holistic models or lifelong
learning algorithms, which are argued to signiﬁcantly improve sentiment analysis accuracy [ 58].
While other methods learn a model by using only data for a particular application, this method attains
a continually updating knowledge base of attributes, such as sentiment polarity or sentiment aspects.
Stai et al. [ 59] introduced a social recommendation framework, whose main objective is the creation of
enriched multimedia content adapted to users. This is achieved through a holistic approach, where
the explicit and implicit relevance feedback from users is derived from their interactions with both
the video and its enrichment. Although this method represents a signiﬁcant improvement over other
approaches, it requires personal user information.
Table 1 summarizes 32 important papers related to our research. It includes the year of publication,
authors’ names, research work, methods, datasets, and the study target.
4. Comparative Study
In this section, we begin by introducing di erent topics pertaining to datasets, and then we o er
details about the sentiment classiﬁcation process.
We used eight datasets in our experiments on sentiment polarity analysis. Three of them contain
tweets; the largest has 1.6 million tweets, with each one labeled as either positive or negative sentiment,
while the other two datasets contain 14,640 and 17,750 tweets, respectively, labeled as positive, negative,
or neutral. The remaining ﬁve datasets include a total of 125,000 comments from user reviews of
movies, books, and music labeled as either positive or negative sentiments.
Two approaches for preparing inputs to the classiﬁcation algorithms are compared in our
experiments: word embedding and TF-IDF. For word embedding, we applied Word2vec, which contains
models such as skip-gram and continuous bag-of-words (CBOW). Skip-gram makes it possible to start
with a word and predict the words that are likely to surround it. Continuous bag-of-words reverses
that and enables the prediction of a word that is likely to occur in the context of words. For TF-IDF,
we used the vectorizer class in the scikit-learn library.
We conducted an experimental study where three models (DNN, CNN, and RNN) were trained
and evaluated on di erent datasets, which had been preprocessed with both word embedding and
TF-IDF. The objective was to compare the performance of all these techniques and improve the
state-of-the-art of sentiment analysis tasks.