Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 16 of 29
for sentiment analysis purposes: {“id”, “date”, “query_string”, “user”} and converted class label
values {4, 0} to {1, 0} (1 =positive, 0 =negative). For the Tweets Airline and Tweets SemEval datasets,
we removed all samples labeled “neutral”, leaving only two classes for the experiment—positive
and negative.
After the datasets were cleaned, sentences were split into individual words, which were returned
to their base form by lemmatization. At this point, sentences were converted into vectors of continuous
real numbers (also known as feature vectors) by using two methods: word embedding and TF-IDF.
Both kinds of feature vectors were the inputs for the deep learning algorithms evaluated in the study.
Those algorithms were CNN, DNN, and RNN. Thus, two models were induced per algorithm, one for
each type of vector.
4.4. Sentiment Model
Most traditional models use well-known features, such as bag-of words, n-grams, and TF-IDF.
Such features do not consider the semantic similarity between words. Currently, many deep learning
models in NLP require word embedding results as input features. Figure 7 shows the semantic
similarity of the words that are the closest to “iPhone”, “Obama”, and “university”. The words
nearest to “Obama” are “president”, “leader”, and “election”. The words nearest to “university” are
“students”, “education”, and “master”. Since neural networks can be deployed to solve sentiment
classiﬁcation using word embedding, we use Word2vec to train initial word vectors from the datasets
that were described above.
Figure 8 shows word clouds produced from some of the topics of the datasets described in
Section 4.1. These datasets were cleaned before being transformed into vectors. The ﬁgure demonstrates
how topics can be easily identiﬁed. The book topic is shown in the top left corner, the movie topic is
shown in the top right corner, the left bottom corner shows the music topic, and ﬁnally the airplane
topic is shown in the bottom right corner.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 29 
 sentence data include white space, punctuation, and stop words. Text cleaning has several steps for 
sentence normalization. All datasets were cleaned using the following s teps: 
 Cleaning the Twitter RT s, @, #, and the links from the sentences;  
 Stemming or lemmatization;  
 Converting the text to lower case;  
 Cleaning all the non -letter characters , including numbers;  
 Removing English stop words and punctuation;  
 Eliminating extra white spaces;  
 Decoding HTML to general text.  
A certain processing method was then performed depending on the dataset to facilitate model 
formation. For example,  for the Sentiment140 dataset, we dropped the columns that are not useful 
for sentiment analysis  purposes: {"id", "date","query_string", "user"}  and converted class label values 
{4, 0} to {1, 0} (1  = positive, 0 = negative). For the Tweets Airline and Tweets Sem Eval datasets, we 
removed all samples labeled “neutral,” leaving only two classes  for the experiment —positive and 
negative . 
After the datasets were cleaned, sentences were split into individual words, which were 
returned to their base form by lemmatization. At this point, sentences were converted into vectors o f 
continuous real numbers  (also known as feature vectors ) by using two methods: word embedding 
and TF-IDF. Both kinds of feature vectors were the input s for the deep learning algorithms evaluated 
in the study. Those algorithms were CNN, DNN , and RNN. Thus, two models were induced per 
algorithm, one for each type of vector.  
4.4. Sentiment Model  
Most traditional models use well -known features, such as bag -of words, n -grams, and TF-IDF. 
Such features do not consider the semantic similarity between words. Currently, many deep learning 
models in NLP require word embedding results as input features. Figure 7  shows the semantic 
similarity of the words that are the closest to “iPhone,”, “O bama,” and “university.” The words 
nearest to “ Obama” are “president,” “leader,” and “election.” The wo rds nearest to “univers ity” are 
“students,” “education,” and “master”. Since neural networks can be deployed to solve sentiment 
classification using word embedding, we use Word2 vec to train initial word vectors from the datasets 
that were described above.  
 
Figure 7.  Word embedding after training the da taset with a minimum count of 5 000. 
Figure 7. Word embedding after training the dataset with a minimum count of 5000.