Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 5 of 29
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 29 
  
Figure 4.  A long short -term memory network . LSTM, long short -term memory.  
2.1.4. Other Neural Networks  
One type of deep neural network is called a deep belief network (DBN)  [25]. It comprises 
multiple layers of a graphical model , having both directed and undirected edges. Each network is 
composed of multiple layers of hidden units and each layer is  connected to the next one , but the units 
within a layer are not connected. A DBN is learned by using a greedy layer -wise learning algorithm.  
A recursive neural network (RecNN)  [26] is a type of neural network that can be viewed as a 
generalization of RNN.  Recursive neural networks are usually used to learn a directed acyclic graph 
structure from data. The hidden state vectors of the left and right child nodes in the graph can be 
used to compute for the hidden state vector of the current node.  
Another categ ory is hybrid deep learning  [27], which combines two or more deep learning 
techniques together, such as convolutional neural networks (CNN) and long short-term memory 
(LSTM) [28], or probabilistic neural networks (PNN) and a two -layered restricted Boltzmann machine 
(RBM) [29]. 
2.2. Sentiment Analysis  
Sentiment analysis is a process of extracting information about an entity and automatically 
identifying any of the subjectivities of that entity . The objective is to determine whether text gen erated 
by users conveys their positive, negative , or neutral opinions. Sentiment classification can be carried 
out on three levels of extraction: the aspect or feature level , the sentence level , and the document 
level. Currently, there are three approaches  to address the problem of sentiment analysis  [30]: (1) 
lexicon-based techniques , (2) machine -learning-based technique s, and (3) hybrid approaches.  
Lexicon-based techniques were the first to be used  for sentiment analysis. They are  divided into 
two approa ches: dictionary -based and corpus -based [31]. In the former type , sentiment classification 
is performed by using a dictionary of terms , such as those found in SentiWordNet and WordNet. 
Nevertheless, c orpus-based sentiment analysis does not rely on a predef ined dictionary but on 
statistical analysis of the contents of a collection of documents, using  techniques based on k -nearest 
neighbors (k -NN) [32], conditional random field (CRF) [33], and hidden Markov models (HMM) [34], 
among others . 
Machine -learning-based techniques [35] proposed for sentiment analysis problems can be 
divided into two groups: (1) traditional models and (2) deep learning models. Traditional models 
refer to classical machine learning techniques , such as the naïve Bayes classifie r [36], maximum 
entropy classifier [37,38], or support vector machines (SVM) [39]. The input to those algorithms 
includes lexical features, sentiment lexicon -based features, parts of speech , or adjectives and adverbs. 
The accuracy of these systems depends on which features are chosen. Deep learning models can 
provide better results than traditional models. Different kinds of deep learning models can be used 
for sentiment analysis, including CNN, DNN, and RNN. Such approaches address classification 
Figure 4. A long short-term memory network. LSTM, long short-term memory.
2.1.4. Other Neural Networks
One type of deep neural network is called a deep belief network (DBN) [ 25]. It comprises multiple
layers of a graphical model, having both directed and undirected edges. Each network is composed of
multiple layers of hidden units and each layer is connected to the next one, but the units within a layer
are not connected. A DBN is learned by using a greedy layer-wise learning algorithm.
A recursive neural network (RecNN) [ 26] is a type of neural network that can be viewed as a
generalization of RNN. Recursive neural networks are usually used to learn a directed acyclic graph
structure from data. The hidden state vectors of the left and right child nodes in the graph can be used
to compute for the hidden state vector of the current node.
Another category is hybrid deep learning [ 27], which combines two or more deep learning
techniques together, such as convolutional neural networks (CNN) and long short-term memory
(LSTM) [ 28], or probabilistic neural networks (PNN) and a two-layered restricted Boltzmann machine
(RBM) [29].
2.2. Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment analysis is a process of extracting information about an entity and automatically
identifying any of the subjectivities of that entity. The objective is to determine whether text generated
by users conveys their positive, negative, or neutral opinions. Sentiment classiﬁcation can be carried
out on three levels of extraction: the aspect or feature level, the sentence level, and the document level.
Currently, there are three approaches to address the problem of sentiment analysis [ 30]: (1) lexicon-based
techniques, (2) machine-learning-based techniques, and (3) hybrid approaches.
Lexicon-based techniques were the ﬁrst to be used for sentiment analysis. They are divided into
two approaches: dictionary-based and corpus-based [ 31]. In the former type, sentiment classiﬁcation
is performed by using a dictionary of terms, such as those found in SentiWordNet and WordNet.
Nevertheless, corpus-based sentiment analysis does not rely on a predeﬁned dictionary but on
statistical analysis of the contents of a collection of documents, using techniques based on k-nearest
neighbors (k-NN) [ 32], conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) [ 33], and hidden Markov models (HMM) [ 34],
among others.
Machine-learning-based techniques [ 35] proposed for sentiment analysis problems can be divided
into two groups: (1) traditional models and (2) deep learning models. Traditional models refer to
classical machine learning techniques, such as the naïve Bayes classiﬁer [ 36], maximum entropy
classiﬁer [ 37,38], or support vector machines (SVM) [ 39]. The input to those algorithms includes lexical
features, sentiment lexicon-based features, parts of speech, or adjectives and adverbs. The accuracy
of these systems depends on which features are chosen. Deep learning models can provide better