scope of collaboration, constructs a resource sharing model with
large-scale man-machine cooperation as the main model. The
role access control mechanism is used to manage user rights,and the settlement incentive algorithm is introduced to protect
the intellectual property rights o f distance education resources.
The experimental results show that this system promotes the
development of distance education information, improves the
efficiency of resource sharing, and enhances the enthusiasm of
users to contribute onlin e educational resources.
When using current index update methods of educational
resources, there is no analysis o f the hierarchical association
structure between educational resources, which bring some prob-lems such as too long index construction time, high query time
and low query accuracy. Ther efore, the third article, “Research
on Adaptive Updating Method of Education Resource Index
based on Mobile Computing ”,a u t h o r e db yA r u nK u m a r
Sangaiah from the School of Computing Science andEngineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, India, introduces
mobile computing to study the a daptive updating method of
education resource index. Their method analyzes the structureof the index system of educational resources. The initial queryis expanded by selecting extension words by local co-occurrence
method, and the weight of the extended query is allocated by
genetic algorithm to realize the adaptive updating of the index of
educational resources. The experimental results show that the
average index redundancy rate is only 0.22%, indicating thatthe resource index update performance of the proposed method
is suited for online education application.
In response to the demand for high-quality electronic infor-
mation talents in the mobile network industry, in the situation ofartificial intelligence (AI) to promote technological innovation,
the forth article, “Application and Exploration of Artificial
Intelligence and Edge Computing in Long-distance Educationon Mobile Network ”, authored by Yun Lin from the College
of Information and Communication Engineering, Harbin
Engineering University, China, conducts an overall design in
the target system, curriculum syst em, teaching platform, teaching
mode and teaching case. The practice education mode of teach-
ing, engineering, innovation, an d enterprise, which aims to im-
prove students ’ability to solve complex engineering problems, is
constructed. The modal breaks geographical boundaries betweenschools and enterprises to build the through-through experimen-
tal teaching course system based on artificial intelligence and
edge computing. At the same time, the hardware portability of
the edge computing platform provides good conditions for long-
distance education. This method is a beneficial attempt to online
education.
3 Models of intelligent learning
The second section of this issue includes four papers, whichfocuses on the models of inte lligent learning, includingservice and movie recommendation, evaluation of teaching
quality, and semantic classification [ 9–12].
In view of the problem that the traditional learning service
recommendation does not fully consider the distinct differencesbetween individuals, it is easy to lead to the contradiction be-
tween unchanging learning resources and learners ’personalized
learning requirements that are constantly improving. In this way,
the fifth article, “Improvement of Adaptive Learning Service
Recommendation Algorithm based on Big Data” , authored by
Marcin Wo źniak from Faculty of Applied Mathematics, Silesian
University of Technology, Poland, proposes an improved adap-
tive learning service recommen dation algorithm based on big
data. Their method builds a student demand model by consider-
ing the individual differences, making students as the center, and
collecting students ’personalized learning demand. Then, with
data mining on clustering recommendation service resources in
learning, an adaptive recommendation model is constructed ac-
c o r d i n gt os t u d e n t s ’individual needs. Experimental results show
that the proposed recommendation algorithm has high recom-
mendation accuracy, coverage rate and recall rate, which is of
great significance in the actual learning service recommendation.
In order to enhance the hybrid teaching of physical education
online and offline, a quality evaluation method for online andoffline hybrid teaching based on mobile edge computing is pro-
p o s e di nt h es i x t ha r t i c l e ,“ Evaluation Method of Online and
Offline Hybrid Teaching Quali ty of Physical Education based
on Mobile Edge Computing ”,a u t h o r e db yP i n gY uf r o mt h e
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University,China. Through the evaluation target, index, weight of index andevaluation standard, their method constructs a quality evaluation
index system of hybrid physical education online and offline.
Index items are simplified by analyzing factor and cluster onthe importance evaluation grade data of each index, and the
quality evaluation of hybrid physical education is realized effec-
tively by using the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation model. Thesimulation results show that the proposed method can effectively
reduce the cost and error of quality evaluation for online-offline
hybrid teaching, improve the evaluation efficiency, and enhancethe quality of online and offline hybrid teaching.
With rich resources, movies have been applied as instruc-
tional media in the domain of education, such as fields ofSecond/Foreign Language Learning, Communication, and
Media Art. Factorization machine (FM) can effectively simu-
late common matrix factorization models by changing theform of real-value vector, which can be utilized in movies
recommendation under the context of education. In this way,
the seventh article, “Movie Recommendation System for
Educational Purposes Based on Field-aware Factorization
Machine ”, authored by Suxia Zhu from the Research Center
of Information Security and Intelligent Technology, Harbin
University of Science and Technology, China, applies the
field-aware factorization machine (FFM) to solve movie rat-
ing prediction and help users to select appropriate movies for2124 Mobile Netw Appl (2021) 26:2123–2126