An Introduction to Key Technology in Artificial Intelligence and big
Data Driven e-Learning and e-Education
Peng Gao1,2,3&Jingyi Li1,2,3&Shuai Liu1,2,3
#The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2021
1 Editorial
Age of artificial intelligence and big data comes rapidly with
fast increment of computer and communication technology,
and the new technology improvements bring new educational
age [ 1]. Mobile education and fragmentation of education
become new trends. Moreover, artificial intelligence and mo-
bile network technology in education is also becoming a hot
research domain [ 2]. Long distance education is changing the
traditional education and has much benefit. However, here are
many remaining scientific and engineering problems in it. The
problem in education based information technology with mo-
bile networks is a key issue to solve. Besides, the new gener-
ation of mobile networks and IT in education is also an im-
portant research domain now. Meanwhile, the engineering
application of AI and big data driven long distance learning
and education exist lots of problems [ 3,4]. All these need
scholars to put much energy into this area.
In this way, this issue “K e yT e c h n o l o g yi nA Ia n dB i gD a t a
Driven Long-Distance Learning and Education ”aims to pro-
vide an opportunity for educators and scholars to publish their
gifted theoretical and technological studies in this area, as well
as the novel real applications of industrial researchers within
this domain.
This issue received 19 submissions and accepted 8 out of
them with at least 2 rounds of strict reviews, with acceptance
ratio 42.11%. This editorial is divided into two sections,
which aims to the intelligent algorithms for online educationin the first section, as well as models of intelligent learning in
the second section.
2 Intelligent algorithms for online education
The first section of this issue includes four papers, which
focuses on the intelligent algorithms for online education, in-
cluding fuzzy system, man-machine cooperation, index up-
date, and edge computing [ 5–8].
The multi-dimensional charact eristics of public opinion in
online education lead to the difficulty of data cross-dimensional
mining. To solve this problem, the first article, “Cross-
Dimension Mining Model of Public Opinion Data in Online
Education based on Fuzzy Association Rules ”, authored by
Jerry Chun-Wei Lin from the Department of Computer
Science, Electrical Engineering and Mathematical Sciences,
Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Norway, de-
signs a cross-dimensional data mining model of public opinion in
online education based on fuzzy association rules. Their method
uses Yaahp software to calculate the influence factor weight of
public opinion in online education, and clarifies the relationship
between the dimensions of various public opinion data. By in-
troducing the fuzzy set theory into the database, the data is
preprocessed with feature selectio n and text vectorization. The
simulation results show that the model has the advantages of
wide range, fast speed, and high accuracy, and can provide data
support for online education reform.
The rapid development of information technology accelerates
the modernization of distance education. In order to realize the
unified organization and management of learning resources as
well as improve the utilization rate of resources, the second arti-
cle,“The Design of Mobile Distance Online Education Resource
Sharing from the Perspective of Man-Machine Cooperation ”,
authored by Norbert Herencsar from the Department of
Telecommunications, Brno University of Technology,
Czech Republic, proposes the design of a mobile online educa-
tion resource sharing system from the perspective of man-
machine cooperation. This method analyzes the main body and*Shuai Liu
liushuai@hunnu.edu.cn
1College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal
University, Changsha, China
2Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and
Language Information Processing, Hunan Normal University,
Changsha, China
3Hunan Xiangjiang Artificial Intelligence Academy, Changsha, Chinahttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11036-021-01777-7
Published online: 30 April 2021Mobile Networks and Applications (2021) 26:2123–2126