learning purposes. In order to further enhance the availability
of the model, clustering algorithm is also integrated in FFM
for adding new fields. The experimental results demonstratethe effectiveness of the proposed methods in reducing the
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE).
Scholarly articles are a great s ource of knowledge. Learning
from them like E-learning requires automatic approaches to buildconcept-maps, learning paths, etc., as these sources are monoton-
ically increasing and are big too. These sources have multi-do-main, variety, huge volumes, which are, in fact, Big Data ’sc h a r -
acteristics. Thus data from dif ferent domains have to be handled
together, especially in the E-lea rning systems. Therefore, the
eighth article, “Fuzzy Semantic Classification of Multi-Domain
E-Learning concept ”, authored by Omar Almutiry from the
College of Applied Computer Science, King Saud University(Almuzahmiyah Campus), Saudi Arabia, presents a new ap-
proach for concept extraction and semantically clustering and
classification of these e-learning concepts using fuzzy member-ship values. A test on BBC datasets with 100 documents and 650
documents is achieved for testing their fuzzy-based semantic
system by extending the maximum accuracy up to current 94%to 96% for all data sets. In clustering, by using K-Means, their
method gets precision up to 93%. The system can be used to
generate adaptive learning paths, concept map extraction, and big
data based e-learning portals.
Acknowledgements The guest editors are thankful to our reviewers for
their effort in reviewing the manuscripts. We also thank the Edit-in-Chief,
Dr. Imrich Chlamtac for his supportive guidance during the entire pro-cess. This issue was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of
Hunan Province with No.2020JJ4434, Key Scientific Research Projects
of Department of Education of Hunan Province with No.19A312; HunanProvincial Science & Technology Project Foundation (2018TP1018,2018RS3065), Innovation and Entrepreneurship Training Program of
Hunan Xiangjiang Artificial Intelligence Academy, Educational Reform
Project of Hunan Xiangjiang Artificial Intelligence Academy.
References
1. Liu S, Wang S, Liu X, Lin CT, Lv Z (2020) Fuzzy detection aided
real-time and robust visual tracking under complex environments.IEEE Trans Fuzzy Syst:1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.2020.
3006520
2. Liu S, Guo C, Fadi A et al (2020) Reliability of response region: a
novel mechanism in visual tracking by edge computing for IIoT
environments. Mech Syst Signal Process 138:106537
3. Ke Q, Zhang J, Wozniak M, Wei W (2019) The phase and shift-
invariant feature by adaptive independent subspace analysis for
cortical complex cells. Information Technology And Control 48:58–70
4. Lin Y, Li Y, Yin X, Dou Z (2018) Multisensor fault diagnosis
modeling based on the evidence theory. IEEE Trans Reliab 67(2):
513–5215. Li-Xuan L, Huo Y, Lin JC (2021) Cross-Dimension Mining Model
of Public Opinion Data in Online Education based on Fuzzy
Association Rules. Mobile Networks and Applications
6. Li C, Zhao Q, Herencsar N, et al. The Design of Mobile Distance
Online Education Resource Sharing from the Perspective of Man-Machine Cooperation
7. Liu J, Sangaiah AK (2021) Research on Adaptive Updating
Method of Education Resource Index based on MobileComputing. Mobile Networks and Applications
8. Hou C, Hua L, Lin Y, et al (2021) Application and Exploration of
Artificial Intelligence and Edge Computing in Long-distanceEducation on Mobile Network. Mobile Networks and Applications
9. Yang Y, Zhong Y, Wo źniak M (2021) Improvement of Adaptive
Learning Service Recommendation Algorithm based on Big Data.Mobile Networks and Applications
10. Bao L, Yu P (2021) Evaluation Method of Online and Offline
Hybrid Teaching Quality of Physical Education based on MobileEdge Computing. Mobile Networks and Applications
11. Lang F, Liang L, Huang K, et al (2021) Movie Recommendation
System for Educational Pur poses Based on Field-aware
Factorization Machine. Mobile Networks and Applications
12. Ahmed R, Ahmad T, Almutairi FM, et al (2021) Fuzzy semantic
classification of multi-domain E-learning concept. MobileNetworks and Applications
Publisher ’sn o t e Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Peng Gao is now a master under
postgraduate in College ofInformation Science andTechnology, Hunan Normal
University. His research interests
include computer vision, targettracking, artificial intelligence ap-plication.
Jingyi Li is now a master under
postgraduate in College ofInformation Science andTechnology, Hunan NormalUniversity. Her research interests
include computer vision, target
tracking, artificial intelligence ap-plication.2125 Mobile Netw Appl (2021) 26:2123–2126