Multi-Task Learning as a Bargaining Game
Aviv Navon* 1Aviv Shamsian* 1Idan Achituve1Haggai Maron2Kenji Kawaguchi3
Gal Chechik1 2Ethan Fetaya1
Abstract
In Multi-task learning (MTL), a joint model is
trained to simultaneously make predictions for
several tasks. Joint training reduces computation
costs and improves data efﬁciency; however, since
the gradients of these different tasks may conﬂict,
training a joint model for MTL often yields lower
performance than its corresponding single-task
counterparts. A common method for alleviating
this issue is to combine per-task gradients into a
joint update direction using a particular heuristic.
In this paper, we propose viewing the gradients
combination step as a bargaining game, where
tasks negotiate to reach an agreement on a joint
direction of parameter update. Under certain as-
sumptions, the bargaining problem has a unique
solution, known as the Nash Bargaining Solution ,
which we propose to use as a principled approach
to multi-task learning. We describe a new MTL
optimization procedure, Nash-MTL, and derive
theoretical guarantees for its convergence. Empir-
ically, we show that Nash-MTL achieves state-of-
the-art results on multiple MTL benchmarks in
various domains.
1. Introduction
In many real-world applications, one needs to solve several
tasks simultaneously using limited computational or data
resources. For example, perception for autonomous vehicles
requires lane detection, object detection, and free-space esti-
mation, which must all run in parallel and in real-time. This
is normally solved via multi-task learning (MTL), where one
model is jointly trained on several learning tasks (Caruana,
1997; Ruder, 2017; Crawshaw, 2020). Multi-task learning
was also shown to improve generalization in theory (Baxter,
*Equal contribution1Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
2Nvidia, Tel-Aviv, Israel3National University of Singapore. Corre-
spondence to: Aviv Navon <aviv.navon@biu.ac.il >, Aviv Sham-
sian<aviv.shamsian@live.biu.ac.il >.
Proceedings of the 39thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copy-
right 2022 by the author(s).2000) and in practice (e.g., auxiliary learning, Liu et al.,
2019a; Achituve et al., 2021; Navon et al., 2021a).
Unfortunately, MTL often causes performance degradation
compared to single-task models (Standley et al., 2020). A
main reason for such degradation is gradients conﬂict (Yu
et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021a). These
per-task gradients may have conﬂicting directions or a large
difference in magnitudes, with the largest gradient domi-
nating the update direction. The degraded performance of
MTL due to poor training, compared with its potential to
improve performance due to better generalization, has a
major impact on many real-world systems. Improving MTL
optimization algorithms is therefore an important task with
signiﬁcant implications to many systems.
Currently, most MTL optimization algorithms (Sener &
Koltun, 2018; Yu et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2021a) follow a
general scheme. First, compute the gradients for all tasks
g1;:::;gK. Next, combine those gradients into a joint direc-
tion, =A(g1;:::;gK)using an aggregation algorithm A.
Finally, update model parameters using a single-task opti-
mization algorithm, replacing the gradients with . Multi-
ple heuristics were proposed for the aggregation algorithm
A. However, to the best of our knowledge, a principled,
axiomatic, approach to gradient aggregation is still missing.
Here we address the gradient combination step by viewing
it as a cooperative bargaining game (Thomson, 1994). Each
task represents a player, whose utility is derived from its
gradient, and players negotiate to reach an agreed direction.
This formulation allows us to use results from game theory
literature that analyze this problem from an axiomatic per-
spective. In his seminal paper, Nash (1953) presented an
axiomatic approach to the bargaining problem and showed
that under certain axioms, the bargaining problem has a
unique solution known as the Nash Bargaining Solution .
This solution is known to be proportionally fair, where any
alternative will have a negative average relative change. This
proportionally fair update allows us to ﬁnd a solution that
works for all tasks without being dominated by a single
large gradient.
Building on Nash’s results, we propose a novel MTL opti-
mization algorithm, named Nash-MTL , where the gradients
are combined at each step using the Nash bargaining so-arXiv:2202.01017v2  [cs.LG]  8 Jul 2022