Multi-Task Learning as a Bargaining Game
Figure 1. Illustrative example : Optimization trajectories in loss space. Shown are 5 different initializations (black dots ), and their
trajectories are colored from orange to purple. Losses have a large difference in scale. See Appendix B for details. For linear scalarization
(LS), PCGrad, and CAGrad, the optimization process is controlled by the gradient of `2, since it has a larger magnitude, resulting in
imbalanced solutions between tasks (mostly ending at the bottom right). These three methods also fail to converge to an optimal solution
for the rightmost initialization points. In contrast, MGDA is inclined towards the task with the smallest gradient magnitude ( `1). Our
method, Nash-MTL , is invariant to changes in loss scale and produces solutions that are well balanced across the Pareto front.
lution. We ﬁrst characterize the Nash bargaining solution
for MTL and derive an efﬁcient algorithm to approximate
its value. Then, we analyze our approach theoretically and
establish convergence guarantees in the convex and non-
convex cases. Finally, we show empirically that our Nash-
MTL approach achieves state-of-the-art results on four MTL
benchmarks on a variety of challenges ranging from com-
puter vision and quantum chemistry to reinforcement learn-
ing. To support future research and the reproducibility of
the results, we make our source code publicly available at:
https://github.com/AvivNavon/nash-mtl .
2. Background
2.1. Pareto Optimality
Optimization for MTL is a speciﬁc case of multiple-
objective optimization (MOO). Given objective functions
`1;:::;`K, the performance of solution a xis measured by
the vector of objective values (`1(x);:::;`K(x)). One main
property of MOO is that since there is no natural linear
ordering on vectors it is not always possible to compare
solutions so there is no clear optimal value.
We say that a solution xdominatesx0if it is better on one
or more objectives and not worse on any other objectives.
A solution that is not dominated by any other is called
Pareto optimal , and the set of all such solutions is called
thePareto front . It is important to note that there is no clear
way to select between different Pareto optimal solutions
without additional assumptions or prior about the user pref-
erences (Navon et al., 2021b). For non-convex problems, a
point is deﬁned as local Pareto optimal if it is Pareto optimal
in some open set containing it. Further, a point is called
Pareto stationary if there exists a convex combination of the
gradients at this point that equals zero. Pareto stationarity is
a necessary condition for Pareto optimality.2.2. Nash Bargaining Solution
We provide a brief background on cooperative bargain-
ing games and the Nash bargaining solution, see Thom-
son (1994) for more details. In a bargaining problem,
we haveKplayers, each with their own utility function
ui:A[fDg!R, which they wish to maximize. A
is the set of possible agreements and Dis the disagree-
ment point which the players default to if they fail to
reach an agreement. We deﬁne the set of possible pay-
offs asU=f(u1(x);:::;uK(x)) :x2AgRKand
d= (u1(D);:::;uK(D)). We assume Uis convex, com-
pact and that there exists a point in Uthat strictly dominates
d, namely there exists a u2Usuch that8i:ui>di.
Nash (1953) showed that for such payoff set U, the two-
player bargaining problem has a unique solutionthat satisﬁes
the following properties or axioms: Pareto optimality, sym-
metry, independence of irrelevant alternatives, and invariant
to afﬁne transformations. This was later extended to multi-
ple players (Sz ´ep & Forg ´o, 1985).
Axiom 2.1. Pareto optimality: The agreed solution must
not be dominated by another option, i.e. there cannot be any
other agreement that is better for at least one player and not
worse for any of the players.
As it is a cooperative game, it makes little sense that the
players will curtail another player without any personal
gains, so it is natural to assume the agreed solution will not
be dominated by another.
Axiom 2.2. Symmetry: The solution should be invariant
to permuting the order of the players.
Axiom 2.3. Independence of irrelevant alternatives
(IIA): If we enlarge the of possible payoffs to ~U)U,
and the solution is in the original set U,u2U, then the
agreed point when the set of possible payoffs is Uwill stay
u.