whereRexpresses the magnitude of the covering number ( R="2is an"-covering bound).
Combining the property generally for any neural network under the stem-vine framework,
eq. (36) gives two insights about the eﬀects of residual connections on the generalization
capability of neural networks: (1) The in/f_luences of weight matrices on the generalization
capability are invariant, no matter where they are (either in the stem or in the vines);
(2) Adding an identity vine could not aﬀect the generalization. These results give an
theoretical explanation of why ResNet has equivalently good generalization capability as
the chain-like neural networks.
As indicated by eq. (35), the expected risk (or, equivalently, the expectation of the test
error) of ResNet equals the sum of the empirical risk (or, equivalently, the training error)
and the generalization error. In the meantime, residual connections signi/f_icantly reduce
the training error of the neural network in many tasks. Our results therefore theoretically
explain why ResNet has a signi/f_icantly lower test error in these tasks.
5.4 Practical Implementation
Besides the sample size N, our generalization bound (eq. (35)) has a positive correlation
with the norms of all the weight matrices. Speci/f_ically, weight matrices with higher norms
lead to a higher generalization bound of the neural network, and therefore leads to a worse
generalization ability. This feature induces a practical implementation which justi/f_ies the
standard of technique weight decay.
Weight decay can be dated back to a paper by Krogh and Hertz [ 28] and is widely used
in training deep neural networks. It uses the L2norm of all the weights as a regularization
term to control the magnitude of the norms of the weights not to increase too much:
Remark 2. The technique of weight decay can improve the generalization ability of deep
neural networks. It refers to adding the L2norm of the weights w= (w1;:::;wD)to the
objective function as a regularization term:
L0(w) =L(w) +1
2DX
i=1w2
i;
whereis a tuneable parameter, L(w)is the original objective function, and L0(w)is the
objective function with weight decay.
The term1
2PD
i=1w2
ican be easily re-expressed by the L2norms of all the weight
matrices. Therefore, using weight decay can control the magnitude of the norms of all
the weights matrices not to increase too much. Also, our generalization bound (eq. (35))
provides a positive correlation between the generalization bound and the norms of all
the weight matrices. Thus, our work gives a justi/f_ication for why weight decay leads to a
better generalization ability.
A recent systematic experiment conducted by Li et al. studies the in/f_luence of weight
decay on the loss surface of the deep neural networks [ 30]. It trains a 9-layer VGGNet [ 9]
17