... Most generic 
rationales
(our target )
Most specific 
rationalesMode of a species 
with a specific poseMode of standing birds 
of various specieses
 Disentangled 
filters in the top 
conv-layery=0.9...FC 
layers
A head filter
A feet filter
A torso filtercontribute 2.32%
contribute 0.72%
contribute 1.21%A decision 
mode
Figure 2. Decision tree that encodes all potential decision modes
of the CNN in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner. We learn a CNN for object
classiﬁcation with disentangled representations in the top conv-
layer, where each ﬁlter represents an object part. Given an input
image, we infer a parse tree (green lines) from the decision tree
to semantically and quantitatively explain which object parts (or
ﬁlters) are used for the prediction and how much an object part
(or ﬁlter) contributes to the prediction. We are more interested in
high-layer decision modes that summarize low-layer modes into
compact explanations of CNN predictions.
explanations for CNNs have potential values beyond pixel-
level visualization/analysis of CNNs. Semantic and quan-
titative explanations can help people better understand and
trust CNN predictions. E.g. in critical applications, such as
the recommendation for a surgery plan, people are usually
not simply satisﬁed by the plan itself, but expect a quantita-
tive explanation for the plan.
However, bridging the gap between a CNN’s middle-
layer features and semantic explanations has not been well
explored yet. We will introduce our task, clarify its chal-
lenges, and deﬁne relevant concepts from the following two
perspectives.
•Bridging middle-layer features with semantic concepts:
Given an input image, the ﬁrst issue is to learn more inter-
pretable feature representations inside a CNN and associate
each neural activation inside a CNN with a semantic con-
cept. This presents signiﬁcant challenges for state-of-the-
art algorithms.
Firstly, we need to force feature representations in mid-
dle conv-layers to be well disentangled during the learning
process. According to [ 2,38]2, a ﬁlter in traditional CNNs
usually represents a mixture of parts and textures. Learning
semantically meaningful ﬁlters is difﬁcult but is the foun-
dation of semantic-level explanations. In this research, we
learn a CNN with disentangled ﬁlters in high conv-layers.
Each ﬁlter needs to be consistently activated by the same
object region over different input images. We do not use
any annotations of parts or textures to supervise the disen-
tanglement of ﬁlter features.
2Zhang et al. [40] summarized the six types of semantics deﬁned in [ 2]
as parts and textures.Secondly, we also need to associate each disentangled
ﬁlter with an explicit semantic meaning ( i.e.an object part
in this study). This association enables linguistic descrip-
tions of middle-layer knowledge, for example, how many
parts are memorized in the CNN and how the parts are or-
ganized.
•Bridging middle-layer features with ﬁnal CNN predic-
tions: When we have assigned middle-layer features with
speciﬁc part concepts, the next issue is to quantitatively ex-
plain how the CNN uses these middle-layer features to com-
pute prediction scores. In other words, given an input im-
age, we hope to clarify the speciﬁc rationale of the CNN
prediction.
Here, we deﬁne the rationale of a CNN prediction as
the set of object parts (or ﬁlters) that are activated and con-
tribute to the prediction. Given different input images, the
CNN uses different object parts to activate different sets of
ﬁlters to compute prediction scores, thereby having differ-
ent rationales. Let us take the bird classiﬁcation as an exam-
ple. The CNN may use several ﬁlters activated by the head
appearances as rationales to classify a standing bird, and the
CNN may take ﬁlters for wings to distinguish a ﬂying bird.
Given each input image, our task is to clarify ﬁlters of
which object parts are activated and to quantitatively mea-
sure the contribution of each object part to the prediction.
The concept of the contribution was also called the “impor-
tance” in [ 24,22] and was termed “attribution” in [ 16]. As
shown in Fig. 2, we describe the contribution as “a head ﬁl-
ter contributes 2.32%, and a feet ﬁlter contributes 0.72%.”
Task: As shown in Fig. 1, given a pre-trained CNN, we
propose a method to construct a decision tree to explain CN-
N predictions semantically and quantitatively. We summa-
rize rationales of CNN predictions on all images into vari-
ousdecision modes . Each tree node represents a decision
mode. Each decision mode describes common rationales
of predictions that are shared by multiple images. I.e.for
these images, the CNN usually activates similar ﬁlters (ob-
ject parts), and each part makes a similar contribution to the
prediction.
The decision tree hierarchically represents all potential
decision modes of a CNN in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner. Nodes
near to the tree root node mainly represent most common
decision modes (prediction rationales) shared by many im-
ages. Nodes near leaves correspond to ﬁne-grained modes
of minority images. In particular, each leaf node encodes
the speciﬁc decision mode of a certain image.
In order to build the decision tree, we learn ﬁlters to rep-
resent object parts (we do not label any parts or textures as
additional supervision3). Then, we assign each ﬁlter with
a speciﬁc part name. Finally, we mine decision modes to
3Part annotations are not used to learn the CNN and the decision tree.
Given the learned CNN, we label object parts for the ﬁlters to compute
part-level contributions in Equation ( 11).
6262