1
2 3123
1
2 31
23
1
2 3123
1
2 3123
1
2 3123
1
2 3123
1
2
3123
1
2
3123
1
2
3123
1
2
3123
Figure 5. Visualization of decision modes corresponding to nodes in the 2nd tree layer. We show typical images of each decision mode.
Input Activation 
distributionContribution 
distributionInput Activation 
distributionContribution 
distribution
Filter for 
cat torso
Filter for 
cat headFilter for 
bird nape
Filter for 
bird breast
Image receptive fields of a filter on different images
Figure 6. Object-part contributions for CNN prediction. Pie charts show contribution proportions of different parts, which are estimated
using nodes in the second tree layer. Heat maps indicate spatial distributions of neural activations in the top conv-layer (note that the
heat maps do not represent distributions of “contributions,” because neural activations are not weighted by gi). Right ﬁgures show image
receptive ﬁelds of different ﬁlters estimated by [ 44]. Based on these receptive ﬁlters, we assign the ﬁlters with different object parts to
compute the distribution of object-part contributions.
Analysis of object parts for prediction: We analyzed
the contribution of different object parts in the CNN pre-
diction, when we assigned each ﬁlter with a speciﬁc ob-
ject part. The vector ˆ̺iin Equation ( 11) speciﬁes the
contribution of different object parts in the prediction of
yi. For the m-th object part, we computed contri m=
|ˆ̺(m)
i|//summationtextM
m′=1|ˆ̺(m′)
i|as the ratio of the part’s contribution.
More speciﬁcally, for CNNs based on the ILSVRC 2013
DET Animal-Part dataset, we manually labeled the object
part for each ﬁlter in the top conv-layer. For CNNs based
on the Pascal VOC Part dataset [ 7], the study of [ 40] merged
tens of small parts into several major landmark parts for the
six animal categories. Given a CNN for a certain catego-
ry, we used [ 44] to estimate regions in different images that
corresponded to each ﬁlter’s neural activations, namely the
image receptive ﬁeld of the ﬁlter (please see Figs. 6and
3). For each ﬁlter, we selected a part from all major land-
mark parts, which was closest to the ﬁlter’s image receptive
ﬁeld through all positive images. For the CNN based on the
CUB200-2011 dataset, we used ground-truth positions of
the breast, forehead, nape, tail of birds as major landmark
parts. Similarly, we assigned each ﬁlter in the top conv-
layer with the nearest landmark part.
Evaluation metrics: The evaluation has two aspects.
Firstly, we use two metrics to evaluate the accuracy of the
estimated rationale of a prediction. The ﬁrst metric eval-
uates errors of object-part contributions to the CNN pre-
diction that were estimated using nodes in the second tree
layer. Given an input image I,ˆ̺iin Equation ( 11) denotes
the quantitative contribution of the i-th part. Accordingly,
ˆ̺∗
i=y−ˆyiis referred to as the ground-truth contribution ofthe part, where ydenotes the original CNN prediction on I;
ˆyiis the output when we removed neural activations from
feature maps (ﬁlters) corresponding to the i-th part. In this
way, we used the deviation EI∈I[ˆ̺i−ˆ̺∗
i]/EI∈I[y]to de-
note the error of the i-th part contributions. Another metric,
namely the ﬁtness of contribution distributions , compares
the ground-truth contribution distribution over different ﬁl-
ters in the top conv-layer with the estimated contribution of
these ﬁlters during the prediction process. When the deci-
sion tree uses node ˆvto explain the prediction for Ii, the
vectorρiin Equation ( 11) denotes the estimated contribu-
tion distribution of different ﬁlters. ti=gi◦xicorrespond-
s to the ground-truth contribution distribution. We report-
ed the interaction-of-the-union value between ρiandtito
measure the ﬁtness of the ground-truth and the estimated
ﬁlter contribution distributions. I.e.we computed the ﬁt-
ness asEi∈Ω+[min(ˆρ(d)
i,|t(d)
i|)
max(ˆρ(d)
i,|t(d)
i|)], wheret(d)
idenotes the d-th
element of tiandˆρ(d)
i= max{ρ(d)
isign(t(d)
i),0}. We used
non-negative values of ˆρ(d)
iand|t(d)
i|, because vectors ρi
andtimay have negative elements.
Secondly, in addition to the accuracy of the rationale, we
also measured the information loss of using the decision tree
to represent a CNN, as a supplementary evaluation. A met-
ric is the classiﬁcation accuracy . Because ˆh(xi)denotes
the prediction of yibased on the best child in the second
tree layer, we regarded ˆh(·)as the output of the tree and we
evaluated the discrimination power of ˆh(·). We used val-
ues ofˆh(xi)for classiﬁcation and compared its classiﬁca-
tion accuracy with the accuracy of the CNN. Another met-
ric, namely the prediction error , measures the error of the
6267