Interpreting CNNs via Decision Trees
Quanshi Zhang†, Yu Yang‡, Haotian Ma§, and Ying Nian Wu‡
†Shanghai Jiao Tong University,‡University of California, Los Angeles,
§South China University of Technology
Abstract
This paper1aims to quantitatively explain the rationales
of each prediction that is made by a pre-trained convolu-
tional neural network (CNN). We propose to learn a deci-
sion tree, which clariﬁes the speciﬁc reason for each predic-
tion made by the CNN at the semantic level. I.e.the decision
tree decomposes feature representations in high conv-layers
of the CNN into elementary concepts of object parts. In this
way, the decision tree tells people which object parts ac-
tivate which ﬁlters for the prediction and how much each
object part contributes to the prediction score. Such seman-
tic and quantitative explanations for CNN predictions have
speciﬁc values beyond the traditional pixel-level analysis of
CNNs. More speciﬁcally, our method mines all potential de-
cision modes of the CNN, where each mode represents a typ-
ical case of how the CNN uses object parts for prediction.
The decision tree organizes all potential decision modes in
a coarse-to-ﬁne manner to explain CNN predictions at dif-
ferent ﬁne-grained levels. Experiments have demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed method.
1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [ 20,18,14] have
achieved superior performance in various tasks. However,
besides the discrimination power, model interpretability is
still a signiﬁcant challenge for neural networks. Many s-
tudies have been proposed to visualize or analyze feature
representations hidden inside a CNN, in order to open the
black box of neural networks.
Motivation & objective: In the scope of network inter-
pretability, state-of-the-art algorithms are still far from the
ultimate goal of explaining why a CNN learns knowledge as
it is. Although some theories, such as the information bot-
tleneck [ 34], analyzed statistical characteristics of a neural
1Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author with the John Hopcroft
Center and the MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, at the
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Yu Yang and Ying Nian Wu are
with the University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Haotian Ma is with
the South China University of Technology, China.
...
Explanatory 
treey=0.87
(b) grad-CAM (a) Input (c) Visualization of filters(d) Our explanations
Conv5-2 Conv3-3
Tail
Feature maps 
of a nape filterDistribution of 
contributions of 
different filters
Figure 1. Different types of explanations for CNNs. We compare
(d) our task of quantitatively and semantically explaining CNN
predictions with previous studies of interpreting CNNs, such as
(b) the grad-CAM [ 26] and (c) CNN visualization [ 23]. Given an
input image (a), we infer a parse tree (green lines) within the deci-
sion tree to project neural activations onto clear concepts of object
parts. Our method quantitatively explains which ﬁlters/parts (in
the small/big round) are used for the prediction and how much
they contribute to the prediction. We visualize numerical contri-
butions from randomly selected 10% ﬁlters for clarity.
network, it is still a challenge to explain why a CNN en-
codes frontal-leg features, rather than rear-leg features, for
classiﬁcation during the end-to-end learning process.
Therefore, in this study, we limit our discussion to the
issue of explaining what knowledge a CNN learns. In this
direction, our research focuses on the following two new
perspectives of interpreting CNNs:
•How to explain features of a middle layer in a CNN at the
semantic level. I.e.we aim to transform chaotic features of
ﬁlters inside a CNN into semantically meaningful concepts,
such as object parts, so as to help people to understand the
knowledge in the CNN.
•How to quantitatively analyze the rationale of each C-
NN prediction. We need to ﬁgure out which ﬁlters/parts
pass their information through the CNN and contribute to
the prediction output. We also report the numerical contri-
bution of each ﬁlter (or object part) to the output score.
As shown in Fig. 1, the above two perspectives are cru-
cial in real applications and have essential differences from
traditional pixel-level visualization and diagnosis of CNN
features [ 37,23,10,24,22]. Our semantic and quantitative
1
6261