Filter 1
Filter 2
Filter 3
Ordinary filters Disentangled filters
Figure 3. Comparisons between ordinary CNN feature maps and
disentangled feature maps that are used in this study. We visualize
image regions corresponding to each feature map based on [ 44].
siﬁcation and cannot provide semantic-level explanation-
s. Secondly, we summarize decision modes from gradients
w.r.t. neural activations of object parts as rationales to ex-
plain CNN prediction. Compared to the above “distillation-
based” methods, our “gradient-based” decision tree reﬂects
CNN predictions more directly and strictly.
3. Image-speciﬁc rationale of a CNN prediction
In this section, we design a method to simplify the com-
plex feature processing inside a CNN into a linear form
(i.e.Equation ( 3)), as the speciﬁc rationale of the predic-
tionw.r.t. the input image. This linear equation clariﬁes (i)
which object parts activate which ﬁlters in the CNN and (ii)
how much these parts/ﬁlters contribute to the ﬁnal predic-
tion score.
In order to obtain semantic-level rationale of a CNN pre-
diction, we need (i) ﬁrst to ensure that the CNN’s middle-
layer features are semantically meaningful, and (ii) then to
extract explicit contributions of middle-layer features to the
prediction score.
In this study, we learn the CNN for object classiﬁcation.
Theoretically, we can interpret CNNs oriented to different
tasks. Nevertheless, in this paper, we limit our attention to
CNNs for classiﬁcation, in order to simplify the story.
3.1. Learning disentangled ﬁlters
The basic idea is to revise a benchmark CNN, in order
to make each ﬁlter in the top conv-layer represent a speciﬁc
object part. We expect the ﬁlter to be automatically con-
verged to the representation of a part, instead of using addi-
tional part annotations to supervise the learning process.
We apply the ﬁlter loss [ 40] to each ﬁlter in the top conv-
layer to push the ﬁlter towards the representation of an ob-
ject part. As shown in Fig. 3, the ﬁlter is learned to be acti-
vated by the same object part given different input images.
Theoretically, our method also supports other techniques of
mining interpretable features in middle layers [ 38,27]. N-
evertheless, the ﬁlter loss usually ensures more meaningful
features than the other approaches.
Filter loss: Letxf∈RL×Ldenote the feature map of
a ﬁlterf. Without part annotations, the ﬁlter loss forces xf
to be exclusively activated by a speciﬁc part of a category.
We can summarize the ﬁlter loss as the minus mutual infor-mation between the distribution of feature maps and that of
part locations.
Lossf=/summationdisplay
xf∈XfLossf(xf) =−MI(Xf;P)
=−/summationdisplay
µ∈Pp(µ)/summationdisplay
xf∈Xfp(xf|µ)logp(xf|µ)
p(xf)(1)
whereMI(·)indicates the mutual information. Xfdenotes
a set of feature maps of fextracted from different input
images. P={µ|µ= [h,w],1≤h,w≤L}∪{∅} is referred
to as a set of all part-location candidates. Each location µ=
[h,w]corresponds to an activation unit in xf. Besides, ∅ ∈
Pdenotes the case that the target part does not appear in the
input image. In this case, all units in xfare expected to keep
inactivated. The joint probability p(xf,µ)to describe the
compatibility between xfandµ(please see [ 40] for details).
The ﬁlter loss ensures that given an input image, xf
should match only one of all L2+1location candidates. It is
assumed that repetitive shapes on various regions are more
likely to describe low-level textures than high-level parts. If
the part appears, xfshould have a single activation peak at
the part location; otherwise, xfshould keep inactivated.
3.2. Quantitative rationales of CNN predictions
As analyzed in [ 2], ﬁlters in high conv-layers are more
prone to represent object parts, while those in low conv-
layers usually describe textures. Therefore, we choose ﬁl-
ters in the top conv-layer to represent object parts. Con-
sequently, we quantitatively analyze how fully-connected
(FC) layers use object-part features from the top conv-layer
to make ﬁnal predictions, as the rationale.
Given an input image I, letx∈RL×L×Ddenote the
feature map of the top conv-layer after a ReLU operation,
whereLdenotes the scale of the feature map, and Dis the
ﬁlter number. Let ydenote the scalar classiﬁcation score of
a certain category before the softmax operation (when the
CNN is learned for multiple categories, we may learn a spe-
ciﬁc decision tree to explain the output of each category).
Our task is to use xto represent the rationale of y.
As discussed in [ 22,24], we can use a piecewise linear
representation to represent the function of cascaded FC lay-
ers and ReLU layers, as follows.
y=ffc-n(frelu(···ffc-1(x))) =/summationdisplay
h,w,dg(h,w,d)·x(h,w,d)+b(2)
wherex(h,w,d)∈Rdenotes the element at the location
(h,w)of thed-th channel; g(h,w,d)is a weight that describes
the importance of x(h,w,d)for the prediction on I. Theoreti-
cally, we can compute g=∂y
∂xandb=y−g⊗x.
We use weights gto denote the speciﬁc rationale of the
prediction for the input image. g(h,w,d)x(h,w,d)measures
x(h,w,d)’squantitative contribution to the prediction.
Different input images correspond to different weights
g,i.e.different rationales of their CNN predictions. It is
6264