Training Graph Neural Networks with 1000 Layers
of language modelling. Recent progress in natural language
processing (NLP) has been enabled by a massive increase
in parameter counts: GPT (110M) (Radford et al.), BERT
(340M) (Devlin et al., 2019), GPT-3 (175B) (Brown et al.,
2020), Gshard-M4 (600B) (Lepikhin et al., 2021), and Deep-
Speed (1T) (Rasley et al., 2020). More parameters mean
deeper or wider networks that consume more memory.
GNNs have shown a lot of promise on recent large-scale
graph datasets such as Benchmarking GNNs (Dwivedi et al.,
2020), Open Graph Benchmark (OGB) (Hu et al., 2020;
2021) and Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG) (Wang et al.,
2020). Recent works (Li et al., 2019; 2020; Chen et al.,
2020) have successfully trained deep models with a large
number of parameters and achieved state-of-the-art perfor-
mance. However, these models have large memory foot-
prints and operate at the physical limits of current hardware.
In order to apply deeper and wider GNNs with more param-
eters, we need either different hardware or more efﬁcient
architectures that consume less memory.
Existing works try to overcome the memory bottleneck by
mini-batch training, i.e.sampling a smaller set of nodes
(Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018b;a) or partition-
ing large graphs (Chiang et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2020)
into smaller subgraphs and sampling from those. These ap-
proaches have proven successful, but they introduce further
hyperparameters that need to be tuned. For instance, if the
sampled size of nodes or subgraphs is too small, it may break
important structures in the graph. While these methods are a
step in the right direction, they do not scale well as the mod-
els become deeper or wider, since memory consumption is
still dependent on the number of layers. Another approach
is efﬁcient propagation via K-power adjacency matrices or
graph diffusion matrices (Wu et al., 2019; Klicpera et al.,
2019; Bojchevski et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Frasca et al.,
2020). However, the propagation schemes of these methods
are non-trainable, which may lead to sub-optimality.
Inspired by efﬁcient architectures from computer vision and
natural language processing (Gomez et al., 2017; Xie et al.,
2017; Bai et al., 2018; 2019), here we investigate several
methods to obtain more efﬁcient GNNs that use less memory
than conventional architectures while achieving state-of-the-
art results (see Figure 1). We explore grouped reversible
graph connections in order to reduce the memory complexity
with respect to the number of layers from O(L)toO(1). In
other words, the memory consumption is independent of the
depth. This allows us to train very deep, over-parameterized
models with constant memory consumption.
We also investigate parameter-efﬁcient architectures. We
study deep weight-tied GNNs that have the parameter cost
of only a single layer. We also develop a deep graph equilib-
rium GNN, which is essentially a weight-tied network with
inﬁnite depth. We directly solve for the equilibrium point ofthis inﬁnite-layer network using a root-ﬁnding method. We
backpropagate through the equilibrium point using implicit
differentiation. Hence, we do not need to store intermediate
states and get an inﬁnite-depth network at the memory and
parameter cost of a single layer.
Our analysis of these methods shows that deep reversible
architectures are the most powerful in terms of achieving
state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets. This
is due to their very large capacity at low memory cost and
only slightly increased training time. Weight-tied models
offer constant parameter size regardless of depth. How-
ever, due to the smaller number of parameters, performance
on large datasets suffers and has to be compensated by in-
creasing the width. Finally, graph equilibrium models have
the same memory efﬁciency as reversible models and the
same parameter efﬁciency as weight-tied models. They per-
form similarly to weight-tied models, and the training time
vs.performance tradeoff can be further adjusted by tuning
the number of iterations in each optimization step.
Our methods can be applied to different GNN operators. In
our experiments, we successfully apply them to GCN (Kipf
& Welling, 2017), GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), GAT
(Veli ˇckovi ´c et al., 2018), and DeepGCN (Li et al., 2019). We
can also combine the proposed techniques with sampling-
based methods to further reduce memory and boost perfor-
mance on some datasets. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the ﬁrst to train a GNN with more than 1000 layers. Our
model RevGNN-Deep, outperforms all state-of-the-art ap-
proaches on the ogbn-proteins dataset (Hu et al., 2020) with
an ROC-AUC of 87.74%, while only consuming 2.86 GB
of GPU memory during training, one order of magnitude
less than the current top performer. We can also trade our
memory savings for larger width, pushing performance to
new heights. Our RevGNN-Wide achieves an ROC-AUC
of 88.24% on the ogbn-proteins dataset, ranking ﬁrst on the
leaderboard by a large margin.
In summary, we investigate several techniques to increase
the memory efﬁciency of GNNs and perform an extensive
analysis. We signiﬁcantly outperform current state-of-the-
art methods on several datasets by employing reversible
connections to train deeper and wider models. Further, we
demonstrate the generality of these techniques by applying
them to multiple GNN operators. We release our implemen-
tation, which supports PyTorch Geometric (Fey & Lenssen,
2019) and the Deep Graph Library (Wang et al., 2019a).
2. Related Work
GNNs were introduced by Gori et al. (2005) and Scarselli
et al. (2008) for learning a graph representation by ﬁnd-
ing stable states through ﬁxed-point iterations. Bruna et al.
(2014) generalized Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)