HafemeisterandSatija GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:296 Page11of15
is tailored to single-cell data. For example, Townes et al.
[29] introduced GLM-PCA, a generalization of PCA for
dataexhibitingnon-normalerrordistributionssuchasthe
negative binomial, that takes count data directly as input
instead of relying on intermediate residuals. Similarly,
an extension of sctransform could perform differential
expression directly on the resulting parameter estimates
instead of the residual values, potentially coupling this
withanempiricalBayesframework[ 12,30].
Finally,whilewefocushereonmodelingtechnicalvari-
ation due to differences in cellular sequencing depth,
we note that our approach can be easily extended to
model alternative “nuisance” parameters, including cell
cycle [31], mitochondrial percentage, or experimental
batch,simplybyaddingadditionalcovariatestothemodel.
Indeed, we observed that a modified GLM including
a batch indicator variable was sufficient to correct for
technical differences arising from two profiled batches
of murine bipolar cells [ 32], though successful applica-
tion requires all cell types to share a similar batch effect
(Additional file 2: Figure S8). In the future, we anticipate
thatsimilareffortscanbeusedtomodeldiversesingle-cell
data types, including single-cell protein [ 33], chromatin
[34],andspatial[ 35]data.
Methods
Regularizednegativebinomialregression
WeexplicitlymodeltheUMIcountsforagivengeneusing
a generalized linear model. Specifically, we use the sum
of all molecules assigned to a cell as a proxy for sequenc-
ing depth and use this cell attribute in a regression model
with negative binomial (NB) error distribution and log
linkfunction.Thus,foragivengene i,wehave
log(E(xi))=β0+β1log10m,
wherexiis the vector of UMI counts assigned to gene i
andmis the vector of molecules assigned to the cells, i.e.,
mj=/summationtext
ixij. The solution to this regression is a set of
parameters: the intercept β0and the slope β1. The dis-
persion parameter θof the underlying NB distribution is
also unknown and needs to be estimated from the data.
Here we use the NB parameterization with mean μand
variancegivenas μ+μ2
θ.
We use a regression model for the UMI counts to
correct for sequencing depth differences between cells
and to standardize the data. However, modeling each
geneseparatelyresultsinoverfitting,particularlyforlow-
abundance genesthat are detected inonly a minor subset
ofcellsandaremodeledwithahighvariance.Weconsider
thisanoverestimationofthetruevariance,asthisisdriven
by cell-type heterogeneity in the sample, and not due
to cell-to-cell variability with respect to the independentvariable, log10m. To avoid this overfitting, we regular-
ize all model parameters, including the NB dispersion
parameter θ,bysharinginformationacrossgenes.
The procedure we developed has three steps. In the
first step, we fit independent regression models per gene.
In the second step, we exploit the relationship of model
parameter values and gene mean to learn global trends in
t h ed a t a .W ec a p t u r et h e s et r e n d su s i n gak e r n e lr e g r e s -
sion estimate (ksmooth function in R). We use a normal
kernelandfirstselectakernelbandwidthusingtheRfunc-
tion bw.SJ. We multiply this by a bandwidth adjustment
factor (BAF, default value of 3, sensitivity analysis shown
inAdditionalfile 2:Fig.S4).Weperformindependentreg-
ularizations for all parameters (Fig. 2). In the third step,
weusetheregularizedregressionparameterstodefinean
affine function that transforms UMI counts into Pearson
residuals:
zij=xij−μij
σij,
μij=exp(β0i+β1ilog10mj),
σij=/radicalBigg
μij+μ2
ij
θi,
wherezijisthePearsonresidualofgene iincellj,xijisthe
observed UMI count of gene iin cellj,μijis the expected
UMIcountofgene iincelljintheregularizedNBregres-
sion model, and σijis the expected standard deviation of
geneiin celljin the regularized NB regression model.
Hereβ0i,β1i,andθiarethe linearmodelparametersafter
regularization. To reduce the impact of extreme outliers,
wecliptheresidualstoamaximumvalueof√
N,whereN
isthetotalnumberofcells.
We highlight that our approach was inspired by meth-
ods developed for differential expression analysis in bulk
RNA-seqdata.Forexample,DESeq[ 23]usesthenegative
binomial distribution for read count data and links vari-
ance and mean by local regression. DESeq2 [ 12] extends
this approach with Empirical Bayes shrinkage for disper-
sionestimation.Additionally,edgeR[ 22]introducedGLM
algorithms and statistical methods for estimating biolog-
ical variation on a genewise basis and separating it from
technicalvariation.
Geometricmeanforgenes
Our regularization approach aims to pool information
across genes with similar average expression. To avoid
the influence of outlier cells and respect the exponential
nature of the count distributions, we consistently use the
geometricmean.Referencestoaverageabundanceorgene
meaninthisworkarebasedonthefollowingdefinitionof
mean:
exp/parenleftbig
amean (log(x+/epsilon1))/parenrightbig
−/epsilon1,