HafemeisterandSatija GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:296 Page13of15
groupstosomeofthegenes.Togetarealisticsetofmodel
parameters, we first chose a group of cells (FCGR3A+,
MS4A7+ Monocytes; 2924 cells) from the main 33k-cell
PBMC dataset to learn a regularized NB model for each
gene (ca. 12k genes). We then randomly chose 5% of the
genes to have a higher mean in A vs B (ratio 10/1) and
another 5% to have a lower mean in A vs B (ratio 1/10).
Specifically,weadjustedthegenemeanbyafactorof√
10
i nA( B )a n d1√
10in B (A) for genes that are high in A (B).
We then adapted the model parameters (intercept, slope,
theta) based on the new gene mean and the regulariza-
tion curve learned from real data. Genes not selected to
bevariablehadidenticalmeanandmodelparametersinA
andB.
We generated count data by first sampling a total cell
UMI count from the input data (2924 Monocytes, see
above). Given the total UMI, we could obtain the NB
mean parameters for each gene per cell group (A and
B), and together with the gene-specific theta generate
UMIcounts.Thisprocedurewasrepeated5ktimes,each
time generating a cell for groups A and B. The combined
count matrix of 10k cells was then used as input to our
normalizationmethod.
Finally, we repeated the above procedure 13 times and
summarized the results in Additional file 2:F i g u r eS 6 ,
specifically looking at the Jensen-Shannon divergence of
t h eg e n e r a t i n gm o d e l sa n dt h ev a r i a n c eo ft h eP e a r s o n
residuals.
Variancecontributionanalysis
To evaluate whether gene variance is dependent on
sequencing depth, we determined the contribution of
differentcellgroupstotheoverallvarianceofoursixpre-
viously determined gene sets. For this, we placed all cells
into five equal-sized groups based on total UMI counts
(group 1 has the greatest depth, group 5 the lowest). We
center each gene and square the values to obtain the
squareddeviationfromthemean.Thevariancecontribu-
tion of a cell group is then the sum of the values in those
cellsdividedbythesumacrossallcells.
DensitymapsforPearsonresiduals
To illustrate different models (regularized NB, Poisson,
non-regularized NB) for four example genes, we show
Pearsonresidualson256 ×256gridsinformofheatmaps.
X-andY-axisrangeswerechosentorepresentthecentral
98% of cells and central 99.8% of UMI counts. Heatmap
colors show the magnitude (absolute value) of Pearson
residuals,clippedtoamaximumvalueof4.
Dimensionalityreduction
For both log-normalized data and Pearson residuals,
we performed dimensionality reduction as follows. We
centeredandscaledall16Kgenes,clippedallvaluestotheinterval [ −10, 10] and performed a truncated principal
components analysis as provided by the irlba R package.
Inbothcases,wekeptthefirst25PCsbasedoneigenvalue
drop-off. For 2D visualization, the PC embeddings were
passedintoUMAP[ 36,37]withdefaultparameters.
Differentialexpressiontesting
Differential expression testing was done using indepen-
dentttests per gene for all genes detected in at least 5
cells in at least one of the two groups being compared. P
values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the
BenjaminiandHochbergmethod(FDR).Inputtothetest
waseitherlog-normalized(log (10,000UMI gene/UMIcell+
1)) expression or Pearson residuals after regularized
NB regression. A random background distribution of
mean differences was generated by randomly choosing
1000 genes and permuting the group labels. Significance
thresholds for the difference of means were derived from
thebackgrounddistributionbytakingthe0.5thand99.5th
percentile.Finally,wecalledgenesdifferentiallyexpressed
if the FDR was below 0.01 and the difference of means
exceededthethresholdforsignificance.
Modelextensions—additionalnuisanceparameters
Fortheresultsshowninthismanuscript,wehaveusedthe
log-transformed total number of UMI assigned to each
cell as the dependent variable to model gene-level UMI
counts. However, other variables may also be suitable as
long as they capture the sampling depth associated with
eachcell.
Additionally, the model can be flexibly extended
to include additional covariates representing nuisance
sources of variation, including cell-cycle state, mitochon-
drial percentage, or experimental batch. In these cases
(unlike with sequencing depth), no regularization can be
performed for parameters involving these variables, as
genes with similar abundances cannot be assumed to (for
example) be expressed in a similar pattern across the cell
cycle. In these cases, we first learn regularized models
using only the sequencing depth covariate, as described
above. We next perform a second round of NB regres-
sion, including both the depth covariate and additional
nuisance parameters as model predictors. In this round,
the depth-dependent parameters are fixed to their previ-
ously regularized values, while the additional parameters
areunconstrainedandfitduringtheregression.ThePear-
sonresidualsofthissecondroundofregressionrepresent
normalizeddata.
As a proof-of-concept, we illustrate a potential model
extension by including a batch indicator variable when
analyzing a dataset of 26,439 murine bipolar cells
produced by two experimental batches [ 32], consid-
ering all bipolar cells and Müller glia. After running
sctransform , either with the inclusion or exclusion of