HafemeisterandSatija GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:296 Page2of15
Forexample,geneswithhighvarianceafter
normalizationshouldbedifferentiallyexpressed
acrosscelltypes,whilehousekeepinggenesshould
exhibitlowvariance.Additionally,thevarianceofa
geneshouldbesimilarwhenconsideringeither
deeplysequencedcells,orshallowlysequencedcells.
Given its importance, there have been a large num-
berofdiversemethodsproposedforthenormalizationof
scRNA-seqdata[ 6–11].Ingeneral,thesefallintotwodis-
tinctsetsofapproaches.Thefirstsetaimstoidentify“size
factors”forindividualcells,asiscommonlyperformedfor
bulk RNA-seq [ 12]. For example, BASiCS [ 7] infers cell-
specific normalizing constants using spike-ins, in order
to distinguish technical noise from biological cell-to-cell
variability. Scran [ 8] pools cells with similar library sizes
and uses the summed expression values to estimate pool-
based size factors, which are resolved to cell-based size
factors. By performing a uniform scaling per cell, these
methodsassumethattheunderlyingRNAcontentiscon-
stant for all cells in the dataset and that a single scaling
factorcanbeappliedforallgenes.
Alternative normalization approaches model molecule
counts using probabilistic approaches. For example, ini-
tialstrategiesfocusedonread-level(insteadofUMI-level)
data and modeled the measurement of each cell as a
mixture of two components: a negative binomial (NB)
“signal” component and a Poisson “dropout” component
[13]. For newer measurements based on UMI, model-
ing strategies have focused primarily on the use of the
NB distribution [ 14], potentially including an additional
parameter to model zero-inflation (ZINB). For example,
ZINB-WaVE[ 9]m od e l sc o u n t sa sZI N Bi nas pec i a lv a r i -
ant of factor analysis. scVI and DCA also use the ZINB
noisemodel[ 10,15],eitherfornormalizationanddimen-
sionality reduction in Bayesian hierarchical models or for
a denoising autoencoder. These pioneering approaches
extendbeyondpre-processingandnormalization,butrely
ontheaccurateestimationofper-geneerrormodels.
In this manuscript, we present a novel statistical
approach for the modeling, normalization, and vari-
ance stabilization of UMI count data for scRNA-seq.
We first show that different groups of genes cannot be
normalized by the same constant factor, representing an
intrinsic challenge for scaling-factor-based normalization
schemes, regardless of how the factors themselves are
calculated.Weinsteadproposetoconstructageneralized
linear model (GLM) for each gene with UMI counts as
the response and sequencing depth as the explanatory
variable. We explore potential error models for the GLM
and find that the use of unconstrained NB or ZINB
models leads to overfitting of scRNA-seq data and a
significant dampening of biological variance. To address
this, we find that by pooling information across geneswith similar abundances, we can regularize parameter
estimates and obtain reproducible error models. The
residuals of our “regularized negative binomial regres-
sion” represent effectively normalized data values that
are no longer influenced by technical characteristics,
but preserve heterogeneity driven by distinct biological
states. Lastly, we demonstrate that these normalized
values enable downstream analyses, such as dimension-
ality reduction and differential expression testing, where
the results are not confounded by cellular sequencing
depth. Our procedure is broadly applicable for any UMI-
based scRNA-seq dataset and is freely available to users
through the open-source R package sctransform
(github.com/ChristophH/sctransform ), with a direct
interfacetooursingle-celltoolkit Seurat.
Results
Asinglescalingfactordoesnoteffectivelynormalizeboth
lowlyandhighlyexpressedgenes
Sequencing depth variation across single cells represents
a substantial technical confounder in the analysis and
interpretation of scRNA-seq data. To explore the extent
of this effect and possible solutions, we examined five
UMI datasets from diverse tissues, generated with both
plate- and droplet-based protocols. We show results on
all datasets in Additional file 1,b u tf o c u sh e r eo na
dataset of 33,148 human peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) freely available from 10x Genomics. This
dataset is characteristic of current scRNA-seq experi-
ments;weobservedamediantotalcountof1891UMI/cell
and observed 16,809 genes that were detected in at least
5c e l l s( F i g. 1a, b). As expected, we observed a strong lin-
ear relationship between unnormalized expression (gene
UMI count) and cellular sequencing depth. We observed
nearly identical trends (and regression slopes) for genes
across a wide range of abundance levels, after grouping
genesintosixequal-widthbinsbasedontheirmeanabun-
dance(Fig. 1c),demonstratingthatcountsfrombothlow-
andhigh-abundancegenesareconfoundedbysequencing
depthandrequirenormalization.
We next tested how the standard normalization
approach in popular scRNA-seq packages such as
Seurat [16–18] and SCANPY [ 19]c o m p e n s a t e sf o rt h i s
effect. In this two-step process (referred to as “log-
normalization” for brevity), UMI counts are first scaled
by the total sequencing depth (“size factors”) followed by
pseudocountadditionandlog-transformation.Whilethis
approach mitigated the relationship between sequenc-
ing depth and gene expression, we found that genes
with different overall abundances exhibited distinct pat-
terns after log-normalization, and only low/medium-
abundancegenesinthebottomthreetierswereeffectively
normalized (Fig. 1d). In principle, this confounding rela-
tionship could be driven by the presence of multiple cell