HafemeisterandSatija GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:296 Page5of15
a GLM to randomized subsets of cells and assessed the
variance of parameter estimates. We found that param-
eter estimates were not reproducible across bootstraps
(Fig.2), particularly for genes with low to moderate
expression levels, and observed highly concordant results
when estimating uncertainty using the GLM fisher infor-
mation matrix as an alternative to bootstrapping (see the
“Methods” section and Additional file 2:F i g u r eS 2 ) .W e
repeated the same analysis on the “Chromium control
dataset,” where the data from each droplet represents a
technical replicate of a bulk RNA sample. There is no
biological variation in this sample, but parameters from
negative binomial regression still exhibited substantial
variation across genes, particularly for lowly abundant
genes (Additional file 2: Figure S3). Taken together, these
results demonstrate that the gene-specific differences we
observedwereexaggeratedduetooverfitting.
Ourobservationthatsingle-cellcountdatacanbeover-
fitbyastandard(two-parameter)NBdistributiondemon-
stratesthatadditionalconstraintsmaybeneededtoobtain
robust parameter estimates. We therefore considered the
possibility of constraining the model parameters through
regularization, by combining information across similar
genes to increase robustness and reduce sampling varia-
tion.Thisapproachiscommonlyappliedinlearningerror
models for bulk RNA-seq in the context of differential
expression analysis [ 22–25], but to our knowledge has no
t been previously applied in this context for single-cell nor-
malization. We note that in contrast to our approach, the
use of a zero-inflated negative binomial model requires
anadditional(third)parameter,exacerbatingthepotential
for overfitting. We therefore suggest caution and careful
consideration when applying unconstrained NB or ZINB
modelstoscRNA-seqUMIcountdata.
To address this challenge, we applied kernel regres-
sion(“Methods”section)tomodeltheglobaldependence
between each parameter value and average gene expres-
sion. The smoothed line (pink line in Fig. 2)r e p r e s e n t s
a regularized parameter estimate that can be applied to
constrain NB error models. We repeated the bootstrap
procedure and found that in contrast to independent
gene-level estimates, regularized parameters were con-
sistent across repeated subsamples of the data (Fig. 2b),
suggesting that we are robustly learning the global trends
thatrelateintercept,slope,anddispersiontoaveragegene
expression.
Our regularization procedure requires the selection
of a kernel bandwidth, which controls the degree of
smoothing. We used a data-based bandwidth selection
method [ 26] scaled by a user-defined bandwidth adjust-
ment factor. In Additional file 2: Figure S4, we show
that our method returns robust results when varying
this parameter within a reasonable range that extends
over an order of magnitude, but that extreme valuesresult in over/under-smoothing which will have adverse
affects.
Applyingregularizednegativebinomialregressionfor
single-cellnormalization
Our observations above suggest a statistically motivated,
robust,andefficientprocesstonormalizesingle-celldata.
First, we utilize generalized linear models to fit model
parameters for each gene in the transcriptome (or a rep-
resentativesubset;Additionalfile 2:FigureS7;“Methods”
section) using sequencing depth as a covariate. Second,
we apply kernel regression to the resulting parameter
estimates in order to learn regularized parameters that
depend on a gene’s average expression and are robust to
samplingnoise.Finally,weperformasecondroundofNB
regression,constrainingtheparametersofthemodeltobe
those learned in the previous step (since the parameters
are fixed, this step reduces to a simple affine transforma-
tion; “Methods” section). We treat the residuals from this
model as normalized expression levels. Positive residuals
f o rag i v e ng e n ei nag i v e nc e l li n d i c a t et h a tw eo b s e r v e d
moreUMIsthanexpectedgiventhegene’saverageexpres-
sion in the population and cellular sequencing depth,
while negative residuals indicate the converse. We uti-
lize the Pearson residuals (response residuals divided by
the expected standard deviation), effectively representing
a variance-stabilizing transformation (VST), where both
lowly and highly expressed genes are transformed onto a
commonscale.
Thisworkflowalsohasattractivepropertiesforprocess-
ingsingle-cellUMIdata,including:
1 Wedonotassumeafixed“size,”orexpectedtotal
molecularcount,foranycell.
2 Ourregularizationprocedureexplicitlylearnsand
accountsforthewell-establishedrelationship[ 27]
betweenagene’smeanabundanceandvariancein
single-celldata
3 OurVSTisdatadrivenanddoesnotinvolve
heuristicsteps,suchasalog-transformation,
pseudocountaddition,or z-scoring.
4 Asdemonstratedbelow,Pearsonresidualsare
independentofsequencingdepthandcanbeusedfor
variablegeneselection,dimensionalreduction,
clustering,visualization,anddifferentialexpression.
Pearsonresidualseffectivelynormalizetechnical
differences,whileretainingbiologicalvariation
To evaluate our regularized NB regression model, we
explored the relationship between the Pearson resid-
uals and cellular sequencing depth. Encouragingly, we
observedminimalcorrelation(Fig. 3a,c),forgenesacross
the full range of expression levels. In addition, gene vari-
ance was strikingly consistent across cells with different