HafemeisterandSatija GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:296 Page12of15
withxbeingthevectorofUMIcountsofthegene,amean
being the arithmetic mean, and /epsilon1being a small fixed
value to avoid log (0). After trying several values for /epsilon1
in the range 0.0001 to 1, and not observing significant
differencesinourresults,weset /epsilon1=1.
Speedconsiderations
sctransform has been optimized to run efficiently
on large scRNA-seq datasets on standard computa-
tional infrastructure. For example, processing of a 3000
cell dataset takes 30 s on a standard laptop (the
33,148 cell dataset utilized in this manuscript takes
6min).
The most time-consuming step of our procedure is the
initial GLM-fitting, prior to regularization. Here, we fit
Klinear regression models with NB error models, where
Kis the total number of genes in the dataset. However,
since the results of the first step are only used to learn
regularized parameter estimates (i.e., the overall relation-
shipofmodelparametervaluesandgenemean),wetested
thepossibilityofperformingthissteponarandomsubset
of genes in lieu of the full transcriptome. When select-
ing a subset of genes to speed up the first step, we do not
selectgenesatrandom,i.e.,withauniformsamplingprob-
ability, as that would not evenly cover the range of gene
means. Instead, we set the probability of selecting a gene
ito 1/d(log10¯xi),w h e r edis the density estimate of all
log10-transformed gene means and ¯xiis the mean of UMI
countsofgene i.
For different numbers of genes (ranging from 4000 to
50), we drew 13 random samples to be used in the ini-
tial step of parameter estimation. We then proceeded
to generate regularized models (for all genes based on
parameterslearnedfromagenesubset)andcomparedthe
results to the case where all genes were used in the ini-
tialestimationstepaswell.Weemployedafewmetricsto
compare the partial analysis to the full analysis: the cor-
relation of gene-residuals, the ranking of genes based on
residual variation (most highly variable genes), and the
CV of sum of squared residuals across random samples
(model stability). For all metrics, we observed that using
asfewas200genesintheinitialestimationcloselyrecapit-
ulated the full results, while using 2000 genes gave rise to
virtually identical estimates (Additional file 2:F i g u r eS 7 ) .
We therefore use 2000 genes in the initial GLM-fitting
step.
Additionally,weexploredthreemethodstoestimatethe
model parameters in the initial step. We list them here in
increasingorderofcomputationalcomplexity.
1 AssumeaPoissonerrordistributiontoestimate β
coefficients.Then,giventheestimatedmeanvector,
estimatetheNB θparameterusingmaximum
likelihood.2 Sameasabove,followedbyare-estimationof β
coefficientsusingaNBerrormodelwiththe
previouslyestimated θ.
3 FitaNBGLMestimatingboththe βandθ
coefficientsusinganalternatingiterationprocess.
While the estimated model parameters can vary slightly
between these methods, the resulting Pearson residuals
are extremely similar. For example, when applying the
three procedures to the 10x PBMC dataset, all pairwise
gene correlations between the three methods are greater
than 0.99, though the alternating iteration process is
fourfold more computationally demanding. We therefore
proceededwiththefirstmethod.
Modelparameterstability
To assess model parameter stability, we bootstrapped the
parameter estimation and sampled from all cells with
replacement 13 times. For a given gene and parameter
combination, we derived an uncertainty score as follows.
We used the standard deviation of parameter estimates
across 13 bootstraps divided by the standard deviation of
the bootstrap-mean value across all genes. Values greater
orequaltooneindicatehighuncertainty,whilevaluesless
orequalto0.01indicatelowuncertainty.
As an alternative to bootstrapping, we also examined
the 95% confidence intervals (CI) of the parameter esti-
mates. The standard errors (SE) of the parameter esti-
mates (based on the Fisher information matrix obtained
during the estimation procedure) are taken from the out-
put of the R function glm (intercept and slope) and
theta.ml( θ).CIarethencalculatedastheestimatedvalues
±1.96×SE.
Trendsinthedatabeforeandafternormalization
We grouped genes into six bins based on log10-
transformed mean UMI count, using bins of equal width.
T os h o wt h eo v e r a l lt r e n d si nt h ed a t a ,f o re v e r yg e n e ,
we fit the expression (UMI counts, scaled log-normalized
expression, scaled Pearson residuals) as a function of
log10-transformed mean UMI count using kernel regres-
sion (ksmooth function) with normal kernel and large
bandwidth (20 times the size suggested by R function
bw.SJ). For visualization, we only used the central 90% of
cells based on total UMI. For every gene group, we show
the expression range after smoothing from first to third
quartileat200equidistantcellUMIvalues.
Simulationstudytoassesssensitivityofvariablegene
detection
Toevaluatethesensitivityofourmethodtodetectvariable
genes, we used simulated data. The goal of our simula-
t i o nw a st og e n e r a t et w op o p u l a t i o n so fc e l l s( Aa n dB ,
5kcellseach),whileintroducingexpressionshiftsbetween