HafemeisterandSatija GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:296 Page10of15
PBMCdata)andrandomlydividedthemintotwogroups.
In one of the groups (50% of the cells), we randomly sub-
sampled UMIs so that each cell expressed only 50% of its
total UMI counts. Therefore, the two groups of mono-
cytes are biologically equivalent and differ only in their
technical sequencing depth, and we should ideally detect
nodifferentiallyexpressedgenesbetweenthem.However,
when performing DE on log-normalized data ( ttest with
significance thresholds determined by random sampling,
see the “Methods” section), we detected more than 2000
DEgenes(FDRthreshold0.01),duetoglobalshiftsarising
fromimpropernormalization(Fig. 6c,d).Whenperform-
ing DE on Pearson residuals, we identified only 11 genes.
While these 11 represent false positives, they are each
highly expressed genes for which it is difficult to obtain a
goodfitduringtheregularizationprocessastherearefew
geneswithsimilarmeanvalues(Fig. 3atopleft).
We also tested a second scenario where true DE genes
could be masked by sequencing depth differences. We
compared two distinct populations, CD14+ and CD16+
monocytes (5551 and 1475 cells), before and after ran-
domly downsampling the CD16+ group to 20% sequenc-
ing depth. We would expect the set of DE genes to be
nearly identical in the two analyses, though we expect
a decrease in sensitivity after downsampling. However,
when using log-normalized data, we observed dramatic
changes in the set of DE genes—with some CD14+-
enriched markers even incorrectly appearing as CD16+-
enrichedmarkersafter downsampling.Whenperforming
DE on Pearson residuals, the results of the two analy-
seswerehighlyconcordant,albeitwithreducedstatistical
power after downsampling (Fig. 6e). Therefore, Pearson
residuals resulting from regularized NB regression effec-
tivelymitigatedepth-dependentdifferencesindimension-
ality reduction and differential expression, which are key
downstreamstepsinsingle-cellanalyticalworkflows.
Discussion
Here, we present a statistical approach for the normaliza-
tionandvariancestabilizationofsingle-cellUMIdatasets.
Incontrasttocommonlyappliednormalizationstrategies,
our workflow omits the use of linear size/scaling factors
andfocusesinsteadontheconstructionofaGLMrelating
cellular sequencing depth to gene molecule counts. We
calculate the Pearson residuals of this model, represent-
ing a variance-stabilization transformation that removes
theinherentdependencebetweenagene’saverageexpres-
sion and cell-to-cell variation. In this manuscript, we
demonstratethatournormalizationprocedureeffectively
removes the influence of technical variation, without
dampeningbiologicalheterogeneity.
When exploring error models for the GLM, our
analyses revealed that an unconstrained negative bino-
mial model tends to overfit single-cell RNA-seq data,particularly for genes with low/medium abundance. We
demonstrate that a regularization step, a commmon step
in bulk RNA-seq analysis [ 22,28] where parameter esti-
mates are pooled across genes with similar mean abun-
dance, can effectively overcome this challenge and yield
reproducible models. Importantly, statistical and deep-
learning methods designed for single-cell RNA-seq data
often utilize a negative binomial (or zero-inflated nega-
tive binomial) error model [ 10,15]. Our results suggest
that these and future methods could benefit by substitut-
ing a regularized model and that including an additional
parameter for zero-inflation could exacerbate the risk of
overfitting. More generally, our work indicates that a reg-
ularized negative binomial is an appropriate distribution
to model UMI count data from a “homogeneous” cell
population.
To facilitate users applying these methods to
their own datasets, our approach is freely avail-
able as an open-source R package sctransform
(github.com/ChristophH/sctransform ),withanaccompa-
nyinginterfacetooursingle-cellRtoolkitSeurat[ 16–18].
In a single command, and without any requirement to
set user-defined parameters, sctransform performs
normalization, variance stabilization, and feature selec-
tion based on a UMI-based gene expression matrix. We
demonstrate the ease-of-use for sctransform in a
short vignette analyzing a 2700 PBMC dataset produced
by 10x Genomics in Additional file 3. In this example,
sctransform reveals significant additional biological
substructure in NK, T, B, and monocyte populations that
cannot be observed in the standard Seurat workflow,
whichisbasedonlog-normalization(Additionalfile 3).
As our workflow leverages all genes (or a random sub-
set) for the initial regularization, we make an implicit
assumption that the majority of genes in the dataset do
not exhibit significant biological variation. This is anal-
ogous to similar assumptions made for bulk RNA-seq
normalization and DE (i.e., that the majority of genes are
notdifferentiallyexpressedacrossconditions)[ 28].While
this assumption may be overly simplistic when perform-
ing scRNA-seq on a highly heterogeneous sample, we
did not observe adverse affects when applying our model
to human PBMC data, or any of the other datasets we
examined. In principle, an extension of sctransform that
includedaninitialpre-clusteringstep(asproposedin[ 8])
could alleviate this concern, as the biological heterogene-
itywouldbesignificantlyreducedineachgroup.
Our work makes extensive use of Pearson residuals,
the output of our regularized NB regression procedure.
These can be utilized as input for standard downstream
methods, i.e., Wilcoxon rank test for differential expres-
sion, or PCA for dimensional reduction. An alternative
approach, however, would modify the underlying meth-
ods themselves to assume a statistical error model that