Graph Transformer Networks
Seongjun Yun, Minbyul Jeong, Raehyun Kim, Jaewoo Kang, Hyunwoo J. Kim
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Korea University
{ysj5419, minbyuljeong, raehyun, kangj, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr
Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely used in representation learning on
graphs and achieved state-of-the-art performance in tasks such as node classiﬁcation
and link prediction. However, most existing GNNs are designed to learn node
representations on the ﬁxed andhomogeneous graphs. The limitations especially
become problematic when learning representations on a misspeciﬁed graph or
aheterogeneous graph that consists of various types of nodes and edges. In
this paper, we propose Graph Transformer Networks (GTNs) that are capable of
generating new graph structures, which involve identifying useful connections
between unconnected nodes on the original graph, while learning effective node
representation on the new graphs in an end-to-end fashion. Graph Transformer layer,
a core layer of GTNs, learns a soft selection of edge types and composite relations
for generating useful multi-hop connections so-called meta-paths . Our experiments
show that GTNs learn new graph structures, based on data and tasks without
domain knowledge, and yield powerful node representation via convolution on the
new graphs. Without domain-speciﬁc graph preprocessing, GTNs achieved the
best performance in all three benchmark node classiﬁcation tasks against the state-
of-the-art methods that require pre-deﬁned meta-paths from domain knowledge.
1 Introduction
In recent years, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely adopted in various tasks over
graphs, such as graph classiﬁcation [ 11,21,40], link prediction [ 18,30,42] and node classiﬁcation
[3,14,33]. The representation learnt by GNNs has been proven to be effective in achieving state-of-
the-art performance in a variety of graph datasets such as social networks [ 7,14,35], citation networks
[19,33], functional structure of brains [ 20], recommender systems [ 1,27,39]. The underlying graph
structure is utilized by GNNs to operate convolution directly on graphs by passing node features
[12,14] to neighbors, or perform convolution in the spectral domain using the Fourier basis of a
given graph, i.e., eigenfunctions of the Laplacian operator [9, 15, 19].
However, one limitation of most GNNs is that they assume the graph structure to operate GNNs on is
ﬁxed andhomogeneous . Since the graph convolutions discussed above are determined by the ﬁxed
graph structure, a noisy graph with missing/spurious connections results in ineffective convolution
with wrong neighbors on the graph. In addition, in some applications, constructing a graph to operate
GNNs is not trivial. For example, a citation network has multiple types of nodes (e.g., authors,
papers, conferences) and edges deﬁned by their relations (e.g., author-paper, paper-conference),
and it is called a heterogeneous graph. A naïve approach is to ignore the node/edge types and
treat them as in a homogeneous graph (a standard graph with one type of nodes and edges). This,
apparently, is suboptimal since models cannot exploit the type information. A more recent remedy is
to manually design meta-paths, which are paths connected with heterogeneous edges, and transform
corresponding author
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.