a heterogeneous graph into a homogeneous graph deﬁned by the meta-paths. Then conventional
GNNs can operate on the transformed homogeneous graphs [ 37,43]. This is a two-stage approach
and requires hand-crafted meta-paths for each problem. The accuracy of downstream analysis can be
signiﬁcantly affected by the choice of these meta-paths.
Here, we develop Graph Transformer Network (GTN) that learns to transform a heterogeneous input
graph into useful meta-path graphs for each task and learn node representation on the graphs in an
end-to-end fashion. GTNs can be viewed as a graph analogue of Spatial Transformer Networks [ 16]
which explicitly learn spatial transformations of input images or features. The main challenge to
transform a heterogeneous graph into new graph structure deﬁned by meta-paths is that meta-paths
may have an arbitrary length and edge types. For example, author classiﬁcation in citation networks
may beneﬁt from meta-paths which are Author-Paper-Author (APA) or Author-Paper-Conference-
Paper-Author (APCPA). Also, the citation networks are directed graphs where relatively less graph
neural networks can operate on. In order to address the challenges, we require a model that generates
new graph structures based on composite relations connected with softly chosen edge types in a
heterogeneous graph and learns node representations via convolution on the learnt graph structures
for a given problem.
Ourcontributions are as follows: (i) We propose a novel framework Graph Transformer Networks, to
learn a new graph structure which involves identifying useful meta-paths and multi-hop connections
for learning effective node representation on graphs. (ii) The graph generation is interpretable and the
model is able to provide insight on effective meta-paths for prediction. (iii) We prove the effectiveness
of node representation learnt by Graph Transformer Networks resulting in the best performance
against state-of-the-art methods that additionally use domain knowledge in all three benchmark node
classiﬁcation on heterogeneous graphs.
2 Related Works
Graph Neural Networks. In recent years, many classes of GNNs have been developed for a wide
range of tasks. They are categorized into two approaches: spectral [ 5,9,15,19,22,38] and non-
spectral methods [ 7,12,14,26,29,33]. Based on spectral graph theory, Bruna et al. [5] proposed a
way to perform convolution in the spectral domain using the Fourier basis of a given graph. Kipf et al.
[19] simpliﬁed GNNs using the ﬁrst-order approximation of the spectral graph convolution. On the
other hand, non-spectral approaches deﬁne convolution operations directly on the graph, utilizing
spatially close neighbors. For instance, Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al. [33] applies different weight matrices for
nodes with different degrees and Hamilton et al. [14] has proposed learnable aggregator functions
which summarize neighbors’ information for graph representation learning.
Node classiﬁcation with GNNs. Node classiﬁcation has been studied for decades. Conventionally,
hand-crafted features have been used such as simple graph statistics [ 2], graph kernel [ 34], and
engineered features from a local neighbor structure [ 23]. These features are not ﬂexible and suffer
from poor performance. To overcome the drawback, recently node representation learning methods
via random walks on graphs have been proposed in DeepWalk [ 28], LINE [ 32], and node2vec [ 13]
with tricks from deep learning models (e.g., skip-gram) and have gained some improvement in
performance. However, all of these methods learn node representation solely based on the graph
structure. The representations are not optimized for a speciﬁc task. As CNNs have achieved
remarkable success in representation learning, GNNs learn a powerful representation for given
tasks and data. To improve performance or scalability, generalized convolution based on spectral
convolution [ 4,26], attention mechanism on neighbors [ 25,33], subsampling [ 6,7] and inductive
representation for a large graph [ 14] have been studied. Although these methods show outstanding
results, all these methods have a common limitation which only deals with a homogeneous graph.
However, many real-world problems often cannot be represented by a single homogeneous graph.
The graphs come as a heterogeneous graph with various types of nodes and edges. Since most GNNs
are designed for a single homogeneous graph, one simple solution is a two-stage approach. Using
meta-paths that are the composite relations of multiple edge types, as a preprocessing, it converts the
heterogeneous graph into a homogeneous graph and then learns representation. The metapath2vec
[10] learns graph representations by using meta-path based random walk and HAN [ 37] learns graph
representation learning by transforming a heterogeneous graph into a homogeneous graph constructed
by meta-paths. However, these approaches manually select meta-paths by domain experts and thus
might not be able to capture all meaningful relations for each problem. Also, performance can be
2