Table 3: Comparison with predeﬁned meta-paths and top-ranked meta-paths by GTNs. Our model
found important meta-paths that are consistent with pre-deﬁned meta-paths between target nodes (a
type of nodes with labels for node classiﬁcations). Also, new relevant meta-paths between all types
of nodes are discovered by GTNs.
DatasetPredeﬁned Meta-path learnt by GTNs
Meta-path Top 3 (between target nodes) Top 3 (all)
DBLP APCPA, APA APCPA, APAPA, APA CPCPA, APCPA, CP
ACM PAP, PSP PAP, PSP APAP, APA, SPAP
IMDB MAM, MDM MDM, MAM, MDMDM DM, AM, MDM
(a)
 (b)
Figure 3: After applying softmax function on 1x1 conv ﬁlter Wi
(i: index of layer) in Figure 1,
we visualized this attention score of adjacency matrix (edge type) in DBLP (left) and IMDB (right)
datasets. (a) Respectively, each edge indicates (Paper-Author), (Author-Paper), (Paper-Conference),
(Conference-Paper), and identity matrix. (b) Edges in IMDB dataset indicates (Movie-Director),
(Director-Movie), (Movie-Actor), (Actor-Movie), and identity matrix.
Now we can interpret new graph structures learnt by GTNs. The weightQl
i=0(i)
tifor a meta-path
(t0;t1;:::tl) is an attention score and it provides the importance of the meta-path in the prediction
task. In Table 3 we summarized predeﬁned meta-paths, that are widely used in literature, and the
meta-paths with high attention scores learnt by GTNs.
As shown in Table 3, between target nodes, that have class labels to predict, the predeﬁned meta-paths
by domain knowledge are consistently top-ranked by GTNs as well. This shows that GTNs are
capable of learning the importance of meta-paths for tasks. More interestingly, GTNs discovered
important meta-paths that are not in the predeﬁned meta-path set. For example, in the DBLP dataset
GTN ranks CPCPA as most importance meta-paths, which is not included in the predeﬁned meta-path
set. It makes sense that author’s research area (label to predict) is relevant to the venues where
the author publishes. We believe that the interpretability of GTNs provides useful insight in node
classiﬁcation by the attention scores on meta-paths.
Fig.3 shows the attention scores of adjacency matrices (edge type) from each Graph Transformer
Layer. Compared to the result of DBLP, identity matrices have higher attention scores in IMDB.
As discussed in Section 3.3, a GTN is capable of learning shorter meta-paths than the number of
GT layers, which they are more effective as in IMDB. By assigning higher attention scores to the
identity matrix, the GTN tries to stick to the shorter meta-paths even in the deeper layer. This result
demonstrates that the GTN has ability to adaptively learns most effective meta-path length depending
on the dataset.
8