Yu-Feng LI et al. Safe semi-supervised learning: a brief introduction 3
dataset, GSSL will make a poor performance. In order to im-
prove safeness, an important problem is the way to identifythe quality of the graph before we get the ultimate perfor-mance.
Li et al. [22] ﬁrstly study the quality of the graph. They
propose a large margin based method for graph-judging. Thebasic idea is that given a set of candidate graphs, when onegraph has a high quality, its predictive results may have a
large margin separation as shown in Fig. 2. Therefore, given
multiple graphs with unknown quality, one should encourageto use the graphs with a large margin, rather than the graphswith a small margin, and reduce the chances of performance
degradation consequently. They propose a stacking method,
which ﬁrst regenerates a new SSL data set with the predic-
tive results of GSSL on candidate graphs, and then formu-lates safe GSSL as the classical Semi-Supervised SVM opti-mization on the regenerated dataset. The experimental results
demonstrate that a large margin principle is helpful in judging
the graph quality and improving the safeness of GSSL.
Later, Liang and Li [33] formulate the safe graph construc-
tion as a minimax optimization problem. They optimize the
worst-case nearest-neighbor error on candidate graphs, and
the optimal solution can be re garded as conventional GSSL
methods on a “safe” graph. Guo et al. [34] propose a graphconstruction method based on the large margin principle.
They optimize a margin-type loss to learn a graph that has
a large margin on its prediction.
Apart from the large margin principle in graph quality
judgment, there are some e ﬀorts focusing on data selection.
Wang et al. [23] proposed a safe GSSL method named GsslIs
concentrating on sample sel ection. The basic idea is that
given a set of unlabeled instances, it is not the best to exploitall the unlabeled instances; Ins tead, the unlabeled instances
which are highly possible to help improve the performance,while do not take the ones with high risk into account. GsslIs
constructed multiple GSSL classi ﬁers to identify the risky un-
labeled samples and tried to reduce the degeneration proba-bility. Li and Zhou [24] propose S3VM with unlabeled data
selection. It uses hierarchical clustering to estimate the relia-
bility of unlabeled instances and then removes the ones withthe lowest reliability. Only the unlabeled instances with highconﬁdence by hierarchical clustering are predicted by TSVM,
and the rest are predicted by SVM.
3 Model uncertainty
From the model view, the uncertainty of the SSL model
makes it unstable in di ﬀerent trials and incorrect selection
under uncertainty degenerate the performance of SSL. Forexample, for generative methods, Cozman et al. [21] conjec-
tured that the performance degradation is caused by the use of
incorrect model assumption in the generative methods; how-ever, it is almost impossible to ﬁnd the correct model assump-
tion without adequate domain knowledge. For disagreement-
based methods [35], such as co-training [12], Zhou and Li
[13] realized that incorrect pseudo-labels used in the SSLprocess are the root of performance degradation. For semi-supervised SVMs (S3VMs), Li and Zhou [36] showed thatthe existence of multiple low-density separators and the in-
correct selection will lead to pe rformance degradation. Fig-
ure 3 visualizes the uncertainty of S3VM: there is more thanone large margin separator, and these separators are usuallydiverse. Conventional S3VMs select one of them as the out-
put, while incorrect selection d egenerates the performance.
The uncertainty of separator results in unsafeness.
Li et al. [25, 36] ﬁrstly develop the safe S3VM (S4VM)
method. S4VMs ﬁrst generate a pool of diverse large mar-
gin low-density separators, and then optimizes the label
Fig. 2 Large margin principle for graph quality judgement