6 Front. Comput. Sci.
Weakly supervised learning is closely related to semi-
supervised learning. Semi-supervised learning can be in-cluded in weakly supervised learning as a type of machinelearning under incomplete supervision [43], i.e., only a sub-
set of training data is given with labels. Other types of weak
supervision include inexact supervision, i.e., only coarse-grained labels are given, and inaccurate supervision, i.e., thegiven labels are not always ground-truth. Weakly supervised
learning covers a variety of studies which attempt to build
predictive models under weak supervision. Weakly super-vised data are widespread in r eal-world applications apart
from semi-supervised learning, such as label noise learning[44], domain adaptation [45] and so on. Similarly, learning
with the help of weakly supervised data may also cause per-
formance degradation. For example, label noise learning maybe worse than learning from only a small number of noise-free data [44]; domain adaptation methods may have the phe-
nomenon of negative transfer [45]. The way to safely exploit-
ing weakly supervised data thus is an important problem.
There are some studies on safe weakly supervised learn-
ing in recent years. Existing wor k focuses on integrating
base learners to improve safeness. Guo and Li [46] present
a general scheme that builds the ﬁnal prediction results by
integrating several weakly supervised learners. The proposedformulation provides safeness guarantees for commonly usedloss functions (i.e., square loss, hinge loss) supposing that theground-truth can be constructed by the base learners. Wei et
al. [47] study safe multi-label learning of weakly labeled
data. They optimize multi-label evaluation metrics ( F1s c o r e
and Top- kprecision) given that the ground-truth label assign-
ment is realized by a convex combination of base multi-label
learners. In the scenarios of large-scale multi-label learning,
labels have diﬀerent impacts on the commonly used perfor-
mance metric, and there are a few studies utilizing this featureto reduce the model size [48,49]. However, the impact of dis-
tinct labels on safeness when exploiting weakly supervised
information remains uncertain.
Clustering analysis plays an important role in unsupervised
learning and aims to discover a group structure of the dataset,which can be helpful when learning with few labels. Simi-
larly, without prior-knowledge about a dataset, it is hard to
judge the quality of results generated by di ﬀerent clustering
methods, and there is still much room for improving the clus-tering performance for categorical data. Some e ﬀort has been
paid in this line of research [50, 51].
Automated machine learning (AutoML) [52, 53], whichseeks to build an appropriate machine learning model for an
unseen dataset in an automatic manner (without human inter-vention), has received increas ing attention recently. However,
existing AutoML systems focus on supervised learning, and
existing AutoML techniques could not directly be used for
the automated SSL problem. E ﬀorts on automated SSL re-
main limited right now. Automated SSL introduces somenew challenges, i.e., various meta-features extracted from a
number of labeled examples are no longer available and suit-
able [53]; the use of auxiliary unlabeled instances may some-times even be outperformed by direct supervised learning.Therefore, safeness is one of the crucial aspects of AutoSSL,since it is not desirable to have an automated yet perfor-
mance degenerated SSL system. Li et al. [54] ﬁrst present
an automated learning system for SSL. They incorporatemeta-learning with enhanced meta-features to help searchingwell-perform instantiations, and a large margin separation
method to ﬁne-tune the hyperparameters as well as alleviate
performance deterioration.
Learning in dynamic environments is far more diﬃcult than
in static ones. The challenges come from distribution drift,
new class emerging, feature space change and so on. Thereare some studies trying to tackle these problems [55–57]when learning in data streams, however, the issue of safeness
remains an open problem for semi-supervised learning in dy-
namic environments, i.e., an interesting problem is when theunlabeled data are useful in online learning.
6C o n c l u s i o n
Semi-supervised learning has a wide range of application sce-
narios and has attracted considerable attention in the past
decades. However, phenomena of performance degenerationhinder the deployment of semi-supervised learning in real ap-plications. It is desirable to be able to exploit unlabeled datasafely.
This article focuses on three viewpoints to tackle the issue
of safeness in semi-supervised learning: data quality, modeluncertainty, and measure diversity. Although we considerthem separately, in practice they often occur simultaneously.
Note that due to the space limit, this article actually serves
more like a literature index rather than a comprehensive re-view. Readers interested in some details are encouraged toread the corresponding references. In the future, it will be
worth understanding the boundary of safe SSL and making
valuable decisions for SSL data.