Front. Comput. Sci.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11704-019-8452-2
Safe semi-supervised learning: a brief introduction
Yu-Feng LI
1,2, De-Ming LIANG1,2
1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2 Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
c/circlecopyrtHigher Education Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2019
Abstract Semi-supervised learning constructs the predic-
tive model by learning from a few labeled training exam-ples and a large pool of unlabeled ones. It has a wide range
of application scenarios and ha s attracted much attention in
the past decades. However, it is noteworthy that although thelearning performance is expected to be improved by exploit-ing unlabeled data, some empir ical studies show that there are
situations where the use of unlabeled data may degenerate the
performance. Thus, it is advisable to be able to exploit unla-
beled data safely. This article reviews some research progressof safe semi-supervised learning, focusing on three types ofsafeness issue: data quality, where the training data is risky
or of low-quality; model uncertainty, where the learning algo-
rithm fails to handle the uncertainty during training; measurediversity, where the safe performance could be adapted to di-verse measures.
Keywords machine learning, semi-supervised learning,
safe
1 Introduction
Machine learning has achieved great success in numeroustasks, particularly in supervised learning tasks such as clas-siﬁcation and regression. Typically, machine learning algo-
rithms learn from a training data set with a certain amount of
training examples. Each traini ng example has a feature vector
to describe the corresponding instance, and a label indicat-ing the ground-truth output (the class to which the trainingexample belongs in classi ﬁcation or the real-valued response
Received December 27, 2018; accepted March 5, 2019
E-mail: liyf@nju.edu.cncorresponding to the example in regression). The most fa-
mous technique in recent years, deep learning [1], makesenormous commercial success in computer vision based on
the fact that ground-truth labels for a broad training data set
are provided. However, in various tasks such as disease diag-nosis, auto-vehicle, physical system, it is hard to attain con-siderable ground-truth information due to the cost of time orexpense. Thus, it is desirable to be able to learn a good model
with a few labeled data. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [2]
is a promising direction which attempts to exploit labeleddata (often of limited amount) and a huge pool of unlabeleddata for optimizing machine learning models. Existing semi-
supervised approaches can be roughly grouped into four cat-
egories, including generative models [3, 4], semi-supervisedSVMs [5, 6], graph-based semi-supervised methods [7–11]and disagreement-based methods [12, 13].
It is generally recognized that by using unlabeled data,
semi-supervised learning can help improve the performance,
particularly when the number of labeled data is limited. How-ever, it is noteworthy that although the learning performanceis expected to be improved by exploiting unlabeled data,
some empirical studies [4,9,14–20] show that there are cases
in which the use of the unlabeled data may degenerate theperformance, making it even worse after semi-supervisedlearning. This phenomenon prevents the deployment of semi-supervised learning in real-w orld applications because the
cost of utilizing unlabeled data may not be rewarded some-
times. It is desirable to have safe semi-supervised learning
approaches which never reduce learning performance signif-icantly when using unlabeled data. Safe, here means that the
generalization performance is never statistically signi ﬁcantly
worse than methods using only labeled data. It is meaning-