q kcontrastive loss
gradient gradient
(a) end-to-endxqxkq kcontrastive loss
gradient
(c) MoCoxqxkencodermomentum
encoderq kcontrastive loss
sampling
memory
bankgradient
(b) memory bankxqencoder encoder q encoder kq·k q ·k q ·k
Figure 2. Conceptual comparison of three contrastive loss mechanisms (empirical comparisons are in Figure 3and Table 3). Here we
illustrate one pair of query and key. The three mechanisms differ in how the keys are maintained and how the key encoder is updated.
(a): The encoders for computing the query and key representations are updated end-to-end by back-propagation (the two encoders can
be different). (b): The key representations are sampled from a memory bank [61].(c):MoCo encodes the new keys on-the-ﬂy by a
momentum-updated encoder, and maintains a queue (not illustrated in this ﬁgure) of keys.
3.2. Momentum Contrast
From the above perspective, contrastive learning is a way
of building a discrete dictionary on high-dimensional con-
tinuous inputs such as images. The dictionary is dynamic in
the sense that the keys are randomly sampled, and that the
key encoder evolves during training. Our hypothesis is that
good features can be learned by a large dictionary that cov-
ers a rich set of negative samples, while the encoder for the
dictionary keys is kept as consistent as possible despite its
evolution. Based on this motivation, we present Momentum
Contrast as described next.
Dictionary as a queue. At the core of our approach is
maintaining the dictionary as a queue of data samples. This
allows us to reuse the encoded keys from the immediate pre-
ceding mini-batches. The introduction of a queue decouples
the dictionary size from the mini-batch size. Our dictionary
size can be much larger than a typical mini-batch size, and
can be ﬂexibly and independently set as a hyper-parameter.
The samples in the dictionary are progressively replaced.
The current mini-batch is enqueued to the dictionary, and
the oldest mini-batch in the queue is removed. The dictio-
nary always represents a sampled subset of all data, while
the extra computation of maintaining this dictionary is man-
ageable. Moreover, removing the oldest mini-batch can be
beneﬁcial, because its encoded keys are the most outdated
and thus the least consistent with the newest ones.
Momentum update. Using a queue can make the dictio-
nary large, but it also makes it intractable to update the key
encoder by back-propagation (the gradient should propa-
gate to all samples in the queue). A na ¨ıve solution is to
copy the key encoder fkfrom the query encoder fq, ignor-
ing this gradient. But this solution yields poor results in
experiments (Sec. 4.1). We hypothesize that such failure
is caused by the rapidly changing encoder that reduces the
key representations’ consistency. We propose a momentum
update to address this issue.Formally, denoting the parameters of fkasθkand those
offqasθq, we update θkby:
θk←mθk+(1−m)θq. (2)
Herem∈[0,1)is a momentum coefﬁcient. Only the pa-
rametersθqare updated by back-propagation. The momen-
tum update in Eqn.( 2) makesθkevolve more smoothly than
θq. As a result, though the keys in the queue are encoded
by different encoders (in different mini-batches), the dif-
ference among these encoders can be made small. In ex-
periments, a relatively large momentum ( e.g.,m=0.999,
our default) works much better than a smaller value ( e.g.,
m= 0.9), suggesting that a slowly evolving key encoder is
a core to making use of a queue.
Relations to previous mechanisms. MoCo is a general
mechanism for using contrastive losses. We compare it with
two existing general mechanisms in Figure 2. They exhibit
different properties on the dictionary size and consistency.
Theend-to-end update by back-propagation is a natural
mechanism ( e.g., [29,46,36,63,2,35], Figure 2a). It uses
samples in the current mini-batch as the dictionary, so the
keys are consistently encoded (by the same set of encoder
parameters). But the dictionary size is coupled with the
mini-batch size, limited by the GPU memory size. It is also
challenged by large mini-batch optimization [ 25]. Some re-
cent methods [ 46,36,2] are based on pretext tasks driven by
local positions, where the dictionary size can be made larger
by multiple positions. But these pretext tasks may require
special network designs such as patchifying the input [ 46]
or customizing the receptive ﬁeld size [ 2], which may com-
plicate the transfer of these networks to downstream tasks.
Another mechanism is the memory bank approach pro-
posed by [ 61] (Figure 2b). A memory bank consists of the
representations of all samples in the dataset. The dictionary
for each mini-batch is randomly sampled from the memory
bank with no back-propagation, so it can support a large
dictionary size. However, the representation of a sample in
9731