Momentum Contrast for Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning
Kaiming He Haoqi Fan Yuxin Wu Saining Xie Ross Girshick
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Abstract
We present Momentum Contrast (MoCo) for unsuper-
vised visual representation learning. From a perspective on
contrastive learning [ 29] as dictionary look-up, we build
a dynamic dictionary with a queue and a moving-averaged
encoder. This enables building a large and consistent dic-
tionary on-the-ﬂy that facilitates contrastive unsupervised
learning. MoCo provides competitive results under the
common linear protocol on ImageNet classiﬁcation. More
importantly, the representations learned by MoCo transfer
well to downstream tasks. MoCo can outperform its super-
vised pre-training counterpart in 7detection/segmentation
tasks on PASCAL VOC, COCO, and other datasets, some-
times surpassing it by large margins. This suggests that
the gap between unsupervised and supervised representa-
tion learning has been largely closed in many vision tasks.Code:https://github.com/facebookresearch/moco
1. Introduction
Unsupervised representation learning is highly success-
ful in natural language processing, e.g., as shown by GPT
[50,51] and BERT [ 12]. But supervised pre-training is still
dominant in computer vision, where unsupervised meth-
ods generally lag behind. The reason may stem from dif-
ferences in their respective signal spaces. Language tasks
have discrete signal spaces (words, sub-word units, etc.)
for building tokenized dictionaries , on which unsupervised
learning can be based. Computer vision, in contrast, further
concerns dictionary building [ 54,9,5], as the raw signal is
in a continuous, high-dimensional space and is not struc-
tured for human communication ( e.g., unlike words).
Several recent studies [ 61,46,36,66,35,56,2] present
promising results on unsupervised visual representation
learning using approaches related to the contrastive loss
[29]. Though driven by various motivations, these methods
can be thought of as building dynamic dictionaries . The
“keys” (tokens) in the dictionary are sampled from data
(e.g., images or patches) and are represented by an encoder
network. Unsupervised learning trains encoders to perform
dictionary look-up: an encoded “query” should be similar
to its matching key and dissimilar to others. Learning is
formulated as minimizing a contrastive loss [ 29].encodermomentum
encoderqcontrastive loss
similarity
queuek0k1k2...
xqueryxkey
0xkey
1xkey
2...
Figure 1. Momentum Contrast (MoCo) trains a visual represen-
tation encoder by matching an encoded query qto a dictionary
of encoded keys using a contrastive loss. The dictionary keys
{k0,k1,k2,...}are deﬁned on-the-ﬂy by a set of data samples.
The dictionary is built as a queue, with the current mini-batch en-
queued and the oldest mini-batch dequeued, decoupling it from
the mini-batch size. The keys are encoded by a slowly progressing
encoder, driven by a momentum update with the query encoder.
This method enables a large and consistent dictionary for learning
visual representations.
From this perspective, we hypothesize that it is desirable
to build dictionaries that are: (i) large and (ii) consistent
as they evolve during training. Intuitively, a larger dictio-
nary may better sample the underlying continuous, high-
dimensional visual space, while the keys in the dictionary
should be represented by the same or similar encoder so that
their comparisons to the query are consistent. However, ex-
isting methods that use contrastive losses can be limited in
one of these two aspects (discussed later in context).
We present Momentum Contrast (MoCo) as a way of
building large and consistent dictionaries for unsupervised
learning with a contrastive loss (Figure 1). We maintain the
dictionary as a queue of data samples: the encoded repre-
sentations of the current mini-batch are enqueued, and the
oldest are dequeued. The queue decouples the dictionary
size from the mini-batch size, allowing it to be large. More-
over, as the dictionary keys come from the preceding sev-
eral mini-batches, a slowly progressing key encoder, imple-
mented as a momentum-based moving average of the query
encoder, is proposed to maintain consistency.
1
9729