*Corresponding Author : Chandrahas Singh  
Email - chandrahas@ce.iitr.ac.in  APPLICATION OF UAV SWARM SEMI -AUTONOMOUS SYSTEM FOR THE LINEAR PHOTOGRAMMETRIC 
SURVEY  
Chandrahas Singh 1*, Vishal Mishra1,  Harshit  Harshit1, Kamal Jain 12, Martin M okros3 
1 Dept. of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India - 247667 - 
chandrahas@ ce.iitr.ac.in, vmishra1@ce.iitr.ac.in ,harshit@ce.iitr.ac.in  
2Centre of Excellence in Disaster Mitigation and Management (CoEDMM),  Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee , Uttarakhand, 
India - 247667 - kamal.jain@ce.iitr.ac.in  
3 Faculty of Forestry and Wood Sciences, Czech University of Life Sciences, Prague , Czech Republic - mokros@fld.czu.cz  
 
Commission 1, ICWG I/II 
ABSTRACT:  
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle s (UAVs)  are used as stand -alone systems for a  variety of purposes  from agriculture, and environmental 
monitoring through architecture, and construction to humanitarian missions . The advantage of UAV is high spatial and temporal 
resolution but on the other hand, the disadvantage is the small area of cover and time demanding data collection. As a result of 
technological advancements, the complexity of systems  to unprecedented levels  these disadvantages can be solved by UAV Swarm 
systems.  A UAV Swarm system is defined as the utilization of more than one  UAV  that are cooperating together  in a semi -autonomous  
or autonomous manner to achieve a common  goal. There are numerous factors in play while designing a system as advanced as a UAV 
Swarm. In our experiment, we focused on t he semi -autonomous concept of creating and deploying a UAV Swarm with three Small 
UAVs in master -slave architecture for high -resolution fine -scale mapping. We demonstrate the implementation of collective behaviour 
of UAV swarm for river bed mapping that considers all on -board systems, i ncluding high resolution georeferenced aerial photography 
and navigation using high accuracy GPS. The testing field for this study was a 13.3 ha linear area of Solani River in the Haridwar 
district of the state of Uttarakhand, India. Images were captured b y all three UAVs (one leader and two followers) and 5 ground control 
points (GCP) were used for geo -referencing. Aerial Triangulation and Bundle Block adjustment were processed by photogrammetric 
software Pix4DMapper.  This UAV swarm mapping concept generat es standard accurate geospatial results of 1.24 cm GSD and RMS 
Error 0.023 meter. Assessing the proposed system's efficiency and accuracy after such processes are taken into account reduces the 
time and cost manifolds of the UAV surveying.  
KEYWORDS : UAV , UAV  swarm , Swarm Mapping, UAV Photogrammetry . 
1. INTRODUCTION  
Current advances in remote sensing technology, particularly the 
use of small and efficient unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), are 
transforming aerial mapping, generating vast amounts of data 
that can be used to optimize processes in practically every aspect 
of topographic map generation. Before recent times, high -
resolution satellite photos were regarded as the primary source of 
information, but this is changing owing to the widespread use of 
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), which reduce  issues such as 
high level of ground details and restricted availability of satellite 
imagery.  Fixed -wing UAVs become impractical since they can't 
hover and must fly at too high an altitude . Therefore , rotary -wing 
UAVs like quadcopters have become the preferred option  for the 
majority of studies  (Fascista, 2022; Tang and Shao, 2015; Yao et 
al., 2019) . Given the current state of the art, they are restricted in 
flight time, necessitating time and energy -efficient solutions 
(Sampedro et al., 2016). Aerial mapping also nec essitates a 
higher level of autonomy for UAVs than their existing role as 
passive sensors with predetermined mission plans. The 
intelligent, real -time updating of the UAVs sampling strategies 
to reflect the information being acquired allows for greater 
concentration on important regions while avoiding wasting 
resources on less important locations. The principle of precision 
farming , "more production with less input " becomes attainable in 
this method. UAVs can cover a large area by a single flight of a 
swarm  to observe crops, which minimizes human involvement in obtaining information on crop health status. Due to this timely 
detection of vulnerable health areas can save losses by adopting 
proper action  (Velusamy et al., 2021) . Similar techniques may be 
used o n a UAV with more  intelligent autonomy, but they are less 
versatile and efficient in terms of time and energy consumption. 
It's also worth noting that, despite falling hardware prices as the 
drone industry grows, top -end mapping systems with onboard 
autonomy and high accuracy sensors would still be prohibitively 
expensive.  
As a result, an autonomous UAV is a liability that does not scale 
expenses with farm size and does not provide resilience against 
defects during operation execution. The foregoing d iscussion 
motivates the current research, which aims to use a swarm 
robotics approach involving groups of miniaturized low -cost 
UAVs that can provide collectively similar precision to high -end 
solutions, can be scaled to various farm sizes without sacrific ing 
speed , and has intrinsic resilience against individual flaws  (Rizk 
et al., 2020) . That is why we have decided to create an experiment 
focusing on a multi -UAV -based swarm system for mapping the 
river bed.  
2. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM AND 
MOTIVATION  
High -level missions, such as automated target recognition and 
inspection or autonomous area exploration with a UAV  may be  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
407