Table 1. Flight parameters for UAV swarm system.  
Parameter  Specification  
Area of interest  0.133 km2 
Flying height  60 meters  
Front overlap  75 %  
Side overlap  75 %  
Master  UAV  Flying Speed  5 m/s  
 
UAV swarm has been deployed in every field of engineering 
mostly in the defense  sector , but one field that remains untouched 
is aerial mapping. As far as UAV photographing is concerned, 
the UAV completes the mission by flying back and forth on its 
path during the mission . Since the task of photogrammetric 
mapping by the UAV swarm is to cover the area of interest in a 
single flight, each member of the UAV swarm must be at such a 
constant distance from the master UAV durin g the flight that the 
required side overlap for the photogrammetric calculation can be 
fully satisfied.  
 
Figure 6.UAV swarm system for aerial mapping.  
3.5 Methodology  
It is conceivable for the UAV to scan a region of interest that is 
too large for a single flight. Because UAVs rely on batteries, their 
lifetime dictates how long they can remain in the air and, in turn, 
how much ground they can cover before they run out o f power. 
In such instances, numerous flights employing two or three 
UAVs in an overlapping way may cover the whole research 
region. This allowed each mission region to be surveyed entirely 
in a single trip. In such instances, mission planning for the 
missi on area is required ( Nesbit et al., 2022). We must first 
establish and configure specific settings in your mission planner 
program before you begin shooting photographs. Figure 7 shows an example of a mission planner interface that you may use to 
schedule your flights. Take -off and landing site identification and 
specifications, flying height, direction, speed, number of flight 
lines, overlap, and other criteria are among them. These variables 
affect the final photographs as well as the entire flying campai gn. 
As a result, it is critical to understand what goes into each of these 
characteristics and what to look out for when choosing them. We 
will need to figure out how high you want your UAV to fly, 
which will be determined by the spatial resolution of the final 
photographs and the focal length of the camera ( Liu et al., 2022). 
The link between spatial resolution and flying height is inverse. 
The spatial resolution decreases as the flying height increases. 
Images are captured with an overlap to ensure the ge neration of 
a height model. Front overlap refers to the overlap between two 
consecutive photographs obtained on the same flight path, while 
side overlap refers to the overlap between two photos acquired 
on adjacent UAV flight tracks.  
 
Figure 7. Flight parameters for UAV swarm flight.  
A flight line is a route that the drone takes while gathering 
images, as the name implies. A shared region is seen on two 
sequential or adjacent pictures th anks to longitudinal and lateral 
overlaps. This allows for the creation of stereo pictures, which 
may then be used to create a height model. The percentage of 
forward and side overlap provided affects the number of flight 
paths  and the number of photograph s per flight path. Higher 
overlaps result in more flight lines and images per flight line, 
whereas smaller overlaps result in fewer  paths  and fewer aerial 
photographs  per flight line. Overlaps of 75 to 7 5% were utilized 
inside the UAV swarm system. If precise height models are to be 
constructed, these overlaps are required ( Rossi et al., 2017).  
Aerial triangulation is a technique for obtaining the coordinates 
of all objects in a picture using geographical co ordinates. The 
images must include 3D coordinates and aerial triangulation to 
determine the correctness of the mapping. The criteria for 
assessing aerial geometry in photogrammetry are now the same 
as in classic photogrammetry (Mugnai et al., 2022).  
To a s ubstantial fraction, the outcome of a UAV operation is 
driven by pre -flight planning. Mission planner programs are 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
410