difficult  tasks . A strong and adaptable architecture is required to 
efficiently accomplish such high -level missions with a high level 
of autonomy  A localization module for estimating the UAV's 
position in the world geodetic system, a mission planner for 
assigning and monitoring the mission's tasks, a projected path 
planner for assigning routes with obstacle avoidance, a trajectory 
control s ystem for relocating the UAV along the desired routes 
given by the trajectory planner, and several modules for error 
checking, environment parameters monitoring, communication, 
and supervision are all required components of this architecture.  
The requireme nt for such architectures is stressed for 
complicated tasks that must be carried out in an industrial setting. 
Missions requiring the use of a complex and coordinated system, 
such as power line inspection, bridge inspection, and so on, 
necessitate the use of a coordinated system to optimize resources 
while fulfilling the objective. Due to the limited durability of the 
real batteries, doing these duties with only one UAV would need 
multiple inspection efforts in most circumstances. In these types 
of settings , the benefits of utilizing a swarm of UAVs can lead to 
more effective resource management and, as a result, cost savings 
for businesses. Furthermore, in a variety of missions where time 
is a vital limitation, a swarm of UAVs can be a very efficient way 
to complete the desired task (Jahan et al., 2020).  
On the other hand, a UAV swarm  is a complex system in which 
numerous units must work together efficiently. To do this, a 
modular and adaptive architecture capable of managing all of the 
elements of such a co mplicated system must be created. Our 
traditional generation has all of the essential capabilities for this 
management, but it lacked a coordinator capable of steering a 
multi -robot swarm of UAVs through the execution of a  mission 
that could be dynamically  re-adapted at any time if an issue 
occurred.  This effort is a step in the right direction in that regard. 
As a result, new  modules have been developed based on all of the 
functionalities of our current semi -autonomous architecture: the 
swarm system in  Mission Planner (MP), which is in charge of 
dynamically and efficiently distributing missions across all of the 
agents in the swarm while monitoring swarm behaviour , and a 
local coordinator using the radio mesh network, who is in charge 
of executing these tas ks with multipoint communication with the 
MP. 
3. MATERIALS AND METHOD  
The present paper intended to provide a real -time framework for 
UAV photogrammetric applications for topographic surveys 
using a UAV swarm system.  
3.1 Study Area  
The study area selected for testing the proposed system is located 
in the northern part of India. Roorkee is a city and municipal 
corporation in Uttarakhand, India, located in the Haridwar 
district. It is located on a level plateau under the Himalayan 
Shivalik Hills. The experimental site is located at an altitude of 
268 meters and part of the district Haridwar,  just 30 kilometers  
distant. It is positioned between the rivers Ganga and Yamuna on 
the banks of the upper Ganga canal. The test field selected for  
this experiment was the Solani riverbed , and the total area 
covered was 0.133 km2, as shown in Figure 1.   
Figure 1. Study area map and UAV swarm testing field.  
3.2 UAV Swarm System  
Yaw, pitch, roll, and thrust  and six degrees of freedom for 
movement and maneuvering  are regulated by an underactuated 
autonomous and adaptive quadcopter and propellers in the UAV 
swarm system   (Erdelj et al., 2017). There are different kinds of 
sensor and control devices  required f or every quadcopter to 
ensure a stable and controllable flight are ESC and IMU. The 
ESC operates the brushless motor while converting the Pulse 
Width Modulation (PWM) data from radio receivers or flight 
controllers by delivering a proper amount of electric  power. 
("https://ardupilot.org/planner/docs/swarming.html ," n.d.). A 
little change in the speeds of the four motors while 
simultaneously providing a constant input signal to the four 
individual ESCs causes quadcopter position drift in the x -y plane. 
This d rift is usually avoided by using flexible feedback control  
techniques .  
 
Figure 2. Three UAVs connected with Mission planner for 
flight together.  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
408