An IMU is an electromechanical device that combines an 
accelerometer and a gyroscope into one unit. It aids in 
determining the quadcopter's angular location and altitude. The 
accelerometer is responsible for detecting acceleration forces 
such as gravity (a pplied to each axis) about the Earth, while the 
gyroscope is responsible for measuring the rate of angular 
rotation for each axis. Additional modules like a barometer, 
magnetometer, and altitude sensors may be utilized to provide 
very precise real -time inf ormation on height and direction of 
movement, making high -precision control of a drone much 
easier. Quadcopters frequently use the Global Positioning 
System (GPS). The primary goal of a navigation module like this 
is to enable path planning, tracking, and drone localization  (Tahir 
et al., 2019).  
APM Planner, which is also built on a multiple -vehicle 
architecture, offers more complex swarming/multiple -UAV 
control. However, Mission Planner does this in a restricted 
fashion by concurrently creating several ser ial port MAVLink 
connections and transferring GPS location data from one leader, 
flying in any mode, from manual to auto, to the other followers, 
flying in Guided mode. The leader's GPS position is updated by 
a predetermined offset before being communicate d to the 
followers as a sequence of dynamic waypoints. The followers 
will follow the leader at predetermined X, Y, and Z offset 
distances ( Khan Beigi and Reza Soleymani, 2021). Getting the 
beginning location in a UAV swarm might be difficult. The 
SYSID_THI SMAV  number and COM port are used to identify 
them in the grid. It's a good idea to fix the SYSID _THISMAV  
number to the physical vehicles so you can match the on -screen 
numbers and grid positions to the physical arrangement of the 
vehicles on the ground. M ultiple networks with the same setup 
can be launched at the same time to accommodate additional 
nodes.  
 
Figure 3. Proposed semi -autonomous architecture for UAV 
swarm.  
3.3 Swarm Communication Architecture  
The RFD900X telemetry radio establishes a mesh network by 
linking multiple drones to a single ground station without the 
need for additional radio on the central ground control station 
side. The role of fast -acting network monitoring and 
confi guration software also needs to be included. The centralized 
communications architecture evolved from the development of 
single -UAV systems and was later applied to the creation of UAV swarm technology. As shown in Figure 3, it primarily 
consists of a cent ral point to which all UAVs in the UAV swarm 
are effectively connected and responsible for exchanging 
information (Zhao et al., 2018). Under the system of 
decentralized communication architecture, the UAV operates and 
performs the interactive communication  system in real -time in an 
ad-hoc manner as per the requirement of the mission, eliminating 
the dependency of the central control station and all restrictions 
on the communication system (Skorobogatov et al., 2020).  
To solve the routing problem in multi -radio infrastructure mesh 
networks, in which each mesh node has multiple radio interfaces , 
and a subset of nodes acts as communication gateways. We 
introduce a new interference -aware routing mesh network that 
improves the discovery of pathways with lower interflow and 
intra-flow interference. This statistic  and new capabilities for 
multi -radio networks  are incorporated into the multipoint routing 
protocol to provide an improved mesh topology routing protocol 
(Campion et al., 2019).  
 
Figure 4. Multipoint mesh network using RFD900x 
modules.  
 
Figure 5. UAV swarm flight in leader and follower mode.  
We evaluate the performance of our new routing measure in our 
wireless testbed, which consists of four mesh nodes. There will 
still only be one master node , and all nodes will need to be in the 
range of the master for synchronization. Node 1 on NetworkIDs 
other than 0 will act as normal nodes and need no master node 
setting configurations. Nodes will only see other nodes on the 
same network ( Davoli et al., 20 21). 
3.4 Flight Plan And Data Collection  
The Solani River flowing along the Roorkee City was chosen to 
select a straight line and safe from human reach for testing the 
UAV swarm. The survey process was carried out by keeping the 
front overlap 75 % and the side overlap 75 % out of a total area 
of 0.133 km2 . 
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
409