often included with UAVs, making this step quite simple. This 
step enables you to plan the whole flight mission by choosing and 
defining crit ical criteria for success . However , in the case of a 
UAV swarm flight, each UAV flight path separation is 
determined by the distance between the master UAV in the center  
and two adjacent slave UAVs. Therefore, m ake the best 
selections if you have a deeper grasp of these characteristics. As 
a result, this part will go through some of the key pre -flight 
preparations needed for a successful UAV operation ( Šiljeg et al., 
2022).  
 
Figure 8.Complete methodology for UAV swarm system for 
aerial mapping.  4. RESULTS  
Data acquired from the swarm system was processed in Pix4D 
Mapper pro photogrammetric software. Standard 3D mapping 
workflow was followed in the propriety software to generate 
DSM (Digital surface model) and Ortho -photo as shown below.  
 
 
Figure 9. Data processing in Pix4DMapper 
photogrammetric software.  
The accuracy of DSM (Figure 10) generation requires well-
established  feature points extracted from the image with accurate 
exterior orientation parameters. For this drone -based  IMU  and 
GPS data are utilized  and this information  is recorded in EXIF 
tags for each acquired image . The initialization  of the 
photogrammetric process uses this information for calibration 
and further re -optimization of the solution. The triangulation 
algorithm based on Delauney triangulation is used. This method 
is recommended for flat areas (agriculture fields) and stock piles.  
 
Figure 10.DSM generated by Pix4DMapper.  
The resolution of ortho -photo is related to the resolution of DSM 
used, as a rule of thumb a DSM is generated from a set of images  
that varies in resolution > = 4 times the input image resolution.  
The point cloud, DSM , and, consequently, the ortho -photo  
accuracy are  also affected by the quality of the initial images and 
their visual content. Generated ortho -photo  here provides an 
orthographic overview of the study area consisting of a river bed 
with surrounding agricultural land parcels.  
The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume XLIII-B1-2022 
XXIV ISPRS Congress (2022 edition), 6–11 June 2022, Nice, France
This contribution has been peer-reviewed. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLIII-B1-2022-407-2022 | © Author(s) 2022. CC BY 4.0 License.
 
411