SPEECH SYNTHESIS USING EEG
Gautam Krishna Co Tran Yan Han?Mason Carnahan?Ahmed H Tewﬁk
Brain Machine Interface Lab, The University of Texas at Austin
ABSTRACT
In this paper we demonstrate speech synthesis using differ-
ent electroencephalography (EEG) feature sets recently in-
troduced in [1]. We make use of a recurrent neural network
(RNN) regression model to predict acoustic features directly
from EEG features. We demonstrate our results using EEG
features recorded in parallel with spoken speech as well as
using EEG recorded in parallel with listening utterances. We
provide EEG based speech synthesis results for four subjects
in this paper and our results demonstrate the feasibility of syn-
thesizing speech directly from EEG features.
Index Terms —Speech synthesis, EEG, Deep Learning
1. INTRODUCTION
Speech production is one of the most important abilities of
human beings which helps humans to communicate with each
other. In recent years there is lot of research interest in devel-
oping assistive technologies to help with speech restoration
for people with speaking disabilities. In [2] authors demon-
strated synthesizing speech directly from invasive electro-
corticography (ECoG) neural recordings using a recurrent
neural network (RNN) based speech decoder. Recently in
[1, 3, 4] authors have demonstrated speech recognition using
electroencephalography (EEG) features where EEG signals
recorded in parallel with spoken speech [4, 3] as well as
EEG signals recorded in parallel with listening utterances [1]
are translated directly into text. EEG is a non invasive way
of measuring electrical activity of human brain. EEG has
high temporal resolution like the invasive ECoG signals. The
subjects need not undergo a brain surgery like in the case
of ECoG for recording EEG since EEG is completely a non
invasive technique. EEG sensors are placed on the scalp of
the subjects to obtain the recordings.
In [1] authors introduced three types of EEG feature sets
which are useful for speech recognition and speech synthe-
sis. Though in [1] authors demonstrated preliminary results
for synthesizing speech directly from EEG signals using a
long short term memory (LSTM) [5] based regression model
and generative adversarial network (GAN) [6] based model,
they didn’t provide speech synthesis results per each subject
for their experiments and they provided only EEG feature
?Equal author contributionset 1 based result for synthesizing speech from EEG signals
recorded in parallel with spoken speech. Where as in this pa-
per we provide speech synthesis results per each subject us-
ing all the three different EEG feature sets for EEG signals
recorded in parallel with spoken speech as well as from EEG
signals recorded in parallel with listening utterances. More
over in this paper we introduce a new EEG data set con-
sisting of EEG, speech signals recorded for commonly used
voice commands and our overall results mentioned in this pa-
per demonstrate a signiﬁcant improvement compared to the
results demonstrated for speech synthesis by authors in [1].
We demonstrate in this paper that using a gated recurrent unit
(GRU) [7] based RNN network with dropout [8] instead of a
LSTM network results in speech synthesis performance im-
provement as well as in this paper we perform speech synthe-
sis experiments using more number of speech, EEG recording
examples per sentence compared to the ones used by authors
in [1].
For synthesizing speech from EEG signals recorded in
parallel with spoken speech, with our approach we were able
to achieve a mel cepstral distortion (MCD) [9] value as low as
0.433 compared to 5.737 demonstrated by authors in [1] and
for synthesizing speech from EEG signals recorded in paral-
lel with listening utterances, with our approach we were able
to achieve a MCD value as low as 0.471 compared to 1.34
demonstrated by authors in [1]. Given the challenges outlined
by authors in [1] for training a GAN model for speech syn-
thesis using EEG, we didn’t perform experiments with GAN
model.
Results mentioned in this paper demonstrates a signiﬁcant
ﬁrst step towards synthesizing speech directly from EEG fea-
tures. Synthesizing speech directly from EEG signals might
help amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients who lost
ability to speak with speech restoration.
2. SPEECH SYNTHESIS MODEL
Our speech synthesis model consists of two layers of gated
recurrent unit (GRU) [7] with 256 hidden units in ﬁrst layer
and 128 hidden units in second layer as shown in Figure 1.
The ﬁnal GRU layer is connected to a time distributed dense
layer of 13 hidden units to predict acoustic features of dimen-
sion 13 at every time step. Between each GRU layers and
between the ﬁnal GRU layer and time distributed dense layer,arXiv:2002.12756v2  [eess.AS]  3 May 2020