a dropout regularization [8] with dropout rate 0.2 is applied.
The model takes EEG features as input at every time step and
outputs acoustic features at every time step. The model was
trained for 250 epochs with adam optimizer with learning rate
0.01 [10] to observe loss convergence. The batch size was set
to 100 and mean squared error (MSE) was used as the regres-
sion loss function for the model. For each subject’s data we
used 80 % data to train the model and remaining 10 % for
testing and rest 10 % for validation set. The validation set
was used to identify the right values for hyper parameters for
the model. All the scripts for the model were written using
Keras deep learning python framework.
Fig. 1 . Speech Synthesis Model
3. DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS FOR BUILDING THE
DATABASE
Four subjects took part in the EEG recording experiments. All
were UT Austin undergraduate students in their early twen-
ties. Three were females and one subject was male. Each
subject was ﬁrst asked to listen to four different natural utter-
ances and then speak out loud the utterances that they listened
to. The EEG was recorded in parallel while they were listen-
ing to the utterances as well as EEG was recorded in parallel
while they were speaking out the utterances that they listened
to. Throughout this paper we will refer to the EEG recorded
in parallel with listening as listen EEG and EEG recorded in
parallel with speech as spoken EEG. The listening utterances
were simultaneously recorded with listen EEG and the sub-
ject’s speech was recorded simultaneously with spoken EEG.
The four natural utterances that the subjects listened were”Hi Bixby”, ”Call Mom”, ”Open Camera” and ” What’s the
weather”. We collected 70 Speech - EEG recordings per each
subject per each sentence.
We used Brain Vision EEG recording hardware. Our EEG
cap had 32 wet EEG electrodes including one electrode as
ground as shown in Figure 2. We used EEGLab [11] to obtain
the EEG sensor location mapping. It is based on standard 10-
20 EEG sensor placement method for 32 electrodes [12].
Fig. 2 . EEG channel locations for the cap used in our experi-
ments
4. EEG AND SPEECH FEATURE EXTRACTION
DETAILS
EEG signals were sampled at 1000Hz and a fourth order IIR
band pass ﬁlter with cut off frequencies 0.1Hz and 70Hz
was applied. A notch ﬁlter with cut off frequency 60 Hz
was used to remove the power line noise. EEGlab’s [11]
Independent component analysis (ICA) toolbox was used to
remove other biological signal artifacts like electrocardiog-
raphy (ECG), electromyography (EMG), electrooculography
(EOG) etc from the EEG signals. We then extracted the three
EEG feature sets explained by authors in [1]. The details of
each EEG feature set are covered in [1]. Each EEG feature
set was extracted at a sampling frequency of 100 Hz for each
EEG channel [3].
The recorded speech signal was sampled at 16KHz fre-
quency. We extracted mel-frequency cepstral coefﬁcients
(MFCC) as features for speech signal. We extracted MFCC
features of dimension 13. The MFCC features were also
sampled at 100Hz same as the sampling frequency of EEG
features.
5. EEG FEATURE DIMENSION REDUCTION
ALGORITHM DETAILS
We used kernel principal component analysis (KPCA) [13] to
de-noise the EEG feature space by performing dimension re-
duction for each EEG feature set. By following the dimension
reduction methods explained by authors in [1] we reduced
EEG feature set 1 to a dimension of 30, EEG feature set 2
was reduced to a dimension of 50 and EEG feature set 3 was
kept at original dimension of 93. More details of explained