Convolutional Self-Attention Networks
Baosong YangyLongyue WangzDerek F. WongyLidia S. ChaoyZhaopeng Tuz
yNLP2CT Lab, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
nlp2ct.baosong@gmail.com, fderekfw,lidiasc g@umac.mo
zTencent AI Lab
fvinnylywang,zptu g@tencent.com
Abstract
Self-attention networks (SANs) have drawn
increasing interest due to their high paral-
lelization in computation and ﬂexibility in
modeling dependencies. SANs can be fur-
ther enhanced with multi-head attention by
allowing the model to attend to information
from different representation subspaces. In
this work, we propose novel convolutional
self-attention networks , which offer SANs the
abilities to 1) strengthen dependencies among
neighboring elements, and 2) model the inter-
action between features extracted by multiple
attention heads. Experimental results of ma-
chine translation on different language pairs
and model settings show that our approach
outperforms both the strong Transformer base-
line and other existing models on enhancing
the locality of SANs. Comparing with prior
studies, the proposed model is parameter free
in terms of introducing no more parameters.
1 Introduction
Self-attention networks (SANs) (Parikh et al.,
2016; Lin et al., 2017) have shown promising
empirical results in various natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) tasks, such as machine transla-
tion (Vaswani et al., 2017), natural language in-
ference (Shen et al., 2018a), and acoustic model-
ing (Sperber et al., 2018). One appealing strength
of SANs lies in their ability to capture dependen-
cies regardless of distance by explicitly attending
to all the elements. In addition, the performance
of SANs can be improved by multi-head atten-
tion (Vaswani et al., 2017), which projects the in-
put sequence into multiple subspaces and applies
attention to the representation in each subspace.
Despite their success, SANs have two major
limitations. First, the model fully take into ac-
Zhaopeng Tu is the corresponding author of the paper.
This work was conducted when Baosong Yang was interning
at Tencent AI Lab.count all the elements, which disperses the atten-
tion distribution and thus overlooks the relation of
neighboring elements and phrasal patterns (Yang
et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2019).
Second, multi-head attention extracts distinct lin-
guistic properties from each subspace in a parallel
fashion (Raganato and Tiedemann, 2018), which
fails to exploit useful interactions across differ-
ent heads. Recent work shows that better features
can be learned if different sets of representations
are present at feature learning time (Ngiam et al.,
2011; Lin et al., 2014).
To this end, we propose novel convolutional
self-attention networks (CSANs), which model lo-
cality for self-attention model and interactions be-
tween features learned by different attention heads
in an uniﬁed framework. Speciﬁcally, in order to
pay more attention to a local part of the input se-
quence, we restrict the attention scope to a window
of neighboring elements. The localness is there-
fore enhanced via a parameter-free 1-dimensional
convolution. Moreover, we extend the convolu-
tion to a 2-dimensional area with the axis of at-
tention head. Thus, the proposed model allows
each head to interact local features with its adja-
cent subspaces at attention time. We expect that
the interaction across different subspaces can fur-
ther improve the performance of SANs.
We evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed
model on three widely-used translation tasks:
WMT14 English-to-German, WMT17 Chinese-
to-English, and WAT17 Japanese-to-English. Ex-
perimental results demonstrate that our approach
consistently improves performance over the strong
TRANSFORMER model (Vaswani et al., 2017)
across language pairs. Comparing with previous
work on modeling locality for SANs (e.g. Shaw
et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018; Sperber et al.,
2018), our model boosts performance on both
translation quality and training efﬁciency.arXiv:1904.03107v1  [cs.CL]  5 Apr 2019