For tasks involving sentence-pairs, we concatenate
them and add a new separator token < sep > be-
tween them. We add the output of this token to the
ﬁnal projection W22RC3d.
Structured prediction tasks. For named entity
recognition and parsing we use task-speciﬁc archi-
tectures which we ﬁne-tune together with the lan-
guage model but with different learning rate. The
architectures are detailed in the respective results
sections. The input to the architectures are the
output representations of the pretrained language
model.
No Masking. For ﬁne-tuning, we found it ben-
eﬁcial to remove masking of the current token in
the ﬁnal layer that pools the output of the two tow-
ers. It is important to have access to information
about the token to be classiﬁed for token level clas-
siﬁcation tasks such as NER but we also found
this to perform better for sentence classiﬁcation
tasks. In practice, we completely disable masking
in the combination layer so that it operates over
all forward and backward states. However, dis-
abling masking below the combination layer does
not perform well.
Optimization. During ﬁne-tuning we use larger
learning rates for the new parameters, that is W1,
W2,bor the task-speciﬁc architecture, compared
to the pretrained model. For GLUE tasks, we do
so by simply scaling the output of the language
model before the W1andW2projections by a
factor of 16. For structured prediction tasks, we
explicitly use different learning rates for the pre-
trained model and the task-speciﬁc parameters.
We ﬁne tune with the Adam optimizer (Kingma
and Ba, 2015). For GLUE tasks, we disable
dropout in the language model and add 0.1 dropout
between language model output and the ﬁnal out-
put projection; for structured prediction tasks, we
use 0.3 at all levels (within the pretrained model,
within the task-speciﬁc architecture, and on the
weights connecting them). In all settings, we use a
batch size of 16 examples. We use a cosine sched-
ule to linearly warm up the learning rate from 1e-
07 to the target value over the ﬁrst 10% of train-
ing steps, and then anneal the learning rate to 1e-
06, following the cosine curve for the remaining
steps. For GLUE tasks, we tuned the learning rate
for each task and chose the best value over three
settings: 1e-04, 5e-05 and 3e-05. For structured
prediction tasks, we tuned on the pairs of learningrate, see the results section for details. For GLUE
tasks, we train three seeds for each learning rate
value for three epochs and choose the model af-
ter each epoch that performs best on the validation
set. For structured prediction tasks, we train for up
to 25 epochs and stop if the validation loss does
not improve over the previous epoch.
5 Experimental setup
5.1 Datasets for pretraining
We train the two tower model on several datasets.
Common Crawl. We consider various subsets
of Common Crawl which is web data. We fol-
low the same pre-processing as Grave et al. (2018)
which is based on the May 2017 Common Crawl
dump. This setup add 20 copies of English
Wikipedia resulting in about 14% of the ﬁnal
dataset to be Wikipedia. We subsample up to 18B
tokens. All experiments use Common Crawl sub-
sampled to 9B tokens, except x6.4.
News Crawl. We use up to 4.5B words of En-
glish news web data distributed as part of WMT
2018 (Bojar et al., 2018).
BooksCorpus + Wikipedia. This is similar to
the training data used by BERT which comprises
the BooksCorpus (Zhu et al., 2015) of about 800M
words plus English Wikipedia data of 2.5B words.
5.2 Pretraining hyper-parameters
We adapt the transformer implementation avail-
able in the fairseq toolkit to our two tower archi-
tecture (Ott et al., 2019). For hyper-parameter and
optimization choices we mostly follow Baevski
and Auli (2018). Our experiments consider three
model sizes shown in Table 1: There are two CNN
input models in a base and large conﬁguration as
well as a Byte-Pair-Encoding based model (BPE;
Sennrich et al., 2016). The CNN models have un-
constrained input vocabulary, and an output vo-
cabulary limited to 1M most common types for
the large model, and 700K most common types
for the base model. CNN models use an adap-
tive softmax in the output: the head band contains
the 60K most frequent types with dimensionality
1024, followed by a 160K band with dimension-
ality 256. The remaining types have dimensional-
ity 64; there are 480K types for the small model
and 780K for the large model. The BPE model
uses a vocabulary of 55K types and we share input