Cloze-driven Pretraining of Self-attention Networks
Alexei Baevski, Sergey Edunov, Yinhan Liu, Luke Zettlemoyer, Michael Auli
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, CA and Seattle, WA
Abstract
We present a new approach for pretraining a
bi-directional transformer model that provides
signiﬁcant performance gains across a vari-
ety of language understanding problems. Our
model solves a cloze-style word reconstruction
task, where each word is ablated and must be
predicted given the rest of the text. Exper-
iments demonstrate large performance gains
on GLUE and new state of the art results on
NER as well as constituency parsing bench-
marks, consistent with the concurrently intro-
duced BERT model. We also present a detailed
analysis of a number of factors that contribute
to effective pretraining, including data domain
and size, model capacity, and variations on the
cloze objective.
1 Introduction
Language model pretraining has recently been
shown to provide signiﬁcant performance gains
for a range of challenging language understand-
ing problems (Dai and Le, 2015; Peters et al.,
2018; Radford et al., 2018). However, existing
work has either used unidirectional (left-to-right)
language models (LMs) (Radford et al., 2018) or
bi-directional (both left-to-right and right-to-left)
LMs (BiLMs) where each direction is trained with
an independent loss function (Peters et al., 2018).
In this paper, we show that even larger perfor-
mance gains are possible by jointly pretraining
both directions of a large language-model-inspired
self-attention cloze model.
Our bi-directional transformer architecture pre-
dicts every token in the training data (Figure 1).
We achieve this by introducing a cloze-style train-
ing objective where the model must predict the
center word given left-to-right and right-to-left
context representations. Our model separately
computes both forward and backward states with
Equal contribution.
<s>abc<s>Block1BlockNBlock1BlockNBlock1BlockNBlock1BlockNcombbFigure 1: Illustration of the model. Block iis a standard
transformer decoder block. Green blocks operate left to
right by masking future time-steps and blue blocks op-
erate right to left. At the top, states are combined with
a standard multi-head self-attention module whose out-
put is fed to a classiﬁer that predicts the center token.
a masked self-attention architecture, that closely
resembles a language model. At the top of the net-
work, the forward and backward states are com-
bined to jointly predict the center word. This ap-
proach allows us to consider both contexts when
predicting words and to incur loss for every word
in the training set, if the model does not assign it
high likelihood.
Experiments on the GLUE (Wang et al., 2018)
benchmark show strong gains over the state of the
art for each task, including a 9.1 point gain on
RTE over Radford et al. (2018). These improve-
ments are consistent with, if slightly behind, those
achieved by the concurrently developed BERT
pretraining approach (Devlin et al., 2018), which
we will discuss in more detail in the next sec-
tion. We also show that it is possible to stack task-
speciﬁc architectures for NER and constituency
parsing on top of our pretrained representations,
and achieve new state-of-the-art performance lev-arXiv:1903.07785v1  [cs.CL]  19 Mar 2019