Lifelong Zero-Shot Learning
Kun Wei ,Cheng Deng,Xu Yang
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
fweikunsk, chdeng.xd, xuyang.xdg@gmail.com
Abstract
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) handles the problem that
some testing classes never appear in training set.
Existing ZSL methods are designed for learning
from a ﬁxed training set, which do not have the
ability to capture and accumulate the knowledge
of multiple training sets, causing them infeasible
to many real-world applications. In this paper,
we propose a new ZSL setting, named as Life-
long Zero-Shot Learning (LZSL), which aims to
accumulate the knowledge during the learning from
multiple datasets and recognize unseen classes of
all trained datasets. Besides, a novel method is
conducted to realize LZSL, which effectively al-
leviates the Catastrophic Forgetting in the contin-
uous training process. Speciﬁcally, considering
those datasets containing different semantic em-
beddings, we utilize Variational Auto-Encoder to
obtain uniﬁed semantic representations. Then, we
leverage selective retraining strategy to preserve the
trained weights of previous tasks and avoid nega-
tive transfer when ﬁne-tuning the entire model. Fi-
nally, knowledge distillation is employed to trans-
fer knowledge from previous training stages to cur-
rent stage. We also design the LZSL evaluation
protocol and the challenging benchmarks. Ex-
tensive experiments on these benchmarks indicate
that our method tackles LZSL problem effectively,
while existing ZSL methods fail.
1 Introduction
In recent years, Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [Socher et al.,
2013; Xian et al., 2018a; Zhao et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2019;
Xuet al., 2019 ]has gained increasing attention in computer
vision [Chang et al., 2020 ]and machine learning communi-
ties[Yang et al., 2019 ]. Different from traditional classiﬁca-
tion tasks that require adequate samples of all classes in train-
ing phase, ZSL aims to recognize samples of new classes,
which have never appeared in the training stage. In the pop-
ular ZSL setting, the learning model is only trained on seen
classes of a single dataset, and then tested on unseen classes
Contact Authorof the same dataset, whose seen and unseen classes are dis-
joint. However, in many real-world applications, the recog-
nition system is required to have the ability of learning from
obtained training data continuously and to improve the sys-
tem in a lifelong manner.
To meet such a requirement, we propose a more practical
ZSL setting, named as Lifelong Zero-Shot Learning (LZSL),
which requires the model to accumulate the knowledge of dif-
ferent datasets and recognize the unseen classes of all faced
datasets. As illustrated in Figure 1, the model is trained in
multiple learning stages, and each stage includes images and
semantic embeddings from a new dataset. The semantic em-
beddings of these datasets are various and complex, e.g., the
attribute lists of these datasets are different. After ﬁnishing
all training stages, the model is evaluated on both seen and
unseen testing images of all these datasets.
The mainstream ZSL methods aim to learn a mapping
between images and corresponding semantic embeddings.
These methods can be divided into three types according to
the classiﬁcation spaces, i.e., visual space, semantic space
and common embedding space. Besides, there are some ZSL
methods [Felix et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018 ], which train
generative models to obtain the features of unseen classes.
Then, the visual features of seen classes and the generated
visual features of unseen classes are used to train the classi-
ﬁer. These methods convert ZSL tasks to supervised learning
tasks. However, these methods cannot effectively deal with
LZSL problem, since they lack the mechanism to accumulate
knowledge from previously trained tasks without rehearsal.
Aiming to solve aforementioned problems and realize
LZSL, we propose a novel method that integrates uniﬁed se-
mantic embedding, selective retraining and knowledge distil-
lation strategies seamlessly. Cross and Distribution Aligned
V AE (CACD-V AE) [Schonfeld et al., 2019 ]is selected as
the base model, which trains V AEs [Kingma and Welling,
2013 ]to encode and decode features of visual and seman-
tic embeddings respectively, and uses the learned latent fea-
tures to train a ZSL classiﬁer. To equip CACD-V AE with
the ability of Lifelong Learning, we ﬁrst use the trained
V AEs to obtain uniﬁed semantic embeddings in each train-
ing stage. With the uniﬁed semantic embeddings, the la-
tent space of different tasks is learned and ﬁxed respec-
tively. To ensure the visual features can be projected into
the ﬁxed latent space precisely, selective retraining strategyProceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-20)
551