+ red wings
+ sharp claws
+ black color+ inky eyesDataset 1
ClassifyTraining Testing
…
+ black color+ inky eyes
Seen Class
Unseen ClassDataset N-1
+ fragrant+ has seeds + tastes sour+ small
Dataset 2+ yellow+ big in size + short horns+ small in size
Dataset N
+ fragrant+ has seeds
+  has peel+ has seeds
 + middle size+ has cameras+ large size+ give out lights+ blue head+ sharp clawsFigure 1: The overview of Lifelong Zero-Shot Learning. When new task arrives, the model learns the new task sequentially, which accu-
mulates the knowledge from all faced tasks. Transferring knowledge from previous tasks to current task promotes the model to classify the
unseen classes of different datasets effectively.
is leveraged to promote the similarity among the classiﬁ-
cation spaces of different tasks, which also avoids negative
transfer in the process of capturing the knowledge of new
task. Besides, knowledge distillation [Hinton et al., 2015;
Chen et al., 2019 ]is employed to transfer knowledge from
previous tasks to current task. Extensive experiments show
that our method effectively accumulates knowledge from
previous learned tasks and relieves Catastrophic Forgetting,
while other state-of-the-art ZSL methods are inoperative. The
contributions of our method are summarized as follow:
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to pro-
pose and tackle Lifelong Zero-Shot Learning problem.
The LZSL benchmark and evaluation protocols are also
designed in a novel way.
Aiming to tackle the challenge of isomerism semantic
embeddings of different datasets, we employ V AEs to
obtain the uniﬁed semantic embeddings, which can ﬁx
the latent space of corresponding tasks.
The selective retraining is utilized to promote the
similarity among the classiﬁcation spaces of different
datasets, and supervised by knowledge distillation loss,
which regularizes the process of transferring the knowl-
edge from previous tasks to current task.
Extensive experimental results on the proposed bench-
mark demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed ap-
proach, which signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art
ZSL methods.
2 Related Work
2.1 Zero-Shot Learning
Zero-Shot Learning [Socher et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2017;
Zhao et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018 ]has become a popular re-
search topic, which aims to recognize unseen classes without
any labeled training data. In addition, ZSL is a subproblem
of transfer learning, whose key point is to transfer knowledgefrom seen classes to unseen classes. In testing stage, the test
samples are captured from visual space, while we only have
the semantic embeddings of unseen classes in semantic space.
Thus, the mainstream approach of ZSL methods [Chen et al.,
2018 ]is to construct the connection between visual space and
semantic space. Typical methods learn functions that maps
the visual features and semantic features into a common em-
bedding space, where the embeddings of visual features and
semantic features are matched. Recently, generative adver-
sarial networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014 ]had been
proposed and successfully introduced to ZSL. The target of
generative ZSL methods [Felix et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018 ]
is to generate visual features of unseen classes from semantic
features, which converts ZSL to traditional supervised classi-
ﬁcation task. For instance, f-CLSWGAN [Xian et al., 2018b ]
was proposed by employing conditional Wasserstein GANs,
which generated discriminative unseen visual features. Based
on f-CLSWGAN, Cycle-WGAN [Felix et al., 2018 ]lever-
aged reconstruction regularization that aimed to preserve the
discriminative features of classes in transferring process.
However, all the methods mentioned above are only trained
on a single dataset, with limited ability to learn various
datasets sequentially. To our best knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst to propose and tackle the problem of Lifelong Zero-Shot
Learning.
2.2 Lifelong Learning
Lifelong Learning [McCloskey and Cohen, 1989; Rebufﬁ et
al., 2017 ]is the learning pattern which requires the model
to have the ability to learn from a sequence of tasks and to
transfer knowledge obtained from earlier tasks to later one.
The key challenge for Lifelong Learning is Catastrophic For-
getting, which means the trained model forgets the knowl-
edge of previous task when new task arrives. Many Lifelong
learning methods were proposed, which can be divided into
three parts, i.e, storing training samples of previous tasks [Re-
bufﬁ et al. , 2017; Li and Hoiem, 2017 ], regularizing the pa-Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-20)
552