1 Probabi listic Framework to Evaluate the Resilience of Engineering Systems Using  Bayesian 1 
and Dynamic Bayesian Networks  2 
Omar Kammouh1, Paolo Gardoni2, and Gian Paolo Cimellaro3 3 
Abstract  4 
Resilience i ndicators are a convenient tool  to assess the resilience of engine ering systems. T hey are often used 5 
in preliminary design s or in the assessment of complex systems. This paper introduces a novel approach to 6 
assess the time -dependent resilience of engineering systems using resilience indicators. A  Bayesian network  7 
(BN)  approach is employed  to handle the relationships among the indicators. BN is known for its capability of 8 
handling causal dependencies between  different variables  in probabilistic t erms . However, the use of BN is 9 
limited to static systems that are in a state of  equilibrium. Being at equilibrium is  often not the case because 10 
most engineering systems are dynamic  in nature  as their performance fluctuates with time, especially after 11 
disturbing events (e.g. natural disasters). Therefore, the temporal dimension  is tackled in this work using the 12 
Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN). DBN extends the classical BN by adding the time dimension. It permits  13 
the interaction among variables at different time steps. It can be used to track the evolution of a system ’s 14 
performance given evidence recorded at a previous time step. This allows  predicting the resilience state of a 15 
system given its initial condition. A mathematical probabil istic framework based on the DBN is developed to 16 
model the resilience of dynamic engineering systems.  Two illustrative examples  are presented  in the paper  to 17 
demonstrate  the applicability of the introduced framework.  One example  evaluates the resilience of  Brazil. The 18 
other one evaluates the resilience of a transportation system.  19 
Keywords: Bayesian Network ; Dynamic Bayesian Network ; Resilience analysis ; critical infrastructure ; Resilience indicators, Recovery  20 
  21 
                                                      
1 Postdoc researcher, Dept. of Civil Engineering and Geosciences  (CEG ), Delft University of Technology , Delft,  The Netherlands , E-
mail: o.kammouh@tudelft.nl  
2 Professor  and MAE Center Director , Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign, 3118 
Newmark Civil Engineering Laboratory, 205 N. Mathews Ave., Urbana, IL 61801, United States Email: gardoni@illinois.edu  
3Associate  Professor, Dept. of Structural, Geotechnical and Building Engineering (DISEG), Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli 
Abruzzi 24, 10129, Torino, Italy (Corresponding author)  E-mail: gianpaolo.cimellaro@polito.it