31 static and dynamic engineering systems  using quantitative and /or qualitative  data.  The uncertainty in the input s 657 
and in the variables  relationships is accounted for and  propagated  through out the model; h ence, the output is 658 
probabilistic in nature.  Two illustrative examples  were  presented in the paper. T he first is  a static system that 659 
uses the indicators of the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) to assess  the resilience of a country, while the 660 
second is a transportation network  modeled  as a dynamic system. The examples  demonstrate  the applicability 661 
of the framework  for both  static and dynamic systems.  662 
In the static analysis, the indicators are the main determinant of the resilience output. A highly uncertain state 663 
of the indicator (i.e., uniform probability distribution among the indicator’s states) would result in a high 664 
standard deviation in the probability distribution of the  resilience states.  For the dynamic analysis , results show 665 
a nonlinear behavior  of resilience as a function of time. T he recovery variables play a  significant role in the 666 
resilience assessment, where the resilience function shows an increasing trend  whose slope depends  on the 667 
recovery capacity of the system. The damage variables also contribute to the overall resilience output as they 668 
are the primar y determinant of the system’s functionality drop following the disaster event. A large functionality 669 
drop would result in a longer re covery time under the same  recovery characteristics  of a system . In both static 670 
and dynamic analys es, the uncertainty is in troduced in the indicators ’ initial conditions. This is rather useful 671 
when determini stic numbers are not available to initiate the analysis.  672 
The quantitative resilience analysis tools that can be readily available to  system designers to model and quantify 673 
engineering resilience are still underdeveloped. This paper aims at motivat ing the resilience community to agree 674 
on the proposed universal resilience framework . The presented framework  provides a tool for decision -makers 675 
to systematically learn about the state of their system s given a specific event. It allows them to improve the 676 
system s’ performance  using the backward analysis feature of BN. This is done by setting a desirable state of the 677 
resilience and getting the variables inputs that lead to the predefined  resilience state.  678 
There is a number of limitations in the proposed BN and DBN approaches. F irst, the need to include subjectivity 679 
during  the different phases of model development and analysis. This is unavoidable because the main feature 680 
of BN is to substitute missing data with expert judgment , which is subjective. This can be partially addresse d 681 
by using multiple experts. Another limitation is the increased complexity of the model as the analyzed system 682 
increases in size and detail. When the system is complex, the mission of classifying the variables and connecting 683 
them to one another becomes so phisticated and involves more subjectivity.  In addition, BN is a directed acyclic 684 
graph, which means that if a variable depends on another variable the reverse is not true. This limits the 685 
possibility of modeling some real -life situations where two variabl es can be dependent on each other. This can 686 
be artificially solved by introducing the same variable twice in the network, one time as a dependent variable 687 
and another time as a leading variable. However, this can also cause some consequences on the final o utput and 688 
on the dynamic s of the system. Finally, DBN presents an additional limitation, which is the complexity in 689 
connecting variables at different temporal states. It can be challenging to identify which variables can affect 690 
other variables at another t ime step.  691