13 Q8- National and local risk assessments take account of regional /trans boundary risks, with a view to regional 
cooperation on risk reduction.  P2-P3 
(3) 
Use knowledge, innovation, and 
education to build a culture of 
safety and resilience at all levels  Q9- Relevant information on disasters is available and accessible at all levels, to all stakeholders (through networks, 
development of information sharing systems , etc.) P2 
Q10- School curricula, education material , and relevant training include disaster risk reduction and recovery 
concepts and practices.  P3 
Q11- Research methods and tools for multi -risk assessments and cost -benefit analysis are developed and 
strengthened.  P2-P3 
Q12- Countrywide public awareness strategy exists to stimulate a culture of disaster resilience, with outreach to 
urban and rural communities.  P2 
(4) 
Reduce the underlying risk 
factors  Q13- Disaster risk reduction is an integral objective of environment -related policies and plans, including for land 
use natural resource management and adaptation to climate change.  P1 
Q14- Social development policies and plans are being implemented to reduce the vulnerability of populations most 
at risk.  P1 
Q15- Economic and productive sectorial policies and plans have been implemented to reduce the vulnerability of 
economic activities  P1 
Q16- Planning and management of human settlements incorporate disaster risk reduction components, including 
enforcement of building co des. P1 
Q17- Disaster risk reduction measures are integrated into post -disaster recovery and rehabilitation processes  P3 
Q18- Procedures are in place to assess the disaster risk impacts of major development projects, especially 
infrastructure.  P3 
(5) 
Strengthen disaster preparedness 
for effective response at all 
levels  Q19- Strong policy, technical and institutional capacities and mechanisms for disaster risk management, with a 
disaster risk reduction perspective , are in place.  P1-P2 
Q20- Disaster preparedness plans and contingency plans are in place at all administrative levels, and regular training 
drills and rehearsals are held to test and develop disaster response programs.  P3 
Q21- Financial reserves and contingency mechanisms are in place to support effective response and recovery when 
required.  P2-P3 
Q22- Procedures are in place to exchange relevant information during hazard events and disasters, and to undertake 
post-event reviews  
 P2 
 342 
 343 
Figure 5 Bayesian Network of the Hyogo framework indicators  344 
 345