Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:3
underwater site collected by the current sensor are obtained, the sensor data is processed by the
digital twins inference model. In this way, the status data of the underwater station is obtained,
therebyimprovingtheaccuracyandefficiencyofobtainingtheoperatingstatusofthestationand
reducinglaborcosts.Moreover,afterthestatusdataoftheunderwaterstationisobtained,thedig-
italtwinsdisplaymodelfurthervisualizestheoperatingstatusofthestation,whichisconvenient
for users to intuitively obtain the operating status of the station and is beneficial to improve the
userexperience.
At present, various countries in the world have been making breakthroughs in the field of
UWSNsresearch.ThemorerepresentativeprojectsincludeSeaweb,Ocean-TUNEoftheUSNavy,
and SUNRISE and CommsNet 12 of Europe.They have accumulated a lot of experience in the ex-
periment,andhavetriedtoaddmobilenodessuchasAUVtothenetwork,achievinggoodresults.
But there is no research on fully self-organized underwater mobile cluster networking. The key
torealizingunmannedmobileclusternetworkingiswhetherthenodesaresufficientlyintelligent,
which requires a large number of intelligent algorithm support. The research of underwater mo-
bileclustershastoconsidernotonlytheintelligenceofclusters,butalsoaseriesofcomplexissues
that affect network performance. The marine monitoring network is explored, and the informa-
tiontransmissionmechanismandnetworkcoverageofUWSNsarediscussedinthisstudy.Taking
sensor nodes as agents, a multiple access mechanism based on the propagation characteristics of
underwater acoustic signals is put forward with the guidance of the power allocation strategy of
network node game. Furthermore, a reliable underwater data transmission protocol is proposed
to enhance the reliability and robustness of underwater data transmission, and its performance
is verified by simulation experiments. Finally, the digital twins of the ship are generated through
data-driven and physical model-driven methods to realize the prediction of ship navigation. The
relatively systematic research in this study compensates the lack of information transmission ef-
ficiencyinthefieldofunderwatersensors,therebypromotingtheconstructionandimprovement
of MICNsystem.
2 EXPERIMENTAL AND COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS
2.1 Design of MICN System
2.1.1 Architecture Design of the MICN System. The collection, analysis, processing, and effec-
tivetransmissionofmarineinformationisthecoreofmarinetechnology.Themarinenetworksys-
temismainlydividedintothemarinenetworkandtheunderwaternetwork.Themarinenetwork
assists marine users to expand more marine services by obtaining monitoring data, and the
underwater network is mainly to monitor and transmit various marine data [ 15,16]. For the
transmission of marine data information, it is necessary to cross the water-air interface, and
the efficient integration of the underwater acoustic network and the radio network is required
inthedatainformationtransmissionnetworkarchitecture.Thecurrentsingleunderwaterormar-
itime network system mainly relies on the Internet and satellite communication technology to
transmit the collected marine data information to the land. The marine users only can obtain the
required information from transmission by a land data center. The MICN system leads to very
hightransmissioncosts,highenergyconsumptionofthenetwork,andobviousdelay[ 17].There-
fore,anewmarinenetworkarchitecturehastobedesignedtocollecttheunderwatermonitoring
data and the efficient acquisition of UWSNs data effectively by sea users. Based on MWMN, an
MICN system integrating the offshore and underwater networks is proposed by combining with
the UWSNs. The overall architecture is shown in Figure 1. The MICN system consists of three
parts: the MWMN and intelligent data gateway (IDG) and theunderwater wireless sensor
network (UWWSN) .
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.