39:10 Z.Lv et al.
The objective of sensor node is to place the sensor nodes, reaching the maximal value η(E).
WhenHA(E)reachesthemaximal value log m,η(E)can be1.
AFSA adopts a bottom-up optimization idea to design the perceptionand behavior mechanism
of a single individual, and then place one entity or a group of entities in the environment, allow-
ing them to solve problems in the interaction of the environment [ 41]. Artificial fish have four
behaviors: foraging, clustering, rear-end collision, and random. Each fish will try before moving
to decide which action can be taken. The steps of the AFS algorithm are summarized as follows.
Thesettingsareinitialized,includingthesizeofthepopulation,theinitialpositionoftheartificial
fish, thefield of view (FOV) of the artificial fish, the step length, and the crowding factor. The
fitnessvalueofeachindividualintheinitialfishschooliscalculated,andtheoptimalartificialfish
stateanditsassignmentareselectedtothebulletinboard.Eachindividualisevaluatedtoselectthe
behaviortobeperformed,includingforaging,clustering,rear-endcollision,andrandombehavior.
The behavior of artificial fish is implemented and a new fish school is generated. All individuals
areevaluatedtocheckifanyindividualisbetterthanthebulletinboard,whichshouldbereplaced
withtheindividualifyes.Whentheoptimalsolutiononthebulletinboardreacheswithinthesat-
isfactoryerrorrangeorwhentheupperlimitofthenumberofiterationsisreached,theoperations
of thealgorithmiscompleted,orotherwisestep3 canbe repeated.
Forthedeploymentofnetworkareacoverage,sensornodescanbedeemedastheartificialfish
in AFSA, and events can be considered as food. According to the principle of fish school system
operationmode,adistributedhybridFSOAisproposedforUWSNs.InthemonitoringareaA,the
allowable congestion σ(si)atsensornode sjis definedasfollows:
σ(si)=ψ×Ne(si) (8)
IntheEquation( 8)abo v e ,ψreferstotheexpectedcoverage ofasingle event,and Ne(si)refers
to thenumberof eventscovered,whichcanbeexpressedasfollows:
Ne(si)=/summationdisplay
ej∈Ep(ei,sj) (9)
Thenumberofnodeswithinthecommunicationrangeandsensingrangeofsensornode sjare
Ns
ne(si)andNs
co(si),respectively,whichcanbe writtenas follows:
Ns
ne(si)=card (λ(sj)) (10)
Ns
co(si)=card (γ(sj)) (11)
Intheaboveequations, λ(sj)andγ(sj)arethesetsofnodes sjwithinthecommunicationradius
and sensingrange, respectively.
Ifthenumberofpartnersinthevisibledomainof sjissettoNs
ne(si)>0,theoptimalnode sopt
in theinformationpool Csumcanbedetermined:
sopt=argmax
sk∈Csum/braceleftbigNs
ne(sk)/bracerightbig(12)
If there are more events covered at sopta n di ti sn o tt o oc r o w d e d ,t h e ni tc a nm o v et ot h e
directionof partner sopt:
Xnext=Xi+rand (l)×Xopt−Xi
/bardblXopt−Xi/bardbl(13)
In the Equation ( 13)a b o v e ,lrefers to the value of the moving step, and XiandXoptare the
positionvectorsof siandsopt,respectively.
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.