39:8 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.5. UWSNs under 3D monitoring.
the battery of sensor nodes, and the network coverage loopholes caused by energy consumption
problemswillcontinuetoincrease.Reducingtheenergyconsumptionofsensornodescanprolong
the life cycle of the network. It can avoid the premature end of the life cycle of the network by
keeping the balance of energy consumption of the nodes in the network due to the premature
disappearanceof theenergy consumptionof some nodes.
According to the mobility of underwater sensor nodes, network coverage deployment algo-
rithms can currently be classified into three categories: static deployment, self-adjusting deploy-
ment, and mobile-assisted deployment. The static deployment assumes that all sensor nodes are
staticaftertheinitialdeploymentandfixedontheseasurfacebuoyoranchoredontheseabed[ 38].
The strategy of static deployment is more energy-efficient and easy to operate, but such manual
deploymentofsensornodesistoodifficulttooperateunderwaterandisnotsuitableforscenarios
wherethenetworkscaleisexpandedorthetopologychanges.Ifthedeploymentofsensornodesis
achievedbyadjustingthedepthoftheautomaticinflatablebuoy,thenetworkcoveragecanadopt
the self-adjusting deployment to achieve better coverage of the monitoring area by the network.
3D random deployment does not require the coordination of ground base stations. The sensor
nodes are randomly deployed at the bottom of the target area, and then the depth is randomly
selected.Thedifferencebetweenthebottomrandomdeploymentandthe3Drandomdeployment
is that the location of each sensor node will be informed by the ground base station [ 39]. Sen-
sor nodes can adjust the depth by applying repulsive force until the sensor monitoring overlap
area among nodes disappears. If there are other portable underwater mobile sensor nodes in the
monitoring area, the nodes in UWSNs can communicate with the mobile nodes and cooperate to
complete underwater monitoring tasks. Compared with ordinary sensor nodes, underwater sen-
sor nodes are more flexible, and they can move autonomously and collect data as needed, but its
energy consumptionisthemost obvious.
It can effectively avoid the energy loss caused by blind movement of sensor nodes while the
range of sensing and monitoring is expanded to enable connected nodes to share information.
Thedeploymentofsensornodesintheunderwatermonitoringareaisdescribed,andadistributed
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.