39:6 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.3. Themarine underwater environment.
have the ability to perceive the spectrum of other underwater acoustic systems, and can realize
multi-userspectrumsharingandmulti-channelspectrumaccessandmanagement.Spectrumsens-
ing is to detect the underwater spectrum occupancy. In the UWSNs where underwater mammals
arethemainusers,ifthedistributiondensityofsensingusersistoolarge,itmaynotbepossibleto
obtainsufficientandaccuratesensingdata.Thepositioningalgorithmisasub-linkinthespectrum
sensingmodule,whichcanpositiontheunderwatermammalsfoundinthespectrumdetectionand
pass the position information to the power control module [ 29–31]. The operation result of spec-
trum sensing is undertaken as the basis, and the channel quality measurement index is finally
set by describing the different characteristics of the idle frequency band. In UWSNs, interference
amongsensornodescanbeavoidedbythepowercontrolonly,whichreducestheinterferenceand
impactsof underwatermammals on themain userand improving thenetworkthroughput.
In sensor nodes, the sensor is responsible for data collection; the processor stores and process
the data, realizing control of the entire node; and the wireless communication module is for
transmitting data and control information. The battery is generally deemed as an energy supply
module and is mainly to provide energy for the first three modules. Since the data collected by
UWSNs usually does not change for a long time, it is necessaryto implement a data compression
strategy to reduce the energy consumption during transmission of a large amount of redundant
data. When the underwater node uploads the collected data to the gateway, the gateway makes
the decision with the best energy saving effect based on the data upload decision mechanism at
this time. In the MICN designed in this study, the gateway will send the data to the MWMN for
transmission after the data collected underwater is received. There will be a big difference for
marineWMNduetothewirelesschannelcharacteristicsoftheUWWSN,andthecommunication
protocol different from VHF-WMN is required. In general, there are differences between marine
WMNs and underwater sensors in terms of transmission media and communication protocols.
Therefore, the MICN system should be equipped with a protocol conversion intelligent gateway
to realize themonitor of datainformation and management of UWSNsbyseausers.
2.2 Intelligent Coverage and Transmission Optimization of 3D UWSNs
2.2.1 Topological Structure Model of UWSNs. At present, the more common UWSNs include
twostructures:a two-dimensional(2D) networkforstaticmonitoringanda three-dimensional
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.