39:4 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.1. Architectureof MICN System.
In a traditional wireless local area network (WLAN) , each client accesses the network
through a wireless link connected to an access point (AP) . Users have to first visit a fixed AP to
realize communication with each other. Such network structure is called the single-hop network
[18–20].InanMWMN,anywirelessdevicenodecanactasanAPandaroutersynchronously,each
node has the ability of sending and receiving signals and directly communicates with one node
or more peer nodes. The robustness of the Mesh network is more in contrast to the single-hop
network, because it does not depend on the performance of a single node. Failure of any node in
asingle-hopnetworkcancausethebreakdownoftheentirenetwork.Thereisoneorseveraldata
transmission paths for each node in the Mesh network [ 21–23]. Mesh adopts the standard 802.11
standard protocol, which can be widely compatible with wireless client terminals. The maritime
Meshnetworkismainlycomposedofcommunicationnodes.Thedatacollectedbythesensornet-
workcanbetransmittedandsharedamongdifferentnodesthrough voiceoverInternetprotocol
(VoIP).
UWSNismainlyaself-organizingnetworkconstructedbyunderwatersensornodeswithcom-
munication and computing capabilities. Using the underwater acoustic communication method
basedonhigh-speedmulti-carriertransmissiontechnology,thenoderealizesthecollectionofun-
derwaterresourcesandenvironmentalinformationbycarryingdifferentsensors.Furthermore,the
collecteddataistransmittedtotheunderwatersinknode,andthenuploadedtothemarinesmart
data gateway [ 24]. The node concept of UWWSN has been expanded from traditional sensors to
newconceptnodeformsincludingautonomousunderwaterrobots,ships,submarines,torpedoes,
mines, and surface buoys. The sensor network system usually is composed of sensor nodes, sink
nodes (receivers), and management nodes (servers). The data under the monitor of sensor nodes
aretransmittedinmultiplehopsalongthesensorbackbonenodes(clusterheads).Themonitored
datamaybeprocessedbymultiplenodes,thenroutedtothesinknodeaftermultiplehops,andfi-
nally reach the management node through the Internet or satellite [ 25–27] .T h es e n s o rc a nb e
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.