Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:15
whilemaximizingthethroughputofthenetwork.Intheexclusivemode,thepowerallocationop-
timizationcanbeexpressedasEquation( 28),andthetwoconstraintscanbeexpressedasEquation
(29):
maxui(pi,P−i)=log/parenlefttpA
/parenleftbtA1+hi·pi/summationtextN−1
j=1hi·pi+σ2/parenrighttpA
/parenrightbtA−αi·pi (28)
s.t.
pi∈[0,Pmax](1≤i≤N)
hi·pi/summationtextN−1
j=1hi·pi+σ2≥SINRth(1≤i≤N)(29)
Comparedwiththesharedmode,theexclusivemoderemovesthethirdconstraintusedtolimit
theimpactsonanimals, and thenode cansenddata packetsatthemaximum power.
The Bellhop model is adopted to describe the underwater acoustic propagation characteristics,
so as to verify the performance of the PLA and PoCA algorithms proposed in the underwater
environment. The experimental data come from the Ocean-TUNE underwater network test bed
(located in the Long Island Strait) deployed in a real environment. The reflection coefficients of
thebottomandwatersurfacearesetto1and −1,respectively,andfouranchornodesaredeployed
ata waterdepthof50m.
2.2.4 Reliable Transmission Protocol for Underwater Acoustic Sensors Based on Coding. Under-
waterinformationtransmissionwillcausehighbiterrorrateduetospecialenvironmentalfactors,
so it is necessary to design a reliable transmission protocol based on error control strategies. The
traditionalerrorcontrolstrategiesaremainlyclassifiedintofourtypes: errordetection(ED),au-
tomaticretransmissionrequest(ARQ),forwarderrorcorrectioncoding(FEC) ,andHARQ
[46–48]. In HARQ, the number of retransmission and the bit error rate can be lowered using the
FEC, and the packet data transmission is guaranteed by the ARQ retransmission. Therefore, the
HARQmechanismcanbedeterminedasacompromisesolution,whichcancorrecttheerrorsau-
tomaticallyduetothecapabilityoferrorcorrection.Thesenderisrequiredtoretransmitthedata
undertheconditionofoutoftherangeoftheerrorcorrection.Itnotonlyimprovesthereliability
of thesystem,butalsoelevatesthetransmissionefficiencyof thesystem.
A reliable transmission protocol NC-HARQ is proposed based on the combination of NC and
HARQ, which makes full use of the cooperative nodes and the hierarchical gains of multi-node
transmissionin thenetwork,and finally obtainstheoptimaltransmissionsystem.Thedata send-
ingprocessandreceivingprocessofNC-HARQprotocolareshowninFigure 8.Duringtheretrans-
mission,ifthesendingnodereceivesthesuccessfullydecodedinformation,buttherelaynodedoes
not receive the next hop node confirmation, the sending node will terminate the retransmission,
andtherelaynodewithbetterchannelconditionswillperformthedataretransmission.Basedon
the automatic feedback of ARQ, the NC-HARQ protocol can reduce transmission failures caused
by randomburstpacketloss,therebyimprovingthereliabilityof thesystem.
In this study, the routing protocols are divided into energy-balanced and non-energy-balanced
routing protocols. According to the different selection methods of the route candidate node set,
the non-energy-balanced routing is divided into sending-based and receiving-based hybrid rout-
ing, and energy-balanced routing is divided into variable power and fixed power routing accord-
ing to whether the node has variable transmission power. For underwater routing based on the
receivingend,theselectionofthenexthopsendingnodesetisdeterminedbythereceivingnode
that receives the data packet. Under this system, the sender no longer stores the information of
neighbornodes.Atthebeginningofdatatransmission,thesendingnodepackspartofthecontrol
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.