Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:21
increases. The calculated average positioning success rate is 89.4% in scenario one and 87.3% in
scenario two. Therefore, the deployment of anchor nodes will have an impact on the positioning
success rate. The average positioning error of mammals at different speeds in the two scenes is
illustratedinFigure 11below.
Furthermore, the performance of the PoCA algorithm is evaluated through simulation experi-
ments, including the throughput of the network under different v values and the influence of the
detectedmammalianmotiononthenetworkperformance.Thecurvesoftheeffectivethroughput
of the network at different v values in the two scenarios are shown in Figure 12. When there are
several mammals, the sensor node will switch to shared mode; and in the exclusive mode where
nomammalsaredetected,noderequeststhatallowparalleltransmissionwillbepostponed.Inthe
casewheremammals aremostseverelyaffected(v =v1),theeffectivethroughputofthenetwork
can still reach 85% of the throughput without mammals. At different speeds (v values), the effec-
tivethroughputofnetworkofthePoCAalgorithmcanbeincreasedby30% ∼50%comparedwith
the classic underwater medium access control (MAC) protocol and slotted floor acquisition
multiple access (SFAMA) protocol. Therefore, the PoCA algorithm can effectively improve the
capacityof multiplexing space,allowingmore paralleltransmission.
End-to-end delay is an important indicator for evaluating the network performance. It is eval-
uated in different speed scenarios through simulation experiments in this study, and the results
are shown in Figure 13. It can be found that the presence of underwater mammals enhances the
end-to-endtimedelay.Whenthemovingdirectionisthesame,themovingspeedofthemammalis
lower,whichcausesalongertimedelay.Thereasonisthattheslowmovementspeedofthemam-
malmeansthattheimpactonthenetworklastsforalongtime,duringwhichthetransmissionof
many data packetsisdelayed,resultinginan increaseinend-to-end delay.
3.3 Performance Analysis of NC-HARQ Reliable Transmission Protocol
The comparison results of the transmission redundancy of the three transmission protocols at
different distances are shown in Figure 14(a). Due to the impacts from integer quantization, the
redundancy is higher when the distance between nodes is shorter and K =4; the change of the
value of K has less influence on the redundancy when the distance between nodes increases. As
thedistanceincreases,theredundancyoftheFECprotocolincreasesmore.Figure 14(b)illustrates
thecomparisonresultofthesuccessrateofthedatapackettransmissionofthethreeprotocolsat
different distances. The FEC protocol encodes K original data packets and sends them, and all K
datapacketsfailtobesentwhenthenumberofencodingscan’tresistthehighpacketlossratein
thechannel,sotheoveralltransmissionsuccessrateislow.HARQaddsafeedbackretransmission
link,whichimprovesthetransmissionsuccessrateincontrasttotheFEC.Butonlyonedatapacket
isretransmitted,soallerrorscan’tbecorrected.TheNC-HARQprotocolproposedappliesarelay
node for retransmission, and the probability of successful retransmission is obviously higher in
contrast to that of the source node. When the distance is larger than 2,000 m, the success rate of
datapacketsis ashighas 99.6%.
Therelationshipbetweenthenormalizedenergyconsumptionofdatapackettransmissionand
thecommunicationdistanceisanalyzedunderthethreeprotocols,asshowninFigure 15(a).HARQ
improvesthesuccessfuldeliveryrateofthesystemcomparedtoFEC,thenormalizedenergycon-
sumption is slightly reduced. In contrast to the other two protocols, the NC-HARQ protocol pro-
posed increases the redundancy, but improves the successful delivery rate of the system greatly,
sotheenergyconsumptionrequiredforthesuccessfuldeliveryofadatapacketisrelativelylower.
Therefore, the efficiency of the system has been effectively improved. The end-to-end time delay
under the three protocols is shown in Figure 15(b). It can be found that the FEC protocol can re-
duce the delay in the feedback propagation process by increasing the transmission redundancy.
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.