Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:7
Fig. 4. UWSNs under dynamicmonitoring.
(3D)network for dynamic monitoring [ 32,33]. The 2D network structure is formed based on the
fuzzyperceptionmodelandisgenerallycomposedofnodesdeployedonthesealeveloranchored
on the seabed, as shown in Figure 4. In the 2D network structure, there are lots of sensor nodes
to detect the surrounding area of interest on the seafloor plane. Each sensor node is connected to
thejointpointoftheunderwaternetworkthroughtheacousticlinkaccordingtothecorrespond-
ing clustering algorithm, and the gateway node further transmits the collected data to the data
processing base station on the surface. The underwater gateway node can directly communicate
with the surface base station in the shallower ocean area; while the underwater gateway node
has to communicate with the surface base station through a transducer that can support long-
distance communication in the deep ocean area. When the amount of underwater data is large
and the coverage area is wide, the data between the gateways is fused based on the fuzzy data
fusionmechanism,andthenthefuseddataistransmittedtothemaingatewaynodethroughrelay
multi-hoptransmission[ 34].
Comparedwiththe2Dnetwork,the3DUWSNsaremorepowerfulwithmorecomplexnetwork
structure.ThenetworkarchitectureisshowninFigure 5.Inthe3Dnetworkstructure,sensornodes
are distributed in sea areas of different depths. They are fixed sensor nodes on the anchor on the
seabedorontheplatformonthewatersurfacethroughcables,andthelattermethodiseasier.Itis
preciselybecausesensornodesaredeployedatdifferentseadepthsthatthe3Dnetworkmonitors
theunderwaterareamoreextensivelyandcomprehensively.Intermsofdatatransmission,routing
algorithms are generally adopted to determine a reliable path from sensor nodes to surface base
stations [ 35–37]. If the distance between the node and the surface base station is relatively long,
datacan betransmittedbyusinga multi-hoprelay.
2.2.2 Network Smart Coverage based on Swarm Intelligence Algorithm. The coverage control
of UWSNs can be described as by determining the coverage deployment strategy or topological
structure of sensor nodes, so that the sensor nodes can cooperate with each other to realize the
comprehensive management of the monitoring area. The influence of underwater environment
characteristics, channel bandwidth, and node energy supply will hinder the effective coverage of
the network. In addition, special underwater environmental factors make it difficult to substitute
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.