39:20 Z.Lv et al.
Fig.10. Thecomparisonofthecoverageofnodeeventsandthetotalmovingdistanceofthetwoalgorithms.
nodes.Inthethreesetsofexperiments,thecomparisonofthecoverageofnodeeventsandtheto-
tal moving distance of the two algorithms in the running process is shown in Figure 10(a) and
Figure10(b), respectively. In the first set of experiments, the coverage of the FSOA algorithm can
reach 0.78 after five iterations when 35 events are distributed in a T-shape. The dynamic adjust-
ment capability of the PSO algorithm is relatively good, but the FSOA algorithm realizes more
stability throughout the deployment. In the second and third sets of experiments, the FSOA algo-
rithm is better than the PSO algorithm in terms of event coverage and total movement distance.
Therefore, the FSOA algorithm not only exhibits a wider coverage capability, but also overcomes
the blindness of the traditional algorithm for random search, with fast convergence speed and
betterstability.
In summary, both algorithms require to move significantly in the initial deployment phase, so
theinitialtotalnodemovementdistanceisrelativelylarge.Asthedeploymentfurtherdeepens,the
rangeofmovementgraduallydecreases.TheFSOAalgorithmrealizesinformationsharingamong
different nodes on the basis of the information pool, so that the blind movement of nodes can be
avoided effectively. Compared with the PSO algorithm, the FSOA can obviously reduce the total
movement distanceofnodes duringthedeployment.
3.2 Evaluation on Multiple Access Performance of UWSNs
Two anchor node deployment scenarios are set, and 1,000 points in the monitoring range are
randomlyselectedasthepossiblelocationsforanimalstocomprehensivelyassesstheperformance
ofthePLApositioningalgorithm.AUWSNsimulationsoftwareAqua-SimbasedonNS2isadopted
tocompletethesimulation,andsomeofthephysicallayermodulesaremodifiedtomeettheneeds
of transmission power adjustment. The coordinates of the four anchor nodes in scene one are:
A (0,0,0), B (2000,0,0), C (0,2000,0), and D (2000,0,0), respectively. Standard triangular pyramid
structure is set in the scene two. With reference to the speed range of mammals, four unequal
speeds are set as v1 =5m / s ,v 2 =10 m/s, v3 =15 m/s, and v4 =20 m/s, respectively. The actual
positionoftheanimaliscomparedwiththepositionresultobtainedbythepositioningalgorithm
to assess the performance of the PLA algorithm. The magnitude and direction of the movement
speedofunderwatermammalswillaffectthepositioningsuccessrate,butthespeeddoesnothave
a functional relationship. In the PLA determination algorithm proposed, the absolute frequency
deviation of the received signal increase to varying degrees as the movement speed of mammals
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.