39:2 Z.Lv et al.
ACM Reference format:
ZhihanLv,DongliangChen,HailinFeng,WeiWei,andHaibinLv.2022.ArtificialIntelligenceinUnderwater
Digital Twins Sensor Networks. ACMTrans.Sen.Netw. 18, 3,Article 39 (April 2022), 27pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3519301
1 INTRODUCTION
Asscholarsfromallovertheworldpaymoreattentiontomarinetechnologytoanunprecedented
strategic height, marine resource survey, marine environmental monitoring, and sea area secu-
ritycanberealizedthroughsatellites,ships,andsubmarines[ 1].Butthesemethodsareunableto
completethesetasksoveralongtime,atcloserange,seamless,andinreal-time.Asanunderwater
monitoring network system composed of acoustic communication sensor nodes, UWSN has now
become an important part of ocean informatization [ 2–4]. The use of sensor networks can obtain
marinedataforalongtime,monitorthemarineenvironment,andcooperatewithtraditionalship
platforms to jointly complete more complex tasks [ 5]. In recent years, the research of UWSNs
mainly involves underwater communication technology, layout and networking, routing proto-
cols,andlocationtracking[ 6].Communicationandpositioningarethetwocorekeytechnologies
that support UWSNs. Underwater acoustic communication provides a link channel for informa-
tionexchangeamongdifferentnodes.Ontheonehand,underwateracousticpositioningprovides
positioncalibrationforthenodes;ontheotherhand,asthedynamicnodeoftheunderwatersen-
sor network, the underwater unmanned submarine can carry a variety of equipment to perform
underwatertasks,anditsmaneuverabilitygreatlyexpandstheapplicationfieldoftheUWSNs[ 7].
The digital twins is considered to be an effective means to realize the interactive integration
of the manufacturing information world and the physical world. It makes full use of the physical
models,sensorupdates,andoperatinghistorytocompletethemappingofphysicalentitiesinthe
virtualspace,therebyreflectingthelifecycleprocessofphysicalentities[ 8–10].Asthecoretech-
nologyforcreatingandrunningdigitaltwins,simulationtechnologyisthebasisfordigitaltwinsto
realizedatainteractionanddatafusion.Onthisbasis,thedigitaltwinshastorelyonandintegrate
othernewtechnologiestobeonlinewiththesensor,soastoensureitsfidelity,instantaneity,and
closed-loop characteristics. The Internet of Things (IoT) allow to access the information about
thephysicalworld,anddigitaltwinscanuse,analyze,optimize,andtestthisinformation[ 11].Data
miningandIoTtechnologyarethemaindrivingfactorsofdigitaltwins.Withthegradualmaturity
of technology, digital twins has begun to be applied in fields other than manufacturing [ 12]. By
continuously integrating the latest information, digital twins technology can bring the greatest
value, and combine the real data with virtual models for analysis, thereby reducing production
interruptions and costs. For example, engineers can access real-time data, simulation results, and
solutionsusingthedigitaltwins,efficientlyperforminghundredsofoperationaltasksfromalong
distance[ 13].
The sensor industry is showing explosive growth in the world, but it is also facing more new
challengeswiththevigorousdevelopmentofintelligentmanufacturing.Fortheunderwaterenvi-
ronmentwithhighcomplexity,theunderwateracousticchannelwillhaveaseriousimpactonthe
communication among the sensor nodes, and the existing underwater routing strategy is greatly
affected by the underwater environment [ 14]. Therefore, more in-depth research is needed in the
fieldofreliabletransmissionandroutingtechnologyforunderwateracousticsensornetworks.In
addition, when the multiple access mechanism of UWSNs is explored, it is not only necessary to
consider the competing access requirements of nodes within the network, but also to avoid harm
toothernetworkusers,achievingparalleltransmissionofmultiplecommunicationsandmaximize
network capacity and increasing the spatial reuse rate of spectrum. After the sensor data of the
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.