39:18 Z.Lv et al.
frameworkbasedonavirtualrealitysystemisproposed.Therealseaareadatabaseandhydrody-
namicdatabasearefirstdevelopedtoensuretheconsistencyofthemarineenvironmentandship
motion characteristics with physical entities. Then, a virtual ship based on the sensor data and
physical model is built, and the real sea environment and the virtual ship are finally rendered in
thesimulator.Aframeworkofdigitaltwinsbasedonshipsimulatorisproposedinthisstudy.First,
a real sea area database and a hydrodynamic database are established for the reproduction of the
realoceanenvironmentandthepredictionofshipmotion.Thesensordatacontainsthereal-time
motion state and control equipment information of the real ship, which are directly transmitted
to the navigation virtual reality system for driving the virtual ship. The fluid data information
obtained from the sensing equipment is introduced into the physical model for state prediction,
and the data collected by the actual ship can support the comparison and verification. The real
sea area database is to render the marine environment information to realize the digital twins
ofships.
2.3.2 Ship-Based Sensors and Virtual Ship. The ship simulator realized by VR technology can
simulate the marine environment and the operation process of the ship. The modeling of ships
and the marine environment includes not only 3D digital models such as port buildings, various
typesofships,andnavigationaids,butalsovariousphysicalmodelssuchasshipmotion,weather
conditions, wind, and waves. Based on the six-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) motion equation of
a rigid body,thedynamic modeloftheshipcanbe establishedas theequationsbelow:
η=[x,y,z,φ,θ,ϕ]T(38)
v=[u,v,w,p,q,r]T(39)
ηrefers to the 3D position and three-axis heading angle in the geographic coordinate system;
andvrefers to the three-axis speed and the three-axis angular velocity in the ship coordinate
system.
Basedonthetheoryoftimedomainunificationandmodularization,theshipkinematicsmodel
constructedis describedasfollows:
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩Mv=fH+fP+fR+fwind+fcurrent+fexc+fdrift
fH=−A(∞)v−B(∞)v−/integraltextt
0K(t−τ)[v(τ)−Ue1]dτ
−Cη+fNL−Hull (v)(40)
In the Equation ( 40)a b o v e ,wind, current, exc ,a n ddriftrefer to the environmental interference
force caused by wind, ocean current, first-order waves, and second-order waves, respectively; fH,
fP,a n dfRrefer to the forces generated by hull, propeller,and rudder, respectively; A, B,a n dKare
theadditionalmassmatrix,dampingcoefficientmatrix,andimpulseresponsefunctionofthehull,
respectively; Cisthehullradiationforcematrix;and fNL−Hull (v)representsthenonlinearviscous
force ofthehull.
ThemarineenvironmentisnumericallysolvedbasedontheWAVEWATCH-IIImodeltoensure
that the real marine environment is consistent with the marine environment in the digital twins.
Theenvironment vectorfieldis given as follows:
∂N
∂t+∇x(cд+U)N+∂
∂k∧
kN+∂
∂θ∧
θN=S
σ(41)
∧
k=−∂σ
∂d∂d
∂s−k∂U
∂s(42)
∧
θ=−1
k/parenleftBigg∂σ
∂d∂d
∂m−k∂U
∂m/parenrightBigg
(43)
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.