Artificial Intelligence inUnderwater Digital TwinsSensor Networks 39:5
Fig.2. Thestructureof UWSNs and theinternalstructureof nodes.
configured and managed through the management node, the monitoring tasks can be issued,
and the monitoring data can be collected. Underwater sensor nodes are mainly composed of a
maincontrolleror centralprocessingunit(CPU) ,andthecontrollerisconnectedtothesensor
through an interface circuit. The controller receives the sensor data and stores it in the memory,
and then sends the data to other network nodes through the underwater acoustic modem after
processing.ThestructureofUWSNsandtheinternalstructureofnodesareshownin Figure 2.
Since UWSNs and the maritime Mesh network use different communication signals, the net-
working and access methods of the network are different, and the network protocols are not
compatible. The corresponding gateway is designed for different networking to realize the in-
tercommunication between the underwater network and the maritime network. The main part
of the gateway is composed of three parts: underwater acoustic modem, very high frequency
(VHF)module,andBeidou +GPSpositioningmodule.Theunderwateracousticmodemadopts or-
thogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) modem, which realizes communication,
networking,andpositioningsynchronously.TheVHFmoduleadoptsawirelessdatatransmission
station, and the Beidou +GPS positioning module adopts a dual-mode positioning module. The
gateway has to make a data upload decision before the sensor nodes upload the collected data.
Sensor nodes realize the energy-saving and efficient transmission of collected data by executing
theuploaddecisionof thegateway.
2.1.2 Network Functional Architecture. CorrespondingtotheMICNsystem,thenetworksystem
functional architecture also includes three modules. The marine Mesh network is responsible for
sea surface information service and underwater data transmission; the intelligent gateway is to
collect and upload the underwater data, completing protocol conversion and data transfer; and
UWSNsisto collecttheunderwaterdatainformation [ 28].
The marine underwater environment (Figure 3) includes various types of artificial and natural
underwateracousticsystems,whichsimultaneouslyshareonlyafewhundredkilohertzofunder-
water acoustic channel bandwidth. The sound waves emitted and received by marine organisms
will affect the acoustic sensor system. Therefore, the sensor network in the MICN system should
ACM Transactions onSensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article39.Publicationdate:April 2022.