39:12 Z.Lv et al.
Fig. 6. Keyelements of PLA algorithm.
location information of the target. The distance measurement of the existing positioning algo-
rithm depends on the signal received by the anchor node, and it has to feed back a signal with a
time stamp when the target receives the signal. As the target node, mammals can’t provide the
above parameters through interaction [ 45]. Therefore, a target search algorithm based on the re-
ceived signal strength is proposed in this study to passively locate mammals. The algorithm can
search for the possible sound power of animals, and screen the sound power, and finally obtain
themost likely soundpowerina limited space.
In the signal detection stage, it is assumed that the anchor node has detected the signal and
completed the classification of mammals, and PLA will enter the information interaction stage.
Each anchor node sends an information packet containing its received signal information and its
own position information. In the final target positioning stage, each anchor node independently
solves the position information of mammals through the PLA algorithm. In the localization algo-
rithm, it has to consider the sound power range of the target first, and then search for the sound
sourcesoundpoweraccordingtoacertainstep.Foreachsoundsourceundertest,thecalculation
equationforthedistancebetweentheanchornodeandthepositioningtargetisgivenasfollows:
10logPs
Pr=A(d,f) (16)
A(d,f)=10k·logd+d
1000·logα(f) (17)
In the above equations, the distance between the anchor node and the positioning target is
denotedas d;freferstotheacousticsignalfrequency; Areferstothechannelgain; kreferstothe
propagation coefficient, which is set to 1.5; αis the absorption coefficient; and PsandPrare the
soundpowerandthereceivedpowerofthemeasuredsoundsource,respectively.
ThekeyelementsandmainprocessesofthePLAalgorithmareshowninFigures 6and7,respec-
tively. After the distance between the target and the anchor node is obtained, any two distances
should satisfy d1+d2>dABaccording to the relationship theorem of the three sides of the trian-
gle. Forthisalgorithm,ithasto calculatethedifferenceof thedistancebetweenthesoundsource
target and different anchor nodes, and each difference can establish a hyperboloid equation. Any
threehyperboloidequationsareselected,andtheintersectionpointisthelocationoftheposition-
ingtarget.Finally,ithastoverifywhethertheintersectionpointcorrespondstothesoundpower,
so astoobtaintheaccuratesoundsourcepositioninformation.
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, Vol. 18,No. 3,Article 39.Publicationdate:April 2022.