This implementation justi/f_ies the standard technique of weight decay in training deep
neural networks, which uses the L2norm of the weights as a regularization term [28].
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing litera-
ture regarding the generalization ability of deep neural networks in both theoretical and
empirical aspects. Section 3 provides necessary preliminaries. Section 4 summarises the
notation for deep neural networks with residual connections as the stem-vine framework.
Section 5 presents our main results: a covering bound for deep neural networks with
residual connections, a covering bound for ResNet, a generalization bound for ResNet, and
a practical implementation from the theoretical results. Section 6 collects all the proofs.
And Section 7 concludes this paper.
2 Related Works
Understanding the generalization ability has vital importance to the development of deep
neural networks. There already exist some results approaching this goal.
Zhang et al. conduct systematic experiments to explore the generalization ability of
deep neural networks [ 52]. They show that neural networks can almost perfectly /f_it the
training data even when the training labels are random. This paper attracts the community
of learning theory to the important topic that how to theoretically interpret the success of
deep neural networks.
Kawaguchi et al. discuss many open problems regarding the excellent generalization
ability of deep neural networks despite the large capacity, complexity, possible algorithmic
instability, nonrobustness, and sharp minima [ 24]. They also provide some insights to
solve the problems.
Harvey et al. prove upper and lower bounds on the VC-dimension of the hypothesis
space of deep neural networks with the activation function of ReLU [ 18]. Speci/f_ically, the
paper presents anO(WLlog(W))upper bound for the VC-dimension and an example of
such networks with the VC-dimension 
(WLlog(W=L )), whereWandLare respectively
denoted to the width and depth of the neural network. The paper also gives a tight bound
(WU)for the VC-dimension of any deep neural network, where Uis the number of the
hidden units in the neural network. The upper bounds of the VC-dimensions lead to an
O(h=N)generalization bound, where his the VC-dimension and Nis the training sample
size [38].
Golowich et al. study the sample complexity of deep neural networks and present upper
bounds on the Rademacher complexity of the neural networks in terms of the norm of the
weight matrix in each layer [ 15]. Compared to previous works, these complexity bounds
have improved dependence on the network depth, and under some additional assumptions,
are fully independent of the network size (both depth and width). The upper bounds on
the Rademacher complexity further lead to O(1p
N)upper bounds on the generalization
error of neural networks.
Neyshabur et al. explore several methods that could explain the generalization ability of
deep neural networks, including norm-based control, sharpness, and robustness [ 40]. They
3