1 Introduction
The recent years saw dramatic progress of deep neural networks [ 29,16,44,46,34,7].
Since ResNet [ 21], residual connections have been widely used in many state-of-the-art
neural network architectures [ 21,22,51], and lead a series of breakthroughs in computer
vision [ 27,1,33,20,9], data mining [ 50], and so forth. Numerous empirical results are
showing that residual connections can signi/f_icantly ease the diﬃculty of training deep
neural networks to /f_it the training sample while maintaining excellent generalization
ability on test examples. However, little theoretical analysis has been presented on the
eﬀect of residual connections on the generalization ability of deep neural networks.
Residuals connect layers which are not neighboured in chain-like neural networks.
These new constructions break the convention that stacking layers one by one to build
a chain-like neural network. They introduce loops into neural networks, which are
previously chain-like. Thus, intuitively, residual connections could signi/f_icantly increase
the complexity of the hypothesis space of the deep neural network, and therefore lead to a
signi/f_icantly worse generalization ability according to the principle of Occam’s razor, which
demonstrates a negative correlation between the generalization ability of an algorithm and
its hypothesis complexity. Leaving this problem elusive could set restrictions on applying
the recent progress of neural networks with residual connections to safety-critical domains,
from autonomous vehicles [ 23] to medical diagnose [ 13], in which algorithmic mistakes
could lead to fatal disasters.
In this paper, we explore the in/f_luence on the hypothesis complexity induced by residual
connections in terms of the covering number of the hypothesis space. An upper bound for
the covering number is proposed. Our bound demonstrate that, when the total number of
weight matrices involved in a neural network is /f_ixed, the upper bound on the covering
number remains the same, no matter whether the weight matrices are in the residual
connections or in the “stem”1. This result indicates that residual connections may not
increase the complexity of the hypothesis space compared with a chain-like neural network
if the total numbers of the weight matrices and the non-linearities are /f_ixed. Based on
the upper bound on the covering number, we further prove an O(1=p
N)generalization
bound for ResNet as an exemplary case for all neural networks with residual connections,
whereNis denoted to the training sample size. Based on our framework, generalization
bounds for similar architectures constructed by adding residual connections to chain-like
neural networks can be straightly obtained.
Our generalization bound closely depends on the product of the norms of all weight
matrices. Speci/f_ically, there is a negative correlation between the generalization ability of
a neural network with the product of the norms of all weight matrices. This feature leads
to a practical implementation:
To approach a good generalization ability, we need to use regularization terms
to control the magnitude of the norms of weight matrices.
1The “stem” is de/f_ined to denote the chain-like part of the neural network besides all the residuals. For
more details, please refer to Section 4.
2