bounds for all layers (see a detailed proof in [ 4]). However, residual connections introduce
paralleling structures into neural networks. Therefore, the computed mapping cannot be
directly expressed as a series of compositions of aﬃne/nonlinear transformations. Instead, to
approach a covering bound for the whole network, we are facing many additions of function
spaces (see, eq. (16)), where the former results cannot be straightly applied. To address this
issue, we provide a novel proof collected in Section 6.3.
Contrary to the diﬀerent proofs, the result for deep neural networks with residual
connections share similarities with the one for the chain-like network (see, respectively,
eq. (18) and eq. (20)). The similarities lead to the property summarised as follows.
The in/f_luences on the hypothesis complexity of weight matrices are in the
same way, no matter whether they are in the stem or the vines. Speci/f_ically,
adding an identity vine could not aﬀect the hypothesis complexity of the deep
neural network.
As indicated by eq. (20) in Lemma 3, the covering number of the hypothesis computed
by a chain-like neural network (including the stem and all the vines) is upper bounded
by the product of the covering number of all single layers. Speci/f_ically, the contribution
of the stem on the covering bound is the product of a series of covering numbers, i.e.,QL
j=1supFM(j)NM(j+1). In the meantime, applying eq. (20) in Lemma 3, the contribution
supFuNu;v;i
Vof the vine V(u;v;i )can also be decomposed as the product of a series of
covering numbers. Apparently, the contributions respectively by the weight matrices in
the stem and the ones in the vines have similar formulations. This result gives an insight
that residuals would not undermine the generalization capability of deep neural networks.
Also, if a vine V(u;v;i )is an identity mapping, the term in eq. (18) that relates to it is
de/f_initely 1, i.e.,Nu;v;i
V= 1. This is because there is no parameter to tune in an identity
vine. This result gives an insight that adding an identity vine to a neural network would
not aﬀect the hypothesis complexity.
However, it is worth noting that the vines could in/f_luence the part of the stem in the
covering bound, i.e., NM(j+1)in eq. (18). The mechanism of the cross-in/f_luence between
the stem and the vines is an open problem.
5.2 Covering Bound for ResNet
As an example, we analyze the generalization capability of the 34-layer ResNet. Analysis of
other deep neural networks under the stem-vine framework is similar. For the convenience,
we give a detailed illustration of the 34-layer ResNet under the stem-vine framework in
Figure 2.
There are one 34-layer stem and 16vines in the 34-layer ResNet. Each layer in the
stem contains one weight matrix and several Lipschitz-continuous nonlinearities. For most
layers with over one nonlinearity, the multiple nonlinearities are connected one by one
directly; we merge the nonlinearities as one single nonlinearity. However, the vine links
12