epochratio of changed lablels
0 100 200 300 4000.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
Figure 5. The ratio of changed labels in each batch gradually
declines, indicating ODC tends to be stable during training.
convergence of ODC throughout the full training iterations.
To measure the stability of our models, we record the ratio
of samples whose labels are changed in a batch. Intuitively,
fewer label switchings suggest a higher stability. We
report the ratio when different backbones are trained from
scratch with ODC. The curves begin with the highest label-
switching ratio, i.e., nearly 100% of samples in a batch
experience a switch in their labels. Gradually, the label-
switching ratio declines and converges to a relatively low
value. Though there is always a small portion of samples
altering their labels at last, ODC reaches a stable state.
Training on Long-Tailed Data. In all previous experi-
mens, we train our models on the class-balanced ImageNet
dataset. To evaluate the learning efﬁcacy of ODC on long-
tailed data, we perform experiments on downsampled long-
tail ImageNet following [ 64]. Speciﬁcally, we randomly
downsample 300 classes with 100K images from the orig-
inal ImageNet dataset to make different levels of long-tail
ImageNet datasets, where the ratio of the largest class to
the smallest class ranges from 1 (the non-long-tail level)
to 64 (the highest long-tail level). Figure 6shows the
performance of ODC trained on different levels of long-
tail ImageNet. We observe no signiﬁcant performance
drop even in the conditions with large long-tail degrees,
suggesting the robustness of our method on long-tailed data.
Visualization of Clusters. We visualize some selected
clusters as shown in Figure 7. Since the number of clusters
is much larger than that of the original annotations, there
will certainly be some clusters that represent new semantics
beyond the annotated classes. We ﬁnd new classes, e.g.,
“hand” and “feet”, and new relations, e.g., “animal in cage”,
“person holds dog” and “person leads dog with a rope”,
that are discovered by ODC. The phenomenon reveals the
potential of unsupervised learning to capture new semantics
beyond manual annotations.
5. Conclusion
We have proposed an effective joint clustering and
feature learning paradigm for unsupervised representation
learning. The proposed approach, Online Deep Clustering5050.55151.552
1 2 4 8 16 32 64mAP (%)
largest class : smallest class
Figure 6. The efﬁcacy of ODC trained on downsampled 300-class
100K long-tail ImageNet, with the ratio of the size of largest class
to smallest class ranging from 1 ( non-long-tail ) to 64 ( highly long-
tail). We report mAP on VOC07 SVM task with ResNet-50.
existing
classes
new
classes
new
relationscluster 0
cluster 1
cluster 5
cluster 9
cluster 20
cluster 60
cluster 24
cluster 23
cluster 33
Figure 7. This ﬁgure shows part of selected clusters. Each row
represents a cluster. Apart from the clusters that represents
existing classes in ImageNet annotations, shown in the green
box, we also ﬁnd some new classes discovered by ODC. For
example, the two rows in the blue box group “hand” and “feet”
respectively, while “hand” or “feet” is not a category in ImageNet
annotations. ODC also surprisingly groups images with similar
relations between objects. As shown in the orange box, the clusters
represent “animal in cage”, “person holds dog” and “person leads
dog with a rope” respectively.
(ODC), attains effective and stable unsupervised training
of deep neural networks, via decomposing feature cluster-
ing and integrating the process into iterations of network
update. ODC performs compellingly as an unsupervised
representation learning scheme alone. It can also be
used to ﬁne-tune and substantially improve previous self-
supervised learning methods.
Acknowledgements. This work is supported by the
SenseTime-NTU Collaboration Project, Singapore MOE
AcRF Tier 1 (2018-T1-002-056), NTU SUG, NTU NAP,
the Max Planck-NTU Joint Lab for Artiﬁcial Senses and
Data Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Lab. We
thank Yue Zhao for his participation in discussing the idea.
6695