Online Deep Clustering for Unsupervised Representation Learning
Xiaohang Zhan∗1, Jiahao Xie∗2, Ziwei Liu1, Yew Soon Ong2,3, Chen Change Loy2
1CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2Nanyang Technological University3AI3, A*STAR, Singapore
1{zx017, zwliu }@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
2{jiahao003, asysong, ccloy }@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
Joint clustering and feature learning methods have
shown remarkable performance in unsupervised represen-
tation learning. However, the training schedule alternating
between feature clustering and network parameters update
leads to unstable learning of visual representations. To
overcome this challenge, we propose Online Deep Clus-
tering (ODC) that performs clustering and network update
simultaneously rather than alternatingly. Our key insight
is that the cluster centroids should evolve steadily in keep-
ing the classiﬁer stably updated. Speciﬁcally, we design
and maintain two dynamic memory modules, i.e., samples
memory to store samples’ labels and features, and centroids
memory for centroids evolution. We break down the abrupt
global clustering into steady memory update and batch-
wise label re-assignment. The process is integrated into
network update iterations. In this way, labels and the net-
work evolve shoulder-to-shoulder rather than alternatingly.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that ODC stabilizes the
training process and boosts the performance effectively.
1. Introduction
Unsupervised representation learning [ 1,2,3,4,5,
6,7,8,9] aims at learning transferable image or video
representations without manual annotations. Among them,
clustering-based representation learning methods [ 10,11,
12,13,14] emerge as a promising direction in this
area. Different from recovering-based approaches [ 2,
3,4,8], clustering-based methods require little domain
knowledge [ 13] while achieving encouraging performances.
Compared to contrastive representation learning [ 15,16,
17] that captures merely intra-image invariance, clustering-
∗Equal Contribution.1 epoch
1 iterationDeep Clustering
Online Deep Clustering (ours)
Supervised Classificationunsupervised
uninterrupted
network update label update feature extraction1 epoch
(a)
(b)
training loss
iteration1 epoch
Figure 1. (a) Online Deep Clustering (ODC) seeks to reduce the
discrepancy in training mechanism between Deep Clustering (DC)
and supervised classiﬁcation via integrating clustering process into
network update iterations. ODC training is both unsupervised
and uninterrupted. (b) Compared to DC, ODC updates labels
continuously rather than in a pulsating manner, enabling the
representations to evolve steadily. The loss curves (only initial
32 epochs for clarity) show the stability of ODC. After training,
the loss is decreased to around 2.0 for ODC while 2.9 for DC.
based methods are able to explore inter-image similarity.
Unlike conventional clustering that is typically performed
on ﬁxed features [ 18,19], these works jointly optimize
clustering and feature learning.
While evaluations of early works [ 11,12] are mostly
6688