ing [ 13], we use AlexNet architecture without Local Re-
sponse Normalization and add batch normalization layers.
The ODC models for AlexNet and ResNet-50 are trained
from scratch. The batch size is 512 allocated to 8 GPUs.
The learning rate is constantly 0.01for AlexNet and 0.03for
ResNet-50 for 400 epochs, and decayed by 0.1for further
80 epochs. Following DC, the number of clusters is set as
10,000, which is 10 times larger than the annotated number
of classes of ImageNet. The momentum coefﬁcient mis
set as0.5. The threshold to identify small clusters is set
as 20. Varying this threshold does not affect the results
signiﬁcantly, provided that it does not exceed the average
number of samples in a cluster. The centroids memory
is updated in every 10 iterations. The centroids update
frequency constitutes a trade-off between learning efﬁcacy
and efﬁciency. In our experiments, we observe that as long
as the frequency is restricted to a reasonable range, the
performance of ODC is not sensitive to it.
4. Experiments
4.1. Evaluation on Unsupervised Representation
After pre-training the ODC model, we evaluate the qual-
ity of unsupervised features on standard downstream tasks
including ImageNet classiﬁcation, Places205 [ 62] classiﬁ-
cation, VOC2007 [ 63] SVM classiﬁcation, and VOC2007
Low-shot classiﬁcation. We provide the details of each
benchmark and show our competing results as follows.
Re-implementation of Deep Clustering. Since the origi-
nal paper of DC does not include ResNet-50, we implement
a DC model with ResNet-50. The DC model adopts the
same data augmentations as ODC, except that DC applies
a Sobel ﬁlter on images. For fair comparisons, the training
hyper-parameters of DC are the same as ODC except that
we empirically ﬁnd lr= 0.1is more suitable for DC.
ImageNet Classiﬁcation. Following the setup in Zhang et
al. [36], we keep the backbone including all convolution
and batch normalization layers frozen, and train a 1000-
way linear classiﬁer on features from different depths of
convolutional layers. The features are mapped to around
9000 dimensions via average pooling. We train all models
for 100 epochs in total, using SGD with a momentum of
0.9 and batch size of 256. The learning rate is initialized as
0.01, decayed by a factor of 10 after every 30 epochs. Other
hyper-parameters are set following Goyal et al. [57]. We
report top-1 center-crop accuracy on the ofﬁcial validation
split of ImageNet.
For AlexNet, as shown in Table 1, ODC has a con-
sistent improvement over DC in all conv layers, with the
largest improvement (6.7%) observed in conv1 layer. The
performance in conv1 layer surpasses the ImageNet pre-
trained model. With regard to the best-performing layer,
ODC achieves 41.4% on conv4 layer, outperforming thelatest LA [ 61], ranking only second to Rot-Decoupling [ 60].
Though ODC does not outperform Rot-Decoupling in its
best performing layer, it provides a complementary perspec-
tive to rotation based methods.
ODC also scales well with deeper architectures. For
ResNet-50, as shown in Table 2, ODC achieves 57.6%
center-crop accuracy in the conv5 layer, which is 5.4%
higher than the best performing layer of the re-implemented
DC. Compared with the concurrent state-of-the-art method
LA [ 61], our method produces competing results. Though
the result of conv5 is slightly lower than LA, ODC outper-
forms LA from conv1 to conv4 layers by large margins. We
observe a consistent performance increase from shallower
layers to deeper layers, indicating that ODC makes full use
of all residual layers.
Places205 Classiﬁcation. Following Zhang et al . [36],
to test the generalization ability on other domains, we
also transfer the learned models to Places205 dataset that
contains 2.45M images of 205 scene categories. Similar to
the experiments on ImageNet, we train a 205-way linear
classiﬁer on top of each frozen convolutional layer on
the train split of Places205, and report top-1 center-crop
accuracy on the standard validation split. The evaluation
setting and hyper-parameters are the same as those in the
ImageNet classiﬁcation task.
The results in Table 1show that ODC with AlexNet
as the backbone outperforms DC in all layers as well.
ODC surpasses all previous works on conv1, conv3 and
conv4 layers. Similar to the observation in the ImageNet
classiﬁcation task, ODC scales well on deeper architectures
when it is transferred to Places205 with ResNet-50. As
shown in Table 2, in all layers, ODC surpasses all previous
works, with the largest margin (3.1%) to the runner-up
observed in conv2 layer. With regard to the best performing
layer, ODC reaches 49.3% center-crop accuracy in the
conv5 layer, surpassing the re-implemented DC by 3.2%
in the respective best layer. We observe the superiority of
ODC in conv1 and conv2 layers over the supervised model
using either Places labels or ImageNet labels. The transfer
performance of our method in the Places205 classiﬁcation
task indicates that representations learned by ODC can
generalize well to different domains from ImageNet.
VOC2007 SVM Classiﬁcation. To further evaluate the
generalization of learned features, we perform experiments
on the VOC2007 transfer learning task that resembles real
applications with smaller datasets. Following [ 57], we
train linear SVMs on features extracted from the frozen
backbone on the “trainval” split of VOC2007 and evaluate
on the test split. We follow the same test setting and hyper-
parameters used in [ 57], and report the best performing
layers of different methods for ResNet-50. The results in
Table 3show that ODC surpasses previous approaches by
a signiﬁcant margin on the VOC2007 SVM classiﬁcation
6692