1
2
3
N8
6
1
2ind features labels
1
2
3
Cind featuresSamples Memory
Centroids Memory1
23
4
Classifier
Figure 2. Each ODC iteration mainly contains four steps: 1. forward to obtain a compact feature vector; 2. read labels from the samples
memory and perform back-propagation to update the CNN; 3. update samples memory by updating features and assigning new labels; 4.
update centroids memory by recomputing the involved centroids.
to avoid some trivial shortcuts like chromatic aberration on
context-based self-supervised learning. Noroozi et al. [53]
improve the performance of self-supervised models using
a clustering-based knowledge transfer method that allows
a deeper network during pre-training. Wang et al . [54]
and Doersch et al. [55] exploit multiple cues contained in
different pretext tasks to improve self-supervised models.
Recently, some works [ 56,57] have studied extensively the
architectures and scaling ability on existing self-supervised
approaches. Complementary to these works, ODC serves
as a ﬂexible and uniﬁed unsupervised ﬁne-tuning scheme to
boost general self-supervised learning methods although it
can be used alone to perform unsupervised representation
learning from scratch.
3. Methodology
In the following sub-sections, we ﬁrst discuss the dif-
ferences between the proposed ODC to the conventional
DC [ 13] in Sec. 3.1. We then recommend some useful
strategies to maintain stable cluster size while using ODC
in Sec. 3.2. We ﬁnally explain how one can use ODC for
unsupervised ﬁne-tuning (Sec. 3.3) and the implementation
details of ODC (Sec. 3.4).
3.1. Online Deep Clustering
We ﬁrst discuss the basic idea of DC [ 13] and then
detail the proposed ODC. To learn representations, DC
alternates between off-line feature clustering and network
back-propagation with pseudo-labels. The off-line cluster-
ing process requires deep feature extraction on the entire
training set, followed by a global clustering algorithm, e.g.,
K-Means clustering. The global clustering permutes thepseudo labels vastly, requiring the network to adapt to new
labels rapidly in the subsequent epoch.
Framework Overview. Different from DC, ODC does
not require an extra feature extraction process. Besides,
labels evolve alongside the network parameters update
smoothly. This is made possible by the newly introduced
samples and centroids memories. As shown in Fig. 2,
the samples memory stores features and pseudo-labels of
the entire dataset; while the centroids memory stores the
features of class centroids, i.e., the mean feature of all
samples in a class. A “class” here represents a temporary
cluster that evolves continuously during training. Labels
and network parameters are updated simultaneously dur-
ing uninterrupted iterations of ODC. Speciﬁc techniques
including loss re-weighting anddealing with small clusters
are introduced to avoid ODC from getting stuck into trivial
solutions.
An ODC Iteration. Assuming that we are given with
a randomly initialized network fθ(∗)along with a linear
classiﬁer gw(∗), the goal is to train the backbone parame-
tersθto produce highly discriminative representations. To
prepare for ODC, the samples and centroids memories are
initialized via a global clustering process, e.g., K-Means.
Next, one can perform uninterrupted ODC iteratively.
An ODC iteration contains four steps. First, given a
batch of input images {x}, the network maps the images
into compact feature vectors F=fθ(x). Second, we
read pseudo-labels for this batch from the samples mem-
ory. With the pseudo-labels, we update the network with
stochastic gradient descent to solve the following problem:
min
θ,w1
BB/summationdisplay
n=1l(gw(fθ(xn)),yn), (1)
6690