whereynis the current pseudo label from the samples
memory, Bdenotes the size of each mini-batch. Third,
fθ(x)after L2 normalization is reused to update the sam-
ples memory:
Fm(x)←mfθ(x)
∝bardblfθ(x)∝bardbl2+(1−m)Fm(x), (2)
whereFm(x)is the feature of xin the samples memory,
m∈(0,1]is a momentum coefﬁcient. Simultaneously,
each involved sample is assigned with a new label by
ﬁnding the nearest centroid following:
min
y∈{1,..,C}∝bardblFm(x)−Cy∝bardbl2
2, (3)
whereCydenotes the centroid feature of class y. Fi-
nally, the involved centroids, including those in which new
members join, and those from which old members leave,
are recorded. They are updated every k-th iterations by
averaging the features of all samples belonging to their
corresponding centroid.
3.2. Handling Clustering Distribution in ODC
Loss Re-weighting. To avoid the training from collapsing
into a few huge clusters, DC adopts uniform sampling
before each epoch. However, for ODC, the number of
samples over the clusters changes in each iteration. Using
uniform sampling requires one to re-sample the entire
dataset in each iteration, a process that is deemed redundant
and costly. We propose an alternative approach, i.e., re-
weighting the loss according to the number of samples in
each class. To verify their equivalence, we implement a DC
model with loss re-weighting and empirically ﬁnd that the
performance remains unchanged when the weight follows
wc∝1√Nc, whereNcdenotes the number of samples
in classc. Hence, we adopt the same loss re-weighting
formulation for ODC. With loss re-weighting, samples in
smaller clusters contribute more towards backpropagation,
thus pushing the decision boundary farther to accept more
potential samples.
Dealing with Small Clusters. Loss re-weighting helps to
prevent the formation of huge clusters. Nevertheless, we
still face the risk of having some small clusters collapsing
into empty clusters. To overcome this problem, we propose
to process and eliminate extremely small clusters in advance
before they collapse. Denoting normal clusters as Cnwhose
sizes are larger than a threshold, and small clusters as Cs
whose sizes are not, for c∈Cs, we ﬁrst assign samples in
cto the nearest centroids in Cnto makecempty. Next, we
split the largest cluster cmax∈Cninto two sub-clusters by
K-Means and randomly choose one of the sub-clusters as
the newc. We repeat the process until all clusters belong
toCn. Though this process alters some clusters abruptly, itonly affects a small portion of samples which are involved
in this process.
Dimensionality Reduction. Some of the backbone net-
works map an image to a high-dimensional vector, e.g.,
AlexNet produces 4,096-dimensional features and ResNet-
50 yields 2,048-dimensional features, leading to high space
and time complexities in subsequent clustering. DC per-
formed PCA on features across the entire dataset to reduce
dimension. However, for ODC, the features of different
samples have varying timestamps, leading to incompatible
statistics among samples. Hence, PCA is not applicable
anymore. It is also costly to perform PCA in each iteration.
We therefore add a non-linear head layer of {fc-bn-relu-
dropout-fc-relu}to reduce high dimensional features into
256 dimensions. It is jointly tuned during ODC iterations.
The head layer is removed for downstream tasks.
3.3. ODC for Unsupervised Fine­tuning
Compared with self-supervised learning approaches that
tend to capture intra-image semantics, clustering-based
methods focus more on inter-image information. Hence,
DC and ODC are naturally complementary to previous
self-supervised learning approaches. As DC and ODC
are not restricted to a speciﬁcally designed objective, like
rotation angle or color prediction, they readily serve as an
unsupervised ﬁne-tuning scheme to boost the performance
of existing self-supervised approaches. In this paper, we
study the effectiveness of DC and ODC as a ﬁne-tuning
process with initialization from different self-supervised
learning methods.
3.4. Implementation Details
Data Pre-processing. We use ImageNet that contains
1.28M images without labels for training. Images are
ﬁrst randomly cropped to have a resolution of 224x224
with augmentation including random ﬂipping and rotation
(±2◦). DC adopts a Sobel ﬁlter on the images to avoid
exploiting color as the shortcut. Such a pre-processing
step requires the downstream tasks to include the Sobel
layer as well, which potentially limit its application. We
ﬁnd that strong color jittering shows the same effect as a
Sobel ﬁlter in avoiding shortcuts, while it allows normal
RGB images as inputs. Speciﬁcally, we adopt PyTorch
style color jitter transform with brightness factor (0.6,1.4),
contrast factor (0.6,1.4), saturation factor (0,2), and hue
factor(−0.5,0.5). Besides, we randomly convert images
to grayscale with a probability of 0.2. The random color
jittering and grayscale applied on training samples random-
ize the similarity measured in color. This discourages the
network from exploiting trivial information from color.
Training of ODC. We use ResNet-50 as our backbone.
Considering that most early works use AlexNet, we also
perform experiments on AlexNet for comparison. Follow-
6691