performed on small datasets, Deep Clustering [ 13] (DC)
proposed by Caron et al . is the ﬁrst attempt to scale up
clustering-based representation learning. DC alternates be-
tween deep feature clustering and CNN parameters update.
In particular, at the start of each epoch, it performs off-
line clustering algorithms on the entire dataset to obtain
pseudo-labels as the supervision for the next epoch. Off-
line clustering inevitably permutes the assigned labels in
different epochs, i.e., even if some of the clusters do not
change, their indices after clustering will be permuted
randomly. As a result, parameters in the classiﬁer cannot be
inherited from the last epoch and they have to be randomly
initialized before each epoch. The mechanism introduces
training instability and exposes representations to a high
risk of representation corruption. As shown in Figure 1(a),
network update in DC is interrupted by feature extraction
and clustering in each epoch. This is in contrast to the
conventional supervised classiﬁcation that is performed
in an uninterrupted manner using ﬁxed labels, where an
iteration consists of forward and backward propagations of
the network.
In this work, we seek to devise a joint clustering and
feature learning paradigm with high stability. To reduce
the discrepancy of training mechanism between DC and
supervised learning, we decompose the clustering process
into mini-batch-wise label update, and integrate this update
process into iterations of network update. Based on this
intuition, we propose Online Deep Clustering (ODC) for
joint clustering and feature learning. Speciﬁcally, an ODC
iteration consists of forward and backward propagations,
label re-assignment, and centroids update. For label update,
ODC reuses the features in the forward propagation, thus
avoiding additional feature extraction. To facilitate online
label re-assignment and centroids update, we design and
maintain two dynamic memory modules, i.e., samples
memory to store samples’ labels and features, and centroids
memory for centroids evolution. In this way, ODC is trained
in an uninterrupted manner similar to supervised classiﬁ-
cation, while no manual annotation is required. During
the training process, labels and network parameters evolve
shoulder-to-shoulder, rather than alternatingly. Since labels
are updated in each iteration continuously and instantly, the
classiﬁer in the CNN also evolves more steadily, resulting
in a much more steady loss curve as shown in Figure 1(b).
While ODC alone achieves compelling unsupervised
representation learning performance on various bench-
marks, it can be naturally used to ﬁne-tune models that have
been trained using other unsupervised learning approaches.
Extensive experiments show that the steadiness of ODC
helps it to perform superiorly over DC as an unsupervised
ﬁne-tuning tool. We conclude our contributions as follows:
1)we propose ODC that learns image representations in
an unsupervised manner with high stability. 2)ODCalso serves as a uniﬁed unsupervised ﬁne-tuning scheme
that further improves previous self-supervised represen-
tation learning approaches. 3)Promising performances
are observed on different benchmarks, indicating the great
potential of joint clustering and feature learning.
2. Related Work
Unsupervised Representation Learning. Many unsuper-
vised visual representation learning algorithms are based
on generative models, which usually use a latent repre-
sentation bottleneck to reconstruct input images. Exist-
ing generation-based models include Auto-Encoders [ 20,
21], Restricted Boltzman Machines [ 22,23,24], Vari-
ational Auto-Encoders [ 25] and Generative Adversarial
Networks [ 26], some of which have shown powerful ability
in generating images or videos [ 27,28,29,30,31,32].
By learning to generate examples, these models can learn
meaningful latent representations that can be used for
downstream tasks [ 5,33,34].
Another popular form of unsupervised representation
learning is self-supervised learning, where a pretext task
is designed to derive proxy labels from raw data. Repre-
sentations are learned by encouraging a CNN to predict the
proxy labels from the data. Various pretext tasks have been
explored, e.g., predicting relative patch locations within an
image [ 1], solving jigsaw puzzles [ 4], colorizing grayscale
images [ 3,35], inpainting of missing pixels [ 2], cross-
channel prediction [ 36], counting visual primitives [ 37],
and predicting image rotations [ 8]. For videos, self-derived
supervision signals come from temporal continuity [ 38,39,
40,41,42,43,44] or motion consistency [ 45,46,47,48,9].
Joint Clustering and Feature Learning. Clustering-based
unsupervised representation learning is of particular interest
recently. Various methods are proposed to jointly optimize
feature learning and image clustering. Notably, these meth-
ods have shown great potential in learning unsupervised
features on small datasets [ 11,12,49,50]. To scale up
to large datasets like ImageNet [ 51], Caron et al . [13]
propose DeepCluster to cluster features and update CNN
with subsequent assigned pseudo-labels for each epoch. In
a subsequent study, Caron et al. [14] propose DeeperCluster
to leverage self-supervision and clustering, and validate the
representation learning ability of their approaches on non-
curated data. Although deep clustering methods are capable
of learning good representations from large-scale unlabeled
data, the alternating update of feature clustering and CNN
parameters update leads to instability in training.
Improvements to Self-supervised Learning. Some works
aim at improving previous self-supervised learning ap-
proaches from different perspectives. For instance, Lars-
sonet al. [6] give a ﬁrst in-depth analysis on colorization as
a pretext task and provide some insights on improving its ef-
fectiveness. Mundhenk et al. [52] explore a set of methods
6689