CNN
Feature
ExtractionDescendant
PropagationClassifier
Word
EmbeddingAncestor
Propagation
𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠෩𝑊DGPResNet
𝑊
Knowledge
GraphPredicted
classifier
weightsExtracted
classifier
weights
𝜶𝒂
𝜶𝒅
𝛼1𝑑𝛼1𝑑
𝛼2𝑑𝛼2𝑑𝛼2𝑑𝛼2𝑑𝛼2𝑑𝛼1𝑎𝛼2𝑎𝛼3𝑎
Figure 2: DGP is trained to predict classiﬁer weights Wfor each node/class in a graph. The weights for the training classes
are extracted from the ﬁnal layer of a pre-trained ResNet. The graph is constructed from a knowledge graph and each
node is represented by a vector that encodes semantic class information, in our experiments the classes word embedding.
The network consists of two phases, a descendant phase where each node receives knowledge form its descendants and an
ancestor phase, where it receives knowledge from its ancestors.
W∈RM×P. During the inference phase, the features of
new images are extracted from the CNN and the classiﬁers
predicted by the GCN are used to classify the features.
However, the Laplacian smoothing operation in matrix
form can be written as (I−γD−1L)H, as also noted in Li et
al. [17]. Substituting the graph Laplacian with its deﬁnition
L=D−Athe operation simpliﬁes for γ= 1(looking only
at the immediate neighbors) to D−1AH. This corresponds
in parts to the graph convolution operation in Eq. 1. Thus,
repeatedly applying Eq. 1in a multi-layer GCN architecture
will lead to repeated Laplacian smoothing, thus diluting the
information. Empirical evidence is provided in the model
analysis section (Sec. 4.4).
3.2. Dense Graph Propagation Module
Our DGP for zero-shot learning aims to use the hierar-
chical graph structure for the zero-shot learning task and
avoids dilution of knowledge by intermediate nodes. This
is achieved using a dense graph connectivity scheme con-
sisting of two phases, namely descendant propagation and
ancestor propagation. This two-phase approach further en-
ables the model to learn separate relations between a node
and its ancestors and a node and its descendants. Table 6in
the model analysis section provides empirical evidence for
this choice. Unlike the GCN, we do not use the knowledge
graph relations directly as an adjacency graph to include
information from neighbors further away. We do therefore
not suffer from the problem of knowledge being washed out
due to averaging over the graph. Instead, we introduce two
separate connectivity patterns, one where nodes are con-nected to all their ancestors and one where nodes are con-
nected to all descendants. We use two adjacency matrices:
Aa∈RN×Ndenotes the connections from nodes to their
ancestors, whereas Addenotes the connections from nodes
to their descendants. Note, as a given node is the descendant
of its ancestors, the difference between the two adjacency
matrices is a reversal of their edges Ad=AT
a. Unlike pre-
vious approaches, this connectivity pattern allows nodes di-
rect access to knowledge in their extended neighborhood as
opposed to knowledge that has been modiﬁed by intermedi-
ate nodes. Note that both these adjacency matrices include
self-loops. The connection pattern is illustrated in Fig. 1.
The same propagation rule as in Eq. 1is applied consecu-
tively for the two connectivity patterns leading to the overall
DGP propagation rule
H=σ/parenleftbig
D−1
aAaσ/parenleftbig
D−1
dAdXΘd/parenrightbig
Θa/parenrightbig
. (3)
Distance weighting scheme In order to allow DGP to
weigh the contribution of various neighbors in the dense
graph, we propose a weighting scheme that weighs a given
node’s neighbors based on the graph distance from the node.
Note, the distance is computed on the knowledge graph
and not the dense graph. We use wa={wa
i}K
i=0and
wd={wd
i}K
i=0to denote the learned weights for the an-
cestor and the descendant propagation phase, respectively.
wa
iandwd
icorrespond to weights for nodes that are ihops
away from the given node. wa
0,wd
0correspond to self-loops
andwa
K,wd
Kcorrespond to the weights for all nodes further
thanK−1hops away. We normalize the weights using
a softmax function αa
k=softmax(wa
k) =exp(wa
k)/summationtextK
i=0exp(wa
i).
11490