Their advantage is that their graph structure allows the
sharing of statistical strength between classes making these
methods highly sample efﬁcient. After being introduced in
Bruna et al. [3], they were extended with an efﬁcient ﬁlter-
ing approach based on recurrent Chebyshev polynomials,
reducing their computational complexity to the equivalent
of the commonly used CNNs in image processing operating
on regular grids [ 7]. Kipf et al. [14] further proposed simpli-
ﬁcations to improve scalability and robustness and applied
their approach to semi-supervised learning on graphs. Their
approach is termed graph convolutional network (GCN) and
provides the foundation for the model in this paper.
Zero-shot learning has in recent years been consid-
ered from various set of viewpoints such as manifold align-
ment [ 9,18], linear auto-encoder [ 15], and low-rank em-
bedded dictionary learning approaches [ 10], using seman-
tic relationships based on attributes [ 22,30,11] and rela-
tions in knowledge graphs [ 33,21,27,24]. One of the
early works [ 16] proposed a method based on the idea of
a model-of-models approach, where a model is trained to
predict class models based on their description. Each class
is modeled as a function of its description. This idea has
recently been used in another work in Wang et al. [33], the
work most similar to our own, where a graph convolutional
neural network is trained to predict logistic regression clas-
siﬁers on top of pre-trained CNN features in order to predict
unseen classes. Their approach has yielded impressive per-
formance on a set of zero-shot learning tasks and can, to the
author’s knowledge, be considered the current state-of-the-
art.
3. Approach
Here we ﬁrst formalize the problem of zero-shot learn-
ing and provide information on how a GCN model can be
utilized for the task. We then describe our proposed model
DGP.
LetCdenote the set of all classes and CteandCtrthe
test and training classes, respectively. Further, assume that
the training and test classes are disjoint Cte∩ Ctr=∅and
that we are given a Sdimensional semantic representation
vectorz∈RSfor all classes and a set of training data points
Dtr={(/vectorXi,ci)i= 1,...,N}, where/vectorXidenotes the i-th
training image and ci∈ Ctrthe corresponding class label.
In this setting, zero-shot classiﬁcation aims to predict the
class labels of a set of test data points to the set of classes
Cte. Note that, unlike traditional classiﬁcation, the test data
set points have to be assigned to previously unseen classes.
3.1. Graph Convolutional Networks for Zero­Shot
Learning
In this work, we perform zero-shot classiﬁcation by us-
ing the word embedding of the class labels and the knowl-
edge graph to predict classiﬁers for each unknown classin form of last layer CNN weights. Our zero-shot learn-
ing framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. The last layer CNN
weights are interpreted as a class-speciﬁc classiﬁer for a
given output class on top of the extracted CNN features.
The zero-shot task can then be expressed as predicting a
new set of weights for each of the unseen classes in order to
extend the output layer of the CNN. Our DGP takes as in-
put the combined knowledge graph for all seen and unseen
classes, where each class is represented by a word embed-
ding vector that encodes the class name. It is then trained to
predict the last layer CNN weights for all (seen and unseen)
classes in a semi-supervised manner. Exploiting the knowl-
edge graph allows us to capture semantic relationships be-
tween classes, while the word embedding provides a seman-
tic description of each speciﬁc class. During inference, the
predicted weights can then be used to extend the set of out-
put classes in the original CNN to enable classiﬁcation of
datapoints from unseen classes.
More speciﬁcally, given a graph with Nnodes and Sin-
put features per node, X∈RN×Sdenotes the feature ma-
trix. Here each node represents one distinct concept/class
in the classiﬁcation task and each concept is represented by
the word vector of the class name. The connections between
the classes in the knowledge graph are encoded in form of
a symmetric adjacency matrix A∈RN×N, which also in-
cludes self-loops. We employ a simple propagation rule to
perform convolutions on the graph
H(l+1)=σ/parenleftBig
D−1AH(l)Θ(l)/parenrightBig
, (1)
whereH(l)represents the activations in the lthlayer and
Θ∈RS×Fdenotes the trainable weight matrix for layer l
withFcorresponding to the number of learned ﬁlters. For
the ﬁrst layer, H(0)=X.σ(·)denotes a nonlinear activa-
tion function, in our case a Leaky ReLU. Dii=/summationtext
jAijis
a degree matrix D∈RN×N, which normalizes rows in A
to ensure that the scale of the feature representations is not
modiﬁed by A. Similarly to previous work done on graph
convolutional neural networks, this propagation rule can be
interpreted as a spectral convolution [ 14].
The model is trained to predict the classiﬁer weights for
the seen classes by optimizing the loss
L=1
2MM/summationdisplay
i=1P/summationdisplay
j=1(Wi,j−/tildewiderWi,j)2, (2)
where/tildewiderW∈RM×Pdenotes the prediction of the GCN
for the known classes and therefore corresponds to the M
rows of the GCN output, which correspond to the train-
ing classes. Mdenotes the number of training classes
andPdenotes the dimensionality of the weight vectors.
The ground truth weights are obtained by extracting the
last layer weights of a pre-trained CNN and denoted as
11489