Rethinking Knowledge Graph Propagation for Zero-Shot Learning
Michael Kampffmeyer∗1, Yinbo Chen∗2, Xiaodan Liang†3, Hao Wang4, Yujia Zhang5, and Eric P. Xing6
1UiT The Arctic University of Norway,2Tsinghua University,3Sun Yat-sen University,4Massachusetts
Institute of Technology,5Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
6Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
Graph convolutional neural networks have recently
shown great potential for the task of zero-shot learning.
These models are highly sample efﬁcient as related con-
cepts in the graph structure share statistical strength al-
lowing generalization to new classes when faced with a
lack of data. However, multi-layer architectures, which are
required to propagate knowledge to distant nodes in the
graph, dilute the knowledge by performing extensive Lapla-
cian smoothing at each layer and thereby consequently
decrease performance. In order to still enjoy the beneﬁt
brought by the graph structure while preventing dilution of
knowledge from distant nodes, we propose a Dense Graph
Propagation (DGP) module with carefully designed direct
links among distant nodes. DGP allows us to exploit the hi-
erarchical graph structure of the knowledge graph through
additional connections. These connections are added based
on a node’s relationship to its ancestors and descendants. A
weighting scheme is further used to weigh their contribution
depending on the distance to the node to improve informa-
tion propagation in the graph. Combined with ﬁnetuning
of the representations in a two-stage training approach our
method outperforms state-of-the-art zero-shot learning ap-
proaches.
1. Introduction
With the ever-growing supply of image data, from an
ever-expanding number of classes, there is an increasing
need to use prior knowledge to classify images from un-
seen classes into correct categories based on semantic re-
lationships between seen and unseen classes. This task is
called zero-shot image classiﬁcation. Crucial to this task is
precise modeling of class relationships based on prior class
∗Indicates equal contribution.
†Corresponding Author.knowledge. Previously, prior knowledge has been incor-
porated in form of semantic descriptions of classes, such as
attributes [ 1,28,19] or word embeddings [ 30,11,18], or by
using semantic relations such as knowledge graphs [ 24,27,
29,20]. Approaches that use knowledge graphs are less-
explored and generally assume that unknown classes can
exploit similarity to known classes. Recently, the beneﬁt of
hybrid approaches that combine knowledge graph and se-
mantic class descriptions has been illustrated [ 33].
The current state-of-the-art by Wang et al. [33] processes
the unweighted knowledge graph by exploiting recent de-
velopments in neural networks for non-Euclidean spaces,
such as graph and manifold spaces [ 2]. A deep graph
convolutional neural network (GCN) [ 14] is used and the
problem is phrased as a regression task, where the GCN
is trained to output a classiﬁer for each class by regress-
ing real-valued weight vectors. These weight vectors cor-
respond to the last layer weights of a pretrained convolu-
tional neural network (CNN) and can be viewed as logistic
regression classiﬁers on top of the feature extraction pro-
duced by the CNN. GCNs balance model complexity and
expressiveness with a simple scalable model relying on the
idea of message passing, i.e. nodes pass knowledge to their
neighbors. However, these models were originally designed
for classiﬁcation tasks, albeit semi-supervised, an arguably
simpler task than regression. In recent work, it has been
shown that GCNs perform a form of Laplacian smoothing,
where feature representations will become more similar as
depth increases leading to easier classiﬁcation [ 17]. In the
regression setting, instead, the aim is to exchange informa-
tion between nodes in the graph and extensive smoothing is
not desired as it dilutes information and does not allow for
accurate regression. For instance, in a connected graph all
features in a GCN with nlayers will converge to the same
representation as n→ ∞ under some conditions, hence
washing out all information [ 17].
Therefore, we argue that this approach is not ideal for
the task of zero-shot learning and that the number of lay-
11487