Similarly, αd
k=softmax(wd
k). The weighted propagation
rule in Eq. 3becomes
H=σ/parenleftBiggK/summationdisplay
k=0αa
kDa−1
kAa
kσ/parenleftBiggK/summationdisplay
k=0αd
kDd−1
kAd
kXΘd/parenrightBigg
Θa/parenrightBigg
,
(4)
whereAa
kandAd
kdenote the parts of the adjacency matri-
ces that only contain the k-hop edges for the ancestor and
descendant propagation phase, respectively. Da
kandDd
k
are the corresponding degree matrices for Aa
kandAd
k. As
weights are shared across the graph, the proposed weight-
ing scheme only adds 2×(K+1) parameters to the model,
whereKtends to be small ( K= 4in our experiments).
Our proposed weighting scheme is related to the at-
tention mechanisms in graph convolutional neural net-
works [ 32]. However, unlike attention approaches, our
weighting scheme adds only a negligible amount of param-
eters and does not add the potentially considerable mem-
ory overhead of attention approaches. Further, in our zero-
shot learning setting, we observed a drop in performance
when including the attention approach proposed in [ 32]. We
hypothesize that this is due to the fact that a more com-
plex model will be more prone to overﬁt given the limited
amount of labeled data (sparsely labeled graph). Results are
provided in the supplementary material.
3.3. Finetuning
Training is done in two stages, where the ﬁrst stage trains
the DGP to predict the last layer weights of a pre-trained
CNN using Eq. 2. Note,/tildewiderW, in this case, contains the M
rows ofH, which correspond to the training classes. In or-
der to allow the feature representation of the CNN to adapt
to the new class classiﬁers, we train the CNN by optimizing
the cross-entropy classiﬁcation loss on the seen classes in a
second stage. During this stage, the last layer weights are
ﬁxed to the predicted weights of the training classes in the
DGP and only the feature representation is updated. This
can be viewed as using the DGP as a constraint for the CNN,
as we indirectly incorporate the graph information to con-
strain the CNN output space.
4. Experiments
We perform a comparative evaluation of the DGP against
previous state-of-the-art on the ImageNet dataset [ 8], the
largest commonly used dataset for zero-shot learning2. In
our work, we follow the train/test split suggested by Frome
et al. [11], who proposed to use the 21K ImageNet dataset
for zero-shot evaluation. They deﬁne three tasks in increas-
ing difﬁculty, denoted as ”2-hops”, ”3-hops” and ”All”.
Hops refer to the distance that classes are away from the
2Additional experiments have been performed on the AWA2 dataset
and can be found in the supplementary material.ImageNet 2012 1K classes in the ImageNet hierarchy and
thus is a measure of how far unseen classes are away from
seen classes. ”2-hops” contains all the classes within two
hops from the seen classes and consists of roughly 1.5K
classes, while ”3-hops” contains about 7.8K classes. ”All”
contains close to 21K classes. None of the classes are
contained in the ImageNet 2012 dataset, which was used
to pre-train the ResNet-50 model. Mirroring the experi-
ment setup in [ 11,23,33] we further evaluate the perfor-
mance when training categories are included as potential
labels. Note that since the only difference is the number
of classes during the inference phase, the model does not
have to be retrained. We denote the splits as ”2-hops+1K”,
”3-hops+1K”, ”All+1K”.
4.1. Training details
We use a ResNet-50 [ 12] model that has been pre-trained
on the ImageNet 2012 dataset. Following Wang et al. [33],
we use the GloVe text model [ 26] trained on the Wikipedia
dataset as the feature representation of our concepts in the
graph. The DGP model consists of two layers as illustrated
in Eq. 3with feature dimensions of 2048 and the ﬁnal output
dimension corresponds to the number of weights in the last
layer of the ResNet-50 architecture, 2049 for weights and
bias. Following the observation of Wang et al . [33], we
perform L2-Normalization on the outputs as it regularizes
the outputs into similar ranges. Similarly, we also normalize
the ground truth weights produced by the CNN. We further
make use of Dropout [ 31] with a dropout rate of 0.5in each
layer. The model is trained for 3000 epochs with a learning
rate of0.001and weight decay of 0.0005 using Adam [ 13].
We make use of leaky ReLUs with a negative slope of 0.2.
The number of values per phase Kwas set to 4as additional
weights had diminishing returns. The proposed DGP model
is implemented in PyTorch [ 25] and training and testing are
performed on a GTX 1080Ti GPU. Finetuning is done for
20 epochs using SGD with a learning rate of 0.0001 and
momentum of 0.9.
4.2. Comparing approaches
We compare our DGP to the following approaches: De-
vise [11] linearly maps visual information in form of fea-
tures extracted by a convolutional neural network to the
semantic word-embedding space. The transformation is
learned using a hinge ranking loss. Classiﬁcation is per-
formed by assigning the visual features to the class of the
nearest word-embedding. ConSE [23] projects image fea-
tures into a semantic word embedding space as a convex
combination of the Tclosest seen classes semantic embed-
ding weighted by the probabilities that the image belongs
to the seen classes. The probabilities are predicted using
a pre-trained convolutional classiﬁer. Similar to Devise,
ConSE assigns images to the nearest classes in the embed-
11491