SN Computer Science (2021) 2:389
 389 Page 10 of 11
SN Computer Science
cost and more reliable than the conventional RT-PCR testing 
method.
For the COVID-19 diagnostic test, the applied model could 
be used with CT images. CT images are better suited for patients 
in critical conditions due to their readily available and efficient 
criteria. The model is capable of instantly identifying COVID-
19. Therefore, a deep learning model with CT imagery is recom-
mended because it is a more robust training mechanism. Finally, 
deep learning techniques utilizing CT images are not only capa-
ble of classifying and segmenting images, but it may also be 
utilized as a strategy to help physicians battling the emerging 
widespread illness by allowing doctors to anticipate the treat -
ment result.
Finally, a few main advantages of this study are outlined 
following:
 I. CT image classification provides outperform per -
formance for COVID-19 detection rather than other 
images like X-ray or Chest images. Additionally, the 
DenseNet-121 model has better classification accu-
racy than other studies.
 II. There is no hand-made extraction technique needed 
for the applied architecture.
 III. To conclude, our study showed that a deep learning 
approach could be applied to help doctors and/or 
healthcare engineers diagnose patients with COVID-
19 and recognize lesions from CT images automati-
cally.
Conclusion
The automated image classification of CT images by com-
puter-aided systems is of great importance in medical image 
analysis. Microscopic analysis of CT images is challeng-
ing and time-consuming. This study identified COVID-19 
patients using CT image classification based on the deep 
learning technique that demonstrated outperformed accu-
racy. The overall accuracy is 92%, and recall is 95%. The 
DenseNet-121 model performs low computational cost with 
an average of 195.35 s. We applied DenseNet-121 deep 
learning architecture for image classification. Several clas-
sification models were, for example, to validate our claim.
Theoretically, the applied methodology contributed to 
the current emerging COVID-19 literature providing an 
unrevealed best alternative identification technique using a 
DenseNet-121 CNN with a relatively large dataset in the 
training phase of DenseNet-121 model. In addition, no hand-
made data extraction technique is required for the applied 
architecture because of the use of the data augmentation 
strategy. Practically, this method can be applied to the 
clinical practice for accurate COVID-19 detection. Thus, increasing reliability represented through the proposed com-
putational method for testing could add value to capture a 
real picture of the infection rate, which strongly correlates to 
the number of daily infected cases. The applied methodology 
offered a powerful machine learning-based approach to min-
imize human professionals’ manual judgment errors and pro-
vide a quicker way of providing time and resource-saving.
However, our present investigation still has many shortcom-
ings. First, a further improvement in network architecture and 
optimization may improve classification accuracy. Second, an 
unavoidable issue faced by specific areas is the lack of train-
ing data during the initial phases of the COVID-19 epidemic. 
Thus, several hundred images might not be adequate for reli-
able prediction. Another drawback of this study is not presenting 
Grad Cam visualizations of the applied DenseNet-121 model 
that might enhance the readability. Furthermore, DenseNet can 
be justified for further research development by applying other 
types of architecture, i.e., DenseNet-161, DenseNet-169, and 
DenseNet-201. However, other deep learning methods or modi-
fied deep learning methods could be implemented and tested 
for further development and assessment for more accurate 
identification of COVID-19 patients using CT images. Once 
again, since new COVID-19 CT image datasets are being pub-
lished on a timely basis, updated COVID-19 imaging datasets 
may be examined to enhance the efficacy of the DenseNet-121 
technique.
Acknowledgements  This research received no specific grant from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial, or non-profit organization.
Declarations  
Conflict of interest There is no potential conflict of interest declared 
by all authors.
References
 1. Kursumovic E, Lennane S, Cook TM. Deaths in healthcare 
workers due to COVID-19: the need for robust data and analysis. 
Anaesthesia. 2020;75(8):989–92.
 2. Mirza-Aghazadeh-Attari M, et al. Predictors of coronavirus dis -
ease 19 (COVID-19) pneumonitis outcome based on computed 
tomography (CT) imaging obtained prior to hospitalization: a 
retrospective study. Emerg Radiol. 2020;27(6):653–61.
 3. Behzad S, et al. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pneumo-
nia incidentally detected on coronary CT angiogram: a do-not-
miss diagnosis. Emerg Radiol. 2020;27(6):721–6.
 4. Hasan N. A methodological approach for predicting COVID-
19 epidemic using EEMD-ANN hybrid model. Internet Things. 
2020;11: 100228.
 5. Shereen MA, et al. COVID-19 infection: origin, transmission, and char -
acteristics of human coronaviruses. J Adv Res. 2020;24:91–8.
 6. Liu R, et al. Positive rate of RT-PCR detection of SARS-CoV-2 infection 
in 4880 cases from one hospital in Wuhan, China, from Jan to Feb 
2020. Clin Chim Acta. 2020;505:172–5.