SN Computer Science (2021) 2:389
 389 Page 2 of 11
SN Computer Science
chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis (as a vital diagnosis 
approach clinically) is generally adopted for the detection of 
COVID-19 virus in clinical practice, following the national 
recommendation for disease and treatment of pneumonia 
caused by the 2019-nCoV, started from China. However, a 
defective rate of RT-PCR test results [6 , 7] might be con -
tributing to any limitations leading to the sample collection 
process and transportation, which involve a time-consuming 
procedure [ 8, 9]. This procedure might not recognize the 
patients with critical conditions (i.e., patients with intensive 
care unit (ICU)). Another drawback of the RT-PCT testing 
system is that the time required for conventional PCR tests 
to diagnose disease is longer [10]. An infected person may 
be a carrier to spread the virus to other healthy, ordinary 
people or healthcare professionals as this virus (COVID-
19) holds strong transmittable nature. However, developing 
countries suffer from limited scientific resources and a lack 
of health technologists or professionals [11]. While there 
are few resources to fight against a pandemic, the promising 
alternative of the COVID-19 test protocol reflects a situ-
ational demand. Computed tomography (CT) imaging is a 
standard tool for diagnosing pneumonia that provides more 
accurate decision-making than a laboratory-based detection 
method called RT-PCR [12]. In this context, the CT image 
classification can be a promising alternative methodology 
for predicting COVID-19 [7 ], especially for patients with 
critical conditions. Literature reveals that the performance 
of RT-PCR shows a lower sensitivity rate compared to the 
sensitivity of CT [13].
This research mainly aims to bring reliable measures to 
identify patients with COVID-19 from the CT image using 
CNN. The CNN demonstrated excellent results in several 
computer vision tasks [14, 15]. CNN recently became a 
dominant in-depth learning approach for medical image 
classification due to its self-learning ability [16]. For the 
detection of COVID-19, numerous CNN-based strategies 
were proposed [ 17–22]. Unlike other image datasets [ 23], 
relatively few training samples of the medical images dataset 
are used. To achieve ground-breaking efficiency on these 
datasets, CNNs have been amplified with several techniques 
like data augmentation. We applied a comparatively new 
approach, CNN, in which the learning technique is designed 
with an association of densely connected convolutional net-
works (DenseNet) [24] to identify patients with COVID-
19. The main motivation behind the use of DenseNet-121 
is, it mitigates the problem of vanishing gradient, improves 
feature reuse, and decreases parameter usage, which is use-
ful for training deep learning models [25]. Furthermore, 
DenseNet-121 has proven effective in diagnosing diseases 
based on medical imaging [26, 27]. The concept of driving 
DenseNet would be to link each layer to every other layer 
behind it to improve the architecture flow. This approach 
helps CNN to settle based on all layers instead of one final layer. DenseNet is more sophisticated and can capture image 
information on a larger scale compared to traditional image 
processing methods [15].
This study contributes to current literature in some 
aspects, which are summarized:
• First, we applied a newly adopted DenseNet-121 CNN 
technique with a data augmentation technique to clas -
sify and identify COVID-19 patients. While RT-PCR test 
results might be contributing to any limitations for the 
critical patients, the CT image classification technique 
might be a promising alternative for the detection of 
COVID-19 as this technique has an exceptionally high 
sensitivity in diagnosing the disease [2 ].
• Second, we conducted an extensive application of 
experimental analyses and reported the performance of 
DenseNet-121 CNN on multiple indices, including sen-
sitivity, specificity, and AUC.
• Third, this study resolved a literature gap using more 
extensive medical image classification data, while previ-
ous literature has used comparatively smaller datasets.
• Fourth, as noted by the researchers, the novelty of this 
study is that DenseNet-121 CNN is an effective pre-
trained model compared to other models.
• Finally, using real-time COVID-19 CT image data, the 
applied technique outperforms for prediction of COVID-
19. Practically, this approach assists healthcare profes-
sionals in fast diagnoses and effective treatment decisions 
for the patient in an emergency.
The remaining part of the paper is structured accordingly. 
“Related Works” includes related works on several deep 
learning techniques for classifying images and the DenseNet 
in brief. The data set used in this paper and the descriptions 
of the method are outlined in “Methods”. “ResultsandDis-
cussion” contains the results and discussions of experiments. 
Finally, in “Conclusion”, the conclusion, strangeness, limi-
tations, and scope of further research have been discussed.
Related Works
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence, differ -
ent image classification techniques in medical informatics 
have been proposed for various diversified demands. The 
machine learning (ML) technique has recently been consid-
ered a prominent tool for predicting and diagnosing numer -
ous diseases [ 28]. However, their accuracy and adequate 
performance criteria are yet to need improvement. AlexNet, 
VGG, GoogLeNet, and ResNet architecture, for example, 
are more performing in the classification of medical images. 
However, these networks face the difficulty of convergence, 
overfitting, and vanishing gradient problems [29]. Therefore,