is to achieve brain-like systems or to create robust AI. It is possible that
these two goals may soon lead into two quite separate researc h directions:
those who seek to understand and model the brain and those who seek to
achieve or improve AI. Maybe from that perspective the ﬁeld i s too broad
andwillrequirefurtherspecialization. Acommonchalleng e thatwillpersist,
however, is embodied in the question: how symbolic meaning emerges
from large networks of neurons?
Perhaps an important choice for neurosymbolic AI is the choi ce between
combinatorial (exact) reasoning and commonsense, approxi mate reasoning.
While learning is always approximate, reasoning can be appr oximate or pre-
cise. In a neurosymbolic system, it is possible to envisage t he combination
of eﬃcient approximate reasoning (jumping to conclusions) with more delib-
erative and precise or normative symbolic reasoning [94]. C onclusions may
be revised through learning from new observations and via co mmunication
with the system through knowledge extraction and precise re asoning. One
might expect commonsense to emerge as a result of this proces s of reason-
ing and learning, although the modelling and computing of co mmonsense
knowledge continues to be another challenge.
From a practical perspective, a recipe for neurosymbolic AI might be:
learning is carried out from data by neural networks which us e gradient-
descent optimization; eﬃcient forms of propositional reas oning can also be
carried out by the network, c.f. neural-symbolic cognitive reasoning [20];
rich ﬁrst-order logic reasoning and extrapolation needs to be done symbol-
ically from descriptions extracted from the trained networ k; once symbolic
meaning has emerged from the trained network, symbols can be manipu-
lated easily by the current computer and can serve as constra ints for further
learning from data as done in [79]; this establishes a practi cal form of neu-
rosymboliccycle for learningandreasoningwhichis feasib lewiththecurrent
technology.
Ingredients of neurosymbolic AI: Narrow AI based on neural net-
works is already successful and useful in practice with big d ata. There is
obvious value in this as shown by the ﬂourishing of the Machin e Learning
community and the growing NeurIPS conference community. Da ta scien-
tists will do this work. In this paper, however, we have been d iscussing
the science of what constitutes the fundamental ingredient s of an intelligent
system [92]. One such ingredient, current results show, is g radient-based op-
timization used by deep learning to handle large amounts of d ata, but other
ingredients are surely needed. At the AAAI-2020 ﬁreside con versation, a
question was asked about the beauty and value of abstract com pact sym-
bolic representations such as F=maore=mc2. Yoshua Bengio’s answer
25