oﬀers a kind of compiler for neural networks5, whereby prior knowledge is
translated into the network, and a decompiler whenever symb olic descrip-
tions are extracted from a trained network. The compiler can either set-up
the network’s initial weights akin to a one-shot learning al gorithm which
is guided by knowledge, or deﬁne a knowledge-based penalty o r constraint
which is added to the network’s loss function.
A third form of integration has been proposed in [6] which is b ased on
changing therepresentation of neuralnetworks intofactor graphs. Thevalue
of this particular representation deserves to be studied. C hange of repre-
sentation is a worthwhile endeavour on its own right in that i t may help
us understand the strengths and limitations of diﬀerent neur al models and
network architecture choices. This third form of integrati on, however, pro-
poses to create an intermediate representation with factor graphs in between
neural networks and logical representations.
A note about terminology: In [58], Turing award winner Judea Pearl
oﬀersacritiqueofmachinelearningwhich,unfortunately, c onﬂatestheterms
machine learning anddeep learning . Similarly, when Geoﬀrey Hinton refers
tosymbolic AI , the connotation of the term tends to be that of expert sys-
tems dispossessed of any ability to learn. The use of the term inology is in
need of clariﬁcation. Machine learning is not conﬁned to ass ociation rule
mining, c.f. the body of work on symbolic ML and relational le arning [55]
(the diﬀerences to deep learning being the choice of represen tation, localist
logical rather than distributed, and the non-use of gradien t-based learning
algorithms). Equally, symbolic AI is not just about product ion rules written
by hand. A proper deﬁnition of AI concerns knowledge represe ntation and
reasoning, autonomous multi-agent systems, planning and a rgumentation,
as well as learning. In what follows, we elaborate on the abov e misunder-
standings one at a turn.
Symbolic Machine Learning and Deep Learning: In [58], Pearl
proposes a hierarchy consisting of three levels: associati on, intervention and
counterfactual reasoning, and claims that ML is only capabl e of achieving
association. A neurosymbolic or purely symbolic ML system s hould be ca-
pable of satisfying the requirements of all three of Pearl’s levels, e.g. by
mapping the neural networks onto symbolic descriptions. It is fair to say in
relation to Pearl’s top level in the hierarchy - counterfact ual reasoning - that
5In the study of programming languages it is accepted that diﬀ erent levels of abstrac-
tion and diﬀerent representations are needed - e.g. java byt ecode and a java program -
for the purpose of eﬃciency, system maintenance, user inter action and veriﬁcation. We
argue that in AI, neural-symbolic systems will provide equa lly important forms of abstract
representation.
8