neural models beyond data-driven comparative empirical ev aluations. As
advocated by Paul Smolensky, neurosymbolic computing can h elp map the
latest neural models into existing symbolic hierarchies, t hus helpingorganise
the extensively ad-hoc body of work in neural computation.
5 Challenges for the Principled Combination of
Reasoning and Learning
For a combined perspective on reasoning and learning, it is u seful to note
that reasoning systems may have diﬃculties computationall y when reason-
ing with existential quantiﬁers and function symbols, such as∃xP(f(x)).
Eﬃcient logic-based programming languages such as Prolog, for example,
assume that every logical statement is universally quantiﬁ ed. By contrast,
learning systems may have diﬃculty when adopting universal quantiﬁcation
over variables. To be able to learn a universally quantiﬁed s tatement such
as∀xP(x), a learning systems needs in theory to be exposed to all poss i-
ble instances of x. This simple duality points to a possible complementary
nature of the strengths of learning and reasoning systems. T o learn eﬃ-
ciently∀xP(x), a learning system needs to jump to conclusions , extrapolat-
ing∀xP(x) given an adequate amount of evidence (the number of example s
or instances of x). Such conclusions may obviously need to be revised over
time in the presence of new evidence, as in the case of nonmono tonic logic.
In this case, a statement of the form ∀xP(x) becomes a data-dependent gen-
eralization, which is not to be assumed equivalent to a state ment∀yP(y), as
done in classical logic. Such statements may have been learn ed from diﬀer-
ent samplesof theoverall potentially inﬁnitepopulation. Ontheother hand,
a statement of the form ∃xP(x) is trivial to learn from data by identifying
at least one case P(a), although reasoning from ∃xP(x) is more involved,
requiring the adoption of an arbitrary constant bsuch that P(b) holds.
It is now accepted that learning takes place on a continuous s earch space
of (sub)diﬀerentiablefunctions; reasoningtakes placeing eneral onadiscrete
space as in the case of goal-directed theorem proving. The mo st immediate
way of beneﬁting from the combination of reasoning and learn ing, there-
fore, is to adopt a hybrid approach whereby a neural network t akes care of
the continuous search space and learning of probabilities, while a symbolic
system consisting of logical descriptions of the network us es discrete search
to achieve extrapolation and goal-directed reasoning.7As hinted already in
7The investigation of continuous reasoning or discrete lear ning approaches is of course
worth pursuing too. There have been a number of recent develo pments with relevant
17