such as a violin and its case, which are in turndescribed by th eir embedding.
This process is known as relational embedding [7, 75, 85, 87] . For represent-
ing more complex logical structures such as ﬁrst order-logi c formulas, e.g.
∀X,Y,Z: (P(X,Y)→Q(Y,Z)), a system named Logic Tensor Networks
(LTN) [80] was proposed by extending Neural Tensor Networks (NTN) [85],
a state-of-the-art relational embedding method. Related i deas are discussed
formally in the context of constraint-based learning and re asoning in [32].
Two powerful concepts of LTN are (1) the grounding of logical concepts
onto tensors with the use of logical statements which act as c onstraints
on the vector space to help learning of an adequate embedding , and (2)
the modular and diﬀerentiable organisation of knowledge wit hin the neural
network which allows querying and interaction with the syst em. Any user-
deﬁned statement in ﬁrst-order logic can be queried in LTN wh ich checks
if that knowledge is satisﬁed by the trained neural network. With such
a tool, a user can decide when to keep using a distributed conn ectionist
representation or switch to a localist symbolic representa tion. This last
aspect brings the question of the emergence of symbols and th eir meaning
in neural networks to the fore: recent work using the weakly s upervision of
auto-encoders and ideas borrowed from disentanglement hav e been showing
promise in the direction of learning relevant concepts whic h can in turn be
re-used symbolically [10]. Related work seeking to explore the advantages of
distributed representations of logic include [11], which i s based on stochastic
logic programs, [26, 100, 24], with a focus on inductive prog ramming, and
[70], based on diﬀerentiable theorem proving.
A taxonomy for neurosymbolic AI: with an understanding of the
role of localist and distributed approaches, we now provide an analysis of
Henry Kautz’s taxonomy for neurosymbolic AI [42], which was introduced
at AAAI 2020: In Kautz’s taxonomy, a Type 1neural-symbolic integration
is standard deep learning, which some may argue is a stretch, but which is
included by Kautz to note that the inputand outputof aneural network can
be made of symbols, e.g. text in the case of language translat ion or question
answering applications. Type 2are hybrid systems such as DeepMind’s Al-
phaGo and other systems where the core neural network is loos ely-coupled
with a symbolic problem solver such as Monte Carlo tree searc h.Type 3
is also a hybrid system whereby a neural network focusing on o ne task (e.g.
object detection) interacts via its input and output with a s ymbolic system
specialising in a complementary task (e.g. query answering ). Examples in-
clude the neuro-symbolic concept learner [51] and deepProb Log [50]. In a
Type 4 neural-symbolic system, symbolic knowledge is compiled in to the
training set of a neural network. Kautz oﬀers [48] as an exampl e (to be
12