supervised approaches revive the important stance of modul arity in neural
computation. Earlier eﬀorts towards modularity in neurosym bolicAI can be
traced back to the system for Connectionist Modal and Intuit ionistic Logics
[18, 19]. Modal logics with a possible-world semantics have been shown to
oﬀer a natural approach to modularity in neural computation [ 20].
With AI understood as a superset of ML which in turn is a supers et
of DL, we shall argue for the combination of statistical mach ine learning,
knowledge representation (KR) and logical reasoning. By lo gical reasoning,
weshallmeannotonlyclassical logicreasoningwiththetra ditionaltrue-false
interpretation, but non-classical reasoning including no nmonotonic, modal
and many-valued logics. In the study of the interplay betwee n learning and
reasoning and how best to implement it (e.g. in a continuous o r discrete
system), it shall become clear that universal quantiﬁcatio n is easy to reason
about and hard to learn using neural networks; existential q uantiﬁcation is
easy to learn and harder to reason about in a symbolic system. Such lim-
itations on either side of the spectrum will dictate a few pra ctical design
decisions to be discussed in this paper. In a nutshell, we claim that neu-
rosymbolic AI is well placed to address concerns of computat ional eﬃciency,
modularity, KR + ML and even causal inference . More researchers than
ever on both sides of the connectionist-symbolic AI divide a re now open to
studying and learning about each others’ tools and techniqu es. This was not
the case until very recently. The use of diﬀerent terminology alongside some
preconceived opinion or perhaps idleness, fuelled by the wa y that science
normally rewards research that is carried out in silos, have prevented earlier
progress. The fact that this is now changing will lead to fast er progress in
the overall ﬁeld of AI. It is reassuring to see it happening in this way: the
neural information processing community have shown the val ue of neural
computation in practice, which has attracted the curiosity of great minds
from symbolic AI. We hope that further collaboration in neur osymbolic AI
will help solve many of the issues which are still outstandin g.
3 Distributed and Localist Representation
Theintegration oflearningandreasoningthroughneurosym bolicsystemsre-
quiresabridgebetween localist anddistributedrepresent ations. Thesuccess
of deep learning indicates that distributed representatio ns with gradient-
based methods are more adequate than localist ones for learn ing and opti-
mization. At the same time, the diﬃculty of neural networks a t extrapola-
tion, explainability and goal-directed reasoning point to the need of a bridge
10