was to point out that these must have come out of someone’s bra in, Isaac
Newton and Albert Einstein to be precise. As Stephen Mugglet on noted at
another debate on the future of AI, his goal is to shorten the w ait for the
next Newton or Einstein, or Alan Turing. Muggleton’s bet is o n the use
of higher-order logic representations and meta-interpret ive learning.10With
this example we seek to illustrate that among highly respect ed researchers
the choice of ingredients may vary widely, from the need for m uch more
realistic models of the brain to the need for ever more sophis ticated forms
of higher-order computation. With the neural-symbolic met hodology, the
goal is to develop neural network models with a symbolic inte rpretation.
The key is how to learn representations neurally and make the m available
for use symbolically (as for example when an AI system is aske d to explain
itself). In this paper, we have argued for modularity as an im portant ingre-
dient, allowing one to refer to large parts of the network by t he composition
of symbols and relations among them. Having an adequate lang uage for
describing knowledge encoded in such networks is another im portant ingre-
dient. We have argued for the use of ﬁrst-order logic as this l anguage, as a
canonical form of representation, but also other forms of no n-classical rep-
resentation such as nonmonotonic and modal logic and logic p rogramming.
Onceacomplexnetworkcanbedescribedsymbolically, ideal lyinanabstract
compact form as in e=mc2, any style of deductive reasoning becomes pos-
sible. Reasoning is obviously another fundamental ingredi ent, either within
or outside the network, exact or approximate. Finally, symb olic meaning
can serve to improve performanceof S1. In other words, symbo ls which have
been learned, derived or even invented can act as constraint s on the large
network and help improve learning performance as part of a po sitive cycle
of learning and reasoning. Constraint satisfaction as part of the interplay
between learning and reasoning is therefore another ingred ient.
Summary and Future Directions: With the above ﬁve ingredients of
neurosymbolic AI - gradient-based optimization, modulari ty, symbolic lan-
guage, reasoningandconstraint satisfaction -thereaderw illnotbesurprised
to know that there are many outstanding challenges for neuro symbolic AI.
First, no agreement exists on the best way of achieving the ab ove combina-
tion of language and structure, of knowledge acquired by age nts acting in an
environment andthecorrespondingreasoning that an agent m ustimplement
to achieve its goals. It is highly desirable, though, that th e study of how to
10In a recent paper, Pedro Domingos has shown that gradient des cent achieves in eﬀect
a superposition of the training examples, similar to a data- dependent form of kernel [22],
which in our view highlights the importance of the structure of neural networks, and not
just their function.
26