beengiven computational semantics in thepasttwo decades. A typical ques-
tion in the counterfactual category is: what if I had acted diﬀerently? , thus
necessitating retrospective reasoning.
As noted earlier in the paper, neural-symbolic computing ca n implement
all three of Pearl’s levels. Once a symbolic description of t he formif A then
Bhas been associated with a neural network, surely the idea of intervention
[9] and counterfactual reasoning become possible, c.f. for example, [99] on
the measurement and extraction of counterfactual knowledg e from trained
neural networks.
Our conclusion from the above discussion is that in neurosym-
bolic AI :
•Knowledgeshouldbegroundedontovector representations f or eﬃcient
learning from data based on message passing in neural networ ks as an
eﬃcient computational model.
•Symbolsshouldbecomeavailableasaresultofqueryingandk nowledge
extraction from trained networks, and oﬀer a rich descriptio n language
at an adequate level of abstraction, enabling inﬁnite uses of ﬁnite
means, but also compositional discrete reasoning at the symbolic level
allowing for extrapolation beyond the data distribution.
•The combination of learning and reasoning should oﬀer an impo rtant
alternative to the problem of combinatorial reasoning by le arning to
reduce the number of eﬀective combinations, thus producing s impler
symbolic descriptions as part of the neurosymbolic cycle.
As an example, consider an Autoencoder which learns in unsup ervised
fashion to maximise mutual information between pixel input s and a latent
code or some other embeddingconsisting of fewer relevant fe atures than pix-
els. Suppose that this neural network has learned to ﬁnd regu larities such
as e.g.when it sees features of type A, it also sees features of type B but
not features of type C . At this point, such regularities can be converted into
symbols:∀xA(x)→(∃yB(y)∧¬∃zC(z)). As a result of the use of variables
x,y,zat the symbolic level, one can extrapolate the above regular ity to any
features of type A,BorC.8A symbolic description is also a constraint
on the neurosymbolic cycle. It is generalised from data duri ng learning and
8As another example, consider a neural network trained to cla ssify graphs into those
which contain a Hamiltonian cycle and those which do not, giv en a ﬁxed range of available
graph sizes as training examples. Contrast this network wit h a symbolic description of
the deﬁnition of Hamiltonian cycle which therefore applies to graphs of any size.
20