the necessary and suﬃcient building blocks of AI , and how systems
that evolve automatically based on machine learning can be d eveloped and
analysed in eﬀective ways that make AI trustworthy.
Turing award winner and machine learning theory pioneer Les lie Valiant
pointed out that a key challenge for Computer Science is the p rincipled
combination of reasoning and learning, building a rich sema ntics and robust
representation language for intelligent cognitive behavi our [92]. In Valiant’s
words:“The aim is to identify a way of looking at and manipulating com -
monsense knowledge that is consistent with and can support w hat we consider
to be the two most fundamental aspects of intelligent cognit ive behaviour: the
ability to learn from experience and the ability to reason fr om what has been
learned. We are therefore seeking a semantics of knowledge t hat can com-
putationally support the basic phenomena of intelligent be haviour.” Neural-
symbolic computing seeks to oﬀer such a principled way of stud ying AI
by establishing provable correspondences between neural m odels and logical
representations [4, 23, 16, 20, 12]. In neural-symbolic com putation, logic can
be seen as a language with which to compile a neural network, a s discussed
in more detail later in this paper.2
Thesuccess of deep learningalong with anumberof drawbacks identiﬁed
more recently such as a surprising lack of robustness [88] ha s prompted a
heated debate around the value of symbolic AI by contrast wit h neural
computation and deep learning. A key weakness, as Bengio et a l. state in a
recent article, isthat current machine learning methods seem weak when they
are required to generalize beyond the training distributio n, which is what is
often needed in practice [6]. In the recent AI debate between Yoshua Bengio
and Gary Marcus, Marcus argues the case for hybrid systems [5 2] and seeks
to deﬁne what makes an AI system eﬀectively hybrid:
“Many more drastic approaches might be pursued. Yoshua Ben-
gio, for example, has madea numberof sophisticated suggest ions
for signiﬁcantly broadening the toolkit of deep learning, i nclud-
ing developing techniques for statistically extracting ca usal re-
lationships through a sensitivity to distributional chang es and
techniques for automatically extracting modular structur e, both
2Over the years, the terminology “neural-symbolic” (integr ation, computing, system,
etc.) was used predominantly by the research community to in dicate a combination of
two paradigms: neural and symbolic AI, see e.g. [20] More rec ently, the more colloquial
terminology “neuro-symbolic” (AI, approach, system, etc) has become more commonly
used in publications and the printed press. In this paper, we use the term “neural-
symbolic” when referring to the combination of paradigms, a nd we introduce the term
“neurosymbolic” as a single word to symbolise the coming of a ge of a new area of research.
4