4 Neurosymbolic Computing Systems: Technical
Aspects
In symbolic ML, symbols are manipulated as part of a discrete search for
the best representation to solve a given classiﬁcation or re gression task.
The most well-known form of symbolic ML are decision trees, b ut richer
forms of representation exist, in particular relational re presentations us-
ing ﬁrst-order logic to denote concepts ranging over variab lesX,Y,Z...
within a (possibly inﬁnite) domain, e.g. ∀X,Y,Z:grandfather (X,Y)←
(father(X,Z)∧mother(Z,Y)) (the father of someone’s mother is that per-
son’s grandfather). Probabilistic extensions of this appr oach seek to learn
probability distributions for such logical rules (or funct ional programs) as
a way of accounting for uncertainty in the training data. Wor k in these
areas is probably best characterised by the conference seri es on Inductive
Logic Programming [65, 56], Statistical Relational Learni ng [68, 25, 3, 81]
and Probabilistic or Inductive Programming [77].
All of the excitement and industrial interest in the past 10 y ears sur-
rounding AI and Machine Learning, though, have come from an e ntirely
separate type of ML: deep learning. Deep learning uses neura l networks
and stochastic gradient descent to search through a continu ous space, also
to solve a given classiﬁcation or regression task, but creat ing vector-based,
distributed representations, rather than logical or symbo lic ones. For this
reason, such systems are called sub-symbolic.
Whilst it is clear now that AI will not be achieved by building expert
systems by hand from scratch (GOFAI), but by learning from la rge collec-
tions of data, one would be misguided to conﬂate all of machin e learning
or dismiss the role of symbolic logic, which remains the most powerful and
adequate representation for the analysis of computational systems. As put
simply by Moshe Vardi “Logic is the Calculus of Computer Science” and,
diﬀerently fromstatistics, machinelearningcan onlyexist withinthecontext
of a computational system.
Speciﬁcally, deep neural networks will require a language f or description,
as also advocated by Leslie Valiant. Neural network-based AI is distributed
and continuous , deals well withlarge-scale multimodalnoisyperceptuald ata
such as text and audio, handles symbol grounding better than symbolic sys-
tems since concepts are grounded on feature vectors, and is b y deﬁnition a
computational model, frequently implemented eﬃciently us ing propagation
of activation and tensor processing units.6Symbolic AI is generally localist
6Contrast with Bayesian networks which may be ineﬃcient as a c omputational model
14