the sky; (b) The moon became visible in the sky. Another very r elevant
application domain is planning, which requires learning an d reasoning over
time, as in this example adapted from [76]: Daniel picks up th e milk; Daniel
goes to the bedroom; Daniel places the milk on the table; Dani el goes to
the bathroom. Where is the milk? Finally, an area where machi ne learning
and knowledge representation and reasoning have complemen tary strengths
isknowledge engineering , including knowledge-base completion and data-
driven ontology learning. In this area of application, rich and large-scale
symbolic representations exist alongside data, including knowledge graphs
to be combined with neural networks such as graph neural netw orks.
A commonthreadacross theabove examples andapplications i stheneed
for modelling cause and eﬀect with the use of implicit information. This
requires learning of general rules and exceptions to the rul es that evolve
over time. In such cases, deep learning alone fails when pres ented with
examples from outside the distribution of the training data . This motivated
Judea Pearl’s critique of Machine Learning [58] which we sha ll address in
some detail next.
In Pearl’s 3-level causal hierarchy (association, interve ntion and coun-
terfactuals), association involves purely statistical re lationships. In Pearl’s
words,observing a customer who buys toothpaste makes it more likel y that
this customer will also buy ﬂoss. Such associations can be in ferred directly
from the observed data using standard conditional probabil ities and condi-
tional expectation or other standard non-probabilistic ML model. Questions
asked at this level require no causal information and, for th is reason, this
layer is placed at the bottom of the hierarchy. Answering suc h questions is
the hallmark of current machine learning methods . Pearl’s hierarchy may
unintentionally give the impression that machine learning is conﬁned to this
bottom layer, since no reference is made in [58] to the body of work on
symbolic machine learning which is unequivocally not conﬁn ed to associ-
ation rules [55, 70]. Pearl continues: the second level, intervention, ranks
higher than association because it involves not just seeing what is but chang-
ing what we see. A typical question at this level would be: wha t will happen
if we double the price? Such a question cannot be answered fro m sales data
alone, as it involves a change in customers’ choices in react ion to the new
pricing. These choices may diﬀer substantially from those ta ken in previous
price-raising situations, unless we replicate precisely t he market conditions
that existed when the price reached double its current value . At this level
there is a need for inference that can reach beyond the data di stribution.
Finally, the top level invokes counterfactuals, a mode of re asoning that re-
verts to the philosophers David Hume and John Stuart Mill and that has
19