(1) Fireside conversation between 2019 Turing award winner s, Francesca
Rossi, and Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman on thinking fast a nd slow and
its relation to neural networks and symbol manipulation;
(2) The Third AI Summer, Henry Kautz’s AAAI 2020 Robert S. Eng elmore
Memorial Award Lecture, which introduced a taxonomy for neu rosymbolic
computing;
(3)TheDirectorofMIT/IBMWatsonAIlaboratoryDavidCoxIA AIkeynote
address, which focused on neurosymbolic AI and application s on vision and
language understanding, machine commonsense, question an swering, argu-
mentation and XAI.
At the Turing award session and ﬁreside conversation with Da niel Kah-
neman, there was a clear convergence towards integrating sy mbolic reason-
ing and deep learning. Kahneman made his point clear by stati ng that on
top of deep learning, a System 2 symbolic layer is needed. Thi s is reassur-
ing for neurosymbolic AI going forward as a single more cohes ive research
community that can agree about deﬁnitions and terminology, rather than a
community divided as AI has been up to now.
AI is still in its infancy, so perhaps some of the early disput es can be un-
derstood. The debate around symbols versus neurons is unlikely to produce
concrete results unless it prompts researchers on either si de of the divide to
learn about each others’ methods and techniques. As the sayi ng goes, “all
vectors are symbols, but not all symbols are vectors”.
Kahneman made the point that System 1 (S1) and System 2 (S2) ar e
terms not coined by him which have a long history in psycholog y research
[40], andthathepreferstouse implicitversusexplicitthinkingandreasoning
[41]. He argued that S1 (as the intuitive parallel system) is capable of
understanding language, in contradiction with Yoshua Beng io’s account of
deep learning’s S1 and S2. Kahneman also stated that S2 (as th e sequential
deliberative system) is most probably performing symbol ma nipulation as
argued by Gary Marcus in [52]. In his “next decade of AI” paper , Marcus
arguesstronglyinfavour ofhybridsystems, andseekstodeﬁ newhatmakes a
systemhybrid. Marcus’sdeﬁnitionisimportantinasmuchas amainproblem
of deep learning is a lack of deﬁnition. By contrast, Yann LeC un’s recent
attempt at deﬁning deep learning, also presented at the AAAI 2020 debate
[41], falls short of what is a useful formal deﬁnition. For ex ample, LeCun’s
deﬁnition fails to distinguish deep and shallow networks. A ll attempts to
create suchabridgebetween S1andS2areat thispoint useful andshouldbe
commended given our state of lack of understandingof how the brain works.
For example, attempts to create diﬀerentiable reasoning are useful, although
we would require an important distinction be made, whether t he purpose
24