progress has only been made recently and that much research i s still needed,
although good progress is being made towards the extraction of local, mea-
surable counterfactual explanations from black box ML syst ems [99]. Once
a neural network has been endowed with a symbolic interpreta tion, one has
no reason to doubt the ability of a neural system to ask what ifquestions.
In fact, the very algorithm for extracting symbolic logic de scriptions of the
formA→Bfrom trained neural networks [15] uses a form of interrogati on
of the network akin to the intervention of Bayesian models ad vocated by
Pearl. We argue therefore that a more important question is r epresenta-
tional: which representation is most eﬀective, deep network s or Bayesian
networks? While attempting to answer this question, as well as consider-
ing the demands of the practical applications, it is importa nt to recognise
that neural networks oﬀer a concrete model of computation, on e which can
be implemented eﬃciently by message passing or propagation of activation,
diﬀerently from Bayesian networks, and trained by diﬀerentia ble learning
algorithms. A limitation of having such a concrete computat ional model,
however, may be a diﬃculty of pure neural networks at modelli ng rich forms
of abstraction which are not dependent on the data (images, a udio, etc.)
but which exist instead at a higher conceptual level. We shal l return to this
challenge later in the paper.
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning in AI: Complex prob-
lem solving using AI requires a much richer language than tha t of expert
systems as suggested by Hinton [36]. AI requires a language t hat can go
well beyond Horn clauses to include relational knowledge, t ime and other
modalities, negation by failure, variable substitution an d quantiﬁcation, etc.
In statistical relational learning, the use of ﬁrst-order l ogic does not require
instantiating (or grounding) all possible combinations of the values of the
variables (e.g. XandYin a relation R(X,Y)). Inrelational reasoning
with neural networks, borrowing from the ﬁeld of relational databases, it is
typically the grounded (and therefore propositional rathe r than ﬁrst-order)
representation that is learned and reasoned about. For the a voidance of
confusion, we would term this latter task relationship learning . Two other
equally important attributes of a rich language for complex problem solving
arecompositionality , in the sense of the compositionality of the semantics
of a logical language, and modularity. It is worth noting tha t in the original
paper about deep learning [37], before much of the attention turned to con-
volutional networks, modularity was a main objective of the proposed semi-
supervised greedy learning of stacks of restricted Boltzma nn machines. The
recently-proposed stacked capsule autoencoders [44] and n eural-symbolic
approaches such as Logic Tensor Networks [79] as well as othe r weakly-
9