recurring theme in the current debate. A point made recently by Geoﬀ Hin-
ton on this issue was that: “the goal posts keep changing. Bef ore, if an AI
system could translate a text, it would have been deemed as ha ving under-
stood the text, or if the system could sustain a conversation or describe the
scene on an image. Now, none of these count as proper understa nding”.
One may argue that it is the very deﬁnition of AI and the recent success of
deep learning itself that have been responsible for this sit uation. Perhaps,
instead of proper “understanding”, a more forgiving approa ch might be to
specify comprehensibility tests of the kind used in schools to evaluate the
performance of students on various subjects, including e.g . foreign language
comprehensibility tests, as proposed by Stephen Muggleton . Neurosymbolic
AI is in need of standard benchmarks and associated comprehe nsibility tests
whichcouldinaprincipledwayoﬀerafaircomparativeevalua tionwithother
approaches with a focus on learning from fewer data, reasoni ng about ex-
trapolation, computational complexity and energy consump tion. Justas the
ﬁeld of AI progressed when challenging applications were se t such as chess
playing, roboticfootball, self-drivingvehicles andprot ein folding, neurosym-
bolic AI should beneﬁt from a similar challenge and benchmar k being set
by the AI community speciﬁcally for the next decade.
References
[1] F. Arabshahi, Z. Lu, S. Singh, and A. Anandkumar. Memory a ug-
mented recursive neural networks. CoRR, abs/1911.01545, 2019.
[2] F. Arabshahi, S. Singh, and A. Anandkumar. Combining sym bolic
expressions and black-box function evaluations in neural p rograms. In
ICLR, 2018.
[3] S.H. Bach, M. Broecheler, B. Huang, and L. Getoor. Hinge- loss markov
random ﬁelds and probabilistic soft logic. CoRR, abs/1505.04406, 2015.
[4] S. Bader and P. Hitzler. Dimensions of neural-symbolic i ntegration:
a structured survey. In S. Artemov, H. Barringer, A. d’Avila Garcez,
L. Lamb, and J. Woods, editors, We Will Show Them! Essays in Hon-
our of Dov Gabbay , 2005.
[5] S. Bader, P. Hitzler, S. H¨ olldobler, and A. Witzel. The c ore method:
Connectionist model generation for ﬁrst-order logic progr ams. In
B. Hammer and P. Hitzler, editors, Perspectives of Neural-Symbolic
28