between distributed and localist representations for reas oning.
Neural-symbolic computing has been an active area of resear ch seeking
to establish such a bridge for several years [4, 26, 16, 20, 35 , 43, 80, 93].
In neural-symbolic computation, knowledge learned by a neu ral network
can be represented symbolically. Reasoning takes place eit her symbolically
or within the network in distributed form. Despite their diﬀe rences, both
the symbolic and connectionist paradigms share common char acteristics,
oﬀering beneﬁts when put together in a principled way (see e.g . [17, 20, 84,
93]). Change of representation also oﬀers a way of making sens e of the value
of diﬀerent neural models and architectures with respect to w hat is a more
formal and better understood area of research: symbolic log ic.
Neural network-based learning and inference under uncerta inty have
been expected to address the brittleness and computational complexity
of symbolic systems. Symbolism has been expected to provide additional
knowledge in the form of constraints for learning [23, 32], w hich amelio-
rate neural network’s well-known catastrophic forgetting or diﬃculty with
extrapolation in unbounded domains or with out-of-distrib ution data. The
integration of neural models with logic-based symbolism is expected there-
fore to provide an AI system capable of explainability, tran sfer learning and
a bridge between lower-level information processing (for e ﬃcient perception
and pattern recognition) and higher-level abstract knowle dge (for reasoning,
extrapolation and planning).
Suppose that a complex neural network learns a function f(x). Once
this function is known, or more precisely a simpliﬁed descri ption of f(x)
is known, computationally it makes sense to use such a repres entation, not
least for the sake of extrapolation, as exempliﬁed earlier w ith thef(x) =x
function. One could argue that at this point the neural netwo rk has become
superﬂuous. Symbol manipulation (once symbols have been di scovered) is
key to further learning at new levels of abstraction. This is exempliﬁed well
in [52] with the use of the concept of a container which may be learned from
images.
Among the most promising recent approaches to neural-symbo lic inte-
gration, so-called embedding techniques seek to transform symbolic repre-
sentations into vector spaces where reasoning can take plac e through matrix
computations over distance functions [7, 85, 87, 80, 75, 11, 26, 100, 24, 70].
In such systems, learning of an embedding is carried out usin g backpropa-
gation [98, 73]. Most of the research in this area is focused o n the art of
representing relational knowledge such as P(X,Y) in a distributed neural
network. Thelogical predicate Prelatingvariables XandYcouldbeusedto
denote, for example, the container relation between two objects in an image
11