bias in the ML system, which is a serious and present problem [ 25]. As a
result of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), ma ny companies
have decided as a precaution to remove protected variables s uch as gender
and race from their ML system. It is well known, however, that proxies exist
in the data which will continue to bias the outcome so that the removal of
such variables may serve only to hide a bias that otherwise co uld have been
revealed via knowledge extraction [61]. Current AI-based d ecision support
systems process very large amounts of data which humans cann ot possibly
evaluate in a timely fashion. Thus, even with a so-called hum an-in-the-loop
approach where technology domain experts or end-users may b ecome ac-
countable to the decisions, domain experts or end-users are likely to quickly
feel progressively less capable of over-riding recommenda tions which were
deemed accurate and based on so much more data than they can ha ndle.
Even when such AI systems are portrayed as decision support s ystems, the
current reality is that in order to function well with Big Dat a, the system
must execute a form of triage of the data to be presented to the expert, thus
only oﬀering partial information to the decision maker. With out knowledge
extraction and a capacity for system communication, the dec ision maker
will, by the very nature of the automated data triage, not be i n control.
Finally, the simple extraction of rules from trained networ ks may be insuﬃ-
cient. Onemay needtoextractalso conﬁdence values soastobeabletorank
extracted rules. This oﬀers a system that knows when it does not know . As
a simple example, consider a typical neural network trained to classify the
well-known MNIST hand-written digits from 0 to 9. Faced with an image
of an obvious non-digit such as an image of a cat, this system m ust surely
provide a very low conﬁdence value to any of the outcomes 0 to 9 . The use
of adversarial approaches alongside knowledge extraction for robustness has
a contribution to make here. In summary, for the many reasons discussed
above, neurosymbolic AI with a measurable form of knowledge extraction is
a fundamental part of XAI.
6 AAAI 2020, a Turning Point
We now return to the debate around System 1 and System 2 that mo tivated
the introduction of this paper and provide a short summary of the AAAI
2020 conference. Not only did the AAAI 2020 conference conta ined a larger
than usual number of papers proposing to combine neural netw orks and
symbolic AI, there were a number of keynote addresses and deb ates directly
relevant to neural-symbolic computing, notably:
23