As well as pointing to the various related and promising tech niques
within AI, ML and Deep Learning, this article seeks to help or ganise some of
theterminology commonly usedaroundAI. Thisseems importa nt at thisex-
citing time when AI becomes popularized and more people from other areas
of Computer Science and from other ﬁelds altogether turn to A I: psychol-
ogy, cognitive science, economics, medicine, engineering and neuroscience to
name a few.
In Section 2, we position the current debate in the context of the nec-
essary and suﬃcient building blocks of AI and long-standing challenges of
variable grounding and commonsense reasoning. In Section 3 , we seek to
organise the debate, which can become vague if deﬁned around the concepts
ofneurons versus symbols , around the concepts of distributed and localist
representations. We argue for the importance of this focus o n representation
since representation precedes learning as well as reasonin g. We also analyse
a taxonomy for neurosymbolic AI proposed by Henry Kautz at AA AI-2020
from the angle of localist and distributed representations . In Section 4,
we delve deeper into a more technical discussion of current n eurosymbolic
systems and methods with their pros and cons. In Section 5, we identify
promisingapproaches and directions for neurosymbolic AI f rom the perspec-
tive of learning, reasoning and explainable AI. In Section 6 , we return to the
debate that was so present at AAAI-2020 to conclude the paper and identify
exciting challenges for the third wave of AI.
2 Neurons and Symbols: Context and Current
Debate
Deep learning researchers and AI companies have achieved gr oundbreaking
results in areas such as computer vision, game playing and na tural lan-
guage processing [49, 83] Despite the impressive results, d eep learning has
been criticised for brittleness (being susceptible to adve rsarial attacks), lack
of explainability (not having a formally deﬁned computatio nal semantics
or even intuitive explanation, leading to questions around the trustworthi-
ness of AI systems), and lack of parsimony (requiring far too much data,
computational power at training time or unacceptable level s of energy con-
sumption) [52]. Against this backdrop, leading entreprene urs and scientists
such as Bill Gates and the late Stephen Hawking have voiced co ncerns about
AI’s accountability, impact on humanity and the future of th e planet [74].
The need for a better understanding of the underlying princi ples of AI has
become generally accepted. A key question however is that of identifying
3