Among the recent neurosymbolic systems, one can identify qu ite a va-
riety in range from integrative to hybrid systems: [51] can b e seen as a
loosely-coupled hybrid approach whereimage classiﬁcatio n is combined with
reasoning from text data; [50] oﬀers further integration by a llowing a node
in the probabilistic inference tree of a symbolic ML system ( ProbLog) to be
replaced by a neural network; [79] takes another step toward s integration
by using a diﬀerentiable many-valued logic in the loss functi on of a neural
network (in LTN, theorem proving is left for the symbolic cou nterpart of
the system); [54] proposes to perform diﬀerentiable uniﬁcat ion and theorem
proving inside the neural network.
Out of the systems and techniques now available, some more in tegrative
others more loosely-coupled, a common question clearly eme rges:what are
the fundamental building blocks, the necessary and suﬃcient com-
ponents of neurosymbolic AI? For example, is the use of an attention
layer necessary [96] or can it be replaced by richer structur e such as graph
networks [47]? Is the explicit use of probability theory nec essary, and in
this case inside the network or at the symbolic level or both? Is there a real
computational gain in combinatorial problem solving by the orem proving
using neural networks or is this task better left to the devic es of a symbolic
system? One thing is now very clearer: there is great practic al value in the
use of gradient-based learning on distributed representat ions[45].
In this paper, we also seek to bring attention to another perh aps less
attractive but equally if not more relevant question of adop ting adistributed
versus a localist representation . In a localist representation the relevant
concepts have an associated identiﬁer. This is typically a d iscrete represen-
tation. By contrast, in a distributed representation, conc epts are denoted
by vectors with continuous values. This is therefore an issu e of which repre-
sentation is adequate or most appropriate. Symbolic machin e learning takes
a localist approach while neural networks are distributed, although neural
networks can also be localist [57]. The next section will be d evoted to the
pros and cons of distributed and localist representations.
Forms of Neurosymbolic Integration: WithinneurosymbolicAIone
may identify systems that translate and encode symbolic knowledge in the set
of weights of a network [27], orsystems that translate and encode symbolic
knowledge into the loss function of the network [79]. The neural-symbolic
cycletranslating symbolic knowledge into neural networks and vi ce-versa
perform logical uniﬁcation exactly or approximately using a neural network, although at
present the most practical way may be to adopt a hybrid approa ch whereby uniﬁcation is
computed symbolically.
7