to be application and user speciﬁc. While some stakeholders may be happy
without an explanation, as in the case of a patient faced with a medical
diagnosis, in most cases some form of explanation is needed t o improve
system performance or trust. In some cases, producing an exp lanation is in
fact the main goal of the system as in the application of ML to r esponsible
gambling in [59, 60].
Early eﬀorts at knowledge extraction in neurosymbolic AI as a form of
explanation were always evaluated w.r.t. ﬁdelity: a measur e of the accuracy
of the extracted knowledge in relation to the neural network rather than
the data, or in today’s terminology, a measure of the accurac y of the stu-
dentmodel w.r.t. the teachermodel. High ﬁdelity is therefore fundamental
whenever a student model is to be claimed to oﬀer a good explana tion for
a (more complex) teacher model. Unfortunately, many recent XAI meth-
ods have abandoned ﬁdelity as a measure of the quality of an ex planation,
making it easier for an apparently excellent explanation to be simply wrong,
in that it may not be at all an explanation of the ML model in que stion.
This is particularly problematic for very popular local XAI methods such
as LIME [67]. Local explanation systems currently in use by c onsultancy
ﬁrms and available in many AI toolboxes can be shown to achiev e very low
levels of ﬁdelity. Without high ﬁdelity results, an apparen tly perfectly good
explanation produced by an XAI system is likely not to be an ex planation of
the underlying ML system which it is expected to explain. In [ 99] a way of
measuring ﬁdelity of local methods was introduced which we a rgue should
be adopted by all XAI methods. The same paper exempliﬁes how L IME’s
explanations may achieve very low ﬁdelity.
Even better than ﬁdelity, if an XAI method can be shown to be so und
[15] then it will provably converge to a high-ﬁdelity. Sound ness however is
normally associated with exponential complexity and so in p ractice a mea-
sure of ﬁdelity may be all that is available. Knowledge extra ction should
also allow communication between users and the ML system. Cu rrent in-
teractive ML is insuﬃcient to the extent that it proposes to r eplace sound
statistical evaluation by subjective user evaluation. Com munication with
the system implies an ability to ask questions (query the sys tem) and check
one’s understanding (obtain a rationale for the outcome). T he user can
then either agree with the outcome and the rationale, agree w ith the out-
come but not the rationale, or disagree with the outcome, thu s providing
usefulfeedback ordirect intervention tochange thesystem andits outcomes,
probably through the system’s symbolic description langua ge in the case of
neurosymbolic AI.
Knowledge extraction also oﬀers a way of identifying and corr ecting for
22