sions, such as e.g.∀X,Y:father(X,Y)→ancestor (X,Y), from relatively
few examples and using similarity measures to infer new rela tions, at the
same time deriving symbolic descriptions which can be used f or reasoning
beyond the distribution of the data, allowing in turn for ext rapolation. In
this example, once a description for ancestor is obtained, one should be able
to reason about arbitrarily long chains of family relations hips. Notice that
key to this process is the ability to revise the conclusion ta ken once new
evidence to the contrary of what has been inferred is made ava ilable from
the data. In other words, the reasoning here is nonmonotonic [14].
In summary, at least two options exist for neurosymbolic AI .
In Option 1, symbols are translated into a neural network and one seeks to
perform reasoning within the network. In Option 2, a more hyb rid approach
is taken wherebythenetwork interacts with asymbolicsyste m forreasoning.
A third option, which would not require a neurosymbolic appr oach, exists
when expert knowledge is made available, rather than learne d from data,
and one is interested in achieving precise sound reasoning a s opposed to
approximate reasoning. We discuss each option brieﬂy next.
In Option 1, it is desirable still to produce a symbolic descr iption of the
network for the sake of improving explainability (discusse d later) or trust,
or for the purpose of communication and interaction with the system. In
Option 2, by deﬁnition, a neurosymbolic interface is needed . This may
be the best option in practice given the need for combining re asoning and
learning in AI, and the apparent diﬀerent nature of both tasks (discrete
and exact versus continuous and approximate). However, the value of dis-
tributed approximate reasoning using neural networks is on ly starting to be
investigated as in the case of diﬀerentiable neural computer s [33] and neural
theorem proving [97], although early eﬀorts did not prove to b e promising
in terms of practical eﬃciency [62, 38, 82]. In Option 3, a rea sonable re-
quirement nowadays would beto compare results with deep lea rning and the
other options. This is warranted by the latest practical res ults of deep learn-
ing showing that neural networks can oﬀer, at least from a comp utational
perspective, better results than purely symbolic systems.
Inpractice, thechoice betweenOptions1and2abovemay depe ndonthe
application at hand and the availability of quality data and knowledge. A
comparatively small number of scientists will continue to s eek to make sense
of the strengths and limitations of both neural and symbolic approaches.
On this front, the research advances faster on the symbolic s ide due to the
clear hierarchy of semantics and language expressiveness a nd rigour that
exists at the foundation of the area. By contrast, little is k nown about the
expressiveness of the latest deep learning models in relati on to established
16