and discrete, capable of sophisticated reasoning , including temporal, epis-
temic and nonmonotonic reasoning, planning, extrapolatio n and reasoning
by analogy. Neurosymbolic AI has shown that non-classical l ogics, in par-
ticular many-valued logics, oﬀer an adequate language for de scribing neural
networks [79, 69]. As the ﬁeld of AI moves towards agreement o n the need
for combining the strengths of neural and symbolic AI, it sho uld turn next
to the question: what is the best representation for neurosymbolic
AI?
To answer this question, one shouldseek to beinformed by dev elopments
in neural-symbolic computing of the past 20 years, and to eva luate in a pre-
cise manner the methods, algorithms and applications of neu rosymbolic AI.
For instance, it is known that current recurrent neural netw orks are capable
of computing thelogical consequences of propositional mod al logic programs
and other forms of non-classical reasoning and fragment of ﬁ rst order logic
programs [5, 20]. Obtaining results for full ﬁrst-order log ic has not been
possible thus far, which reinforces John McCarthy’s claim t hat neural net-
worksareessentially propositional. Intermsofapplicati ons ofAI,thesehave
been largely focused on perceptual or pattern matching task s such as image
and audio classiﬁcation. Recent eﬀorts at question answerin g and language
translation as well as protein folding classiﬁcation have h ighlighted the im-
portance of the neurosymbolic approach. The ideal type of ap plication for a
neurosymbolic system, however, should be that where abstra ct information
is required to be reasoned about at diﬀerent levels beyond tha t what can
be perceived from data alone, such as complex concept learni ng whereby
simpler concepts are required to be organised systematical ly as part of the
deﬁnition of a higher concept. Such a conceptual structure, which is still to
be discovered using data, also requires knowledge which is g overned by gen-
eral rules and exceptions to the rules , allowing for sound generalization in
the face of uncertainty but also capable of handling speciﬁc cases (the many
exceptions, which may be important for the sake of robustnes s although
not necessarily statistically relevant). Similarly, it se ems hard to achieve
true relational learning using only neural networks. A usef ul but simple
example can be borrowed from the area of Inductive Logic Prog ramming:
learning the concept of ancestor from a few examples of the mother,father
andgrandparent relations. Groundingthe entire knowledge-base in this cas e
would not be productive since the chain of reasoning to deriv e the concept
ofancestor may be arbitrarily large depending on the data available. In
this case, one is better oﬀ learning certain relations by jumping to conclu-
frequently requiring simpliﬁcation of graphs into tree-ba sed representations.
15