it certainly includes an ability to ask what-if questions. R easoning about
what has been learned allows for extrapolation beyond the da ta distribu-
tion, and ﬁnally the symbolic description can serve as prior knowledge (as
a constraint) for further learning in the presence of more da ta, which in-
cludes the case of knowledge-based transfer learning [90]. Further training
can now take place at the perceptual or sub-symbolic level, o r at the con-
ceptual or symbolic level. This is when having a distributed (sub-symbolic)
and a localist (symbolic or sub-symbolic) representation b ecomes relevant.
Assuming that probabilities are dealt with at the sub-symbo lic distributed
level (as in RBMs) and that the symbolic level is used for a mor e qualitative
representation of uncertainty in the form of general rules w ith exceptions,
we avoid the complications of having to deal simultaneously with discrete
and continuous learning of rules and probabilities.
A Note about Explainable AI (XAI): Knowledge extraction is an
integral part of neural-symbolic integration and a major in gredient towards
explainability of black-box AI systems. The main diﬃculty i n XAI is the
eﬃcient extraction of compact and yet correct and complete k nowledge. It
can be argued that a large knowledge-base is not more explain able than a
large neural network.9Although this may be true at the level of the entire
model explainability, in the case of local explanations, i. e. explanations
of individual cases, a knowledge-base is certainly more exp lainable than
a neural network because it oﬀers a trace (a proof history) sho wing why
an outcome was obtained, as opposed to simply showing how pro pagation
of activation through the network has led to that outcome. It is a main
goal of knowledge extraction algorithms to seek to derive co mpact relevant
representations from large complex networks. This is not al ways possible
to achieve eﬃciently, in which case one may need to resort to h aving local
explanations only.
Many aspects of XAI are being investigated at present. Some o f the
research questions include: Is the explanation intended fo r an expert or lay
person? Is an explanation required because one does not trus t the system,
expected a diﬀerent outcome/would like to induce a diﬀerent ou tcome, or
would like to question the normative system that has led to th e outcome?
Is an explanation intended to try and improve system perform ance, reduce
bias/increase fairness, or is it the case that one would simp ly like to be able
tounderstandthedecisionprocess? Theanswerstotheseque stionsarelikely
9The now apparent lack of explainability of Random Forests, w hich amount to a collec-
tion of Decision Trees and therefore propositional logic fo rmulas with probabilities, serves
as a good reminder that XAI is not conﬁned to neural networks.
21