achieve the combination of (symbolic) language and (neural ) structure be
principled, in that both language and structure should be fo rmally speciﬁed
with theorems proven about their correspondence or lack the reof. As done
in the case of Noam Chomsky’s language hierarchy, proofs are needed of
the capability of diﬀerent neural architectures at represen ting various log-
ical languages. Proofs of correspondence have been shown be tween neural
networks and propositional, nonmonotonic, modal, epistem ic and temporal
logic in [20]. Similar proofs are required for ﬁrst-order an d higher-order
logic.
Henry Kautz spoke of 6 types of neurosymbolic AI and said that what
is important next is to work out which speciﬁc technique is be st [42]. Kautz
made a distinction between expert knowledge and commonsens e knowledge
and noted that one should not necessarily want to backpropagate through
expert knowledge . Inthiscase, exactreasoningisneeded ` a laneural-symbolic
computing with knowledge extraction. An equally valid argu ment exists for
diﬀerentiable reasoning in the case of commonsense knowledg e. The use
of probabilistic languages or higher-order (functional or logical) languages
may also have a central role in the technical debate, includi ng on the best
place for probability theory: in S1 or S2 or both? In the meant ime, we
say: translate back and forth between representations, tak e a principled
approach, adopt a language as a constraint on the structure, seek to provide
explanations, combine reasoning and learning, and repeat.
We also set out three immediate challenges for neurosymboli c AI, each
capable of spinning out multiple research strands which may become area
deﬁning in the next decade:
•Challenge 1: First-order logic and higher-order knowledge extraction
from very large networks that is provably sound and yet eﬃcie nt, ex-
plains the entire model and local network interactions and a ccounts
for diﬀerent levels of abstraction.
•Challenge 2: Goal-directed commonsense and eﬃcient combin atorial
reasoning about what has been learned by a complex deep netwo rk
trained on large amounts of multimodal data.
•Challenge 3: Human-network communication as part of a multi -agent
system that promotes communication and argumentation prot ocols
between the user and an agent that can ask questions and check her
understanding.
Whether or not an AI system truly understands what it does is another
27