this paper, a property of early deep learning may hold the key to the above
hybrid perspective: modularity. In the original paper on de ep learning [37],
a modular system is proposed consisting of a stack of restric ted Boltzmann
machines (RBMs). The extraction of symbolic descriptions f rom each RBM
is thus made considerably easier [90]. Each RBM learns a join t probability
distribution while their symbolic description reﬂects the result of learning
without manipulating probabilities explicitly, thus avoi ding the complexity
of probabilistic inference found in symbolic AI.
In [90], an eﬃcient algorithm is presented that extracts pro positional
rules enriched with conﬁdence values from RBMs, similar to w hat was pro-
posed with Penalty Logic for Hopﬁeld networks in [62]. When R BMs are
stacked onto a deep belief network, however, the modular ext raction of com-
positional rules may be accompanied by a compounding loss of accuracy, in-
dicating that knowledge learned by the neural network might not have been
as modular as one would have wished. Systems that impose a mor e explicit
separation of modules may hold the answer to this problem, in particular
systems where unsupervised learning is combined with weakl y-supervised
classiﬁcation at distinct levels of abstraction, such as wi th the use of varia-
tional auto-encoders [86] or generative adversarial netwo rks [31]. In the area
of Reinforcement Learning too, deep learning systems combi ned with sym-
bolic rules were ﬁrst proposed in [29], and there is promise o f considerable
progress with the use of neurosymbolic approaches especial ly in the case of
model-based Reinforcement Learning.
We therefore do not advocate the adoption of monoblock networks with
millions of parameters. Even though this may be how the human brain
works, loss of modularity seems to be, at least at present fro m a compu-
tational perspective, a price that is too high to pay. Modula rity remains a
fundamentally relevant property of any computing system.
Applications of Neurosymbolic AI: One major way of driving ad-
vances in AI continues to bethrough challenging applicatio ns, beit language
translation, computer games or protein folding competitio ns. Language un-
derstanding in the broadest sense of the term, including que stion-answering
that requires commonsense reasoning, oﬀers probably the mos t complete
application area for neurosymbolic AI. As an example, consi der this ques-
tion and its commonsense answer from the COPA data set [72]: I t got dark
outside. What happened as a result? (a) Snowﬂakes began to fa ll from
results in both of these directions [71, 50, 100, 64]. Comput ational complexity issues
remain a challenge though for the combination of ﬁrst-order logic and probabilities in
symbolic AI.
18