read alongside the critique in [21]). An approach to learn an d reason over
mathematical constructions is proposed in [2], and in [1] a l earning archi-
tecture that extrapolates to harder symbolic maths reasoni ng problems is
introduced. We would also include in Type 4 other tightly-coupled but lo-
calist neural-symbolic systems where various forms of symb olic knowledge,
not restricted to if-thenrules, is translated into the initial architecture and
set of weights of a neural network, in some cases with guarant ees of correct-
ness [20], as well as Logical Neural Networks, where the key c oncept is to
create a 1-to-1 correspondence between neurons and the elem ents of logical
formulas [69]. Type 5 are those tightly-coupled but distributed neural-
symbolic systems where a symbolic logic rule is mapped onto a n embedding
which acts as a soft-constraint (a regularizer) on the netwo rk’s loss function.
Examples of these include Logic Tensor Networks [79] and Ten sor Product
Representations [39], referred to in [13] as tensorization methods. Finally,
aType 6 system should be capable, according to Kautz, of true symbolic
reasoning inside a neural engine . This is what one could refer to as a fully-
integrated system. Early work in neural-symbolic computin g has achieved
this (see [20] for a historical overview). Some Type 4 systems are also ca-
pable of it, but using a localist rather than a distributed re presentation and
using much simpler forms of embedding than Type 5 systems. Kautz adds
that aType 6 system should be capable of combinatorial reasoning , possi-
bly by using an attention schema to achieve it eﬀectively. Rec ent eﬀorts in
this direction include [8, 47, 63], although a fully-ﬂedged Type 6system for
combinatorial reasoning does not exist yet.
Further research into Type 5 systems will likely focus on the provision
of rich embeddings and the study of the extent to which such em beddings
may correspondeither to pre-deﬁnedpriorknowledge or to le arned attention
mechanisms. Further research onto Type 6systems is highly relevant to the
theory of neural-symbolic computing, as discussed in more d etail in the next
section. In practical terms, a tension exists between eﬀecti ve learning and
sound reasoning, which may prescribe the use of a more hybrid approach
ofTypes 3 to 5 , or variations thereof such as the use of attention with
tensorization. Orthogonal to the above taxonomy, but mostl y associated
thus far with Type 4, is the study of the limits of reasoning within neural
networks, which was already of interest since the ﬁrst eﬀorts by Valiant at
providing a foundation for computational learning [91]. Re cently, this has
beenthefocusofexperimental analysesofdeeplearningins ymbolicdomains
[89], and it should include the study of ﬁrst-order logic, hi gher-order, many-
valued and non-classical logic.
13