symbols versus neurons to the research question:
How to compute and learn with symbols, inside or outside of a
neural network, and how eﬃciently computationally, in a pre cise
or approximate reasoning setting?
Foundational work about neurosymbolic models and systems s uch as
[16, 17, 20] will be relevant as we embark in this journey. In [ 20], corre-
spondences are shown between various logical-symbolic sys tems and neural
networkmodels. Thecurrentlimitsofneuralnetworksasess entially apropo-
sitional3system are also evaluated. In a nutshell, current neural net works
arecapable ofrepresentingpropositional logic, nonmonot oniclogic program-
ming, propositional modal logic and fragments of ﬁrst-orde r logic, but not
full ﬁrst-order or higher-order logic. This limitation has prompted the re-
cent work in the area of Logic Tensor Networks (LTN) [79, 53, 9 5] which, in
order to use the language of full ﬁrst-order logic with deep l earning, trans-
lates logical statements into the loss function rather than into the network
architecture. First-order logic statements are therefore mapped onto dif-
ferentiable real-valued constraints using a many-valued l ogic interpretation
in the interval [0,1]. The trained network and the logic beco me communi-
cating modules of a hybrid system, instead of the logic compu tation being
implemented by the network. This distinction between havin g neural and
symbolic modules that communicate in various ways and havin g transla-
tions from one representation to the other in a more integrat ive approach
to reasoning and learning should be at the centre of the debat e in the next
decade.4
3The current limitation of neural networks, which John McCar thy referred to as propo-
sitional ﬁxation , is of course based on the current simple models of neuron. Al though
this may be about to change through important work on underst anding the mind and
brain which may produce richer models of neural networks [30 ], one should note that the
recent state-of-the-art results obtained by deep networks using large amounts of data are
predicated on the notion of a simple neuron [49, 78].
4Having worked for two decades on integrative neurosymbolic AI and more recently on
hybrid neural-symbolic systems, we are acutely aware of the tension between principled
integration and practical value and application . Scientiﬁcally, there is obvious value in the
study of the limits of integration to improve our understand ing of the power of neural
networks using the well-studied structures and algebras of computer science logic. When
seeking to solve a speciﬁc problem, however, one may prefer t o take, for example, an
existing knowledge-base and ﬁnd the most eﬀective way of usi ng it alongside the tools
available from deep learning and software agents. As a case i n point, take the uniﬁcation
algorithm, which is an eﬃcient way of computing symbolic sub stitutions. It is notoriously
diﬃcult to implement in neural networks. One may, of course, wish to study how to
6