1 Introduction
Over the past decade, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and in particu lar deep learning
have attracted media attention, have become the focus of inc reasingly large
research endeavours, and have changed businesses. This led to inﬂuential
debates on the impact of AI both on academia and industry [52] , [66]. It
has been claimed that Deep Learning (DL) caused a paradigm sh ift not
only in AI, but in several Computer Science ﬁelds, including speech recogni-
tion, computer vision and image understanding, natural lan guage processing
(NLP) and machine translation [49]. The 2019 Montr´ eal AI De bate between
Yoshua Bengio and Gary Marcus, mediated by Vincent Boucher [ 52], and
the AAAI-2020 ﬁreside conversation with Economics Nobel La ureate Daniel
Kahneman, mediated by Francesca Rossi and including the 201 8 Turing
Award winners and DL pioneers Geoﬀrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio a nd Yann
LeCun, have pointedtonewperspectivesandconcernsonthef utureof AI.It
has now been argued eloquently that if the aim is to build a ric h AI system,
that is, a semantically sound, explainable and ultimately t rustworthy AI
system, one needs to include with it a sound reasoning layer i n combination
with deep learning. Kahneman corroborated this point at AAA I-2020 by
stating that ...as far as I’m concerned, System 1 certainly knows language ...
System 2 does involve certain manipulation of symbols [41]. Kahneman’s
comments at AAAI-2020 go to the heart of the matter, with para llels hav-
ing been drawn many times by AI researchers between Kahneman ’s research
on human reasoning and decision making - reﬂected in his book “Thinking,
Fast and Slow” [40] - and the so-called “AI systems 1 and 2”, wh ich would
in principle be modelled by deep learning and symbolic reaso ning, respec-
tively.1
In this paper, we place 20 years of research from the area of ne urosym-
bolic AI, known as neural-symbolic integration, in the cont ext of the recent
explosion of interest and excitement about the combination of deep learning
and symbolic reasoning. We revisit early theoretical resul ts of fundamental
relevance to shaping the latest research, and identify bott lenecks and the
most promising technical directions for the sound represen tation of learning
and reasoning in neural and symbolic systems.
1“Thinking Fast and Slow”, by Daniel Kahneman: New York: Farr ar, Straus and
Giroux, 2011, describes the author’s “... current understanding of judgement and deci-
sion making, which has been shaped by psychological discove ries of recent decades.” Of
course, the concepts of systems 1 and 2 derive from decades of research in Psychology and
Cognitive Science and a comprehensive explanation is beyon d the scope and aims of this
paper.
2