of which I am quite sympathetic to. But for reasons that will
become apparent, I worry that even these sorts of tools will n ot
suﬃce on their own for getting us to robust intelligence. Ins tead,
I will propose that in order to get to robust artiﬁcial intell igence,
we need to develop a framework for building systems that can
routinelyacquire, represent, andmanipulateabstractkno wledge,
with a focus on building systems that use that knowledge in th e
service of building, updating, and reasoning over complex, inter-
nal models of the external world.”
Key to the appreciation of the above statement by Marcus, als o advo-
cated in [46] and [28], is an understanding of the representa tional value of
the symbolic manipulation of variables in logic and the comp ositionality of
language. It is probably fair to assume that the next decade w ill be devoted
to researching speciﬁc methods and techniques which seek to address the
above issues of representation, robustness and extrapolat ion. Such tech-
niques will be drawn from a broader perspective of neurosymb olic machine
learning and AI which embraces hybrid systems, including:
(a) Variable Grounding and Symbol Manipulation: Embracing
hybrid systems requires the study of how symbols may emerge a nd become
useful in the context of what deep learning researchers have termeddisen-
tanglement . Once symbols emerge (which may happen at diﬀerent levels
of abstraction, ideally within a modular network architect ure), it may be
more productive from a computational perspective to refer t o such symbols
and manipulate (i.e. compute) them symbolically rather tha n numerically.
Once it becomes known that a complex neural network serves to calculate,
for example, the sum of two handwritten digits provided as in put images, or
equally that a complex neural network has learned the functi onf(x) =x,
then it is probably the case that one would prefer such a calcu lation to be
precise and to extrapolate well to any value of x. This is easily achieved
symbolically. Reasoning, in many cases too, is preferred to be precise and
not approximate, although there are cases where approximat e or human-like
reasoning become more eﬃcient than logical deduction [34].
(b) Commonsense and Combinatorial Reasoning: Another key
distinction that is worth making explicit refers to the diﬀer ence between
commonsense knowledge and expert knowledge. While the form er is ap-
proximate and diﬃcult to specify, the latter strives to be as precise as pos-
sible and to prove its properties. We believe that, once equi pped with a
solid understanding of the value of hybrid systems, variabl e manipulation
and reasoning, the debate will be allowed to progress from th e question of
5