namic pooling, such as Bow-CNN (Johnson and
Zhang, 2014) and XML-CNN (Liu et al., 2017).
Linear classiﬁers : PD-Sparse (Yen et al., 2016)
introduces a Fully-Corrective Block-Coordinate
Frank-Wolfe algorithm to address data sparsity.
4.2 Question and Answering
State-of-the-art approaches to QA fall into two
categories: IR-based and knowledge-based QA.
IR-based QA ﬁrstly preprocesses the question
and employ information retrieval techniques to
retrieve a list of relevant passages to questions.
Next, reading comprehension techniques are
adopted to extract answers within the span of re-
trieved text. For answer extraction, early methods
manually designed patterns to get them (Pasca). A
recent popular trend is neural answer extraction.
Various neural network models are employed to
represent questions (Severyn and Moschitti, 2015;
Wang and Nyberg, 2015). Since the attention
mechanism naturally explores relevancy, it has
been widely used in QA models to relate the ques-
tion to candidate answers (Tan et al., 2016; Santos
et al., 2016; Sha et al., 2018). Moreover, some
researchers leveraged external large-scale knowl-
edge bases to assist answer selection (Savenkov
and Agichtein, 2017; Shen et al., 2018; Deng et al.,
2018).
Knowledge-based QA conducts semantic pars-
ing on questions and transforms parsing results
into logical forms. Those forms are adopted to
match answers from structured knowledge bases
(Yao and Van Durme, 2014; Yih et al., 2015; Bor-
des et al., 2015; Yin et al., 2016; Hao et al., 2017).
Recent developments focused on modeling the in-
teraction between question and answer pairs: Ten-
sor layers (Qiu and Huang, 2015; Wan et al., 2016)
and holographic composition (Tay et al., 2017)
have pushed the state-of-the-art.
4.3 Capsule Networks
Capsule networks were initially proposed by Hin-
ton (Hinton et al., 2011) to improve representa-
tions learned by neural networks against vanilla
CNNs. Subsequently, Sabour et al. (2017) re-
placed the scalar-output feature detectors of CNNs
with vector-output capsules and max-pooling with
routing-by-agreement.
Hinton et al. (2018) then proposed a new it-
erative routing procedure between capsule layers
based on the EM algorithm, which achieves bet-
ter accuracy on the smallNORB dataset. Zhanget al. (2018a) applied capsule networks to relation
extraction in a multi-instance multi-label learning
framework. Xiao et al. (2018) explored capsule
networks for multi-task learning.
Xia et al. (2018) studied the zero-shot intent
detection problem with capsule networks, which
aims to detect emerging user intents in an unsu-
pervised manner. Zhao et al. (2018) investigated
capsule networks with dynamic routing for text
classiﬁcation, and transferred knowledge from the
single-label to multi-label cases. Cho et al. (2019)
studied capsule networks with determinantal point
processes for extractive multi-document summa-
rization.
Our work is different from our predecessors in
the following aspects: (i) we evaluate the perfor-
mance of routing processes at instance level, and
introduce an adaptive optimizer to enhance the re-
liability of routing processes; (ii) we present cap-
sule compression and partial routing to achieve
better scalability of capsule networks on datasets
with a large output space.
5 Conclusion
Making computers perform more like humans is
a major issue in NLP and machine learning. This
not only includes making them perform on similar
levels (Hassan et al., 2018), but also requests them
to be robust to adversarial examples (Eger et al.,
2019) and generalize from few data points (R ¨uckl´e
et al., 2019). In this work, we have addressed the
latter issue.
In particular, we extended existing capsule net-
works into a new framework with advantages con-
cerning scalability, reliability and generalizability.
Our experimental results have demonstrated its ef-
fectiveness on two NLP tasks: multi-label text
classiﬁcation and question answering.
Through our modiﬁcations and enhancements,
we hope to have made capsule networks more suit-
able to large-scale problems and, hence, more ma-
ture for real-world applications. In the future, we
plan to apply capsule networks to even more chal-
lenging NLP problems such as language modeling
and text generation.
6 Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their com-
ments, which greatly improved the ﬁnal version of
the paper. This work has been supported by the
German Research Foundation as part of the Re-