Towards Scalable and Reliable Capsule Networks
for Challenging NLP Applications
Wei Zhaoy, Haiyun Pengz, Steffen Egery, Erik Cambriazand Min Yang
yComputer Science Department, Technische Universit ¨at Darmstadt, Germany
zSchool of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
www.aiphes.tu-darmstadt.de
Abstract
Obstacles hindering the development of cap-
sule networks for challenging NLP applica-
tions include poor scalability to large out-
put spaces and less reliable routing processes.
In this paper, we introduce (i) an agreement
score to evaluate the performance of routing
processes at instance level; (ii) an adaptive
optimizer to enhance the reliability of rout-
ing; (iii) capsule compression and partial rout-
ing to improve the scalability of capsule net-
works. We validate our approach on two NLP
tasks, namely: multi-label text classiﬁcation
and question answering. Experimental results
show that our approach considerably improves
over strong competitors on both tasks. In ad-
dition, we gain the best results in low-resource
settings with few training instances.1
1 Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have
achieved outstanding success in natural language
processing (NLP), computer vision and speech
recognition. However, these deep models are data-
hungry and generalize poorly from small datasets,
very much unlike humans (Lake et al., 2015).
This is an important issue in NLP since sen-
tences with different surface forms can convey the
same meaning (paraphrases) and not all of them
can be enumerated in the training set. For exam-
ple,Peter did not accept the offer andPeter turned
down the offer are semantically equivalent, but use
different surface realizations.
In image classiﬁcation, progress on the gener-
alization ability of deep networks has been made
by capsule networks (Sabour et al., 2017; Hinton
et al., 2018). They are capable of generalizing to
the same object in different 3D images with vari-
ous viewpoints.
1Our code is publicly available at http://bit.ly/311Dcod
Jerry completed his project.Jerry managed to finish his project.Jerry succeeded in finishing his project.
Extrapolate
Extrapolated sentencesUnseen sentencesObserved sentencesExtrapolate operationExtrapolation regime
Jerry is sleeping.Figure 1: The extrapolation regime for an observed
sentence can be found during training. Then, the un-
seen sentences in this regime may be generalized suc-
cessfully.
Such generalization capability can be learned
from examples with few viewpoints by extrapo-
lation (Hinton et al., 2011). This suggests that
capsule networks can similarly abstract away from
different surface realizations in NLP applications.
Figure 1 illustrates this idea of how observed
sentences in the training set are generalized to un-
seen sentences by extrapolation. In contrast, tra-
ditional neural networks require massive amounts
of training samples for generalization. This is
especially true in the case of convolutional neu-
ral networks (CNNs), where pooling operations
wrongly discard positional information and do not
consider hierarchical relationships between local
features (Sabour et al., 2017).
Figure 2: Outputs attend to a) active neurons found by
pooling operations b) all neurons c) relevant capsules
found in routing processes.arXiv:1906.02829v1  [cs.CL]  6 Jun 2019