CNN
stop grad
CNN
K
KeyNet [Jakab and Gupta et al.]
Feature CNNKeyNetFeature CNNKeyNetinference mode+source image
target imagetransportRefineNet
reconstructed target
Set                    for keypoint locationsfrom both images
Add               from target image keypoints
Figure 1: Transporter. Our model leverages object motion to discover keypoints by learning to
transform a source video frame ( xs) into another target frame ( xt) bytransporting image features at
the discovered object locations. During training, spatial feature maps (x)and keypoints co-ordinates
	(x)are predicted for both the frames using a ConvNet and the fully-differentiable KeyNet [16]
respectively. The keypoint co-ordinates are transformed into Gaussian heatmaps (same spatial
dimensions as feature maps) H	(x). We perform two operations in the transport phase: (1) the
features of the source frame are set to zero at both locations H	(xs)andH	(xt); (2) the features in
the source image (xs)at the target positions 	(xt)are replaced with the features from the target
imageH	(xt)(xt). The ﬁnal reﬁnement ConvNet (which maps from the transported feature map
to an image) then has two tasks: (i) to inpaint the missing features at the source position; and (ii) to
clean up the image around the target positions. During inference, keypoints can be extracted for a
single frame via a feed-forward pass through the KeyNet (	).
However, as we will show, the existing methods struggle to accurately track keypoints under the
variability in number, size, and motion of objects present in common RL domains.
We propose Transporter , a novel architecture to explicitly discover spatially, temporally and geomet-
rically aligned keypoints given only videos. After training, each keypoint represents and tracks the
co-ordinate of an object or object part even as it undergoes deformations (see ﬁg. 1 for illustrations). As
we will show, Transporter learns more accurate and more consistent keypoints on standard RL domains
than existing methods. We will then showcase two ways in which the learned keypoints can be used
for control and reinforcement learning. First, we show that using keypoints as inputs to policies instead
of RGB observations leads to drastically more data efﬁcient reinforcement learning on Atari games.
Second, we show that by learning to control the Cartesian coordinates of the keypoints in the image
plane we are able to learn skills or options [ 33] grounded in pixel observations, which is an important
problem in reinforcement learning. We evaluate the learned skills by using them for exploration and
show that they lead to much better exploration than primitive actions, especially on sparse reward tasks.
Crucially, the learned skills are task-agnostic because they are learned without access to any rewards.
In summary, our key contributions are:
Transporter learns state of the art object keypoints across a variety of commonly used RL envi-
ronments. Our proposed architecture is robust to varying number, size and motion of objects.
Using learned keypoints as state input leads to policies that perform better than state-of-the-art
model-free and model-based reinforcement learning methods on several Atari environments,
while using only up to 100k environment interactions.
Learning skills to manipulate the most controllable keypoints provides an efﬁcient action
space for exploration. We demonstrate drastic reductions in the search complexity for
exploring challenging Atari environments. Surprisingly, our action space enables random
agents to play several Atari games without rewards and any task-dependent learning.
2