Unsupervised Learning of Object Keypoints
for Perception and Control
Tejas Kulkarni *1, Ankush Gupta *1, Catalin Ionescu1, Sebastian Borgeaud1,
Malcolm Reynolds1, Andrew Zisserman1,2, and V olodymyr Mnih1
*indicates equal contribution
1DeepMind, London
2VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{tkulkarni,ankushgupta,cdi,sborgeaud,mareynolds,zisserman,vmnih}@google.com
Abstract
The study of object representations in computer vision has primarily focused on
developing representations that are useful for image classiﬁcation, object detection,
or semantic segmentation as downstream tasks. In this work we aim to learn object
representations that are useful for control and reinforcement learning (RL). To
this end, we introduce Transporter , a neural network architecture for discovering
concise geometric object representations in terms of keypoints or image-space
coordinates. Our method learns from raw video frames in a fully unsupervised
manner, by transporting learnt image features between video frames using a
keypoint bottleneck. The discovered keypoints track objects and object parts across
long time-horizons more accurately than recent similar methods. Furthermore,
consistent long-term tracking enables two notable results in control domains –
(1) using the keypoint co-ordinates and corresponding image features as inputs
enables highly sample-efﬁcient reinforcement learning; (2) learning to explore
by controlling keypoint locations drastically reduces the search space, enabling
deep exploration (leading to states unreachable through random action exploration)
without any extrinsic rewards. Code for the model is available at: https://github.
com/deepmind/deepmind-research/tree/master/transporter .
1 Introduction
End-to-end learning of feature representations has led to advances in image classiﬁcation [ 19], genera-
tive modeling of images [ 8] and agents which outperform expert humans at game play [ 24,31]. However,
this training procedure induces task-speciﬁc representations, especially in the case of reinforcement
learning, making it difﬁcult to re-purpose the learned knowledge for future unseen tasks. On the other
hand, humans explicitly learn notions of objects, relations, geometry and cardinality in a task-agnostic
manner [ 32] and re-purpose this knowledge to future tasks. There has been extensive research inspired
by psychology and cognitive science on explicitly learning object-centric representations from pixels.
Both instance and semantic segmentation has been approached using supervised [ 23,26] and unsuper-
vised learning [ 3,10,15,11,17,22,7] methods. However, the representations learned by these methods
do not explicitly encode ﬁne-grained locations and orientations of object parts, and thus they have not
been extensively used in the control and reinforcement learning literature. We argue that being able
to precisely control objects and object parts is at the root of many complex sensory motor behaviours.
In recent work, object keypoint or landmark discovery methods [ 40,16] have been proposed to learn
representations that precisely represent locations of object parts. These methods predict a set of
Cartesian co-ordinates of keypoints denoting the salient locations of objects given image frame(s).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.