(a) Unstructured 1 2 3
 (b) Unstructured 1 2 3
 (c) Unstructured 1 2 3
 (d) Unstructured 1 2 3
(e) Structured 1 2 3
 (f) Structured 1 2 3
 (g) Structured 1 2 3
 (h) Structured 1 2 3
Figure 6: Spectrogram reconstruction visualizations on the AudioSet eval set. Column-wise
type: speech, music, event, others. Masking type: (a-d) unstructured (random); (e-h) structured
(time +frequency). Masking Ratio: 70%. In each group, we show the original spectrogram (1, top),
masked input (2, middle), and MAE output (3, bottom). The spectrogram size is 1024 ×128; patch
size is 16 ×16. Each sample has 64 ×8=512 patches with 154 (70% masked) patches being visible to
Audio-MAE. Please click (1 2 3) for audible .wavs. More audible examples are in Supplementary.
For the speech tasks (SPC-1, SPC-2, and SID), Audio-MAE outperforms other models without
pre-training (ERANN [ 58], PANN [ 59]), supervised (AST) and self-supervised models (SS-AST,
MAE-AST). We further list other works (marked with*) to include the latest results introduced in
the SUPERB [ 53] benchmark. But note that these results are not strictly comparable since SUPERB
employs linear evaluation where the underlying pre-trained models are not end-to-end fine-tuned.
In summary, with audio-only from-scratch pre-training on AudioSet, our Audio-MAE performs well
for both the audio and speech classification tasks.
4.6 Visualization and Audible Examples by Audio-MAE Decoder
For better visualization, we follow MAE [ 1] to use MSE over non-normalized spectrograms as the self-
supervised objective. We use ViT-L as the Audio-MAE encoder for visualization. Fig. 6 illustrates
the reconstruction results sampled from the AudioSet-2M evalset. We further reconstruct .wavs using
the Griffin-Lim [61] algorithm, audible under the anonymous links (accessible in respective 1 2 3).
As can be seen and heard, for various masking strategies and different sounds, our Audio-MAE
generates reasonable reconstruction. It works well for noisy event sounds ( e.g., the reconstructed
siren in Fig. 6c-3), as well as speech and music ( e.g., the reconstructed singing in Fig. 6b-3). Notably,
unlike visual contents that are typically scale/translation/position invariant [ 19], absolute positions
and arrangement of spectrogram components are critical for humans to understand sound [ 62]. For
example, shifting a pitch will make an audio sounds completely different. Also, phoneme sequences
in time are important cues for speech understanding. Consequently, unstructured masking produces
better aligned outputs that are closer to the ground-truth (top row in each subfigure) as the model can
make better predictions based on nearby spectrogram patches; while structured masking is harder
(less accurate or with words missing), especially when masking is performed over the time axis. A
failure example (missing words) is the reconstructed speech in Fig. 6e-3.
9