44.545.546.547.5
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9unstructured time freq time+freq(a) Pre-training masking
46.2546.7547.25
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5unstructured time freq time+freq (b) Fine-tuning masking
Figure 4: Masking strategy . For pre-training, a higher ratio and unstructured masking (random)
is preferred. For fine-tuning, a lower ratio and structured masking (time +frequency) is better. The
y-axes are mAP on AS-2M and the x-axes are masking ratio. This ablation format follows [1].
for 100 epochs, which aggregate to ∼10 full epochs of AudioSet-2M. The probability of sampling
an instance is inversely proportional to the dataset-wise occurrences of its classes. Fine-tuning on
64 GPUs takes ∼12 hours. For the smaller balanced AudioSet-20K, we fine-tune on 4 GPUs for 60
epochs without weighted sampling. Please see Supplementary for the details on other datasets.
4.4 Ablations and Model Properties
Masking Strategies in Pre-training and Fine-tuning. In Fig. 4, we compare different pre-training
and fine-tuning masking strategies for Audio-MAE. First, in Fig. 4a we explore the pre-training
masking ratio . We observe, similar as in MAE for images [ 1], that a high pre-training masking
ratio (80% in our case) is optimal for audio spectrograms. This is due to the fact that both audio
spectrograms and images are continuous signals with significant redundancy. Further, we find the
unstructured random masking works the best for self-supervised pre-training over more structured
masking ( e.g., time +frequency).
Unlike MAE for images, there are clear performance differences among masking strategies when
pre-training with audio spectrograms. Comparing Audio-MAE reconstructions between Fig. 6a
to 6e and 6d to 6h, under the same masking ratio, we observe the unstructured random masking
is comparably easier than structured masking ( i.e., time and/or frequency) as the model can guess
the missing component by extrapolating nearby context ( e.g., formants in vowels and frictional
sounds in consonants around). We also observe that for higher masking ratios, the structured masking
alternatives drop in performance, presumably because the task becomes too difficult while random
masking improves steadily up to 80%. This result show that designing a pretext task with proper
hardness is important for effective self-supervised learning of audio representations. We therefore
use random masking with ratio of 80% as our default for pre-training.
Fig. 4b studies the effect of masking during the fine-tuning phase. We see that in this case, it is more
beneficial to use structured masking: time +frequency performs better than time- or frequency-based
masking, and these perform better than unstructured masking. Overall, we see that the optimal
masking ratios are lower than for pre-training and we use 0.3 as our default in the fine-tuning phase.
In general, we observe that for task-agnostic pre-training, unstructured masking with a higher ratio is
preferred. While in task-specific fine-tuning, structured masking with lower ratios performs better.
Impact of Patch Size and Stride. We compare the performance of Audio-MAE trained with different
patch sizes and strides in Table 1a. A non-zero overlap ( i.e., stride <patch size) between patches will
increase the number of patches and quadratically increase computation in floating point operations
(FLOPs), as reported in the table. Most prior works follow AST [ 10] to use overlapped patches
(patch = 16 and stride = 10 ) to boost end task performance. As shown in Table 1a, we do not observe
a performance improvement using overlapped patches for Audio-MAE (both 47.3 mAP), presumably
because due to overlap, the patch embedding can leak information into the masked patches. The
non-overlapped 16 ×16 patches achieve a good balance between computation and performance. By
default, we use this setup in our experiments.
Encoder. We investigate the design choices of encoder and decoder architectures in Audio-MAE.
Table 1b shows the trade-off between encoder model size and performance. As expected, larger
models achieve better performance, at a cost of computation and memory. The accuracy gain of ViT-L
over ViT-B/S is more significant on the smaller and balanced AS-20K. For ViT-S, the performance
6