EncoderDecoder…
…Target
MSEInput)(,
Figure 1: Audio-MAE for audio self-supervised learning . An audio recording is first transformed
into a spectrogram and split into patches. We embed patches and mask out a large subset (80%).
An encoder then operates on the visible (20%) patch embeddings. Finally, a decoder processes the
order-restored embeddings and mask tokens to reconstruct the input. Audio-MAE is minimizing the
mean square error (MSE) on the masked portion of the reconstruction and the input spectrogram.
This computational burden has been addressed in different ways. A popular approach is to reduce the
sequence length in self-attention. Various ViT-based architectures have been developed to alleviate
such issues for image and video understanding. For example, Swin-Transformer [ 19] only performs
local attention within windows that shift across layers. MViT [ 20] employs pooling attention to
construct a hierarchy of Transformers where sequence lengths are downsampled. For self-supervised
learning, MAE [ 1] efficiently encodes only a small portion (25%) of visual patches while the majority
of patches is discarded. The simplicity and scalability in MAE make it a promising framework for
large-scale self-supervised learning.
In this work, we study MAE for sound recognition and the unique challenges of the audio domain.
We present Audio-MAE (Fig. 1) as unified and scalable framework for learning self-supervised audio
representations. Similar to MAE, it is composed of a pair of a Transformer encoder and decoder.
Sound is first transformed and embedded into spectrogram patches. Before feeding them into the
Transformer encoder, we mask and discard the majority and only feed a small number of non-masked
embeddings into the encoder for efficient encoding. After padding encoded patches with learnable
embeddings to represent masked patches, it then restores the order of these patches in frequency and
time and propagates them through a Transformer decoder to reconstruct the audio spectrogram.
Different from image patches, spectrogram patches are comparably local-correlated. For example,
formants, the vocal tract resonances, are typically grouped and continuous locally in the spectrogram.
The location in frequency and time embeds essential information that determines the semantics of a
spectrogram patch and how it sounds like. To this end, we further investigate using localized attention
and a hybrid architecture in the Transformer decoder to properly decode for reconstruction. This
simple-yet-effective upgrade leads to improved performance for Audio-MAE.
Similar to MAE for images, we minimize the patch-normalized mean square error. At the fine-tuning
stage, we discard the decoder and fine-tune the encoder with patch-masking. Empirically, Audio-
MAE sets a new state-of-the-art performance on six audio and speech classification tasks. It is the first
audio-only self-supervised model that achieves state-of-the-art mAP on AudioSet-2M, outperforming
other recent models with external supervision. We further provide the visualization and audible
examples to qualitatively demonstrate the effectiveness of the Audio-MAE decoder.
2 Related Work
Visual masked pre-training. Masked/Denoising autoencoders [ 21,22,3] are a general represen-
tation learning methodology by reconstructing source from masked or corrupted inputs. In CV ,
visual masked pre-training has made recent progress [ 23,24,1,20]. Based on ViT [ 9] that applies
Transformers to image patches, BEiT [ 17] and MAE [ 1] present masked image modeling frameworks.
BEiT [ 17] learns to predict discrete visual tokens generated by V AE [ 25] in masked patches. MAE [ 1]
reduces sequence length by masking a large portion of image patches randomly and encoding only
non-masked ones for reconstruction of pixel color information. MaskFeat [ 20] studies features for
masked pre-training and finds that Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HoG) [ 26], which are in turn
related to spectrogram features, perform strongly for image and video classification models. Our
work extends the MAE framework for representation learning with audio spectrograms.
2