Masked Autoencoders that Listen
Po-Yao Huang1Hu Xu1Juncheng Li2Alexei Baevski1
Michael Auli1Wojciech Galuba1Florian Metze1Christoph Feichtenhofer1
1Meta AI2Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
This paper studies a simple extension of image-based Masked Autoencoders
(MAE) [ 1] to self-supervised representation learning from audio spectrograms.
Following the Transformer encoder-decoder design in MAE, our Audio-MAE
first encodes audio spectrogram patches with a high masking ratio, feeding only
the non-masked tokens through encoder layers. The decoder then re-orders and
decodes the encoded context padded with mask tokens, in order to reconstruct
the input spectrogram. We find it beneficial to incorporate local window atten-
tion in the decoder, as audio spectrograms are highly correlated in local time and
frequency bands. We then fine-tune the encoder with a lower masking ratio on
target datasets. Empirically, Audio-MAE sets new state-of-the-art performance
on six audio and speech classification tasks, outperforming other recent models
that use external supervised pre-training. Our code and models is available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/AudioMAE .
1 Introduction
Transformers [ 2] and self-supervised learning [ 3,4,5,6,7,1] are dominating computer vision (CV)
and natural language processing (NLP) research. The revolution firstly started in NLP with the
invention of the Transformer architecture and self-attention [ 8]. Masked autoencoding with BERT [ 3]
set a new state-of-the-art on various NLP tasks by self-supervised pre-training on large-scale language
corpus. Similarly in the CV community, Vision Transformers (ViT) [ 9] have become popular for CV
tasks, and, for self-supervised image representation learning, Masked Autoencoders (MAE) [ 1] have
brought the CV community closer to the success of BERT in NLP. In addition to the existing masked
autoencoders that can read (BERT) or see (MAE), in this work we study those that can listen .
Transformer-based models have recently refreshed leaderboards for audio understanding tasks. For
example, AST [ 10] and MBT [ 11] improved the audio classification performance on the AudioSet [ 12],
Event Sound Classification [ 13], etc. The key technique behind this is initialization of audio model
weights with ImageNet pre-trained supervised models ( e.g., DeiT [ 14]) by deflating patch embeddings
and interpolating positional embeddings for encoding audio spectrograms. However, exploiting
ImageNet pre-trained models could be sub-optimal. Unlike initializing video models with weights
from image models ( e.g., the initial weights of I3D [ 15] or 3D-ResNets [ 16] are inflated from
ImageNet pre-trained image models), there are clear and notable discrepancies between spectrograms
representing audio content and natural images. It remains unclear why such heterogeneous image-to-
audio transfer is useful beyond arguably similar low-level semantics such as shapes of spectrograms
and shapes of visual objects. Further, any label bias would inevitably be transferred to audio models.
Addressing these concerns, self-supervised audio representation learning has recently attracted much
research attention. Based on BEiT [ 17] that learns to reconstruct image patches or learnt patch
tokens, SS-AST [ 18] extends to the audio domain and exploits spectrograms (akin to 1-channel 2D
images) and use both contrastive and reconstruction objective as self-supervision. Without using any
labels, the key enabler to effective self-supervised representation learning is large-scale pre-training
data. In this work we use AudioSet [ 12] for pre-training, a common dataset containing ∼2 million
audio recordings. Performing large-scale training with Transformer architectures is challenging as
self-attention in Transformers has quadratic complexity w.r.t. the length of input sequence.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).