tokens/patches can be discarded for spectrograms as well as images due to high redundancy in these
modalities. Beyond self-supervised pre-training, we further explore the effectiveness of masking in
the supervised fine-tuning stage. Empirically, we found unstructured (random) masking at a higher
ratio for pre-training and structured (time +frequency masking) at a lower ratio for fine-tuning provide
best accuracy (ablations are in §4.4).
Encoder . Audio-MAE uses a stack of standard Transformers [ 2] as its encoder. The encoder only
processes (20%) non-masked patches to reduce computation overhead which is quadratic to the input
sequence length. We use the 12-layer ViT-Base (ViT-B) [9] Transformer as our default.
Decoder with Local Attention . The decoder is also composed of standard Transformer blocks.
The encoded patches from the encoder are padded with trainable masked tokens. After restoring
the original time-frequency order in the audio spectrogram, we add the decoder’s (fixed sinusoidal)
positional embeddings and feed the restored sequence into the decoder. At the top of the decoder
stack, we add a linear head to predict and reconstruct the input spectrogram.
To address the unique characteristics of audio spectrograms, our work investigates an enhancement to
the vanilla MAE decoder. Image-based MAE uses global self-attention in the Transformer decoder
which is appropriate for visual context, because visual objects are typically invariant under translation
or scaling, and their exact position may not affect the semantics of an image. In contrast, the position,
scale, and translation of spectrogram features however directly affects the sound or semantics of an
audio recording. Consequently, global self-attention is sub-optimal for spectrograms if the time-
frequency components is predominantly local. For instance, we would have better success to use the
harmonics ( e.g., Fig. 2a) in lower bands of a vowel to predict the spectrogram patch vertically in a
higher frequency band rather than horizontally in the time domain. Similarly, a frictional sound of a
consonant likely only correlates to other part of the consonant, and is without dependency to other
silence segments in the audio recording. Compared to images, the spectrogram patches are more
similar to speech or text tokens where its order and position is more relevant.
Layer LLayer L+1
Figure 3: Decoder’s local attention
and shifted window (right).To address the nature of audio spectrograms, in addition to us-
ing Transformers with global self-attention as in vanilla MAE,
we incorporate the local attention mechanism which groups
and separates the spectrogram patches in to local windows
in self-attention for decoding. We investigate two types of
local attention: (1) Shifted window location: Inspired by the
shifted-window in Swin Transformers [ 19], we shift window
attention by 50% between consecutive Transformer decoder
layers. For padding the margin when shifting, we cyclically
shift the spectrogram to the top-left direction. Fig. 3 illustrates
the localized decoder attention by shifted windows. (2) Hybrid window attention (global +local
attention): Inspired by [ 45], to add better cross-window connections, we design a simple hybrid
(global+local) attention that computes local attention within a window in all but the last few top layers.
In this way, the input feature maps for the final reconstruction layer also contain global information.
For simplicity, we use nopooling or hierarchical structure. Decoders with different attention types
are compared in §4.4.
Objective . The Audio-MAE decoder learns to reconstruct the input spectrogram by predicting the
values in the spectrogram patches or their per-patch normalized ones. The objective is the mean
squared error (MSE) between the prediction and the input spectrogram, averaged over unknown
patches. Empirically we found employing the reconstruction loss alone is sufficient while including
additional contrastive objectives ( e.g., InfoNCE loss [46]) does not improve Audio-MAE.
Fine-tuning for Downstream Tasks . In the fine-tuning stage, we only keep and fine-tune the Audio-
MAE encoder and discard the decoder. Different from the original MAE, and inspired by [ 47,28],
we also explore to employ masking in the fine-tuning stage to remove a portion of patches to further
regularize learning from a limited view of spectrogram inputs, which, as a side effect, also reduces
computation during fine-tuning. Compared to SpecAug [ 48] which takes full-length input with the
masked portion set to zero as data augmentation, Audio-MAE sees only a subset of real-valued input
patches without the nullified ones. Audio-MAE then encodes these non-masked patches and applies
an average pooling layer followed by a linear layer on top for fine-tuning in classification tasks.
4