2
Graph -based semi -supervised learning
Step 1 : Graph Construction (Sec. III)
Unsupervised methods
Supervised methodsStep 2 : Label Inference (Sec. IV - VII)
Graph Regularization (Sec. IV)
Graph Embedding (Sec. V - VII)
Graph Shallow Embedding (Sec. VI) Graph Deep Embedding (Sec. VII)Solution (Sec. III - VII) Problem Setting (Sec. II)
Transductive
InductiveApplications (Sec.  VIII)
Datasets
Implementations
Domains
Figure 1: Taxonomy for graph-based semi-supervised learning
The most relevant work to ours is [7] by Chong et al. ,
and it is considered as the most up-to-date survey paper on
GSSL. However, there are several noticeable drawbacks of
this work that are worth mentioning here. First, [7] reviews
work from the perspective of transductive, inductive, and
scalability learning. This taxonomy fails to show the context
of development and thus does not reveal the relationship of
different methods or models. As a result, we provide a novel
taxonomy from the perspective of the two main steps in GSSL:
graph construction and label inference. Secondly, some of the
reviewed methods in [7] are not graph-based models, but rather
are some semi-supervised convolutional neural network (CNN)
models as shown in Section 3.4 in the original paper[7]. Most
importantly, [7] fails to develop a framework to generalize the
methods or models reviewed. However, this paper ﬁlls all these
gaps with several noticeable contributions.
Contributions. To sum up, this paper presents an extensive
and systematic review of GSSL with the following contribu-
tions.
1)Comprehensive review. We provide the most compre-
hensive and the most up-to-date overview of GSSL
methods. For every approach reviewed in this paper,
we present the detailed descriptions with key equations,
clarify the context of development beneath the algorithms,
make the necessary comparison, and summarise the cor-
responding strengths or limitations.
2)New taxonomy. We propose a new taxonomy for graph-
based semi-supervised learning with a more generalized
framework, as shown in Figure 1. We divide the GSSL
process into two steps. The ﬁrst one is to construct
a similarity graph and the second step is to do label
inference based on this graph. The latter step is much
more challenging and is also the main focus of this paper.
Label inference methods are then categorized into two
main groups: graph regularization methods and graph
embedding methods. For the former group, a generalized
framework of regularizers from the perspective of the loss
function is presented. For the latter group, we provide a
new uniﬁed representation for graph embedding methods
in SSL with the help of the encoder-decoder framework.
3)Abundant resources. We collect abundant resources
related to GSSL and build a useful, relevant code base,including the open-source codes for all the reviewed
methods or models, some popular benchmark data sets,
and pointers to representative practical applications in
different areas. This survey can be regarded as a hands-on
guide for researchers interested in understanding existing
GSSL approaches, using the codes for experiments, and
even developing new ideas for GSSL.
4)Future directions. We propose some open problems and
point out some directions for future research in terms
of dynamicity, scalability, noise-resilience, and attack-
robustness.
Organization of the paper. The rest of this survey is orga-
nized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the background
knowledge related to GSSL. Then some necessary notations
are listed, and the relevant terms are properly deﬁned. In Sec-
tion III, we provide a detailed review of graph construction, the
ﬁrst step of GSSL. From Section IV to VII, the label inference,
the second step of GSSL, is covered, which is the main focus
of this paper. Furthermore, a new taxonomy is provided, as
shown in Figure 1. Graph regularization methods are reviewed
in Section IV while graph embedding methods are reviewed
from Section V to Section VII. Section V discusses the
generalized encoder-decoder framework for graph embedding.
To provide a more detailed overview of it, we further split
it into shallow embedding and deep embedding and review
them in Section VI and Section VII respectively. Moreover,
in Section IX, four open problems are brieﬂy reviewed as
future research directions. Finally, applications of GSSL are
extensively explored in the Appendix, along with a list of
common datasets and a code base for some popular models.
II. B ACKGROUND AND DEFINITION
As is mentioned earlier, a majority of GSSL algorithms
requires solving the following two sub-problems:
Constructing a graph over the input data (if one is not
already available).
Inferring the labels on the unlabeled samples in the input
or estimating the model parameters.
GSSL methods run on a speciﬁcally designed graph in
which training samples are represented as nodes, and each
node pair is linked by weight to denote the underlying sim-
ilarity. Some of the nodes are labeled, while others are not.