1
Graph-based Semi-supervised Learning: A
Comprehensive Review
Zixing Song, Xiangli Yang, Zenglin Xu, Senior Member, IEEE Irwin King, Fellow, IEEE,
Abstract —Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has tremendous
value in practice due to its ability to utilize both labeled data
and unlabelled data. An important class of SSL methods is to
naturally represent data as graphs such that the label information
of unlabelled samples can be inferred from the graphs, which
corresponds to graph-based semi-supervised learning (GSSL)
methods. GSSL methods have demonstrated their advantages
in various domains due to their uniqueness of structure, the
universality of applications, and their scalability to large scale
data. Focusing on this class of methods, this work aims to provide
both researchers and practitioners with a solid and systematic
understanding of relevant advances as well as the underlying
connections among them. This makes our paper distinct from
recent surveys that cover an overall picture of SSL methods
while neglecting fundamental understanding of GSSL methods.
In particular, a major contribution of this paper lies in a new gen-
eralized taxonomy for GSSL, including graph regularization and
graph embedding methods, with the most up-to-date references
and useful resources such as codes, datasets, and applications.
Furthermore, we present several potential research directions as
future work with insights into this rapidly growing ﬁeld.
Index Terms —Semi-supervised learning, graph-based semi-
supervised learning, graph embedding, graph representation
learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
SEMI-SUPERVISED learning (SSL) has achieved great
successes in various real-world applications where only
a few expensive labeled samples are available and abundant
unlabeled samples are easily obtained. Moreover, as a typical
class of SSL solutions, graph-based SSL (GSSL) is very
promising because the graph structure can be naturally used
as a reﬂection for the signiﬁcant manifold assumption in SSL.
More speciﬁcally, GSSL methods start with constructing a
graph where the nodes represent all the samples and the
weighted edges reﬂect the similarity between a pair of nodes.
This way of graph construction implies that nodes connected
by edge associated with large weights tend to have the same
label, which corresponds to the manifold assumption. The
manifold assumption suggests that samples locating near to
each other on a low-dimensional manifold should share similar
labels. Consequently, the expressive power of graph structure
Z. Song and I. King are with the Department of Computer Science and En-
gineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China(Email:
zxsong@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, king@cse.cuhk.edu.hk).
X. Yang is with the SMILE Lab, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China(E-mail: xlyang@std.uestc.edu.cn).
Z. Xu is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, and also with Peng Cheng Lab,
Shenzhen, China (Email: xuzenglin@hit.edu.cn).under the manifold assumption contributes to the success of
GSSL methods.
In the graph structure commonly used for SSL, each sample
is represented by a node, and these nodes are connected by
weighted edges that measure the similarity between them.
Therefore, the main procedure of GSSL is to create a suitable
graph along which the given labels can be easily propagated.
To be precise, this goal can be achieved by the following two
main steps.
Step 1. Graph construction. A similarity graph is con-
structed based on all the given data, including both the labeled
and unlabeled samples. During this step, the biggest challenge
is how to make the relationship between original samples well
represented.
Step 2. Label inference. The label inference is performed
so that the label information can be propagated from the
labeled samples to the unlabeled ones by incorporating the
structure information from the constructed graph in the previ-
ous step.
Compared with other SSL methods, which are not involved
with any graph structure, GSSL has some advantages that are
worth noticing. In the following, we list several advantages of
graph-based SSL methods.
Universality . Many common data sets of current trends
are represented by graphs like the World Wide Web
(WWW), citation networks, and social networks.
Convexity . Since an undirected graph is usually involved
in the graph construction step, the symmetric feature of
the undirected graph makes it easier to formulate the
learning problem into a convex optimization problem,
which can be solved with various exciting techniques [1].
Scalability . Many of the GSSL methods are meticulously
designed so that the time complexity is linear to the total
number of samples. As a result, they are often easily
parallelized to handle large scale datasets with ease.
Related work. Several SSL survey papers [2][3] often fail
to cover enough methods of GSSL, neglecting its signiﬁcant
role in SSL. Zhu et al. [2] conduct a comprehensive review of
classic methods involved in SSL, and GSSL is not explored
in detail. Similar earlier work like [3] by Pise et al. also tries
to present a whole picture of SSL methods without covering
enough work in GSSL. Recent literature review work, [4] [5]
and [6] all follow the footsteps of work [2] and [3] by adding
more recent research output. However, they do not cover the
recent development in GSSL methods. Instead, our work solely
focuses on GSSL and combines both earlier studies with recent
advances.arXiv:2102.13303v1  [cs.LG]  26 Feb 2021