www.nature.com/scientificreports/10 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1103  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37387-9
will be highly semantic and quite effective for tumor OS classification as they are learned under supervision. 
However, it is currently difficult to investigate which imaging features really help improve the accuracy and what they really represent. It is also difficult for our study, although we have tried to investigate which region of the imaging data contributes most to the useful features.
However, the lack of transparency doesn’t affect the robustness of our model. As reported in Section 
Experiments and Results, we first validate our proposed method on the dataset with 68 patients in a 3-fold cross-validation fashion. Then we further validate it by introducing extra testing on a new dataset with 25 patients. The experimental results on these two datasets indicate that our proposed method is robust. Furthermore, a lot of similar researches based on deep learning models are recently proposed and achieve great success. For exam-ple, Setio et al . proposed a multi-stream CNN to categorize the points of interest in chest CT as a nodule or 
non-nodule
58. Esteva et al . proposed a deep neural network to implement dermatologist-level classification of 
skin cancer59. And part of these studies has even been applied to clinical trials. Thus, we believe our proposed 
method is useful in developing a new tumor OS prediction model.
Limitation and Future Works. It is worth indicating the limitations of our work. For example, we only 
use limited clinical information in our study and thus obtain a weak clinical model. We have also thought of using other features such as genetic indicators for OS prediction
8, including IDH1, MGMT, EGFR, 1p19q. The 
newly revised WHO grading system even suggests using some of the genetic features to grade the gliomas. Unfortunately, we did not have such information for all the subjects because our data were collected several years ago (at that time, collecting genetic information has not become the clinical routine yet). On the other hand, in our recent paper
60, we have used our newly-enrolled subjects’ neuroimaging data to predict their genotype 
information (IDH1 and MGMT), indicating the existence of relationship between imaging phenotypes and gen-otypes. But, for these newly-enrolled subjects, since they were newly admitted to the hospital and have been only followed up for a short time, we have not had their OS information yet. In the future follow-up study, as more subjects with both genetic information and OS data, we will include genetic information for OS prediction.
As for other important predictive features related to treatment, such as the extent of resection and the type/
dose/duration of the adjuvant therapy, we did check this information before carrying on this study. However, as mentioned in the Introduction section, the motivation of this study is to answer a question: “Can we predict the patients’ OS based on their presurgical neuroimages, given similar treatments” . Therefore, in the experimental design, we have deliberately enrolled subjects with total (or gross total) resection; for most of them, they have been conducted with postsurgical adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy with the same protocol suggested by the guideline. With these specifically selected subjects, we can then reduce the confounding effect of treatment and focus more on the prognostic value of neuroimaging. In post hoc analysis, we found that there is no group difference in extension of resection ( p = 0.22) and postoperative treatments ( p = 0.82) between short and long 
OS groups. Of note, we acknowledge that treatment is very important to OS, and we are carrying on an ongoing study to predict OS based on both presurgical and treatment features, as well as genetic features, so that future treatment can be better tailored for each individual.
As discussed earlier, our experiments are conducted on a dataset with 68 subjects and a new dataset with 25 
patients. The number of subjects is relatively small. Therefore, to obtain better generalizability of the proposed method, we need to increase the participating subjects in the future. Also, we simply concatenate features (fc6 or fc7) extracted from different modalities together and utilize them for subsequent OS prediction without con-sidering the relationship between different modalities. We should better take it into consideration in the future work. Moreover, we have resized the tumor cuboids to make them consistent in size; however, this operation 
obviously affects parts of the geometric properties of the tumor. This issue can be possibly resolved by applying 
a multi-instance learning framework. Furthermore, our current model considers tumor patients of WHO III and IV together, and we can potentially build separate models for WHO III and WHO IV patients to make more detailed predictions. Lastly, we choose a hard threshold to classify the patients into two categories (long or short OS), which decreases the precision of our predictive results. Besides, we can further categorize the patients into more (e.g., 4 or 5) subgroups for making more precise predictions.
In our future work, we will use all currently available features, including features from presurgical imaging, 
treatment ways, patient statuses before and after surgery, genetic information and molecular indicators (including Figure 7. Comparison of experimental results with SVM, CNN and CNN + SVM.