www.nature.com/scientificreports/9 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1103  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37387-9
located within an image patch. The size of each cubic-region is randomly chosen from an arbitrary range, i.e., 1, 
3, 5 in voxels57.
Since we have multiple modalities of data to extract the features, we first extract features from each modality 
separately and then use PCA to reduce their dimensionality. Next, we concatenate the features from different modalities and the handcrafted features, and finally train an SVM model. The experimental results are shown in Fig.  6. The Haar-like features present the worst performance, and the proposed deep-learning-based features 
result in the best performance. Specifically, our supervised feature extraction framework can improve the perfor -
mance by approximately 12%.
Impact of Combining CNN and SVM. As reported in the Method Section, our proposed method com-
bines CNN and SVM together, since we assume that CNN can well learned semantic features in a patch-level, and SVM can well handle a small samples-size classification problem in subject-level. To investigate the impact of combining these two models, we design comparison experiments with SVM alone method and CNN alone method.
With SVM alone, we used manual designed features, i.e., Haar and SIFT features, as reported in the Section 
“Comparison with Unsupervised Feature Extraction Approaches” . As for CNN-based classification, as CNN has an ability to combine feature learning and classification together, which directly generates the soft label as the final output from the neuronal network. Therefore, one can directly use CNN’s output (by treating the largest soft label result as the final classification result) as the OS prediction result. The rationale that we design our model (CNN-based feature extraction plus SVM-based classification) is that SVM generally performs better and more robustly in a study with limited sample size. Therefore, we designed CNN + SVM by extracting features from the 
fully connected layers as the inputs of SVM for classification.
To make the comparison results easier to understand, we concluded our results from using CNN alone, 
using SVM alone (with SIFT features) and using CNN + SVM in Fig.  7. CNN alone performs better than SVM 
alone, as CNN can learn better feature representations. Since the CNN + SVM conduct the classification on the 
subject-level feature representations which can well aggregate the patch-level features, it can improve the perfor -
mance about 2.5% compared to CNN alone.
Model Transparency and Robustness. Deep learning based models hierarchically process the input data 
(imaging data in our case), and output the highly semantic features towards the target (i.e., tumor OS prediction in our case). As in our study, we use the last two layers (i.e., fc6 and fc7) as the extracted features. These features Figure 5. The experimental results using different feature extraction methods (such as 2D CNN and the 
proposed 3D CNN).
Figure 6. The experimental results using different kinds of (unsupervised vs. supervised) features.