1 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1103  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37387-9
www.nature.com/scientificreportsMulti-Channel 3D Deep Feature 
Learning for Survival Time 
Prediction of Brain Tumor Patients 
Using Multi-Modal Neuroimages
Dong Nie  1,2, Junfeng Lu3,4, Han Zhang2, Ehsan Adeli   2, Jun Wang   2, Zhengda Yu3,4, 
LuYan Liu5, Qian Wang5, Jinsong Wu3,4 & Dinggang shen2,6
High-grade gliomas are the most aggressive malignant brain tumors. Accurate pre-operative prognosis 
for this cohort can lead to better treatment planning. Conventional survival prediction based on clinical information is subjective and could be inaccurate. Recent radiomics studies have shown better 
prognosis by using carefully-engineered image features from magnetic resonance images (MRI). 
However, feature engineering is usually time consuming, laborious and subjective. Most importantly, the engineered features cannot effectively encode other predictive but implicit information provided by multi-modal neuroimages. We propose a two-stage learning-based method to predict the overall 
survival (OS) time of high-grade gliomas patient. At the first stage, we adopt deep learning, a recently 
dominant technique of artificial intelligence, to automatically extract implicit and high-level features from multi-modal, multi-channel preoperative MRI such that the features are competent of predicting survival time. Specifically, we utilize not only contrast-enhanced T1 MRI, but also diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and resting-state functional MRI (rs-fMRI), for computing multiple metric maps (including 
various diffusivity metric maps derived from DTI, and also the frequency-specific brain fluctuation 
amplitude maps and local functional connectivity anisotropy-related metric maps derived from rs-fMRI) from 68 high-grade glioma patients with different survival time. We propose a multi-channel architecture of 3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for deep learning upon those metric maps, 
from which high-level predictive features are extracted for each individual patch of these maps. At the 
second stage, those deeply learned features along with the pivotal limited demographic and tumor-related features (such as age, tumor size and histological type) are fed into a support vector machine (SVM) to generate the final prediction result (i.e., long or short overall survival time). The experimental results demonstrate that this multi-model, multi-channel deep survival prediction framework 
achieves an accuracy of 90.66%, outperforming all the competing methods. This study indicates highly 
demanded effectiveness on prognosis of deep learning technique in neuro-oncological applications for better individualized treatment planning towards precision medicine.
Brain tumors are one of the most lethal cancers. High-grade gliomas with World Health Organization (WHO) 
grades III and IV are the most deadly brain tumors with short overall survival (OS) time. Presurgical progno-sis of the high-grade gliomas is highly desired in clinical practice for better treatment planning, but still chal-lenging compared to low-grade gliomas (i.e., WHO grades I and II, for which generally long OS is expected). 
Presurgical OS prediction is traditionally believed to be affected by numerous factors, such as tumor location, 
1Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27514, USA. 
2Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27514, USA. 
3Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200040, China. 4Shanghai Key Lab 
of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention, Shanghai, 200040, China. 5Med-X Research 
Institute, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China. 6Department 
of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, Republic of Korea. Dong Nie, Junfeng Lu and Han 
Zhang contributed equally. correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Q.W. (email: wang.
qian@sjtu.edu.cn ) or J.W. (email: wjsongc@126.com ) or D.S. (email: dgshen@med.unc.edu )Received: 19 March 2018
Accepted: 13 November 2018Published: xx xx xxxxOPEN