www.nature.com/scientificreports/2 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1103  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37387-9
histopathological types, patient’s age, physical status, patient performance status and neurological disability1–3. 
Although generally corresponding to the short OS4, recent molecular pathological studies have shown that the 
higher grade glioma patients with the same tumor histopathology may have significantly different OS5. These 
findings indicate that the traditional prognosis prediction based on the simple clinical and demographical infor -
mation may not be adequately accurate6–9. Instead, based on the abundant non-invasive multi-modal neuroimag-
ing data acquired prior to any invasive examination or surgery, a more accurate prognosis model for high-grade 
gliomas could be established, which is of great clinical importance and could benefit both treatment planning and patient care.
Recently, promising progress has been made using presurgical brain imaging and the radiomics features 
extracted from these images to study glioma prognosis, or to investigate phenotype-genotype association
10–13 for 
indirect  prognostic studies. Among all presurgical neuroimaging modalities, T1-weighted magnetic resonance 
image (MRI) provides a 3D visualization of the brain structures with high soft-tissue contrast and high spatial resolution. Specifically, contrast-enhanced T1 MRI (where hyper-intensity suggests higher grade) has been widely used for imaging-based presurgical diagnosis and treatment planning. The rich appearance information depicted 
by this modality has also played an important role in prognostic studies
14–16. For example, Pope et al . extracted 15 
features from contrast-enhanced T1 MRI and found that the existence of non-enhancing regions indicated good 
OS while enhancing regions was not a valuable predictor17. Jain et al .18 found that, using dynamic susceptibility 
contrast-enhanced T2* -weighted perfusion MR, increasing relative cerebral blood volume in non-enhancing 
regions could predict worsen OS. The same group further found that patients with high rCBV and wild-type EGFR mutation had poor overall survival
19. However, Gutman et al . suggested that the volume of the enhancing 
lesions strongly indicated poor survival14. In a phenotype-genotype association study20, more image features were 
found to be helpful for bifurcate survival curves, which included the volume of contrast-enhancing area again. In addition to the contrast-enhanced T1 MRI, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and functional MRI (fMRI) could also have prognostic values. DTI measures the anisotropic diffusivity of water molecules. It can be used to indicate edema and capture white matter microstructural alterations, which are helpful for OS evaluation. For instance, 
Saksena et al . found a potential relationship between various DTI metrics and survival time of glioblastoma 
patients
21. Several survival studies have shown that DTI is statistically more effective to help separate glioblas-
toma patients into short and long survival groups than only using histopathologic information22,23. Although 
extensively used for presurgical functional mapping24, fMRI has not been used for OS prediction yet. FMRI can 
measure brain function with blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signals and, similar to perfusion MRI, fMRI 
has also been used to characterize relative cerebral blood volume/flow25. Since highly malignant gliomas may 
have abnormal cerebrovascular reactivity26, or altered regional blood flow due to neovascularization27 and/or 
abnormal metabolism28. This imaging modality can also be used to predict OS.
The aforementioned imaging-based prognostic studies usually use handcrafted features that are carefully 
designed and manually extracted by well-trained and experienced clinicians (or automatically extracted using image processing techniques). Although such feature extraction is straightforward, the simplicity of such features prevents the rich information embedded in the multi-modal neuroimages from being fully utilized for OS pre -
diction, because the handcrafted features are extracted based on previous studies or prior knowledge of diseases, and can also be limited to the existing image processing techniques. These feature descriptors could be biased and subjective to human interference. On the contrary, rich imaging phenotype information, which is beyond simple changes in image contrast/intensity, is deeply embedded and could be of essential prognostic value. The functional alternations within/around the visible lesion in MRI should also be extracted to further improve prognostic accu-racy. Recently, rich radiomics features have further extended our knowledge on the roles of neuroimages in OS predictability
15. However, the automatically extracted features in these studies are mostly based on the existing 
image processing algorithms or related with the lesions or their proximity29. There could be more sophisticated, 
high-level features that have better OS predictive values. In addition, the simple methodology in previous studies may also prevent the multi-modal images being well-integrated for OS prediction. Most existing works conduct univariate (i.e., independently considering each feature) or multivariate (i.e., jointly considering all features in a linear regression framework) analysis for prognosis
3,29. The individual-level predictive capability (i.e., predicting 
OS for a single patient) of these models is limited by the group-level comparisons (e.g., identifying image features as biomarkers for either statistically partitioning patients into the long/short OS groups
3 or statistically better bifur -
cated of survival curves15,16,30). In clinical practice, however, survival time is expected to be individually predictable.
Similar to a radiologist who deliberates a prognostic suggestion after carefully review and comparison of 
all multi-modal images, we propose an objective and accurate computer-aided OS prediction framework for high-grade glioma patients. Our method is powered by popular and effective machine learning techniques, such that it is capable of extracting multi-modal and multi-channel neuroimaging features and effectively fusing 
them for individual OS prediction. We particularly use deep learning to extract features. With a convolutional 
neural network (CNN), a hierarchy of appearance features can be synthesized from low level to high level in a layer-by-layer manner
31,32. Upon the convolutional parameters of the CNN are trained, with which the input 
raw image patches (i.e., small segments of whole-brain image) can be mapped to fit the target estimates (long/short OS). The mapping yields a highly sophisticated feature representation for the neuroimages, which is the key advantage of CNN compared to other machine learning methods. The CNN has shown superior performance on numerous visual object recognition and image classification studies
33. It has also boosted the development of 
medical image analysis34, including applications to tumor diagnosis35. In this paper, we propose a novel learn -
ing based method to predict OS of high-grade glioma patients: (1) We first automatically learn the high-level features for patches from multi-modal images (i.e., using the popularly acquired presurgical images, including contrast-enhanced T1 MRI, DTI and resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI)) by training a supervised deep learning model at patch level; (2) We then train a binary support vector machine (SVM) model
36,37 based on the automatically 
extracted semantic features (i.e., by concatenating patch-level features together to form patient-level features for