www.nature.com/scientificreports/12 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1103  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37387-9
and fc7) as the learned high-level appearance features of individual input patch. The efficiency and effectiveness 
of the extracted features will be verified in the experiments.
There are four convolutional layer groups and three fully-connected layers. The network’s input is a 
32 × 32 × 32 patch from a tumor region of a patient, and the output is the decision that this patient belongs to the 
long or short survival group.
Multi-Channel Feature Extraction.  We compute multiple metric maps for DTI and rs-fMRI. Each 
metric map corresponds to an input channel when learning the high-level appearance features. To effectively employ all multi-channel data for providing complementary information for the brain tumor, we propose a new multi-channel-CNN (mCNN) architecture to train one mCNN for each modality. Inspired by the multi-modal deep Boltzmann machine
63, we extend our single-channel 3D CNN architecture to deal with multi-channel data. 
Specifically, in the proposed mCNN, the same convolutional layer groups are applied to each channel separately. Then, a fusion layer is added to integrate the outputs of the last convolutional layer group (conv4) from all chan-nels by concatenating them. Then, three fully-connected layers are further incorporated to finally extract the features. The mCNN architecture is illustrated in Fig.  9. Note that the major difference between mCNN and 
single-channel CNN is the fusion layer. Other layers, including the convolutional layers and the fully-connected layers, follow the same configuration.
It is important to note that the statistical properties of different channels of the input data can vary largely, 
which makes it difficult for a single-channel model to directly encode multi-channel data (i.e., by simply con -
catenating multi-channel data and then applying the single-channel model). In contrast, our proposed mCNN model sustains much better capability of modeling multi-channel input data and fusing them together to generate high-level features.
SVM-Based Survival Prediction. Once we complete training a CNN (Fig.  8) for T1 MRI and two mCNN 
(Fig.  9 for DTI and fMRI, respectively, we can predict the short/long survival given 3D patches extracted in each 
of the four “modalities” (note that we derive two sub-modalities from rs-fMRI, i.e., freq-fMRI and fTensor-fMRI). That is, the patch(es), from single or multiple channels of the metrics, will go through the convolutional networks. Then the CNNs convert the input patch(es) to the high-level features and obtain the survival estimation in the 
final layer. In particular, the high-level features extracted at the last two layers (fc6 and fc7) of our CNN archi-
tectures are perceived to be suitable image-level descriptors
64. In this way, each patch can associate its high-level 
features with the survival time of the patient under consideration. Note that the fc6 layer has 256 neurons, while 
the last (fc7) layer comprises of two neurons.
In addition to these high-level appearance features, the limited demographic and tumor-related features (dtf) 
are also included in our experiments. These limited demographic and tumor-related features consist of generic 
brain tumor features, including gender, age at diagnosis, tumor location, size of tumor, and the WHO grade. Tumor location is defined by two metrics, i.e., (1) major location (such as the brain lobe where the tumor is mainly located), and (2) tumor distribution (i.e., a three-grade scale, ranging from 1 to 3, denoting the number of different brain lobes (such as 5 different lobes used in this study, including occipital, temporal, parietal, frontal and insula lobe) with tumor). For example, the tumor distribution of 1 denotes that the tumor appears only in one brain lobe. The assessment was conducted by three authors (HZ, JW and JL) with consensus. The size of the 
tumor was calculated based on T1 contrast-enhanced MRI by manually delineating the volume with abnormal 
intensity (i.e., the volume of a tumor as shown in the presurgical imaging). This was conducted by one neuro-surgeon with 8-year experience (JL) to ensure the consistent tumor delineation criteria. There is no significant difference in the tumor volume (p = 0.55) between the two OS groups. Patient performance status was evaluated 
by using Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS) scores; however, the two OS groups have no group difference in KPS score (p  > 0.99). For the treatment variables, between the two OS groups, there is no significant difference 
in resection extension ( p = 0.22), and the ways of post-surgical treatments received ( p = 0.82). Although not 
included as the limited demographic and tumor-related features, we think that these factors will not likely to make significant contribution to the individualized OS prediction.Figure 9. Architecture of mCNN for feature extraction from multi-channel data.