www.nature.com/scientificreports/8 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1103  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37387-9
performance among all single modalities, i.e., about 82.63% of accuracy (with significant improvement compared 
with the “dtf ” only method, p  < 0.05, McNemar’s test). However, as it is obvious from the results, we can benefit 
about 7% improvement of accuracy by fusing multi-modal images, when using our proposed framework.
We also conduct experiments by comparing the outcome prediction performance using 3D CNN in our 
model against the case of using traditional 2D CNN. The result shows significant advantage of using 3D CNN 
(with the details given in Section Comparison with 2D CNN based Approaches). Another experiment shows 
the comparison result between supervised feature extraction method (in our proposed method) and traditional unsupervised feature extraction approaches (i.e., adopted in Radiomics studies), indicating the superiority of supervised feature extraction to unsupervised feature extraction (see details in the Section Comparison with Unsupervised Feature Extraction Approaches).
The Role of the Features from Each Modality. To analyze the importance of the features for predict-
ing OS, we also calculate the number of the features selected from each modality in the prediction based on multi-modal images. To do this, we use the L1-regularized SVM for classification, for internally enforcing the selection of the most discriminative features from the outputs of the fc7 layers of the CNNs. The average numbers of the discriminative features selected for T1 MRI, DTI, freq-fMRI and fTensor-fMRI are 1, 4, 4, and 4, respec-
tively. As can be seen, the fMRI and DTI data contribute more significantly in building a better prediction model, 
compared to the T1 MRI. However, for the T1 MRI, we only have a single channel of data, while multiple channels for the other modalities. Therefore, we further normalize these numbers by the total number of the channels from the corresponding modality. The normalized measures are 1, 0.57, 0.8 and 0.67, respectively, for the four (sub-)modalities. In this sense, the results then show that T1 MRI encodes relatively more information for OS predic-tion, compared to DTI and fMRI.
Comparison with 2D CNN based Approaches. To illustrate the superiority of using the proposed 3D 
CNN architectures, we also compare our proposed method with the CNNs that use the 2D filters. Specifically, we adopted a 2D version of the CNN architecture shown in page 13, in which the inputs are 2D patches along the axial plane, and the feature maps are all reduced to 2D. Moreover, we employ the same strategy shown in page 14 to train multi-channel deep networks, with 2D features. We use slices from the tumor region (64 × 64 ×  64) as 
input for the 2D CNNs (Note, we can also use 32 × 32 as the patch size to train a 2D CNN model; however, such a 
small patch size could not catch much information and it resulted in unfavorable results). As the dataset is small (64 × 68 =  4352), we perform several fixed rotations of
90,180,270 degrees for each extracted 2D patch to augment the 
dataset (4352 × 4 = 17408).
The experimental results are presented in Fig.  5. The 2D CNN-based approach presents a decent performance 
such as about 81% of accuracy, 89% of sensitivity, and 74% of specificity. In contrast, the proposed 3D CNN can advance the performance by approximately 10%. These results illustrate that the proposed 3D CNN features are 
more effective and powerful than the 2D-CNN based features.
Comparison with Unsupervised Feature Extraction Approaches.  To show the advantage of our 
3D-CNN-based supervised feature learning, we also perform comparisons with several unsupervised feature 
extraction techniques, which are popularly used in both computer vision and medical imaging fields.
Specifically, we adopt scale-invariant transform (SIFT)52, a commonly used unsupervised image descrip -
tor in image reconstruction, alignment and recognition tasks, as a comparison feature extraction approach. As our medical image is stored in 3D format, we employ a spatial-temporal descriptor based on 3D gradients
53 to 
extract the features from the tumor regions. We then cluster the vector-represented patches to “codewords” using k-means, which produces visual vocabularies for the features. Each patch in an image is represented by a certain visual vocabulary, and finally the image can be represented by a histogram of the visual vocabularies. This is the same procedure used in many recognition methods in computer vision, denoted as “bag of words” method
54.
We also extract the Haar-like features from tumor patches, which are originally proposed by the paper55 for 
object detection and have been applied to many applications due to its efficiency. Note that we use a variant of the Haar-like features
56 calculated based on the difference between the mean values of two cubic-regions randomly Figure 4. OS prediction results using different imaging modalities. “Proposed” denotes the prediction result by 
combining all modalities together.