www.nature.com/scientificreports/11 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1103  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37387-9
IDH1, MGMT, 1p19q, TERT, and ATRX), to perform OS prediction. Since these features are from different 
domains, more advanced feature learning and integration methods need to be developed. Moreover, since our ultimate goal is to predict the overall survival which can be better used in clinical practice, we will treat it as con-tinuous variable with a rigorous machine-learning or deep-learning-based regression model in our future work.
Generally, in this study, we have proposed a 3D deep learning model to predict the (long or short) OS time for 
the patients with brain glioma. We trained 3D CNN and mCNN models for learning features from single-channel (T1 MRI) and multi-channel (DTI, freq-fMRI and fTensor-fMRI) data in a supervised manner, respectively. The extracted features were then fed into a binary SVM classifier. The performance of our supervised CNN-based learned features was compared with the performances of several other state-of-the-art methods, including those using the traditional handcrafted features. Experimental results showed that our supervised-learned features significantly improved the predictive accuracy of OS time for the glioma patients. This also indicates that our proposed 3D deep learning frameworks can provoke computational models to extract useful features for such neuro-oncological applications. Besides, the analysis on the selected features further shows that DTI data can contribute slightly more than fMRI, but both fMRI and DTI play more significant role, compared to the T1 MRI, 
in building successful prediction models. Overall, our proposed method shows its great promise in multi-modal 
MRI-based diagnosis or prognosis for a wider spectrum of neurological and psychiatric diseases.
Method
In this paper, we first employ the CNN architecture to train survival prediction models with the patches from all metric maps of T1 MRI, DTI and rs-fMRI, respectively. With such trained deep learning models, we can extract features for individual patches of the respective channels/modalities in a supervised manner. Then, a binary clas-sifier (i.e., SVM) is trained to fuse all the patches and their extracted high-level features for OS prediction (Fig.  1). 
In the following subsections, we will introduce both our CNN-based feature extraction and the SVM-based OS 
prediction strategies. Note that the CNN-based feature extraction for T1 MRI is slightly different from that for 
DTI and fMRI. That is, there is only a single inputting channel for T1 MRI, while there are multiple inputting channels for multiple metrics computed from DTI and fMRI. Thus, we will first introduce the 3D CNN architec-ture for single-channel T1 MRI, and then extend it for multi-channel DTI and fMRI. Different from the conven-tional CNN that stacks multi-channel inputs at the beginning, we perform independent convolution streams for each inputting channel in the early layers and then fuse them in deep layers for high-level feature extraction. Of note, to augment the dataset, we flip the bounding box along three directions (x, y, z) separately for all metrics. Next, we extract numerous partially-overlapping patches with the size of 32 × 32 × 32 to train the CNNs.
Single-Channel Feature Extraction. For 3D T1 MRI, we propose a 3D CNN model with a set of 3D train -
able filters. CNN derives the high-level features from the low-level input, while the estimated high-level features directly contribute to the classification of the input data. The network architecture usually consists of a number of layers. As we go deeper in the network, the layer will generate higher-level features. For example, the last layer can represent more intrinsic features compared to the earlier layer(s)
61.
Inspired by the very deep convolutional networks (VGGNet)62, we design our CNN architecture with four 
convolutional layer groups and three fully-connected layers. The detailed configurations of the four convolu -
tional layer groups (conv1 to conv4) are shown in Fig.  8. The input to the CNN is a 3D patch with the size 
of 32  × 32 × 32, which is extracted in the bounded neighborhood of the tumor. The convolutional layers com -
pute their outputs from the input 3D patch, by applying the convolutional operations with 3D filters of the size 
3 × 3 × 3. The convolutional operation results in the 3D output patch of the same size as the input, followed by 
max-pooling to down-sample the patch. The last three layers in the CNN are fully connected (fc5 to fc7). These 
fully-connected layers include the neurons that are connected to all outputs of their precedent layers, as in the conventional neural networks. The last layer (fc7) has 2 neurons, whose correspond to the probabilities of classi-fying the patient into the long or the short OS group.
The supervision on the classification of the training data leads to a back-propagation procedure for learning 
the most relevant features in the CNN. Specifically, we regard the outputs from the last two layers of the CNN (fc6 
Figure 8. An illustration of the CNN architecture for the single-channel feature extraction from 3D patches. 
There are four convolutional layer groups and three fully-connected layers. The network’s input is a 32 × 32 × 32 
patch from a tumor region of a patient, and the output is the decision that this patient belongs to the long or short survival group.