www.nature.com/scientificreports/5 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1103  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37387-9
stimulation47 and anesthesia48. Since gliomas grow in white matter, which could alter the fTensor-fMRI, we decide 
to adopt this metric (mainly focusing on the white matter) together with freq-fMRI (mainly focusing on the grey 
matter) to jointly predict OS. Like the metric maps derived from diffusion tensor for DTI, we also compute λ1, λ2, 
λ3, FA, MD and RD maps based on fTensor for rs-fMRI, which results in 6 additional metric maps (thus totally 
11 metric maps for rs-fMRI). Of note, it is the first time that fTensor-fMRI has been used in clinical applications.
For all channels of the metric maps from the three imaging modalities, the bounding box is applied. Then, the 
intensities inside the bounding box are normalized per metric map. The 3D metric maps within the bounding box are rescaled to the same dimension (64 × 64 × 64) to facilitate the subsequent deep learning.
Experimental Settings.  As described earlier, we use our 3D CNN architectures, which is implemented by 
the widely used deep learning framework Caffe49, to extract features from multi-modal brain images and their 
multi-channel metric maps in a supervised manner. These features are expected to classify individual image patches according to the survival of the patient. Then, the high-level features of all patches of the patient, as well as the important limited demographic and tumor-related features, are integrated to train the SVM classifier for the survival time prediction of the patient. As mentioned in the Method section, the patch-based features are 
processed through Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for feature reduction and Sparse Representation (SR)
50 
for feature selection. Specifically, the number of the features from fc6 for each metric map is 8 × 256 = 2048 (note 
that we extract 8 non-overlapping patches uniformly within the bounding box of each metric map for a subject), 
and the number for fc7 is 8 × 2 = 16. With PCA, we preserve the principal components up to 99% and reduce 
the feature numbers of fc6 for the T1 MRI, DTI, freq-fMRI and fTensor-fMRI to 9, 14, 12, 16, respectively, as 
well as the feature numbers of fc7 to 5, 7, 7, 8, respectively. With SR, we set the balance parameter to 0.2 with 
the SLEP package51. Usually, there are 3, 10, 8, 7 selected features from fc6 for the T1 MRI, DTI, freq-fMRI and 
fTensor-fMRI, respectively; as for fc7, the corresponding numbers are 3, 5, 4, 4, respectively. For the SVM37, we 
chose the L1-regularized logistic regression and set the cost parameter to be 1.
Experimental Results.  Cross-Validation Experiments. We use 10-fold and 3-fold cross-validation upon 68 
patient subjects. That is, for each testing fold, the remaining other folds are used to train both the single-channel CNN (for T1 MRI) and mCNN (for DTI and fMRI), as well as the SVM. The performance measures averaged over all the folds are reported in Table  2, including accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (SEN), specificity (SPE), positive 
predictive rate (PPR), and negative predictive rate (NPR).
Incorporating both deeply learned (with the proposed CNNs) and limited demographic & tumor-related fea-
tures (dtf) leads to the best classification accuracy of 90.46%. In contrast, using dtf alone, we obtain just an accu-racy of 63.23%. Regarding the sensitivity and the specificity, we know that the higher the sensitivity, the lower the chance of misclassifying the short survival patients; on the other hand, the higher the specificity, the lower the chance of misclassifying the long survival patients. The proposed feature extraction method resulted in an approx-imately 30% higher sensitivity and specificity, compared to the limited demographic and tumor-related features. Interestingly, our model predicts the short survival patients with more confidence than the long survival patients.
To further investigate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we also draw a Kaplan-Meier plot based 
on the model output (i.e., the hard classification labels) in Fig.  3. We can see that the survival curves of the two 
groups are well separated (p  < 0.0001, log-rank test). The result indicates that our model can well separate subjects 
with long OS from those with short OS. It should be noted that the K-M plot we plotted is not based on the two 
Figure 2. A sample glioblastoma patient in our dataset. T1 MRI is presented as a single metric map, while DTI 
and rs-fMRI are presented as multi-channel metric maps.