www.nature.com/scientificreports/3 Scientific  RepoRts  |          (2019) 9:1103  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37387-9
each patient) to predict the OS for each patient. To well utilize neuroimage information, we calculate multiple 
diffusivity metric maps as multi-channel maps for DTI; also from rs-fMRI, we derive two types of multi-channel images using frequency information (freq-fMRI) of voxel-wise brain activity and inter-voxel local functional connectivity anisotropy (expressed as “functional tensor” , or fTensor-fMRI), respectively. The flowchart of our OS prediction framework is illustrated by Fig.  1.
A preliminary version of this work has been presented at a conference
38. Herein, we (i) extend our method by 
introducing an additional modality (fTensor-fMRI) to enhance the multi-modal multi-channel feature learning by providing more supplementary information, (ii) explore the impact of using the multi-modality information, (iii) investigate the impact of convolutional kernels: comparing 3D convolutional kernels with 2D convolutional kernels, (iv) compare the proposed supervised learned features with unsupervised extracted features on the clas-
sification task, and (vi) test on an extra 25-subject dataset.
Experiments and Results
Data Acquisition.  Subjects. In this study, we included 68 patients with high-grade gliomas screened by pre-
surgical imaging from the glioma image database (collected during 2010–2015) of Huashan hospital, Shanghai, 
China. We call this dataset training dataset. We also included another independent dataset with 25 patients (see Validation on Independent Dataset), which is the validation dataset to further validate our model. The inclusion criteria are listed in the following: (1) patients who have primary intracranial tumor but having not received 
any treatment before multi-modal MRI scan; (2) patients who have all three key imaging modalities (i.e., T1 
MRI, rs-fMRI and DTI) with the same imaging parameters (see Imaging Parameters); and (3) with the screening thick-slice contrast-enhanced T1 MRI clearly showing the enhancing lesions (indicating high-grade gliomas). The exclusion criteria are patients (1) with any surgery, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy of brain tumor prior to image acquisitions; (2) with excessive head motion or presence of artifacts in any image. To avoid subjectivity, the T1 images were separately visually evaluated by three raters, only consensus result were used for decision making; (3) with irrelevant death causes (e.g., suicide) during follow-ups which may confound OS estimation; and (4) with inadequate follow-up period to determine the label of long or short OS. Specifically, OS is defined by the duration from the date when the patient received operation (i.e., the starting date of treatment) to the date of death (if 
applicable). The threshold is chosen to be 650 days and the patients are thus divided into two groups: short OS 
group and long OS group. This threshold is defined according to the median OS for the adult high-grade glioma patients
39. The patients who were alive according to the latest follow-up but already lived longer than 650 days 
are also labeled as “long OS” . Detailed patient information can be found in Table  1. Informed written consents 
were acquired from all the participants before imaging. The imaging study was also approved by the local ethical committee at Huashan hospital. The whole study was carried out in accordance with the approved guidelines. The images from a sample subject are shown in Fig.  2, from which we can see the contrast-enhanced T1 MRI 
(presented in single channel), and the multi-channel metric maps derived from DTI and rs-fMRI. The detailed multi-channel metric map calculation will be described later.
Imaging parameters. All the multi-modal images are acquired by a 3T MRI scanner (MAGNETOM Verio, 
Siemens Healthcare, Siemens AG, Germany) at Huashan hospital. The image data collected from each patient 
subject include T1 MRI (TR, 1900 ms; TE, 2.93 ms; flip angle, 9; FOV , 250 × 250 mm
2; matrix size, 256 × 215; slice 
Figure 1. Schematic description of the proposed survival prediction framework for high-grade glioma patients, 
by using (1) 3D CNN-based deep learning to conduct feature learning and (2) an SVM for final prediction (long or short OS).