5
(a) Att3-pc-tanh
(b) Att3-dot-sm
Fig. 4. Illustration of the weakly sensor data sample and the generated
compatibility score
results in the feature vectors produced by combining the local
feature vectors and the defective compatibility score that lack
crucial information beside of these valid points. We address the
above problem by employing Att-pc-tanh architecture, where
the operation of parametrized compatibility can generate a
set of compatibility scores with relatively low disparity and
meanwhile the compatibility scores are not jointly normalized
by the softmax operation but are normalized independently
using pointwise tanh function.
D. Location Experiments
We conduct the location experiment using the proposed
attention Net-att3-pc-tanh model on the weakly labeled data
sequences which have manually labeled ground truth by
matching the video and the sensor data. Converting the com-
patibility score to the compatibility density provides more
clarity in determining the locations of labeled activity, because
compared with the peak points of the compatibility score
curve, that of the compatibility density curve concentrate on
the points where the labeled activity happen more intensively.
We mark the locations by utilizing windows whose width are
equal to that of the slide window used for conversion of scores.
In our experiment, the width of the slide window is set to
128. The center of these windows are determined by the local
maximum points of the compatibility density curve instead
of the compatibility score. The location windows depend
on compatibility density locate within the margin of labeled
activity as expected, while another one cross the boundary, as
is illustrated between Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 5(b).
V. C ONCLUSION
We study the attention-based convolutional neural network
for weakly labeled human activities recognition with wear-
(a) Labeled activity location based on compatibility density
(b) Labeled activity location based on compatibility score
Fig. 5. Comparison of the location performance between the compatibility
density and the compatibility score
able sensors. The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed attention model is comparable with the classical
methods of human activity recognition on traditional UCI
HAR Dataset. Crucially, our model can achieve signiﬁcant
accuracy improvement on the weakly labeled dataset, com-
pared to the classical deep learning models. We discuss how
attention model achieves higher accuracy and why the Att-pc-
tanh architecture perform well than the Att-dot-sm .
Usually, it is hard for data recorder to keep a ﬁxed activity,
and the weakly labeled sensor data inevitably occurs in the
data collection process. Our attention-based CNN method can
greatly facilitate the data collection process based on wearable
sensor data. The proposed model can utilize the weakly labeled
data to avoid the time-consuming process of traditional data
annotation, and do not increase unduly computational cost
compared to the classical CNN model. Taking advantage of
the mechanism of attention, we utilize the compatibility score
by converting it to compatibility density to determine the
speciﬁc location of the labeled activity in a long weakly
labeled data sequence. In the future, we will utilize the location
function of our model to collect speciﬁc segments extracted
from the weakly labeled dataset as a dataset for human activity
recognition, and then evaluate the performance.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Pei, R. Guinness, R. Chen, J. Liu, H. Kuusniemi, Y . Chen, L. Chen,
and J. Kaistinen, “Human behavior cognition using smartphone sensors,”
Sensors , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 1402–1424, 2013.