1
Attention-based Convolutional Neural Network
for Weakly Labeled Human Activities Recognition
with Wearable Sensors
Kun Wang, Jun He, and Lei Zhang
Abstract —Unlike images or videos data which can be easily
labeled by human being, sensor data annotation is a time-
consuming process. However, traditional methods of human
activity recognition require a large amount of such strictly labeled
data for training classiﬁers. In this paper, we present an attention-
based convolutional neural network for human recognition from
weakly labeled data. The proposed attention model can focus
on labeled activity among a long sequence of sensor data, and
while ﬁlter out a large amount of background noise signals. In
experiment on the weakly labeled dataset, we show that our
attention model outperforms classical deep learning methods
in accuracy. Besides, we determine the speciﬁc locations of
the labeled activity in a long sequence of weakly labeled data
by converting the compatibility score which is generated from
attention model to compatibility density. Our method greatly
facilitates the process of sensor data annotation, and makes data
collection more easy.
Index Terms —Human activity recognition, attention-based
convolutional neural network, compatibility density, weakly su-
pervised learning, wearable sensor data.
I. I NTRODUCTION
IN the recent years, the wide diffusion of mobile devices has
made human activity recognition(HAR) based on wearable
sensors[1] become a new research point in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence and pattern recognition[2][3], and there are pre-
vailing applications which beneﬁt from HAR include sports
activity detection[4], smart homes[5] and health support[6],
et al. Those sensors such as accelerometers, gyroscopes and
magnetometers[7], which are embedded on mobile devices,
can generate time-series data for HAR. But unlike videos or
images which can be smoothly annotated by humans, it is
laborious to accurately segment a speciﬁc type of activity from
a long sequence of sensor data. Nevertheless, it is feasible for
data collector to identify whether a labeled activity takes place
in a long recorded sensor data. This kind of data is correspond-
ing to the weakly labeled sensor data. Consequently, the new
The work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
of China under Grant 61203237 and the Industry-Academia Cooperation
Innovation Fund Projection of Jiangsu Province under Grant BY2016001-
02, and in part by the Foundation of Shanghai Key Laboratory of Navigation
and Location-based Services, Shanghai, under Grant 20040. (Corresponding
author: Lei Zhang.)
Kun Wang and Lei Zhang are with School of Electrical and Automation
Engineering, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, 210023, China (e-mail:
iskenn7@gmal.com, leizhang@njnu.edu.cn).
Jun He is with the School of Electronic and Information Engineer-
ing,Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing,
210044, China (e-mail: jhe@nuist.edu.cn).
Kun Wang and Jun He contribute equally to the article.challenge is whether we can exploit the weakly labeled sensor
data to accurately predict activities and determine the exact
location of the labeled activity.
Traditional methods, which have been developed to facilitate
human activity recognition, are inside the range of supervised
learning. For instance, the pervious methods include SVM[8]
and Random Forest[9], which require to extract handcrafted
features as the inputs of classiﬁers. Later, deep learning, and
in particular, convolutional neural networks, has been diffusely
used in the ﬁeld of HAR. Although deep learning models have
excellent performance in HAR, there are some challenges need
to be addressed, the main one of which is the need for labeled
datasets for ground truth annotation[10].
Recently, an end-to-end-trainable attention module for con-
volutional neural network architectures built for image classi-
ﬁcation has been proposed[11]. Inspired by that, we propose
a new weakly supervised learning method of human activity
recognition, which can be trained by weakly labeled sensor
data and determine the location of the labeled activity.
In this paper, we exploit the attention-based convolutional
neural network model to recognize activities from sensor data
with weak labels. The dataset only obtains the information
about what activity occurred in a sequence of sensor data
without knowing the speciﬁc time of this activity. Besides,
the precise locations of the speciﬁc labeled activity can be
determined by utilizing the mechanism of attention.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section
II summarizes related work of human activity recognition. In
section III, we propose our attention model for HAR. Section
IV presents and examines the experimental results. In section
V , we draw out our conclusion.
II. R ELATED WORKS
The pervious methods used to extract features manually. For
example, Bao and Intille[12] corroborated that accelerometer
sensor data is appropriate for activities recognition. They
extracted handcrafted features (mean, energy, frequency and
domain entropy) from accelerometer data and then fed these
features into different classiﬁers: decision table[13], K-nearest
neighbor(KNN)[14], decision tree[15], and Nave Bayes[13].
Kwapisz et al.[16] also manually extracted features (i.e. av-
erage and standard deviation) from the accelerometer sensor
of smartphones, and recognized six different activities us-
ing classiﬁers such as decision trees(J48), multilayer percep-
tions(MLP), and logistic regression. However, these methodsarXiv:1903.10909v2  [cs.LG]  27 Mar 2019