TÜRKOĞLU and HANBA Y/T urk J Elec Eng & Comp Sci
has unique features such as number of layers, number of connections, and filter types. Therefore, performance
results differed from each other. F or example, the ResNet50 model has fewer layers and connections than
InceptionResNetV2, but its performance was higher.
In this study , we calculated execution times for deep feature extraction and transfer learning based on
deep learning models, as shown in T ables 5 and 8. According to the results, deep feature extraction has a much
lower training time compared to transfer learning. F or example, while the AlexNet deep feature extraction was
almost ten times lower than the fine-tuned AlexNet in training time, the ResNet50-based deep feature extraction
was almost five times lower than the fine-tuned ResNet50. In addition, the testing times for transfer learning
and deep feature extraction based on deep models were mostly 10–30 s due to low test data, so there was no
need for a separate table. As a result, although the proposed architecture based on deep feature extraction
resulted in lower training times than transfer learning, it had higher accuracy scores.
5. Conclusion
This paper compared the performance results of deep feature extraction and transfer learning for the detection
of plant diseases and pests. This study used nine powerful architectures of deep neural networks for both
deep feature extraction and transfer learning. First, we extracted deep features for fully connected layers
of these deep models. The obtained deep features had their performances calculated using SVM, ELM, and
KNN classifiers. Then these deep models were fine-tuned based on plant disease and pest images. Finally , we
compared the performance results with deep learning models using traditional methods. The evaluation results
showed that the deep learning models produced better results compared to the traditional methods. The results
for deep feature extraction were better than the transfer learning achievements. In the studies based on deep
feature extraction and classifier methods, the fc6 layers of the AlexNet, VGG16, and VGG19 models produced
better accuracy scores compared to the other layers. As a result, the highest level accuracy scored was 97.86%,
obtained with the ResNet50 model and SVM classifier. In addition, the calculated execution time for deep
feature extraction and transfer learning based on deep learning models and the proposed architecture based on
deep feature extraction showed lower computational complexity than models based on transfer learning.
In future works, we are planning to use regional images and improved CNN models in order to improve
the classification performance. Additionally , we will gather images of different diseases in order to enrich the
database. The main goal for subsequent research will be developing a smart mobile device application that can
detect various plant diseases. This application, which will provide automatic plant disease diagnosis with visual
inspection, could be of great benefit to users with little to no knowledge of the plants that they are cultivating.
References
[1] T urkoglu M, Hanbay D. Apricot disease identification based on attributes obtained from deep learning algorithms.
In: IEEE 2018 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Data Processing; Malatya, T urkey; 2018. pp.
1-4.
[2] Güzel M. The importance of good agricultural practices (GAP) in the context of quality practices in agriculture
and a sample application. PhD, Dokuz Eylül University , İzmir, T urkey , 2012.
[3] Asma BM, Birhanlı O. Mişmiş. Malatya, T urkey: Evin Ofset, 2004 (in T urkish).
[4] Al-Hiary H, Bani-Ahmad S, Reyalat M, Braik M, Al-Rahamneh Z. F ast and accurate detection and classification
of plant diseases. International Journal of Computer Applications 2011; 17 (1): 31-38.
1649