TÜRKOĞLU and HANBA Y/T urk J Elec Eng & Comp Sci
• This work proposes a novel classification architecture using pretrained deep learning networks and tradi-
tional classifiers. The nine deep learning networks are also utilized for feature extraction. V ariable sizes
of features are extracted using these networks. The traditional classifiers, which are SVM, ELM, and
KNN, are used in the classification phase with 10-fold cross-validation. The results clearly indicate that
the proposed architecture has higher classification accuracy than transfer-learning-based networks.
• The proposed architecture has lower computational complexity than transfer-learning-based models. This
situation is proved using execution time calculation.
• In the literature, studies have generally been performed using synthetic plant disease and pest images. In
this study , we use a dataset consisting of 1965 real plant disease and pest images within eight clusters. The
proposed method was tested on this dataset and the results clearly prove that it can be used in real-world
applications.
The study is organized as follows. While the proposed method is given in detail in Section 2, the proposed
architectures are given in Section 3. The experimental work and results are given in Section 4. Finally , in Section
5, the results are discussed, as well as a presentation of the contributions of the study .
2. Materials and methods
In this section, the theoretical background and related algorithms, dataset, and recommended method are
detailed under appropriate subheadings.
2.1. Deep learning and pretrained CNN models
Deep learning is a form of machine learning technique that uses calculation models composed of multiple
processing layers in order to learn the characteristics of the data [ 16]. As a result of significantly high
achievements in areas such as classification and recognition using deep learning, interest in this subject has
increased. Recently , these methods have been used in many areas such as speech recognition, visual object
recognition, and object detection [ 17]. Although the first studies on deep learning were based on a very long
history , the main reasons for its success in recent years are the creation of large data and the generation of
faster computers with large scale memory [ 18].
This study evaluated performance by trying different approaches of the nine most powerful architectures
of deep neural networks for the issue of plant disease identification. These deep learning architectures are trained
on a subset of the ImageNet database. The AlexNet architecture is a deep learning algorithm consisting of a
total of 25 layers with weights that can be trained on eight layers [ 19]. The GoogleNet architecture, based on
a network-in-network approach, uses architecture modules that use multiple convolutions in parallel to extract
various feature points [ 20,21]. The VGG network proposed by the Oxford Visual Geometry Group (VGG) is
a homogeneous architecture used to obtain better results in the ILSVRC-2014 competition [ 22]. The ResNet
network was developed by He et al. to train networks with even larger depth [ 23]. This architecture, based
on microarchitecture modules, differs from traditional consecutive network architectures such as VGGNet and
AlexNet. The Inception network was proposed by Szegedy et al. as a type of convolutional neural network
model [ 21]. This network consists of a large number of convolution and maximum pooling steps. In the last
stage, it has a fully connected neural network. The InceptionResNetV2 network [ 24] was based on the Inception-
based network structure and residual connections. InceptionResNetV2 performs nearly identically to Inception
1638