TÜRKOĞLU and HANBA Y/T urk J Elec Eng & Comp Sci
There have been numerous studies in the literature with regards to the detection of plant diseases. In the
past decade, these studies have often been conducted based on the classification process by using features such
as color, shape, and texture [ 4–7,9,9,10]. The major disadvantages of methods based on these properties are:
• V ery low performance when used alone, although attempts have been made to improve performance
through a combination of several methods.
• Requires the use of segmented methods, meaning that plants have to be separated from their roots in
order to extract geometric and similar features.
• Applied using datasets that contain images that are difficult to obtain in real life.
F or these reasons, such systems and methods cannot be used in real life. Recently , deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have provided significant gains in areas of visual object and machine learning. One of
the biggest advantages of models and methods improved regarding these areas is that they can perform feature
extraction without applying segmented methods. Therefore, these methods and models can be easily used in
real applications.
CNNs used as basic deep learning tools have obtained significant success in several plant disease detection
studies. Amara et al. [ 11] used the LeNet architecture as a convolutional neural network to classify image
datasets, including being able to contrast healthy and diseased banana leaves. These were evaluated with deep
models fine-tuned by transfer learning. Mohanty et al. [ 12] used a dataset consisting of 54,306 images of diseased
and healthy plant leaves. They were evaluated for performance using AlexNet and GoogleNet models based on
a deep CNN to identify 14 crop species and 26 diseases. F ujita et al. [ 13] developed a new practical plant disease
detection system that contained seven disease types. They used classification systems based on CNNs, which
showed an average of 82.3% accuracy under a fourfold cross-validation strategy . Sladojevic et al. [ 14] proposed
a new approach in order to recognize 13 different types of plant diseases by using deep convolutional networks.
F uentes et al. [ 15] developed a robust deep-learning-based detector for real-time usage that recognized nine
different tomato diseases and pests.
In this paper, a system based on deep CNNs is developed for the detection of plant diseases and pests as
a classification problem. In this study , we use a dataset consisting of real plant disease and pest images from
T urkey . First, we use this dataset for deep feature extraction based on deep learning architectures: AlexNet,
VGG16, VGG19, GoogleNet, ResNet50, ResNet101, Inception V3, InceptionResNetV2, and SqueezeNet. The
deep features obtained from these deep models are classified by SVM, ELM, and KNN. Later, we fine-tune
using deep learning models based on transfer learning. W e remove the last three layers of the architecture and
then add new layers to adopt the pretrained CNNs to solve the problem. Finally , we evaluate the performance
results by using transfer learning and deep feature extraction methods. The main contributions of the proposed
plant disease classification method are the following:
• Plant disease and pest classification using images is problematic for machine learning. In order to classify
these images, various methods have been proposed in the literature. T oday , deep learning methods are
phenomena of machine learning, and various deep learning networks have been proposed in the literature
for supervised learning. In this article, nine of the most used deep learning networks (AlexNet, GoogleNet,
VGG16, VGG19, ResNet50, ResNet101, Inception V3, Inception ResNetV2, and SqueezeNet) are examined
for plant diseases and pests using transfer learning and deep feature extraction, and their results are
discussed comprehensively .
1637