as possible. This is in contrast with classiﬁcation networks that discard information regarding the
input [31]. Second, V AEs often respond differently to the over-parameterization in neural networks.
Since the marginal log-likelihood only depends on the generative model, overparameterizing the
decoder network may hurt the test log-likelihood, whereas powerful encoders can yield better
models because of reducing the amortization gap [ 6]. Wu et al. [ 32] observe that the marginal log-
likelihood, estimated by non-encoder-based methods, is not sensitive to the encoder overﬁtting (see
also Fig. 9 in [ 19]). Moreover, the neural networks for V AEs should model long-range correlations in
data [ 33,34,35], requiring the networks to have large receptive ﬁelds. Finally, due to the unbounded
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence in the variational lower bound, training very deep hierarchical
V AEs is often unstable. The current state-of-the-art V AEs [ 4,36] omit batch normalization (BN) [ 37]
to combat the sources of randomness that could potentially amplify their instability.
In this paper, we aim to make VAEs great again by architecture design. We propose Nouveau V AE
(NV AE), a deep hierarchical V AE with a carefully designed network architecture that produces high-
quality images. NV AE obtains the state-of-the-art results among non-autoregressive likelihood-based
generative models, reducing the gap with autoregressive models. The main building block of our
network is depthwise convolutions [ 38,39] that rapidly increase the receptive ﬁeld of the network
without dramatically increasing the number of parameters.
In contrast to the previous work, we ﬁnd that BN is an important component of the success of deep
V AEs. We also observe that instability of training remains a major roadblock when the number of
hierarchical groups is increased, independent of the presence of BN. To combat this, we propose a
residual parameterization of the approximate posterior parameters to improve minimizing the KL
term, and we show that spectral regularization is key to stabilizing V AE training.
In summary, we make the following contributions: i) We propose a novel deep hierarchical V AE,
called NV AE, with depthwise convolutions in its generative model. ii) We propose a new residual
parameterization of the approximate posteriors. iii) We stabilize training deep V AEs with spectral
regularization. iv) We provide practical solutions to reduce the memory burden of V AEs. v) We show
that deep hierarchical V AEs can obtain state-of-the-art results on several image datasets, and can
produce high-quality samples even when trained with the original V AE objective. To the best of our
knowledge, NV AE is the ﬁrst successful application of V AEs to images as large as 256 256 pixels.
Related Work: Recently, VQ-V AE-2 [ 40] demonstrated high-quality generative performance for
large images. Although VQ-V AE’s formulation is motivated by V AEs, its objective does not corre-
spond to a lower bound on data log-likelihood. In contrast, NV AE is trained directly with the V AE
objective. Moreover, VQ-V AE-2 uses PixelCNN [ 41] in its prior for latent variables up to 128 128
dims that is very slow to sample from, while NV AE uses an unconditional decoder in the data space.
Our work is related to V AEs with inverse autoregressive ﬂows (IAF-V AEs) [ 4]. NV AE borrows the
statistical models (i.e., hierarchical prior and approximate posterior, etc.etc) from IAF-V AEs. But, it
differs from IAF-V AEs in terms of i) neural networks implementing these models, ii) the parame-
terization of approximate posteriors, and iii) scaling up the training to large images. Nevertheless,
we provide ablation experiments on these aspects, and we show that NV AE outperform the original
IAF-V AEs by a large gap. Recently, BIV A [ 36] showed state-of-the-art V AE results by extending
bidirectional inference to latent variables. However, BIV A uses neural networks similar to IAF-V AE,
and it is trained on images as large as 64 64 px. To keep matters simple, we use the hierarchical
structure from IAF-V AEs, and we focus on carefully designing the neural networks. We expect
improvements in performance if more complex hierarchical models from BIV A are used. Early works
DRAW [ 5] and Conv DRAW [ 42] use recurrent neural networks to model hierarchical dependencies.
2 Background
Here, we review V AEs, their hierarchical extension, and bidirectional encoder networks [4, 43].
The goal of V AEs [ 1] is to train a generative model in the form of p(xxx;zzz) =p(zzz)p(xxxjzzz)wherep(zzz)
is a prior distribution over latent variables zzzandp(xxxjzzz)is the likelihood function or decoder that
generates data xxxgiven latent variables zzz. Since the true posterior p(zzzjxxx)is in general intractable, the
generative model is trained with the aid of an approximate posterior distribution or encoder q(zzzjxxx).
In deep hierarchical V AEs [ 5,9,4,43,44], to increase the expressiveness of both the approximate
posterior and prior, the latent variables are partitioned into disjoint groups, zzz=fzzz1;zzz1;:::;zzzLg,
2