Sampling Speed: Due to the unconditional decoder, NV AE’s sampling is fast. On a 12-GB Titan V
GPU, we can sample a batch of 36 images of the size 256 256 px in 2.03 seconds (56 ms/image).
MaCow [67] reports 434.2 ms/image in a similar batched-sampling experiment ( 8slower).
Reconstruction: Fig. 5a visualizes the reconstruction results on CelebA HQ datasets. As we can see,
the reconstructed images in NV AE are indistinguishable from the training images.
Posterior Collapse: Since we are using more latent variables than the data dimensionality, it is
natural for the model to turn off many latent variables. However, our KL balancing mechanism
(Sec. A) stops a hierarchical group from turning off entirely. In Fig. 5b, we visualize KL per group
in CIFAR-10 (for 30 groups). Note how most groups obtain a similar KL on average, and only one
group is turned off. We apply KL balancing mechanism only during KL warm-up (the ﬁrst 25000
iterations). In the remaining iterations, we are using the original V AE objective without any KL
balancing (Eq. 1).
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed Nouveau V AE, a deep hierarchical V AE with a carefully designed
architecture. NV AE uses depthwise separable convolutions for the generative model and regular
convolutions for the encoder model. We introduced residual parameterization of Normal distributions
in the encoder and spectral regularization for stabilizing the training of very deep models. We also
presented practical remedies for reducing the memory usage of deep V AEs, enabling us to speed up
training by2. NV AE achieves state-of-the-art results on MNIST, CIFAR-10, CelebA 64, and
CelebA HQ-256, and it provides a strong baseline on FFHQ-256. To the best of our knowledge,
NV AE is the ﬁrst V AE that can produce large high-quality images and it is trained without changing
the objective function of V AEs. Our results show that we can achieve state-of-the-art generative
performance by carefully designing neural network architectures for V AEs. The future work includes
scaling up the training for larger images, experimenting with more complex normalizing ﬂows,
automating the architecture design by neural architecture search, and studying the role of batch
normalization in V AEs. We have released our source-code to facilitate research in these directions.
Impact Statement
This paper’s contributions are mostly centered around the fundamental challenges in designing
expressive neural architectures for image V AEs, and the ideas, here, are examined on commonly
used public datasets. This work has applications in content generation, computer graphics, data
augmentation, semi-supervised learning, and representation learning.
V AEs are known to represent the data distribution more faithfully than commonly used generative
adversarial networks (GANs), as V AEs do not suffer from the mode collapse problem. Thus, in the
long run, enabling V AEs to generate high-quality images will help us reduce bias in the generated
content, produce diverse output, and represent minorities better.
One should also take into consideration that V AEs are trained to mimic the training data distribution,
and, any bias introduced in data collection will make V AEs generate samples with a similar bias.
Additional bias could be introduced during model design, training, or when V AEs are sampled using
small temperatures. Bias correction in generative learning is an active area of research, and we
recommend the interested readers to check this area [ 80] before building applications using this work.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Karsten Kreis and Margaret Albrecht for providing feedback on the
early version of this work. They also would like to extend their sincere gratitude to Sangkug Lym for
providing suggestions for accelerating NV AE. Last but not least, they are grateful to Sabu Nadarajan,
Nithya Natesan, Sivakumar Arayandi Thottakara, and Jung Seok Jin for providing compute support.
References
[1]Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In The International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2014.
9