NVAE: A Deep Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder
Arash Vahdat, Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
{avahdat, jkautz}@nvidia.com
Abstract
Normalizing ﬂows, autoregressive models, variational autoencoders (V AEs), and
deep energy-based models are among competing likelihood-based frameworks
for deep generative learning. Among them, V AEs have the advantage of fast and
tractable sampling and easy-to-access encoding networks. However, they are cur-
rently outperformed by other models such as normalizing ﬂows and autoregressive
models. While the majority of the research in V AEs is focused on the statistical
challenges, we explore the orthogonal direction of carefully designing neural archi-
tectures for hierarchical V AEs. We propose Nouveau V AE (NV AE), a deep hierar-
chical V AE built for image generation using depth-wise separable convolutions and
batch normalization. NV AE is equipped with a residual parameterization of Normal
distributions and its training is stabilized by spectral regularization. We show that
NV AE achieves state-of-the-art results among non-autoregressive likelihood-based
models on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, CelebA 64, and CelebA HQ datasets and it
provides a strong baseline on FFHQ. For example, on CIFAR-10, NV AE pushes the
state-of-the-art from 2.98 to 2.91 bits per dimension, and it produces high-quality
images on CelebA HQ as shown in Fig. 1. To the best of our knowledge, NV AE is
the ﬁrst successful V AE applied to natural images as large as 256 256 pixels. The
source code is available at https://github.com/NVlabs/NVAE .
1 Introduction
The majority of the research efforts on improving V AEs [ 1,2] is dedicated to the statistical challenges,
such as reducing the gap between approximate and true posterior distributions [ 3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10],
formulating tighter bounds [ 11,12,13,14], reducing the gradient noise [ 15,16], extending V AEs to
discrete variables [ 17,18,19,20,21,22,23], or tackling posterior collapse [ 24,25,26,27]. The role
of neural network architectures for V AEs is somewhat overlooked, as most previous work borrows
the architectures from classiﬁcation tasks.
Figure 1: 256256-pixel samples generated by NV AE, trained on CelebA HQ [28].
However, V AEs can beneﬁt from designing special network architectures as they have fundamentally
different requirements. First, V AEs maximize the mutual information between the input and latent
variables [ 29,30], requiring the networks to retain the information content of the input data as much
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.