A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 621
3. On the basis of these materials, the essential prospects lying ahead for sentiment analysis
are identiﬁed and discussed. Speciﬁcally, we have summarized multimodal sentimentanalysis (MSA) techniques in sentiment analysis, which we thought will be the mainchallenge for future development.
This survey is organized as follows: In Sect. 2, we introduce main concepts and deﬁni-
tions used throughout this paper. In Sect. 3, we present researches from new perspectives
of task-oriented, granularity-oriented, methodology-oriented sentiment analysis and explorethe motivations, beneﬁts, and limitations of these techniques and methods. In Sect. 4,w e
discuss some of the benchmark datasets and tools that have been used in sentiment analysisresearch as well as their limitations. Section 5highlights possible trends and challenges in
sentiment analysis. Finally, Sect. 6concludes this survey with ﬁnal remarks.
2 Terminology and background concepts
Before we dive into the details of this survey, we start with an introduction of the termi-
nologies and background concepts, which concerns of emotion and sentiment in the ﬁeldof psychology, the deﬁnition of sentiment analysis in social media, and different types ofopinions.
2.1 Emotion and sentiment from psychological perspective
The words emotion and sentiment are usually used interchangeably in daily life. While in theﬁeld of psychology, they are treated as two different concepts. Watson and Tellegen’s well-known psychological model showed a two-dimensional structure of emotions (see Fig. 2).
Emotion is deﬁned as a complex psychological state, which plays a key role of operatingmotivators. Psychologist Paul Eckman proposed six basic emotions, i.e., happiness, sad-ness, anger, fear, surprise, and disgust. Later on, other psychologists enriched this list byadding emotions such as pride, excitement, embarrassment, contempt, shame. There arethree main components in emotion, which respectively are the subjective experience, thephysical response, and the behavioral response. Sentiment, on the other hand, refers to amental attitude, which is created based on emotion. The deﬁnition highlights that sentimentis used to convey the thoughts of the individual deriving from his emotion. Unlike emo-tion, sentiment goes a step further, which is not conﬁned to the psychological dimensions.Sentiment is usually not a primary emotion but is highly organized. McDougall stated thatsentiment usually connects primary emotion with action. To sum up, the differences betweenemotion and sentiment can be seen from four aspects (see Table 1):
All types of emotion can be treated as multiple factors together for affecting sentiment.
Most of the sentiment analysis researches are based on natural language processing so far.These traditional works focus on textual content, while we are increasingly making use ofaudios, images, and videos to air our opinions on social media platforms. Thus, it is highlycrucial to analyze opinions and identify sentiments from multiple modalities, which is calledemotion analysis. While the ﬁeld of multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) has not receivedmuch attention, the scatter of multimodal sentiment expressions requires a higher demandfor more analysis to derive useful data. We will present an overview of recent research ofdifferent models and individually and jointly ﬁnd the gaps in terms of tasks, approachestheories, and applications in Sect. 5.
123