A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 633
Since opinion always has a target, their relationships can be exploited to extract aspect.
This method is based on the assumption: Of those sentences with some sentiment wordsand no frequent aspect, the nearest noun or noun phrase to the sentiment word is extracted.Such dependency relations were further generalized into double propagation for extractingsentiment words or aspects, at the same time, exploiting certain syntactic relations betweensentiments and targets, and a small set of seed sentiment words [ 104]. This method is also
based on bootstrapping technique.
Besides, two kinds of aspects that have been introduced in Sect. 2were identiﬁed: explicit
and implicit aspects. Limited research has been done on mapping implicit aspects to explicitaspects, although explicit aspect extraction has been studied extensively. Hai et al. [ 43] utilized
two-phase co-occurrence association rule mining to identify implicit features. Firstly, in rulegeneration phase, for the occurrence of each opinion word in an explicit sentence in thecorpus, they mined a signiﬁcant set of association rules of the form [opinion-word, explicit-feature] from a co-occurrence matrix. Secondly, in rule application phase, they clusteredrule consequents (explicit features) to generate more robust rules for each opinion wordmentioned above. Given a new opinion word with no explicit feature, they then searched amatched list of robust rules, among which the rule containing the feature cluster with thehighest frequency weight is ﬁred, and accordingly, they assigned the representative word ofthe cluster as the ﬁnal identiﬁed implicit feature.
Recently, Penalver-Martinez et al. [ 91] proposed an innovative method that takes advan-
tage of new Semantic Web-guided solutions to enhance the results obtained with traditionalsentiment analysis processes and natural language processing techniques. This methodimproves feature-based opinion mining by using ontologies at the feature selection stage,providing a new vector analysis-based method for sentiment analysis. Yang et al. [ 149]p r o -
posed a combined approach, which integrates local context information (LCI) and globalcontext information (GCI) to extract and rank features based on feature score and frequency,in which LCI uses the HITS algorithm with considering direct links between opinion wordsand nouns in a sentence, GCI uses SimRank with considering the LCI (direct) links andindirect links in the corpus. Manek et al. [ 70] proposed a statistical method using weight by
Gini index method for feature selection in sentiment analysis with SVM classiﬁer.
3.2 Granularity-oriented sentiment analysis
The rapid growth in the scale of existing applications or a surge in demand for particu-lar services may result in additional needs for sentiment analysis at different granularity.Current researches broadly handle this issue by classifying the task of sentiment analysisinto three levels: document level, sentence level, and word level. That is, models built formulti-granularity sentiment analysis assume fully labeled corpus at the ﬁne-grained level orcoarse-grained level or both. A huge amount of online reviews is not fully labeled at any par-ticular level; instead, they are partially labeled at both levels. Actual usage patterns of manyreal-world application granularities vary with strategy, and most of the time, in unpredictableways. Therefore, as we stated earlier, unexpected granularity can potentially overburden asingle task and lead to unreliable and interrupted services.
3.2.1 Document-level sentiment analysis
The major challenges on document-level sentiment analysis are cross-domain sentimentanalysis and cross-language sentiment analysis. It has been shown that speciﬁc domain-
123