618 L. Yue et al.
ment analysis should be treated as a branch of machine learning, data mining, natural language
processing, and computational linguistics, which also borrows elements from sociology andpsychology. Although the history of natural language processing (NLP) starts in the 1950s,little attention had been paid to people’s opinions and sentiments analysis until 2005s. Forthe past few years, the prosperity of the social media propels the development of sentimentanalysis. In this section, we will mainly answer three main questions: the importance of sen-timent analysis, the differences between our survey and former ones, and the contributionsof our survey.
1.1 Reasons for caring about sentiment analysis in social media
The growth of information available in social media makes sentiment analysis more crucial;related researches have been ﬁltered into three main aspects of the application.
From the commercial perspective, sentiment analysis can provide online advices and
recommendations for both of the customers and merchants. On the one hand, user preferencesthat the data reveals can be used to help e-commerce platforms analyzing their productsand services. On the other hand, for the virtual nature of online shopping, it is not easyto understand a commodity comprehensively and objectively, and whether the consumer iswilling to learn about other consumers’ comments or opinions.
From the political perspective, the massive demand for political information can be
regarded as another important factor. Commercial application is not the only motivationbehind people seeking or expressing opinions online. For example, in the analysis of the con-versation on Twitter before the European Parliament elections, researchers have collectedmore than 1.2 million tweets in three languages (English, German, and French) during atwo-week period (May 1 to May 14, 2014),
1in which:
– For the Twitter conversation in English, 39% of the assertions on Twitter are negative toward
the European Union (EU), compared with 30% neutral and 31% positive. In French, theresult broke down the same basic way, about 39% negative, 28% neutral, and 33% positive.And while in German, conversations on Twitter are much more positive (39%) than negative(5%), these attitudes are embedded in sparse conversation that represent a mere fractionof the Twitter activity in English and French (see Fig. 1a).
– There are low-intensity conversations of English language on Twitter about the ﬁve can-
didates competing for the European Commission presidency: Jean-Claude Juncker fromLuxembourg, who is a candidate of the center-right European People’s Party; MartinSchulz from Germany, who is a candidate of the center-left Party of European Socialists;Guy Verhofstadt from Belgium, representing the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats forEurope; Alexis Tsipras from Greece, who is a candidate of the European Left Party; andSka Keller from Germany, who is a candidate of the European Green Party (see Fig. 1b).
From the perspective of public security, sociopolitical events such as the Arab Spring
and the London Riots vividly demonstrate the importance of sentiment analysis to publicsecurity. In both cases, online social medias such as Twitter and Facebook were regarded assigniﬁcant contributors to the outbreak and proliferation of the events. Sentiment analysis canhelp authorities discover those types of sensitive information in advance. If so, an action suchas shutting down Internet communication channels would prevent supporters of terrorismfrom having access to such services.
1http://www.journalism.org/2014/05/22/the-eu-elections-on-twitter/ .
123