A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 653
another challenge on automatic recognition of facial expressions, which dedicates to FACS
action unit detection and intensity estimation on the highly challenging data.
5.2 Audio modality: emotion recognition based on speech
Basic researches on emotion recognition from speech aimed at identifying several acousticfeatures such as frequency, intensity of utterance, bandwidth. Further studies are based ontypes of features including formants, Mel frequency cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCC), pause,teager energy operated based features, log frequency power coefﬁcients (LFPC), linear pre-diction cepstral coefﬁcients (LPCC), etc. Existing methods can be categorized into twocategories: speaker-dependent approach and speaker-independent approach. In general, thespeaker-dependent approach gave much better results than the speaker-independent approachas shown in [ 77]; higher accuracy was achieved by using the Gaussian mixture model
(GMM) as a classiﬁer and Mel frequency cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCC) as speech fea-tures. However, the speaker-dependent approach is not feasible in many applications. Forthe speaker-independent application, the best result achieved so far is only 81% [ 8], in which
features are selected by the sequential ﬂoating forward selection algorithm (SFFS).
Recently, Deep learning approaches are gaining increasing attention in audio research.
Dahake et al. [ 29] extracted the features with hybrid of pitch, formants, zero crossing, MFCC
and its statistical parameters. The pitch detection is done by cepstral algorithm after compar-ing it with autocorrelation and AMDF. The training and testing part of the SVM classiﬁer iscompared with different kernel function like linear, polynomial, quadratic, and RBF. Trigeor-gis et al. [ 123] proposed a strategy for “context-aware” emotional relevant feature extraction,
which combines convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with LSTM networks. In this novelwork, the best representation of the speech signal directly from the raw time representationis automatically learned. Usually, deep neural networks trained on simple acoustic featuresachieve good performance on this type of task, while continuous dimensional emotion recog-nition from audio has not been fully taken into account. It is treated as a sequential regressionproblem, in which the goal is to maximize the correlation between sequences of regressionoutputs and continuous-valued emotion contours, while minimizing the average deviation[135]. Han et al. [ 44] proposed a prediction-based learning framework for a continuous pre-
diction task, where the main goal is to utmostly exploit the individual advantage of differentregression models cooperatively. Researchers concatenate the two models in a tandem struc-ture by different ways, forming a united cascaded framework. The outputs predicted by theformer model are combined together with the original features as the input of the latter modelfor ﬁnal predictions.
5.3 Text modality: emotion recognition based on textual data
This type of emotion recognition is a rapidly developing area of nature language pro-
cessing and computational linguistics, which is emphatically introduced in former chaptersand sections. Basically, researches of sentiment analysis revolve mainly around this type ofemotion recognition, and will no longer be covered again here.
123