A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 625
Queensland election prediction We collected a total number of 14,922 tweets (Tweets
collected between 00 middle night 01/01/2015 and 12 noon 30/01/2015) for predicting QLDElection Parties results. Based on the data crawled from Twitter, the Labour Party is expectedto win slightly. Speciﬁcally, the public are positive to Labor which is 12.39% higher thanLNP. In addition, others (Greens, etc.) are at 13%.
Australian federal election prediction Twitter data are collected between 00:00 12/31/2015
and 03:55 28/06/2016, in a statewide scope of Australia. About 968,966 tweets are related topolitics. A proportion of 63.13% tweets (611,691) was found relevant to this event. Amongthem, a proportion of 34.07% tweets (208,413) were subjective opinions. Based on ouranalysis on Twitter, there seems a 10% ahead of support to Coalition than ALP in AustralianFederal Election 2016.
The problem that we addressed is how to identify emerging events with location sensitivity
from a given set of Twitter messages. We have considered a set of messages, in which eachmessage is associated with an event. However, due to the characteristics of Twitter messages,several issues should be considered such as the abbreviation identiﬁcation, the short tweetstext with the semantic loss, the dynamic topic tracking. And, probably most important ofall is location-based sentiment analysis. People might share various types of content such asconversation topics, advertisements, events, opinions, and others. Our goal is to detect onlyemerging hotspot events that are happening in a particular area within a given period of time.From this review, we need to perform location identiﬁcation based on check-in information,user proﬁle, and geographical name in Twitter textual content before we analyze users’support over a speciﬁc political party.
From this review, we add spatial information element and redeﬁne opinion as a six-tuple:
Deﬁnition (opinion ) An opinion is a six-tuple,
(e
i,aij,sijk lt ,hk,tl,pt)
where eidenotes the name of an object, aijis an aspect of oi,sijk lt is the sentiment on
an aspect aijof object oi,hkis the sentiment holder, tlis the time when the sentiment is
expressed by hk,a n d ptis the place when the sentiment is expressed by hk. Note that objects
can be issues, products, organizations, services, events, individuals, topics, etc.
2.3 Different types of opinions
In [63], various types of opinions in opinion mining are introduced and compared, including
regular and comparative opinions, explicit and implicit opinions, subjectivity and emotion.In this section, we will brieﬂy sketch these basic conceptions combined with instances.
Regular and comparative opinions Direct sentiment and indirect sentiment, as two main
sub-types, are included in regular sentiment. Direct sentiment expresses opinions on an objector an aspect of the object directly. For the indirect sentiment, opinions on an object or an aspectof an object are expressed indirectly. For example, the sentence “After the election campaign,all candidates felt exhausted” describes an undesirable effect of the election on “all candi-dates,” which indirectly gives a negative opinion or sentiment to the election campaign. In thiscase, the entity is the election campaign and the aspect is the effect on all candidates. Compar-ative sentiment expresses relative or similar attribute between two objects. The superlative orcomparative form of an adjective or an adverb is usually contained in comparative opinion,e.g., “Donald Trump has higher approval ratings than Hillary Clinton does”.
Explicit and implicit opinions A subjective statement that gives a comparative or a regular
opinion is treated as an explicit opinion. While an objective statement that gives a comparative
123