648 L. Yue et al.
Mood States (POMS) identiﬁes and assesses transient, ﬂuctuating affective mood states. The
POMS measures six identiﬁable mood or affective states, namely tension-anxiety, vigor-activity, depression-dejection, fatigue-inertia, anger-hostility, and confusion-bewilderment.Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) is a text analysis software program. LIWC cal-
culates the degree to which people use different categories of words across a wide arrayof texts, including emails, speeches, poems, or transcribed daily speech. LIWC2007 weredeveloped to assess emotional, cognitive, and structural components of text samples using apsychometrically validated internal dictionary. Two versions can be found online.
The sentiment lexicons mentioned above are domain-general, which is insensitive to some
special domain issues, e.g., positive words in one area may be negative in others. Therefore,there should be emotional lexicon which is sensitive in some special ﬁelds. For example,Financial Sentiment Dictionary (FSD) deriving from Harvard IV-4 Dictionary is used in the
accounting or ﬁnance ﬁelds. Lexicoder Sentiment Dictionary (LSD) deriving from Regres-
sive Imagery Dictionary (RID) is used in the political ﬁeld. DICTION is a computer program
used for analyzing text on 5 aspects of the feature such as vigor, optimism, certainty, real-ity, citizenship. TAS/C is a computer program used for psychological treatment, including
more than 2000 emotional words divided into three dimensions of pleasure, approval, andattachment.
Besides, LingPipe is a tool kit for processing text using computational linguistics, which
can be used to ﬁnd the names of people, organizations, or locations in the news, to classifyTwitter search results into categories, or to suggest correct spellings of queries. Mallet and
Apache OpenNLP are another two ﬂedged toolkits for processing text using natural language
processing and machine learning techniques. They both provide a wealth of tools for part-of-speech tagging, sentence segmentation, etc. Although the method of analyzing lexicalpolarity based on sentiment lexicon is simple and easy to implement without training data,there are still some limitations about this type of approach (see Table 6).
5 Perspectives about the past and future
Research of sentiment analysis has studied almost all main aspects of the problems. The most
well-studied subproblem is opinion classiﬁcation on different granularity. But in other ways,existing solutions are still far from being perfect. Not much work has been done to addressthe problem on ﬁner details. The area of sentiment analysis gives us many clues of the maintasks and challenges. Based on current developments, it is believed that it needs to conductmore in-depth and reﬁned investigations aiming at multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA).
Multimodal content, as the medium of user expressions on the web, has evolved from text
content to multimedia data such as videos from YouTube, Vimeo, VideoLectures, imagesfrom Flickr, Picasa, Facebook, and audios from podcasts. Multimodal form of expressionhas become the mainstream information resource for different institutions in strategy-settingand decision-making. But the scatter of multimodal sentiment expressions requires moreanalysis to derive useful data. We present an overview on recent researches of differentmodes individually and jointly to ﬁnd the gaps in terms of approaches, theories, tasks, andapplications.
So far, most of the sentiment analysis researches are based on natural language processing
and computational linguistics. These traditional works focus on textual content, while peopleincreasingly take advantage of videos, images, and audios to air their opinions on socialmedia platforms. Thus, it is highly crucial to mine opinions and identify sentiments from the
123