A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 627
Supervised Learning Approach
Methodology-oriented Unsupervised Learning Approach
Semi-supervised Learning ApproachDocument Level Sentimant Analysis
Sentence Level Sentimant Analysis Sentiment Analysis/Opinion Mining Granularity-orientedPolarity Classification
The Level of Valence or Arousal at a Specific Scale
Beyond Polarity
Subjectivity/Objectivity Identification
Feature/Aspect-based Sentiment AnalysisTask-oriented
Word Level Sentimant Analysis
Fig. 4 Sentiment analysis researches from multiple perspectives
is positive, negative, or neutral. Early work in this area includes [ 89,126], who applied
different methods for detecting the polarity of product reviews and movie reviews. Pang et al.[89] ﬁrst explored the effectiveness of applying naïve Bayes and support vector machine to
the sentiment classiﬁcation task on movie reviews. Sentiment classiﬁcation can usually beseen as a two-class classiﬁcation problem. In this type of research, sentiment analysis isessentially a text classiﬁcation problem, in which feature selection has important effects onthe performance of classiﬁcation algorithm. As in machine learning and statistics, featureselection is the process of selecting a subset of relevant features for model construction. In textclassiﬁcation, feature selection techniques are used for simplifying the models to make themeasier to be interpreted, reducing training times, and enhancing generalization by overcomingthe problem of overﬁtting. In sentiment classiﬁcation, feature words should be sentimentwords that indicate a certain polarity, which needs to process more complex semantics.Moreover, researchers studied the several types of features and found that using unigramsfeatures gets better performance compared to other different feature selection strategies,although two machine learning methods on sentiment classiﬁcation task do not perform aswell as on traditional text classiﬁcation task. Like traditional classiﬁcation task, the key tosentiment classiﬁcation task is also selecting effective features. These effective features canbe seen in Table 3.
In recent years, Khan et al. [ 56] presented a multilingual framework for polarity classi-
ﬁcation with two aspects of contributions. On the one hand, this approach can serve as abaseline to compare other classiﬁcation systems. It considers techniques for text represen-tation such as spelling features, emoticons, word-based n-grams, character-based q-grams,and language dependent features. On the other hand, it is a framework for practitioners look-ing for a bootstrapping sentiment classiﬁer method to build more elaborated systems. As
123