640 L. Yue et al.
learner, co-training uses two learners, which operate on different feature sets from indepen-
dent views and build more labeled data in turn. Iosiﬁdis et al. [ 50] presented how to annotate
large-scale collections with sentiment labels, which uses self-learning and co-training, batch-and stream-processing. This work solves the problem of lacking large-scale labeled datasetsthat span large periods of time, which is especially important for stream mining research.
Topic -based method Topic information has been applied in different domains of sentiment
analysis. Si et al. [ 112] utilized a continuous Dirichlet process mixture model to learn the
daily topic set from Twitter to help predicting the stock market. Xiang et al. [ 147]p r e s e n t e da
topic-based sentiment mixture model with topic-speciﬁc data to improve sentiment analysison Twitter data, which generates topic information through topic modeling based on theimplementation of latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA).
3.4 Summary of different sentiment analysis studies
Analyzing the sentiments contained in the subjective statement is one of the most activeresearch domains. This research focuses on the opinions, emotions, and subjectivity of theinformation being processed. In all kinds of emotional analysis, polarity classiﬁcation is themain task of emotional analysis, which is to analyze the positive and negative feelings of emo-tion, namely to analyze and judge the positive and negative meanings. Polarity classiﬁcationhas great commercial value and public service value, which will be very time-consuming, highcost, if such amount of research is performed artiﬁcially. Sentiment analysis, especially thepolarity classiﬁcation research, perfectly meets the potential huge demand for the customer.However, simple dichotomy point of sentiment analysis ignores the richness and diversityof human emotions, and more emotional types, dimensions, or granularities. Multiple-levelsentiment analysis has been developed to address this problem to a certain extent. Moreover,scale system calculates the positive and negative emotional strength scores of the text, whichputs sentiment into an interval. This approach has promoted the understanding of textualemotions to a more intelligent level. Subjectivity or objectivity identiﬁcation is sometimesmore difﬁcult than the problem of polarity classiﬁcation. Subjective words and phrases maybe based on the context, while an objective document may contain subjective statements.Feature or aspect-based sentiment analysis determines the opinions or sentiments expressedon different features or aspects of entities, which involves the extraction of entity, opinionholder, etc. Basically, almost all task orientation sentiment analysis studies have the samelimitation, which ignores the richness and diversity of human emotions, and more emotionaltypes, dimensions or granularities, mainly based on the positive and negative direction ofsentiment that should be further explored with considering more sentiment factors.
The rapid growth in the scale of existing applications or a surge in demand for partic-
ular services may result in additional needs for sentiment analysis at different granularity.Current researches broadly handle this issue by classifying the task of sentiment analysisinto three levels: document level, sentence level, and word level. That is, models built formulti-granularity sentiment analysis assume fully labeled corpus at ﬁne-grained level orcoarse-grained level or both. We will discuss both the advantages and disadvantages frommulti-granularity in this section. Speciﬁcally, we show the advantages and disadvantages ofcross-domain sentiment analysis and cross-language sentiment analysis on document level,and analysis on sentence level and word level.
In recent years, a large amount of studies has been conducted on data mining and machine
learning that bring up both advantages and disadvantages for sentiment analysis research.Machine learning is capable of extracting models and patterns in complicated data sets,
123