632 L. Yue et al.
subjectivity labeling for unseen senses by using either cross-lingual or multilingual training
enhanced with bootstrapping. Fu et al. [ 36] proposed an adaptive semi-supervised extreme
learning machine (ASELM) to solve the data imbalance between subjective and objectivequestions, which employs the different impacts on identiﬁcation performance caused by theimbalanced data. This method introduces the unlabeled data and builds a model about theratio between the number of labeled and unlabeled data based on Gaussian model, which isapplied to automatically generate the constraint on the unlabeled data.
3.1.5 Feature or aspect-based sentiment analysis
A more ﬁne-grained analysis task is known as the feature or aspect-based sentiment analysis[46], which refers to determining the opinions expressed on different aspects or features
of an entity. In the context of sentiment analysis, aspect extraction is different from entityextraction. A feature or an aspect is an attribute or a component of an entity. This prob-lem involves subproblems such as identifying relevant entities, extracting their features oraspects, and determining whether an opinion expressed on each aspect or feature is positive,negative, or neutral [ 64]. More detailed discussions about this problem also can be found in
“Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivity ” chapter of Handbook of Natural Language Processing
[62]. Basically, aspect-based analysis needs to ﬁnd explicit aspect expressions, which usually
are nouns and noun phrases from the text of given domain. These nouns and phrases can beidentiﬁed by a part-of-speech tagger (POS).
All of these types of methods are based on an assumption: When people comment on
different aspects of an entity, the words that they use usually converge together. Researcherswill be more interested in frequently used nouns and consider them as signiﬁcant. This methodis quite simple, but actually effective. On this basis, many researchers tried to improve theprecision of this algorithm. Among all these work, a classic algorithm has been proposedin [96], which tried to remove redundancy noun phrases by calculating a pointwise mutual
information score (PMI) between each discovered noun phrase and meronymy discriminatorrelated to the entity class. Given a candidate aspect that is identiﬁed by using the frequencyapproach and a discriminator, the computed PMI score is denoted as:
PMI( a,d)/equal1hits( a∧d)
hits( a)hits( d)
The algorithm needs to ﬁnd the number of hits of individual terms and their co-occurrences.
Once the value of PMI is too low, the candidate aspect may not be a component of the entity.
Zhu et al. [ 153] proposed a Cvalue measure-based method to extract multi-word aspects,
which is also a frequency-based method by considering the frequency of multi-word term t,
the length of term t, and other terms that contain term t. The Cvalue score of a multi-word
term tcan be calculated:
Cvalue( t)/equal1/braceleftBigg
log(|t|)×frequency( t), iftis not contained by any other terms
log(|t|)(frequency( t)−1
n(L)/summationtext
l∈Lfrequency( l)),otherwise
where | t| represents the number of words contained in t, frequency( t) represents the frequency
of occurrence of tin the corpus, Lis the set of multi-word terms containing t, and n( L)
represents the number of terms in S. However, Cvalue is only capable of ﬁnding a set of
candidates. It still needs to be reﬁned using bootstrapping technique with a set of seed aspects.The co-occurrence of each candidate with the seeds is further considered in a reﬁnementprocess.
123