630 L. Yue et al.
approach and explores LSTM-based models for the joint extraction of opinion entities and
relations such as opinion expression, opinion target, and opinion holder.
Liao et al. [ 61] embedded both semantic structures and language expression features in the
representation of opinion object and its corresponding attribute and proposed the FREERLframework. This framework is domain-independent and no manually crafted linguistic rulesare needed. The framework can freely fuse any type of language expression features likestatistical co-occurrence or dependency syntax into the structure-based embedding of eachentity.
Wiegand et al. [ 139] presented a method for the new task of opinion holder and target
extraction on opinion compounds. Opinion compounds are noun compounds whose head isan opinion noun. Researchers did not only examine features known to be effective for nouncompound analysis, such as paraphrases and semantic classes of heads and modiﬁers, butalso proposed novel features tailored, in which the paraphrases of holders and targets arejointly considered, noun heads are replaced by related verbs, inferencing between differentcompounds is allowed by a global head constraint, etc.
Poria et al. [ 98] presented the ﬁrst deep learning approach for aspect extraction, which
identiﬁes opinion targets and detects the speciﬁc aspects of a service or a product that theopinion holder is either praising or complaining about. In their model, a 7-layer deep convo-lutional neural network is used to tag each word in opinionated sentences as either aspect ornon-aspect word. For the same purpose, a set of linguistic patterns and the neural networkcombined with them are developed. The ensemble classiﬁer coupled with a word-embeddingmodel allows this approach to obtain signiﬁcantly better accuracy than the state-of-the-artmethods.
Deng et al. [ 31] improved recognizing sources of opinions based on a new categorization
of opinions, i.e., non-participant opinion or participant opinion, in which transductive SVM isbuilt to classify an opinion utilizing existing limited resources. The categorization informationis then utilized by a probabilistic soft logic model to jointly recognize sources of the twotypes of opinions in a single model.
As people might create or share their content and interact with other users with many
location-based services, usually in a real-time manner, there are some special factors neededto be considered such as “spatial factor,” “temporal information.” Zhao et al. [ 152] studied
two types of user preferences, i.e., topical-region preference and category-aware topical-aspect preference. With a large amount of geo-tagged review data, researchers performeddeep analysis of user preferences by proposing a uniﬁed probabilistic model to capture thesetwo preferences simultaneously. This model is capable of capturing the interaction of dif-ferent factors, including topical aspect, sentiment, and spatial information. Moreover, it caninvestigate whether people like an aspect of an object or whether people like a topical aspectof some objects in a region, which offer explanation for recommendations. Location-basedsentiment analysis extracts, identiﬁes, or characterizes the sentiment content of a “text unit,”according to the location of origin of the text unit. In many application scenarios, it is ofteninteresting, and in some cases critical, to discover patterns and trends based on geographicaland/or temporal partitions, and keep track of how they will change overtime. Almatraﬁ et al.[4] studied the application of location-based sentiment analysis using Twitter for identifying
trends and patterns toward the Indian general elections 2014. In this work, researchers illus-trated how sentiments, both positive and negative, change from one location to the other. Paulet al. [ 90] investigated trends based on geographical and/or temporal partitions through US
Election 2016. This work aims to discover sentiment on Twitter toward either the Democraticor the Republican Party at US county and state levels over any arbitrary temporal intervals,
123