A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 635
3.2.2 Sentence-level sentiment analysis
Sometimes document-level sentiment analysis is too coarse for some special purposes. A lot
of early work at sentence-level analysis focuses on identifying subjective sentences. But therewill be complex tasks such as dealing with conditional sentences or dealing with sarcasticsentences. In such cases, sentence-level sentiment analysis is desirable.
A conditional sentence consists of the condition clause and the consequence clause, which
describes implications or hypothetical situations and their consequences. Sarcasm is a moresophisticated form of speech act, in which the speakers say the opposite of what they reallymean. Tsur et al. [ 124] presented a novel semi-supervised algorithm called SASI for sarcasm
identiﬁcation that recognizes sarcastic sentences in product reviews. SASI has two stages:semi-supervised pattern acquisition and sarcasm classiﬁcation. For the ﬁrst stage, they used asmall set of labeled sentences as seeds and expanded this seed set through the web search. Thisenriched training set was then used for learning and classiﬁcation. González-Ibánez et al. [ 41]
tried to solve the problem of automatically detecting sarcasm in Tweets. They used a corpusannotated by the tweeters themselves as their gold standard and relied on the judgmentsof tweets because of the relatively poor performance of human coders at this task. Theysemiautomatically cleaned the corpus to address concerns about corpus noisiness resultedfrom previous work and explored the contribution of linguistic and pragmatic features oftweets to the automatic separation of sarcastic messages from positive and negative ones.Wu et al. [ 144] proposed an approach for sentence-level sentiment classiﬁcation without
labeling sentence. It is a uniﬁed framework to incorporate two types of weak supervisionwith document-level and word-level sentiment labels, to learn the sentence-level sentimentclassiﬁer. Recently, recursive autoencoder (RAE) methods have been proposed for sentence-level sentiment analysis. Fu et al. [ 37] proposed a semi-supervised method CHL-PRAE
which combines HowNet lexicon to train phrase recursive autoencoders. CHL-PRAE modelcalculates the sentiment orientation of each node with the HowNet lexicon acting as sentimentand conducts bidirectional training to capture global information. Appel et al. [ 5]p r e s e n t e d
using natural language processing (NLP) essential techniques, a sentiment lexicon enhancedwith the assistance of SentiWordNet, and fuzzy sets to estimate the semantic orientationpolarity and its intensity for sentences. As using deep learning models to solve sentimentanalysis of sentences is still a challenging task, Fu et al. [ 38] proposed a model using rhetorical
structure theory (RST) for text parsing. This model builds long short-term memory (LSTM)network on RST parse structure to make full use of LSTM structural characteristics forautomatically enhancing the nucleus information and ﬁltering the satellite information. Thisapproach is capable of making the representations concerning the relations between segmentsof text, which can improve text semantic representations.
3.2.3 Word-level sentiment analysis
Document-level analysis focuses on distinguishing the entire document from subjective orobjective, and positive or negative, while sentence-level analysis is more effective thandocument-level analysis, because a document contains both subjective and objective sen-tences. While word is the basic unit of language, the polarity of a word is closely related tothe subjectivity of corresponding sentence or document. There exists a huge possibility thata sentence containing an adjective is a subjective sentence. In addition, choice of word forexpression reﬂects not only the individual’s demographic characteristic such as gender, age,but also reﬂects its motivation, personality, social status, and other psychological or socialtraits. Therefore, word is the basis of text sentiment analysis. At present, the commonly
123