652 L. Yue et al.
diverse modalities. However, the ﬁeld of multimodal sentiment analysis has not received much
attention, there are only two well-known state-of-the-art methods in multimodal sentimentanalysis [ 21,75], and there seems to be no single approach, theory, and tool for MSA task.
Actually, the majority of such state-of-the-art frameworks rely on processing single modality.These studies showed that each mode presents different problematic issues that have not beenfully solved yet. The ensemble application of feature extraction from different types of dataand modalities enhances the performance of multimodal sentiment system [ 99]. Besides,
feature fusion is important for the development of a multimodal sentiment analysis system.In general, existing research on MSA can be categorized into two broad categories, namelyfeature extraction from each individual modality and feature fusion coming from differentmodalities.
5.1 Video modality: emotion analysis based on facial expressions
The earliest work used anger, sadness, surprise, fear, disgust, and joy as six basic emo-tion categories to describe most emotions from facial expressions. However, later on,researchers added other emotions into this list such as pride, excitement, embarrassment, con-tempt, shame. Related systems were developed such as facial action coding system (FACS)based on the reconstruction of facial expressions in terms of action units (AU) and emo-tional facial action coding system (EFACS). The active appearance model (AAM) [ 30]a n d
optical ﬂow, probabilistic principal component analysis (PCA), independent component anal-ysis (ICA), Gabor wavelet are common methods using FACS to understand expressed facialexpressions. A comparison of these techniques found that Gabor wavelet and ICA performedbetter on most datasets. Moreover, Bayesian networks, hidden Markov models (HMM),nearest neighbor, support vector machine (SVM), AdaBoost classiﬁers, and artiﬁcial neuralnetworks (ANN) have helped many researchers to infer emotions from facial expressions. Itis worth mentioning that 3D morphable models (3DMM), muscle-based models, 3D wire-frame models [ 27], elastic net model, geometry-based shape models [ 130], 3D constrained
local model (CLM-Z) [ 10], generalized adaptive view-based appearance model (GA V AM)
[76] are important facial expression recognition techniques.
With the advent of deep learning, we can extract features without prior intervention now.
Soleymani et al. [ 114] presented an approach on detecting the emotions of video viewers’
emotions from electroencephalogram (EEG) signals and facial expressions, in which longshort-term memory recurrent neural networks (LSTM-RNN) and continuous conditionalrandom ﬁelds (CCRF) were utilized on detecting emotions automatically and continuously.On this basis, it will be beneﬁcial to record multimodal data with the sole aim of understandingthe correlation and causation relationships between facial expressions and EEG signals.Research on facial expression analysis has been developed from acted facial expressions tospontaneous facial expressions. Huang et al. [ 48] proposed an approach for multimodal video-
induced emotion recognition based on facial expression and electroencephalogram (EEG)technologies. In this paper, spontaneous facial expression is utilized as an external channel.A new feature, formed by percentage of nine facial expressions, is proposed for analyzingthe valence and arousal classes. Furthermore, EEG is used as internal channel supplementingfacial expressions for more reliable emotion recognition. Finally, these two channels are fusedon feature level and decision-level for multimodal emotion recognition. Valstar et al. [ 127]
pointed out that it is hard to tell how existing expression recognition approaches performunder conditions, where faces appear in a wide range of poses (or camera views). This is also
123