A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 641
which includes supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and semi-supervised learning
methods. Supervised learning algorithms can produce sentiment classiﬁcation by trainingmodel with labeled data, while unsupervised learning algorithms perform this procedurewith unlabeled data and get hidden structure from unlabeled data. Semi-supervised learningtakes advantage of training model with using unlabeled data and can improve classiﬁcationwhen labeled data are scarce. All the algorithms in three types of machine learning techniquesare analyzed separately in Table 4, including both pros and cons.
4 Available datasets and tools
In this section, we introduce benchmark datasets, tools and lexicons for sentiment analysis.
We aim to identify the most notable and promising ones rather than offer an exhaustive list.
4.1 Benchmark datasets
Facebook and Twitter As two main online social media, they were launched in 2004 and 2006,
respectively. Since then, Twitter service rapidly gained worldwide popularity with more than500 million users, out of which more than 284 million are active users as of September 2014.Facebook had over 1.3 billion active users as of June 2014. A large volume of data that userssubmit to the service should be the best data resource. Ideally, researchers also like to conductresearch with these direct data available on social network media. For the reasons of userprivacy and corporate policies, Facebook’s Terms of Service prohibit the distribution of anycontent to third parties; therefore, any collected data is usually prevented from being givento the researchers. Nonetheless, there are studies providing signiﬁcant insights because ofthe massive scale of the analysis that is typically conducted by employees of such services[58,129]. Recently, Ortigosa et al. [ 80] presented a new method for sentiment analysis in
Facebook. They have asked for the user’s permission by following a strict policy-orientedtoward protecting the user’s privacy. Therefore, the data accessed by their application dependson the level of user authorization. On the other hand, the majority of the contents in Twittercan be accessed since most of these contents are public. The contents from Twitter havebeen used by researchers [ 16,17,81,82]. The Twitter API provides easy access to the
site’s content through programming. Therefore, such data can be collected and analyzed byindividual researcher.
Digg Paltoglou et al. [ 83] presented another two publicly available datasets extracted from
BBC discussion forums and the Digg. The former is a complete crawl of a subsection of theBBC message boards spanning 4 years, from June 2005, when the forum went online, untilJune 2009, when part of it was shut down. It provides 97,946 separate discussion threads and2592,745 distinct comments about ethical, religious, and news-related issues. The second is
a complete crawl of the Digg Web site spanning the months of February, March, and April
in 2009, which provides 1195,808 submitted stories, 1646,153 individual comments, and14,376,742 approvals (users are allowed to publicly approve or disapprove submitted storiesand comments, processes, respectively, called “digging” and “burying”). Both datasets areavailable from the ofﬁcial CyberEmotion project web site. They have been extensively usedin researches [ 24,25,74]. Corresponding details about how to obtain these datasets can be
found in [ 83].
Cornell movie review As research in sentiment analysis has mainly focused on datasets
extracted from review sites, many prominent datasets such as movie review and general
123