A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 655
5.4 Multimodal fusion
The ability to perform multimodal fusion is the most critical step for emotion recognition. To
date, there are two main levels of fusion studied: feature-level fusion or called early fusion[100,110,134] and decision-level fusion or called late fusion [ 3,40,148]. Feature-level
fusion fuses features from various modalities before any operations are performed; decision-level fusion examines and classiﬁes the features of each modality independently, then fusesthem as a decision vector to achieve the ﬁnal decision.
Besides, there are novel fusion types such as hybrid multimodal fusion combining both
of feature-level fusion and decision-level fusion methods [ 97,99], model-level fusion using
the correlation between data under different modalities [ 9,142], rule-based fusion [ 28],
classiﬁcation-based fusion using a range of classiﬁcation algorithms to classify the multi-modal information [ 1,78], estimation-based fusion including Kalman ﬁlter, extended Kalman
ﬁlter and particle ﬁlter [ 79,102]. Mainstream multimodal emotion recognition datasets and
related works are summarized in Table 7.
6 Conclusion
Sentiment analysis became a very popular research domain and a lot of excellent researches
have been accomplished toward to this area. In this survey, a series of the state-of-the-artliteratures have been reviewed. In particular, this survey categorized and classiﬁed sentimentanalysis researches from multiple perspectives, i.e., task-oriented, granularity-oriented, andmethodology-oriented. In addition, we explored different types of data and tools that canbe used in sentiment analysis research and suggested their strength and limitations. Finally,we emphasized the prospects for future development, suggestions for possible extensions,and specially presented an overview of multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA). However,since MSA methods are, in general, not being used widely in sentiment analysis and relatedNLP research area, there are signiﬁcant and timely opportunities for future research in themulti-disciplinary ﬁeld of multimodal fusion.
This survey established a common terminology across various researches, enabling people
from different background knowledge to easily understand, and laid a foundation for advancedresearch in sentiment analysis. Current studies are intended to pave the way for furtherresearches and development activities by identifying weaknesses and deriving guidelinestoward a holistic approach.
Acknowledgments This research has been supported by Australian Research Council Discovery Project
(Grant NO. DP160104075), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant NO.2412017QD028), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2017M621192), the Scientiﬁc and Tech-nological Development Program of Jilin Province (Grant No. 20180520022JH). Besides, Dr. Lin YUE hasbeen awarded a scholarship under the State Scholarship Fund to ﬁnish this research at the University ofQueensland; this work also has been awarded by China Scholarship Council (CSC). We feel grateful to Prof.
Xiaofang Zhou at the University of Queensland and Prof. Ivor Tsang at University of Technology Sydney,
who once offered us valuable suggestions during the study period. Our sincere thanks are also given to theanonymous reviewers, from whose comments we have beneﬁted greatly.
References
1. Adams W, Iyengar G, Lin CY , Naphade MR, Neti C, Nock HJ, Smith JR (2003) Semantic indexing of
multimedia content using visual, audio, and text cues. EURASIP J Adv Signal Process 2:987184
123