644 L. Yue et al.
product reviews were conducted. Pang et al. [ 89] selected movie reviews where the author
rating was expressed either with stars or some numerical value. Moreover, they limited fewerthan 20 reviews per author per sentiment category, yielding a corpus of 752 negative and1301 positive reviews, with a total of 144 reviewers represented.
Amazon product reviews Blitzer et al. [ 14] conducted a dataset by selecting the Amazon
product reviews for books, DVDs, electronics and kitchen applications, where 1000 positiveand 1000 negative examples are involved for each domain. Hu et al. [ 47] conducted experi-
ments on the customer reviews of ﬁve electronics products: 2 digital cameras, 1 DVD player,1 mp3 player, and 1 cellular phone. The two Web sites that they collected the reviews are ww
w.amazon.com andwww.CNETdownload.com . Products in these sites have a large number
of reviews. Each of the reviews includes a text review and a title. Additional informationincludes date, time, author name, and location (for Amazon reviews), and ratings are alsoavailable. Besides, almost every e-commerce Web site has reviews for their product. Someof the famous review sites have made their data available for research purpose.
MPQA Multi-perspective question answering (MPQA) is a dataset containing news articles
and other text documents manually annotated for opinions and other private states (e.g.,opinions, emotions, sentiments, speculations, evaluations, and other private states), whichconsists of 692 documents (15,802 sentences). In [ 137,141], more details about producing
MPQA are described.
ICWSM Spinn3r datasets There are two versions of ICWSM Spinn3r Datasets [ 18], i.e.,
version 2009 and a more recent version 2011. Both of the two versions include severalmillion blog posts crawled by Spinn3r. The former dataset comprises of 44 million blogposts published between 08/2008 and 10/2008. The time span includes a number of signiﬁcantworldwide news events, such as the U.S. presidential nominating conventions, the OlympicGames, the beginning of the credit crisis. The version 2011 [ 19] comprises of 386 million
blog posts, new articles, forum posts, and social media communication published between13/01/2011 and 14/02/2011. In this span of time, there exist signiﬁcant events related to theArab Spring, including the Tunisian revolution, the Egyptians protests, etc. They have beenused in sentiment analysis studies and other corresponding research in [ 22].
TSentiment15 It is a collection of 228 million tweets without retweets and 275 million
tweets with retweets, collected from Twitter using its public streaming API which spans thewhole year of 2015.
In Table 5, we summarize the research instances based on the aforementioned datasets.
We list at least one paper for each dataset, the research content of the corresponding paper,and the type of these work. For researchers who try to ﬁnd a proper dataset, they can takethese instances as references. Details of these approaches have already been given throughoutthe text and will not be repeated again.
4.2 Tools and lexicons
Document-level analysis focuses on distinguishing the entire document from subjective toobjective, or from positive to negative. Sentence-level analysis is more effective than docu-mentation, because a document contains both subjective and objective statements. And wordis the basic unit of language; the polarity of the word is closely related to the subjectivityof a sentence or document. Word-based matching techniques judge emotional tendency bymatching the words contained in the text and emotional words in the emotional lexicon.Emotional lexicon is undoubtedly the foundation of this approach.
123