634 L. Yue et al.
oriented sentiment analysis has achieved remarkable accuracy, which is highly sensitive to
the domain. The feature vector used in these tasks contains a bag of words, which should bespeciﬁc to a particular domain and are limited. Sentiment classiﬁer is applied as it is costlyto annotate data for each new domain. Spectral feature alignment, structural correspondencelearning, and sentiment-sensitive thesaurus are three classical techniques. They are differentin terms of feature vector expansion, words relatedness measurement, and ﬁnally classiﬁerused for classiﬁcation.
Many methods used for cross-domain classiﬁcation usually utilize labeled or unlabeled
data or both of them. Hence, the techniques give different results for different domainsas well as for different purposes. Bollegala et al. [ 15] developed a technique which uses
sentiment-sensitive thesaurus (SST) for performing cross-domain sentiment analysis. Theyproposed a cross-domain sentiment classiﬁer using an automatically extracted sentiment-sensitive thesaurus. To handle the mismatch between features in cross-domain sentimentclassiﬁcation, they utilized labeled data from multiple source domains and unlabeled datafrom target domains to compute the relatedness of features and construct a sentiment-sensitivethesaurus. Then the created thesaurus is used to expand feature vectors during training andtesting process for a binary classiﬁer. A relevant subset of the features is selected using L1regularization. Pan et al. [ 84] ﬁrst proposed spectral feature alignment (SFA). In SFA model,
the mutual information between a feature and a domain label is used to classify features intothe domain-speciﬁc or the domain-independent. SFA represents a review by considering bothunigrams and bigrams as features. Next, a bipartite graph between domain-independent anddomain-speciﬁc features is constructed. In this graph, an edge is formed between a domain-independent and a domain-speciﬁc feature, when those two features co-occur in any featurevector. After that, feature clusters are identiﬁed by conducting spectral clustering, and abinary classiﬁer based on these feature clusters is trained for positive and negative sentimentclassiﬁcation. The structural correspondence learning (SCL) is proposed in [ 14]. It selects
pivots using the mutual information between a feature (unigrams or bigrams) and the domainlabel. Next, linear classiﬁers are learned for predicting the existence of those pivots. Thelearned weight vectors are arranged in a matrix, and singular value decomposition (SVD)is performed to reduce the number of dimensions. Finally, this lower-dimensional matrix isused as project features for training a binary sentiment classiﬁer.
Another document-level sentiment analysis is cross-language sentiment analysis, which
has been studied by several researchers. Most of them focus on sentiment classiﬁcation at thedocument level. Wan [ 132] proposed an approach that ﬁrst translates Chinese reviews into
English reviews by machine translation services and then identiﬁes the sentiment polarityof English reviews by directly leveraging English resources. Furthermore, their approachperforms sentiment analysis for both Chinese reviews and English reviews and then usesensemble methods to combine the individual analysis results. Wan [ 133] proposed another
co-training method which leverages an available English corpus for Chinese sentiment clas-siﬁcation by using the English corpus as training data. Besides, limited cross-languagesentiment analysis has been done at the aspect level [ 42]. Xia et al. [ 146] proposed a three-
stage cascade model for the polarity shift problem in the context of document-level sentimentclassiﬁcation, in which each document is split into a set of sub-sentences, and a hybrid modelis built up with employing rules and statistical methods to detect explicit and implicit polarityshifts. Then, a polarity shift elimination method is used to remove polarity shift in negations.Finally, different types of polarity shifts are used to train base classiﬁers. Li et al. [ 60] proposed
a cross-lingual structural correspondence learning SCL based on the distributed representa-tion of words; it can learn meaningful one-to-many mappings for pivot words using largeamounts of monolingual data and a small dictionary.
123