620 L. Yue et al.
for the beginners getting started quickly with the research progress, the classical algorithm,
the recent dynamics, the typical tools, the suitable databases, etc.
Of all those surveys proposed in recent years, Liu [ 63] summed up all important research
topics in the ﬁeld of sentiment analysis, which is regarded as an encyclopedia on sentimentanalysis and opinion mining. As evidence of that, it involves more than 400 bibliographicreferences from major journals and conferences. Pang et al. [ 87] covered works that directly
enable opinion-oriented information-seeking systems, which sought to address the problemsraised by sentiment-aware applications and included material on issues regarding manipula-tion, privacy, and economic impact that is generated by opinion-oriented information-accessservices. Medhat et al. [ 73] provided a categorization of articles according to the used tech-
niques, which can help the researchers who are familiar with certain techniques to use them inthe sentiment analysis and choose the appropriate technique for a certain application. Vinod-hini et al. [ 131] presented a short survey that covers the techniques and challenges appeared
in the ﬁeld of sentiment analysis. Wiegand et al. [ 138] presented a survey on the role of nega-
tion in sentiment analysis, in which various computational approaches modeling negationare introduced. In particular, this work focuses on aspects such as negation word detection,scope of negation, and limitation and challenges of negation modeling. Ravi et al. [ 106]i s
organized on the basis of sub-tasks to be performed, that is to say, machine learning, natu-ral language processing techniques, and applications of sentiment analysis. Saif et al. [ 109]
presented an overview of eight publicly available manually annotated evaluation datasets forTwitter sentiment analysis and a common limitation of most of these datasets. Tsytsarau et al.[125] reviewed the development of sentiment analysis in recent years and also discussed the
gradual progress of a research direction, namely contradiction analysis. Schouten et al. [ 111]
focused on aspect-level sentiment analysis, and the goal of this paper is to ﬁnd and aggregatesentiment on entities mentioned within documents or aspects of these entities. Tang et al.[121] discussed related issues and main approaches to word sentiment classiﬁcation, subjec-
tivity classiﬁcation, opinion extraction, and document sentiment classiﬁcation. Giachanouet al. [ 39] investigated and brieﬂy described the algorithms of sentiment analysis in Twitter,
in which researchers discussed tasks related to Twitter opinion retrieval, tracking sentimentsover time, irony detection, emotion detection, and tweet sentiment quantiﬁcation.
1.3 Contributions of this survey
With the constant advent of novel researches, a new inclusive survey is required for betterunderstanding of current research progress. The goal of this paper is to give an in-depthintroduction and present new insights toward this area. Our work is different from the othersby proposing novel multiple perspectives, teasing out series of works, organizing tools, andbenchmarks datasets used in various work. To our knowledge, this type of study is notavailable in the literature.
In summary, the contributions of this article are:
1. We reviewed literatures in the area of sentiment analysis from multiple perspectives
and provided the strength and weaknesses of these methods and techniques. Varioustechniques of sentiment analysis are categorized with brief details of the algorithms andtheir originating references. This work will help beginners aiming at sentiment analysisto have a panoramic view of the entire research ﬁeld.
2. The available benchmark datasets are discussed and categorized according to the usage
in certain applications. We have analyzed types of tools and lexicons that can be used insentiment analysis research as well as their limitations.
123