636 L. Yue et al.
used methods include: natural language processing technology-based approach and machine
learning-based approach. For sentiment analysis of micro-blog text, most researchers sug-gest that term matching-based technique should be adopted. The emotional term is the linkbetween the emotional orientation of the text and the single word. Each word can be regardedas the collection of certain kinds of viewpoint information, which is a clue to the emotionand subjectivity of the text. There exist several studies on the emotional orientation of wordbased on using sentiment lexicon. We will discuss typical sentiment lexicons, the bases ofword-level sentiment analysis in Sect. 4.2.
3.3 Methodology-oriented sentiment analysis
The existing methods can be roughly categorized into three groups: supervised learning,
semi-supervised learning, and unsupervised learning. The idea of supervised learning is tostudy the features from both positive and negative examples. All of the existing approachesconsist of a system of reading annotated corpus, memorizing lists of entities, and creatingdisambiguation rules. The shortcoming of supervised learning is the requirement of a largeannotated corpus, which leads to two alternative learning methods: semi-supervised learningand unsupervised learning. The main technique for unsupervised learning “bootstrapping”also involves some degree of supervision such as a set of seeds for starting the learningprocess. The typical approach in unsupervised learning is clustering such as using a dictionaryto compile sentiment words. Basically, these techniques rely on resources, lexical patterns,or statistics calculated on a large unannotated corpus.
3.3.1 Supervised learning approach
In the analysis of emotion orientation, an important task is sentiment classiﬁcation. Theobjects for classifying are some subjective factors, which is different from traditional textclassiﬁcation based on themes. Supervised learning considers that the sentiment classiﬁcationis a standard statistical classiﬁcation that contains a large number of labeled instances. In thefollowing, several widely used classiﬁcation algorithms in sentiment analysis are discussed.
Rule-based algorithm Rule-based classiﬁcation can be used to any classiﬁcation scheme
that makes use of IF–THEN rules for class prediction. Asghar et al. [ 7] analyzed the semantic
orientation of words by categorizing them into +ive and -ive classes to identify and classifyemoticons, modiﬁers, general-purpose, and domain-speciﬁc words expressed in the public’sfeedback about the products, which solves the problem of previous studies becoming lessefﬁcient due to data sparseness. Lexicon enhancing sentiment analysis-based on rule-basedclassiﬁcation scheme, in this work, is an effective alternative approach for improving senti-ment classiﬁcation.
Decision tree algorithm Decision tree is a decision support tool that uses a tree-
like graph or model of decisions and their possible consequences. Phu et al. [ 94] proposed a
model for the English document-level emotional classiﬁcation, which presents a new modelby using an ID3 algorithm of a decision tree to classify semantics (positive, negative, andneutral) for the English documents. The semantic classiﬁcation of this model is based onmany rules which are generated by applying the ID3 algorithm for dataset training.
Support vector machine (SVM) SVM is supervised learning model with associated learning
algorithms that analyze data used for classiﬁcation and regression analysis. Liu et al. [ 66]
presented a multi-class sentiment classiﬁcation method based on an improved one-vs-one(OVO) strategy and SVM algorithm. For improved OVO strategy, the relative competence
123