A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 629
can be proven that speciﬁc classiﬁers like max entropy and SVMs will beneﬁt from adding
neutral class and improve the effectiveness of classiﬁcation.
In opinion mining, unigram and n-gram representations of text are common ways. How-
ever, important expressions like “could have been better” that are essential for predictionmodels of ratings cannot be captured by unigrams. N-grams representations, on the otherhand, are capable of capturing such phrases, but typically occur too sparsely in the train-ing data and thus fail to yield robust performance. Qu et al. [ 105] addressed the problem
of numeric rating prediction from another perspective. They overcome the limitations ofunigrams and n-grams representations, through introducing a novel bag-of-opinions repre-sentation method, where the opinion in a review is constituted with three components: a rootword, a modiﬁer word set from the same sentence, and one or more negative words. Theprior polarity of the opinion is determined by opinion root. Then the strength of the priorpolarity will be intensiﬁed or weakened by modiﬁers. Negation words reverse or stronglyreduce the prior polarity. For each opinion, the set of negation words consists of at most onenegation valence shifter like “not” and its intensiﬁers like capitalization of the valence shifter.Each opinion component is associated with a score. By using a score function, the scores ofopinion elements are assembled into an opinion-score.
This type of sentiment analysis can also well characterize user preferences, which can be
helpful for improving the recommendation performance. Traditional recommender systems(RS) should consider factors of user’s purchase records, product category, and geographicallocation. In [ 59], researchers proposed a sentiment-based rating prediction method (RPS)
to improve prediction accuracy in recommender systems, including a social user sentimen-tal measurement approach on calculating each user’s sentiment on items or products, animportant mechanism of considering a user’s own sentimental attributes and interpersonalsentimental inﬂuences. Recommender system has made an accurate rating prediction withconsidering these factors, which is also a novel perspective of applying sentiment analysistechniques. Karyotis et al. [ 54] presented a novel emotion modeling methodology for incor-
porating human emotion into intelligent computer systems, which includes eliciting emotioninformation from users, a new representation of emotion (A V-AT model) with a geneticallyoptimized adaptive fuzzy logic technique, and a framework for predicting and tracking user’saffective trajectory over time. Compared to other existing machine learning approaches, fuzzytechnique is evaluated in terms of its ability to model affective states.
3.1.3 Beyond polarity (entity, opinion holder, spatial information, and temporal
information analysis)
The goal of researches in the area of ﬁne-grained opinion analysis is to identify subjective
expressions in text, along with their associated sources and targets. More speciﬁcally, ﬁne-grained opinion analysis aims to identify types of opinion entities such as opinion holders[55], opinion expressions [ 61], opinion targets [ 139], aspects of a target [ 98], opinion sources
[31]. In addition, we have redeﬁned opinion as a six-tuple, which brings us news sub-task of
sentiment analysis such as temporal and spatial information pattern analysis [ 101].
Opinion holder extraction is a typical task in this section. Several researches have investi-
gated on opinion holder extraction based on conditional random ﬁelds (CRF) [ 26], maximum
entropy (ME) model [ 57], convolution kernels [ 140], and dependency parser method [ 68], or
automatic semantic role labeling (ASRL) [ 108]. Recently, Katiyar et al. [ 55] investigated the
use of deep bidirectional LSTMs for joint extraction of opinion entities and the IS-FROMand IS-ABOUT relations that connect them, which is the ﬁrst attempt at using a deep learning
123