A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 639
big data sentiment classiﬁcation in the parallel network environment. The proposed model
uses the fuzzy c-means (FCM) method for English sentiment classiﬁcation with HadoopMAP(M)/REDUCE(R) in Cloudera.
Hierarchical algorithm Hierarchical clustering groups data over a variety of scales by
creating a cluster tree or dendrogram . The tree is not a single set of clusters, but rather
a multilevel hierarchy, where clusters at one level are joined as clusters at the next level.This allows people to decide the level or scale of clustering that is most appropriate forparticular application. Wu et al. [ 145] designed a visual analysis system OpinionFlow, which
can visually explore and trace opinion diffusion among users on Twitter. Especially, theproposed system uses a hierarchical topic structure built by Bayesian rose tree (BRT), whichdetects a multibranch hierarchy of topics from a large number of tweets and displays thetopic hierarchy by using a stacked topic tree. The tree is linked to opinion ﬂow for facilitatinganalysis of opinion diffusion on different topics. Chen et al. [ 23] developed a method called
TCOL-Miner, which integrates network structure and leadership quality analysis methodsto efﬁciently ﬁnd opinion leaders in a large social network. In this work, the two-stageclustering methods are utilized to signiﬁcantly reduce the impact of overlapping problemin social network. Vaziripour et al. [ 128] classiﬁed the sentiment of individual tweets to
determine their changing sentiments over time toward a number of trending political topics.In their work, a hierarchical representation of the vocabulary is created by tracking themerging process of clusters, which is then used as features.
Density-based algorithm Given a set of points in some space, a density-based clustering
algorithm groups together the points that are closely packed together, marking outliers inlow-density regions. Hassan et al. [ 45] proposed a framework for sentiment analysis by
using a combination of density-based clustering and distance based clustering. This proposedframework gives a high level of accuracy and it is useful for performing types of attacksprediction. It gives analyst a feasible way of dealing with terrorism attacks in advance.
3.3.3 Semi-supervised learning approach
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) techniques are capable of using unlabeled data in theirtraining processes and improving classiﬁcation in applications when labeled data are scarce.From this perspective, SSL techniques are of great practical value because a balance betweensupervised and unsupervised learning is found. Basically, there exist several classic categoriesof semi-supervised learning approaches: graph-based, wrapper-based, topic-based methods.
Graph -based method In the area of graph-based methods, semi-supervised learning can
manage either sentence or document. Lu et al. [ 69] proposed a generic framework for incor-
porating social context information by adding regularization constraints to the text-basedpredictor. Tan et al. [ 117] used social network structures to help sentiment analysis by incor-
porating link information. These links can correspond to attention, such as when a Twitteruser wants to pay attention to another’s status updates, or homophily, where people whoknow each other are connected. Pozzi et al. [ 103] proposed a framework that estimates user
polarities about a given topic by combining post contents and weighted approval relations,which are intended to better represent the contagion on social networks.
Wrapper -based method The wrapper-based method labels a certain number of unlabeled
instances using the decision function, which is then learned and incorporated into the trainingdata iteratively. The well-known types of wrapper-based method include self-training [ 67,
151] and co-training [ 50,65,150]. Self-training starts with a supervised learner that is trained
on available labeled data and then iterates several times. Instead of using a single supervised
123