626 L. Yue et al.
or regular opinion is treated as an implicit opinion, e.g., “Stop the boat!” is a domain-speciﬁc
phrase, which implies negative attitude to ALP and positive to LNP in Australian governmentelection in 2013. We can intuitively get the conclusion that explicit opinions are easier todetect and classify than implicit opinions.
Subjectivity and emotion A subjective sentence expresses some personal feelings, views, or
beliefs. Emotions are subjective feelings and thoughts, which are closely related to sentiments.The strength of a sentiment or an opinion is typically related to the intensity of certainemotions, e.g., “joy and anger.”
Other than all types of opinions mentioned above, there are still some challenging examples
as shown below. From the observation: The review in sentence (1) has a target restaurant,whilefood and service are two different aspects of the same target with positive and negativeopinions, constructing the corresponding relationship between one aspect of the target andits opinion is one important preparatory step; sentence (2) implies a negative attitude about acertain event or location of current speaker; sentence (3) seems like a negative opinion literally.But under some particular situations, such as between two friends, it could be positive toneas well. All these examples show more complicated proposals should be involved in opinionanalysis task, especially in natural language process, text mining, etc.
(1) “The food was great but the service was awful.”
–Object with features: [Restaurant, Food, Services]
(2) “I really think I shouldn’t be here.”
–Negative to the implied event or location of the current speaker.
(3) “You are terrible! : - )”
            –Positive to an object: [a friend of speaker]
(4) “Stop the boat!”
            –Domain specific: negative to ALP & positive to LNP in Australian government election in 2013.
3 Sentiment analysis research
Existing surveys of sentiment analysis studies either concentrate on enumerating technical
details in the areas of social media analysis, text mining, natural language processing, anddata mining or just focus on a certain aspects of sentiment analysis researches. Moreover, therapid development of the ﬁeld, to some extent, makes those surveys outdated. Besides, there isno one survey organized for the beginners getting started quickly with the research progress,the classical algorithm, the recent dynamics. In this survey, we reviewed the literatures insentiment analysis from multiple perspectives and provided the strength and weaknesses ofthese methods and techniques (see Fig. 4).
3.1 Task-oriented sentiment analysis
In this section, ﬁve different aspects in task-oriented sentiment analysis, as depicted in Fig. 4,
will be introduced and compared. These ﬁve aspects are polarity classiﬁcation, the level ofvalence or arousal at speciﬁc scale, beyond polarity, subjectivity/objectivity identiﬁcation,and feature/aspect-based sentiment analysis.
3.1.1 Polarity classiﬁcation
Basic research of sentiment analysis is polarity classiﬁcation, which explores whether theexpressed opinion in a document or a sentence, on a certain feature or aspect of a target,
123