A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 647
There are lexicons and tools that are freely available for identifying subjective content
or named-entity, performing various levels of affective analysis, and generating multi-dimensional mood, etc. Sentiment lexicon is an important connection between textual contentand individual word, in which each word can be treated as a collection of opinion information.Some sentiment lexicons can be used to classify emotional orientation based on the corpus,where semantic collocations such as coordinating relation, progressive relation, and transi-tive relation divide adjectives into positive and negative. The shortcoming of this method isthat algorithm rule is limited to adjectives and adverbs. On the other hand, the polarity ofa new word only can be judged by utilizing conjunctions. Other methods utilize the syn-onyms or antonyms of seed words, the deﬁnition, and annotations of words to ﬁnd out relatedinformation.
Lexicon-based approaches can be applied without any training or human labor. There
are two common ways to construct sentiment lexicon: existing lexicon-based constructionmethod that artiﬁcially creates lexicon, and automatical or semiautomatical constructionmethod. General Inquirer (GI) is regarded as the earliest one emotional thesaurus and affec-
tive analysis program, in which emotional words derives from Harvard IV-4 Dictionary andLasswell’s Dictionary. GI labels each word with polarity, strength, parts of speech, etc, andcan be used in sentiment analysis task ﬂexibly. General Inquirer takes a pre-set list of positiveand negative words and analyzes the polarity of documents based on the prevalence of wordsfrom each category. The existing lexicon-based method is time-consuming and only includesfewer vocabularies and certain deviations. With the development of techniques, automaticalor semiautomatical construction of an emotion lexicon becomes the dominant way. Senti-
WordNet is a lexical resource for opinion mining, which assigns each synset of WordNet three
sentiment scores: positivity, negativity, objectivity. The current ofﬁcial version of SentiWord-Net is 3.0, which is based on WordNet 3.0. OpinionFinder automatically identiﬁes subjective
sentences as well as various aspects of subjectivity within sentences, including sources ofopinion, direct subjective expressions and speech events, and sentiment expressions. Twoversions of OpinionFinder can be found online. The OpinionFinder system seeks to addressdeviation problem by analyzing polarity in the context, rather than simply using single-wordtriggers. National Taiwan University Sentiment Dictionary (NTUSD) is constructed based on
the Chinese translation of GI and Chinese network sentiment dictionary (CNSD), including2812 positive words and 8276 negative words. Bing Liu’s Opinion Lexicon includes positive
words and negative 4783 words.
In above-mentioned lexicons, emotion words are simply classiﬁed into positive and nega-
tive based on dichotomy theory, which ignores the richness and diversity of human emotion.While constructing a lexicon based on the theory of emotional structure, subdivide humanemotion into more dimensions. SentiStrength can estimate the strength of positive and neg-
ative sentiment in short texts, even for informal language. It has human-level accuracy forshort social web texts in English except for political texts. SentiStrength reports two sentimentstrengths ( −1 (not negative) to −5 (extremely negative): 1 (not positive) to 5 (extremely pos-
itive)). It can also report binary (positive/negative), trinary (positive/negative/neutral), andsingle scale ( −4 to + 4) results. Moreover, SentiStrength can be conﬁgured for other lan-
guages and contexts by changing its input ﬁles. WordNet -Affect expands key words based
on WordNet, achieving sentiment lexicon of 4787 words, in which there are 4 types of basicemotion with happy, sad, anger, and fear. Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW) grades
emotional words with nine levels based on PAD model, rather than a simple two-level parti-tion with positive or negative polarity. Google -Proﬁle of Mood States (GPOMS) can generate
public mood with six dimensions (calm, alert, sure, vital, kind, and happy). GPOMS’s mooddimensions and lexicon are derived from the Proﬁle of Mood States (POMS-bi). Proﬁle of
123