A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 631
S1
Snn-sentence 
reviewsubjective
sentence?m-sentence 
extract (m =n)
S1
S7subjective 
detectorS2yes
yesno
no
default 
polarity 
classifierpositive or negative?
subjective extraction
Fig. 5 Subjective extraction for improving polarity classiﬁcation
using a large collection of geo-tagged tweets from a period of 6 months leading up to the US
Presidential Election in 2016.
3.1.4 Subjectivity or objectivity identiﬁcation
Another research direction is subjectivity or objectivity identiﬁcation. Although it seems tobe an identiﬁcation problem, in fact, is often solved as a classiﬁcation problem. Pang et al.[88] deﬁned this task as allocating a given text (usually a sentence) into one of two categories:
subjective or objective. Sometimes, it can be more difﬁcult than polarity classiﬁcation prob-lem. For example, the subjectivity of words or phrases usually depends on the context, butan objective chapter such as a news article may quote people’s opinions which are subjectivesentences. Moreover, as mentioned in [ 115], analysis results largely depend on the deﬁnition
of subjectivity annotated texts. However, Pang et al. [ 85] showed that it could be helpful
to remove objective sentences from a document before classifying its sentiment polarity (asshown in Fig. 5).
In recent years, Wiebe et al. [ 136] proposed a rule-based classiﬁer, which classiﬁes a
sentence with strong subjective clues into a subjective category. This system is capable oflearning new patterns of objective sentences using the information extraction system calledAutoSlog-TS, which identiﬁes patterns in terms of some syntactic templates. Barbosa et al.[12] proposed an approach automatically detecting sentiments on Tweets, which explores
some traits of how tweets are written, and meta-information of the words composing thesemessages. Moreover, they utilized the sources of noisy labels as training data. The labels areprovided by a few sentiment detection Web sites over Twitter data. Some Twitter-speciﬁc cluessuch as hashtags, retweets, links, emoticons, uppercase words, exclamation, and questionmarks are used for subjectivity classiﬁcation. Benamara et al. [ 13] leveraged a subjectivity
classiﬁcation method at the segment level, which is more appropriate for discourse-basedsentiment analysis. This approach automatically uses local and global context features todistinguish between implicit and explicit opinions, and between subjective non-evaluativeand objective segments. Karimi et al. [ 53] proposed a language model-based structure that
can facilitate dealing with subjectivity detection by introducing a difference based scoringformula, which leads to minimizing the effect of common topic relevant words in the processof distinguishing subjective documents from objective ones.
Banea et al. [ 11] conducted a case study seeking to assess subjectivity transfer across
languages following sense aligned resources. In this model, the framework is able to predict
123