A survey of sentiment analysis in social media 637
weight of each binary classiﬁer is determined according to the Knearest neighbors and the
class center of each class in the training sample set concerning the binary classiﬁer. Theimportant features for multi-class sentiment classiﬁcation are selected using the informationgain (IG) algorithm; a binary SVM classiﬁer is then trained on feature vectors training ofeach pair of sentiment classes.
Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) ANNs is widely used for classiﬁcation task, which is
inspired by biological neural networks of human’s central nervous system. In the area ofsentiment analysis, document-level sentiment classiﬁcation remains a problem of encodingthe intrinsic relations between sentences in the semantic meaning of a document. To addressthis challenge, Tang et al. [ 118] introduced a neural network model to learn vector-based
document representation in a uniﬁed, bottom-up fashion, which learns sentence represen-tation with convolutional neural network or long short-term memory, and then encodes thesemantics of sentences, and their relations are adaptively in document representation withgated recurrent neural network.
Deep learning Deep learning is part of a broader family of machine learning methods
based on learning data representations, as opposed to task-speciﬁc algorithms. Learning canbe supervised, partially supervised, or unsupervised. Moreover, deep learning plays an impor-tant role in big data analysis. To date, various types of deep learning models have been appliedfor sentiment analysis such as deep belief, deep neural networks, deep convolution neuralnetworks. Tang et al. [ 119] developed a deep learning system called Coooolll for message-
level Twitter sentiment classiﬁcation. Coooolll is built on a supervised learning frameworkby concatenating the sentiment-speciﬁc word embedding (SSWE) features with the state-of-the-art hand-crafted features, in which SSWE is trained from large-scale tweets collected bypositive and negative emotions, without any manual annotation. The advantage of this systemis that Coooolll can be easily re-implemented with the publicly available sentiment-speciﬁcword embedding. As the fact that most existing algorithms for learning continuous word rep-resentations typically only model the syntactic context of words but ignore the sentiment oftext, Tang et al. [ 120] presented a method of learning word embedding for Twitter sentiment
classiﬁcation, which addresses this issue by learning sentiment speciﬁc word embedding(SSWE), which encodes sentiment information in the continuous representation of words.Moreover, the researchers developed three neural networks to effectively incorporate thesupervision from sentiment polarity of text in their loss functions.
Ensemble Ensemble methods use multiple learning algorithms to obtain better per-
formance rather than use any of the constituent learning algorithms alone. To improvethe performance of deep learning techniques by integrating them with traditional surfaceapproaches based on manually extracted features, Araque et al. [ 6] developed a deep learning-
based sentiment classiﬁer using a word-embedding model and a linear machine learningalgorithm, which serves as a baseline to compare to subsequent results. Then, the researchersproposed two ensemble techniques aggregating this baseline classiﬁer with other surfaceclassiﬁers widely used in sentiment analysis. In this work, combining both surface and deepfeatures to merge information with using different methods is also presented. Akhtar et al.[2] presented a cascaded framework of feature selection and classiﬁer ensemble using parti-
cle swarm optimization (PSO) for aspect-based sentiment analysis. Aspect-based sentimentanalysis is performed by two steps: aspect term extraction and sentiment classiﬁcation. Thispruned and compact set of features perform better than the baseline model that makes use ofthe complete set of features for aspect term extraction and sentiment classiﬁcation.
Regression Regression analysis is widely used for prediction and forecasting, and it has
substantial overlap with the ﬁeld of machine learning. Regression analysis is also used tounderstand, to what extent the independent variables are related to the dependent variables
123