638 L. Yue et al.
and to explore the forms of these relationships. The text on social media is usually informal
and short in length, which may not always express the sentiment clearly. Therefore, multipleraters may assign different sentiments to a tweet. So rather than employing majority votingthat ignores the strength of sentiments, the annotation can be enriched with a conﬁdencescore assigned for each sentiment. Ertugrul et al. [ 34] analyzed the effect of using regres-
sion on conﬁdence scores in sentiment analysis using Turkish tweets, in which hand-craftedfeatures including lexical features, emoticons and sentiment scores are extracted. Then, theresearchers employed word embedding of tweets for regression and classiﬁcation. The ﬁnd-ings in this work reveal that employing regression on conﬁdence scores slightly improvessentiment classiﬁcation accuracy. Moreover, combining word embedding with hand-craftedfeatures is capable of reducing the feature dimensionality and outperforms alternative featurecombinations.
Statistical model Above all else, there are several statistical models widely used in senti-
ment analysis task such as hidden Markov model and Gaussian mixture model, which willbe further discussed.
–Hidden Markov model (HMM) Kang et al. [ 52] presented a text-based hidden Markov
models (TextHMMs)-based method, for text classiﬁcation that uses a sequence of wordsin training texts instead of a predeﬁned sentiment lexicon, which seeks to learn text pat-terns representing sentiment through ensemble TextHMMs. In this method, the researchersdeﬁned hidden variables in TextHMMs by semantic cluster information in consideration ofthe co-occurrence of words and thus calculated the sentiment orientation of sentences byﬁtted TextHMMs. An ensemble of TextHMM-based classiﬁers is applied to reﬂect diversepatterns.
–Gaussian mixture model (GMM) Fattah [ 35] proposed multiple classiﬁers for sentiment
analysis, in which GMM is used for clustering data by allocating query data points to themultivariate normal components. Assigning data points to clusters is termed as hard clus-tering. Power of GMM clustering can be noted because it uses soft clustering techniques,assigning score to data point for each cluster.
3.3.2 Unsupervised learning approach
Clustering is a process of classifying data into different classes or clusters, so the objects inthe same cluster have the extremely high similarity, while the objects of different clustershave very high diversity. From the point of view of machine learning, clusters correspond tohidden patterns, while clustering is the unsupervised learning process of searching clusters.And unlike classiﬁcation, unsupervised learning is not dependent on a predeﬁned categoryor training instances with labels. Clustering algorithms are capable of automatically deter-mining latent patterns, which is observing learning, not sample learning. Further informationregarding clustering algorithms for sentiment analysis is discussed.
Partitional algorithm Partitional algorithm decomposes a data set into a set of disjoint
clusters. Given a data set of Npoints, a partitioning method constructs K(N≥K) partitions
of the data, with each partition representing a cluster. Riaz et al. [ 107] performed senti-
ment analysis on the customer review real-world data at phrase level to ﬁnd out customer
preference by analyzing subjective expressions. The researchers calculated the strength ofsentiment words to ﬁnd out the intensity of each expression and applied k-means clusteringfor placing the words in various clusters based on their intensity. Suresh [ 116]p r e s e n t e da
fuzzy clustering model to analyze Twitter feeds regarding the sentiments of a particular brandusing the real dataset collected over a period of 1 year. Phu et al. [ 93] proposed a model for
123