628 L. Yue et al.
Table 3 The candidate features for sentiment classiﬁcation
Feature types Descriptions Examples
Terms and their frequency Frequency counts of individual
words and their n-gramsTF-IDF weighting scheme
Part of speech As important indicators of
opinions, adjectives are treatedas special features–
Sentiment words and phrases Words that are used to express
negative or positive sentimentsPositive sentiment words such as
good, wonderful, and amazing
Negative sentiment words such as
bad, poor, and terrible
Nouns such as rubbish, junk, and
crap
Verbs such as hate and love
Rules and opinions Individual sentiment words with
implied sentiments orcompound expressions and theirorientations determined bydomain knowledgeCompositional semantics
Sentiment shifters Expressions that could change the
sentiment orientationsNegation words of the most
common type of sentimentshifters such as not, never, none,nobody, nowhere, neither, andcannot
Modal auxiliary verbs such as
would, should, could, might,must, and ought
Words such as fail, omit, neglect,
less
Sarcasm often changes
orientations
Syntactic dependency Features with word dependency
generated from parsing or
dependency trees–
SentiWordNet (SWN) has been extensively used as a lexical resource for opinion mining,
Tellez et al. [ 122] proposed a framework named enhanced sentiment analysis and polarity
classiﬁcation (eSAP), which incorporates SWN as the labeled training corpus, where thesentiment scores are extracted based on the part of speech information. Then, SWN-basedvocabulary SWN-V generated from SWN with revised sentiment scores is used for supportvector machine model learning and classiﬁcation process.
3.1.2 The level of valence or arousal at speciﬁc scale
People also classify document polarity on multiple scales; Pang et al. [ 86] and Snyder et al.
[113] expanded the basic task of two-class classiﬁcation as either positive or negative for
predicting star ratings on either a 3 or a 4 star scale, while Snyder et al. [ 113] performed an in-
depth review analysis by predicting ratings for various aspects of the given target. Although inmost statistical classiﬁcation algorithms, the neutral category is ignored under the assumptionthat neutral objects lie near the boundary of the binary classiﬁer, a few researchers suggestthat, as in every polarity classiﬁcation task, three categories must be identiﬁed. Moreover, it
123