Figure 1: Graphical model for
CURL. The categorical task
variableyis used to instantiate
a latent mixture-of-Gaussians
z, which is then decoded to x.
Figure 2: Diagram of the proposed approach, showing the
inference procedure and architectural components used.
to the learner, and hence the focus is on unsupervised task learning. The tasks could correspond to
either unsupervised representation learning, or learning skills without extrinsic reward if applied to
the reinforcement learning domain. In this sense, the problem setting is “unsupervised” in two ways:
in terms of the absence of task labels (or indeed well-deﬁned tasks themselves), and in terms of the
absence of external supervision such as class labels, regression targets, or external rewards. The
two aspects may seem independent, but considering the unsupervised learning problem encourages
solutions that aim to capture all fundamental properties of the data, which in turn might encourage,
or reinforce, particular ways of addressing the task boundary problem. Hence the two aspects are
connected through the type of solutions they necessitate, and it is beneﬁcial to consider them jointly.
We argue that this is an important and challenging open problem, as it enables continual learning
in environments without clearly deﬁned tasks and goals, and with minimal external supervision.
Relaxing these constraints is crucial to performing lifelong learning in the real world.
Our approach, named Continual Unsupervised Representation Learning (CURL), learns a task-
speciﬁc representation on top of a larger set of shared parameters, and deals with task ambiguity by
performing task inference within the model. We endow the model with the ability to dynamically
expand its capacity to capture new tasks, and suggest methods to minimise catastrophic forgetting.
The model is experimentally evaluated in a variety of unsupervised settings: when tasks or classes
are presented sequentially, when training data are shufﬂed, and with ambiguous task boundaries
when transitions are continuous rather than discrete. We also demonstrate that despite focusing on
unsupervised learning, the method can be trivially adapted to supervised learning while removing the
reliance on task knowledge and class labels. The experiments demonstrate competitive performance
with respect to previous work, with the additional ability to learn without supervision in a continual
learning setting, and indicate the efﬁcacy of the different components of the proposed method.
2 Model
We begin by deﬁning the CURL model and training loss, then introduce methods to perform dynamic
expansion, and propose a generative replay mechanism to combat forgetting.
2.1 Inference over tasks
To address the problem, we utilise the following generative model (Figure 1):
y∼Cat(π),
z∼ N(µz(y),σ2
z(y)), (1)
x∼Bernoulli (µx(z)),
with the joint probability factorising as p(x,y,z) =p(y)p(z|y)p(x|z). Here, the categorical
variableyindicates the current task, which is then used to instantiate the task-speciﬁc Gaussian
parameters for latent variable z, which is then decoded to produce the input x.p(y)is a ﬁxed
uniform prior, with component weights speciﬁed by π. In the representation learning scenario,
ycan be interpreted as representing some discrete clusters in the data, with zthen representing
2