3 Related Work
Generative models A number of related approaches aim to learn a discriminative latent space
using generative models. Building on the original V AE ( Kingma & Welling ,2013 ),Nalisnick et al.
(2016 ) utilise a latent mixture of Gaussians, aiming to capture class structure in an unsupervised
fashion, and propose a Bayesian non-parametric prior, further developed in ( Nalisnick & Smyth ,
2017 ). Similarly, Joo et al. (2019 ) suggest a Dirichlet posterior in latent space to avoid some of the
previously observed component-collapsing phenomena. Lastly, Jiang et al. (2017 ) propose Variational
Deep Embedding (VaDE) focused on the goal of clustering in an i.i.d setting. While VaDE has the
same generative process as CURL, it assumes a mean-ﬁeld approximation, with yandzconditionally
independent given the input. In the case of CURL, conditioning zonyensures we can adequately
capture the inter- and intra- class uncertainty of a sample within the same structured latent space z.
Continual learning A large body of work has addressed the continual learning problem ( Parisi
et al. ,2019 ).Regularisation-based methods minimise changes to parameters that are crucial for earlier
tasks, with some parameter-wise weight to measure importance ( Kirkpatrick et al. ,2017 ;Nguyen
et al. ,2017 ;Zenke et al. ,2017 ;Aljundi et al. ,2018 ;Schwarz et al. ,2018 ). Related techniques
seek to ensure the performance on previous data does not decrease, by employing constrained
optimisation ( Lopez-Paz et al. ,2017 ;Chaudhry et al. ,2018 ) or distilling the information from old
models or tasks ( Li & Hoiem ,2018 ). In a similar vein, other methods encourage new tasks to
utilise previously unused parameters, either by ﬁnding “free” linear parameter subspaces ( He &
Jaeger ,2018 ); learning an attention mask over parameters ( Serra et al. ,2018 ); or using an agent
to ﬁnd new activation paths through a network ( Fernando et al. ,2017 ).Expansion-based models
dynamically increase capacity to allow for additional tasks ( Rusu et al. ,2016 ;Yoon et al. ,2017 ;
Draelos et al. ,2017 ), and optionally prune the network to constrain capacity ( Zhou et al. ,2012 ;
Golkar et al. ,2019 ). Another popular approach is that of rehearsal-based methods ( Robins ,1995 ),
where the data distribution from earlier tasks is captured by samples from a generative model trained
concurrently ( Shin et al. ,2017 ;van de Ven & Tolias ,2018 ;Ostapenko et al. ,2018 ).Farquhar & Gal
(2018 ) combine such methods with regularisation-based approaches under a Bayesian interpretation.
Alternatively, Rebufﬁ et al. (2017 ) learn class-speciﬁc exemplars instead of a generative model.
However, these methods usually require task identities, rely on well-deﬁned task boundaries, and are
often evaluated on a sequence of supervised learning tasks.
Task-agnostic continual learning Some recent work has investigated continual learning without
task labels or boundaries. Hsu et al. (2018 ) and van de Ven & Tolias (2019 ) identify the scenarios of
incremental task, domain, and class learning; which operate without task labels in the latter cases,
but all focus on supervised learning tasks. Aljundi et al. (2019 ) propose a task-free approach to
continual learning related to ours, which mitigates forgetting using the regularisation-based Memory
Aware Synapses (MAS) approach ( Aljundi et al. ,2018 ), maintains a hard example buffer to better
estimate the regularisation weights, and detects when to update these weights (usually performed
at known task boundaries in previous work). Zeno et al. (2018 ) propose a Bayesian task-agnostic
learning update rule for the mean and variance of each parameter, and demonstrate its ability to
handle ambiguous task boundaries. However, it is only applied to supervised tasks, and can exploit
the “label” trick, inferring the task based on the class label. In contrast, Achille et al. (2018 ) address
the problem of unsupervised learning in a sequential setting by learning a disentangled latent space
with task-speciﬁc attention masks, but the main focus is on learning across datasets, and the method
relies on abrupt shifts in data distribution between datasets. Our approach builds upon this existing
body of work, addressing the full unsupervised continual learning problem, where task labels and
boundaries are unknown, and the tasks themselves are without class supervision. We argue that
addressing this problem is critical in order to tackle continual learning in challenging, real-world
scenarios.
4 Experiments
In the following sections, we empirically evaluate a) whether our method learns a meaningful
class-discriminable latent space in the unsupervised sequential learning setting, without forgetting,
even when task boundaries are unclear; b) the importance of the dynamic expansion and generative
replay techniques to performance; and c) how CURL performs on external benchmarks when
5