fashion to existing techniques such as the Forget-Me-Not process ( Milan et al. ,2016 ) and Dirichlet
process ( Teh,2010 ), we rely on a threshold to determine when to instantiate a new component.
More concretely, we denote a subset of parameters θ(k)={θ(k)
qy,θ(k)
qz,θ(k)
pz}corresponding to the
parameters unique to each component k(i.e. thekthsoftmax output in q(y|x)and thekthGaussian
component in p(z|y)andq(z|y,x)). During training, any sample with a log-likelihood less than a
threshold cnewis added to set Dnew(where the log-likelihood is approximated by the ELBO). Then,
when the set Dnewreaches size Nnew, we initialise the parameters of the new component to the
current component k∗that has greatest probability over Dnew:
θ(K+1)=θ(k∗), k∗= argmax
k∈{1,2,...,K}/summationdisplay
x∈Dnewq(y=k|x). (5)
The new component is then tuned to Dnew, by performing a small ﬁxed number of iterations of
gradient descent on all parameters θ, using the component-constrained ELBO (Eqn. 4) with label
K+1.
Intuitively, this process encourages forward transfer, by initialising new concepts to the “closest”
existing concept learned by the model and then ﬁnetuning to a small number of instances. The
additional capacity used for each expansion is only in the top-most layer of the encoder, with ∼104
parameters, compared to ∼2.5×106for the rest of the shared model. That is, while dynamic
expansion incorporates a new high-level concept, the underlying low-level representations in the
encoder, and the entire decoder, are both shared among all tasks.
2.4 Combatting forgetting via mixture generative replay
A shared low-level representation can mean that learning new tasks interferes with previous ones,
leading to forgetting. One relevant technique to address this is Deep Generative Replay (DGR) ( Shin
et al. ,2017 ), in which samples from a learned generative model are reused in learning. We propose to
adapt and extend DGR to the mixture setting to perform unsupervised learning without forgetting.
In contrast to the original DGR work, our approach is inherently generative, such that a generative
replay-based approach can be incorporated holistically into the framework at minimal cost. We note
that many other existing methods (e.g., Kirkpatrick et al. (2017 )) could straightforwardly be adapted
to our approach, but our experiments demonstrated generative replay to be simple and effective.
To be more precise, during training, the model alternates between batches of real data, with samples
xdata∼ D drawn from the current training distribution, and generated data, with samples xgen
produced by the previous snapshot of the model (with parameters θprev):
ygen∼π(y),zgen∼pθprev(z|ygen),xgen∼pθprev(x|zgen), (6)
whereπrepresents a choice of prior distribution for the categorical y. While the uniform prior p(y)
is a natural choice, this fails to consider the degree to which different components are used, and can
therefore result in poor sample quality. To address this, the model maintains a count over components
by accumulating the mean of posterior q(y|x)over all previous timesteps, thereby favouring the
components that have been used the most. We refer to this process as mixture generative replay
(MGR).
While MGR ensures tasks or concepts that have been previously learned by the model are reused
for learning, it places no constraint on which components are used to model them. Given that each
generated datum xgenis conditioned on a sampled ygen, we can use ygenas a self-supervised
learning signal and encourage mixture components to remain consistent with respect to the model
snapshot, by using the component-constrained loss from Eqn. 4.
The only remaining question is when to update the previous model snapshot θprev. For this, we
explore two cases, with snapshots taken at periodic ﬁxed intervals, or immediately before performing
dynamic expansion. The intuition behind the latter is that dynamic expansion is performed when
there is a sufﬁcient shift in the input distribution, and consolidating previously learned information is
beneﬁcial prior to adding a newly observed concept. This is also advantageous as it eliminates the
additional snapshot period hyperparameter.
4