Continual Unsupervised Representation Learning
Dushyant Rao, Francesco Visin, Andrei A. Rusu,
Yee Whye Teh, Razvan Pascanu, Raia Hadsell∗
DeepMind
London, UK
Abstract
Continual learning aims to improve the ability of modern learning systems to
deal with non-stationary distributions, typically by attempting to learn a series
of tasks sequentially. Prior art in the ﬁeld has largely considered supervised or
reinforcement learning tasks, and often assumes full knowledge of task labels and
boundaries. In this work, we propose an approach (CURL) to tackle a more general
problem that we will refer to as unsupervised continual learning . The focus is on
learning representations without any knowledge about task identity, and we explore
scenarios when there are abrupt changes between tasks, smooth transitions from
one task to another, or even when the data is shufﬂed. The proposed approach
performs task inference directly within the model, is able to dynamically expand to
capture new concepts over its lifetime, and incorporates additional rehearsal-based
techniques to deal with catastrophic forgetting. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of
CURL in an unsupervised learning setting with MNIST and Omniglot, where
the lack of labels ensures no information is leaked about the task. Further, we
demonstrate strong performance compared to prior art in an i.i.d setting, or when
adapting the technique to supervised tasks such as incremental class learning.
1 Introduction
Humans have the impressive ability to learn many different concepts and perform different tasks
in a sequential lifelong setting. For example, infants learn to interact with objects in their environ-
ment without clear speciﬁcation of tasks ( task-agnostic ), in a sequential fashion without forgetting
(non-stationary ), from temporally correlated visual inputs ( non-i.i.d ), and with minimal external
supervision ( unsupervised ). For a learning system such as a robot deployed in the real world, it is
highly desirable to satisfy these desiderata as well. In contrast, learning algorithms often require
input samples to be shufﬂed in order to satisfy the i.i.d. assumption, and have been shown to
perform poorly when trained on sequential data, with newer tasks or concepts overwriting older
ones; a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting ( McCloskey & Cohen ,1989 ;Goodfellow
et al. ,2013 ). As a result, there has been renewed research focus on the continual learning problem
in recent years (e.g. Kirkpatrick et al. ,2017 ;Nguyen et al. ,2017 ;Zenke et al. ,2017 ;Shin et al. ,
2017 ), with several approaches addressing catastrophic forgetting as well as backwards or forwards
transfer—using the current task to improve performance on past or future tasks. However, most of
these techniques have focused on a sequence of tasks in which both the identity of the task ( task
label ) and boundaries between tasks are provided; moreover, they often focus on the supervised
learning setting, where class labels for each data point are given. Thus, many of these methods fail
to capture some of the aforementioned properties of real-world continual learning, with unknown
task labels or poorly deﬁned task boundaries, or when abundant class-labelled data is not available.
In this paper, we propose to address the more general unsupervised continual learning setting (also
suggested separately by Smith et al. (2019 )), in which task labels and boundaries are not provided
∗Correspondence to: {dushyantr, visin}@google.com
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.