(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 3: a) Cluster accuracy for CURL variants on MNIST, measuring the contribution of mixture
generative replay (“MGR”) and dynamic expansion (“exp”); b) Accuracy per class, over time; c)
Class confusion matrix at the end of learning, for CURL w/ MGR & exp.
trained i.i.d or adapted to learn in a supervised fashion. Code for all experiments can be found at
https://github.com/deepmind/deepmind-research/ .
4.1 Evaluation settings and datasets
One desired outcome of our approach is the ability to learn class-discriminative latent representations
from non-stationary input data. We evaluate this using cluster accuracy (the accuracy obtained when
assigning each mixture component to its most represented class), and with the accuracy of a k-Nearest
Neighbours (k-NN) classiﬁer in latent space. The former measures the amount of class-relevant
information encoded into the categorical variable y, while the latter measures the discriminability of
the entire latent space without imposing structure (such as a linear boundary).
For the evaluation we extensively utilise the MNIST ( LeCun et al. ,2010 ) and Omniglot ( Lake et al. ,
2011 ) datasets, and further information can be found in Appendix B. We investigate a number of
different evaluation settings: i.i.d, where the model sees shufﬂed training data; sequential , where the
model sees classes sequentially; and continuous drift , similar to the sequential case, but with classes
gradually introduced by slowly increasing the number of samples from the new class within a batch.
4.2 Continual class-discriminative representation learning
We begin by analysing our approach, and follow this with evaluation on external benchmarks in later
sections. First, we measure the ability to perform class-discriminative representation learning in the
sequential setting on MNIST, where each of the classes is observed for 10000 training steps (further
experimental details can be found in Appendix C.1). Figure 4a shows the cluster accuracy for a
number of variants of CURL. We observe the importance of both dynamic expansion and mixture
generative replay (MGR) to learn a coherent representation without forgetting. Figure 4b shows the
class-wise accuracies during training, for the model with MGR and expansion. Interestingly, while
many existing continual learning approaches appear to forget earlier classes (see e.g. Nguyen et al.
(2017 )), these classes are well modelled by CURL, and the confusion is more observed between
similar classes (such as 3s and5s; or7s and9s). Indeed, this is reﬂected in the class-confusion matrix
after training (Figure 4c). This implies the model adequately addresses catastrophic forgetting, but
could improve in terms of plasticity, i.e., learning new concepts. Further analysis can be found in
Appendix A.1, showing generated samples; and Appendix A.2, analysing the dynamic expansion
buffers.
4.3 Ablation studies
Next, we perform an ablation study to gauge the impact of the expansion threshold for continual
learning, in terms of cluster accuracy and number of components used, as shown in Figure 3. As the
threshold value is increased, samples are more frequently stored into the “poorly-modelled” buffer,
and the model expands more aggressively throughout learning. Consequently, for sequential learning,
the number of components ranges from 12to71, the cluster accuracy varies up to a maximum of 84%,
6