18
showed that the standard update rule from Equation 5
gives suboptimal results if we do not take precautions when
annotations are missing. To alleviate this problem, Kim
et al. [107] proposed to use an alternate learning scheme
by updating the network weights for a single task at a
time. A knowledge distillation term [108] is included, in
order to avoid loosing relevant information about the other
tasks. Differently, Nekrasov et al. [106] proposed to use
the predictions from an expert model as synthetic ground-
truth when annotations are missing. Although, these early
attempts have shown encouraging results, we believe that
this problem could beneﬁt from further investigation.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we reviewed recent methods for MTL within
the scope of deep neural networks. First, we presented an
extensive overview of both architectural and optimization
based strategies for MTL. For each method, we described
its key aspects, discussed the commonalities and differences
with related works, and presented the possible advantages
or disadvantages. Finally, we conducted an extensive ex-
perimental analysis of the described methods that led us to
several key ﬁndings. We summarize some of our conclu-
sions below, and present some possibilities for future work.
First, the performance of MTL strongly varies depending
on the task dictionary. Its size, task types, label sources,
etc., all affect the ﬁnal outcome. As a result, an appropri-
ate architecture and optimization strategy should better be
selected on a per case basis. Although we provided concrete
observations as to why some methods work better for
speciﬁc setups, MTL could generally beneﬁt from a deeper
theoretical understanding to maximize the expected gains
in every case. For example, these gains seem dependent on
a plurality of factors, e.g. amount of data, task relationships,
noise, etc. Future work should try to isolate and analyze the
inﬂuence of these different elements.
Second, when it comes to tackling multiple dense predic-
tion tasks using a single MTL model, decoder-based archi-
tectures currently offer more advantages in terms of multi-
task performance, and with limited computational overhead
compared to the encoder-based ones. As explained, this is
due to an alignment of common cross-task patterns that
decoder-based architectures promote, which naturally ﬁts
well with dense prediction tasks. Encoder-based architec-
tures still offer certain advantages within the dense pre-
diction task setting, but their inherent layer sharing seems
better ﬁtted to tackle multiple classiﬁcation tasks.
Finally, we analyzed multiple task balancing strategies,
and isolated the elements that are most effective for balanc-
ing task learning, e.g. down-weighing noisy tasks, balancing
task gradients, etc. Yet, many optimization aspects still
remain poorly understood. For example, opposed to recent
works, our analysis indicates that avoiding gradient com-
petition between tasks can hurt performance. Furthermore,
our study revealed that some task balancing strategies still
suffer from shortcomings, and highlighted several discrep-
ancies between existing methods. We hope that this work
stimulates further research efforts into this problem.
Acknowledgment. The authors acknowledge support
by Toyota via the TRACE project and MACCHINA (KULeuven, C14/18/065). This work is also sponsored by the
Flemish Government under the Artiﬁciele Intelligentie (AI)
Vlaanderen programme.
Simon Vandenhende received his MSE degree
in Electrical Engineering from the KU Leuven,
Belgium, in 2018. He is currently studying to-
wards a PhD degree at the Center for Process-
ing Speech and Images at KU Leuven. His re-
search focuses on multi-task learning and self-
supervised learning. He won a best paper award
at MVA’19. He is co-organizing the ﬁrst Com-
mands For Autonomous Vehicles workshop at
ECCV’20.
Stamatios Georgoulis is a post-doctoral re-
searcher at the CVL group of ETH Zurich.
His current research interests include multi-task
learning, unsupervised learning, and image gen-
eration. Before coming to Zurich, he was a doc-
toral student at the PSI group of KU Leuven,
where he received his PhD under the supervi-
sion of Prof. Van Gool and Prof. Tuytelaars, fo-
cusing on extracting surface characteristics and
lighting from images. Further back, he received
his diploma in Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and participated
in Microsoft’s Imagine Cup Software Design Competition. He regularly
serves as a reviewer in major Computer Vision and Machine Learning
conferences (CVPR, NeurIPS, ICCV, ECCV, etc.) with distinctions.
Marc Proesmans is a research associate at
the Center for Processing Speech and Images
at KU Leuven, where he leads the TRACE
team. He has an extensive research experience
on various aspects in image processing, e.g.
early vision processes, 3D reconstruction, op-
tical ﬂow, stereo, structure from motion, recog-
nition. He has been involved in several Euro-
pean research projects, such as VANGUARD,
IMPROOFS, MESH, MURALE, EUROPA, ROV-
INA. From 2000-2011, he has been CTO for a
KU Leuven spin-off company specialized in special effects for the movie
and game industry. He won several prizes, Golden Egg, Tech-Art, a
European IST, tech. Oscar nomination, European seal of Excellence.
From 2015 he s leading the research on automotive driving as Research
expert, and co-founded TRACE vzw to drive the technology transfer
from academia to the real R&D environment for autonomous driving in
cooperation with Toyota.
Dengxin Dai is a senior scientist working with
the Computer Vision Lab at ETH Zurich. In 2016,
he obtained his PhD in Computer Vision at ETH
Zurich. Since then he is the Team Leader of the
TRACE-Zurich team, working on Autonomous
Driving in collaboration with Toyota. His research
interests lie in autonomous driving, robust per-
ception in adverse weather and lighting condi-
tions, automotive sensors, and learning under
limited supervision.