7
Backbone
Step t - 1 Step t Step t + 1
Fig. 8: The architecture in Joint Task-Recursive Learn-
ing [43]. The features of two tasks are progressively reﬁned
in an intertwined manner based on past states.
Backbone
Scale
1/32Distillation
Scale 1/32Scale
1/16Distillation
Scale 1/16Scale
1/8Distillation
Scale 1/8Scale
1/4 Initial T ask Predictions Distillation
Scale 1/4
Feature
Propagation Module
Feature
Propagation ModuleInitial T ask Predictions
Feature
Propagation ModuleInitial T ask PredictionsFeature
Aggregation
Feature
Aggregation 
Multi-Scale
Multi-Modal
Distillation
Fig. 9: The architecture in Multi-Scale Task Interaction Net-
works [45]. Starting from a backbone that extracts multi-
scale features, initial task predictions are made at each scale.
These task features are then distilled separately at every
scale, allowing the model to capture unique task interactions
at multiple scales, i.e. receptive ﬁelds. After distillation, the
distilled task features from all scales are aggregated to make
the ﬁnal task predictions. To boost performance, a feature
propagation module is included to pass information from
lower resolution task features to higher ones.
2.3.4 Multi-Scale Task Interaction Networks
In the decoder-based architectures presented so far, the
multi-modal distillation was performed at a ﬁxed scale,
i.e. the features of the backbone’s last layer. This rests on
the assumption that all relevant task interactions can solely
be modeled through a single ﬁlter operation with speciﬁc
receptive ﬁeld. However, Multi-Scale Task Interaction Net-
works (MTI-Net) [45] showed that this is a rather strict as-
sumption. In fact, tasks can inﬂuence each other differently
at different receptive ﬁelds.
To account for this restriction, MTI-Net explicitly took
into account task interactions at multiple scales. Its architec-
ture is illustrated in Figure 9. First, an off-the-shelf backbone
network extracts a multi-scale feature representation from
the input image. From the multi-scale feature representation
an initial prediction for every task is made at each scale. The
task predictions at a particular scale are found by applying
a task-speciﬁc head to the backbone features extracted at
that scale. Similarly to PAD-Net, the features in the last
layer of the task-speciﬁc heads are combined and reﬁned tomake the ﬁnal predictions. Differently, in MTI-Net the per-
task feature representations can be distilled at each scale
separately. This allows to have multiple task interactions,
each modeled within a speciﬁc receptive ﬁeld. The distilled
multi-scale features are upsampled to the highest scale and
concatenated, resulting in a ﬁnal feature representation for
every task. The ﬁnal task predictions are found by decoding
these ﬁnal feature representations in a task-speciﬁc manner
again. The performance was further improved by also prop-
agating information from the lower resolution task features
to the higher ones using a Feature Propagation Module.
The experimental evaluation in [45] shows that distilling
task information at multiple scales increases the multi-
tasking performance compared to PAD-Net where such
information is only distilled at a single scale. Furthermore,
since MTI-Net distills the features at multiple scales, i.e.
using different pixel dilations, it overcomes the issue of
using only limited local information to fuse the features,
which was already shown to be beneﬁcial in PAP-Net.
2.4 Other Approaches
A number of approaches that fall outside the aforemen-
tioned categories have been proposed in the literature. For
example, multilinear relationship networks [35] used ten-
sor normal priors to the parameter set of the task-speciﬁc
heads to allow interactions in the decoding stage. Yang et
al. [59] generalized matrix factorisation approaches to MTL
in order to learn cross-task sharing structures in every layer
of the network. Routing networks [60] proposed a princi-
pled approach to determine the connectivity of a network’s
function blocks through routing. Piggyback [61] showed
how to adapt a single, ﬁxed neural network to a multi-
task network by learning binary masks. Huang et al. [57]
introduced a method rooted in neural architecture search for
the automated construction of a tree-based multi-attribute
learning network. Stochastic ﬁlter groups [38] re-purposed
the convolution kernels in each layer of the network to
support shared or task-speciﬁc behaviour. In a similar vein,
feature partitioning [62] presented partitioning strategies to
assign the convolution kernels in each layer of the network
into different tasks. In general, these works have a different
scope within MTL, e.g. automate the network architecture
design. Moreover, they mostly focus on solving multiple
(binary) classiﬁcation tasks, rather than multiple dense pre-
dictions tasks. As a result, they fall outside the scope of this
survey, with one notable exception that is discussed next.
Attentive Single-Tasking of Multiple Tasks (ASTMT) [42]
proposed to take a ’single-tasking’ route for the MTL prob-
lem. That is, within a multi-tasking framework they per-
formed separate forward passes, one for each task, that ac-
tivate shared responses among all tasks, plus some residual
responses that are task-speciﬁc. Furthermore, to suppress
the negative transfer issue they applied adversarial training
on the gradients level that enforces them to be statistically
indistinguishable across tasks. An advantage of this ap-
proach is that shared and task-speciﬁc information within
the network can be naturally disentangled. On the negative
side, however, the tasks can not be predicted altogether, but
only one after the other, which signiﬁcantly increases the
inference speed and somehow deﬁes the purpose of MTL.