10
TABLE 1: A qualitative comparison between task balancing techniques. First, we consider whether a method balances the
loss magnitudes ( Balance Magnitudes ) and/or the pace at which tasks are learned ( Balance Learning ). Second, we show
what tasks are prioritized during the training stage ( Prioritize ). Third, we show whether the method requires access to
the task-speciﬁc gradients ( Grads Required ). Fourth, we consider whether the tasks gradients are enforced to be non-
conﬂicting ( Non-Competing Grads ). Finally, we consider whether the proposed method requires additional tuning, e.g.
manually choosing the weights, KPIs, etc. ( No Extra T uning ). For a detailed description of each technique see Section 3.
Method Balance
MagnitudesBalance
LearningPrioritizeGrads
RequiredNon-Competing
GradsNo Extra
T uningMotivation
Uncertainty [32] X Low Noise X Homoscedastic uncertainty
GradNorm [33] X X X X Balance learning and magnitudes
DWA [29] X Balance learning
DTP [40] Difﬁcult Prioritize difﬁcult tasks
MGDA [34] X X X X X Pareto Optimum
task learning. Another group of works also tried to regulate
the training of multi-task networks, albeit for more speciﬁc
setups. We touch upon several of these approaches here.
Note that, some of these concepts can be combined with
task balancing strategies too.
Zhao et al. [41] empirically found that tasks with gra-
dients pointing in the opposite direction can cause the
destructive interference of the gradient. This observation is
related to the update rule in Equation 5. They proposed to
add a modulation unit to the network in order to alleviate
the competing gradients issue during training.
Liu et al. [46] considered a speciﬁc multi-task architec-
ture where the feature space is split into a shared and a task-
speciﬁc part. They argue that the shared features should
contain more common information, and no information that
is speciﬁc to a particular task only. The network weights
are regularized by enforcing this prior. More speciﬁcally, an
adversarial approach is used to avoid task-speciﬁc features
from creeping into the shared representation. Similarly, [39],
[42] added an adversarial loss to the single-task gradients in
order to make them statistically indistinguishable from each
other in the shared parts of the network.
4 E XPERIMENTS
This section provides an extensive comparison of the pre-
viously discussed methods. In particular, Section 4.1 intro-
duces the employed datasets, followed by the evaluation
criterion. Section 4.2 compares the encoder-based architec-
tures, while the decoder-based ones are discussed in Sec-
tion 4.3. Note that, we ﬁrst opted for a separate analysis
of the encoder-based and decoder-based approaches, as
a direct joint comparison is impractical3. However, we
provide a separate comparison between encoder-based and
decoder-based approaches in Section 4.4. Finally, Section 4.5
considers the inﬂuence of the task balancing strategies.
4.1 Experimental Setup
Our experiments were conducted on a variety of datasets.
As we need to compare a large number of works, including
different MTL architectures and task balancing techniques,
the datasets were selected separately for the encoder-based
3. For example, some works rely on the use of particular backbones,
or were designed for tackling speciﬁc task dictionaries, etc.approaches, the decoder-based approaches and the task-
balancing techniques. In each case, we opted for datasets
that provide us with a rich and diverse group of settings
and allow us to scrutinize the pros and cons of the meth-
ods under consideration. We additionally took into account
what datasets were used in the original works. Note that, for
every experiment we describe the most important elements
of the experimental setup. However, further details to repro-
duce the reported results can be found in the supplementary
materials. Next we discuss the employed datasets, followed
by a presentation of the evaluation criterion.
4.1.1 Datasets
The PASCAL dataset [66] is a popular benchmark for dense
prediction tasks. We use the split from PASCAL-Context [67]
which has annotations for semantic segmentation, human
part segmentation and semantic edge detection. Addition-
ally, we consider the tasks of surface normals prediction and
saliency detection. The annotations were distilled by [42]
using pre-trained state-of-the-art models [68], [69].
The Cityscapes dataset [70] considers the scenario of
urban scene understanding. The train, validation and test
set contain 2975, 500 and 1525 images respectively, taken by
driving a car in European cities. We consider a number of
dense prediction tasks on the Cityscapes dataset: semantic
segmentation, instance segmentation and monocular depth
estimation. The depth maps were generated with SGM [71].
The NYUD-v2 dataset [72] considers indoor scene un-
derstanding. The dataset contains 795 train and 654 test
images annotated for semantic segmentation and monocular
depth estimation. Other works have also considered surface
normal prediction [24], [42], [44] and semantic edge detec-
tion [24], [42] on the NYUD-v2 dataset. The annotations for
these tasks can be directly derived from the semantic and
depth ground truth. In this work we focus on the semantic
segmentation and depth estimation tasks.
The Taskonomy dataset [73] contains semi-real images
of indoor scenes, annotated for 26 (dense prediction, clas-
siﬁcation, etc.) tasks. Out of all available tasks, we select
scene categorization, semantic segmentation, edge detec-
tion, monocular depth estimation and keypoint detection
for our experiments. The task dictionary was selected to be
as diverse as possible, while still keeping the total number
of tasks reasonably low for all required computations. We
use the tiny split of the dataset, containing 275k train, 52k
validation and 54k test images.