4
Task A
Cross-Stitch Unit / NDDR-LayerTask B
Fig. 3: The architecture of
cross-stitch networks [26] and
NDDR-CNNs [28]. The acti-
vations from all single-task
networks are fused across
several encoding layers. Dif-
ferent feature fusion mecha-
nisms were used in each case.
Shared Encoder
Task B
Attention Module
Attention Module
Attention Module
Task A
Attention Module
Attention Module
Attention ModuleFig. 4: The architecture of
MTAN [29]. Task-speciﬁc at-
tention modules select and
reﬁne features from several
layers of a shared encoder.
2.2.1 Cross-Stitch Networks
Cross-stitch networks [26] shared the activations amongst
all single-task networks in the encoder. Assume we are
given two activation maps xA;xBat a particular layer, that
belong to tasks AandBrespectively. A learnable linear
combination of these activation maps is applied, before
feeding the transformed result ~xA;~xBto the next layer in the
single-task networks. The transformation is parameterized
by learnable weights , and can be expressed as
~xA
~xB
=AAAB
BABBxA
xB
: (1)
As illustrated in Figure 3, this procedure is repeated at
multiple locations in the encoder. By learning the weights
, the network can decide the degree to which the features
are shared between tasks. In practice, we are required to
pre-train the single-task networks, before stitching them
together, in order to maximize the performance. A disadvan-
tage of cross-stitch networks is that the size of the network
increases linearly with the number of tasks. Furthermore, it
is not clear where the cross-stitch units should be inserted in
order to maximize their effectiveness. Sluice networks [27]
extended this work by also supporting the selective sharing
of subspaces and skip connections.
2.2.2 Neural Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction
Neural Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction CNNs
(NDDR-CNNs) [28] used a similar architecture with cross-
stitch networks (see Figure 3). However, instead of utilizing
a linear combination to fuse the activations from all single-
task networks, a dimensionality reduction mechanism is
employed. First, features with the same spatial resolution
in the single-task networks are concatenated channel-wise.
Second, the number of channels is reduced by processing
the features with a 1 by 1 convolutional layer, before feeding
the result to the next layer. The convolutional layer allows
to fuse activations across all channels. Differently, cross-
stitch networks only allow to fuse activations from channels
that share the same index. The NDDR-CNN behaves as a
cross-stitch network when the non-diagonal elements in the
weight matrix of the convolutional layer are zero.
Due to their similarity with cross-stitch networks,
NDDR-CNNs are prone to the same problems. First, thereis a scalability concern when dealing with a large number
of tasks. Second, NDDR-CNNs involve additional design
choices, since we need to decide where to include the NDDR
layers. Finally, both cross-stitch networks and NDDR-CNNs
only allow to use limited local information when fusing
the activations from the different single-task networks. We
hypothesize that this is suboptimal cause the use of sufﬁ-
cient context is very important during encoding – as already
shown for the tasks of image classiﬁcation [52] and semantic
segmentation [53], [54], [55]. This is backed up by certain
decoder-based architectures in Section 2.3 that overcome the
limited receptive ﬁeld by predicting the tasks at multiple
scales and by sharing the features repeatedly at every scale.
2.2.3 Multi-Task Attention Networks
Multi-Task Attention Networks (MTAN) [29] used a shared
backbone network in conjunction with task-speciﬁc atten-
tion modules in the encoder (see Figure 4). The shared back-
bone extracts a general pool of features. Then, each task-
speciﬁc attention module selects features from the general
pool by applying a soft attention mask. The attention mech-
anism is implemented using regular convolutional layers
and a sigmoid non-linearity. Since the attention modules
are small compared to the backbone network, the MTAN
model does not suffer as severely from the scalability issues
that are typically associated with cross-stitch networks and
NDDR-CNNs. However, similar to the fusion mechanism in
the latter works, the MTAN model can only use limited local
information to produce the attention mask.
2.2.4 Tree-Based Encoders
The models presented in Sections 2.2.1-2.2.3 softly shared
the features amongst tasks during the encoding stage.
Differently, tree-based encoders followed a hard-parameter
sharing scheme. Before presenting these methods, consider
the following observation: deep neural networks tend to
learn hierarchical image representations [56]. The early lay-
ers tend to focus on more general low-level image features,
such as edges, corners, etc., while the deeper layers tend
to extract high-level information that is more task-speciﬁc.
Motivated by this observation, tree-based encoders opted to
learn similar hierarchical encoding structures [36], [37], [57].
These ramiﬁed networks typically start with a number of
shared layers, after which different (groups of) tasks branch
out into their own sequence of layers. In doing so, the dif-
ferent branches gradually become more task-speciﬁc as we
move to the deeper layers. This behaviour aligns well with
the hierarchical representations learned by deep neural nets.
However, as the number of possible network conﬁgurations
are combinatorially large, deciding what layers to share and
where to branch out becomes cumbersome. The following
works tried to automate the procedure of hierarchically
clustering the tasks to form tree-based encoders.
Fully-Adaptive Feature Sharing (FAFS) [36] started from
a thin network, where tasks initially shared all layers, and
dynamically grew the model in a greedy layer-by-layer fash-
ion. The procedure for constructing the tree-based encoder is
illustrated in Figure 5. The task groupings at each layer are
decided based on the probability of concurrently ’simple’
or ’difﬁcult’ examples across tasks. This strategy assumes
that it is preferable to solve two tasks in an isolated manner