models. They suppose that label sets are identical across
domains, as shown in Figure 1(closed set domain adapta-
tion). This simpliﬁed scenario focuses on the fundamental
problem of domain adaptation and provides insightful ideas
for future research. Recent works try to relax the assumption
by proposing open set domain adaptation [ 28,35] and partial
domain adaptation [ 2,45]. As shown in Figure 1, partial
domain adaptation [ 2,45] requests that the source label set
contains the target label set while Busto et al. [28] introduces
“unknown” classes in both domains, and assumes common
classes between two domains are known in the training phase.
Modiﬁed open set domain adaptation by Saito et al. [35]
removes data of source unknown classes such that the source
label set is a subset of the target label set. Luo et al. [24]
allows partly shared label sets and requires some labeled
data in the target domain, where the target label set is known.
These works constitute valuable advances towards practical
domain adaptation.
Practical scenarios are way more complicated and these
assumptions are easily violated. For example, labeled an-
imals from different datasets are easily accessible. But if
we want to recognize animals in the wild, we are exposed
to two challenges: (1)The background may deviate from
those in the training data, leading to large domain gap ;(2)
Some native species do not exist in the training data, in the
meantime, animal species in the deployed environment may
not cover all the training species because training data is too
diverse, leading to large category gap . In summary, the rela-
tionship of label sets between the source and target domains
is unknown in the presence of a large domain gap. If the
source label set is large enough to contain the target label set,
partial domain adaptation methods are good choices; if the
source label set is contained in the target label set or common
classes are known, open set domain adaptation methods are
good choices. In a general scenario, however, we cannot
select the proper domain adaptation method because no prior
knowledge about the target domain label set is given.
For this purpose, we propose a generalized setting, termed
Universal Domain Adaptation (UDA ). In UDA, given a
labeled source domain, for any related target domain, regard-
less of how its label set differs from that of the source domain,
we need to classify its samples correctly if it belongs to any
class in the source label set, or mark it as“unknown” other-
wise. The word “universal” indicates that UDA imposes no
prior knowledge on the label sets.
UDA poses two major technical challenges for designing
domain adaptation models in the wild. ( 1) Since we know
nothing about the target label set, we cannot decide which
part of the source domain should be matched to which part
of the target domain. If we naively match the entire source
domain with the entire target domain, mismatching of dif-
ferent label sets will deteriorate the model. ( 2) The model
should be able to mark target samples as “unknown” if theydo not belong to any class in the source label set. Since there
are no labeled training data for these classes, by no means
the classiﬁer can tell their detailed category.
To address Universal Domain Adaptation, we propose
Universal Adaptation Network (UAN ), equipping with a
novel criterion to quantify the transferability of each sample.
The criterion integrates both the domain similarity and the
prediction uncertainty of each sample into a sample-level
weighting mechanism. With the transferability-enhanced
UAN model, the samples coming from the common label
set between the source and target domains are automatically
detected and matched while the target samples coming from
the target private label set can be successfully marked by a
rejection pipeline as “unknown” class.
The main contributions of this paper are:
(1)We introduce a more practical Universal Domain
Adaptation (UDA) setting that imposes no prior knowledge
on the label sets of source and target domains. This is impor-
tant considering that we do not have access to target labels
in unsupervised domain adaptation and sometimes it is even
impossible to know the target label set, not to mention how
it overlaps with the source label set.
(2)We study the performance of existing domain adap-
tation methods under a variety of UDA settings including
closed set, partial and open set domain adaptation. Methods
tailored to speciﬁc settings do not work well in UDA. This
highlights the need for a UDA-friendly model.
(3)We propose Universal Adaptation Network (UAN), an
end-to-end solution, which exploits both the domain similar-
ity and the prediction uncertainty of each sample to develop
a weighting mechanism for discovering label sets shared by
both domains and promote common-class adaptation. Em-
pirical results show that UAN works stably across different
UDA settings and outperforms existing methods.
2. Related Work
We brieﬂy review recent domain adaptation methods in
this section. According to the constraint on the label set
relationship between domains, these methods fall into closed
set domain adaptation, partial domain adaptation, or open
set domain adaptation.
2.1. Closed Set Domain Adaptation
Closed set domain adaptation focuses on mitigating the
impact of the domain gap between source and target do-
mains. Solutions to closed set domain adaptation mainly fall
into two categories: feature adaptation and generative model.
Feature adaptation methods diminish the feature distribution
discrepancy between source and target domains by minimiz-
ing well-deﬁned statistical distances on feature distributions.
Early shallow adaptation methods [ 33,7,27,5,46,42] usu-
ally provide insights in developing modern deep adaptation
methods [ 38,21,6,11,39,23,37,34,22], while other
2721