Training phase Testing phase
fc layer lossunknown
computation flow conv layer weighting mechanismxFzG
D'
DEG
ED'EDy^
d^d'^ws,wt
xFzG
D'd^y^
wtwt<w0?YesNoargmaxy^
Figure 2. The training and testing phases of the Universal Adaptation Network (UAN) designed for Universal Domain Adaptation (UDA).
predicted as a class in Cswhereas they should be marked
as “unknown”. If we turn to tailored methods of partial or
open set domain adaptation, we must face the fact that the
relationship between CsandCtis unknown. In the absence
of the conﬁguration about C,CsandCt, it is hard to make
a choice among tailored domain adaptation methods. Thus,
we need to automatically identify the source and target data
fromC, such that feature alignment can be done in the auto-
discovered common label set.
Despite the category gap, the domain gap still exists in
UDA setting, i.e. between the source and target data in the
common label set. In other words, p/\e}atio\slash=qandpC/\e}atio\slash=qC.
Domain adaptation should be applied to align distributions
of the source and target data in the common label set C.
Another challenge for UDA is to detect “unknown”
classes . In practice, conﬁdence thresholding, which marks
samples with low classiﬁcation conﬁdence as “unknown”,
is often used. Nonetheless, such a straightforward method
may fail in universal domain adaptation since the predictions
by neural networks are usually overconﬁdent [ 10] but less
discriminative due to the underlying domain gap.
3.3. Universal Adaptation Network
We propose Universal Adaptation Network (UAN) to ad-
dress the UDA problem. As shown in Figure 2, the architec-
ture of UAN consists of a feature extractor F, an adversarial
domain discriminator D, a non-adversarial domain discrimi-
natorD′and a label classiﬁer G. Inputxfrom either domain
is fed into the feature extractor F. The extracted feature
z=F(x)is forwarded into the label classiﬁer Gto obtain
the probability ˆy=G(z)ofxover the source classes Cs.
The non-adversarial domain discriminator D′obtains the do-
main similarity ˆd′=D′(z), quantifying the similarity of x
to the source domain. The adversarial domain discriminatorDaims to adversarially match the feature distributions of
the source and target data falling in the common label set C
(Note that we need a mechanism to detect the common label
set).EG,ED′andEDrepresent the error for label classiﬁer
G, non-adversarial domain discriminator D′and adversarial
domain discriminator D, which are formally deﬁned as
EG=E(x,y)∼pL(y,G(F(x))) (1)
ED′=−Ex∼plogD′(F(x))
−Ex∼qlog/parenleftbig
1−D′(F(x))/parenrightbig (2)
ED=−Ex∼pws(x)logD(F(x))
−Ex∼qwt(x)log(1−D(F(x)))(3)
whereLis the standard cross-entropy loss, ws(x)indicates
the probability of a source sample xbelonging to the com-
mon label set C, and similarly, wt(x)indicates the probabil-
ity of a target sample xbelonging to the common label set
C. The details of ws(x)andwt(x)will be elaborated in the
next subsection. With well-established weighting ws(x)and
wt(x), the adversarial domain discriminator Dis conﬁned
to distinguish the source and target data in the common label
setC. Adversarially, the feature extractor Fstrives to con-
fuseD, yielding domain-invariant features in the common
label setC. The label classiﬁer Gtrained on such features
can be applied safely to the target domain.
The training of UAN can be written as a minimax game:
max
Dmin
F,GEG−λED
min
D′ED′(4)
whereλis a hyper-parameter to trade off between transfer-
ability and discriminability. We utilize the well-established
gradient reversal layer proposed by Ganin et al. [6] to reverse
2723