the gradient between FandDto optimize all the modules
in an end-to-end training framework.
The testing phase of UAN is shown in the right plot of
Figure 2. Given each input target sample x, its categorical
prediction ˆy(x)over the source label set Cs, and the domain
prediction ˆd′(x), we compute wt(x)using Eq. (8)(details
in the next subsection). With a validated threshold w0, the
classy(x)can be predicted by thresholding ˆy(x)w.r.t.w0:
y(x) =/braceleftBigg
unknown wt< w0
argmax( ˆy)wt≥w0(5)
which either rejects the target sample xas “unknown” class
or classiﬁes it to one of the source classes.
3.4. Transferability Criterion
In this section, we further elaborate on how to compute
weighting ws=ws(x)andwt=wt(x)by sample-level
transferability criterion. With a proper sample-level transfer-
ability criterion, each point in both source and target domains
can be weighted such that the distributions of source and tar-
get data in the common label set Ccan be maximally aligned.
Also, data from target private label set Ctcan be identiﬁed
and marked as “unknown” with the help of the sample-level
transferability criterion. Thus, a well-established sample-
level transferability criterion should satisfy Eq. ( 6):
Ex∼pCws(x)>Ex∼pCsws(x)
Ex∼qCwt(x)>Ex∼qCtwt(x)(6)
These inequalities should hold in a non-negligible margin.
Now we need to construct the sample-level transferability
criterion. We ﬁrst list what we have at hand about each input
x:ˆy,ˆd,ˆd′. SinceDis involved in adversarial training and
thus fooled, its output ˆdis not discriminative enough. We
thus analyze the properties of ˆyandˆd′as follows.
Domain Similarity. In Eq. (2), the objective of D′is to
predict samples from source domain as 1 and samples from
target domain as 0. Thus, ˆd′can be seen as the quantiﬁcation
for the domain similarity of each sample. For a source
sample, smaller ˆd′means that it is more similar to the target
domain; for a target sample, larger ˆd′means that it is more
similar to the source domain. Therefore, we can hypothesize
thatEx∼pCsˆd′>Ex∼pCˆd′>Ex∼qCˆd′>Ex∼qCtˆd′.
Due to the nature of D′, inequality Ex∼pCsˆd′,Ex∼pCˆd′>
Ex∼qCˆd′,Ex∼qCtˆd′naturally holds. Since pCandqCshare
the same label set, pCis closer to qCcompared with qCt, and
it is reasonable to hypothesize Ex∼pCsˆd′>Ex∼pCˆd′. The
same observation applies to Ex∼qCˆd′>Ex∼qCtˆd′.
Prediction Uncertainty. The prediction ˆycontains the
discriminative information about the input, but it is only reli-
able in the source domain guaranteed by labeled data. To ex-
ploit unlabeled data, entropy minimization has been used as acriterion in semi-supervised learning and domain adaptation
[9,23] to enforce the decision boundary in the unlabeled data
to pass through low-density area. In principle, entropy quan-
tiﬁes the prediction uncertainty, and smaller entropy means
more conﬁdent prediction. We hypothesize: Ex∼qCtH(ˆy)>
Ex∼qCH(ˆy)>Ex∼pCH(ˆy)>Ex∼pCsH(ˆy).
Since the source domain is labeled and the target domain
is unlabeled, predictions are certain for source samples and
uncertain for target samples, Ex∼qCtH(ˆy),Ex∼qCH(ˆy)>
Ex∼pCH(ˆy),Ex∼pCsH(ˆy).
Similar samples from qCandpCcan attract each other.
Thus, the entropy of samples from pCbecomes larger be-
cause they are inﬂuenced by the high entropy samples from
qC. Still, asCshas no intersection with Ct, samples from pCsare not inﬂuenced by the target data and keeps highest cer-
tainty. So we hypothesize that Ex∼pCH(ˆy)>Ex∼pCsH(ˆy).
Similarly, Cthas no intersection with Cs(data from qCtdoes not belong to any class in Cs), and thus the hypothesis
Ex∼qCtH(ˆy)>Ex∼qCH(ˆy)is reasonable.
With the above analysis, the sample-level transferability
criterion for source data points and target data points can be
respectively deﬁned as Eq. ( 7) and Eq. ( 8):
ws(x) =H(ˆy)
log|Cs|−ˆd′(x) (7)
wt(x) =ˆd′(x)−H(ˆy)
log|Cs|(8)
Note that the entropy is normalized by its maximum value
(log|Cs|) so that it is restricted into [0,1]and comparable
to the domain similarity measure ˆd′. Also, the weights are
normalized into interval [0,1]during training.
The proposed universal adaptation network (UAN) lever-
ages the sample-level transferability criterion to disentangle
source data in C,Csand target data in C,Ct. As such, the
category gap is reduced. The domain gap is reduced as well
by aligning features between domains in shared label set C.
4. Experiments
To perform a thorough evaluation, we compare UAN with
state of the art methods tailored to various domain adaptation
settings under a variety of UDA settings on several datasets
with different ξ,|Cs∪ Ct|,CtandCs. Then, we explore
the performance with respect to the change of ξ,|Cs∪Ct|,
CtandCs. We further provide comprehensive analyses of
the hyper-parameter sensitivity and the quality of sample-
level transferability criterion about the proposed UAN model.
Code and data will be available at github.com/thuml .
4.1. Experimental Setup
In this subsection, we describe the datasets, the evaluation
protocols and the implementation details.
2724