-30-20-10010DANN
-30-20-10010IWAN
-30-20-10010OSBP
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
class-30-20-10010UAN
(a) Negative Transfer in UDA
Uncertainty Domain Similarity
−1 0 1
sourceTransferability
−1 0 1
target
(b) Hypotheses Quality (blue for common and black for private )
Figure 4. (a) The negative transfer inﬂuence in UDA (task Ar→Cl). (b) Justiﬁcation of validity of hypotheses in Section 3.4.
UAN preserves useful samples and does not inﬂuence per-
formance on the closed set domain adaptation setting. Note
that when |C|keeps decreasing, the performance of DANN
and IWAN drops rapidly and only UAN works stably.
4.4. Analysis of Universal Adaptation Network
Ablation Study . We go deeper into the efﬁcacy of the
proposed sample-level transferability criterion by perform-
ing an ablation study that evaluates variants of UAN. (1)
UAN w/o d is the variant without integrating the domain
similarity into the sample-level transferability criterion in
Eq.(7)and Eq. (8); (2) UAN w/o y is the variant without
integrating the uncertainty criterion into sample-level trans-
ferability criterion in Eq. (7)and Eq. (8). Results are shown
in bottom rows of Table 1. UAN outperforms UAN w/o d and
UAN w/o y, indicating both the domain similarity compo-
nent and the uncertainty criterion component in the deﬁnition
ofws(x),wt(x)are important and necessary. In addition,
UAN w/o d performs better than UAN w/o y, meaning that
integrating the uncertainty criterion into the sample-level
transferability criterion is even more crucial.
Hypotheses Justiﬁcation . To justify the validity of the
hypotheses in Section 3.4, we plot in Figure 4(b) the esti-
mated probability density function for different components
of weights ws(x)in Eq. (7)andwt(x)in Eq. (8). Results
show that all the hypotheses are successfully justiﬁed, ex-
plaining why UAN can perform well in various UDA settings.
Another observation is that the uncertainty criterion and the
domain similarity themselves can be used to distinguish all
the examples from common label set and private label sets.
By combining these two components we can obtain more
distinguishable transferability criterion.Threshold Sensitivity . We explore the sensitivity of
UAN with respect to threshold w0in task I→C. As shown
in Figure 3(c), though UAN’s accuracies vary by about 2%
w.r.t.w0, it consistently outperforms the other methods by
large margins in a wide range of w0. Note that the baselines
are fully tuned and their best accuracies are compared here.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce a novel Universal Domain
Adaptation (UDA) setting, where no prior knowledge are
required on the label set relationship between domains. We
propose Universal Adaptation Network (UAN) with a well-
designed sample-level transferability criterion to address
UDA. A thorough evaluation shows that existing methods
requiring prior knowledge on the relationship of label sets
cannot work well in general UDA setting while the proposed
UAN works stably and achieves state-of-the-art results.
In practice, if one wants to generalize a model to a new
scenario, the proposed UAN can be a good candidate model.
If UAN classiﬁes most examples as “unknown”, then domain
adaptation in such a new scenario may well fail, and collect-
ing labels will be indispensable. On the other hand, if UAN
can generate labels for most examples, collecting labels for
such a scenario are not necessary and domain adaptation will
perform the work. That said, UAN can serve as a pilot study
when we encounter a new domain adaptation scenario.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by National Key R&D Program of
China (No. 2017YFC1502003) and National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61772299, 71690231, and 61672313).
2727