Universal Domain Adaptation
Kaichao You1, Mingsheng Long1(/Letter), Zhangjie Cao1, Jianmin Wang1, and Michael I. Jordan2
1KLiss, MOE; BNRist; School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
1Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
1Beijing Key Laboratory for Industrial Big Data System and Application
2University of California, Berkeley, USA
youkaichao@gmail.com, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn, jordan@cs.berkeley.edu
Abstract
Domain adaptation aims to transfer knowledge in the
presence of the domain gap. Existing domain adaptation
methods rely on rich prior knowledge about the relationship
between the label sets of source and target domains, which
greatly limits their application in the wild. This paper intro-
duces Universal Domain Adaptation (UDA) that requires no
prior knowledge on the label sets. For a given source label
set and a target label set, they may contain a common label
set and hold a private label set respectively, bringing up an
additional category gap. UDA requires a model to either (1)
classify the target sample correctly if it is associated with a
label in the common label set, or (2) mark it as “unknown”
otherwise. More importantly, a UDA model should work sta-
bly against a wide spectrum of commonness (the proportion
of the common label set over the complete label set) so that
it can handle real-world problems with unknown target label
sets. To solve the universal domain adaptation problem, we
propose Universal Adaptation Network (UAN). It quantiﬁes
sample-level transferability to discover the common label set
and the label sets private to each domain, thereby promoting
the adaptation in the automatically discovered common label
set and recognizing the “unknown” samples successfully. A
thorough evaluation shows that UAN outperforms the state
of the art closed set, partial and open set domain adaptation
methods in the novel UDA setting.
1. Introduction
Deep learning has boosted the progress of computer vi-
sion and improved state of the art performance on diverse
vision tasks such as image classiﬁcation [ 13], object detec-
tion [ 30] and semantic segmentation [ 12]. However, the
remarkable efﬁcacy of deep learning algorithms highly relies
on abundant labeled training data, which requires tedious
labor work on collecting labeled data. Given a large-scaleClosed Set DA Partial DA
Open Set DA (Busto etal.2017) Open Set DA (Saitoetal.2018)
Universal DA
Source Domain Label Set Target Domain Label Set?
Figure 1. Universal Domain Adaptation (UDA) and existing domain
adaptation settings with respect to label sets of source and target
domains (blue shades indicate shared labels). Only UDA is able to
deal with the setting that the label set of target domain is unknown.
unlabeled dataset, it is usually prohibitive to annotate enough
training data such that we can train a deep learning model
that generalizes well. An alternative is to leverage off-the-
shelf labeled data from a related domain (source domain) to
improve the model for the domain of interest (target domain).
The target domain may contain data collected by different
sensors, from different perspectives or under different illumi-
nation conditions compared with the source domain, leading
to large domain gap . Domain adaptation [ 33] aims to min-
imize the domain gap and successfully transfer the model
trained on the source domain to the target domain.
Existing domain adaptation methods tackle the domain
gap either by learning domain invariant feature representa-
tion, by generating features/samples for target domains or by
transforming samples between domains through generative
2720