IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 2
Inter-satellite 
link 
Space-to-ground 
link Space-to-air 
link 
Inter-UAV 
link 
Ground link (wired) 
Ground link (wireless) 
Ground link (Device-to-Device 
(D2D)) 
UAV 
 balloon 
Cellular base station 
Core router (terrestrial) 
Ground node (user) LEO Satellite 
 e
 Ground station Space 
segment 
Air segment 
Ground 
segment 
MEO Satellite 
 e GEO Satellite 
Air-to-ground link Legends 
Fig. 1: The architecture of the Satellite-Air-Ground Integ rated Network.
to be considered [4] compared with the same problem in
conventional ground communication systems.
Since the SAGIN is more complex than the current terres-
trial networks, we need to consider more efﬁcient technique s
to optimize the SAGIN performance. The Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (AI) technique has always been a hot topic due to
its predominant performance in both industry and academia.
In recent years, the rapid development of deep learning re-
freshes human beings’ realization of AI technique. Google’ s
Alphago and Alphago Zero force humans to realize the fact
that current AI technology can not only master the board
game go even though the complex game is concerned with
2×10170legal positions, but also beat human beings [5].
Besides the excellent performance in games, deep learning h as
also shown overwhelming advantages over human beings in
various industrial applications, such as the disease diagn ose,
automatic drive, and industrial control. Moreover, the dee p
learning technique has also been utilized in satellites for
many applications, such as the image processing. Furthermo re,
researchers have conducted lots of research on the utilizat ion
of deep learning to improve the network performance [5], [6] .
The deep learning technique is demonstrated to outperform
conventional methods. It should also be noted that current
hardware development has also enabled the deep learning
technique to run successfully on communication infrastruc -
tures [7]. Considering all these factors and examples, it is a
perspective direction to adopt the deep learning technique to
optimize the network performance of SAGIN.
In this paper, we consider the deep learning technique to
optimize the performance of SAGIN. We ﬁrst analyze several
urgent problems and challenges which are most related to
the SAGIN performance. Then, we introduce some existing
research on the applications of deep learning. After that, w egive an example to illustrate how to adopt the deep learning
technique to choose paths for the satellite networks. We the n
discuss the future directions about the application of deep
learning in SAGINs. Finally, we conclude the whole paper.
II. C HALLENGES
It has been widely acknowledged that current ground net-
works are facing exponentially increasing trafﬁc generate d by
various things connected to the network [7]. The advent of SA -
GIN can signiﬁcantly alleviate the challenge and provide us ers
with more choices. Since recent developments in the industr y
such as SpaceX and the next generation of GEO ﬁxed satellite
systems, have considerably decreased the communication co st
and increased the available capacity [4], it can be imagined
that the future earth will be surrounded by large volumes of
satellites. Due to the three dimensions and the high mobilit y
of space segment as well as the air segment, the SAGIN is
much more complex than current ground networks. In this
section, we discuss some challenges which is deeply related
to the SAGIN performance.
Network Control: The control manner of the SAGIN is
one of the most important factors which affect the network
performance directly. The distributed management can redu ce
the possibility of bottleneck and response time, while the
cooperative operation among devices increases the network
complexity. On the other hand, the centralized control mann er
can simplify the network structure, whilst the response del ay
signiﬁcantly affects the network performance. It is reason able
to assume that both two control manners will be cooperativel y
utilized in future SAGIN to increase the network tolerance t o
different mistakes. Then, the different control manners le ad to
the diversity in other network management algorithms, whic h
further complicates the network management. Moreover, sin ce