IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 6
 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6
 600  700  800  900 1000  1100  1200  1300  1400  1500  1600Network throughput (Gbps)
Number of source nodesOur proposal
Conventional strategy
(a) Comparison of network throughput for conventional rout ing
strategy and our proposal. 0 10 20 30 40 50
 600  700  800  900  1000  1100  1200  1300  1400  1500  1600Packet loss rate (%)
Number of source nodesOur proposal
Conventional strategy
(b) Comparison of network packet loss rate for conventional
routing strategy and our proposal.
Fig. 4: The performance of our proposal in terms of network th roughput and packet loss rate compared with the conventiona l
routing strategy.
source nodes in the left part and 1,600 destination nodes in
the right part. We consider various number of source nodes
which need to transmit packets to the destination nodes to
change the trafﬁc load of the space segment. For each source
node communicating with the destination nodes, its packet
generation rate is 2Mbps. According to Fig. 3, the inter-
layer connections in the MEO and GEO satellites enable
these packets to be transmitted to the right part via multipl e
paths. For instance, the packets in M1destined for M5can be
transmitted via M2andM4, or via G1andG2. As the long
propagation delay caused by the distances among satellites
deteriorates the performance seriously, the physical dist ance
is one of the most important metrics impacting on the routing
design. Therefore, according to the conventional shortest path
(SP) algorithm, the path via the MEO satellites usually has
higher priority over that through the GEO satellites due to t he
less distance. However, this actually does not lead to bette r
performance, especially when M1,M2, and M3all have heavy
trafﬁc towards the right section. If we consider the periodi cal
bursty trafﬁc as shown in [15], the MEO satellites connectin g
two parts, M2,M3,M4, and M6, will be congested frequently.
On the other hand, if the satellites can learn the rules accor ding
to the trafﬁc patterns, the MEO satellites can transfer some
trafﬁc to GEO satellites for the trafﬁc balance. Here, we
consider the deep learning technique to reach this goal.
We consider the origin-destination (OD) pair which consist s
of a MEO satellite in the left part and right part denoting
the origin and destination, respectively. Since multiple p aths
exist for every OD pair, we consider the path combinations,
C, each of which consists of one path for every OD pair. We
utilize CNN ito represent the path combination CNN iand the
output of CNN imeans that the path combination should be
chosen or not. Speciﬁcally, the input of a CNN is the trafﬁc
pattern and the remaining buffer size of MEO satellites and
GEO satellites. The output is a vector composed of two binary
elements, where (1,0)represents the path combination should
be chosen, otherwise (0,1)means not. We utilize the online
training method to train the considered CNNs [15]. The main
parameters of the utilized CNN are shown in Table II.
Figs. 4 give the results of our proposal and the conventional
SP method in terms of network throughput and packet lossrate. In Fig. 4a, we can ﬁnd the throughput of our proposal
linearly increases with the growth of the source nodes’ numb er
when the number of source nodes is less than 1,200. For
the conventional SP strategy, the value of network throughp ut
is nearly the same as that of our proposal and also linearly
increases at the beginning. However, when the number of
source nodes is above 800, the network throughput of con-
ventional strategy increases gradually slowly and nearly k eeps
a constant value after the source nodes are more than 1,000.
Therefore, we can ﬁnd our proposal can achieve much higher
throughput than the conventional strategy when the source
nodes’ number is more than 800. Fig. 4b shows the packet
loss rate of two networks. It can be easily found that the two
strategies nearly have the same performance when the source
nodes are less than 700. However, after that, the packet loss
rate of conventional strategy increases very fast, which me ans
that the network running conventional strategy is congeste d
when there are more than 700 source nodes and the congestion
becomes more seriously with the growth of source nodes.
For the deep learning based routing strategy, the network
can still transfer all the packets to destinations before th e
number of source nodes increases above 1,100. After that,
our proposal also lose some packets. We can conclude that
compared with the conventional strategy, our proposal can
signiﬁcantly improve the network performance. The reason f or
improvement of our proposal is that the utilized deep learni ng
architecture can learn the experiences from trafﬁc pattern s and
transfer some packets via GEO satellites when some MEO
satellites are nearly congested. On the other hand, in the
network running conventional strategy, the MEO satellites are
always ﬁrst chosen for packet transmission, which leads to
frequent trafﬁc congestion in the MEO satellites.
V. F UTURE DIRECTIONS
Deep learning is a promising technique to optimize the
SAGIN performance since its efﬁciency and ﬂexibility enabl e
it to be a prospective paradigm to promote the SAGIN to
a higher level. On the basis of current achievements, future
research can be conducted in following four aspects.
Architecture Construction: When designing the deep learn-
ing based proposal, the ﬁrst challenge is to construct the de ep