IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 5
GEO 
MEO 
LEO 
UAV G1 G2
M1M2
M3M4 M5
M6
Source nodes Destination nodes 
Fig. 3: The utilized network topology in the simulation.
demonstrate the agent can ﬁnd the best decision to optimize
the proposed reward function after trial and error. As we
mentioned above, the trafﬁc prediction is usually conducte d
for many network management tasks. Our previous work [12]
proposed a deep learning based partially overlapped channe l
assignment strategy for the IoT network. The proposal consi sts
of two steps: utilize the DBA as shown in Fig. 2(a) to
predict the network trafﬁc in next time interval, then adopt
the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) shown in Fig. 2(c)
to choose the suitable channels according to the predicted
trafﬁc. Since the input of the DBA considers the properties
of the IoT trafﬁc, the prediction accuracy is much higher
than conventional methods, which leads to the performance
improvement of channel assignment.
C. Smart Anomaly Detection
Since future IoT network will be abounded with a large
volume of users’ data, it is critically important to increas e the
security and privacy level of corresponding network servic es.
In existing ground networks, deep learning has also been
studied for improving the network security level. In [14], t he
authors proposed a deep learning based approach to detect
anomalous network activity. In the paper, the deep neural
network (DNN) is adopted to extract the features of users’
activities from the system logs. Then, the feature vectors a re
input to the long short-term memory (LSTM) as shown in
Fig. 2(d) to measure the anomaly score. Since the users’ ac-
tivities are often unpredictable over seconds to hours, aut hors
in this paper utilized an online unsupervised training fash ion to
train the deep learning architectures, by which the models c an
adapt to the changing patterns in the data. Simulation resul ts
show that the proposed strategy has very high accuracy rate
and can signiﬁcantly reduce the analyst workloads.
After discussing the deep learning based strategies to solv e
various problems in current terrestrial networks, it can be
clearly found that the deep learning technique can be utiliz ed
to optimize the network performance. As shown in Table. I,
we can ﬁnd that the various deep learning architectures as
well as the different training manners enable this techniqu e to
be ﬂexibly adopted in heterogeneous scenarios. On the other
hand, current research is all concentrated on the terrestri al
networks and does not consider the characteristics of futur eTABLE II. The values of main parameters utilized in the
simulation
GEO/
MEOFrequency band of
connected linksKa band
Channel capacity 1Gbps
LEODownlink L band
Channel capacity 120Mbps
CNN#Convolutional layers 3
#Fully connected layers 3
SAGIN. The heterogeneity of different segments in SAGIN
is an important factor to impact on the network performance
which also leads to more complexity. The inherent require-
ments of each individual segment as well as the tailored
techniques need to be considered when desinging the deep
learning based algorithms for SAGIN.
IV. C ASE STUDY ON DEEPLEARNING AIDED SAGIN
In this section, we take the routing problem as an example
to show how the deep learning can be utilized to optimized
the SAGIN performance. Due to the huge scale of SAGIN as
well as some uncertainties of future aerial and space segmen ts’
structures, in this paper, we just use a simpliﬁed network
structure shown in Fig. 3 as the considered scenario. In the
ﬁgure, we can ﬁnd the hierarchical structure consists of 5
layers. In the space segment, there are 2 GEOs, 6 MEOs,
and 12 LEOs, respectively. The aerial segment is composed of
120 UA Vs which get the most applications. Since researchers
have spent most energy in studying the ground segment, the
terrestrial communication technologies are relatively ma ture.
In this paper, we simplify the ground segments and only
consider the connections between the ground nodes and the
UA Vs. And if the ground nodes need to transmit the packets
via the space segments, they will ﬁrst upload the packets to t he
UA Vs. The total number of ground nodes are 3,200 and they
are evenly distributed. Due to the inherent heterogeneity o f the
three segments, it is reasonable to consider that the routin g
design follows different strategies in different segments . As
the deep learning technique has been studied to improve the
terrestrial and air segments, in this paper, we focus on the
performance optimization of the satellite network with dee p
learning. Since the simulation platform is a workstation wi th
Intel Core i7-6900K CPU, 64GB Random Access Memory
(RAM), and Nvidia Geforce Titan X GPU, it is reasonable to
just consider the inter-layer links in the layers of GEO and
MEO as well as the links connecting adjacent layers, which
can still demonstrate the advantages of our proposed proof-
of-concept. The values of main parameters in the considered
topology are given in Table II.
In Fig. 3, the network can be separated into two parts: the
left part and the right part covered by G1 and G2, respectivel y.
Even though there are lots of simultaneous communication
process in the SAGIN, we only focus on the packets generated
by the ground nodes in the left part and destined for the groun d
nodes in the right part via the satellite networks. Therefor e,
the ground nodes are evenly separated into two groups: 1,600