IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 3
Hidden 
Layers Output 
Layer Input 
Layer 
State Network Q-value 1 
Q-value 2 
Q-value n …
Neural 
networks 
x0h0
Neural 
networks 
x1h1
Neural 
networks 
x2h2
Neural 
networks 
xtht
…(a) Deep Belief Architecture (DBA) (b) Deep Q-networks 
(d) Long Short-Term Memory architecture (LSTM) Input Convolution Convolution Pooling Fully 
connected Fully 
connected Ouptut 
Prediction Pooling 
(c) Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) 
Fig. 2: The commonly utilized deep learning architectures.
the SAGIN consists of heterogenous networks which are
composed various infrastructure, the network integration sig-
niﬁcantly affects the QoE. Due to the inherent heterogeneit y
as well as the high mobility, the management of SAGIN is
exposed to extreme difﬁculties [4].
Spectrum Management: As we know, the quality of wire-
less communication is affected by the propagation medium.
Compared with terrestrial networks, the propagation mediu m
in SAGIN is much more diverse since it is highly variant in
time, frequency, and space. Due to the different impacts of
the propagation medium as well as transmission requirement s,
multiple frequency bands are cooperatively utilized in SAG IN
to improve the network performance. Since the propagation
medium of SAGIN is distinctly different from the well studie d
terrestrial communication systems and the high variance le ads
to the frequent changes, it still needs more endeavors to
manage the spectrum in the SAGIN [4]. Moreover, the channel
resource allocation is still one of the most important facto rs
to affect the network performance despite of the abundant
research on this topic for ground networks. As mentioned
above, the earth will be surrounded by massive satellites as
well as aerial infrastructure in large volume. As the freque ncy
bands are already congested, Internet Service Providers (I SPs)
have to consider sharing the same frequency bands for many
different types of communications. For instance, L-band is
extensively utilized for space-ground, space-air, and air -ground
communications. Then, the mutual interference caused by
different communication process utilizing the same channe ls
or adjacent channels should be considered when optimizing t he
SAGIN performance [8]. However, the inherent heterogeneit y
and high mobility of SAGIN make the problem more complex,meaning that more efﬁcient techniques should be considered
compared with that of terrestrial networks.
Energy Management: Different from some devices in the
ground which can be charged or connected to the power at
any time, the aerial and space infrastructure as well as some
IoT sensors cannot be connected to a power station. These
devices are powered by the solar or battery. For instance,
current satellites have solar cells to absorb and convert th e
solar energy, and then utilize batteries to save the energy f or
usage when moving to the shadow area. To improve the energy
efﬁciency can increase the usage time of the satellites sinc e
the total times of complete charge of battery cells are limit ed.
However, different from the ground segment which usually ju st
improves communication mechanisms to save the energy, the
totally different propagation medium, the intense radiati on, and
space-variant temperature also affect the energy consumpt ions
of satellite segments [9]. For the aerial infrastructure, o ptimiz-
ing the energy efﬁciency is more critical than conventional
terrestrial communication system. Moreover, while the pow er
consumption in terrestrial communication systems are main ly
related to the communication related functions, the majori ty
power consumption for the aerial segments are to maintain th e
aloft and support their mobility [10]. Therefore, the energ y
management is a critical but challenging topic for SAGIN.
Routing and Handover Management: Since the SAGIN
is a multi-layer network, there exists multiple paths for mo st
source and destination pairs. On the one hand, the multiple
paths can be utilized for different types of trafﬁc transmis sion
for meeting the diverse service requirements. On the other
hand, this increases the difﬁculty in routing strategy desi gn
since the network researchers need to consider the service