arXiv:1808.01053v1  [cs.NI]  3 Aug 2018IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 1
Optimizing Space-Air-Ground Integrated Networks
by Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Nei Kato, Fellow, IEEE , Zubair Md. Fadlullah, Senior Member, IEEE, Fengxiao Tang, Student Member, IEEE,
Bomin Mao, Student Member, IEEE, Shigenori Tani, Member, IEEE, Atsushi Okamura, Senior Member, IEEE,
Jiajia Liu, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —It is widely acknowledged that the development of
traditional terrestrial communication technologies cann ot provide
all users with fair and high quality services due to the scarc e
network resource and limited coverage areas. To complement
the terrestrial connection, especially for users in rural, disaster-
stricken, or other difﬁcult-to-serve areas, satellites, u nmanned
aerial vehicles (UA Vs), and balloons have been utilized to r elay
the communication signals. On the basis, Space-Air-Ground
Integrated Networks (SAGINs) have been proposed to improve
the users’ Quality of Experience (QoE). However, compared
with existing networks such as ad hoc networks and cellular
networks, the SAGINs are much more complex due to the various
characteristics of three network segments. To improve the p erfor-
mance of SAGINs, researchers are facing many unprecedented
challenges. In this paper, we propose the Artiﬁcial Intelli gence
(AI) technique to optimize the SAGINs, as the AI technique ha s
shown its predominant advantages in many applications. We ﬁ rst
analyze several main challenges of SAGINs and explain how th ese
problems can be solved by AI. Then, we consider the satellite
trafﬁc balance as an example and propose a deep learning base d
method to improve the trafﬁc control performance. Simulati on
results evaluate that the deep learning technique can be an
efﬁcient tool to improve the performance of SAGINs.
Index Terms —Space-Air-Ground Integrated Networks, Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence, network performance optimization.
I. I NTRODUCTION
IN recent years, signiﬁcant achievements have been
achieved in terrestrial communication systems to offer
users Internet access with much higher data rate and lower
latency [1]. The next generation wireless system, 5G, is
announced 20 times faster than 4G with ultra-densely deploy ed
base stations. However, this does not mean that all users can
enjoy such kind of high quality Internet services at any time
due to the limited network capacities and coverage areas. Fo r
instance, in rural areas which lack the terrestrial high-sp eed
broadband infrastructure because of the high expense, user s
still suffer the narrow-band network access [2]. Moreover,
users in a stadium or participating concerts cannot enjoy st able
Internet service. To address these problems, industry have
Nei Kato, Zubair Md. Fadlullah, Fengxiao Tang, and Bomin Mao
are with the Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohok u
University, Sendai, Japan. Emails: {kato, zubair, fengxia o.tang, and
bomin.mao}@it.is.tohoku.ac.jp
Shigenori Tani and Atsushi Okamura are with Information Tec hnology
R&D center, Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Kamakura, Ja pan. Emails:
{Tani.Shigenori@eb, Okamura.Atsushi@bc}.MitsubishiEl ectric.co.jp
Jiajia Liu is with the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Ser vices Networks,
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 7100 71, China. Email:
liujiajia@xidian.edu.cnmade many endeavors, such as the Google’s Project Loon
and Facebook’s Aquila, which provide Internet access throu gh
balloons and drones located in the air, respectively [3]. As
shown in Fig. 1, compared with the ground segment, the air
and space communication systems have much larger coverage,
which have been utilized to provide Internet service to isla nds,
isolated mountainous areas, as well as the disaster areas.
However, different from the ground networks, the air net-
works and space networks have their own shortcomings.
Users of satellite communication systems have to tolerate
the long propagation latency, while the air networks have
limited capacity and unstable links. Moreover, both the two
networks are of high mobility. On the other hand, the terrest rial
networks have the highest throughput and most resource. As
the three networks at different altitudes can complement ea ch
other, researchers proposed the integrated network termed
Space-Air-Ground Integrated Network (SAGIN) as shown in
Fig. 1 to provide users with improved and ﬂexible end to end
services [4]. It can be found that the SAGIN is a hierarchical
network, with the satellites at the top, the unmanned aerial
vehicles (UA Vs), balloons, and airships in the air, and the
ground segment. Notice that the space segment consists of
the satellites, constellations, as well as the correspondi ng
terrestrial infrastructures, such as the ground stations a nd the
control centers.
Aided by the air and space segments, the SAGIN in
Fig.1 enables the packets generated by the ground nodes to
be transmitted to destinations via multiple paths of variou s
quality. Therefore, the three heterogeneous networks can o f-
fer differential packet transmissions to meet various serv ice
requirements, which is extremely important for the Interne t
of Things (IoT) network. Moreover, the multi-layered satel lite
communication systems which consists of the Geostationary
Earth Orbit (GEO) satellites, the Medium Earth Orbit (MEO)
satellites, and the Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites, can
utilize the multi-cast and broadcast techniques to improve
the network capacity, which can signiﬁcantly alleviate the
growing trafﬁc burden [2], [4]. However, the network design
and optimization in SAGIN are facing lots of challenges due t o
the inherent characteristics of heterogeneity, self-orga nization,
and time-variability [4]. To improve the end to end Quality o f
Experience (QoE), it would happen frequently that research ers
have to conduct the analysis from all three parts since many
transmission in SAGINs are collaboratively conducted by
the base stations in the ground, the UA Vs in the air, and
the satellites in the space. In such case, more factors have