IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 7
learning architecture. As there are so many deep learning
architectures of which each can be utilized for different
applications, it is still tough even for an experienced rese archer
to choose the suitable structure. Moreover, the input and ou tput
design of the architecture is deeply concerned with the stud ied
problems and impacts on the prediction accuracy as well as
the computation overhead. Considering more factors usuall y
means not only much higher accuracy rate but also the in-
creased training and running time. Furthermore, as the SAGI N
is a multi-dimensional network which is more complex than
current terrestrial networks, how to design the correspond ing
deep learning architectures still needs more consideratio n.
Proposal Deployment: As we mentioned above, the long
latency of the space communication system is a serious
shortcoming for the SAGIN. When we deploy deep learning
based proposals, if we consider the centralized control man -
ner, the computation time cost as well as the transmission
latency between the controller and the controlled devices w ill
deteriorate the network performance. However, the distrib uted
control is not always a good choice for any scenario, especia lly
when the input of deep learning architecture is concerned wi th
the whole network. Therefore, the distributed control mann er
often means increased signaling overhead caused by necessa ry
information exchange. Moreover, the device computation re -
quirement in the distributed network is much higher because
every device needs to run the deep learning based method.
Computation Efﬁciency: Since the deep learning tech-
nique is usually concerned with much more computation
consumption than conventional methods, when considering
the deep learning technique to optimize the SAGIN perfor-
mance, it is necessary to improve the computation efﬁciency .
The computation efﬁciency is concerned with many factors,
such as the required accuracy rate, the training strategy, t he
computation hardware, and so on. In most cases, increasing
the number of layers can improve the accuracy rate, but
also leads to increased computation consumption. Therefor e,
when designing the deep learning architectures, we need
to consider the accuracy requirement and try our best to
simplify the architectures. Many other techniques to impro ve
the computation efﬁciency should also be considered, such a s
utilizing the parameters of existing deep learning archite ctures
for initialization. Furthermore, the ofﬂine training mann er
can reduce the computation overhead during running phase,
while the online training fashion enables the deep learning
architecture to easily adapt to the changing patterns.
Hardware Design: To deploy the deep learning based
strategies, we also need to make some modiﬁcations on curren t
communication hardware. It is common that the GPU is more
suitable for deep learning computation since it can efﬁcien tly
handle the matrix computations. Thus, if we adopt the deep
learning technique to optimize the SAGIN performance, it is
important to equip enough GPU resource in current network
infrastructure. At the same time, the cooperation among the
different computation resource as well as the computation t ask
scheduling also need to be studied. Moreover, the hardware
expense should be also considered to improve the cost perfor -
mance ratio, especially for the space communication system s.VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we study the deep learning technique to
optimize the SAGIN performance. Firstly, we discuss severa l
challenges which directly impact on the network performanc e.
Then, we give some analysis about existing deep learning
based research to improve the terrestrial network performa nce
and also explain the shortcomings of these proposals for fut ure
SAGIN. To show how the deep learning technique can improve
the SAGIN performance, we give an example which utilizes
the CNN to choose the path combinations for the satellite
communication system. Since applying the AI technique in
SAGIN is still a new topic, we also discuss some future
promising directions.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Zhang, P. Yang, J. Ren, D. Chen, L. Yu, and X. Shen, “Syne rgy of
Big Data and 5G Wireless Networks: Opportunities, Approach es, and
Challenges,” IEEE Wireless Communications , vol. 25, pp. 12–18, Feb.
2018.
[2] C. Niephaus, M. Kretschmer, and G. Ghinea, “QoS Provisio ning in
Converged Satellite and Terrestrial Networks: A Survey of t he State-of-
the-Art,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials , vol. 18, pp. 2415–
2441, Fourthquarter 2016.
[3] “The Flight to Own the Stratosphere: Google’s Project Lo on vs
Facebook’s Aquila.” https://www.yaabot.com/29834/batt ling-it-out-for-
internet-access-from-the-skies-googles-project-loon -versus-facebooks-
aquila/, (accessed Jun. 2018).
[4] J. Liu, Y . Shi, Y . Shi, Z. M. Fadlullah, and N. Kato, “Space -Air-
Ground Integrated Network: A Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials , 2018, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2018.2841996.
[5] Z. M. Fadlullah, F. Tang, B. Mao, N. Kato, O. Akashi, T. Ino ue,
and K. Mizutani, “State-of-the-Art Deep Learning: Evolvin g Machine
Intelligence Toward Tomorrow’s Intelligent Network Trafﬁ c Control
Systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials , vol. 19, pp. 2432–
2455, Fourthquarter 2017.
[6] N. Kato, Z. M. Fadlullah, B. Mao, F. Tang, O. Akashi, T. Ino ue, and
K. Mizutani, “The Deep Learning Vision for Heterogeneous Ne twork
Trafﬁc Control: Proposal, Challenges, and Future Perspect ive,” IEEE
Wireless Communications , vol. 24, pp. 146–153, Dec. 2017.
[7] B. Mao, Z. M. Fadlullah, F. Tang, N. Kato, O. Akashi, T. Ino ue, and
K. Mizutani, “Routing or Computing? The Paradigm Shift Towa rds
Intelligent Computer Network Packet Transmission Based on Deep
Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Computers , vol. 66, pp. 1946–1960,
Nov. 2017.
[8] T. Pelzmann, T. Jost, M. Schwinzerl, F. PÃl’rez-FontÃ ˛ a n, M. SchÃ˝ unhu-
ber, and N. Floury, “Airborne Measurements Enhancing the Sa tellite-to-
aircraft Channel Model in L-band,” in 2016 10th European Conference
on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP) , pp. 1–5, Apr. 2016.
[9] Y . Yang, M. Xu, D. Wang, and Y . Wang, “Towards Energy-Efﬁc ient
Routing in Satellite Networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications , vol. 34, pp. 3869–3886, Dec. 2016.
[10] Y . Zeng and R. Zhang, “Energy-Efﬁcient UA V Communicati on With
Trajectory Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communica-
tions , vol. 16, pp. 3747–3760, Jun. 2017.
[11] L. Gupta, R. Jain, and G. Vaszkun, “Survey of Important I ssues in UA V
Communication Networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials ,
vol. 18, pp. 1123–1152, Secondquarter 2016.
[12] F. Tang, Z. M. Fadlullah, B. Mao, and N. Kato, “An Intelli gent
Trafﬁc Load Prediction Based Adaptive Channel Assignment A lgorithm
in SDN-IoT: A Deep Learning Approach,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal , online, 2018.
[13] X. He, K. Wang, H. Huang, T. Miyazaki, Y . Wang, and S. Guo, “Green
Resource Allocation based on Deep Reinforcement Learning i n Content-
Centric IoT,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing ,
online, 2018.
[14] A. Tuor, S. Kaplan, B. Hutchinson, N. Nichols, and S. Rob inson,
“Deep Learning for Unsupervised Insider Threat Detection i n Structured
Cybersecurity Data Streams,” CoRR , vol. abs/1710.00811, 2017.
[15] F. Tang, B. Mao, Z. M. Fadlullah, N. Kato, O. Akashi, T. In oue, and
K. Mizutani, “On Removing Routing Protocol from Future Wire less
Networks: A Real-time Deep Learning Approach for Intellige nt Trafﬁc
Control,” IEEE Wireless Communications , vol. 25, pp. 154–160, Feb.
2018.