IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 4
TABLE I. Some existing networking research based on deep lea rning
Purpose StrategyDeep learning
architectureTraining
mannerTraining
timeChallenges for SAGIN
Trafﬁc
controlRouting DBASupervised
learningOfﬂine Each individual segment has its inherent
requirements and tailored techniques and
protocols to cater to those requirements.
Hence, the deep learning based conventional
applications for the individual segments
cannot provide a smart, holistic solution.
Therefore, in this article, we aim to investigate
how to leverage deep learning for the integrated
space, air, and gound networks.Resource
allocationCache
allocationDeep
Q-networkReinforcement
learningOfﬂine
Channel
assignmentDBA,
CNNSupervised
learning
SecurityAnomoly
detectionLSTMUnsupervised
learningOnline
requirements and the performance of paths in terms of packet
loss rate, end-to-end delay, and throughput [11]. Another c hal-
lenge for routing design is the high mobility of SAGIN which
leads to uncertainties in locations of mobile devices. More over,
the high mobility also results in the frequent handover, whi ch
is a challenge for ensuring the seamless transmissions. As t he
SAGIN consists of heterogeneous components and different
segments have various coverage areas, different handover
schemes should be proposed with the properties of corre-
sponding segments considered. For instance, the handover i n
UA V-based communication systems should consider the work
states of UA Vs since they are often shutdown to save power.
Furthermore, efﬁcient prediction algorithms are also requ ired
due to the location uncertainties [4].
Security Guarantee: As a cooperative network with open
links and dynamic topologies, SAGIN are facing many securit y
threatens. Even though the SAGIN is required to offer reliab le
and secure communications due to the large amount of sensi-
tive data, it is still difﬁcult to provide high security leve l, for
which the main reasons are multi-fold. First, the conventio nal
communication protocols, e.g. TCP/IP, have been revised to
integrate diverse technologies for performance improveme nt,
which leads to new problems in IP security mechanism. Sec-
ond, the encryption operations often results in more proces sing
delay and transmission delay, which may hamper the real-tim e
communications. And the higher the security level, the more
time it costs. Third, the high mobility of the SAGIN produces
many challenges to the network security. For instance, the
frequent handover makes the secure routing more difﬁcult
to be realized. And the SAGIN becomes more vulnerable to
jamming, which is difﬁcult to be addressed because of the
large coverage area [4].
III. R ELATED RESEARCH ON AIBASED NETWORKING
OPTIMIZATIONS
Similar to the SAGIN, current terrestrial networks also
have the above-mentioned but less complex problems. To
address these problems, the deep learning technique has bee n
a perspective direction to optimize the network performanc e
in recent years. And the results have evaluated the advantag es
of the deep learning over traditional strategies. In this se ction,
we make some analysis about the existing research and thendiscuss the necessary modiﬁcations for adoption in the SA-
GIN. It should be noted that even though existing proposals
cannot be applied in SAGIN directly, they can provide a solid
foundation for future research.
A. Intelligent Trafﬁc Control
As the network trafﬁc is exponentially increasing, trafﬁc
control is a hot research topic. Our previous work [6] propos ed
a deep learning based routing strategy which utilizes the De ep
Belief Architecture (DBA) as shown in Fig. 2(a) to predict th e
paths. In the proposal, the input and output of the DBA are the
trafﬁc patterns and the next node, respectively. The simula tion
results show that the proposal can signiﬁcantly improve the
network throughput and reduce the average delay per hop. To
enable the deployment of the proposed deep learning based
routing strategy, in [7], we analyzed the Graphics Processi ng
Unit (GPU) accelerated Software Deﬁned Routers (SDRs).
Theoretical analysis shows that time cost for training and
running the strategy with GPU is much lower than that with
CPU. Moreover, the SDR architecture also provides more
opportunities to improve the ﬂexibility. Besides the next n ode
prediction, the deep learning technique is also utilized fo r the
trafﬁc forecast, which can be adopted for routing design and
following resource allocation [12].
B. Intelligent Resource Allocation
Resource allocation is an important factor which directly
impacts on the network performance. In current terrestrial
networks, the network resource allocation is usually conce rned
with two types of resource: the communication resource in-
cluding channels and bandwidth, and the computation resour ce
which consists of the processing power and memory. The
authors of [13] discussed the balance between two conﬂictin g
factors: the network cost and users’ mean opinion score
(MOS) to improve the network QoE. In this paper, authors
utilized the deep reinforcement learning technique to chan ge
the cache location of content. Speciﬁcally, the network sta tes
which consists of the transmission rates and cache conditio n
are utilized as the input of the deep Q-networks shown in
Fig. 2(b). Then, the agent can choose the best action accordi ng
to the output Q-values of different actions. Simulation res ults