Page 36 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
Comparing Augmentations
As shown throughout “Design considerations for image Data Augmentation ” section, 
possibilities for Data Augmentation. However, there are not many comparative studies 
that show the performance differences of these different augmentations. One such study 
was conducted by Shijie et al. [119] which compared GANs, WGANs, flipping, cropping, shifting, PCA jittering, color jittering, adding noise, rotation, and some combinations on the CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets. Additionally, the comparative study ranged across dataset sizes with the small set consisting of 2  k samples with 200 in each class, tthe 
medium set consisting of 10 k samples with 1 k in each class, and the large set consist
-
ing of 50 k samples with 5 k in each class. They also tested with 3 levels of augmentation, 
no augmentation, original plus same size of generated samples, and original plus double 
size of generated samples. They found that cropping, flipping, WGAN, and rotation gen -
erally performed better than others. The combinations of flipping + cropping and flip -
ping + WGAN were the best overall, improving classification performance on CIFAR-10 
by + 3% and + 3.5%, respectively.
Design considerations for image Data Augmentation
This section will briefly describe some additional design decisions with respect to Data 
Augmentation techniques on image data.
Test -time augmentation
In addition to augmenting training data, many research reports have shown the effec -
tiveness of augmenting data at test-time as well. This can be seen as analogous to ensem -
ble learning techniques in the data space. By taking a test image and augmenting it in the same way as the training images, a more robust prediction can be derived. This comes at a computational cost depending on the augmentations performed, and it can restrict 
the speed of the model. This could be a very costly bottleneck in models that require 
real-time prediction. However, test-time augmentation is a promising practice for appli
-
cations such as medical image diagnosis. Radosavovic et al. [120] denote test-time aug -
mentation as data distillation to describe the use of ensembled predictions to get a better representation of the image.
Wang et al. [121] sought out to develop a mathematical framework to formulate test-
time augmentation. Testing their test-time augmentation scheme on medical image segmentation, they found that it outperformed the single-prediction baseline and drop
-
out-based multiple predictions. They also found better uncertainty estimation when using test-time augmentation, reducing highly confident but incorrect predictions. Their test-time augmentation method uses a Monte Carlo simulation in order to obtain 
parameters for different augmentations such as flipping, scaling, rotation, and transla
-
tions, as well as noise injections.
Test-time augmentation can be found in the Alexnet paper [1], which applies CNNs 
to the ImageNet dataset. In their experiments, they average the predictions on ten ran -
domly cropped patches. These patches consist of one extracted from the center, four corner croppings, and the equivalent regions on the horizontally flipped images. These 
predictions are averaged to form the final output. He et al. [3] use the same 10-crop test
-
ing procedure to evaluate their ResNet CNN architecture (Fig. 32).