Page 42 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
speed. Determining the effectiveness of test-time augmentation by primarily exploring 
test-time geometric transformations and Neural Style Transfer, is an area of future work.
An interesting question for practical Data Augmentation is how to determine post-
augmented dataset size. There is no consensus as to which ratio of original to final 
dataset size will result in the best performing model. However, imagine using color aug -
mentations exclusively. If the initial training dataset consists of 50 dogs and 50 cats, and 
each image is augmented with 100 color filters to produce 5000 dogs and 5000 cats, this 
dataset will be heavily biased towards the spatial characteristics of the original 50 dogs and 50 cats. This over-extensive color-augmented data will cause a deep model to overfit even worse than the original. From this anecdote, we can conceptualize the existence of an optimal size for post-augmented data.
Additionally, there is no consensus about the best strategy for combining data warping 
and oversampling techniques. One important consideration is the intrinsic bias in the initial, limited dataset. There are no existing augmentation techniques that can correct a dataset that has very poor diversity with respect to the testing data. All these augmenta
-
tion algorithms perform best under the assumption that the training data and testing data are both drawn from the same distribution. If this is not true, it is very unlikely that these methods will be useful.
Future work
Future work in Data Augmentation will be focused on many different areas such as establishing a taxonomy of augmentation techniques, improving the quality of GAN 
samples, learning new ways to combine meta-learning and Data Augmentation, discov
-
ering relationships between Data Augmentation and classifier architecture, and extend -
ing these principles to other data types. We are interested in seeing how the time-series 
component in video data impacts the use of static image augmentation techniques. Data 
Augmentation is not limited to the image domain and can be useful for text, bioinfor -
matics, tabular records, and many more.
Our future work intends to explore performance benchmarks across geometric and 
color space augmentations across several datasets from different image recognition tasks. These datasets will be constrained in size to test the effectiveness with respect to 
limited data problems. Zhang et al. [135] test their novel GAN augmentation technique on the SVHN dataset across 50, 80, 100, 200, and 500 training instances. Similar to this work, we will look to further establish benchmarks for different levels of limited data.
Improving the quality of GAN samples and testing their effectiveness on a wide range 
of datasets is another very important area for future work. We would like to further explore the combinatorics of GAN samples with other augmentation techniques such as applying a range of style transfers to GAN-generated samples.
Super-resolution networks through the use of SRCNNs, Super-Resolution Convolu
-
tional Neural Networks, and SRGANs are also very interesting areas for future work in Data Augmentation. We want to explore the performance differences across archi
-
tectures with upsampled images such as expanding CIFAR-10 images from 32 × 32 to 
64 × 64 to 128 × 128 and so on. One of the primary difficulties with GAN samples is try -
ing to achieve high-resolution outputs. Therefore, it will be interesting to see how we 
can use super-resolution networks to achieve high-resolution such as DCGAN samples