Page 34 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
the significant performance increase with the Smart Augmentation meta-learning strat -
egy (Fig. 31).
AutoAugment AutoAugment [38], developed by Cubuk et  al., is a much different 
approach to meta-learning than Neural Augmentation or Smart Augmentation. Auto -
Augment is a Reinforcement Learning algorithm [115] that searches for an optimal 
augmentation policy amongst a constrained set of geometric transformations with mis -
cellaneous levels of distortions. For example, ‘translateX 20 pixels’ could be one of the transformations in the search space (Table 8).
In Reinforcement Learning algorithms, a policy is analogous to the strategy of the 
learning algorithm. This policy determines what actions to take at given states to achieve some goal. The AutoAugment approach learns a policy which consists of many sub-policies, each sub-policy consisting of an image transformation and a magnitude of 
transformation. Reinforcement Learning is thus used as a discrete search algorithm of 
augmentations. The authors also suggest that evolutionary algorithms or random search would be effective search algorithms as well.
AutoAugment found policies which achieved a 1.48% error rate on CIFAR-10. Auto
-
Augment also achieved an 83.54% Top-1 accuracy on the ImageNet dataset. Very inter -
estingly as well, the policies learned on the ImageNet dataset were successful when transferred to the Stanford Cars and FGVC Aircraft image recognition tasks. In this case, the ImageNet policy applied to these other datasets reduced error rates by 1.16% 
and 1.76% respectively.
Geng et al. [116] expanded on AutoAugment by replacing the Reinforcement Learning 
search algorithm with Augmented Random Search (ARS) [112]. The authors point out that the sub-policies learned from AutoAugment are inherently flawed because of the 
discrete search space. They convert the probability and magnitude of augmentations into a continuous space and search for sub-policies with ARS. With this, they achieve lower error rates on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet (Table 9).
Minh et  al. [117] also experimented with using Reinforcement Learning [115] to 
search for Data Augmentations. They further explore the effectiveness of learning trans
-
formations for individual instances rather than the entire dataset. They find classifica -
tion accuracy differences of 70.18% versus 74.42% on the CIFAR-10 dataset and 74.61% 
versus 80.35% on the problem of classifying dogs versus cats. Further, they explore the 
robustness of classifiers with respect to test-time augmentation and find that the model 
Fig. 31 On the gender recognition task, the image to the left is an example of an instance produced by 
Network-A in Smart Augmentation given the right images as input [37]