Page 31 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
limits this dataset to 2 classes. Thus there are only 800 images for training. Each of 
the Tiny-imagenet-200 images is 64 × 64 ×  3, and the MNIST images are 28 × 28 ×  1. 
The experiment compares their proposed Neural Augmentation [36] approach with traditional augmentation techniques such as cropping and rotation, as well as with a style transfer approach with a predetermined set of styles such as Night/Day and Winter/Summer.
The traditional baseline study transformed images by choosing an augmentation 
from a set (shifted, zoomed in/out, rotated, flipped, distorted, or shaded with a hue). This was repeated to increase the dataset size from N to 2 N. The GAN style transfer baseline uses 6 different styles to transform images (Cezanne, Enhance, Monet, Uki
-
yoe, Van Gogh and Winter). The Neural Augmentation techniques tested consist of three levels based on the design of the loss function for the augmentation net (Con
-
tent loss, Style loss via gram matrix, and no loss computer at this layer). All experi -
ments are tested with a convolutional network consisting of 3 convolutional layers each followed by max pooling and batch normalization, followed by 2 fully-connected layers. Each experiment runs for 40 epochs at a learning rate of 0.0001 with the Adam 
optimization technique (Table 7 ).
The results of the experiment are very promising. The Neural Augmentation tech
-
nique performs significantly better on the Dogs versus Goldfish study and only 
slightly worse on Dogs versus Cats. The technique does not have any impact on the MNIST problem. The paper suggests that the likely best strategy would be to combine 
the traditional augmentations and the Neural Augmentations.
Smart Augmentation The Smart Augmentation [37] approach utilizes a similar con
-
cept as the Neural Augmentation technique presented above. However, the combina -
tion of images is derived exclusively from the learned parameters of a prepended CNN, 
rather than using the Neural Style Transfer algorithm.
Smart Augmentation is another approach to meta-learning augmentations. This is 
done by having two networks, Network- A and Network- B. Network- A is an augmen -
tation network that takes in two or more input images and maps them into a new 
image or images to train Network- B. The change in the error rate in Network- B is then 
Fig. 29 Illustration of augmentation network [36]