Page 15 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
interesting to see how the performance changes if we partition the training data such 
that the first 100 epochs are trained with original and mixed images and the last 50 with 
original images only. These kinds of strategies are discussed further in Design Consid -
erations of Data Augmentation with respect to curriculum learning [69]. Additionally, the paper will cover a meta-learning technique developed by Lemley et al. [37] that uses 
a neural network to learn an optimal mixing of images.
Random erasing
Random erasing [70] is another interesting Data Augmentation technique developed by Zhong et al. Inspired by the mechanisms of dropout regularization, random erasing can be seen as analogous to dropout except in the input data space rather than embed
-
ded into the network architecture. This technique was specifically designed to combat image recognition challenges due to occlusion. Occlusion refers to when some parts of 
the object are unclear. Random erasing will stop this by forcing the model to learn more 
descriptive features about an image, preventing it from overfitting to a certain visual fea
-
ture in the image. Aside from the visual challenge of occlusion, in particular, random erasing is a promising technique to guarantee a network pays attention to the entire 
image, rather than just a subset of it.
Random erasing works by randomly selecting an n × m patch of an image and masking 
it with either 0 s, 255 s, mean pixel values, or random values. On the CIFAR-10 dataset 
this resulted in an error rate reduction from 5.17 to 4.31%. The best patch fill method 
was found to be random values. The fill method and size of the masks are the only 
parameters that need to be hand-designed during implementation (Figs. 11, 12).
Random erasing is a Data Augmentation method that seeks to directly prevent overfit
-
ting by altering the input space. By removing certain input patches, the model is forced 
to find other descriptive characteristics. This augmentation method can also be stacked 
on top of other augmentation techniques such as horizontal flipping or color filters. Ran -
dom erasing produced one of the highest accuracies on the CIFAR-10 dataset. DeVries and Taylor [71] conducted a similar study called Cutout Regularization. Like the random erasing study, they experimented with randomly masking regions of the image (Table 2).
Mikolajcyzk and Grochowski [72] presented an interesting idea to combine random 
erasing with GANs designed for image inpainting. Image inpainting describes the task of 
Fig. 11 Example of random erasing on image recognition tasks [70]