Page 5 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
privacy, the requirement of medical experts for labeling, and the expense and manual 
effort needed to conduct medical imaging processes. These obstacles have led to many 
studies on image Data Augmentation, especially GAN-based oversampling, from the application perspective of medical image classification.
Many studies on the effectiveness of Data Augmentation utilize popular academic 
image datasets to benchmark results. These datasets include MNIST hand written digit 
recognition, CIFAR-10/100, ImageNet, tiny-imagenet-200, SVHN (street view house 
numbers), Caltech-101/256, MIT places, MIT-Adobe 5K dataset, Pascal VOC, and Stan
-
ford Cars. The datasets most frequently discussed are CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Ima -
geNet. The expansion of open-source datasets has given researchers a wide variety of cases to compare performance results of Data Augmentation techniques. Most of these 
datasets such as ImageNet would be classified as big data. Many experiments constrain 
themselves to a subset of the dataset to simulate limited data problems.
In addition to our focus on limited datasets, we will also consider the problem of class 
imbalance and how Data Augmentation can be a useful oversampling solution. Class 
imbalance describes a dataset with a skewed ratio of majority to minority samples. Leevy 
et  al. [27] describe many of the existing solutions to high-class imbalance across data types. Our survey will show how class-balancing oversampling in image data can be done with Data Augmentation.
Many aspects of Deep Learning and neural network models draw comparisons with 
human intelligence. For example, a human intelligence anecdote of transfer learning is illustrated in learning music. If two people are trying to learn how to play the guitar, and one already knows how to play the piano, it seems likely that the piano-player will learn to play the guitar faster. Analogous to learning music, a model that can classify Ima
-
geNet images will likely perform better on CIFAR-10 images than a model with random weights.
Data Augmentation is similar to imagination or dreaming. Humans imagine differ
-
ent scenarios based on experience. Imagination helps us gain a better understanding of our world. Data Augmentation methods such as GANs and Neural Style Transfer 
can ‘imagine’ alterations to images such that they have a better understanding of them. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: A brief “Background ” is provided 
to give readers a historical context of Data Augmentation and Deep Learning. “Image Data Augmentation techniques” discusses each image augmentation technique in detail 
along with experimental results. “Design considerations for image Data Augmentation ” 
discusses additional characteristics of augmentation such as test-time augmentation 
and the impact of image resolution. The paper concludes with a “Discussion ” of the pre
-
sented material, areas of “Future work ” , and “ Conclusion ”.
Background
Image augmentation in the form of data warping can be found in LeNet-5 [28]. This was one of the first applications of CNNs on handwritten digit classification. Data 
augmentation has also been investigated in oversampling applications. Oversampling 
is a technique used to re-sample imbalanced class distributions such that the model is not overly biased towards labeling instances as the majority class type. Random Oversampling (ROS) is a naive approach which duplicates images randomly from the