Page 22 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
The vanilla GAN architecture uses multilayer perceptron networks in the gen -
erator and discriminator networks. This is able to produce acceptable images on 
a simple image dataset such as the MNIST handwritten digits. However, it fails 
to produce quality results for higher resolution, more complicated datasets. In 
the MNIST dataset, each image is only 28 × 28 ×  1 for a total of 784 pixels. GANs 
applied to the MNIST data are able to produce convincing results. However, MNIST images are far less challenging than other image datasets due to low intra-class vari
-
ance and resolution, to name a couple differences of many. This is in heavy contrast 
with other datasets studied in most academic Computer Vision papers such as Ima -
geNet or CIFAR-10. For immediate reference, an ImageNet image is of resolution 
256 × 256 ×  3, totaling 196,608 pixels, a 250×  increase in pixel count compared with 
MNIST.
Many research papers have been published that modify the GAN framework 
through different network architectures, loss functions, evolutionary methods, and many more. This research has significantly improved the quality of samples created by 
GANs. There have been many new architectures proposed for expanding on the con
-
cept of GANs and producing higher resolution output images, many of which are out 
of the scope of this paper. Amongst these new architectures, DCGANs, Progressively Growing GANs, CycleGANs, and Conditional GANs seem to have the most applica
-
tion potential in Data Augmentation.
The DCGAN [91] architecture was proposed to expand on the internal complex -
ity of the generator and discriminator networks. This architecture uses CNNs for the generator and discriminator networks rather than multilayer perceptrons. The DCGAN was tested to generate results on the LSUN interior bedroom image data
-
set, each image being 64 × 64 ×  3, for a total of 12,288 pixels, (compared to 784 in 
MNIST). The idea behind DCGAN is to increase the complexity of the generator 
network to project the input into a high dimensional tensor and then add decon -
volutional layers to go from the projected tensor to an output image. These decon -
volutional layers will expand on the spatial dimensions, for example, going from 
14 × 14 ×  6 to 28 × 28 ×  1, whereas a convolutional layer will decrease the spatial 
dimensions such as going from 14 × 14 ×  32 to 7 × 7 × 64. The DCGAN architecture 
presents a strategy for using convolutional layers in the GAN framework to produce higher resolution images (Figs. 17, 18).
Fig. 17 DCGAN, generator architecture presented by Radford et al. [91]