Page 12 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
filters can be better implemented as a layer of the network rather than as an addition to 
the dataset through Data Augmentation.
Mixing images
Mixing images together by averaging their pixel values is a very counterintuitive approach to Data Augmentation. The images produced by doing this will not look like a 
useful transformation to a human observer. However, Ionue [65] demonstrated how the 
pairing of samples could be developed into an effective augmentation strategy. In this experiment, two images are randomly cropped from 256 × 256 to 224 × 224 and ran
-
domly flipped horizontally. These images are then mixed by averaging the pixel values for each of the RGB channels. This results in a mixed image which is used to train a clas
-
sification model. The label assigned to the new image is the same as the first randomly selected image (Fig. 7).
On the CIFAR-10 dataset, Ionue reported a reduction in error rate from 8.22 to 6.93% 
when using the SamplePairing Data Augmentation technique. The researcher found even better results when testing a reduced size dataset, reducing CIFAR-10 to 1000 total 
samples with 100 in each class. With the reduced size dataset, SamplePairing resulted in 
an error rate reduction from 43.1 to 31.0%. The reduced CIFAR-10 results demonstrate the usefulness of the SamplePairing technique in limited data applications (Fig. 8).
Another detail found in the study is that better results were obtained when mixing 
images from the entire training set rather than from instances exclusively belonging 
to the same class. Starting from a training set of size N, SamplePairing produces a 
dataset of size  N
2 + N. In addition, Sample Pairing can be stacked on top of other 
augmentation techniques. For example, if using the augmentations demonstrated in 
Fig. 5 Examples of applying the PatchShuffle regularization technique [64]
Fig. 6 Pixels in a n × n window are randomly shifted with a probability parameter p