Page 8 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
Color space
Digital image data is usually encoded as a tensor of the dimension (height × width × color 
channels). Performing augmentations in the color channels space is another strategy 
that is very practical to implement. Very simple color augmentations include isolating 
a single color channel such as R, G, or B. An image can be quickly converted into its representation in one color channel by isolating that matrix and adding 2 zero matrices from the other color channels. Additionally, the RGB values can be easily manipulated with simple matrix operations to increase or decrease the brightness of the image. More 
advanced color augmentations come from deriving a color histogram describing the 
image. Changing the intensity values in these histograms results in lighting alterations such as what is used in photo editing applications.
Cropping
Cropping images can be used as a practical processing step for image data with mixed height and width dimensions by cropping a central patch of each image. Additionally, random cropping can also be used to provide an effect very similar to translations. 
The contrast between random cropping and translations is that cropping will reduce 
the size of the input such as (256,256) → (224, 224), whereas translations preserve the 
spatial dimensions of the image. Depending on the reduction threshold chosen for cropping, this might not be a label-preserving transformation.
Rotation
Rotation augmentations are done by rotating the image right or left on an axis between 1° and 359°. The safety of rotation augmentations is heavily determined by the rotation degree parameter. Slight rotations such as between 1 and 20 or − 1 to 
− 20 could be useful on digit recognition tasks such as MNIST, but as the rotation 
degree increases, the label of the data is no longer preserved post-transformation.
Translation
Shifting images left, right, up, or down can be a very useful transformation to avoid positional bias in the data. For example, if all the images in a dataset are centered, 
which is common in face recognition datasets, this would require the model to be 
tested on perfectly centered images as well. As the original image is translated in a direction, the remaining space can be filled with either a constant value such as 0 s or 255 s, or it can be filled with random or Gaussian noise. This padding preserves the 
spatial dimensions of the image post-augmentation.
Noise injection
Noise injection consists of injecting a matrix of random values usually drawn from a 
Gaussian distribution. Noise injection is tested by Moreno-Barea et al. [57] on nine 
datasets from the UCI repository [58]. Adding noise to images can help CNNs learn 
more robust features.
Geometric transformations are very good solutions for positional biases present in 
the training data. There are many potential sources of bias that could separate the