Page 21 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
modeling technique that exists; however they are dramatically leading the way in com -
putation speed and quality of results.
Another useful strategy for generative modeling worth mentioning is variational 
auto-encoders. The GAN framework can be extended to improve the quality of samples 
produced with variational auto-encoders [86]. Variational auto-encoders learn a low-dimensional representation of data points. In the image domain, this translates an image tensor of size height × width × color channels down into a vector of size n × 1, identi
-
cal to what was discussed with respect to feature space augmentation. Low-dimensional constraints in vector representations will result in a poorer representation, although these constraints are better for visualization using methods such as t-SNE [87]. Imag
-
ine a vector representation of size 5 × 1 created by an autoencoder. These autoencoders 
can take in a distribution of labeled data and map them into this space. These classes could include ‘head turned left’ , ‘centered head’ , and ‘head turned right’ . The auto-encoder 
learns a low-dimensional representation of these data points such that vector operations 
such as adding and subtracting can be used to simulate a front view-3D rotation of a new instance. Variational auto-encoder outputs can be further improved by inputting them into GANs [31]. Additionally, a similar vector manipulation process can be done on the 
noise vector inputs to GANs through the use of Bidirectional GANs [88].
The impressive performance of GANs has resulted in increased attention on how they 
can be applied to the task of Data Augmentation. These networks have the ability to gen
-
erate new training data that results in better performing classification models. The GAN 
architecture first proposed by Ian Goodfellow [31] is a framework for generative mode -
ling through adversarial training. The best anecdote for understanding GANs is the anal -
ogy of a cop and a counterfeiter. The counterfeiter (generator network) takes in some form of input. This could be a random vector, another image, text, and many more. The 
counterfeiter learns to produce money such that the cop (discriminator network) cannot 
tell if the money is real or fake. The real or fake dichotomy is analogous to whether or not the generated instance is from the training set or if it was created by the generator network (Fig. 16).
The counterfeiter versus robber analogy is a seamless bridge to understand GANs 
in the context of network intrusion detection. Lin et al. [89] use a generator network to learn how to fool a black-box detection system. This highlights one of the most interesting characteristics of GANs. Analysis tools derived from game theory such as minimax strategy and the Nash Equilibrium [90] suggest that the generator will even
-
tually fool the discriminator. The success of the generator to overcome the discrimi -
nator makes it very powerful for generative modeling. GANs are the most promising generative modeling technique for use in Data Augmentation.
Fig. 16 Illustration of GAN concept provided by Mikolajczyk and Grochowski [72]