Page 17 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
massively inflated dataset sizes. However, this is not guaranteed to be advantageous. In 
domains with very limited data, this could result in further overfitting. Therefore, it is 
important to consider search algorithms for deriving an optimal subset of augmented 
data to train Deep Learning models with. More on this topic will be discussed in Design Considerations of Data Augmentation.
Data Augmentations based on Deep Learning
Feature space augmentation
All of the augmentation methods discussed above are applied to images in the input 
space. Neural networks are incredibly powerful at mapping high-dimensional inputs into 
lower-dimensional representations. These networks can map images to binary classes 
or to n × 1 vectors in flattened layers. The sequential processing of neural networks can 
be manipulated such that the intermediate representations can be separated from the network as a whole. The lower-dimensional representations of image data in fully-con
-
nected layers can be extracted and isolated. Konno and Iwazume [74] find a performance boost on CIFAR-100 from 66 to 73% accuracy by manipulating the modularity of neural 
networks to isolate and refine individual layers after training. Lower-dimensional repre
-
sentations found in high-level layers of a CNN are known as the feature space. DeVries and Taylor [75] presented an interesting paper discussing augmentation in this feature 
space. This opens up opportunities for many vector operations for Data Augmentation.
SMOTE is a popular augmentation used to alleviate problems with class imbalance. 
This technique is applied to the feature space by joining the k nearest neighbors to form new instances. DeVries and Taylor discuss adding noise, interpolating, and extrapolating 
as common forms of feature space augmentation (Figs. 13, 14).
Fig. 13 Architecture diagram of the feature space augmentation framework presented by DeVries and Taylor 
[75]
Fig. 14 Examples of interpolated instances in the feature space on the handwritten ‘@’ character [75]