Page 19 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
attacks demonstrate that representations of images are much less robust than what 
might have been expected. This is well demonstrated by Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [77] 
using DeepFool, a network that finds the minimum possible noise injection needed 
to cause a misclassification with high confidence. Su et al. [78] show that 70.97% of images can be misclassified by changing just one pixel. Zajac et  al. [79] cause mis
-
classifications with adversarial attacks limited to the border of images. The success of adversarial attacks is especially exaggerated as the resolution of images increases.
Adversarial attacking can be targeted or untargeted, referring to the deliberation 
in which the adversarial network is trying to cause misclassifications. Adversarial attacks can help to illustrate weak decision boundaries better than standard classifica
-
tion metrics can.
In addition to serving as an evaluation metric, defense to adversarial attacks, adver -
sarial training can be an effective method for searching for augmentations.
By constraining the set of augmentations and distortions available to an adversarial 
network, it can learn to produce augmentations that result in misclassifications, thus 
forming an effective search algorithm. These augmentations are valuable for strength -
ening weak spots in the classification model. Therefore, adversarial training can be 
an effective search technique for Data Augmentation. This is in heavy contrast to the 
traditional augmentation techniques described previously. Adversarial augmentations 
may not represent examples likely to occur in the test set, but they can improve weak spots in the learned decision boundary.
Engstrom et  al. [80] showed that simple transformations such as rotations and 
translations can easily cause misclassifications by deep CNN models. The worst out of the random transformations reduced the accuracy of MNIST by 26%, CIFAR10 by 72% and ImageNet (Top 1) by 28%. Goodfellow et al. [81] generate adversarial exam
-
ples to improve performance on the MNIST classification task. Using a technique for 
generating adversarial examples known as the “fast gradient sign method” , a maxout 
network [82] misclassified 89.4% of adversarial examples with an average confidence of 97.6%. This test is done on the MNIST dataset. With adversarial training, the error rate of adversarial examples fell from 89.4% to 17.9% (Fig. 15).
Li et al. [83] experiment with a novel adversarial training approach and compare the 
performance on original testing data and adversarial examples. The results displayed 
Fig. 15 Adversarial misclassification example [81]