Page 3 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
networks with Spatial Dropout, which drops out entire feature maps rather than 
individual neurons.
• Batch normalization [9] is another regularization technique that normalizes the set 
of activations in a layer. Normalization works by subtracting the batch mean from each activation and dividing by the batch standard deviation. This normalization technique, along with standardization, is a standard technique in the preprocessing 
of pixel values.
• Transfer Learning [10, 11] is another interesting paradigm to prevent overfitting. 
Transfer Learning works by training a network on a big dataset such as ImageNet 
[12] and then using those weights as the initial weights in a new classification task. Typically, just the weights in convolutional layers are copied, rather than the entire 
network including fully-connected layers. This is very effective since many image 
datasets share low-level spatial characteristics that are better learned with big data. Understanding the relationship between transferred data domains is an ongoing 
research task [13]. Yosinski et al. [14] find that transferability is negatively affected 
primarily by the specialization of higher layer neurons and difficulties with splitting co-adapted neurons.
• Pretraining [15] is conceptually very similar to transfer learning. In Pretraining, the 
network architecture is defined and then trained on a big dataset such as ImageNet 
[12]. This differs from Transfer Learning because in Transfer Learning, the network architecture such as VGG-16 [2] or ResNet [3] must be transferred as well as the 
weights. Pretraining enables the initialization of weights using big datasets, while still 
enabling flexibility in network architecture design.
• One-shot and Zero-shot learning [16, 17] algorithms represent another paradigm for 
building models with extremely limited data. One-shot learning is commonly used 
in facial recognition applications [18]. An approach to one-shot learning is the use of 
siamese networks [19] that learn a distance function such that image classification is 
possible even if the network has only been trained on one or a few instances. Another very popular approach to one-shot learning is the use of memory-augmented net
-
works [20]. Zero-shot learning is a more extreme paradigm in which a network uses input and output vector embeddings such as Word2Vec [21] or GloVe [22] to classify 
images based on descriptive attributes.
In contrast to the techniques mentioned above, Data Augmentation approaches 
overfitting from the root of the problem, the training dataset. This is done under the 
assumption that more information can be extracted from the original dataset through augmentations. These augmentations artificially inflate the training dataset size by 
either data warping or oversampling. Data warping augmentations transform exist
-
ing images such that their label is preserved. This encompasses augmentations such as geometric and color transformations, random erasing, adversarial training, and neural 
style transfer. Oversampling augmentations create synthetic instances and add them to the training set. This includes mixing images, feature space augmentations, and genera
-
tive adversarial networks (GANs). Oversampling and Data Warping augmentations do not form a mutually exclusive dichotomy. For example, GAN samples can be stacked 
with random cropping to further inflate the dataset. Decisions around final dataset size,