Page 2 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
There are many branches of study that hope to improve current benchmarks by apply -
ing deep convolutional networks to Computer Vision tasks. Improving the generaliza -
tion ability of these models is one of the most difficult challenges. Generalizability refers 
to the performance difference of a model when evaluated on previously seen data (train -
ing data) versus data it has never seen before (testing data). Models with poor general -
izability have overfitted the training data. One way to discover overfitting is to plot the training and validation accuracy at each epoch during training. The graph below depicts 
what overfitting might look like when visualizing these accuracies over training epochs 
(Fig. 1).
To build useful Deep Learning models, the validation error must continue to decrease 
with the training error. Data Augmentation is a very powerful method of achieving this. 
The augmented data will represent a more comprehensive set of possible data points, 
thus minimizing the distance between the training and validation set, as well as any future testing sets.
Data Augmentation, the focus of this survey, is not the only technique that has been 
developed to reduce overfitting. The following few paragraphs will introduce other solu
-
tions available to avoid overfitting in Deep Learning models. This listing is intended to give readers a broader understanding of the context of Data Augmentation.
Many other strategies for increasing generalization performance focus on the model’s 
architecture itself. This has led to a sequence of progressively more complex architec
-
tures from AlexNet [1] to VGG-16 [2], ResNet [3], Inception-V3 [4], and DenseNet [5]. Functional solutions such as dropout regularization, batch normalization, transfer learn
-
ing, and pretraining have been developed to try to extend Deep Learning for application on smaller datasets. A brief description of these overfitting solutions is provided below. 
A complete survey of regularization methods in Deep Learning has been compiled by 
Kukacka et  al. [6]. Knowledge of these overfitting solutions will inform readers about other existing tools, thus framing the high-level context of Data Augmentation and Deep Learning.
• Dropout [7] is a regularization technique that zeros out the activation values of ran
-
domly chosen neurons during training. This constraint forces the network to learn more robust features rather than relying on the predictive capability of a small subset 
of neurons in the network. Tompson et  al. [8] extended this idea to convolutional 
Fig. 1 The plot on the left shows an inflection point where the validation error starts to increase as the 
training rate continues to decrease. The increased training has caused the model to overfit to the training 
data and perform poorly on the testing set relative to the training set. In contrast, the plot on the right shows a model with the desired relationship between training and testing error