Page 37 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
Perez et al. [122] present a study on the effectiveness of test-time augmentation with 
many augmentation techniques. These augmentations tested include color augmen -
tation, rotation, shearing, scaling, flipping, random cropping, random erasing, elastic, 
mixing, and combinations between the techniques. Table  9 shows the higher perfor -
mance achieved when augmenting test images as well as training images. Matsunaga et al. [123] also demonstrate the effectiveness of test-time augmentation on skin lesion classification, using geometric transformations such as rotation, translation, scaling, and 
flipping.
The impact of test-time augmentation on classification accuracy is another mechanism 
for measuring the robustness of a classifier. A robust classifier is thus defined as having a 
low variance in predictions across augmentations. For example, a prediction of an image 
should not be much different when that same image is rotated 20°. In their experiments 
searching for augmentations with Reinforcement Learning, Minh et  al. [117] measure robustness by distorting test images with a 50% probability and contrasting the accu
-
racy on un-augmented data with the augmented data. In this study, the performance of the baseline model decreases from 74.61 to 66.87% when evaluated on augmented test 
images.
Some classification models lie on the fence in terms of their necessity for speed. This 
suggests promise in developing methods that incrementally upgrade the confidence 
of prediction. This could be done by first outputting a prediction with little or no test-
time augmentation and then incrementally adding test-time augmentations to increase 
the confidence of the prediction. Different Computer Vision tasks require certain con
-
straints on the test-time augmentations that can be used. For example, image recogni -
tion can easily aggregate predictions across warped images. However, it is difficult to aggregate predictions on geometrically transformed images in object detection and semantic segmentation.
Curriculum learning
Aside from the study of Data Augmentation, many researchers have been interested 
in trying to find a strategy for selecting training data that beats random selection. In 
the context of Data Augmentation, research has been published investigating the rela -
tionship between original and augmented data across training epochs. Some research 
Fig. 32 Impact of test-time data augmentation for skin lesion classification [122]