Page 41 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
to oversample data could be another effective way to increase the minority class size 
while preserving the extrinsic distribution. Oversampling with GANs can be done using 
the entire minority class as “real” examples, or by using subsets of the minority class as inputs to GANs. The use of evolutionary sampling [133] to find these subsets to input to GANs for class sampling is a promising area for future work.
Discussion
The interesting ways to augment image data fall into two general categories: data warp -
ing and oversampling. Many of these augmentations elucidate how an image classifier 
can be improved, while others do not. It is easy to explain the benefit of horizontal flip -
ping or random cropping. However, it is not clear why mixing pixels or entire images 
together such as in PatchShuffle regularization or SamplePairing is so effective. Addi -
tionally, it is difficult to interpret the representations learned by neural networks for GAN-based augmentation, variational auto-encoders, and meta-learning. CNN visuali
-
zation has been led by Yosinski et al. [134] with their deep visualization method. Hav -
ing a human-level understanding of convolutional networks features could greatly help guide the augmentation process.
Manipulating the representation power of neural networks is being used in many 
interesting ways to further the advancement of augmentation techniques. Traditional hand-crafted augmentation techniques such as cropping, flipping, and altering the color space are being extended with the use of GANs, Neural Style Transfer, and meta-learn
-
ing search algorithms.
Image-to-image translation has many potential uses in Data Augmentation. Neural 
Style Transfer uses neural layers to translate images into new styles. This technique not 
only utilizes neural representations to separate ‘style’ and ‘content’ from images, but also 
uses neural transformations to transfer the style of one image into another. Neural Style Transfer is a much more powerful augmentation technique than traditional color space 
augmentations, but even these methods can be combined together.
An interesting characteristic of these augmentation methods is their ability to be com
-
bined together. For example, the random erasing technique can be stacked on top of any 
of these augmentation methods. The GAN framework possesses an intrinsic property 
of recursion which is very interesting. Samples taken from GANs can be augmented 
with traditional augmentations such as lighting filters, or even used in neural network augmentation strategies such as Smart Augmentation or Neural Augmentation to cre
-
ate even more samples. These samples can be fed into further GANs and dramatically increase the size of the original dataset. The extensibility of the GAN framework is amongst many reasons they are so interesting to Deep Learning researchers.
Test-time augmentation is analogous to ensemble learning in the data space. Instead 
of aggregating the predictions of different learning algorithms, we aggregate predictions 
across augmented images. We can even extend the solution algorithm to parameterize 
prediction weights from different augmentations. This seems like a good solution for sys
-
tems concerned with achieving very high performance scores, more so than prediction