Page 27 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
GAN samples can be used as an oversampling technique to solve problems with class 
imbalance. Lim et al. [97] show how GAN samples can be used for unsupervised anom -
aly detection. By oversampling rare normal samples, which are samples that occur with 
small probability, GANs are able to reduce the false positive rate of anomaly detection. 
They do this using the Adversarial Autoencoder framework proposed by Makhzani et al. 
[98] (Fig. 24).
As exciting as the potential of GANs is, it is very difficult to get high-resolution out -
puts from the current cutting-edge architectures. Increasing the output size of the images produced by the generator will likely cause training instability and non-conver
-
gence. Another drawback of GANs is that they require a substantial amount of data to train. Thus, depending on how limited the initial dataset is, GANs may not be a practical solution. Salimans et al. [99] provide a more complete description of the problems with 
training GANs.
Neural Style Transfer
Neural Style Transfer [32] is one of the flashiest demonstrations of Deep Learning 
capabilities. The general idea is to manipulate the representations of images created in 
CNNs. Neural Style Transfer is probably best known for its artistic applications, but it 
also serves as a great tool for Data Augmentation. The algorithm works by manipulat -
ing the sequential representations across a CNN such that the style of one image can be transferred to another while preserving its original content. A more detailed explanation 
of the gram matrix operation powering Neural Style Transfer can be found by Li et al. 
[100] (Fig. 25).
It is important to also recognize an advancement of the original algorithm from Gatys 
et al. known as Fast Style Transfer [35]. This algorithm extends the loss function from 
a per-pixel loss to a perceptual loss and uses a feed-forward network to stylize images. 
This perceptual loss is reasoned about through the use of another pre-trained net. The use of perceptual loss over per-pixel loss has also shown great promise in the applica
-
tion of super-resolution [101] as well as style transfer. This loss function enhancement enables style transfer to run much faster, increasing interest in practical applications. 
Additionally, Ulyanov et al. [102] find that replacing batch normalization with instance 
normalization results in a significant improvement for fast stylization (Fig. 26).
For the purpose of Data Augmentation, this is somewhat analogous to color space 
lighting transformations. Neural Style Transfer extends lighting variations and enables the encoding of different texture and artistic styles as well. This leaves practitioners of 
Data Augmentation with the decision of which styles to sample from when deriving new 
images via Neural Style Transfer.
Choosing which styles to sample from can be a challenging task. For applica
-
tions such as self-driving cars it is fairly intuitive to think of transferring training 
Fig. 24 Adversarial autoencoder framework used in DOPING [97]