Page 43 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
inputted into an SRCNN or SRGAN. The result of this strategy will be compared with 
the performance of the Progressively Growing GAN architecture.
Test-time augmentation has the potential to make a massive difference in Computer 
Vision performance and has not been heavily explored. We want to establish bench -
marks for different ensembles of test-time augmentations and investigate the solution 
algorithms used. Currently, majority voting seems to be the dominant solution algo -
rithm for test-time augmentation. It seems highly likely that test-time augmentation can be further improved if the weight of each augmented images prediction is further 
parameterized and learned. Additionally, we will explore the effectiveness of test-time 
augmentation on object detection, comparing color space augmentations and the Neural Style Transfer algorithm.
Meta-learning GAN architectures is another exciting area of interest. Using Reinforce
-
ment Learning algorithms such as NAS on the generator and discriminator architectures seem very promising. Another interesting area of further research is to use an evolu
-
tionary approach to speed up the training of GANs through parallelization and cluster computing.
Another important area of future work for practical integration of Data Augmentation 
into Deep Learning workflows is the development of software tools. Similar to how the Tensorflow [136] system automates the back-end processes of gradient-descent learn
-
ing, Data Augmentation libraries will automate preprocessing functions. The Keras [137] library provides an ImageDataGenerator class that greatly facilitates the implementa
-
tion of geometric augmentations. Buslaev et  al. presented another augmentation tool they called Albumentations [138]. The development of Neural Style Transfer, adversar
-
ial training, GANs, and meta-learning APIs will help engineers utilize the performance power of advanced Data Augmentation techniques much faster and more easily.
Conclusion
This survey presents a series of Data Augmentation solutions to the problem of overfit -
ting in Deep Learning models due to limited data. Deep Learning models rely on big data to avoid overfitting. Artificially inflating datasets using the methods discussed in this survey achieves the benefit of big data in the limited data domain. Data Augmen
-
tation is a very useful technique for constructing better datasets. Many augmentations have been proposed which can generally be classified as either a data warping or over
-
sampling technique.
The future of Data Augmentation is very bright. The use of search algorithms com -
bining data warping and oversampling methods has enormous potential. The layered 
architecture of deep neural networks presents many opportunities for Data Augmen -
tation. Most of the augmentations surveyed operate in the input layer. However, some 
are derived from hidden layer representations, and one method, DisturbLabel [28], is 
even manifested in the output layer. The space of intermediate representations and the 
label space are under-explored areas of Data Augmentation with interesting results. This survey focuses on applications for image data, although many of these techniques and concepts can be expanded to other data domains.
Data Augmentation cannot overcome all biases present in a small dataset. For exam
-
ple, in a dog breed classification task, if there are only bulldogs and no instances of