Page 18 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
The use of auto-encoders is especially useful for performing feature space augmen -
tations on data. Autoencoders work by having one half of the network, the encoder, 
map images into low-dimensional vector representations such that the other half of the 
network, the decoder, can reconstruct these vectors back into the original image. This encoded representation is used for feature space augmentation.
DeVries and Taylor [75] tested their feature space augmentation technique by extrapo
-
lating between the 3 nearest neighbors per sample to generate new data and compared their results against extrapolating in the input space and using affine transformations in the input space (Table 3).
Feature space augmentations can be implemented with auto-encoders if it is necessary 
to reconstruct the new instances back into input space. It is also possible to do feature space augmentation solely by isolating vector representations from a CNN. This is done 
by cutting off the output layer of the network, such that the output is a low-dimensional 
vector rather than a class label. Vector representations are then found by training a CNN and then passing the training set through the truncated CNN. These vector representa
-
tions can be used to train any machine learning model from Naive Bayes, Support Vec -
tor Machine, or back to a fully-connected multilayer network. The effectiveness of this technique is a subject for future work.
A disadvantage of feature space augmentation is that it is very difficult to interpret the 
vector data. It is possible to recover the new vectors into images using an auto-encoder network; however, this requires copying the entire encoding part of the CNN being trained. For deep CNNs, this results in massive auto-encoders which are very difficult 
and time-consuming to train. Finally, Wong et  al. [76] find that when it is possible to 
transform images in the data-space, data-space augmentation will outperform feature space augmentation.
Adversarial training
One of the solutions to search the space of possible augmentations is adversarial training. Adversarial training is a framework for using two or more networks with contrasting objectives encoded in their loss functions. This section will discuss using 
adversarial training as a search algorithm as well as the phenomenon of adversarial 
attacking. Adversarial attacking consists of a rival network that learns augmentations to images that result in misclassifications in its rival classification network. These adversarial attacks, constrained to noise injections, have been surprisingly successful from the perspective of the adversarial network. This is surprising because it com
-
pletely defies intuition about how these models represent images. The adversarial Table 3 Performance results of the experiment with feature vs. input space extrapolation 
on MNIST and CIFAR-10 [75]
The italic value denote high performance according to the comparative metricsModel MNIST CIFAR-10
Baseline 1.093 ± 0.057 30.65 ± 0.27
Baseline + input space affine transformations 1.477 ± 0.068 –
Baseline + input space extrapolation 1.010 ± 0.065 –
Baseline + feature space extrapolation 0.950 ± 0.036 29.24 ± 0.27