Page 9 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
distribution of the training data from the testing data. If positional biases are pre -
sent, such as in a facial recognition dataset where every face is perfectly centered in 
the frame, geometric transformations are a great solution. In addition to their pow -
erful ability to overcome positional biases, geometric transformations are also use -
ful because they are easily implemented. There are many imaging processing libraries 
that make operations such as horizontal flipping and rotation painless to get started with. Some of the disadvantages of geometric transformations include additional 
memory, transformation compute costs, and additional training time. Some geo
-
metric transformations such as translation or random cropping must be manually 
observed to make sure they have not altered the label of the image. Finally, in many of the application domains covered such as medical image analysis, the biases distancing 
the training data from the testing data are more complex than positional and transla
-
tional variances. Therefore, the scope of where and when geometric transformations 
can be applied is relatively limited.
Color space transformations
Image data is encoded into 3 stacked matrices, each of size height × width. These matri -
ces represent pixel values for an individual RGB color value. Lighting biases are amongst the most frequently occurring challenges to image recognition problems. Therefore, the 
effectiveness of color space transformations, also known as photometric transforma
-
tions, is fairly intuitive to conceptualize. A quick fix to overly bright or dark images is to 
loop through the images and decrease or increase the pixel values by a constant value. 
Another quick color space manipulation is to splice out individual RGB color matrices. 
Another transformation consists of restricting pixel values to a certain min or max value. The intrinsic representation of color in digital images lends itself to many strategies of augmentation.
Color space transformations can also be derived from image-editing apps. An image’s 
pixel values in each RGB color channel is aggregated to form a color histogram. This his
-
togram can be manipulated to apply filters that change the color space characteristics of an image.
There is a lot of freedom for creativity with color space augmentations. Altering the 
color distribution of images can be a great solution to lighting challenges faced by testing data (Figs. 3, 4).
Image datasets can be simplified in representation by converting the RGB matri
-
ces into a single grayscale image. This results in smaller images, height × width ×  1, 
Fig. 3 Examples of Color Augmentations provided by Mikolajczyk and Grochowski [72] in the domain of 
melanoma classification