Page 29 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
on the table in the simulation, as well as the texture, lighting, number of lights, and ran -
dom noise in the background. They found that with enough variability in the training 
data style, the real-world simply appears as another variation to the model. Interestingly, 
they found that diversity in styles was more effective than simulating in as realistic of an 
environment as possible. This is in contrast to the work of Shrivastava et al. [105] who used GANs to make their simulated data as realistic as possible (Fig. 27).
Using simulated data to build Computer Vision models has been heavily investigated. 
One example of this is from Richter et al. [106]. They use computer graphics from mod
-
ern open-world games such as Grand Theft Auto to produce semantic segmentation datasets. The authors highlight anecdotes of the manual annotation costs required to build these pixel-level datasets. They mention the CamVid dataset [107] requires 60 min 
per image to manually annotate, and the Cityscapes dataset [108] requires 90 min per 
image. This high labor and time cost motivates the use and development of synthetic datasets. Neural Style Transfer is a very interesting strategy to improve the generaliza
-
tion ability of simulated datasets.
A disadvantage of Neural Style Transfer Data Augmentation is the effort required to 
select styles to transfer images into. If the style set is too small, further biases could be introduced into the dataset. Trying to replicate the experiments of Tobin et al. [104] will require a massive amount of additional memory and compute to transform and store 
79,433 new images from each image. The original algorithm proposed by Gatys et  al. 
[32] has a very slow running time and is therefore not practical for Data Augmentation. The algorithm developed by Johnson et al. [35] is much faster, but limits transfer to a pre-trained set of styles.
Meta learning Data Augmentations
The concept of meta-learning in Deep Learning research generally refers to the concept of optimizing neural networks with neural networks. This approach has become very 
popular since the publication of NAS [33] from Zoph and Le. Real et al. [109, 110] also 
Fig. 27 Examples of different styles simulated by Tobin et al. [104]