Page 30 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
show the effectiveness of evolutionary algorithms for architecture search. Salimans et al. 
[111] directly compare evolutionary strategies with Reinforcement Learning. Another 
interesting alternative to Reinforcement Learning is simple random search [112]. Uti -
lizing evolutionary and random search algorithms is an interesting area of future work, but the meta-learning schemes reviewed in this survey are all neural-network, 
gradient-based.
The history of Deep Learning advancement from feature engineering such as SIFT 
[113] and HOG [114] to architecture design such as AlexNet [1 ], VGGNet [2 ], and 
Inception-V3 [4 ], suggest that meta-architecture design is the next paradigm shift. 
NAS takes a novel approach to meta-learning architectures by using a recurrent net
-
work trained with Reinforcement Learning to design architectures that result in the best accuracy. On the CIFAR-10 dataset, this achieved an error rate of 3.65 (Fig. 28).
This section will introduce three experiments using meta-learning for Data Aug
-
mentation. These methods use a prepended neural network to learn Data Augmenta -
tions via mixing images, Neural Style Transfer, and geometric transformations.
Neural augmentation The Neural Style Transfer algorithm requires two parameters 
for the weights of the style and content loss. Perez and Wang [36] presented an algo -
rithm to meta-learn a Neural Style Transfer strategy called Neural Augmentation. The 
Neural Augmentation approach takes in two random images from the same class. The prepended augmentation net maps them into a new image through a CNN with 5 
layers, each with 16 channels, 3 × 3 filters, and ReLU activation functions. The image 
outputted from the augmentation is then transformed with another random image via 
Neural Style Transfer. This style transfer is carried out via the CycleGAN [92] exten
-
sion of the GAN [31] framework. These images are then fed into a classification model 
and the error from the classification model is backpropagated to update the Neural 
Augmentation net. The Neural Augmentation network uses this error to learn the opti -
mal weighting for content and style images between different images as well as the mapping between images in the CNN (Fig. 29).
Perez and Wang tested their algorithm on the MNIST and Tiny-imagenet-200 data
-
sets on binary classification tasks such as cat versus dog. The Tiny-imagenet-200 dataset is used to simulate limited data. The Tiny-imagenet-200 dataset contains 
only 500 images in each of the classes, with 100 set aside for validation. This problem 
Fig. 28 Concept behind Neural Architecture Search [33]