Page 4 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
test-time augmentation, curriculum learning, and the impact of resolution are covered 
in this survey under the “Design considerations for image Data Augmentation ” section. 
Descriptions of individual augmentation techniques will be enumerated in the “Image Data Augmentation techniques” section. A quick taxonomy of the Data Augmentations is depicted below in Fig. 2.
Before discussing image augmentation techniques, it is useful to frame the context of 
the problem and consider what makes image recognition such a difficult task in the first place. In classic discriminative examples such as cat versus dog, the image recognition software must overcome issues of viewpoint, lighting, occlusion, background, scale, and more. The task of Data Augmentation is to bake these translational invariances into the dataset such that the resulting models will perform well despite these challenges.
It is a generally accepted notion that bigger datasets result in better Deep Learning 
models [23, 24]. However, assembling enormous datasets can be a very daunting task 
due to the manual effort of collecting and labeling data. Limited datasets is an especially 
prevalent challenge in medical image analysis. Given big data, deep convolutional net
-
works have been shown to be very powerful for medical image analysis tasks such as skin lesion classification as demonstrated by Esteva et al. [25]. This has inspired the use of 
CNNs on medical image analysis tasks [26] such as liver lesion classification, brain scan analysis, continued research in skin lesion classification, and more. Many of the images studied are derived from computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imag
-
ing (MRI) scans, both of which are expensive and labor-intensive to collect. It is espe -
cially difficult to build big medical image datasets due to the rarity of diseases, patient 
Fig. 2 A taxonomy of image data augmentations covered; the colored lines in the figure depict which data 
augmentation method the corresponding meta-learning scheme uses, for example, meta-learning using 
Neural Style Transfer is covered in neural augmentation [36]