Page 7 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
Image Data Augmentation techniques
The earliest demonstrations showing the effectiveness of Data Augmentations come 
from simple transformations such as horizontal flipping, color space augmentations, and 
random cropping. These transformations encode many of the invariances discussed ear -
lier that present challenges to image recognition tasks. The augmentations listed in this survey are geometric transformations, color space transformations, kernel filters, mixing 
images, random erasing, feature space augmentation, adversarial training, GAN-based augmentation, neural style transfer, and meta-learning schemes. This section will explain how each augmentation algorithm works, report experimental results, and discuss dis
-
advantages of the augmentation technique.
Data Augmentations based on basic image manipulations
Geometric transformations
This section describes different augmentations based on geometric transformations and 
many other image processing functions. The class of augmentations discussed below could be characterized by their ease of implementation. Understanding these trans
-
formations will provide a useful base for further investigation into Data Augmentation techniques.
We will also describe the different geometric augmentations in the context of their 
‘safety’ of application. The safety of a Data Augmentation method refers to its likelihood of preserving the label post-transformation. For example, rotations and flips are gener
-
ally safe on ImageNet challenges such as cat versus dog, but not safe for digit recogni -
tion tasks such as 6 versus 9. A non-label preserving transformation could potentially strengthen the model’s ability to output a response indicating that it is not confident 
about its prediction. However, achieving this would require refined labels [56] post-aug
-
mentation. If the label of the image after a non-label preserving transformation is some -
thing like [0.5 0.5], the model could learn more robust confidence predictions. However, 
constructing refined labels for every non-safe Data Augmentation is a computationally 
expensive process.
Due to the challenge of constructing refined labels for post-augmented data, it is 
important to consider the ‘safety’ of an augmentation. This is somewhat domain depend -
ent, providing a challenge for developing generalizable augmentation policies, (see Auto -
Augment [38] for further exploration into finding generalizable augmentations). There 
is no image processing function that cannot result in a label changing transformation 
at some distortion magnitude. This demonstrates the data-specific design of augmen -
tations and the challenge of developing generalizable augmentation policies. This is an important consideration with respect to the geometric augmentations listed below.
Flipping
Horizontal axis flipping is much more common than flipping the vertical axis. This aug -
mentation is one of the easiest to implement and has proven useful on datasets such 
as CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. On datasets involving text recognition such as MNIST or 
SVHN, this is not a label-preserving transformation.