Page 39 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
when downsampling images to different resolutions. The researchers found that com -
posing an ensemble of models trained with high and low-resolution images performed 
better than any one model individually. This ensemble prediction is found by averag -
ing the softmax predictions. The models trained on 256 × 256 images and 512 × 512 
images achieve 7.96% and 7.42% top-5 error rates, respectively. When aggregated they achieved a lower top-5 error rate of 6.97%. Therefore, different downsampled images can 
be viewed as another Data Augmentation scheme (Fig. 33).
With the advance of Super-Resolution Convolutional Neural Networks presented by 
Chong et  al. [128] or SRGANs, Super-Resolution Generative Adversarial Networks, 
presented by Ledig et al. [129], it is interesting to consider if upsampling images to an 
even higher resolution would result in better models. Quality upsampling on CIFAR-10 
images from even 32 × 32 × 3 to 64 × 64 × 3 could lead to better and more robust image 
classifiers.
Resolution is also a very important topic with GANs. Producing high resolution out
-
puts from GANs is very difficult due to issues with training stability and mode collapse. Many of the newer GAN architectures such as StackGAN [130] and Progressively-Grow
-
ing GANs [34] are designed to produce higher resolution images. In addition to these architectures, the use of super-resolution networks such as SRGAN could be an effective 
technique for improving the quality of outputs from a DCGAN [91] model. Once it is 
practical to produce high resolution outputs from GAN samples, these outputs will be very useful for Data Augmentation.
Final dataset size
A necessary component of Data Augmentation is the determination of the final data -
set size. For example, if all images are horizontally flipped and added to the dataset, the resulting dataset size changes from N to 2N. One of the main considerations with 
respect to final dataset size is the additional memory and compute constraints associ
-
ated with augmenting data. Practitioners have the choice between using generators 
which transform data on the fly during training or transforming the data beforehand and 
Fig. 33 Classifications of the Image to the right by different resolution models trained by Wu et al. [127]