Page 23 of 48
 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
Frid-Adar et  al. [49] tested the effectiveness of using DCGANs to generate liver 
lesion medical images. They use the architecture pictured above to generate 64 × 64 ×  1 
size images of liver lesion CT scans. Their original dataset contains 182 CT scans, (53 
Cysts, 64 Metastases, and 65 Hemangiomas). After using classical augmentations to 
achieve 78.6% sensitivity and 88.4% specificity, they observed an increase to 85.7% sen -
sitivity and 92.4% specificity once they added the DCGAN-generated samples.
Another architecture of interest is known as Progressively Growing GANs [34]. This 
architecture trains a series of networks with progressive resolution complexity. These 
resolutions range from 4 × 4 to 8 × 8 and so on until outputs of size 1024 × 1024 are 
achieved. This is built on the concept that GANs can accept images as input as well 
as random vectors. Therefore, the series of GANs work by passing samples from a 
lower resolution GAN up to higher-resolution GANs. This has produced very amaz -
ing results on facial images.
In addition to improving the resolution size of GANs, another interesting architecture 
that increases the quality of outputs is the CycleGAN [92] proposed by Zhu et al. Cycle -
GAN introduces an additional Cycle-Consistency loss function to help stabilize GAN 
training. This is applied to image-to-image translation. Neural Style Transfer [32], dis -
cussed further in the section below, learns a single image to single image translation. However, CycleGAN learns to translate from a domain of images to another domain, 
such as horses to zebras. This is implemented via forward and backward consistency loss 
functions. A generator takes in images of horses and learns to map them to zebras such that the discriminator cannot tell if they were originally a part of the zebra set or not, as discussed above. After this, the generated zebras from horse images are passed through 
a network which translates them back into horses. A second discriminator determines 
if this re-translated image belongs to the horse set or not. Both of these discriminator losses are aggregated to form the cycle-consistency loss.
The use of CycleGANs was tested by Zhu et al. [93] in the task of Emotion Clas
-
sification. Using the emotion recognition dataset, FER2013 [94], Facial Expression 
Recognition Database, they build a CNN classifier to recognize 7 different emotions: 
angry, disgust, fear, happy, sad, surprise, and neutral. These classes are imbalanced and the CycleGAN is used as a method of intelligent oversampling.
CycleGANs learned an unpaired image-to-image translation between domains. An 
example of the domains in this problem is neutral to disgust. The CycleGAN learns to 
translate an image representing a neutral image into an image representing the dis
-
gust emotion (Figs. 19, 20).
Fig. 18 Complete DCGAN architecture used by Frid-Adar et al. [49] to generate liver lesion images