Page 40 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
storing it in memory. Transforming data on the fly can save memory, but will result in 
slower training. Storing datasets in memory can be extremely problematic depending on 
how heavily the dataset size has been inflated. Storing augmented datasets in memory is especially problematic when augmenting big data. This decision is generally categorized as online or offline data augmentation, (with online augmentation referring to on the fly augmentations and offline augmentation referring to editing and storing data on the 
disk).
In the design of a massively distributed training system, Chilimbi et al. [131] augment 
images before training to speed up image serving. By augmenting images in advance, the 
distributed system is able to request and pre-cache training batches. Augmentations can also be built into the computational graph used to construct Deep Learning models and 
facilitate fast differentiation. These augmentations process images immediately after the 
input image tensor.
Additionally, it is also interesting to explore a subset of the inflated data that will result 
in higher or similar performance to the entire training set. This is a similar concept to curriculum learning, since the central idea is to find an optimal ordering of training data. This idea is also very related to final dataset size and the considerations of transforma
-
tion compute and available memory for storing augmented images.
Alleviating class imbalance with Data Augmentation
Class imbalance is a common problem in which a dataset is primarily composed of examples from one class. This could manifest itself in a binary classification problem 
such that there is a clear majority-minority class distinction, or in multi-class classifi
-
cation in which there is one or multiple majority classes and one or multiple minority 
classes. Imbalanced datasets are harmful because they bias models towards majority class predictions. Imbalanced datasets also render accuracy as a deceitful performance 
metric. Buda et al. [132] provide a systematic study specifically investigating the impact 
of imbalanced data in CNNs processing image data. Leevy et al. [27] cover many Data-level and Algorithm-level solutions to class imbalance in big data in general. Data Augmentation falls under a Data-level solution to class imbalance and there are many 
different strategies for implementation.
A naive solution to oversampling with Data Augmentation would be a simple random 
oversampling with small geometric transformations such as a 30° rotation. Other sim
-
ple image manipulations such as color augmentations, mixing images, kernel filters, and 
random erasing can also be extended to oversample data in the same manner as geo -
metric augmentations. This can be useful for ease of implementation and quick exper -
imentation with different class ratios. One problem of oversampling with basic image transformations is that it could cause overfitting on the minority class which is being oversampled. The biases present in the minority class are more prevalent post-sampling 
with these techniques.
Oversampling methods based on Deep Learning such as adversarial training, Neu
-
ral Style Transfer, GANs, and meta-learning schemes can also be used as a more intel -
ligent oversampling strategy. Neural Style Transfer is an interesting way to create new 
images. These new images can be created either through extrapolating style with a for -
eign style or by interpolating styles amongst instances within the dataset. Using GANs