Page 38 of 48 Shorten and Khoshgoftaar  J Big Data            (2019) 6:60 
suggests that it is best to initially train with the original data only and then finish training 
with the original and augmented data, although there is no clear consensus.
In the SamplePairing [65] study, one epoch on ImageNet and 100 epochs on other 
datasets are completed without SamplePairing before mixed image data is added to the training. Once the SamplePairing images are added to the training set, they run in cycles between 8:2 epochs, 8 with SamplePairing images, 2 without. Jaderberg et al. [124] train 
exclusively with synthetic data for natural scene text recognition. The synthetic data 
produced the training data by enumerating through different fonts and augmentations. This produced sets of training images for size 50 k and 90 k lexicons. Mikolajczyk and Grochowski [72] draw comparisons from transfer learning. They suggest that training on augmented data to learn the initial weights of a deep convolutional network is similar to 
transferring weights trained on other datasets such as ImageNet. These weights are then 
fine-tuned only with the original training data.
Curriculum learning decisions are especially important for One-Shot Learning sys
-
tems such as FaceNet, presented by Schroff et  al. [125]. It is important to find faces which are somewhat similar to the new face such that the learned distance function is 
actually useful. In this sense, the concept of curriculum learning shares many similarities 
with adversarial search algorithms or learning only on hard examples.
Curriculum learning, a term originally coined by Bengio et al. [126], is an applicable 
concept for all Deep Learning models, not just those constrained with limited data. Plot
-
ting out training accuracy over time across different initial training subsets could help reveal patterns in the data that dramatically speed up training time. Data Augmentation 
constructs massively inflated training from combinations such as flipping, translating, 
and randomly erasing. It is highly likely that a subset exists in this set such that training will be faster and more accurate.
Resolution impact
Another interesting discussion about Data Augmentation in images is the impact of res -
olution. Higher resolution images such as HD (1920 × 1080 × 3) or 4 K (3840 × 2160 × 3) 
require much more processing and memory to train deep CNNs. However, it seems intuitive that next-generation models would be trained on higher resolution images. Many current models downsample images from their original resolution to make the classification problem computationally more feasible. However, sometimes this down
-
sampling causes information loss within the image, making image recognition more dif -
ficult (Table 10).
It is interesting to investigate the nature of this downsampling and resulting perfor -
mance comparison. Wu et al. [127] compare the tradeoff between accuracy and speed Table 10 Comparison of resolution across three very popular open-source image datasets
Dataset Resolution
MNIST handwritten digits 28 × 28 × 1
CIFAR-10/100 32 × 32 × 3
ImageNet 256 × 256 × 3