lowed by a 1 ×1 convolution, and then attached to each fea-
ture location. We extend the proposed Co-occurrent Feature
Module with a global pooling feature branch to leverage the
global context, as shown in Figure 3.
3. Co-occurrent Feature Network
With proposed Co-occurrent Feature Module, we build
Co-occurrent Feature Network (CFNet) as shown in Fig-
ure3. We use pre-trained ResNet [ 18] as the base network
and apply dilated network strategy to Res-4 and Res-53of
ResNet, resulting stride-8 models. The proposed Aggre-
gated Co-occurrent Feature Module and global pooling fea-
ture branch are added on top of the base network. ACF
Module considers the input convolutional featuremap with
the shape of C×H×Was a set ofC-dimensional features
X={x1,..xN}, whereN=H∗Wis total number of fea-
tures. The input features are transformed into vector spaces
usingΦtandΦc. We use shared weights for the target trans-
formation Φtand the co-occurrent transformation Φc, and
apply 3×3 average pooling with stride of 2 before the co-
occurrent transformation Φcto reduce the computation. The
probabilities of co-occurrent features are predicted based on
the similarities in the vector space. Then the proposed ACF
Module aggregates the co-occurrent contexts with the co-
occurrent probabilities. The Co-occurrent Feature Model
learns the co-occurrent feature distribution by learning the
transformation functions ΦtandΦcin vector spaces.
In another branch, a global pooling feature is concate-
nated to the output featuremap after convolution and up-
sampling. Finally, the last convolution predicts the per-pixel
prediction of the object categories. We upsample the predic-
tion featuremap by 8 times to make its size equal to input
image size to calculate the segmentation loss. Since the pro-
posed ACF Module is differentiable and can be learned with
the rest of the network, it is compatible with existing FCN
based algorithms.
3.1. Relation to Other Methods
Semantic Segmentation. CNN based method has
achieved remarkable success in semantic segmentation
and scene parsing. Early work classiﬁes each individual
patches/regions for generating segmentation masks [ 13,15].
FCN [ 31] ﬁrst replaces the fully connected layers of pre-
trained network with the convolution layers for seman-
tic segmentation. The adaption of CNN for image clas-
siﬁcation suffers from the loss of spatial resolution. De-
convNet [ 34] and SegNet [ 2] learn a decoder to recover
the information from downsampled features. Applying
Atrous/Dilated convolution in pre-trained network produces
larger featuremap [ 5,50]. UNet [ 38] concatenates the lower
3We refer to the network stages with the original strides of 16 and 32
as Res-4 and Res-5.Network2242center 3202center
top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5
ResNet-50 78.55 94.17 79.33 94.64
ResNet-101 80.24 95.12 80.63 95.50
Table 1: Imagenet [ 10] pretraining for the base networks.
The top-1 and top-5 accuracy (%) on validation set use cen-
ter crop on image size of 224 ×224 and 320 ×320.
level features to the featuremap as skip connections. Prior
work also adapts Dense CRF as post-processing to reﬁne the
FCN prediction boundaries [ 5,8]. CRF-FCN allows end-to-
end learning of CRF with FCN [ 55]. Recent work reﬁnes
segmentation boundaries [ 26,55] and increases spatial res-
olution [ 36]. Hwang et al. [20] and Ke et al. [21] also ex-
ploit label co-occurrence and structural label dependencies.
These work mainly focus on the network training regular-
ization, while our approach improves the network represen-
tation by directly model the feature co-occurrence.
Context Aggregation. Pioneering work demonstrates
that combining global features with local patches can im-
prove the segmentation results [ 37,39,41]. ParseNet [ 29]
proposes to concatenate a global pooling feature with origi-
nal featuremap to capture global context and increase the re-
ceptive ﬁeld size. Pyramid Pooling Module (PPM) [ 17,53]
concatenates the global pooling features from a multi-scale
pyramid. Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) [ 6] uses a
set of different atrous rate convolutions to capture pyramid
feature representations with different receptive ﬁeld sizes.
These methods have the predeﬁned spatial connections.
Consider the convolution operation as a matrix multiplica-
tiony=Wx, wherex∈Rnandy∈Rmare the ﬂatten in-
put and output and W∈Rmnis a transform matrix depend-
ing on the convolution kernel [ 11]. MatrixWhaskh·kw
non-zero elements in each row for the convolution kernel
with the shape of kh×kw. Combining different atrous rate
of convolutions as in ASPP [ 6] is adding the non-zero en-
tries to each row, but the overall spatial connections are still
sparse and the representation is spatial sensitive. The pro-
posed ACF Module can also be formulated as y=Wx and
Wis the co-occurrent probability. Comparing to existing
methods, the ACF Module captures the context across the
whole scene with spatial invariant representation.
Featuremap Attention. Attention mechanism has
achieved great success in natural language processing [ 35,
42], which captures the long-range information using a
weighted sum of all the features in a sequence. Non-local
neural network [ 45] brings the self-attention to the ﬁeld of
video classiﬁcation and object detection in computer vision.
A key difference between Co-occurrent Feature Model with
552