Figure 3: Overview of the proposed CFNet. Given an input image, the convolutional featuremaps are extracted using pre-
trained CNN. Then the featuremaps are transformed into target and co-occurrent vector representations using the feed-forward
networks ΦtandΦc. The Co-occurrent Feature Model estimates the probability of the co-occurrent features based on the pair-
wise similarities in the vector spaces. The ACF Module aggregates the co-occurrent context captured using transformation
Ψwith the co-occurrent probability. Another branch captures the global feature using global average pooling followed by
a convolution. Then the upsampled featuremaps are concatenated with ACF model output along the channel dimension.
Finally, the concatenated feature representation is fed into the last convolutional layer to make the per-pixel predictions. (/circledottext
represents pairwise dot-product similarity,/circlemultiplytextmeans aggregation operation)
al.[49], the contextual prior is deﬁned as a Mixture of
Softmaxes (MoS) to learn a prior distribution for the co-
occurrent features conditioned on the contextual informa-
tion. The MoS formulates the co-occurrent probability of
xcfor targetxtas:
p(xc|xt) =K/summationdisplay
k=1πkesk(xc,xt)
/summationtextN
i=1esk(xi,xt), (2)
whereπkis the prior or mixture weight of the k-th compo-
nent, andsk(xc,xt)is the similarity in k-th component for
k∈ {1,...K}. The vector representations uxcandvxtare
chunked into Ksub-components, and the similarity of each
component is given by sk(xc,xt) =u⊤
xc,kvxt,k. The prior
of each mixture is conditional on the contextual informa-
tion, which can be parameterized as πk=exp(w⊤
k¯vx)/summationtextK
k′=1exp(w⊤
k′¯vx),
where¯vx=/summationtextN
ivxi
Ncaptures the contextual information
andwkis a learnable vector. The MoS allows the co-
occurrent features under different semantic context can have
different priors.
2.2. Aggregated Co­occurrent Feature Module
To utilize the co-occurrent features, we build Aggregated
Co-occurrent Feature Module (ACF), which aggregates the
co-occurrent contexts with their co-occurrent probabilities
across the spatial locations in a self-attention [ 42] or non-
local [ 3] manner:
zt=N/summationdisplay
c=1p(xc|xt)·ψc, (3)whereztis the aggregated feature output for target t,
p(xc|xt)is the co-occurrent probability given by Equation 2
andψcis the co-occurrent context at location c. The co-
occurrent context is given by ψc= Ψ(xc), andΨis a learn-
able transformation using feed-forward network. The ACF
Module captures the co-occurrent feature distributions, and
aggregates the contextual information with the co-occurrent
probabilities.
Dropout and Multi-head Ensembles. Model combina-
tion almost always improves the performance for machine
learning algorithms. Dropout [ 40] randomly drops units
during the training, so that it learns “thinned” networks and
averages the logits during the inference. Dropout can avoid
the network adapting too much on the training data for over-
ﬁtting. We apply dropout [ 40] on the co-occurrent features
and expect the network to make correct predictions even
if some of the concurrent features are missing, so that the
network can generalize from limited patterns appeared in
the training set. Another model combination we explore
is using “multi-head” [ 42], which concatenates the features
of module outputs using different weights to build a in-
network ensemble. We adapt the multi-head strategy to fur-
ther improve the model capacity.
Global Pooling Feature. Global pooling (GP) feature
is commonly used in modern semantic segmentation ap-
proaches [ 6,29,53], which provides a global receptive ﬁeld
as a strong cue to distinguish category in confusing areas.
The GP feature is captured by a global average pooling, fol-
551