Moreover, co-occurrence does not only exist between ob-
jects and it can also be generalized to different parts of an
object. As shown in the 1strow of Figure 2, anarmchair
is composed of armrests, legs, back and seat. It is difﬁcult
to resolve the ambiguity between a chair with an armchair
without noticing the co-occurring armrest parts. In general,
co-occurrent features play an important role in recognizing
the class labels of image pixels. Therefore, a powerful ap-
proach directly capturing the co-occurrent features and uti-
lizing their dependencies is desirable for semantic segmen-
tation.
Existing approaches are not capable to capture the de-
pendencies between co-occurrent features due to their ﬁxed
spatial structure. The baseline FCN [ 31] has a relatively lo-
cal receptive ﬁeld and fails to utilize co-occurrent features
in distant portions of the image. Recent work simply en-
larges the receptive ﬁeld by utilizing the multi-scale feature
representations using pyramid pooling method [ 17,53] or
different atrous rates of convolutions [ 6]. So the same pool-
ing or atrous convolution operation is applied everywhere
in the feature map. However, the distribution of crucial fea-
tures for the recognition of different image regions varies
tremendously. Instead of having ﬁxed spatial connection,
the network should be able to capture co-occurrent features
across different relative locations, in a spatial invariant man-
ner.
As the ﬁrst contribution of this work, the feature co-
occurrence is modeled as a probability distribution over
the feature space conditioned on a given target feature,
which we refer to as Co-occurrent Feature Model (CFM) .
The CFM learns an inherent co-occurrence representation,
where the similarities between features measure how likely
the features would co-occur with the target in the same im-
age. We therefore deﬁne a probability distribution condi-
tioned on target feature using Softmax of the similarities be-
tween the target and co-occurrent features across the space,
which inherits the spatial invariant nature. Moreover, we
expect the co-occurrent features also capture the scene con-
text. However, we ﬁnd that the limitation in expressive-
ness of the Softmax distribution is a bottleneck for model-
ing the context information. For this, we propose a con-
textual prior as a conditional probability on the scene con-
text. The CFM is then deﬁned as a mixture of Softmaxes
distribution with the contextual prior. With the proposed
CFM, we build Aggregated Co-occurrent Feature (ACF)
Module to integrate the context-aware information within
the co-occurrent features, which allows the network to re-
cap the whole scene before making individual predictions
(overview in Figure 3).
The second contribution of this paper is constructing
Co-occurrent Feature Network (CFNet), the state-of-the-
art semantic segmentation architecture. With the proposed
ACF Module, we build CFNet with pre-trained ResNet [ 18]as the base network. The proposed CFNet with ResNet-
101 base network achieves state-of-the-art results 54.0%
mIoU on Pascal Context [ 33], 87.2% mIoU on Pascal VOC
2012 [ 12] and 44.89% mIoU on ADE20K [ 56].
2. Co-occurrent Features
We refer to the features co-occurring with the target
feature within the same input image/featuremap as co-
occurrent features . In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the Co-
occurrent Features Model to capture the distribution of the
co-occurrent features for a given target. We further intro-
duce Aggregated Co-occurrent Feature Module to aggregate
the contextual information of co-occurrent features across
the scene as the output target feature representation.
2.1. Co­occurrent Feature Model
We tackle the feature co-occurrences as a probabilistic
problem instead of predicting their presences, since the co-
occurrent features for a given target are usually not deter-
ministic. We build a Co-occurrent Feature Model , which
learns an inherent representation via measuring the simi-
larity between the co-occurrent feature and the target fea-
ture, indicating how likely they would co-occur2. Then the
probability distribution of the co-occurrent features condi-
tioned on target feature can be deﬁned using Softmax of
the similarities across the space. Consider the input CNN
featuremap as Nnumber of channel-dimensional features
X={x1,...xN}, andxifori∈ {1,...N}is the input
feature at location i. The probability of the co-occurrent
featurexcfor a given target feature xtis:
p(xc|xt) =es(xc,xt)
/summationtextN
i=1es(xi,xt), (1)
wheres(xc,xt)is the similarity between the co-occurrent
featurexcand the target feature xt. A natural parame-
terization for the similarity function sis using dot prod-
uct similarity s(xc,xt) =u⊤
xcvxt, wherevxtanduxcare
the target and co-occurrent vector representations for fea-
turextandxc. The vector representations are given by
uxc= Φc(xc)andvxt= Φt(xt), whereΦc&Φtare
the learnable transformations using feed-forward networks.
The proposed model in Eq. 1is in the same spirit with the
skip-gram model proposed in [ 32], which is used to capture
the co-occurrent word representation.
Contextual Prior. We ﬁnd it is difﬁcult to model the co-
occurrent features only using the target information without
knowing the whole scene, because the distribution of the
co-occurrent features for the same target varies in differ-
ent context. For example, we may expect chairs or tables
2Inspired by the distributed hypothesis [ 16]:the target feature repre-
sentations are modeled to predict well co-occurrent features in its context.
549