Co-occurrent Features in Semantic Segmentation
Hang Zhang1Han Zhang2Chenguang Wang1Junyuan Xie1
1Amazon Web Services2Google Brain
{hzaws,chgwang,junyuanx }@amazon.com, zhanghan@google.com
Abstract
Recent work has achieved great success in utilizing
global contextual information for semantic segmentation,
including increasing the receptive ﬁeld and aggregating
pyramid feature representations. In this paper, we go be-
yond global context and explore the ﬁne-grained repre-
sentation using co-occurrent features by introducing Co-
occurrent Feature Model, which predicts the distribution
of co-occurrent features for a given target. To lever-
age the semantic context in the co-occurrent features, we
build an Aggregated Co-occurrent Feature (ACF) Module
by aggregating the probability of the co-occurrent feature
within the co-occurrent context. ACF Module learns a
ﬁne-grained spatial invariant representation to capture co-
occurrent context information across the scene. Our ap-
proach signiﬁcantly improves the segmentation results us-
ing FCN and achieves superior performance 54.0% mIoU
on Pascal Context, 87.2% mIoU on Pascal VOC 2012 and
44.89% mIoU on ADE20K datasets. The source code and
complete system will be publicly available upon publica-
tion1.
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation provides per-pixel label of object
categories for the given image, which is a challenging task
requiring accurate prediction of the object category, loca-
tion and shape. Successful approaches are usually based
on Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [ 31], with a Deep
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [ 22,23] as the base
network. Recent work achieves great success in leverag-
ing contextual information, including enlarging receptive
ﬁeld size with pyramid-based representations [ 6,29,53] and
learning category speciﬁc scaling factors using context em-
bedding [ 51].
Despite the success in incorporating global contextual
1Links can be found at http://hangzh.com/
(a) Image
 (b) Ground Truth
(c) FCN ( baseline)
 (d) CFNet ( ours )
 (e) legend
Figure 1: Some object categories are difﬁcult to distinguish
based on local appearance and scene context. In this exam-
ple,water, river andseaare visually similar and all ﬁt this
scene context. Human can utilize the presence of the boat to
make the prediction, as it typically co-occurs with the sea.
Motivated by this, we introduce Aggregated Co-occurrent
Feature Module to relook at the relations with all the co-
occurrent features before making the predictions. (More vi-
sual examples in Figure 2)
information, in some challenging scenarios, a rough holis-
tic global context might not be enough for the classiﬁcation
of ambiguous objects in the scene. In addition, we observe
natural scenes usually have reasonable and coherent com-
position of objects. The presence of one object, even in a
spatially disjoint region, can be compelling evidence of the
existence of the other. The co-occurrence property among
objects can improve the robustness of the recognition sys-
tem and help resolve the ambiguity of object labels against
noises such as occlusion and variations in pose and illumi-
nation. For example, as shown in Figure 1,sea, river and
water are very similar in appearance and the global context
as a city scene is not able to disambiguate these three as
they can all exist near a city. But object co-occurrence as-
serts that seais more likely to appear when boat is around.
548