Diagnostics 2021 ,11, 1714 2 of 14
In 2017, about 318,000 mobile health applications were available to consumers through-
out the world [ 11]. This includes tools enabling diabetes self-management by mobile
devices such as mobile phones, tablets, or smart watches [ 12]. Some diabetes applications
differ in the choice of indicators to be tracked, such as blood glucose estimations, suste-
nance and sugar, physical movement and weight tracking, imparting information to health
and social workers, as well as providing patient information. However, most of these
existing diabetes-related mobile health applications are designed for users with a preceding
afﬁrmative diagnosis of the disease status and accompanying factors, while this study is
dedicated to the early diagnosis of DM using machine learning algorithms.
There are several machine-learning-based diabetes assessment approaches; among
them, diagnosis, prediction, and complication analysis are the most researched ones.
In diabetes diagnosis [ 13–15], researchers used a patient’s diabetes history and physical
examination results such as plasma glucose concentration, diastolic blood pressure, body
mass index, age, weight, diet, insulin, water consumption, blood pressure, sex, etc. as input
to the machine learning algorithms. The most frequently used machine learning algorithms
are support vector machines (SVM), k-nearest neighbor (kNN), decision trees, Naive Bayes
(NB), and tree boosting algorithms such as XGBoost, Adaboost, and random forest (RF) [ 15].
Conventional algorithms such as kNN, SVM, NB, etc. result in low performance, whereas
ensemble algorithms such as XGBoost, Adaboost, and RF comparatively achieve a higher
level of accuracy. Since these ensemble learners are deﬁned on a set of hyperparameters,
their design involves a global optimization task to combine a set of indicators into a reliable
classiﬁcation model.
Ravaut et al. [ 16] performed large-scale machine learning studies with health record
datasets of patients in Ontario, Canada, provided by the Institute of Clinical Evaluative
Sciences (ICES) to predict the risk of diabetes in a range of 1–10 years ahead. The considered
dataset has about 963 total input features. The authors compared logistic regression, XG-
Boost, Highway Network, CNN-LSTM, and LSTM-Seq2Seq algorithms to predict the risk
of diabetes mellitus for a scope of 10 years. Based on experimental analysis, the XGBoost
model outperforms other algorithms. The most researched diabetes complications are
retinopathy, neuropathy, and nephropathy. In [ 17], logistic regression is used to predict the
involvement of retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy at different time scenarios—3,
5, and 7 years from ﬁrst diabetes reference. Input features are gender, hypertension, age,
glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), smoking habit, time from diagnosis (how long after diabetes
diagnosis), and body mass index (BMI).
As discussed above, ensemble learning algorithms in many cases outperform other
machine learning approaches for disease diagnosis. Fundamentally, this is achieved by
combining multiple base classiﬁers (individual classiﬁer algorithms) into an ensemble
model by learning the inherent statistics of the combined classiﬁers and, hence, outperform-
ing the single classiﬁers [ 18]. In this paper, we investigate LightGBM ensemble classiﬁers
for the early detection of DM. This research work aims at supporting health practitioners
in the diagnosis of DM.
LightGBM is an ensemble algorithm developed by Microsoft that provides an efﬁcient
implementation of the gradient boosting algorithm [ 19]. The primary beneﬁt of LightGBM
is a dramatic acceleration of the training algorithm, which, in many cases, results in a
more effective model. LightGBM is constructed on the top of decision tree algorithms,
employing nestimators numbers of boosted trees. Tree boosting algorithms outperform others
for prediction problems [ 20]. The LightGBM ensemble learning algorithm has been applied
in numerous classiﬁcation and regression studies and achieved excellent detection results,
indicating that LightGBM is an effective classiﬁer algorithm.
The proposed LightGBM model provides an optimized decision-support system for
users. The particularity of the proposed approach is in the procedure used to calculate
the number of decision trees, maximum depth of the trees, and number of tree leaves
to construct an optimal LightGBM model. Furthermore, the ﬁrst local diabetes dataset
of Ethiopia has been prepared to design a CAD (Computer Aided Diagnosis) system for