Diagnostics 2021 ,11, 1714 5 of 14
function, and ( viii.) age (years) with one binary class variable (diabetic or not). They
followed a two-step approach. Firstly, they developed a weighted feature selection algo-
rithm based on random forest (RF-WFS) for optimal feature selection; then, the extreme
gradient boosting (XGBoost) classiﬁer was applied to predict the risk of diabetes mellitus
accurately. The experimental results showed that the model has a better accuracy of 93.75%
in classiﬁcation performance than other preceding research results.
Nowadays, for classiﬁcation and diagnosis problems, LightGBM outperforms other
state-of-the-art methods, cf. [ 33–40]. In these related works, LightGBM is not only selected
for its effective prediction performance, but also for its shorter computational time and op-
timized data handling technique. For instance, in [ 41], LightGBM and XGBoost algorithms
were employed to construct the prediction models for cardiovascular and cerebrovascular
diseases prediction based on different indicator elements (features) such as systolic blood
pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), serum triglyceride, serum high-density
lipoprotein, and serum low-density lipoprotein. The LightGBM model achieved the lowest
least mean square error (LMSE) for all indicators.
From the above review, we observed that Ethiopian data have never been explored be-
fore in diagnosing diabetes using artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) technology. Hence, an important
goal of this project is to prepare a diabetes dataset for the application of machine-learning-
based diabetes diagnosis serving two purposes: ( a.) decision support for physicians and
handling of potential diabetes conditions onset and ( b.) improvement of DM detection
coverage in countries with low physician density. From the existing work, we observed
LightGBM and XGBoost ensemble classiﬁers are the most promising models for diabetes
detection and even for diagnosing other diseases. However, XGBoost has a lower speed
compared with LightGBM. The LightGBM algorithm features lower memory usage, higher
speed and efﬁciency, compatibility with large datasets over XGBoost, and better accuracy
than any other boosting algorithm [ 19]. LightGBM is almost seven times faster than XG-
Boost [ 19] and, hence, is a much better approach when working on large datasets. This
makes LightGBM an interesting candidate for DM detection.
3. Materials and Methods
According to the WHO (World Health Organization) 2019 report [ 42], four gold stan-
dards of DM diagnostic tests are recommended, which are fasting plasma glucose (fasting
blood sugar, FBS), 2-h post-load plasma glucose after a 75goral glucose tolerance test
(OGTT), HbA1c, and random blood glucose. Individuals with FBS values of 7.0mmol/L
(126mg/dL ), OGTT11.1 mmol/L (200mg/dL ), HbA1c6.5% (48mmol/mol ), or a
random blood glucose 11.1 mmol/L (200mg/dL ) are considered to have diabetes. In the
case of Ethiopian hospitals, the majority of these diabetes diagnostics standards are prac-
ticed. Additionally, age, gender, body mass index (BMI), measured insulin, total cholesterol,
the systolic value of blood pressure, the diastolic value of blood pressure, and low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol may be taken into account as optional attributes.
To achieve our goal, the study approach consists of ﬁve stages, which are ( i.) overview
of proposed approach, ( ii.) diabetes data collection with the relevant attributes of the pa-
tients, ( iii.) data preprocessing (cleaning), ( iv.) evaluation metrics, and ( v.) comparison of the
proposed method with various machine learning classiﬁcation techniques. Subsequently,
we brieﬂy discuss these procedures.
3.1. Overview of Proposed Approach
The proposed approach workﬂow includes the following steps:
1. Problem statement: Identify and solve scientiﬁc challenges to diagnose diabetes by
machine learning in order to prevent or reduce its impact on physical and social
well-being.
2. Relevant data collection: diabetes-related data were collected from Zewditu
Memorial Hospital.