Diagnostics 2021 ,11, 1714 6 of 14
3. Diabetes dataset: the collected diabetes data were converted to machine learning
model recognizable (tabular) format.
4. Data preprocessing: patterns underlying the data were visualized by box-plot and
correlation heat-map. Irrelevant data elements and column values were removed and
replaced, respectively. The correlation coefﬁcient of each input variable (attributes)
to the dependent variable (diabetes or not) was calculated to identify the important
features. Each input variable has values in a different range; fast blood sugar (FBS) has
minimum 60 and maximum 200 values; whereas, gender has binary values (minimum
0 and maximum 1) but machine learning algorithms recognize patterns numerically,
meaning they give higher priority to attributes with large numerical values. By this
scenario, FBS has higher priority over gender, which is logically not always true.
To avoid such confusion, the attribute values were normalized in a common range
using the Min-Max normalization technique [ 43]. Finally, the preprocessed dataset
was split into training and test data samples.
5. Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LightGBM): the state-of-the-art LightGBM algo-
rithm has been proposed to predict diabetes mellitus. Here, the LightGBM was
optimized by calculating the optimal values of the hyperparameters using 10-fold
cross-validation. Finally, we developed other classiﬁer models viz. KNN, SVM, NB,
Bagging (constructed on decision tree), RF, and XGBoost and compared the results
with the optimal LightGBM model.
The general framework of the proposed approach is summarized in Figure 1.
Diabetes dataset 
Data preprocessing
LightGBM Other 
algorithms
Calculation of optimal size 
of trees using cross -
validation 
Model Training test
Model 1 
(M1)M2 Mn ...
Evaluation and comparison of the proposed model 
with other modelsProblem statement
Healthcare diabetes 
diagnostic data storage  Relevant data 
collection
Figure 1. General framework of the proposed approach.