Diagnostics 2021 ,11, 1714 3 of 14
the early detection of DM. Thus, the purpose of this study is to develop an optimal and
accurate diabetes diagnosis model based on machine learning algorithms.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the related
existing work and accomplishments in the prediction and diagnosis of DM. Section 3
describes the materials used in the experiment, the research method, and the details of the
proposed diabetes detection model. Section 4 provides a discourse to the experimental
results and model evaluation, including a comparison to previous research approaches.
Section 5 states the study limitations and concludes the study with established guidelines
for future work.
2. Related Work
In general, we found that there are two categories of existing methods related to
diabetes prediction problems: machine learning viz. classiﬁcation/detection [ 18,21–23]
and forecasting or forward prediction [ 16]. In this study we are interested in estimat-
ing the probability of diabetes positivity and to review relevant indicators and machine
learning methods.
From the existing publications, we generalized two main approaches related to
diabetes-related features. In the ﬁrst approach, some indicators that were more relevant to
diabetes mellitus from the view of medicine are selected manually/systematically and used
for diabetes prediction or diagnosis [ 21–24]. In the second approach, all diabetes-related
available attributes are given to machine (deep) learning algorithms [ 16,25,26] and learning
models must recognize the important features [ 16]. Our investigations follow the ﬁrst
approach by obtaining the expertise of physicians on diabetes indicators for data collection.
The proposed indicators are veriﬁed by their correlation to the class variable in Table 1 in
order to prove statistical relevance.
According to this survey, Deep Neural Networks (DNN) and Support Vector Machines
(SVM) achieve the best classiﬁcation outcomes, followed by random forests and other
ensemble classiﬁers. For DM detection/prediction, the best-in-class method reported by
Chaki et al. applies SVM on oral glucose tolerance test data at an accuracy of 96.8% [ 27].
Hence, this is regarded as a performance landmark for our algorithmic studies based on
patient anamnesis data used to predict type 2 DM. Subsequently, we refer to studies on
comparable data.
Deberneh and Kim [ 28] investigated the problem if patients will develop type 2
DM one year after data elicitation of 12 features: ( i.) fasting plasma glucose, ( ii.) glycated
hemoglobin (HbA1c), ( iii.) triglycerides, ( iv.) body mass index, ( v.)gamma-glutamyltranspep-
tidase (g-GTP), ( vi.) age, ( vii.) uric acid, ( viii.) sex, ( ix.) smoking, ( x.) drinking, ( xi.) physical
activity, and ( xii.) family history. They found that the prediction has an accuracy of up
to 73% for soft voting and random-forest-based approaches, while XGBoost performed
slightly less at 72% accuracy. In case the input data are elicited over a period of the past
4 years, the accuracy increased to 81%. On the one hand, this is signiﬁcantly less than the
96.8% prediction accuracy reported in [ 27]; on the other hand, the merits are to predict the
occurrence of type 2 DM in the future and, hence, to allow for preventive treatment.
Chaki, J. et al. [ 29] systematically reviewed the art of machine learning and artiﬁcial
intelligence for diabetes mellitus detection and self-management. Their work focused on
four speciﬁc aspects: ( i.) databases, ( ii.) ML-based classiﬁcation and diagnostic methods,
(iii.) AI-based intelligent assistants for patients with DM, and ( iv.) performance metrics.
Alasaf et al. [ 30] proposed a system aimed at preemptively diagnosing DM in Saudi
Arabia. They retrieved data from King Fahd University Hospital (KFUH) in Khobar,
Saudi Arabia. The collected dataset contained 399 records, of which 191 instances were
diabetic and 208 instances were not diabetic with a binary target variable (diabetic or not).
Preprocessing techniques were applied to the data to identify relevant features, and 48
more relevant features were selected and prepared for the identiﬁcation/classiﬁcation
process. Four classiﬁcation algorithms (SVM (LibSVM), ANN, NaiveBayes, and k-NN)