Diagnostics 2021 ,11, 1714 7 of 14
LightGBM
Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) is a common machine learning algorithm,
which has effective implementations such as XGBoost and parallel Gradient Boosted
Regression Trees pGBRT [ 44,45]. Although many engineering optimizations have been
adopted in these implementations, for high-dimensional feature spaces and large data sizes,
these implementations have comparably low efﬁciency and scalability. A major reason is
that for each feature, they need to test all the data records to estimate the information gain
of all possible split points, which requires very high computational time. Thus, to address
these problems, Ke et al. [19] proposed LightGBM.
LightGBM is a gradient boosting framework that uses tree-based learning algorithms.
It is designed to be distributed and efﬁcient using two novel techniques: Gradient-based
One-Side Sampling (GOSS) and Exclusive Feature Bundling (EFB) [ 19]. GOSS excludes
a signiﬁcant proportion of data instances with small gradients, and only uses the rest to
estimate the information gain. Since the data records with larger gradients play a vital
role in the computation of information gain, GOSS can obtain quite an accurate estimation
of the information gain with a much smaller dataset. EFB is used for bundling mutually
exclusive features to reduce the number of features. LightGBM is preﬁxed as Light because
of its high speed. Compared to other existing Gradient Boosting Decision Tree algorithms,
LightGBM has the advantages of faster training speed, higher efﬁciency, lower memory
usage, better accuracy, being capability for handling large-scale data, and the support of
parallel and GPU learning. LightGBM is a fast, distributed, high-performance gradient
boosting framework based on a decision tree algorithm. It is used for ranking, classiﬁcation,
and many other machine learning tasks.
One of the characteristics that makes the LightGBM algorithm differ from other tree
boosting algorithms is to split the tree leafwise as shown in Figure 2 with the best ﬁt,
whereas other boosting algorithms split the tree depthwise or levelwise, see Figure 3, rather
than leafwise. So, when growing on the same leaf in LightGBM, the leafwise algorithm
can reduce much more loss than the levelwise algorithm and, henceforth, results in much
better accuracy, which is not met by any of the other boosting algorithms.
… 
Figure 2. Leaf-wise tree growth in LightGBM [19].
… 
Figure 3. Level-wise tree growth in other boosting algorithms (such as in XGBoost) [19].
For a small size of data, leafwise growing may lead to an increase in complexity and
result in overﬁtting [ 46]. To overcome this problem, we optimized the LightGBM algorithm
for our medium size data ZMHDD (2000+) by precalculating the optimal values of the
model’s hyperparameters to control the complexity of the LightGBM model. These are
(i.) the number of iterations, ( ii.) the maximum depth of the trees, and ( iii.) the number
of leaves. Hence, we retrieve the optimum number of trees, maximum depth of trees,
and number of tree leaves. Details on the optimization process are given in Section 4.