Deep UDA: A Review of Recent Advances and Perspectives 21
For sleep signal UDA, the Montreal Archive of Sleep Studies is used as the
source domain, while the Sleep-EDF database and Sleep-EDF-st database are
used as the target domain [297]. For emotion recognition, the DEAP dataset
and DREAMER dataset are usually used as the benchmarks [86].
4.5.1 Climate science and Geosciences
In recent years, deep learning has been applied to numerous applications on the
Earth science, e.g., climate science and geosciences [17]. Similar to the other
application areas, the perception of remote sensing data can also have the
problem of domain shift, across location and time. In Huang et al. [98], UDA
across active and passive satellite data is developed for cloud type detection.
Notably, the active spaceborne Lidar sensor CALIOP onboard CALIPSO
satellite has better representation capability and sensitivity to aerosol types
and cloud phases, while the passive spectroradiometer sensor VIIRS onboard
Suomi-NPP satellite has wide swaths and better spatial coverage. Mengqiu
et al. [190] propose a UDA method to bridge the gap between the abundant
labeled land fog data and the unlabeled sea fog data for sea fog detection. Soto
et al. [246] exploit the cycleGAN-based UDA approach [318] for deforestation
detection in the Amazon forest.
In addition, UDA has been widely explored in many applications on geo-
science research. Nasim et al. [197] investigate a UDA approach to mitigate the
domain gap between seismic images of the F3 block 3D dataset from offshore
Netherlands and Penobscot 3D survey data from Canada, which utilizes the
EarthAdaptNet to semantically segment the seismic images, when a few classes
have data scarcity. The teacher-student network has been used in Hu et al.
[96] for the classification of the Sentinel-2 images across cities, e.g., Moscow
and Munich. Hu et al. [178] conduct experiments on Satelite Image Time
Series (SITS) classification using existing natural image-based UDA methods
and find that those UDA methods are ineffective, due to the temporal nature
of SITS. Nyborg et al. [200] propose an explicit UDA method that learns
the temporal shift of SITS for crop classification and introduce a dataset for
cross-region adaptation from SITS in four different regions in Europe. Ma
and Zhang [179] introduce a UDA approach for corn-yield prediction using
time-series vegetation indices and weather observations.
5 Promising Directions
As stated above, advanced deep UDA methods have been widely applied to
numerous tasks and applications. In this section, we point to a number of
underexplored areas that are of great theoretical and practical importance,
which can be promising future research directions.