Deep UDA: A Review of Recent Advances and Perspectives 23
well-labeled source domain data to be shared, which may cause issues over
source domain data leakage and intellectual property [5]. To address this, Liu
et al. [159, 166] propose a source-free UDA approach with white-box domain
adaptation to delineate anatomic structures in medical imaging data. Specif-
ically, that work leverages an off-the-shelf pre-trained segmentation model
to adapt to a target domain, by migrating its batch normalization statistics.
In addition, recently, Yin et al. [295] propose a deep inversion technique to
demonstrate that original training data can be recovered from knowledge used
in the course of white-box domain adaptation [304]. To address this, a recent
work [169] uses black-box UDA segmentation, for which no prior knowledge of
network weights is needed for adaptation. Liu et al. [168] further propose that
a target domain network structure could be different from a trained source
domain model to achieve UDA for segmentation.
Source-freedomainadaptationisalsocloselyrelatedtotesttimeadaptation,
in that we encounter a single or a few test samples that are different from
source domain data [62, 165, 223, 266]. To accommodate continuously changing
environments, we expect that frameworks employed would be source-free,
involve low-cost training in mobile devices, and avoid catastrophic forgetting
[90, 181, 280, 281].
Therefore, UDA under a more strict data sharing setting can be a promising
direction, which only shares the pre-trained white/black-box source domain
model. We note that the model sharing is also related to the federated learning,
which is another important transfer learning problem [292].
5.4 Continuous and Test Time Adaptation
Existing work on UDA usually assumes that several stationary domains exist
for which prior work attempts to achieve domain adaptation between discrete
distributions. In real-world environments, however, the change in distributions
could be continuous. For example, when one drives from Seattle to Boston, one
will cross snow-capped mountains, deserts, plateaus, flatlands, hilly areas, etc.
There is, however, no distinct boundaries between these environments, and
thus the shift is smoothly evolving. Therefore, one needs to consider lifelong
learning to progressively adapt a trained model to new environments [146].
There is a need to build well organized and gradually changing UDA
datasets. In addition, the mixup or interpolation technology [171] would
be useful to hallucinate the intermediate data between two largely different
domains to facilitate UDA.
5.5 Adaptation in Foundation Model Era
Foundation models [9] are recently surged as a hot topic to utilize super large
labeled data, which can incorporate sufficiently variant data. In addition,