2 X. Liu et al.
topic, we provide a systematic comparison of its methods and
applications. In addition, the connection of UDA with its closely
related tasks, e.g., domain generalization and out-of-distribution
detection, has also been discussed. Furthermore, deficiencies in
current methods and possible promising directions are highlighted.
Keywords: Deep learning, unsupervised domain adaptation, transfer learning,
adversarial training, self training.
1 Introduction
Deep learning is a subfield of machine learning, which aims at discovering
multiple levels of distributed representations of input data via hierarchical
architectures [73]. For the past several years, there has been an explosion
of deep learning-based approaches, where deep learning has substantially
improved state-of-the-art approaches to diverse machine learning problems and
applications [123]. In particular, deep learning has transformed conventional
signal processing approaches into simultaneously learning both features and
a prediction model in an end-to-end fashion [7]. Although supervised deep
learning is the most prevalent and successful approach for a variety of tasks, its
success hinges on (i) vast troves of labeled training data and (ii) the assumption
of independent and identically distributed ( i.i.d.) training and testing datasets
[99]. Because reliable labeling of massive datasets for various application
domains is often expensive and prohibitive, for a task without sufficient labeled
datasets in a target domain, there is strong demand to apply trained models,
by leveraging rich labeled data from a source domain [286]. This learning
strategy, however, suffers from shifts in data distributions, i.e., domain shift,
between source and target domains [302]. As a result, the performance of a
trained model can be severely degraded, when encountering out-of-distribution
(OOD) data, i.e., a source distribution differs from a target distribution [25].
For example, the performance of a disease diagnostic system, applied to a
population in a target domain that is different from a population in a source
domain, cannot be guaranteed.
To counter this, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is proposed as a
viable solution to migrate knowledge learned from a labeled source domain
to unseen, heterogeneous, and unlabeled target domains [155, 167], as shown
in Figure 1. UDA is aimed at mitigating domain shifts between source and
target domains [118]. The solution to UDA is primarily classified into statistic
moment matching (e.g., maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [174]), domain
style transfer [234], self-training [148, 165, 321], and feature-level adversarial
learning [66, 81, 82, 171].