24 X. Liu et al.
they are robust to the covariate shift in many cases. Then, one can ask: if
we have a sufficiently large training set with diverse data distributions, can
they generalize well on all of the implementation scenarios? Though applying
domain generalization may address the covariate and conditional label shifts,
it is challenging to alleviate the label shift, without access to target domain
data. In addition, the concept shift can also cause a problem, even though
there are sufficient training data.
UDA methods to deal with label shift can be an important direction in
the era of foundation models. In addition, it is interesting to investigate the
generality of different foundation models.
5.6 Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation
While there have been great advances in UDA, due to diverse target domains,
the performance of UDA is not satisfactory in many cases [164]. In such
circumstances, labeling a small set of target domain data could be a viable
solution[260]. Alongthisdirection, semi-superviseddomainadaptation(SSDA)
is proposed, as it can leverage both labeled source and target data as well
as unlabeled target data. Further, several SSDA classification methods have
been proposed to use instance constraints [58], subspace learning [293], entropy
minimax [226], adversarial attack [115], etc. These methods are based on
discriminative class boundaries for image classification, which, however, cannot
be directly applied to segmentation. In Liu et al. [164], the asymmetric co-
training is proposed to achieve semi-supervised domain adaptation for medical
image segmentation.
The unified framework for both SSL and UDA is able to utilize both labeled
and unlabeled target domain data. The alternative training based methods,
e.g., self-training, have been applied to these two tasks, which can have a great
potential for semi-supervised domain adaptation. Semi-supervised domain
adaptation for object detection and image generation, however, are largely
underexplored.
5.7 Domain Generalization
Most of the prior work on UDA assumes that there is a single source domain,
while recent work has shown that network generalization can be further
improved with multiple source domain sets [192]. By observing varying datasets,
networks can learn domain invariant cues. Domain generalization further
removes the requirement of unlabeled target domain data in multi-source
UDA [186]. There are two main streams for domain generalization tasks.
The first stream is to learn domain invariant features [69]. For example, Li
et al. [128, 141] utilize adversarial training to mitigate the domain divergence.
The second stream targets to fuse the domain-specific feature representations.