8 X. Liu et al.
In addition, the Wasserstein distance [68, 80, 156, 170], a.k.a. optimal
transportation distance or earth mover’s distance [145, 149], could be another
alternative to measure the distribution divergence. The joint distribution
optimal transport (JDOT) is proposed to measure the Wasserstein distance be-
tween two feature distributions [48]. As a deep learning framework, DeepJDOT
is further proposed to achieve an end-to-end UDA [50].
Furthermore, graph matching has been used as a divergence measure, which
aims at finding an optimal correspondence between two graphs [287]. With
a batch of samples, the feature extraction can be regarded as nodes in an
undirected graph. The distance between two nodes represents their similarity.
The domain divergence is defined as the matching cost between the graphs in
source and target domain batches [51, 52].
3.2 Adversarial Learning
Instead of choosing a divergence measure, such as MMD, recent work focuses
on adaptively learning a measure of divergence. With recent advances in
generative adversarial networks (GAN), adversarial training is widely used to
achieve domain invariant feature extraction.
Following Theorem 1, to efficiently minimize the upper bound, i.e., the
right-hand side of Equation (1), adversarial UDAs are used to minimize across
domain divergence at the feature level with guidance of a discriminator as
an adaptively learned divergence measure. Specifically, as shown in fig. 5(b),
in [66, 258], a feature extractor f(·)is applied onto xto extract a feature
representation f(x)∈RK. We would expect that d[ps(f(x)), pt(f(x))]could
be a small value. Targeting this goal, in addition to training a classifier Clsto
correctly classify source data, f(·)is also optimized to encourage the source and
targetfeaturedistributionstobesimilartoeachother, followingthesupervision
signal from a domain discriminator Dis:RK→(0,1). We note that the
classifier Cls:RK×Y → (0,1)outputs the probability of an extracted feature
f(x)being a class yamong ccategories, i.e., C(f(x), y) =p(y|f(x);Cls). The
objective of different modules can be
max
ClsE
x∼pslogC(f(x), y) (2)
max
DisE
x∼pslog(1−Dis(f(x)) +E
x∼ptlogDis(f(x)) (3)
max
fE
x∼pslogC(f(x), y) +λE
x∼ptlog(1−Dis(f(x)), (4)
where λ∈R+is used to balance between the two loss terms. Following the
conventional adversarial UDA methods, the three maxstrategy [232, 254]
can be leveraged, and the three objectives above are used to update the
corresponding three modules, respectively. In Equation (3), if f(x)is a source
domain feature, then Dis(f(x))is trained to produce 0 and vice versa. Note
that maximizingE
x∼ptlogDis(f(x))forDisin Equation (3), while maximizing