Deep UDA: A Review of Recent Advances and Perspectives 11
Figure 7: Different architectures for (a) adversarial UDA with Conditional and Label Shift
(CLS) [143], and (b) generative adversarial UDA [11].
3.5 Self-training
Unlike approaches that reduce domain discrepancy with a divergence measure,
self-training is proposed as an alternative training scheme, by utilizing unla-
beled target domain data to achieve domain adaptation [321]. Self-training
is based on a round-based alternative training scheme, which is originally
developed for semi-supervised training and has recently been adapted for UDA.
There are two steps involved in deep self-training based UDA: (1) creating a
set of pseudo-labels in the target domain, and (2) retraining the network using
the generated pseudo-labels with target domain data.
Recently, self-training-basedapproacheshavesurpassedadversarialtraining-
based approaches in several deep UDA tasks [188, 241, 273]. Whereas self-
training was initially presented as part of semi-supervised learning [255],
recently proposed deep self-training methods combine feature embedding
with alternative learning in a unified manner, thus yielding flexible domain
adaptation [321].
A crucial issue in self-training-based approaches, however, is that pseudo-
labels in the target domain could be noisy; and thus it is likely that a large
proportion could be unreliable. To mitigate this issue, selecting the prediction
with high confidence is essential. To this end, in classification or segmentation
tasks with softmax output unit, a possible solution would be to gauge the
confidence as the maximum value of histogram [321]. Additionally, to tackle
the problem of the noisy and unreliable pseudo-labels, Zou et al. [321] construct
a more conservative pseudo-label in order to smooth the one-hot hard label to
a soft label vector. Liu et al. [148] further resort to an additional supervision
signal of an energy-based model for regularization, which is independent of
the pseudo-label. Mei et al. [187] explore instance-wise self-training for UDA.
In addition to the discriminative tasks, such as classification and segmen-
tation, Mei et al. [165] further extend self-training to a generative task, by
controlling the confident pseudo-label of continuous pixel value with a Bayesian
uncertainty mask. In learning-based tasks, two kinds of uncertainty exist,