22 X. Liu et al.
5.1 Realistic Shift Assumption
Most of the current UDA methods have focused on the alignment of covariate
shift. As analyzed in Section 1, however, there exist four kinds of possible
shifts in real-world applications [119]. While numerous works are proposed in
the literature to address conditional or covariate shifts, label and concept shifts
have not been investigated extensively. Notably, approaches for the adversarial
feature alignment of the covariate shift and approaches without considering the
conditional shift have been outperformed by several competing approaches, e.g.,
self-training [321], dropout [227], and moment matching methods [205] in most
of the benchmarks. As such, it is important to incorporate both conditional and
covariateshifts, asitisill-posedtotakeoneofthemintoconsideration[118, 307].
In Liuet al. [143], theoretical analysis and methodology under the conditional
and label shift assumptions are discussed in adversarial learning-based UDA.
It is, therefore, necessary to incorporate more realistic assumptions of the
domain shifts, depending on real-world tasks at hand.
5.2 Partial/Open-set Domain Adaptation
Partial UDA can be seen as a special category of label shifts, in which some
classes have zero probability in a target domain. Due to the mismatch of
categories between source and target domains, conventional UDA approaches
may result in negative transfer [18, 19, 116]. Similarly, open-set UDA or
universal UDA are presented under the assumption that there are novel classes
in a target domain; this approach thus could lead to novel class discovery or
out-of-distribution detection [206].
Liptonet al. [140] propose a test distribution estimator to detect the
label shift. Azizzadenesheli et al. [4] introduce a regularization approach to
correct the label shift. Chen et al. [37] cast the problem of the label shift as
an optimal transportation-based UDA task, which is closely related to the
class imbalance problem in the MMD framework. Wu et al. [277] propose
an asymmetrically-relaxed alignment approach using the adversarial UDA.
However, these approaches assume that there is no conditional shift.
As noted above, partial UDA can be regarded as a special case of the
label shifts. Therefore, developing more general label shift UDA methods for
both small label distribution shift and partial UDA can be more practical for
real-world applications. In addition, novel class/subtype discovery could be
incorporated into the open-set UDA.
5.3 Source-free Domain Adaptation
Data privacy has been a critical concern over cross-center collaboration, espe-
cially in the medical domain. Conventional UDA requires the large scale and