16 X. Liu et al.
4.1.4 Image Generation
Generative models have been widely applied to diverse tasks, e.g., entertain-
ment, image harmonization/stylization, and data completion and augmenta-
tion [158, 162, 264, 282, 288, 289].
The image style synthesis task itself can be regarded as a cross-domain
translation task, when the input involves another style or domain. To address
this, GAN-based methods have been widely used for cross-domain image
generation tasks [85]. Self-training has also been applied to the image synthesis
task. For example, Liu et al. [165] leverage self-training for the image synthesis
task, which also considers both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties [54].
Specifically, Liu et al. [165] aim at cross modality synthesis using paired sets
of images acquired from two different sites.
The typical evaluation in He et al. [85] adopt the T1-weighted to T2-
weighted MRI translation across three IXI centers.1In addition, the paired
cine and tagged tongue MRI in two private datasets are used in Liu et al. [165].
4.2 Medical Image Analysis
Medical image analysis has been a major application ground for image analysis
methods, due to its wide usage in real-life imaging problems. In addition, a
variety of imaging modalities are used in a clinical setting, each of which poses
unique challenges. An increasing amount of deep network-based methods have
been proposed to achieve enhanced computational speed and better algorithmic
performance over traditional medical image analysis methods. UDA has been
successfully adopted in image segmentation, classification, and generation tasks
in addition to a few other varying applications.
Peroneet al. [210] use a self-ensembling technique in semantic image
segmentation, demonstrating that it can improve model generalization. Their
method is evaluated using a small number of magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) datasets, serving as a proof-of-concept of the advantage of UDA in
medical imaging, rather than showing an actual application in a more extensive
real-life medical problem. Ouyang et al. [201] report UDA for multi-domain
medical image segmentation via a VAE-based feature prior matching, which
features data efficiency. It is applied to a multi-modality cardiac image dataset
to achieve segmentation. Zou et al. [320] propose UDA with the so-called
Dual-Scheme Fusion Network, where both source-to-target and target-to-source
connections are built to help bridge the gap between domain differences for
improved performance. It is applied to the segmentation of both brain tumors
and cardiac data, yielding decent results. He et al. [84] achieve cross-device
retinal OCT segmentation. Liu et al. [160] facilitate cross-modality brain
tumor segmentation with self-semantic contouring. Additionally, more methods
1https://brain-development.org/ixi-dataset/