APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, 2022, 11, e25
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution licence (http:// creativecommons.org/ licenses/ by-nc/ 4.0/ ), which permits un-
restricted re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, for non-commercial use,
provided the original work is properly cited.
Original Paper
Deep Unsupervised Domain Adaptation:
A Review of Recent Advances and
Perspectives
Xiaofeng Liu1, Chaehwa Yoo2, Fangxu Xing1, Hyejin Oh2, Georges El
Fakhri1, Je-Won Kang2and Jonghye Woo1∗
1Gordon Center for Medical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
2Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering and Graduate Program
in Smart Factory, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea
ABSTRACT
Deep learning has become the method of choice to tackle real-world
problems in different domains, partly because of its ability to learn
from data and achieve impressive performance on a wide range of
applications. However, itssuccessusuallyreliesontwoassumptions:
(i) vast troves of labeled datasets are required for accurate model
fitting, and (ii) training and testing data are independent and iden-
tically distributed. Its performance on unseen target domains, thus,
is not guaranteed, especially when encountering out-of-distribution
dataattheadaptationstage.Theperformancedropondatainatar-
get domain is a critical problem in deploying deep neural networks
that are successfully trained on data in a source domain. Unsuper-
vised domain adaptation (UDA) is proposed to counter this, by
leveraging both labeled source domain data and unlabeled target
domain data to carry out various tasks in the target domain. UDA
has yielded promising results on natural image processing, video
analysis, natural language processing, time-series data analysis,
medical image analysis, etc. In this review, as a rapidly evolving
∗Corresponding author: Xiaofeng Liu, xliu61@mgh.harvard.edu
Received 15 April 2022; Revised 23 May 2022
ISSN 2048-7703; DOI 10.1561/116.00000192
©2022 X. Liu, C. Yoo, F. Xing, H. Oh, G. El Fakhri, J. Kang and J. Woo