Sensors 2020 ,20, 1516 3 of 13
CNNs are considered the best of deep learning methods used. Elshaer et al. [ 13] reduced the
computation time of a large number of slices by using two trained deep CNN models. The ﬁrst model
was used to get the liver region, and the second model was used for avoiding fogginess from image
re-sampling and for avoiding missed small lesions.
Wen Li et al. [ 28] utilized a convolutional neural network (CNN) that uses image patches.
It considers an image patch for each pixel, such that the pixel of interest is in the center of that patch.
The patches are divided into normal or tumor liver tissue. If the patch contains at least 50 percent or
more of tumor tissue, the patch is labeled as a positive sample. The reported accuracy reached about
80.6%. The work presented in [ 12,13] reported s more than 94% accuracy rate for classifying the images
either as normal or abnormal if the image showed a liver with tumor regions. The CNN model has
dierent architectures—i.e., Alex Net, VGG-Net, ResNet, etc. [32–34]. The work presented by Bellver
et al. [ 5] used VGG-16 architecture as the base network in their work. Other work [ 11,16,29,32,35,36]
has used two-dimensional (2D) U-Net, which is designed mainly for medical image segmentation.
The main objective of this work is to present a novel segmentation technique for liver cross-sectional
CT scans based on a deep learning model that has proven successful in image segmentation for scene
understanding, namely SegNet [ 37]. Memory and performance e ciency are the main advantages of
this architecture over the other models. The model has been modiﬁed to ﬁt two-class classiﬁcation tasks.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, a review is presented on recent segmentation
approaches for the liver and lesions in CT images, as well as a short introduction to the basic concepts
addressed in this work. Section 3 presents the proposed method and the experimental dataset.
Experimental results are presented in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are presented and discussed in
Section 5.
2. Basic Concepts
Convolutional neural networks are similar to traditional neural networks [ 20,38,39].A convolutional
neural network (CNN) includes one or more layers of convolutional, fully connected, pooling,
or fully connected and rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) layers. Generally, as the network becomes
deeper with many more parameters, the accuracy of the results increases, but it also becomes more
computationally complex.
Recently, CNN models have been used widely in image classiﬁcation for di erent
applications [20,34,40–42] or to extract features from the convolutional layers before or after the
down sampling layers [ 41,43]. However, the architectures discussed above are not suitable for image
segmentation or pixel-wise classiﬁcations. VGG-16 network architecture [ 44] is a type of CNN model.
The network includes 41 layers. There are 16 layers with learnable weights: there are 13 convolutional
layers and three fully connected layers. Figure 2 shows the architecture of VGG-16 as introduced by
Simonyan and Zisserman [44].
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 13 
 CNNs are considered the best of deep learning methods used. Elshaer et al. [ 13] reduced the 
computation time of a large number of slices by using two trained deep CNN models. The first m odel 
was used to get the liver region, and the second model was used for avoiding fogginess from image 
re-sampling and for avoiding missed small lesions.  
Wen Li et al. [ 28] utilized a convolutional neural network (CNN) that uses image patches. It 
consider s an image patch for each pixel, such that the pixel of interest is in the center of that patch. 
The patches are divided into normal or tumor liver tissue. If the patch contains at least 50 percent or 
more of tumor tissue, the patch is labeled as a positiv e sample. The reported accuracy reached about 
80.6%. The work presented in [ 12,13] reported s more than 94% accuracy rate for classifying the 
images either as normal or abnormal if the image showed a liver with tumor regions. The CNN model 
has different ar chitectures —i.e., Alex Net, VGG -Net, ResNet, etc. [ 32–34]. The work presented by 
Bellver et al. [5] used VGG -16 architecture as the base network in their work. Other work 
[11,16,29,32,35–36] has used two -dimensional (2D) U -Net, which is designed mainly for  medical 
image segmentation.  
The main objective of this work is to present a novel segmentation technique for liver cross -
sectional CT scans based on a deep learning model that has proven successful in image segmentation 
for scene understanding, namely Seg Net [ 37]. Memory and performance efficiency are the main 
advantages of this architecture over the other models. The model has been modified to fit two -class 
classification tasks.  
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, a review is presented  on recent 
segmentation approaches for the liver and lesions in CT images, as well as a short introduction to the 
basic concepts addressed in this work. Section 3 presents the proposed method and the experimental 
dataset. Experimental results are presented  in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are presented and 
discussed in Section 5.  
2. Basic Concepts  
Convolutional neural networks are similar to traditional neural networks [ 20,38,39]. A 
convolutional neural network (CNN) includes one or more layers of convolu tional, fully connected, 
pooling, or fully connected and rectified linear unit (ReLU) layers. Generally, as the network becomes 
deeper with many more parameters, the accuracy of the results increases, but it also becomes more 
computationally complex.  
Rece ntly, CNN models have been used widely in image classification for different applications 
[20,34 , 40–42] or to extract features from the convolutional layers before or after the down sampling 
layers [ 41,43]. However, the architectures discussed above are n ot suitable for image segmentation 
or pixel -wise classifications. VGG -16 network architecture [ 44] is a type of CNN model. The network 
includes 41 layers. There are 16 layers with learnable weights: there are 13 convolutional layers and 
three fully connect ed layers. Figure 2 shows the architecture of VGG -16 as introduced by Simonyan 
and Zisserman [ 44]. 
 
Figure 2.  VGG -16 network architecture [ 44]. 
Most pixel -wise classification network architectures are of encoder –decoder architecture, where 
the encoder par t is the VGG -16 model. The encoder gradually decreases the spatial dimension of the 
images with pooling layers; however, the decoder retrieves the details of the object and spatial 
dimensions for fast and precise segmentation of images. U -Net [ 45,46 ] is a convolutional encoder -
Figure 2. VGG-16 network architecture [44].
Most pixel-wise classiﬁcation network architectures are of encoder–decoder architecture, where the
encoder part is the VGG-16 model. The encoder gradually decreases the spatial dimension of the images
with pooling layers; however, the decoder retrieves the details of the object and spatial dimensions for
fast and precise segmentation of images. U-Net [ 45,46] is a convolutional encoder-decoder network