Sensors 2020 ,20, 1516 5 of 13
The second step is to put the images in an acceptable format for the SegNet model [ 37]. The
images have been converted to three channels, similar to the RGB color space, by simply duplicating
the slice in each channel and resizing each to be the dimension 360 4803. Figure 4 shows three
samples of the input images before color depth correction. The images in this format have too low
contrast and are not suitable for use by the deep learning model.
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 13 
 where ℎ is the pixel value  in Hounsfield, 𝑔 is the corresponding predicted gray level value, and 𝑚1 
and 𝑚2 are the minimum and maximum of the Hounsfield range, respectively.  
The second step is to put the images in an acceptable format for the SegNet model [ 37]. The 
images have been converted to three channels, similar to the RGB color space, by simply duplicating 
the slice in each channel and resizing each to be the dimension 360 × 480 × 3. Figure 4 shows three 
samples of the input images before color depth correction. The images in this format have too low 
contrast and are not suitable for use by the deep learning model.  
   
Figure 4.  Raw CT slices in DICOM format for three different patients imported from the IRCAD 
dataset [ 50]. 
In order to increase the performance of t he system, the training images were subject to data 
augmentation, where the images are transformed by a set of affine transformations, such as flipping, 
rotation, and mirroring, as well as augmenting the color values [ 38,51,52]. Perez et al. [ 53] discuss t he 
effectiveness of data augmentation on the classification results when deep learning is used, and 
showed that the traditional augmentation techniques can improve the results by about 7%.  
3.3. Training and Classification  
The goodness of CNN features was compared to other traditional feature extraction methods, 
such as LBP, GLCM, Wavelet and Spectral. The feature extractors, which give good performance in 
comparison with the other texture extractor features, are a CNN. CNN training consumes some time; 
howe ver, features can be extracted from the trained convolutional network, compared to other 
complex textural methods. CNNs have proven to be effective in classification tasks [ 26]. The training 
data and data augmentation are combined by reading batches of tra ining data, applying data 
augmentation, and sending the augmented data to the training algorithm. The training is started by 
taking the data source, which contains the training images, pixel labels, and their augmentation 
forms.  
4. Experimental Results  
4.1.  Evaluation Metrics  
The output results of classification were compared against the ground truth given by the dataset. 
The comparison was done on a pixel -to-pixel basis. To evaluate the results, we applied the evaluation 
metrics given below. Table 1 repre sent the confusion matrix for binary class classification.  
Table 1.  Terms used to define sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy.  
 Predicted  
Positive  Negative  
Actual  Positive  TP FN 
Negative  FP TN 
Figure 4. Raw CT slices in DICOM format for three di erent patients imported from the IRCAD
dataset [50].
In order to increase the performance of the system, the training images were subject to data
augmentation, where the images are transformed by a set of a ne transformations, such as ﬂipping,
rotation, and mirroring, as well as augmenting the color values [ 38,51,52]. Perez et al. [ 53] discuss
the eectiveness of data augmentation on the classiﬁcation results when deep learning is used, and
showed that the traditional augmentation techniques can improve the results by about 7%.
3.3. Training and Classiﬁcation
The goodness of CNN features was compared to other traditional feature extraction methods,
such as LBP , GLCM, Wavelet and Spectral. The feature extractors, which give good performance in
comparison with the other texture extractor features, are a CNN. CNN training consumes some time;
however, features can be extracted from the trained convolutional network, compared to other complex
textural methods. CNNs have proven to be e ective in classiﬁcation tasks [ 26]. The training data and
data augmentation are combined by reading batches of training data, applying data augmentation,
and sending the augmented data to the training algorithm. The training is started by taking the data
source, which contains the training images, pixel labels, and their augmentation forms.
4. Experimental Results
4.1. Evaluation Metrics
The output results of classiﬁcation were compared against the ground truth given by the dataset.
The comparison was done on a pixel-to-pixel basis. To evaluate the results, we applied the evaluation
metrics given below. Table 1 represent the confusion matrix for binary class classiﬁcation.
Table 1. Terms used to deﬁne sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and accuracy.
Predicted
Positive Negative
Positive TP FNActualNegative FP TN
Out of the confusion matrix, some important metrics were computed, such as