Sensors 2020 ,20, 1516 6 of 13
1. Overall Accuracy: this represents the percentage of correctly classiﬁed pixels to the whole
number of pixels. This could be formulated as in Equation (2):
accuracy =TN+TP
TN+TP+FN+FP(2)
while the mean accuracy is the mean of accuracies reported across the di erent testing folds.
2. Recall (Re) or true positive rate (TPR): this represents the capability of the system to correctly
detect tumor pixels relative to the total number of true tumor pixels, as formulated in Equation (3):
Re=TP
TP+FN(3)
3. Speciﬁcity of the true negative rate (TNR): this represents the rate of the correctly detected
background or normal tissue, as formulated in Equation (4):
Speci f icity =TN
TN+FP(4)
Since most of image is normal or background, the percentage of global accuracy is signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by the TNR. Therefore, some other measures for the tumor class are computed.
4. Intersection over union (IoU): this is the ratio of correctly classiﬁed pixels relative to the union
of predicted and actual number of pixels for the same class. Equation (5) shows the formulation of
the IoU:
IoU =TP
TP+FP+FN(5)
5. Precision (Pr): this measures the trust in the predicted positive class, i.e., prediction of a tumor.
It is formulated as in Equation (6):
Pr=TP
TP+FP(6)
6. F1 score (F1): this is a harmonic mean of recall (true positive rate) and precision, as formulated
in Equation (7). It measures whether a point on the predicted boundary has a match on the ground
truth boundary or not:
F1=2(PrRe)
(Pr+Re)(7)
4.2. Data Set and Preprocessing
As mentioned before, the dataset used to test the proposed algorithm is 3D-IRCADb. The
3D-IRACDb dataset is o ered by the French Research Institute against Digestive Tract, or IRCAD [ 50].
It has two subsets: the ﬁrst one, 3DIRACDb-01, is the one appropriate for liver tumor segmentation.
This subset consists of publicly available 3D CT scans of 20 patients, half of them for women patients
and half for men, with hepatic tumors in 75% of the cases. All the scans are available in DICOM format
with axial dimensions of 512 512. For each case, tens of 2D images are available, together with
labeled images and masked images prepared by radiologists. In this work, we have considered all
15 cases with a total of 2063 images for training and testing. The dataset is used widely and recently, as
in [54–57].
All image slices were subject to preprocessing, as discussed above. The labeled images provided
by the dataset are preprocessed by the same procedure, except the step of range mapping, since they
are given as binary images in the range [0,255]. Figures 5 and 6 show the examples of the preprocessing
steps on input images. Associated with the input (patient) images are the labeled images, which are
labeled by experts and are fed to the system as ground truth for the segmentation process.