Sensors 2020 ,20, 1516 10 of 13
Table 6. Comparison on the overall accuracy for the proposed method against other work in
the literature.
Author (s) Application Method Accuracy
Chlebus [11] Liver tumor candidate classiﬁcation Random Forest 90%
Christ [12]Automatic liver and tumor
segmentation of CT and MRICascaded fully convolutional neural
networks (CFCNs) with dense 3D
conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs)94%
Yang [33] Liver segmentation of CT volumesA deep image-to-image network
(DI2IN)95%
Bi [7] Liver segmentationDeep residual network (Cascaded
ResNet)95.9%
Li [46]Liver and tumor segmentation from CT
VolumesH-DenseUNet 96.5%
Yuan [32]Automatic liver and tumor
segmentationHierarchical
Convolutional—Deconvolutional
Neural Networks96.7%
Wen Li et al. [28] Patch-based liver tumor classiﬁcationConventional Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN)80.6%
Our method Liver tumor in CT Scans segmentation Modiﬁed SegNet 98.8%
5. Conclusions
This paper presents experimental work to adopt a deep learning model, used for semantic
segmentation of road scene understanding, for tumor segmentation in CT Liver scans in DICOM format.
SegNet is recent encoder–decoder network architecture that employs the trained VGG-16 image
classiﬁcation network as encoder, and employs corresponding decoder architecture to transform the
features back into the image domain to reach a pixel-wise classiﬁcation at the end. The advantage of
SegNet over standard auto-encoder architecture is in the simple yet very e cient modiﬁcation where
the max-pooling indices of the feature map are saved, instead of saving the feature maps in full. As a
result, the architecture is much more e cient in training time, memory requirements, and accuracy.
To facilitate binary segmentation of medical images, the classiﬁcation layer was replaced with
binary pixel classiﬁcation layer. For training and testing, the standard 3D-IRCADb-01 dataset was
used. The proposed method correctly detects most parts of the tumor, with accuracy above 86% for
tumor classiﬁcation. However, by examining the results, there were few false positives that could be
improved by applying false positive ﬁlters or by training the model on a larger dataset.
As a future work, we propose using a new deep learning model as an additional level to increase
the localization accuracy of the tumor, and hence reduce the FN rate and increase the IoU metric, like
the work introduced in [20].
Author Contributions: Conceptualization and methodology, M.A.-M.S. and S.A.; software and validation, G.K.
and M.A.; formal analysis, M.A. and M.A.-M.S.; writing—original draft preparation, M.A.-M.S.; writing—review
and editing, G.K., M.A., and B.A.; supervision, M.A.-M.S.; project administration, S.A.; funding acquisition, S.A.
and B.A. Reviewed by all authors. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received external funding for publication by the Deanship of Scientiﬁc Research at
Majmaah University, which is funding this work under project RGP-2019-29.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Mamdouh Mahfouz, Professor of Radiology at Kasr-El-Aini
School of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt, for his help in revising the introduction in order to correct any
misused medical terms.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Al-Shaikhli, S.D.S.; Yang, M.Y.; Rosenhahn, B. Automatic 3d liver segmentation using sparse representation
of global and local image information via level set formulation. arXiv 2015 , arXiv:abs /1508.01521.