Sensors 2020 ,20, 1516 2 of 13
Because the treatment could not be reached by all infected people, the Egypt’s government launched a
“100 Million Seha” (seha is an Arabic word meaning “health”) national campaign between October 2018
and April 2019. At the end of March 2019, around 35 million people had been examined for HCV [ 10].
Primary hepatic malignancy is more prevalent in Southeast Asia and Africa than in the United
States [ 11,12]. The reported survival rate is generally 18%. However, survival rates rely on the stage of
disease at the time of diagnosis [13].
Primary hepatic malignancy is diagnosed by clinical, laboratory, and imaging tests, including
ultrasound scans, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, and computed tomography (CT) scans [ 14].
A CT scan utilizes radiation to capture detailed images around the body from di erent angles,
including sagittal, coronal, and axial images. It shows organs, bones, and soft tissues; the information
is then processed by the computer to create images, usually in DICOM format [ 15]. Quite often, the
examination requires intravenous injection of contrast material. The scans can help to di erentiate
malignant lesions from acute infection, chronic inﬂammation, ﬁbrosis, and cirrhosis [16].
Staging of hepatic malignancies depends on the size and location of the malignancy [ 16,17].
Hence, it is important to develop an automatic procedure to detect and extract the cancer region
from the CT scan accurately. Image segmentation is the process of partitioning the liver region in
the CT scan into regions, where each region represents a semantic part of the liver [ 18,19]. This is a
fundamental step to support the diagnosis by radiologists, and a fundamental step to create automatic
computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems [ 20–22]. CT scans of the liver are usually interpreted by
manual or semi-manual techniques, but these techniques are subjective, expensive, time-consuming,
and highly error prone. Figure 1 shows an example where the gray level intensities of the liver and
the spleen are too similar to be di erentiated by the naked eye. To overcome these obstacles and
improve the quality of liver tumors’ diagnosis, multiple computer-aided methods have been developed.
However, these systems have not been that great at the segmentation of the liver and lesions due to
multiple challenges, such as the low contrast between the liver and neighboring organs and between
the liver and tumors, di erent contrast levels in tumors, variation in the numbers and sizes of tumors,
tissues’ abnormalities, and irregular tumor growth in response to medical treatment. Therefore, a new
approach must be used to overcome these obstacles [23].
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 13 
 launched a “100 Million Seha” (seha is an Arabic word meaning “health”) national campaign between 
October 2018 and April 2019. At the end of March 2019, around 35 million people had been examined 
for HCV [ 10].  
Primary hepatic malignancy is more prevalent in So utheast Asia and Africa than in the United 
States [ 11,12 ]. The reported survival rate is generally 18%. However, survival rates rely on the stage 
of disease at the time of diagnosis [ 13]. 
Primary hepatic malignancy is diagnosed by clinical, laboratory, an d imaging tests, including  
ultrasound scans, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, and computed tomography (CT) scans 
[14]. A CT scan utilizes radiation to capture detailed images around the body from different angles, 
including sagittal, coronal, and ax ial images. It shows organs, bones, and soft tissues; the information 
is then processed by the computer to create images, usually in DICOM format [ 15]. Quite often, the 
examination requires intravenous injection of contrast material. The scans can help to differentiate 
malignant lesions from acute infection, chronic inflammation, fibrosis, and cirrhosis [ 16].  
Staging of hepatic malignancies depends on the size and location of the malignancy [ 16,17]. 
Hence, it is important to develop an automatic procedure to detect and extract the cancer region from 
the CT scan accurately. Image segmentation is the process of partitioning the liver region in the CT 
scan into regions, where each region represents a semantic part of the liver [ 18,19]. This is a 
fundamental st ep to support the diagnosis by radiologists, and a fundamental step to create 
automatic computer -aided diagnosis (CAD) systems [ 20–22]. CT scans of the liver are usually 
interpreted by manual or semi -manual techniques, but these techniques are subjectiv e, expensive, 
time -consuming, and highly error prone. Figure 1 shows an example where the gray level intensities 
of the liver and the spleen are too similar to be differentiated by the naked eye. To overcome these 
obstacles and improve the quality of liver  tumors’ diagnosis, multiple computer -aided methods have 
been developed. However, these systems have not been that great at the segmentation of the liver 
and lesions due to multiple challenges, such as the low contrast between the liver and neighboring 
organs and between the liver and tumors, different contrast levels in tumors, variation in the numbers 
and sizes of tumors, tissues’ abnormalities, and irregular tumor growth in response to medical 
treatment. Therefore, a new approach must be used to overcome  these obstacles [ 23]. 
 
Figure 1.  Example of the similarity in gray levels between the liver and the spleen in computed 
tomography (CT) images. Imported from the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted 
Intervention (MICCAI) SLIVER07 workshop dataset s [24,25]. 
In this work, a review of wide variety of recent publications of image analysis for liver 
malignancy segmentation is introduced. In recent years, extensive research has depended on 
supervised learning methods. The supervised method use inputs la beled to train a model for a 
specific task —liver or tumor segmentation, in this case. On top of these learning methods are the 
deep learning methods [ 26,27]. There are many different models of deep learning that have been 
introduced, such as stacked auto -encoder (SAE), deep belief nets (DBN), convolutional neural 
networks (CNNs), and Deep Boltzmann Machines (DBM) [ 28–31]. The superiority of the deep 
learning models in terms of accuracy has been established. However, it is still a challenge to find 
proper tr aining dataset, which should be huge in size and prepared by experts.  
Figure 1. Example of the similarity in gray levels between the liver and the spleen in computed
tomography (CT) images. Imported from the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted
Intervention (MICCAI) SLIVER07 workshop datasets [24,25].
In this work, a review of wide variety of recent publications of image analysis for liver malignancy
segmentation is introduced. In recent years, extensive research has depended on supervised learning
methods. The supervised method use inputs labeled to train a model for a speciﬁc task—liver
or tumor segmentation, in this case. On top of these learning methods are the deep learning
methods [ 26,27]. There are many di erent models of deep learning that have been introduced, such as
stacked auto-encoder (SAE), deep belief nets (DBN), convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and Deep
Boltzmann Machines (DBM) [ 28–31]. The superiority of the deep learning models in terms of accuracy
has been established. However, it is still a challenge to ﬁnd proper training dataset, which should be
huge in size and prepared by experts.