(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 1: (a) An optimization landscape for two parameters represented in two directions, i.e.horizontal and vertical directions. The loss changes slow in horizontal direction and fast
in vertical direction. (b) A local minima scenario in 1-D optimization. (c) A saddle point scenario in 1-D optimization.
the iteration-wise gradient behavior for that parameter, which
leads to poor optimization. Note that each parameter of the
network is considered as a dimension in the optimization
landscape. Therefore, both dimension and parameter are used
interchangeably in this paper.
Improving SGD based optimization method for neural net-
works has recently become an active area of research interest.
In order to address the above problems, several SGD variants
have been proposed in the literature. For example, SGD with
momentum (SGDM) is an extension of SGD by incorporating
the past gradients in each dimension [31], [32]. SGDM main-
tains a momentum in each dimension as a function of previous
momentum and current gradient in that dimension. The goal
of SGDM is to develop high “velocity” in any dimension that
has a consistent gradient. In SGDM, the jittering problem is
reduced with high velocity in consistent gradient dimensions
and the saddle point problem is reduced by using the past
gradients, which provide some momentum, even when the
current gradient is close to zero. SGDM optimization is
further improved by Sutskever et al. by Nesterov’s Accelerated
Gradient (NAG), which guarantees a better convergence rate
than SGD in certain situations [32]. In NAG, the gradients are
computed based on an approximation of the next position of
the parameters, which are used to update the current moments
and parameters. Thus, NAG updates both the moments and
gradients, based on the future dimensions.
Another widely used variant of the gradient descent method
is AdaGrad [33], proposed to deal with sparse data. AdaGrad
performs larger updates for infrequent parameters which leads
to smaller magnitude of gradients and smaller updates for fre-
quent parameters which leads to larger magnitude of gradients.
Basically, AdaGrad divides the learning rate with the square
root of the sum of the squares of the past gradients for all
parameters. Apart from dealing with sparse data, AdaGrad is
applied to other kinds of problems as well, such as training
large-scale neural nets to recognize cats in Youtube videos
[34] and training GloVe word embeddings, as infrequent words
require larger updates than frequent ones [35]. But, AdaGrad
accumulates the square of gradients which, in turn, may lower
the learning rate drastically after some time and kill the
learning process. Zeiler extended AdaGrad to AdaDelta by re-
moving the problem of a dying learning rate, which was caused
by the monotonically increasing sum of square of gradients
[36]. AdaDelta also accumulates the square of past gradients,
but considers only a few immediate past gradients instead of
all past gradients. RMSProp is another attempt to correct thediminishing learning rate of AdaGrad similar to AdaDelta [37],
i.e. by accumulating the gradient as an exponentially decaying
average of squared gradients. The major difference between
AdaDelta and RMSProp is that AdaDelta does not use any
learning rate [36], whereas RMSProp uses a learning rate [37].
One of the recent and popular variants of gradient descent
is Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam). Adam computes
adaptive learning rates for each parameter [38] by utilizing
both ﬁrst and second moments. Adam accumulates the expo-
nentially decaying average of past gradients similar to SGDM
as ﬁrst moment. It also accumulates the exponentially decaying
average of square of past gradients similar to AdaDelta and
RMSProp as second moment. The moment can be imagined
as a ball rolling down a slope, where Adam behaves like a
heavy ball with friction, which thus prefers ﬂat minima in
the error surface [39]. It is observed that Adam performs
reasonably well in practice as compared to the other adaptive
learning-methods. However, Adam does not utilize the change
in immediate past gradient information, which is incorporated
in the proposed diffGrad method. Very recently, Reddi et
al. proposed AMSGrad as an improvement over Adam [40].
AMSGrad considers the maximum of past second moment
(i.e., “long-term memory” of past gradients) in the parameter
update procedure. By doing so, AMSGrad imposes more
friction in order to avoid the overshooting of the minimum.
AMSGrad does not change the learning rate based on the
recent gradient behavior and does not deal with the saddle
point problem, either. Whereas, the proposed diffGrad method
controls the learning rate based on the changes in the gradient.
Some of the recent works in stochastic gradient methods
include the Predictive Local Smoothness based SGD (PLS-
SGD) [41], the sign of each minibatch SGD (signSGD) [42],
and Nostalgic Adam (NosAdam) [43], etc.
This paper proposes a difference of gradient based opti-
mizer, which improves the well known Adam [38] with the
difference of gradients (diffGrad) over the iterations. The main
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
This paper proposes a new diffGrad gradient descent
optimization method for Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) by considering the local gradient change informa-
tion between the current and immediate past iteration.
We show how the “short-term gradient behavior” can be
utilized to control the learning rate in the optimization
landscape in terms of the optimization stage, i.e., near or
far from an optimum solution. If change in gradient is
large, it means that the optimization is not stable due to
2