Shiv Ram Dubey has been with the Indian In-
stitute of Information Technology (IIIT), Sri City
since June 2016, where he is currently the Assistant
Professor of Computer Science and Engineering.
He received the Ph.D. degree in Computer Vision
and Image Processing from Indian Institute of In-
formation Technology, Allahabad (IIIT Allahabad)
in 2016. Before that, from August 2012-Feb 2013,
he was a Project Ofﬁcer in the Computer Science
and Engineering Department at Indian Institute of
Technology, Madras (IIT Madras). He was a recip-
ient of several awards including the Indo-Taiwan Joint Research Grant from
DST/GITA, Govt. of India, Best PhD Award in PhD Symposium, IEEE-
CICT2017 at IIITM Gwalior, Early Career Research Award from SERB, Govt.
of India and NVIDIA GPU Grant Award Twice from NVIDIA. He received
Outstanding Certiﬁcate of Reviewing Award from Information Fusion, Else-
vier in 2018. He also received the Best Paper Award in IEEE UPCON 2015,
a prestigious conference of IEEE UP Section. His research interest includes
Computer Vision, Deep Learning, Image Processing, Biometrics, Medical
Imaging, Convolutional Neural Networks, Image Feature Description, Content
Based Image Retrieval, Image-to-Image Transformation, Face Detection and
Recognition, Facial Expression Recognition, Texture and Hyperspectral Image
Analysis.
Soumendu Chakraborty received his Bachelor of
Engineering (B.E.) in Information Technology from
University Institute of Technology, University of
Burdwan, India in 2005. He did his M.Tech. in Com-
puter Science and Engineering from GLA Univer-
sity, Mathura, India in 2013. He received his Ph.D.
from Indian Institute of Information Technology,
Allahabad, U.P., India in the year 2018. He has 12
years of teaching and research experience. Presently,
he is working as an Assistant Professor in Indian
Institute of Information Technology, Lucknow, India.
His research interests include Computer Vision, Machine Learning, image
processing, biometric systems, image stegnography and pattern recognition.
Swalpa Kumar Roy received both his Bachelor
and Master degree in Computer Science & Engi-
neering from West Bengal University of Technol-
ogy, Kolkata, India, in 2012, and Indian Institute
of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur,
Howrah, India, in 2015, respectively. He is pursuing
the Ph.D. degree from under Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Unit, Indian Statistical Institute,
Kolkata, India, where he also worked as a Project
Linked Person from July 2015 to March 2016. He
is currently working as an Assistant Professor in
the Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Jalpaiguri Government
Engineering College, Jalpaiguri, West Bengal, India. His research interests
include Computer Vision, Deep Learning, Remote Sensing, Texture Feature
Description, and Fractal Image Coding.
Snehasis Mukherjee has obtained his PhD in Com-
puter Science from the Indian Statistical Institute in
2012. Before doctoral study, he has completed his
Bachelors degree in Mathematics from the Univer-
sity of Calcutta and Masters degree in Computer
Applications from the Vidyasagar University. He
did his Post Doctoral Research works at the Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA. Currently he is work-
ing as an Assistant Professor in the Indian Institute
of Information Technology Chittoor, SriCity (IIIT
Chittoor, SriCity). He has written several peer-reviewed research papers
(in reputed journals and conferences). His research area includes Computer
Vision, Machine Learning, Image and Video Processing.
Satish Kumar Singh is an Associate Professor
with the Indian Institute of Information Technol-
ogy Allahabad, Prayagraj, India. He received the
Ph.D., M.Tech., and B.Tech. degrees in 2010, 2005,
and 2003, respectively. He has over 13 years of
experience in academic and research institutions.
He has authored over 45 publications in reputed
international journal and conference proceedings. He
is a member of various professional societies, like
the Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication
Engineers. He is an Executive Committee Member
of the IEEE Uttar Pradesh Section from 2014. Currently he is serving as
secretary Signal Processing Society Chapter, and Uttar Pradesh Section as
well. He is serving as an Editorial Board Member and reviewer for many
international journals. His current research interests are in the areas of digital
image processing, pattern recognition, multimedia data indexing and retrieval,
watermarking and biometrics.
Bidyut Baran Chaudhuri received the Ph.D. degree
from IIT Kanpur, in 1980. He was a Leverhulme
Postdoctoral Fellow with Queen’s University, U.K.,
from 1981 to 1982. He joined the Indian Statistical
Institute, in 1978, where he worked as an INAE
Distinguished Professor and a J C Bose Fellow at
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Unit of
Indian Statistical Institute. He is now afﬁliated to
Techno India University, Kolkata as Pro-Vice Chan-
cellor (Academic). His research interests include
Pattern Recognition, Image Processing, Computer
Vision, Natural Language Processing (NLP), Signal processing, Digital Doc-
ument Processing, Deep learning etc. He pioneered the ﬁrst workable OCR
system for printed Indian scripts Bangla, Assamese and Devnagari. He also
developed computerized Bharati Braille system with speech synthesizer and
has done statistical analysis of Indian language. He has published about
425 research papers in international journals and conference proceedings.
Also, he has authored/edited seven books in these ﬁelds. Prof Chaudhuri
received Leverhulme fellowship award, Sir J. C. Bose Memorial Award, M.
N. Saha Memorial Award, Homi Bhabha Fellowship, Dr. Vikram Sarabhai
Research Award, C. Achuta Menon Award, Homi Bhabha Award: Applied
Sciences, Ram Lal Wadhwa Gold Medal, Jawaharlal Nehru Fellowship, J
C Bose fellowship, Om Prakash Bhasin Award etc. Prof Chaudhuri is the
associate editor of three international journals and a fellow of INSA, NASI,
INAE, IAPR, The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) and life fellow of
IEEE (2015). He acted as General Chair and Technical Co-chair at various
International Conferences.
12