UNDER REVIEW 1
GBDT-MO: Gradient Boosted Decision Trees
for Multiple Outputs
Zhendong Zhang and Cheolkon Jung, Member, IEEE
Abstract —Gradient boosted decision trees (GBDTs) are widely
used in machine learning, and the output of current GBDT
implementations is a single variable. When there are multiple
outputs, GBDT constructs multiple trees corresponding to the
output variables. The correlations between variables are ignored
by such a strategy causing redundancy of the learned tree
structures. In this paper, we propose a general method to learn
GBDT for multiple outputs, called GBDT-MO. Each leaf of
GBDT-MO constructs predictions of all variables or a subset of
automatically selected variables. This is achieved by considering
the summation of objective gains over all output variables.
Moreover, we extend histogram approximation into multiple
output case to speed up the training process. Various experiments
on synthetic and real-world datasets verify that GBDT-MO
achieves outstanding performance in terms of both accuracy and
training speed. Our codes are available on-line.
Index Terms —gradient boosting, decision tree, multiple out-
puts, variable correlations, indirect regularization.
I. I NTRODUCTION
MACHINE learning and data-driven approaches have
achieved great success in recent years. Gradient
boosted decision tree (GBDT) [1] [2] is a powerful machine
learning tool widely used in many applications including
multi-class classiﬁcation [3], ﬂocculation process modeling
[4], learning to rank [5] and click prediction [6]. It also
produces state-of-the-art results for many data mining com-
petitions such as the Netﬂix prize [7]. GBDT uses decision
trees as the base learner and sums the predictions of a series
of trees. At each step, a new decision tree is trained to ﬁt the
residual between ground truth and current prediction. GBDT
is popular due to its accuracy, efﬁciency and interpretability.
Many improvements have been proposed after [1]. XGBoost
[8] used the second order gradient to guide the boosting
process and improve the accuracy. LightGBM [9] aggregated
gradient information in histograms and signiﬁcantly improved
the training efﬁciency. CatBoost [10] proposed a novel strategy
to deal with categorical features.
A limitation of current GBDT implementations is that the
output of each decision tree is a single variable. This is
because each leaf of a decision tree produces a single variable.
However, multiple outputs are required for many machine
learning problems including but not limited to multi-class
classiﬁcation, multi-label classiﬁcation [11] and multi-output
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 61872280) and the International S&T Cooperation Program of
China (No. 2014DFG12780).
Z. Zhang and C. Jung (corresponding author) are with the School of
Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China e-mail:
zhd.zhang.ai@gmail.com, zhengzk@xidian.edu.cnregression [12]. Other machine learning methods, such as
neural networks [13], can adapt to any dimension of outputs
straightforwardly by changing the number of neurons in the
last layer. The ﬂexibility for the output dimension may be one
of the reasons why neural networks are popular. However, it is
somewhat strange to handle multiple outputs by current GBDT
implementations. At each step, they construct multiple deci-
sion trees each of which corresponds to an individual output
variable, then concatenates the predictions of all trees to obtain
multiple outputs. This strategy is used in the most popular
open-sourced GBDT libraries: XGBoost [8], LightGBM [9],
and CatBoost [10].
The major drawback of the abovementioned strategy is that
correlations between variables are ignored during the training
process because those variables are treated in isolation and
they are learned independently. However, correlations more
or less exist between output variables. For example, there are
correlations between classes for multi-class classiﬁcation. It is
veriﬁed in [14] that such correlations improve the generaliza-
tion ability of neural networks. Ignoring variable correlations
also leads to redundancy of the learned tree structures. Thus,
it is necessary to learn GBDT for multiple outputs via better
strategies. Up to now, a few works have explored it. Geurts et
al. [15] transformed the multiple output problem into a single
output problem by kernelizing the output space. However, this
method was not scalable because the space complexity of
its kernel matrix was n2wherenis the number of training
samples. Si et al. [16] proposed GBDT for sparse output
(GBDT-sparse). They mainly focused on extreme multi-label
classiﬁcation problems, and the outputs were represented in
sparse format. A sparse split ﬁnding algorithm was designed
for square hinge loss. [15] and [16] worked for speciﬁc
loss and they did not employ the second order gradient and
histogram approximation.
In this paper, we propose a novel and general method
to learn GBDT for multiple outputs, which is scalable and
efﬁcient, named GBDT-MO. Unlike previous works, we em-
ploy the second order gradient and histogram approximation
to improve GBDT-MO. The learning mechanism is designed
based on them to jointly ﬁt all variables in a single tree. Each
leaf of a decision tree constructs multiple outputs at once.
This is achieved by maximizing the summation of objective
gains over all output variables. Sometimes, only a subset of the
output variables is correlated. It is expected that the proposed
method automatically selects those variables and constructs
predictions for them at a leaf. We achieve this by adding
L0constraint to the objective function. Since the learning
mechanism of GBDT-MO enforces the learned trees to capturearXiv:1909.04373v2  [cs.CV]  28 Dec 2019