UNDER REVIEW 6
1.0 1.5 2.0
2.5 1.5 0.5 
(a) Non-sparse split ﬁnding
1.0 1.5 2.0
2.5 1.5 0.5 (b) Sparse split ﬁnding
1.0 1.5 2.0
2.5 1.5 0.5 (c) Restricted sparse split ﬁnding
Fig. 2. Examples of different split algorithms for 4samples in rows and 3outputs in columns. The sparse constraint is set to 2. The dashed line divides
samples into two parts. Numbers denote the objectives for each column. Selected columns of left part are marked in blue and selected columns of right part
are marked in red. Best viewed on the screen.
Algorithm 5 Tree Growth
Input: set of samplesS, gradient statistics, and hyper-
parameters for tree learning.
Output: a decision tree
Hist Histograms ofS
Split SplitFinding (Hist )
Q priority queue sorted by Split:gain
Q:push (Split;Hist;S)
repeat
Split;Hist;S Q:pop ()
Histl;Histr;Sl;Sr ApplySplit (Split;Hist;S)
ifstop condition is not meet then
Splitl SplitFinding (Histl)
Q:push (Splitl;Histl;Sl)
end if
ifstop condition is not meet then
Splitr SplitFinding (Histr)
Q:push (Splitr;Histr;Sr)
end if
untilQis empty
We provide an example to show the differences between non-
sparse split ﬁnding, sparse split ﬁnding and restricted sparse
split ﬁnding in Fig. 2.
E. Implementation Details
We implement GBDT-MO from scratch by C++. First,
we implement the core function of LightGBM for ourselves,
called GBDT-SO. Then, integrate the learning mechanism for
multiple outputs into it, i.e. GBDT-MO1. We also provide
a Python interface. We speed up GBDT-MO using multi-
core parallelism, implemented with OpenMP. A decision tree
grows up in the best-ﬁrst manner. Speciﬁcally, we store the
information of nodes that has not been divided in memory. At
each time when we need to add a node, we select the node
whose objective gain is the maximum from all stored nodes.
In practice, we store up to 48nodes in memory to reduce the
1Our codes are available in https://github.com/zzd1992/GBDTMO.TABLE I
COMPLEXITY OF SPLIT FINDING .
Methods Complexity
GBDT-SO O(bmd)
GBDT-MO O(bmd)
GBDT-MO (sparse) O(bmdlogk)
GBDT-MO (exact hessian) O(bmd3)
memory cost. We describe the algorithm for growth of a tree
in Algorithm 5.
F . Complexity Analysis
We analyze the training and inference complexity for
GBDT-SO and GBDT-MO. For the training complexity, we
focus on the complexity of split ﬁnding algorithms. Recall
that the input dimension is mand the output dimension is d,
sparse constraint is k, andbis the number of bins. Suppose
thatbis ﬁxed for all input dimensions, tis the number of
boosting rounds and his the maximum tree depth. Table I
shows the training complexity. The complexity of non-sparse
split ﬁnding isO(bmd)because it enumerates on histogram
bins, input dimensions and output dimension. For the sparse
case, it is multipled by logkbecause inserting an element
into a top-k priority queue requires O(logk)comparisons (see
Algorithm 4). When the exact hessian is used (see (14)), it
becomesO(bmd3)because calculating the inverse of a dd
matrix requiresO(d3)operations. GBDT-SO has the same
complexity as GBDT-MO for split ﬁnding. However, it does
not mean that GBDT-SO is as fast as GBDT-MO. Beyond split
ﬁnding, GBDT-SO has more overhead that slows its training
speed down. For example, samples are divided into two parts,
i.e.dtimes for GBDT-SO, but once for GBDT-MO. Thus,
the training speed of GBDT-MO is faster than GBDT-SO in
practice. Table II shows the inference complexity. It can be
observed that GBDT-SO needs more comparisons than GBDT-
MO.
IV. R ELATED WORK
Gradient boosted decision tree (GBDT) proposed in [1] has
received much attention due to its accuracy, efﬁciency and