THE USA JOURNALS  
THE AMERIC AN JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT AND ECONOMICS INNOVATIONS  (ISSN - 2693-0811)             
VOLUME 06 ISSUE0 6 
                                                                                                                    
  
 11 
 https://www.theamericanjournals.com/index.php/tajmei   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 . The statistics of scientific studies in fraudulent banking field in Scopus by year (Mytnyk 
et al., 2023).  
 
Table 1. Fraudulent banking approaches and threats (Mytnyk et al., 2023).  
 
Fraudulent Banking 
Approach  Threat  
Phishing  
(Abidoye & Kabaso, 2021; 
Barker, 2020)  The attacker steals login credentials or other personal information by tricking the victim 
into entering them  on a fake banking website or through a fake email or text message.  
Malware  
(Shah et al., 2022)  Malicious software is used to steal login credentials or other personal information and may 
be used to take control of the victim’s computer or manipulate banking transactions.  
Social Engineering  
(Maulana & Fajar, 2021)  Attackers use psychological manipulation to trick victims into disclosing sensitive 
information or performing transactions they would not normally . This may include 
pretexting, baiting, or quid pro quo tactics.  
Skimming  
(Al Hattali et al., 2020)  Attackers install devices on ATMs  or other card readers to steal card information. This 
information is then used to create counterfeit cards or make unauthorized transactions.  
Account Takeover  
(Tsai & Su, 2021)  Attackers access a victim’s account by stealing login credentials or other means. Once in 
the account, they make unauthorized transactions, change account details, or otherwise 
manipulate the ac count for their gain.  
Fake Checks  
(Hammi et al., 2021)  Attackers send fake checks to victims, asking them to deposit them and send back a portion 
of the funds. The check eventually bounces, leaving the victim responsible for the funds 
they sent to the attacker.  
Money Mules  
(Abdul Rani et al., 2024)  Attackers recruit unwitting victims to help launder money by having them receive and send 
funds on their behalf. The victims say they are performing legitimate work but participating 
in illegal activities.  
 
In another study, Ileberi et al. (2022) proposed a 
credit card fraud detection mechanism using a 
genetic algorithm for feature selection followed 
by classifiers like rando m forest, neural network, 
decision tree, logistic regression, and naïve Bayesian network. It outperforms existing 
methods for European cardholders and shares 
similarities with another method emphasizing 
preprocessing algorithms, utilizing exclusively 
the g enetic algorithm for preprocessing. Similarly, 
Esenogho et al. (2022) suggested a credit card