Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 6 of 19
3. Connected and Autonomous Vehicles
The automobile has changed the earth’s natural and built environment more than any other
invention in the history of humankind by reshaping cities and economies [ 27]. Connected and
Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) are the natural successors of conventional cars with motion and action
capabilities that do not require any sort of conductor (driver) or teleoperation control [ 28], along with
connectivity functions that make them proactive, cooperative, well-informed and coordinated since
they can “talk” with their surrounding environment [ 29] and eventually with everything and everyone
when the IoT will be in place. CAVs will transform mobility provision, transport networks and road
infrastructure, passing the vehicle control and driving responsibilities from humans to machines with
enormous AI and wireless connectivity capacities. CAVs are projected to be the next gold standard of
mobility, transforming cars and city development as a whole through the use of AI from what they are
conceived of as today.
The automotive industry will have to transform, by changing entirely their production lines,
as CAVs are very di erent from the conventional human-driven vehicles. The companies actively
working on the development of CAVs and conducting trials with various degrees of success (including
a few life-losing failures) is a mix of traditional car manufacturers, ride-hailing and intelligence
companies namely: Audi, Baidu, BMW, Daimler, Delphi, Didi Chuxing, Ford, General Motors, Honda,
Huawei, Hyundai, Jaguar Land Rover, Lyft, Magna, Mercedes-Bosch alliance, Microsoft, nuTonomy,
PSA, Renault-Nissan alliance, Samsung, Tesla, Toyota, Uber, Volkswagen Group, Volvo, Waymo
(Google’s self-driving cars project), ZF and Zoox. Intelligence provision powerhouses like Google and
ride-hailing giants like Uber, not considered at present as typical vehicle manufacturers, will radically
change the dynamics of the industry becoming new entrants in a more versatile automotive market,
where ICT will be a di erence-making competitive advantage. The automotive industry may also be
forced to adopt new business models for sales that will prioritise shared use over private ownership if
smart cities decide to actively promote sustainable growth via car ownership reduction. USA, Great
Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Germany, Sweden and China are the leading countries trying to
position themselves in the epicentre of the CAVs “explosion” working on CAV-enabling legislation
and investing massively in research and development activities including pilots and trials.
Every revolution promises a spirit of optimism and signiﬁcant changes and CAVs are a prime
example of this [ 30]. CAVs intend to generate numerous beneﬁts, such as creating more free time
(since the average driver spends the equivalent of six weeks driving per year); enhancing tra c safety
and accident prevention; improving accessibility, comfort and in-vehicle riding experience; potentially
making it easier for policymakers to prioritise car-sharing and ride-sharing business models; and
reducing road tra c congestion, environmental degradation, air pollution, noise nuisance and social
exclusion for those currently unable to drive. At the same time though, there are also some concerns,
usually less communicated and studied, about the increased vulnerability to hacking, software and
hardware ﬂaws; loss of privacy and travel data exploitation; liability allocation challenges; increased
car usage from more populations and unoccupied vehicles; increased tra c accident, congestion and
emission rates during the transition period when CAVs will co-exist with simpler AVs, semi-autonomous
and conventional vehicles; and behavioural adaption, situational awareness and user resistance
problems. These opportunities and challenges have been recorded in the literature [ 17,19–21,31–34],
but have rarely been grouped in a single source. Table 1, based on these readings, summarises the
key opportunities and challenges reﬂecting and a ecting the full-scale launch of CAVs and their
future usage.