Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 3 of 19
human intervention and “drive” CA Vs instead [ 19].CAVs are projected to have the ability to introduce
eco-driving and energy-saving functions, enhanced safety and security standards, better road space
allocation and tra c congestion management and replace time spent driving with time that can
be utilised for more productive activities [ 20]. However, despite their massive hype, CAVs still
present more unanswered questions than deﬁnitive answers [ 21]. UAVs, drones and PAVs have
recently emerged as a viable alternative to manage problems that primarily arise in the areas of visual
monitoring and tra c surveillance [ 22,23]. Fully autonomous UAVs and PAVs in the future will be
of massive importance for logistics and also for moving people; they are expected to reshape travel
patterns as we have known them for decades now by expanding vertically the urban landscape and
transport network of future cities. MaaS, a very recent transport concept with limited applications
of partial implementation thus far, is promising digital packages of personalised mobility that will
replace privately owned vehicles and optimise the use and combination of several mobility alternatives.
MaaS will be enabled by powerful AI algorithms that will provide holistic travel planning, booking
and ticketing, and real-time information services customised and tailored to each consumer’s needs.
MaaS can maximise its potential if it incorporates, as a complementary option to its public transit
elements, the use of CAVs by way of car-sharing and ride-sharing schemes [ 21]. Technology trends
referring to an AI-centric smart city, which could a ect (or be a ected by) future mobility, such as the
IoT, PI and Industry 4.0, are becoming increasingly relevant [ 24] and will also be considered through
a transport-oriented lens herein. This is because the IoT will enable unprecedented connectivity
levels between users and transport modes; the PI will revolutionise freight transport optimisation
through digital, automated, interconnected and big data technologies; and Industry 4.0, the backbone
of tomorrow’s market productivity, depends on smart transport.
Henceforth, the paper provides the framework of the research methodology employed,
a description of the aforementioned initiatives (a section for each of them) and a ﬁnal section
that serves as a lexicon for the concepts considered in the previous sections. This last part of the paper
is also about elaborating conclusions that bring all the di erent pieces of the complicated smart urban
mobility’s puzzle together and deliver some key recommendations for city scientists, policymakers,
transport and urban planners and an agenda for future research directions.
2. Research Methodology
This work is the result of a systematic literature review that examined the peer-reviewed literature
published in English for the nexus of AI, transport and the smart city. The Scopus search which
underpinned the approach was limited strictly to journal papers as a quality measure. The ﬁrst paper
ever recorded that considered this research agenda was published as early as 1984 but the vast majority
of the papers produced ( >90%) have been published during the last decade; these papers were the
most relevant ones for our task. Furthermore, our analysis includes a few references outside this
search highlighting peripheral, but yet important, aspects of the diverse agenda covered that were
not picked up by the Scopus searching engine but were deemed necessary to support some of the key
arguments made.
Four di erent searches were undertaken using Scopus. All the possible combinations of the key
elements of the study were explored to make sure that most of the synergies reported in a diverse and
multidisciplinary literature between AI, transport and the smart city would be identiﬁed and examined
in our analysis. The search “artiﬁcial intelligence” AND “transport” resulted in identifying 873 papers,
the search “transport” AND “smart city” returned 594 papers and the search “artiﬁcial intelligence”
AND “smart city” shortlisted 201 papers fulﬁlling our search criteria. The most important search of all,
bringing together “artiﬁcial intelligence” AND “transport” AND “smart city”, conﬁrmed our rationale
for writing this manuscript; only 18 papers were found to be discussing all three elements and their
interrelations. Only two of those papers had some direct, but partial, relation with the explicit goals of
the present work [ 25,26], while the other papers were more computing- and engineering-oriented or
focused on very isolated aspects of the nexus discussed. One ﬁnding that was particularly interesting