Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 8 of 19
CAVs, despite technological breakthroughs, a wealth of promised beneﬁts and million miles driven
automatically in segregated and controlled situations across the world, may not be easily integratedable
in our urban transport systems as yet. This is a long process that could take many years before
fully in play [ 20]. This is because the introduction of these vehicles is accompanied by uncertainties
in their e ects on the car-sharing market and land use patterns but more importantly in how the
public formulates opinions regarding beneﬁts and concerns [ 35]. An unconditional, technology-driven
introduction of CAVs could be in conﬂict with social and environmental sustainability objectives,
ignoring the fact that the transport system is a complex socio-technical system which calls for joint
optimisation of both the technical and societal sub-systems [ 36]. A techno-ﬁx cannot be a panacea since
technology is only one of the several tools in the toolbox of mobility [ 19,32,37], therefore the revolution
of CAVs should be underpinned by legislative, moral, educational, business and social engagement
frameworks that set out a clear modus operandi.
It is also expected that CAVs might have a wider role to play if they are, as they should be, designed
to be a powerful intervention with sustainability merits in environmental, economic and social terms;
a role that is beyond the traditional automobility regime of today. They need to evolve to a strong
complementary piece to a more holistic mobility system that substitutes private ownership of cars (and
to some respect some of their use) with multimodal mobility packages that are designed to promote
alternative means of transport and have CAVs as a shared option on an ‘as-needed’ basis only [ 21].
CAVs need to become a strategic centerpiece of MaaS and not its alternative. CAVs will therefore need to
co-function and create synergistic links with public transport instead of competing for space and ways
of priority. Transit Oriented Development (TOD) employing CAVs as ﬁrst- and last-mile solutions and
neighbourhood feeders to mass transit systems should be the ideal development scenario from an urban
and land use perspective as a strategy that will not allow travel behaviour to become disproportionally
car-centric. Bringing cars and public transport together, even in their automated future formats, may
be an uneasy union because of their traditionally contradictory roles but future policy and planning
eorts need to assist with balancing tensions and achieving the optimum blend of the two [ 7]. CAVs
also need to be cleaner than ever before. Becoming electric is an option provided that the electricity will
be produced by renewable energy sources and thus will be non-polluting as Kougias et al. (2019) [38]
and Kougias et al. (2020) [ 39] strongly recommend for the right electromobility model. CAVs need to
be autonomous and connected but they should also be strongly linked to electriﬁcation and shared
usage. The synergistic e ects between automation, connectivity, electriﬁcation and shared use can
multiply signiﬁcantly the beneﬁts of CAVs as also noted by a relevant study [17].
However, the road to change is not straightforward. According to Nikitas (2020) [ 40] there are
10 areas of priority for CAVs policy and planning that need to be addressed for a smooth transition:
technology, legislation, crisis and employment ethics, road infrastructure and land use, integration, tra c safety,
cybersecurity and privacy, business models, tra c congestion and travel behaviour and ﬁnally acceptability,
trust and customer readiness . Even if adequate answers are provided to all the above critical themes
the future automobile ﬂeet will be near homogenous no sooner than 2050 and only if CAV prices are
reasonably low [41].
To date, 623 peer-reviewed journal articles discussing CAVs are accessible in the Scopus search
engine. This number grows to 1688 research outputs when the search includes conference papers and
book chapters, with more than three-quarters of these outputs being published from 2015 onwards.
Nonetheless, the number of papers examining AVs is 20 times more. This is because connectivity
is a latter trend, despite being associated with Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) for decades,
that provides an additional dynamic communication function for a vehicle; AVs do not presuppose
(or necessarily exclude) connectivity but primarily refer to the vehicle’s ability to operate without
human input. This number of available scientiﬁc outputs showcases the immense interest in researching
an initiative with genuinely transformative powers.