Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 9 of 19
4. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Personal Aerial Vehicles
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), also commonly known as drones or unmanned aircraft
systems, is a new powerful intervention that brings the revolution of AI and wireless technologies to air
transport and aviation. With the emergence of high-power-density batteries, long-range and low-power
micro-radio devices, cheap airframes and powerful microprocessors and motors, UAVs are tools with
the potential to provide robust solutions towards the provision of improved military, policing and
commercial services [ 42]. More speciﬁcally, UAVs can support tasks related to intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance, border patrol, target identiﬁcation and designation, counter-insurgency, attack
and strike, civil security control, law enforcement applications, environmental monitoring, surveying
and geospatial activities, remote sensing, aerial mapping, weather monitoring and meteorology, forest
ﬁre detection, tra c control, cargo transport, accident reporting, emergency search and rescue, disaster
control and management, wireless coverage, cloud support and communication relays. Many of these
tasks are barometers reﬂecting and a ecting the day-to-day functionality and operability of a smart city.
UAVs can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories: ﬁxed wing and rotary wing. Fixed-wing UAVs
usually have a high speed and a heavy payload, but they must maintain continuous forward motion to
remain aloft, and thus are not suitable for stationary applications like close inspection; meanwhile,
rotary-wing UAVs, such as quadcopters, while having limited mobility and payload, can move in any
direction and stay stationary in the air [ 43]. Challenges such as the lack of an onboard pilot to see and
avoid other aircrafts and the wide variation in unmanned aircraft missions and capabilities must be
addressed before the full integration of aerial technologies can take place in the smart city context [ 44].
Integrating UAVs with smart cities will create a sustainable economic environment and a peaceful place
of living if challenges relating, on the one hand, with business considerations like ethics and privacy,
cost, licensing, legislation and market adoption, and on the other hand, with technical issues, such as
the proper use of wireless sensors, data communications, application management, resource training
and allocation and power management are addressed adequately [ 45,46]. The key stakeholders for
addressing these challenges all have a distinct role. Governing bodies work on introducing regulations,
policies and operations guidelines to ensure the safe use of UAVs; researchers design models and
architectures to build, integrate and deploy UAV applications; and the industry aims to develop and
introduce value-added features to smart cities using UAVs [47].
Personal Aerial Vehicles (PAVs), Manned Aerial Vehicles (MAVs) or Personal Aerial Transport
Systems (PATS) are emerging forms of mobility that promise to combine the best of ground-based
and air-based transportation as a means of reducing urban congestion by making use of free space in
the air [ 48]. PAVs will be an innovative mobility intervention capable of bridging the niche between
scheduled airliners and ground transport by o ering unprecedented levels of fast, on-demand urban
mobility. If higher automation and falling prices are achieved, PAVs will soon be able to serve the
urban settings of smart cities. Automation will allow PAVs to carry passengers with no piloting skills,
making them much more accessible to anyone in practical terms. Infrastructure requirements, such as
the number of landing and parking spaces, proper ﬂying corridors, interaction with other modes and
synergies with autonomous ground vehicles (PAVs and CAVs can beneﬁt and complement each other),
may allow PAVs to contribute signiﬁcantly in the decrease of congestion and pollution if planned
and implemented in a right way [ 49]. Nonetheless, despite innovation progress in the PAV concept
development and related technologies, there are still key challenges that remain regarding public
acceptance, tra c safety, expensive infrastructure, disaster management, trespassing and unnecessary
surveillance, visual intrusion and excessive air tra c concerns [47,50].
The applications of UAVs are still fairly limited, while PAVs are still in the infancy phase of their
development trajectory despite claims from Germany’s Volocopter that it will start trials of a ﬂying taxi
in Singapore in 2020 and Uber’s plans to launch commercial ﬂights in the USA by 2023 [ 51]. To date,
we have more than 40,000 Scopus-indexed research outputs published almost solely on engineering
and computer science related aspects of the two innovations. In the literature, both are projected to
eventually morph to massive game-changers in urban mobility and facilitators of the smart city concept.