Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 4 of 19
was the availability of conference papers when compared with journal papers; for the search “artiﬁcial
intelligence” AND “smart city”, we ended up shortlisting 201 papers but the number of research
conference papers were four times that many.
Figure 1 provides the results of our Scopus search for the subject combinations discussed above
and also includes quantiﬁcation of the sources identiﬁed. Due to the large number of journal outputs
that we identiﬁed, Figure 1 lists only the top ﬁve journals (in terms of the number of papers referring
to our four key searches) per combination only. We did not necessarily end up reviewing these journal
papers per se since our analytic criteria (explained below) were primarily quality- and relevance-related.
We also searched for combinations of our study’s key elements (i.e., the interventions discussed
per se). More speciﬁcally, “CAVs” AND “UAVs” returned zero papers, “CAVs” AND “PAVs” returned
three papers, “CAVs” AND “MaaS” returned 13 papers, “MaaS” AND “UAVs” returned 46 papers
and “MaaS” AND “PAVs” returned two papers. Furthermore, “CAVs” AND “IoT” returned 29 papers,
“UAVs” AND “IoT” returned 169 papers, “PAVs” AND “IoT” returned three papers, “MaaS” AND
“IoT” returned 174 papers, “PI” AND “CAVs” returned nine papers, “PI” AND “UAVs” returned 28
papers, “PI” AND “PAVs” returned zero papers, “PI” AND “MaaS” returned one paper, “Industry 4.0”
AND “CAVs” returned one paper, “Industry 4.0” AND “MaaS” returned one paper, “Industry 4.0”
AND “UAVs” returned six papers and “Industry 4.0” AND “PAVs” returned no papers. The majority
of these papers were already covered in our initial and more generic search approach outlined in
Figure 1. Again, most of them did not align well with the speciﬁc research agenda of our paper but
were instead rather irrelevant, with most of them being very technical.
At the end, each of the four authors read the 1668 titles of the papers identiﬁed, subsequently
reviewed more than 500 abstracts of papers that were closer to the scope of the present work and
ﬁnally generated an independent structured literature review based on those articles identiﬁed as more
relevant in sketching the picture of the AI-centric transport system that will underpin the smart cities
of tomorrow. The four authors then compared and synthesised their independent review drafts to
develop a uniﬁed “bigger-picture” narrative, which was a process headed by the lead author. The paper
in its ﬁnalised form includes references to 133 studies, all of which were read from cover to cover.
The selection of material was made based on the subject-speciﬁc relevancy of the research output,
the host journal impact factor and each paper’s impact as measured by the number of its citations.
While the authors acknowledge an element of subjective criteria in the choice of the material used
(selection bias is part of human nature), this systematic literature review process was adopted to
minimise bias and improve the richness, ﬂuidity and value of the content. The authors, each of them
with distinct scientiﬁc backgrounds and research priorities and values, acted as checks and balances to
each other and highlighted key points of the literature that a single author could not have captured in
the same interdisciplinary and vivid way.
To support their bibliographic work, the authors reviewed evidence from a selection of
representative international case study examples and media news to recognise the success or failure of
very early (or pilot applications of) AI-centric smart city transport practices. This adds an empirical
dimension to the paper’s theoretical and conceptual merits that may directly inform academics, city
scientists, policymakers, mobility providers and urban planners about some of the lessons available to
them that could fuel a positive paradigm-shifting transition governed by AI applications. A similar
two-step methodological approach involving this structure has been used in the lead author’s previous
work with signiﬁcant success [ 7], which is something that gives an extra layer of validity to the
present study.
The work is also not about forecasting only the “wins”, “advantages” and “positive distributional
impacts” of the listed AI-centric mobility initiatives, but also develops an in-depth understanding
of the not-so-often-studied barriers, concerns and unintended consequences of this transformation
process. Change, despite how good it may be, is neither easy nor straightforward; strategic planning
and implementation are of critical importance for transitioning to the era of the “smart city”.