Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 2 of 19
agents that can reason and plan towards their goal without any built-in knowledge base of their
environment [ 2]. AI holds the promise of making us healthier, wealthier and happier by reducing
the need for human labour and by vastly increasing our scientiﬁc and technological progress [ 3].
Nowadays, AI has transformed our lives in many aspects, from semi-autonomous cars on the roads
to robotic vacuums in our homes and arguably will continue to invade every area of our lives, from
health care to education, entertainment and security, for the foreseeable future [4].
One of the prime areas where AI will make its most paradigm-shifting impact is transport.
Examples of AI methods that are ﬁnding their way into the transport ﬁeld include Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks (ANNs), Genetic Algorithms (GAs), Simulated Annealing (SA), Artiﬁcial Immune System
(AIS), the Ant Colony Optimiser (ACO), Bee Colony Optimisation (BCO) and the Fuzzy Logic Model
(FLM) [ 5]. These AI interventions have potential applications for the vehicle, the infrastructure,
the driver or transport user, and in particular, for how these interact dynamically to deliver a transport
service that promotes user empowerment and supports human–machine interactions [6].
Since transport is the most decisive cornerstone for a city’s functionality, development and
prosperity, revolutionising transport transforms the concept of the city. Urban structure and transport
system developments are closely connected as evidenced by theories like the urban land rent theory
and location theory, which conceptualise the connection between transport and urban land use [ 7,8].
It is impossible to abstract the vision of the cities of tomorrow from that of the future conﬁguration
of their transport systems [ 9]. The provision of mobility solutions for battling congestion, pollution
and environmental degradation through AI technology that is capable of providing better, faster,
cleaner and cheaper ways to move around is the pillar, together with telecommunication and energy
applications [10], of what we call smart cities and the way forward for urban science.
The concept of the smart city is far from being limited to the application of digital and cloud-based
technologies to cities since it has creative, sustainable, strategic decision-making, integrating, knowledge-
generating and people-focused qualities, or as Albino et al. [ 11] describe it, a smart city is an “instrumented,
interconnected and intelligent city” . A smart city incorporates Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT) to reduce costs, optimise resource consumption, improve interactivity and enhance
the quality of life for its citizens [ 12]. Where once the lexicon of transport professionals and city
planners centred upon sustainable urban transport and sustainable cities, this has now shifted in
attention, or expanded, with reference to smart cities and smart urban mobility that is reﬂective
of digital age possibilities [ 13]. This can be seen in the high number of smart city initiatives, city
implementation projects and jointly-funded public research projects that have rapidly emerged across
the world [ 14], especially in the mobility sector. The notion of smart cities is overarching in this work,
and because of our future mobility angle, is primarily set to look into the context of policy prioritisation
for sustainable urban growth via transport innovation, which as Kominos et al. [ 15] recognises, is still
a largely unknown ﬁeld. As with any socio-technical transition, the shift to an AI-based mobility
paradigm creates critical questions to be posed in terms of how the transition will be managed [ 16] and
what will be those interventions that will deﬁne this transition.
This paper provides a novel conceptual contribution that tries to answer these questions by
describing some of the key transport components that are projected to be central to the AI-centric smart
city of the (near?) future. The paper is ultimately a research lexicon deﬁning terms and their dimensions
that reﬂect and a ect the new autonomous, connected, shared and digitised mobility paradigm of
tomorrow. More speciﬁcally the paper thoroughly discusses the nexus of AI, transportation and
the smart city by covering interventions referring to Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs),
Unmanned and Personal Aerial Vehicles (UAVs and PAVs) and Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS), but also
the Internet of Things (IoT), Physical Internet (PI) and Industry 4.0, which are three initiatives that may
impact transport in direct or indirect ways and are critical parts of the smart city agenda.
Automated driving is widely considered to represent a technology that could signal an evolution
towards a major change in (car) mobility [ 17,18].CAVs are the ultimate manifestation of AI in the
field of transport; AI algorithms and machine learning (ML) functions are the tools that could replace