Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 11 of 19
practices and the need to facilitate a change of attitudes to ownership, not only for the more tech-savvy
millennial generation, but for all people [ 72]. As attitudes towards owning versus leasing, renting
and sharing transport vehicles are changing [ 73] because of sustainability pressures and increasing
environmental awareness, MaaS could soon be more acceptable. Another problem that MaaS faces is
the complexity of building up seamless collaborations between actors responsible for its introduction
and operations management due to uncertainties in the business models [ 74] and /or due to conﬂicting
interests between the mobility providers that need to be working together [ 21]. Policymaking, through
research and development activities and trials, therefore needs to solve these cooperation problems by
providing deﬁnitive answers regarding the optimum brand of MaaS since, as Pangbourne et al. [ 64]
clearly suggest, promises of “e ciency” are not possible without government intervention. The third
challenge that we might be facing is a scenario where MaaS will “help” public transport users and
travelers with no driving license (or in the case of a CAV-based MaaS with no ability to drive) to create
unsustainable travel behaviour habits by taking advantage of door-to-door solutions without using
public transport. A modal shift to car-centric solutions will be everything that MaaS means to rectify.
6. Internet of Things, Physical Internet, Industry 4.0 and Their Role in Smart Transport
While the term Internet of Things (IoT) is increasingly used, there is no common deﬁnition or
understanding today of what the IoT actually encompasses [ 75]. For many, the IoT evolved as a
communication paradigm that envisions a near future in which the objects of everyday life will be
equipped with microcontrollers, transceivers for digital communication and suitable protocol stacks
that will make them able to communicate with one another and with the users such that they become an
integral part of the Internet [ 76]. The main enabling factor of this promising paradigm is the integration
of several technologies and communications solutions [ 77]. The IoT provides the ability to remotely
monitor, manage and control devices, and to create new insights and actionable information from
massive streams of real-time data [ 78]. It ultimately empowers an object to hear, see, listen, interpret
and communicate at the same time [ 79]. The IoT uses an integrated cloud architecture of networks,
software, sensors, human interfaces, 5G and data analytics for value creation [80].
The IoT is the technical backbone of smart cities and what makes them feasible; smart cities need to
have three key features that the IoT can provide: intelligence, interconnection and instrumentation [ 81].
The IoT will complement the evolution of ITS based on the concept of object-to-object communication.
ITS can provide the hardware element of the IoT with devices such as radio frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) tags and readers, sensor technologies, positioning systems and emerging technologies to collect
information about road conditions, tra c accidents, road repairs or the redesigning of avenues in the
environment where they are placed [ 82].The IoT, when fully operational and able to maximise its potential,
will be the “glue” connecting the different components of the AI-centric travel eco-system, including
CA Vs, PA VS, UA Vs and all the MaaS-operated modes in general, including non-motorised travellers.
Two more important facilitators of the AI–transport–smart city nexus will be the Physical Internet
(PI,) and Industry 4.0. The PI is a new concept for freight transportation and logistics aiming towards
improving the economic, environmental and societal efficiency and sustainability of the way physical
objects are moved, stored, realised, supplied and used all over the world [ 83,84].It is an open global
logistics system founded on physical, digital and operational interconnectivity through encapsulation,
interfaces and protocols that will replace current analogue logistical models. Through the PI, freight will
move via distributed, multimodal transportation networks in which transit sites aggregate containers
from diverse origins to optimise the loading on the next segments [ 85]. The PI is a novel and complex
concept for the future of supply chain management and it will probably be based on and enabled
by a smart IoT system [ 86]. In the context of a smart city with urbanisation characteristics and the
increased use of online digital services, a PI-based approach for a freight transport will provide pure
and standardised digital data to the future city’s software-deﬁned digital controller (i.e., the “city
brain”). This data will be an added valuable feed for AI and big data analytics machines of the “city
brain” and will support more e cient and optimal decision-making. The PI, in combination with AI,