Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 13 of 19
Table 2. AI–transport–smart city nexus deﬁnitions: The lexicon of smart mobility.
Smart Transport Components Deﬁnitions
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)AI refers to a machine’s ability to simulate the human mind by interpreting data it
receives from its environment, learning from them and using that learning to
successfully complete tasks, even in the most unexpected and novel scenarios.
Smart CitySmart cities are those urban landscapes with the ability to embrace an integrated
brand of autonomous, connected, shared, digital and cloud-based technologies in
their strategic decision-making and operations to become more sustainable,
creative, informed, cost-e cient and people-focused.
Connected and Autonomous
Vehicles (CAVs)A CAV is any vehicle that can understand its surroundings, move, navigate and
behave responsibly without human input, and at the same time has connectivity
functions enabling it to be proactive, cooperative, well-informed and coordinated.
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)UAVs (also commonly known as drones) are smart aircrafts that can ﬂy without the
onboard presence of pilots and can provide robust air transport solutions for the
provision of improved military, policing and commercial services.
Personal Aerial Vehicles (PAVs)PAVs are ﬂying people-movers, bridging the gap between scheduled airliners and
ground transport, o ering unprecedented levels of fast, on-demand urban mobility
by making use of the free air space.
Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS)MaaS is a system that o ers multimodal packages of personalised mobility that will
replace privately owned vehicles through the use of an all-in-one digital platform
that is capable of providing integrated journey planning, booking, smart ticketing
and real-time information services on a subscription or “pay-as-you-go” basis.
Internet of Things (IoT)The IoT is a connectivity paradigm that empowers objects of everyday life to hear,
see, listen and interpret streams of big data and communicate with one another and
with users through integrated cloud technologies, software, sensors and
human–machine interfaces.
Physical Internet (PI or )The PI is a global concept for sustainable and e cient multimodal freight
transportation and logistics that optimises the movement, storage, supply and
usage of physical objects through the use of digital, automated, interconnected and
big data technologies.
Industry 4.0Industry 4.0 is a transformative paradigm representing the computerisation,
automation, digitisation and informisation of industrial systems through the use of
technologies like Cyber-Physical Systems and the Internet of Things.
Trust should be built through information provision, awareness campaigning, research and
development investments, systematic trialing and piloting exercises and strategically designed
incremental implementation. Risks and poisonous side-e ects, such as the possible increase of motor
trac through the creation of more occupied and (scarily) unoccupied CAV trips supported by a
ﬂawed MaaS business model that may still be primarily car-oriented should be eliminated for any
techno-centric transition to take o and maximise its potential. Intelligent innovation should also have
equally signiﬁcant socio-centric dimensions.
Thus, it should be expected that the transition to the next mobility paradigm that will naturally
match the needs of the smart city will be lengthy, diverse and slow-paced with high levels of complexity
and uncertainty. Forecasting may not always be accurate in such a dynamic environment as the one of
the smart city. The successful application of AI requires a good understanding of the relationships
between AI and data on one hand, and transportation system characteristics and variables on the
other hand [ 5], such that even if the tools are readily available, change is not straightforward. Making
signiﬁcant changes to an era deﬁned by the human-driven, conventionally fuelled, privately owned,
unconnected and ground-based vehicle and its colossal impact on the urban development that dictated
how cities have been designed and built for over a century requires a strategic approach based
on determination, adaptability and ﬂexibility. Changes in mobility provision cannot be rushed
unless technology, legislation, educational and moral frameworks supporting them are all in place
and are robust and mature enough to withstand a stratum of challenges, including unknown and
unprecedented ones.