Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 10 of 19
5. Mobility-as-a-Service
Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) is a powerful notion, still in an embryonic stage of its development
when it comes to a full-scale implementation, but immensely hyped up. MaaS in its purest future
form is promising digital packages of personalised multimodal mobility that will replace privately
owned vehicles through the use of an all-in-one smart online platform capable of providing integrated
journey planning, booking, smart ticketing and real-time information services. If MaaS works as a
real substitute to private automobile ownership and transforms car use to a service provided strictly
on an as-needed basis, it has the potential to dramatically reduce the number of cars on the roads
and thus deliver huge reductions in travel delays, air pollution, noise nuisance, energy consumption,
and transport-related social exclusion, as well as provide beneﬁts in terms of tra c safety and accident
prevention, health and wellbeing, social cohesiveness, accessibility and household expenditure. It will
also free up valuable living space from car tra c and car parking and will redistribute it to public and
active transport, but also to other more human-centric built environment investments.
To date, 115 peer-reviewed journal articles are accessible in the Scopus search engine; the number
grows to 259 research outputs if this includes conference papers and book chapters. The total body
of this literature has been exclusively published from 2011 onwards, with more papers being issued
every year. These studies cover many MaaS angles, including user experience [ 52–54], attitudes [ 55,56],
integration with public transport [ 57–59], business models [ 60,61], travel behaviour [ 62,63], governance
and policy [64,65], urban futures [66,67] and even Blockchain adaption [68].
These ﬁgures make it undeniable that the demand for MaaS research is not slowing down in the
foreseeable future despite the vagueness behind MaaS implementation speciﬁcs and the lack of a truly
cohesive and universal deﬁnition of the term. At present, there is a dichotomy between researchers
and developers thinking of MaaS primarily as a ride- and car-sharing scheme facilitator and others
advocating that MaaS should be a lot more than that. This means that given MaaS is not yet clearly
deﬁned and contextualised, it is still very di cult to assess how MaaS can a ect travel behaviour and
how it can help in transforming the future; or as Lyons et al. [ 69] notes: “there is very limited insight
to date in terms of the behavioural impact of MaaS or its future potential”. Regarding this context,
Kamargianni et al. [ 70] highlights that it is important to study not only MaaS as a whole, but also its
component elements (i.e., intermodal journey planners, payment methods, booking systems, real-time
information and mobility packages) and their inﬂuence on consumers in terms of enablers or barriers.
Examples of early applications of MaaS with variable levels of reach, continuity and success so
far include Whim in Helsinki and Birmingham; the pilot UbiGo in Gothenburg, which despite its
success, ceased to exist in 2014 but as of 2019 has been relaunched in Stockholm; Moovel in Hamburg
and Stuttgart; the year-long Smile pilot in Vienna, which has been replaced with the fairly successful
WienMobil Lab; the Italy-wide myCicero; the Scottish project NaviGoGo, which was operational in
Dundee and North Fife; the Hannovermobil in Hanover; Monpelier’s EMMA (TaM); and ALD Move,
which covers the whole of the Netherlands.
In theory at least, MaaS can maximise its potential if it incorporates in its very core the “cautious”
use of CAVs (and even PAVs when available) strictly based on car-sharing or (even better) ride-sharing
schemes. In this favourable (in sustainability terms) MaaS adaption scenario, CAVs can be ﬁrst- and
last-mile neighbourhood feeders to mass transit systems running in transport corridors that clearly
prioritise or even enforce public transport use. If CAVs are shared as such, they might have the
potential to blur the lines between public and private transportation services altogether [ 71] and could
make MaaS appear as a less aggressive, controversial and restrictive mobility paradigm that, although
it does not entirely fulﬁl its institutional rhetoric of “individual unfettered freedom” (as discussed
in Pangbourne et al. [ 64]), makes a justiﬁable pro-sustainability compromise that includes, but is
not centred around, car access. The AI-centric digital services of MaaS will need to mix and match
multimodal trips on this premise.
Three key challenges a ect the transition path to a MaaS-centric transport system. To identify the
biggest barrier to MaaS success, it is necessary to concentrate on the pervasive inﬂuence of cultural