Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2789 12 of 19
will ensure real-time decision-making to provide adaptable city conditions with online communication
and connected PI system elements, such as PI-containers (parcels, pallets), PI-movers (PI-trucks, CAVs,
UAVs) and PI-hubs (stores, warehouses). This novel and e cient orchestration of the key elements of
a logistics system will boost the quest for a smart, sustainable and resilient city. The PI is the transport
and logistics response (or adaptation) to Industry 4.0 [87].
Industry 4.0 or the Fourth Industrial Revolution (per Alexopoulos et al. [ 88]) started as a German
strategic initiative for pioneering manufacturing and has morphed into a transformative paradigm
representing the computerisation, automation, digitisation and informisation of industrial systems
that includes enabling technologies, such as the Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), the IoT, Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) and cloud computing [ 89–93]. According to Lom et al. [ 94], other important
aspects of Industry 4.0 and key elements of the smart city initiative are the Internet of Services (IoS),
which includes intelligent transport and logistics (smart mobility, smart logistics) in particular, as well
as the Internet of Energy (IoE), which determines how natural resources (electricity, water, oil) can be
used appropriately.
In terms of a bibliography, the IoT, PI and Industry 4.0 are widely covered primarily from a
technical and computer engineering perspective; over 53,000, 10,500 and 26,000 Scopus-indexed
research outputs, respectively, are currently available to readers. Nonetheless, the current literature
still lacks e orts to systematically review the state of the art of these paradigm-shifting initiatives in
relation to smart city developments [95].
7. Deﬁnitions and Conclusions
Despite an abundance of quality research studies with a conceptual (or review-based) character that
have tried over time to express, describe and prioritise the diverse, versatile and dynamic dimensions
incorporated in each of the themes presented in our paper, including AI (e.g., [ 96–100]), smart city
(e.g., [ 101–105]), CAVs (e.g., [ 106–109]), UAVs and PAVs (e.g., [ 110–113]), MaaS (e.g., [ 114–117]), IoT
(e.g., [ 118–121]), PI (e.g., [ 122–125]) and Industry 4.0 (e.g., [ 126–129]), there is as yet no clear and
universally approved set of deﬁnitions that critically underpins the nexus of AI, transport and the
smart city.
After contextualising the diverse pieces of the future AI-centric transport eco-system of the smart
city and linking them together, this paper will now try to provide thorough and systematic deﬁnitions
for all of them. Table 2 provides an all-in-one reference point for the multidisciplinary audience of
city science scholars interested in this topical agenda. This would hopefully increase the visibility and
access of the still scarcely studied, in its totality at least, nexus of AI-transport-smart city.
The present work recognises the transformative ability of AI when it comes to the smart city
context and how it can be a paradigm-shifting force that will revolutionise mobility in an unprecedented
way. However, at the same time, it acknowledges that the machine-oriented identity of the new smart
mobility paradigm needs to operate within a responsible, sustainable and user-centred architectural
framework that “understands” and “satisﬁes” the human user, the markets and the society as a whole.
The promise of an autonomous, connected, shared and digitised transport service provision is not
enough if it does not facilitate e orts that lead to improved environmental conservation, resource
eciency, productivity gains, social inclusion, integration, health and wellbeing. People need to
believe that a change could be genuinely beneﬁcial for the many, that they can become active and
engaged participants of the new urban eco-system, and that they can sensibly utilise the opportunities
provided by the AI–transport–smart city nexus. For this to be achieved, as in every socio-technical
transition [130–132], creating trust is the key.