109This is overfitting. Overfitting is when a model fits the training data 
too well. It memorizes answers rather than learning concepts from them. 
In this case, the model cannot distinguish signal from noise and learns 
the noise present in the data. As a result, the model does not understand 
the actual patterns, or signals, in the data. As such, the model does not 
apply to new data and is determinantal to the model’s ability to generalize. 
Decision trees are examples of algorithms that can overfit training data. 
This can be improved through pruning. In many cases, it’s a case of 
keeping things simple.
If a model performs better on training datasets than on unseen 
test sets, then the model is likely to be overfitting. Cross-validation is a 
technique to employ to measure against overfitting. Further still, training 
with more data may help algorithms infer hypotheses better.
The concept of “more data gives better results” is misguiding. In many 
cases, more data may help. However, more data does not imply good data. 
If data with noise were to be added, it wouldn’t help reduce overfitting. 
Hence, this is why it’s paramount to ensure data is clean and appropriate.
Data leakage occurs when data you are using to train your machine 
learning model has the information you are trying to predict in it. This 
leads to poor generalization and contributes to overfitting. Data leakage 
can occur from test data leaking into training data or additional features. 
A trivial example of data leakage would be a model that uses the response 
variable itself as a predictor, thus concluding, for example, that “a patient 
with type 2 diabetes has type 2 diabetes. ”
If the performance of your machine learning algorithm is too good to 
be true, data leakage may be the reason it is. An n-fold cross-validation can 
help to reduce data leakage.
Underfitting is simple to detect, as it will have poor performance. It 
refers to a model that cannot model the training data or generalize to new 
data. Typically, this would be represented by simple models that have too 
few features. Results would tend to show bias over variance (i.e., wrong 
outcomes).Chapter 3  What Is Ma ChIne Learn Ing?