214signs, which contributed to his survival. Arguably the emergency response 
team would be acting unethically if they were not to use the full variety of 
data available to them at that given moment. Perhaps even John himself 
would overrule his consent if it meant increasing his chances of survival.
Precedent demonstrates freedom of choice and consent is ultimately 
a utopian concept. In October 2016, a man accused of the rape and 
murder of a 19-year-old medical student in Germany had the health data 
from his smartphone used against him at trial.[78] The suspect, who was 
identified by a hair discovered at the crime scene, refused to give police the 
PIN code to his smartphone. Police enlisted the help of a cyberforensics 
firm in Munich who broke into the device. Data on the suspect’s iPhone 
recorded his steps and elevation, which police analyzed. Police suggested 
the suspect’s elevation (stair climb) data could correlate to him dragging 
his victim down a riverbank and climbing back up. As well as locating 
the suspect’s movements, the phone also suggested periods of strenuous 
activity, which included two peaks the onboard smartphone app put down 
to climbing stairs. Police investigators mimicked how they believed the 
suspect disposed of the body and demonstrated the same two peaks of 
stair climbing detected on the suspect’s iPhone.
 Public Understanding
The Facebook Cambridge Analytica fiasco went on to highlight just how 
unaware the public are on the topic of data privacy. The US Senate’s 
interrogation of Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerburg illustrated just how 
ignorant and unaware the public was on the topic of technology. Senators 
were puzzled as to how Facebook made money as a free platform, 
referred to sending e-mails through WhatsApp, and queried as to whether 
encrypted messages could ever be used to provide targeted advertising.[79]  
The misunderstandings and ignorance demonstrated by critical 
stakeholders on the topic of data governance were astounding.Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce