280Lifestyle changes such as stopping smoking, moving more, and losing 
weight can all be tackled through behavioral interventions, simultaneously 
targeting the major chronic diseases. Chronic diseases and their 
management are behavior mediated. Digital health tools enable treatment 
to be personalized, democratized, and scaled. Real-world evidence has 
largely demonstrated the efficacy of digital tools. More evidence and 
randomized clinical trials are required to demonstrate causation. One area 
that is still unclear is who pays for digital therapeutics. If a doctor should 
prescribe a digital therapeutic, who should pay? The insurance company? 
The healthcare provider? The employer? The patient?
Regardless, digital innovation is revolutionizing disease management. 
Patients are increasingly demanding autonomy; wishing to be educated 
about their health, aware of the latest evidence base and engaged with 
their health.
 Incentivized Wellness
Ill health is expensive. To employers and the economy, physical and 
mental health issues cost the United Kingdom more than £77 billion.[145]  
Employees lose an average of 30 working days each year due to illness 
or underperformance as the result of poor health. The economic impact 
globally chronic conditions such as cancer, type 2 diabetes, and mental 
illness could reach over $47 trillion by 2030 according to the World 
Economic Forum.[146] Individual lifestyle choices, physical and mental 
health, all impact work performance. There is a significant challenge 
mounting for providers such as insurers and employers in improving 
absenteeism and presenteeism. To do this, providers are realizing the 
importance of holistic health—comprising physical health and mental 
health, social and human interaction, both in and out of the workplace.
As healthcare interventions focus on chronic conditions rather than 
acute illnesses, behavioral therapy is typically becoming first-line therapy 
over pharmacological intervention.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care