276excited or depressed. Virtual assistants will interpret the syntax, semantics, 
and tone of the conversation to check for signs of mental or emotional 
health concerns.
Similarly, there is an application for virtual assistants in products to 
assist people with disabilities. Apps can be used not only to control lights, 
music, and heating but also for lifestyle management. Nominet, a UK 
Internet organization, developed an open source prototype called PIPs to 
cater to people with sensory or cognitive impairments.[136] People are 
empowered with audio and visual prompts, nudges, and reminders to 
go through their daily routines and to develop the skills and confidence 
to navigate their environment. The prototype is built with a low energy 
Bluetooth controller that sends and receives notifications between devices. 
The devices can be used to guide people through tasks such as washing 
their face, taking a bath, or taking their medication.
 Remote Monitoring
Connected devices can provide support for caregivers and healthcare 
professionals to keep people out of a hospital and reduce their visits to the 
doctor. Apps and virtual assistants can provide medication reminders; fitness 
trackers will monitor user health and movement, alerting care providers if 
deviations in a routine were to occur. Connected devices can alert family and 
care providers of events such as using a fridge, having a bath, or opening the 
front door. Aspects of routine demonstrated in the data would be learned 
and respective accounts notified if there were to be a deviation from the 
norm. Emergency buttons can alert the relevant services, ensuring that the 
elderly or those with long-term conditions can receive medical intervention 
when required most. The combination of connected devices, apps, and 
virtual assistants make the home smarter and more conducive to mitigating 
risk, ensuring the healthcare provider/clinic is up-to-date with the latest 
overview of patient health while empowering the patient.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care