266For providers, it provides an opportunity to fully engage in personalized, 
value-based care, with the quality of patient experience paramount. For 
patients, it can pinpoint genetic mutations that predispose a person to 
disease. The physical and mental consequences of such knowledge can be 
profound and have caused controversy among the medical establishment 
and general public. A natural division among all people, regarding specific 
issues, is to be either for or against the topic of discussion. Progress is 
not without moral consequence, and legislation must endure the speed 
at which first-time problems are occurring. People are conflicted about 
having a lot of information about themselves.
 Vision of the Future
Within the next decade, DNA profiling of the embryo will take place from 
within the mother’s womb, which will create an immediate profile of the 
person’s health status and risk of disease and enable the development 
of health and lifestyle treatment plans from the beginning of life. Ethical 
concerns in fertility will move to tackle making decisions based on an 
embryo’s genetic status. Genetic profiling will also make it quicker to 
detect potential concerns and alter or delete potential genetic defects 
or characteristics that are unfavored. Predisposition to disease will be 
estimated, with healthy life care plans developed for patients to follow as 
a daily routine. Patients will constantly be monitored, with their data fed 
back to update their health records and focus on optimal wellness—driven 
through innovation in wearable technology, innovation in medicine, 
healthcare delivery, the IoT, and smart homes, smart cities, and smart 
communities.
Patient data aggregation will facilitate the understanding of baseline 
health and enable healthy people to be algorithmically visualized. Data 
monitoring and predictive analytics will instantly alert health professionals 
and patients should there be a deviation to the norm—alerting users Chapter 7  Future o F health Care