301These devices can notify patients and healthcare professionals in real time: 
forget your Big Brother, this is Big Doctor.
 Smart Homes
There will be many ways that homes will become smart in the pursuit of 
improved patient and population health, which are best illustrated by 
example. On waking, a wearable sleep monitor will assess the quality of 
your sleep while you perform mindfulness through your connected watch. 
Your sleep monitor will even tell you when to go to bed for optimum 
recovery. After brushing your teeth with a toothbrush that assesses 
whether you are hydrated or not, you drink your morning coffee, which 
controls the dosage of insulin released for absorption in your bloodstream. 
Your fridge will inform you of out-of-date food and ensure none of your 
potential allergens are found in the food you purchase. Smartphone apps 
will augment the calories, and nutritional values of foods; and 3-D printers 
will enable the printing of safe-to-dispense, at-home pharmaceuticals. 
Virtual assistants and even mirrors will assess for signs of anxiety and 
depression and assess health biomarkers in natural language. Should you 
develop a cough, your virtual assistant will tell you that you’re coughing 
more than usual; and with the change in body temperature detected 
from your smartwatch, your assistant calls the doctor on your behalf and 
arranges an appointment. As a closed environment, the smart home allows 
for AI to accommodate for the highly individualized needs of the user. 
The most important element aspect of smart anything is the nuance when 
scaling: to understand the context and prioritize local activity.
The future is not as far as it seems. Bolzano in Italy is already working 
with IBM and various partners to empower aging people to age safely at 
home.[167] Safety and security are the main priorities, with the project 
using sensors installed into homes to monitor environmental factors such as 
temperature, carbon monoxide, and water leaks. Data is pushed to an off-site Chapter 7  Future o F health Care