282However, knowledge discovery from the data contained in such systems 
is currently challenging due to variations in complexity, vocabulary, and 
standardization. Data mining provides an opportunity to extract relevant 
information from both textual and image-based archives. Mining also 
enables the discovery of patterns from data that can be used to build 
predictive models.
As discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, unsupervised learning is known 
for feature extraction, whereas supervised learning is suited to predictive 
modeling. Mining of records is beneficial for both the patient and provider. 
Mining of records can be used to identify high-risk patients or those 
with chronic conditions for whom a personalized intervention could be 
delivered. Record mining enables providers to find best practices and 
treatment to reduce claims and hospital admissions. Through comparison 
of symptoms, treatments, and positive and adverse effects, healthcare 
providers can analyze the pathways that improve outcomes for patient 
cohorts, enabling clinical best practice and standards of care.
 Conversational AI
Conversational AI refers to systems that can talk. Rather than a user 
interface based on text or code input, individuals can interact with 
conversational AI system with their voice. Users are increasingly using 
chatbots to communicate with products and services. Voice-driven AI 
such as Amazon’s Alexa can synthesize natural language to provide recipes 
or exercise tips, order products, or call a cab. The technology is catching 
on: 1 in 5 Americans owns a smart speaker, and there are over 100,000 
Facebook messenger chatbots.[147]
As AI chatbots develop, so too are their capabilities. Intelligent 
personal assistants will act as healthcare assistants. By virtue of being 
voice-controlled, there are immediate applications for those less-abled, 
where only the voice needs to be used to perform tasks or instructions. 
Within health, conversational AI enables simple questions that do not Chapter 7  Future o F health Care