243to the charity Action on Addiction, one in three people is addicted to 
something.[106] In 2015, a 38-year-old man was found dead after playing 
video games for five days in an Internet cafe in Taipei.[107]
Real-world and academic evidence demonstrates that technology 
addiction is a mounting issue. AI has the potential to improve productivity 
and discovery. However, humankind is responsible for taking measures 
to prevent AI leading to destructive, digital addictions that make us more 
insular, overdependent, and lethargic.
 Economy and Employment
What happens after the end of jobs? Supermarkets already use automated 
checkouts, and even McDonalds have already replaced the human-
to- human food ordering procedure with a digital interface.[108] The 
hierarchy of labor is concerned primarily with automation, and this is 
also true of healthcare. Pharmacies, assembly lines, and check-ins are 
all commonly automated systems. Although this appears a concern for 
humankind, it can facilitate more complex roles for humans, moving the 
species more from physical work to cognitive labor.
Healthcare organizations exploring the use of AI are understanding 
how to retrain or redeploy their staff, rather than make them redundant. As 
these AI systems become increasingly common and grow in capacity and 
accuracy, conversations are moving past manual and cognitive labor to 
how specialisms such as radiology will be affected. Healthcare teams that 
use image processing AI, for instance, are increasingly confronted with the 
dilemma of what to do with teams of specialists. AI can be used to redirect 
resources to amplify patient care, with more opportunities to engage with 
patients and their treatment. AI can be understood as an efficient and 
effective tool that can analyze and detect patterns in patient data at a rate 
and efficiency inconceivable to humans, with little misinterpretation. 
However, AI should be seen to augment a human’s natural knowledge and 
intellect rather than be left to make a final decision.Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce