308high blood glucose levels, people with diabetes may have slower wound 
healing times. They may also have reduced nerve functioning called 
peripheral diabetic neuropathy. This means the nerves that usually carry 
pain sensation to the brain from the feet do not function as well, and it is 
possible for damage to occur to the foot without feeling it.
Treading on something, wearing tight shoes, cuts, blisters, and bruises 
can all develop into diabetes foot ulcers. Narrowed arteries can also be a 
consequence of diabetes, and reduced blood flow to the feet can also impair 
the foot’s ability to heal properly. When the foot cannot heal, a foot ulcer 
can develop. Foot ulcers are a common complication of poorly controlled 
diabetes, forming as a result of skin tissue breaking down and exposing the 
layers underneath. Chronic poor blood supply can contribute to the risk of 
requiring amputation of toes, feet, and lower legs. Approximately 2.5% of the 
population with diabetes have foot ulcers at any given time, which in England 
alone is 68,000 people. £1 in every £140 of NHS spending is on ulceration 
and amputation. Those who wait longer for specialist care tend to have more 
severe ulcers, and their ulcers are less likely to have healed at 12 weeks. Only 
20% of patients are referred to a foot protection service within the National 
Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE)-recommended time frame of 1 day.
In 2014–2015, 1 in every 390 people with diabetes were admitted to 
the hospital for an amputation; and 1 in 33 people with diabetes were 
hospitalized due to a foot ulceration. The combined NHS cost for inpatient 
care was £322 million (86% on ulcer-related admissions).
Inpatient improvement programs delivered by video to promote foot 
checks and reduce ulcers have been successful. Ipswich Hospital NHS Trust 
saved an estimated 19 foot ulcers and 571 diabetic bed days per year, saving 
£246,000 annually. The cost benefit from improved foot self-care, referral, 
and diagnosis is substantial. NICE guidance recommends those with an 
active foot problem should be referred to a multidisciplinary team (MDT) 
or foot protection service within one working day and triaged within one 
further working day. The National Diabetes Foot Audit (NDFA) found that 
20% of 9,137 patients followed were seen in this time frame.Chapter 8  Case studies