279of video-conferencing facilities, EHRs remote monitoring, digital health 
education, and transmission of scans or images among other applications, 
are all considered part of telemedicine.[143]
The world is truly mobile, and digital tools aim to deal primarily with 
minor primary care issues through electronic means. More serious issues 
would be escalated to the relevant healthcare professional, provider, 
or team. Digital health enables healthcare professionals to anticipate 
healthcare concerns rather than waiting for symptoms to present.
Measures of performance for digital health will be based on how 
convenient the experience was for the patient including patient health 
outcomes, quality of care, and the number of users using tools over the 
long-term.
 Education
Digital health provides a perfect opportunity for education. Less than 1 
in 10 patients with diabetes in the United Kingdom attends structured 
education within 12 months of diagnosis.[144] Research demonstrates 
offline education benefits typically decline 1 to 3 months after interventions 
cease, suggesting that learned behaviors change over time and further 
support is required to ensure lifestyle changes can be maintained. As a 
result, engagement with offline diabetes education courses is limited. 
Digital education is engaging by its very nature; it is available at any time 
and on any device at the patient’s convenience. Digital education can 
additionally be personalized to users through the data exchange between 
user and provider with the presentation, and analysis of real-time patient 
data subsequently encourages personalized, goal-focused practice and 
sustainable behavior change. Education can be made patient-centered and 
person-led rather than the traditional teacher–learner environment. Digital 
therapeutics provide a substantial opportunity to empower patients with 
the knowledge, skills, and resources required to manage and optimize their 
health.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care