294 Blockchain
Transitioning of traditional patient health records to the EHR is 
considered to be enormous progress for healthcare. The digitalization 
of patient records mitigates some of the traditional risks of centralized 
data stores. However, this model still places the medical records in the 
hands of the provider. Blockchain technology, popularized by the bitcoin 
cryptocurrency, has the potential to revolutionize data access, privacy, 
and trust. Currently, blockchain is yet to be deployed for mainstream 
healthcare.
Blockchain, fundamentally a collection of data records, is a piece of 
software formed by the combination of several preexisting technologies 
that provide blockchain with its characteristic features: an immutable, 
distributed public ledger whose authenticity can be verified by anyone: 
those who validate the data on the ledger are rewarded with value, 
which helps create trust in a trustless environment; distributed peer-to-  
peer control, which provides a high level of security; and the ledger can 
be programmed to trigger automatic transactions in the form of smart 
contracts, allowing for a widespread application of this technology.
PayPal, Visa, and Mastercard, for instance, act as central authorities 
for financial transactions: trusted institutions that act as intermediaries. 
The land registry acts as the trusted store for details on homeownership. 
These centralized databases are subject to being hacked or manipulated. 
Blockchain technology aims to solve data management, privacy, and 
security issues, improving interoperability and easing the flow of data 
between doctors, hospitals, healthcare systems, and insurance providers 
through the use of a decentralized, immutable database. Patients are 
demanding increased access to their medical health records, with iOS 11.3 
even including an EHR feature.[163] Data from EHRs IoT, wearables, and 
devices can be used within the ledger, in a trusted, secure, transparent, and 
interoperable environment.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care