242relationships. In 2017, Chinese AI engineer Zheng Jiajia married robot 
Yingying, a robot spouse he created to ease the pressure of marriage.[103]  
Human-replacement sex robots are now common, with connected AI 
robots developed with human-like skin and warmth, as well as safety 
measures to mitigate electrical shocks or worse.
Whether applied to banking, healthcare, transport, or anything else, 
humanity is at the beginning of a juncture where humans engage with AI 
agents as frequently as though they too are humans. Where humans have 
limits as to the amount of attention, kindness, compassion, and energy 
they can expend, AI bots are an infinite resource for developing and 
maintaining relationships.
 Behavior and Addictions
Our behaviors are already influenced and manipulated by technology. 
Web landing pages, shared links, and user experiences are optimized 
through multivariant testing. This is a crude algorithmic approach to 
capture human attention. In the 2017 US Elections, Donald Trump’s 
campaign famously used and tested more than 50,000 ad variations daily 
to micro-target voters.[104] Human experimentation has been taking place 
for centuries, so this is nothing new. However, there is now the ability to 
influence choice and freedom like never before. Organizations have a 
moral responsibility to analyze the impact of AI and safeguard particular 
groups of people, including vulnerable adults and children, from 
manipulative tools like nudging or social proofing. Codes of conduct for 
behavioral experimentation within technological experiments is required.
Technology addiction is becoming a growing concern. Robert Lustig, 
a professor at the University of Southern California, discovered that the 
human brain responds to technology in a similar way to other addictive 
substances.[105] Internet addiction has been documented in a variety 
of countries; and adolescents appear to be more at risk, partly due to the 
prefrontal cortex being the last part of the brain to develop. According Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce