323Health data is collected in real time through blood glucose monitoring, 
medication monitoring, and seizure tracking modules within the 
application. Unstructured data is particularly useful in understanding 
sentiment and the patient’s psychology. Research activity will take place 
over the course of 12 months, reporting on 3-month, 6-month, 9-month, 
and then 1-year epidemiological health outcomes and engagement data 
followed by an 18-month and 2-year follow-up to demonstrate efficacy 
and adherence to the program over the short to medium term. This will 
be the world’s largest and longest study on patients engaged with a digital 
platform epilepsy. It is possible that with the right funding this could be 
conducted as a randomized controlled diet, which would be the world’s 
first in KDs delivered for epilepsy through a digital platform.
 Research
As part of this project, we seek to learn the most efficient and effective 
methods to implement and accelerate at-scale delivery of our technology 
to the UK’s NHS population and international bill payers. The project is  
led by an award-winning and experienced team, recognized for  
innovating digital health, who are determined to revolutionize the 
health and well-  being of people across the globe. The technological 
challenge is to create a scalable, engaging, and effective solution for 
global implementation. This challenge is mitigated through the project 
extending on the infrastructure of DDM’s (Diabetes Digital Media) Low 
Carb Program for type 2 diabetes, with clinically validated outcomes 
and 71% retention at 1 year. Surprisingly, out of 300,000 patients globally 
registered within the Low Carb Program for type 2 diabetes, there are 
3,112 people with epilepsy (0.5% of the UK population)—showing 
the readiness for an online, nutrition-focused intervention for this 
population.
DDM intends to conduct the world’s first RCT on patients following a 
ketogenic protocol with the Ketogenic Program pioneering in the space of Chapter 8  Case studies