268change, while algorithms and AI models will be used to diagnose disease 
and treat patients. Earlier diagnosis of health issues will become more 
common through constant monitoring before they become more serious.
Care will be delivered through a hybrid of digital and face-to-face 
engagement. Virtual and augmented immersive experiences will reinforce 
and maintain behavior change. Drones will deliver your medication 
to wherever you are unless your autonomous vehicle takes you there 
first. You will be instantly alerted when data sources report an adverse 
effect of your medication, and you will instantly be offered a best-suited, 
tailored alternative. A variety of integrated healthcare disciplines will be 
involved in patient treatment to ensure a holistic and human approach to 
healthcare. Innovations will allow doctors, nurses, and wider healthcare 
professionals to be freed up to do the more human parts of the job. Robotic 
AI will be used to carry out more physical tasks such as moving patients 
around, creating sterile environments, performing blood tests, radiology 
assessments, and so on.
Patient concerns will be dealt in, in real time. Should a patient be 
showing symptoms of atrial fibrillation, for example, a doctor may record 
a patient’s heartbeat on their tablet and upload it to a system that confirms 
or denies the doctor’s concerns. If irregularities are spotted, the video is 
instantly sent to a cardiologist who can provide a diagnosis and begin a 
personalized treatment plan for the patient. Appointments and follow-  
ups will take hours or days rather than weeks or months. A network of 
connected care means several experts can look at a patient’s concerns 
simultaneously and give second opinions.
Precision medicine is another emerging approach, which refers to 
modifying a medical treatment considering individual variability. For this 
measure, three additional data sets are added to existing traditional patient 
medical records: data about the patient’s environmental exposures, their 
lifestyle, and their genomic data.[127] This information can assist the 
doctors in identifying which approaches, treatments, and preventions will 
be effective for which patients.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care