225Machine learning has already been used to develop intelligent systems 
that have been able to predict mortality risk and length of life from health 
biomarkers. AI has been used to analyze data from EHR to predict the risk 
of heart failures with a high degree of certainty.
Moreover, machine learning can be used to determine the most 
effective medication dosage learning on patient real-world and clinical 
data, reducing healthcare costs for the patients and providers. AI can 
not only be used in determining dosage but also in determining the 
best medication for the patient. As the genetic data becomes available, 
medications for conditions such as HIV and diabetes will accommodate for 
variations among races, ethnicities, and individual responses to particular 
drugs. Within the same data, medication interactions and side effects can 
be tracked. Where clinical trials and requirement for FDA approval look 
at a controlled environment, big real-world data provide us with real-time 
data such as medication interactions and the influence of demographics, 
medications, genetics, and other factors on outcomes in real time.
As the limitations of technology are tested, there are ethical and legal 
issues to overcome.
 Machine Bias
Machine bias refers to the way machine learning models exhibit bias. 
Machine bias can be the result of several causes, such as the creator’s 
bias on data used to train the model. Biases are often spotted as first-time 
problems with subtle and obvious ramifications. All machine learning 
algorithms rely on a statistical bias to make predictions about unseen data. 
However, machine bias reflects a prejudice from the developers of the data.
The capabilities of AI regarding speed and capacity of processing far 
exceed that of humans. Therefore, it cannot always be trusted to be fair 
and neutral. Google and its parent company, Alphabet, are leaders when 
it comes to AI, as seen with Google’s Photos service, where AI is used to 
identify people, objects, and scenes. But it can still go wrong, such as when Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce