286failed drug trials can be damaging: from reduced share price to closure 
of worksites and reduced staffing. Hence, the pharmaceutical and life 
science industry is increasingly turning to AI to facilitate drug research 
and development. Pharma isn’t looking to replace humans. Instead, it is 
looking to see why the rate of failure is so high through using innovative 
AI. AI systems are being developed that can identify new therapies from 
information on existing medications; this could improve efficiency, drug 
development success, and accelerate the route to market for new drugs. In 
cases of pandemics, such as Ebola or Swine Flu, an accelerated route could 
save numerous lives.
There are approximately 1060 compounds that have drug-like 
characteristics.[152] The chemist of the future will be empowered through 
leveraging data: historical data, experimental data, inferences, and trends. 
AI enables the earlier identification of promising drugs and biomarkers. 
AI also has application in clinical trials. Clinical trial patient stratification 
allows the identification of patient groups most likely to benefit from the 
associated drug. This enables clinical trials operators to find the right 
patients for trials rather than patients who are unlikely to respond.
 3-D printing
Innovation in 3-D printing promises exciting advances in the field 
of healthcare, where 3-D printing is beginning to disrupt traditional 
paradigms as the technology becomes more affordable and accessible. As 
the name suggests, 3-D printing involves printing 3-dimensional objects 
from a digital model, using additive processes to build the object. Also 
known as additive manufacturing, 3-D printing adds iterative layers, one 
on top of the other, to assemble the model. This allows precise modeling 
and reduces error. Although 3-D printing solutions are still in infancy 
compared to other technologies, the potential for its applications is 
exciting. Many AI experts consider it feasible that in the future, humans 
will adopt robotics and bioprinted material into their bodies. Soon humans Chapter 7  Future o F health Care