38through a variety of factors, primarily clinical impact on patient outcomes 
or behavior modification, patient and stakeholder engagement, impact  
on processes and workflows, and monetization (cost saving, cost  
benefits, etc.).
McKinsey stated that the potential annual value of big data to US 
Healthcare is $300 billion. They also mention that big data has a potential 
annual value of €250 billion to Europe’s public sector administration.  
Even more, in their well-regarded report from 2011, they state that the 
potential annual consumer surplus from using personal location data 
globally could be up to $600 billion in 2020.[20]
Data’s value comes from the analyses conducted on it. It is this analysis 
of data that enables it to be turned into information, with the aim of 
eventually turning it into knowledge. The value lies in how organizations 
use available data and become information centric and data-driven for 
purposes of decision-making. Value is not found, it is made. The key 
is to make the data meaningful to your users and your organization by 
managing it well.
Google did a perfect job in tracking the searches for flu symptoms 
in 2013. However, it had no way of knowing that its results weren’t valid 
regarding predicting flu prevalence. Google Flu Trends, at least in this 
instance, wasn’t providing valuable results for this use case. To add insult 
to injury, Google was never to know that real-world cases of flu failed 
to match the search distribution and frequency—so it could never do 
anything about it. Perhaps if this project was to be extended, analyzing 
social media posts may have been more valuable in determining flu 
prevalence. Social media and wider unstructured data sources provide a 
wealth of often unexplored information.
Identifying a population at risk of type 2 diabetes, predicting atrial 
fibrillation (AFIB), assisting patients with recovery from health events, or 
recommending the latest evidence-based medicine therapy to a patient 
are tasks with a clear and valuable return on investments.Chapter 2  Data