285be more advanced than humans. AI can currently be used to examine 
medical scans, identify symptoms of type 2 diabetes, identify retinopathy 
and cardiovascular disease risk, and spot signs of breast cancer. AI will 
perform better as algorithms are trained on more data. However, it is not 
just clinical data that is required for disease diagnosis. Cardiogram, an 
organization based in the United States, can detect type 2 diabetes with 
an 85% accuracy rate—from Apple or Android watches, Fitbits, and other 
heart-rate enabled wearables.[150] Similarly, the US company Striiv can 
detect atrial fibrillation from 2 weeks’ worth of heart-rate data. Algorithms 
to detect disease are showing great promise, with several already in 
medical practice. However, that does not mean all AI diagnostics are ready 
for implementation. Many AI tools are developed without peer review 
and its academic rigor. Essential details require verification, such as the 
algorithm’s code, training, and validation datasets; the data to which it is 
compared; how performance is evaluated; and how neural networks come 
to their conclusions. As AI evolves, one would expect AI diagnostic tools to 
undergo the same RCT analysis that drugs are subject to. Diagnostic AI can 
save lives, money, and time through earlier diagnosis of conditions and 
responsive treatment.
 Making and rationalizing decisions
Doctors make challenging decisions daily. It is vital that these decisions 
are as informed as possible. The use of AI, data mining, and predictive 
analytics is enabling clinicians to rationalize decisions and develop 
evidence-based treatment options. AI does not have to make the decision 
but can present the most reasonable opportunities to proceed.
 Drug discovery
Developing a new drug is an expensive business, and only one in three 
new drugs will make it to the market. Every new drug brought to the 
market costs pharma an average of $2.7 billion.[151] The consequence of Chapter 7  Future o F health Care