311and save the lives of many. A cloud-based system would enable easier 
sharing of the application and its outcomes. A catchall event log was 
developed to identify all events taking place within the ecosystem. The 
platform includes behavior health mentoring and integrated tracking for 
blood glucose, blood pressure, mood, food, weight, and sleep through 
Bluetooth-  enabled devices, wearables, and self-inputted data.
AI models provide boundless opportunity in predictive analytics.  
By analyzing and generalizing on thousands of images, medical images  
are being turned into science. Precision medicine is the objective of 
evidence-based medicine. There are few ways as engaging and immersive 
as digital, which enables healthcare to collect enormous amounts of data; 
analyze and provide useful feedback to inform patients; and prevent, 
predict, diagnose, and treat disease. By the very nature of imagery,  
de-identification for aggregated learning is technically simple. However, 
the requirement to be able to explain the mechanisms of deep neural 
network prediction is technically difficult. A more general understanding 
of the application alleviates most stakeholder concerns, which can be 
explained through demonstration. As a novel innovation, there has been 
a requirement to explain how models are generated, validated, and 
continually evaluated. Regulatory approval has proved more laborious 
than previous projects due to the loose definitions that exist around 
product categorization. Error minimization has been a priority, and 
regulatory approval has focused on ensuring patient safety. The risk of 
false positives was determined to be more likely: early ulceration detection 
means quicker healing and less risk of amputation. Thresholds of concerns 
were developed within the model, with any doubt referred to a human.
Outputs of the project are being documented through clinical papers 
to highlight the value of the project to patients, healthcare providers, and 
global healthcare providers. Perhaps of most significance, the outcomes 
will demonstrate how people with diabetes can achieve significant health 
improvements by preventing and detecting diabetic foot problems.Chapter 8  Case studies