304patients personalized and precise care is realized. At the same time, there 
is an obligation to explore and anticipate the social, economic, political, 
and ethical consequences of innovation.
AI’s adoption in healthcare is best managed as a gradual development, 
which would be useful for stakeholders to have time to map and 
understand the possible consequences of its implementation. Robust 
standards are required for auditing and understanding AI models to 
uphold quality assurance and trust. Academic research, clinical evidence, 
and policymaking are also required on the use of AI systems in healthcare. 
The development of AI standards requires a diverse and public forum that 
is academically robust and reviewed periodically in line with the latest 
evidence base.
Awareness within the medical professional and patient communities 
is required. Healthcare professionals need basic knowledge of how AI 
applications function in their respective medical settings to understand 
the advantages, disadvantages, and consequences of how AI can facilitate 
and assist them in their everyday tasks. Patients must become accustomed 
to engaging with AI systems and explore the benefits for themselves. 
Demonstratable examples of how AI in healthcare is optimizing efficiency, 
optimizing resources, and improving population health outcomes will 
strengthen the public perception of AI.
Organizations working with AI need to communicate and engage the 
general public about the potential advantages and risks of using AI in 
medicine. Organizations developing AI must work with academia to take 
the necessary steps to be able to measure the success and the effectiveness 
of AI systems independently. It is vitally important to encourage affordable 
AI solutions to democratize AI as the stethoscope of the twenty-first 
century; and published, validated evidence and literature is essential to 
trust and adoption. Here’s to the most hopeful era for healthcare yet.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care