252 Identify and Scrub Sensitive Data
All sensitive data should be identified and secured. Data scientists 
should be aware of what data is deemed personal and how to use such 
information. For instance, data collected on consumers that is collected 
without their consent should be scrubbed of personally identifiable data. 
It is paramount that only individuals with the appropriate permissions can 
observe sensitive data. Many organizations also discourage the use of USB 
sticks and external data drives to ensure data remains safe and on-site.
 Compliance with Applicable Laws and Regulations
Trust in your organization’s approach to data, and information 
management can be garnered through adherence to appropriate local 
and national standards, policies, and laws. There are several data and 
information governance laws and regulations that set the boundaries 
of legal and appropriate data usage. It is vital that all regulations are 
abided to. Bodies such as the FDA and MHRA (Medicines and Healthcare 
products Regulatory Agency) set boundaries for the legal, ethical, and 
compliant collection, usage, and management of data. Compliance 
with GDPR and approval from governance-related accreditation bodies 
demonstrates your organization’s approach to ethical data usage and 
builds trust with your users.
Many national- and international-level standards will have a fair 
degree of overlap, requiring appropriate data reporting, documentation, 
transparency, and risk mitigation procedures. Within Europe, for example, 
adherence to regulations such as GDPR is a necessity and regulates over 
27 countries in the European Union. International standards such as ISO 
27001 ensure good data and information management standards. ISO 27001 
(formally known as ISO/IEC 27001:2005) is a specification for an information 
security management system (ISMS). An ISMS is a framework of policies 
and procedures that includes all legal, physical, and technical controls 
involved in an organization’s information risk management processes.Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce