283need the attention of a doctor to be answered. For instance, new parents 
could bombard a conversational AI with questions without fear of 
embarrassment or consuming healthcare professional’s time. Questions 
such as what temperature a baby should bathe in, how often a baby should 
sleep, or whether there are developmental milestones taking place can all 
be instantly answered by an AI speaker. Many individuals turn to search 
engines to find the answers to their questions. However, most patients who 
query symptoms are unaware how to discern research quality and may 
come across conflicting evidence in addition to misleading information 
(or fake news) that can leave patients confused. With the assistance of a 
medical AI chatbot, patients can receive immediate assistance. Continuing 
the preceding example, if a child’s new parents had a medical question 
or were concerned by a symptom (say, a chesty cough), it would be 
burdensome for them to visit the doctor for a response to every question. 
However, there is a need for medical confirmation. This cannot currently 
be detected through algorithmic means; and hence, the evolution of 
conversational AI in healthcare will be digital health assistants supported 
by and learning from healthcare teams and the world around them.
As conversational AI develops, cognitive systems will analyze 
conversation to detect early signs of mental, physical, or neurological 
illness. Voice-enabled devices such as Alexa will one day be able to identify 
symptoms of Asperger’s, anxiety, psychosis, schizophrenia, and depression 
from conversational tones. This will assist doctors to predict better and 
monitor and track disease.
Imagine how much time and resources will be saved when virtual 
assistants, healthcare chatbots, and digital tools give answers to basic medical 
questions that do not require the intervention of a medical professional.
 Making Better Doctors
AI will transform what it means to be a doctor. AI’s integration into 
medicine is making better doctors and saving lives. From waiting times 
to prioritization, finding of evidence to maintaining productivity, Chapter 7  Future o F health Care