187Farideh Bagherzadeh-Khiabani et al. used the clinical dataset from 
803 female prediabetics consisting of 55 features collected over a decade to 
develop multiple models for predicting type 2 diabetes risk.[57] The study 
developed a logistic model, demonstrating wrapper models, or models that 
consider a subset of features, improve the performance of clinical prediction 
models. This was developed into an R program to visualize output.
Similarly, Georgia El et al. used random forest decision trees on many 
features collected from 15 people with type 1 diabetes to predict short-  
term subcutaneous glucose concentrations.[58] Glucose concentration 
was predicted through the use of SVMs. The study concluded that the 
inclusion of two biomarker features—8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine, 
an oxidative stress marker, and interleukin-6—improved classification 
accuracy.
Duygu Çali şir et al. developed an automatic diagnosis system for type 
2 diabetes with a classification accuracy of almost 90% through the use 
of linear discriminant analysis and SVM classifiers.[59] Latent Dirichlet 
Allocation (LDA) was used to distinguish features between healthy 
patients and patients with type 2 diabetes, which was then in turn used 
as the input for the SVM classifier. A tertiary stage evaluated sensitivity, 
classification, and confusion before determining the output.
Razavian et al. conducted a more extensive study, determining that type 
2 diabetes prediction models could be accurately derived from population-
scale datasets.[60] Over 42,000 variables were collected from over 4 million 
patients between 2005 and 2009. Machine learning was used to determine 
relevant features, which tailed out at around 900. Novel risk factors for 
type 2 diabetes were identified, such as chronic liver disease, high alanine 
aminotransferase, esophageal reflux, and history of acute bronchitis.
Machine learning has likewise been applied to diagnosing the risk 
of other diseases related to diabetes. Lagani et al. identified the least set 
of clinical variables with the best predictive accuracy for complications 
such as cardiovascular disease (heart disease or stroke), hypoglycemia, 
ketoacidosis, proteinuria, neuropathy, and retinopathy.[61]Chapter 4  MaChine Learning aLgorith Ms