49and drive prevention of many chronic lifestyle-related diseases similar to 
incentivized car insurance with embedded black-box sensors.
Real-time alerting can also be used to notify patients of adverse 
effects of medications they are prescribed. Currently, patients wouldn’t 
receive any notification unless they were registered with the treatment 
provider. Healthcare providers can use public feeds to notify their patients 
of potential adverse effects. E-mails or text messages would suffice as a 
form of engagement and could provide as much instruction as required, 
reducing time with the clinician.
EHRs can also trigger warnings, alerts, and reminders for when a 
patient should get a new lab test; or track prescriptions to see if a patient 
has been following treatment instructions.
 Movement Toward Evidence-Based Medicine
Evidence-based medicine is a term denoting treatment given based 
on proven scientific methods in pursuit of the best possible outcomes. 
Clinical trials work on a small scale, testing new treatments in small 
groups with internal validity (i.e., no other conditions or concerns other 
than those specified), and looking at how well treatments work and 
establishing if there are any side effects. With growing datafication, there 
is also increasing “real-world evidence” or data, which can be analyzed at 
an individual level to create a patient data model and aggregated across 
populations to derive larger insights around disease prevalence, treatment, 
engagement, and outcomes. This approach improves quality of care, 
transparency, outcomes, value, and at its core, democratizes healthcare 
delivery.
Using data for similar groups of patients, we can understand the 
treatment plans patients with similar profiles have taken, allowing the best 
treatment plan to be recommended based on how others in the population 
responded to any given treatment. The recommended treatment pathway 
would be best for the patient and could be explained to both the patient Chapter 2  Data