267to poor health, possible illness, or nudging the user over an unhealthy 
lifestyle. One will be able to download a clinically validated app that would 
be able to detect, diagnose, and treat many diseases before attending a 
physical doctor’s surgery. Sensors will become far less invasive—chips 
under the skin and smart tattoos that keep constant connectivity.
Visiting the doctor’s practice will be very different. Your digital personal 
assistant, perhaps Siri or Alexa, may suggest you see the doctor based 
on your voice sounding ill, or at least different. Social media platforms, 
health communities, and phones will alert you to mental health problems 
based on what you type. No matter whether it’s a hospital in Malibu or 
Manchester, your health record will be accessible and available on your 
phone and validated through a distributed ledger such as Blockchain, to 
which healthcare providers would continue to add to over time.
Advancements in robotics, automation, and digital health enable 
healthcare professionals to focus their time where needed most: with 
patients. Using a combination of data collected from the patient’s 
everyday life, phone, wearables, health sensors, connected clothing—and 
combining that with clinical tests, scans, and check-ups—will allow much-  
improved analysis and monitoring and focus on health optimization. This 
is especially effective against non-communicable, chronic diseases like 
type 2 diabetes and tracking the progression of progressive conditions such 
as dementia. Both health providers and bill payers will incentivize patients 
to track symptoms and health markers to aid the treatment pathway.
Potential health concerns identified from patient data would trigger 
an alert to the patient’s doctor for validation by a human after initial 
AI investigation and prioritization. As a patient, treatment will be 
personalized, based on health records, genetic analysis, and AI analysis 
of patient data. Medicines will also include 3-D printed treatments 
and digital interventions delivered through mobile apps. Digital 
interventions, measured by engagement, and health outcomes, will be 
hyper-personalized, based on demographics, behavior, health, goals, and 
preferences. Discreet wireless sensors will allow instant notifications of Chapter 7  Future o F health Care