289undergoing operations, 3-D models are printed to enable a variety of uses. 
Firstly, it enables surgeons to demonstrate surgeries that will be performed 
to often anxious and concerned parents using textures and colors that 
closely represent human tissues. Secondly, the 3-D models are used by staff 
and surgeons to familiarize themselves with the most important part of an 
operation—the child’s heart. Finally, 3-D models are used to train students.
3-D printing also enables surgeons to prepare before surgery through 
evaluating a precise model of the patient’s body or organs. This mitigates 
the likelihood of errors, improves surgeon accuracy, and reduces the 
amount of time the patient is required to be on the operating table. 3-D 
modeling is also useful in modeling bodily organs without the need for 
invasive procedures.
 Gene therapy
Just like organ transplant lists, genetic diseases could soon be a thing 
of the past. The use of nanotechnology, which refers to working with 
tiny particles to manipulate cells and alter DNA, enables the editing of 
gene expression at a cellular level. For instance, gene editing has been 
successfully used to modify human immune cells to resist HIV infection. 
With 1 in 25 children born with a genetic condition, gene editing has the 
potential to treat or eliminate disease.[156] It could be used to correct 
defective genes in embryos and personalize the child’s immediate 
healthcare treatment plan. It is feasible that genetic conditions like cystic 
fibrosis, sickle cell anemia, and muscular dystrophy could be treated 
through editing the DNA in patient cells. Gene editing is not without 
ethical implications: many people have moral and religious concerns 
about the use of human embryos for research or the editing of genes. 
Also, there is a concern that nanotechnology and gene editing will only be 
available to those that are wealthy, which will exasperate the disparity in 
healthcare and interventions. Nanotechnology will significantly improve 
treatment and recovery time, with the absolute potential to prevent 
humans from developing disease at all.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care