236an accident, who should be liable? Court cases involving autonomous 
vehicle accidents have demonstrated that drivers are often using autopilot 
on impact.
Assessments have expressed that humans do not want a fair, utilitarian 
approach and want their vehicle to protect the driver. Regulation on 
topics such as these will be instrumental in the long-term adoption of 
autonomous vehicles.
A significant application of machine learning is NLP . Virtual assistants 
such as Alexa have revolutionized methods of agent engagement. As 
the use of AI becomes embedded with everyday life, humans must 
not be assumed to vigilant and aware, and organizations should take 
steps to assure the public. The vocal skills of Google’s Duplex bot were 
demonstrated at its developer conference in 2018 where it was shown 
booking a hair appointment. The onstage unveiling involved the Duplex 
software conducting a conversation with a hair salon receptionist. 
The computer-generated voice used pauses, colloquialisms, and 
circumlocutions usually present in human speech. The voice was 
under control of Google’s DeepMind WaveNet software that has been 
trained using lots of conversations, so it knows what humans sound like 
and can mimic them effectively. Although welcomed by some, many 
were concerned at the deliberate deception of a human by AI. This has 
amplified the public’s voice that humans demand explicit confirmation 
when engaging with AI.[100]
Natural language can be separated into two components: style and 
content. Analysis of communications such as engagements, e-mails, or 
messages can easily identify sentiment and opinion. Negative terms, 
for example, could be identified to understand the state of someone’s 
emotional health. The implications of this, taking place publicly or 
privately, are vast. Analysis of social media profiles and other unstructured 
sources of data could lead to employers or insurers making predictions 
about people based on engagement, communication, or sentiment data 
available for mining.Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce