248Healthcare also suffers from a time lag from evidence-based to clinical 
acceptance. For example, people with type 2 diabetes have placed their 
type 2 diabetes into remission for well over a decade, but health systems 
have been slow to be able to register a patient as placing their type 2 
diabetes into remission. Thus, patients have historically either been 
labeled as having reversed their type 2 diabetes or as living with type 2 
diabetes. If patients were labeled as having reversed their diabetes, they 
often would not receive the tests that confirmed their type 2 diabetes was 
in remission and were at risk of not receiving checks. Equally, if the patient 
was labeled as having type 2 diabetes (and did not), this has an impact 
on insurance and is technically untrue. Collaboration on schemas and 
parallel strides of adoption would help to reduce international disparities.
 Do We Need to Treat AI with Humanity?
The basic concept of reinforcement is parallel to how humans and 
other animals learn. For instance, when training a dog, compliant and 
expected performance is often rewarded with a treat. Noncompliance by 
a reinforcement learning system is met with punishment. This is similar 
to reinforcement learning by an AI agent, where we build mechanisms of 
reward and punishment. Positive performance is reinforced with a virtual 
reward, and negative actions are penalized to augment avoidance.
The majority of AI systems are currently fairly simple and reductionist. 
As AI develops, we can expect them to become more complex and lifelike. 
Humans are already beginning to develop relationships with robots, 
in many cases seen as replacements for another human whether for 
companionship or carnal desire. It could be considered that a penalty 
input to an AI system is a harmful or negative input. Are genetic algorithms 
that delete generations that are no longer of use a form of murder? At what 
point do we need to consider AI’s humane treatment is catalyzed when AI 
systems can mirror both human behavior and appearance?Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce