3explosion of data through mobile devices, smartwatches, wearables, and 
the ability to access computer power cheaper than ever before. It was 
estimated by IBM in 2011 that 90% of global data had been created in the 
preceding 2 years.[2]
It is estimated that there will be 150 billion networked measuring 
sensors in the next decade—which is 20 times the global population. This 
exponential data generated is enabling everything to become smart. From 
smartphones to smart washing cars, smart homes, cities, and communities 
await.
With this data comes a plethora of learning opportunities and 
hence, the focus has now shifted to learning from available data and the 
development of intelligent systems. The more data a system is given, the 
more it is capable of learning, which allows it to become more accurate.
The use and application of AI and machine learning in enterprise are 
still relatively new, and even more so in health. The Gartner “Hype Cycle 
for Emerging Technologies” in 2017 placed machine learning in the peak 
of inflated expectations, with 5 to 10 years before plateau.
As a result, the applications of machine learning within the healthcare 
setting are fresh, exciting, and innovative. With more mobile devices than 
people today, the future of health is wrought with data from the patient, 
environment, and physician. As a result, the opportunity for optimizing 
health with AI and machine learning is ripening.
The realization of AI and machine learning in health could not be 
more welcome in the current ecosystem, as healthcare costs are increasing 
globally, and governmental and private bill payers are placing increasing 
pressures on services to become more cost-effective. Costs must typically 
be managed without negatively impacting patient access, patient care, and 
health outcomes.
But how can AI and machine learning be applied in an everyday 
healthcare setting? This book is intended for those who seek to understand 
what AI and machine learning are and how intelligent systems can be Chapter 1  What Is artIfICIal Intell IgenCe?