309 Cognitive Vision
Cognitive vision or image recognition is a machine learning technique 
designed to mimic how the human brain functions. With this technique, 
machine learning models are taught how to recognize visual components 
that make up an image. Through learning on large datasets of images and 
identifying patterns, models are able to make sense of their input and 
determine relevant tags and classifications. Image recognition is not an 
easy task. To successfully perform image recognition, neural networks are 
the technique of choice. However, even still, the computation resource 
cost is expensive in practice. For instance, a 20-pixel by 20-pixel image 
received by a neural network would receive over 400 inputs. Although 
this sounds achievable in a typical hardware setup, images of greater size, 
say 1,000-pixels by 1,000-pixels, would require a powerful computational 
resource to process the higher number of parameters and inputs. In a 
traditional neural network, each pixel would be linked to a single neuron. 
This is computationally expensive.
Proximity of pixels within images has a strong relationship with their 
similarity. Convolutional neural networks specifically make use of this 
feature. Rather than treating two nearby pixels as distinct, convolutional 
neural networks assume there is more likely a relationship between these 
pixels than two that are further apart. Through bypassing less significant 
connections between pixels, convolution solves the computational and 
time problems faced by traditional neural networks. Convolutional 
neural networks improve the computational resource required for image 
recognition through filtering relationships by proximity.
Clinical evidence suggests that diagnostic tests and risk stratification 
can predict the risk of ulceration and amputation, with early referral 
reducing amputation rates and time to heal. Solutions for diabetic foot care 
must be broader than the standard healthcare worker dependent service 
and be deliverable at a lower cost for the patient and healthcare system. 
Together with my colleague Yang Wang, we applied state-of-the-  art AI Chapter 8  Case studies