215Increased public awareness and understanding are required to 
educate the public on the use of data and to empower people to decide 
how, where, and by whom their data can be used.
 Who Owns the Data?
People generate thousands of data points daily. Nearly every transaction 
and behavior creates a data trail left through devices such as smartphones, 
televisions, smartwatches, mobile apps, health devices, contactless 
cards, cars, and even fridges. However, who owns the data? The topic 
of data ownership is an example of a complex first-time problem that 
has facilitated the development of international policy and governance. 
Historically, user data is owned by companies rather than the individual.
EHRs enable machine learning-based predictive analytics that will 
eventually enable providers to provide enhanced levels of care. Although it 
seems unlikely a patient would not want to not share their health data for 
improved morbidity and mortality, one would reasonably assume it would 
become more difficult to withdraw such privileges, much akin to closed-circuit 
television (CCTV) where consent is not often noted or obvious, and is widely 
assumed to have utilitarian benefits over the long term. Many platforms 
prevent users from accessing their full range of services if data sharing is 
disabled. This is driven by the organizational need to store data in a robust and 
central repository for safety, governance, and improvement.
Take the example of a patient who uses a connected blood glucose device 
and mobile app to track and record their blood glucose. Blood glucose data 
is delivered from the user’s blood glucose meter to her mobile application. 
Although the data would be presented on the user’s phone, the data is held 
in the mobile application provider’s database, subject to the terms and 
conditions of use. Many of today’s web sites, mobile apps, connected devices, 
and health services state that data can and will be used in an anonymized 
and aggregated format, or in some instances in an identifiable format, by the 
organization providing the service and also typically with selected partners.Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce