275and location as they emerge. Future technology could also contain 
safety equipment. ActiveProtective, a company from the United States, 
provide a care belt that detects and deploys airbags if it detects a fall.[135] 
Technologies such as this can help save on avoidable elderly-care and fall-
rated healthcare costs.
However, the true value of the technology, especially connected 
wearables in elderly care, is realized in the machine learning and 
predictive analytics observed from the data collected. For instance, 
deviations from daily routines could indicate cause for concern and 
emerging physical or mental health concerns.
 Virtual Assistants
Virtual assistants are not just entertaining; they can accompany those who 
live alone and provide support to the aging and elderly. Virtual assistants 
can empower people by answering questions, teaching new skills, setting 
verbal reminders to perform tasks such as reminding to take a medication 
and even controlling the home by performing tasks such as picking up the 
telephone or making a call. As homes become more connected, virtual 
assistants will assist people in every aspect of life and interface with all 
aspects of the home. Virtual assistants could call the emergency services on 
behalf of a patient, citing exact details and location. Connected cameras can 
track movement to detect falling, triggering the virtual assistant to reach out 
for help. Not confined to the realms of speech, virtual assistants in the form 
of robots can assist in particular situations within elderly care, performing 
roles such as helping people get of bed, the bath, or into a wheelchair. AI 
within such virtual assistants could even learn patterns, for example, when 
people may want to visit the bathroom. Interaction through voice and 
touchscreen enables communication and will increasingly empower aging 
patients with greater autonomy and reduce the burden on elderly care.
As the capabilities of virtual assistants improve, so too will their ability 
to determine the emotions of their master, whether it be happy or sad, Chapter 7  Future o F health Care