287may be able to print just about everything, from prosthetics and pills to 
bioengineered replacement body parts and organs. The technological 
advance of 3-D printing has life-changing implications for patients.
 Personalized prosthetics
The World Health Organization state that approximately 30 million people 
require prosthetic limbs, braces, or mobility tools and only 20% have 
them.[153] 3-D printing enables prosthetics to be custom built for each 
person. Through capturing a patient’s measurements, prosthetics can be 
tailored to ensure comfortable, custom-fitted devices. Prosthetics will also 
become more comfortable as multi-material, 3-D printing assists with 
ensuring a better integration with the human body. Casts could also be 
made more comfortable through the same, personalized approach. 3-D 
printing facilitates the swift and cost-efficient creation of personalized 
products. Innovation in 3-D printing is combining integrated sensors and 
machine learning algorithms to support more natural, fluid movements. 
Predictive movement algorithms will evolve to mimic more natural 
movement, and humans will be able to use their brain and body to control 
them. 3-D printing technology enables prosthetics to be modeled and 
constructed in a little under 24 hours; importantly, printed prosthetics 
cost a fraction of conventional prosthetics.
 Bioprinting and tissue engineering
Kidney, liver, and heart transplants could soon be a thing of the past. 3-D 
bioprinting marks the beginning of an era where transplant lists are a thing 
of the past. 3-D-printed organs can be built using the same techniques as 
3-D printing, but instead use stem cells as the printing material. As well 
as printing cells, bioprinters typically output a gel to protect cells during 
printing. In the future, once these organoids are printed, they will be able 
to grow inside the bodies of patients. Princeton University has developed a 
bionic ear from 3-D printing tools, which can hear frequencies beyond the Chapter 7  Future o F health Care