263of different hospitals, or even individual doctors, to best choose their 
treatment providers.
Most RCTs conducted within pharmacology are internally valid, 
ensuring an exact population is involved in the testing of a particular drug. 
For example, a trial for type 2 diabetes medication may focus on people 
who have type 2 diabetes only and no other comorbidities; whereas in the 
real world, the comorbidities of hypertension and high cholesterol are 
often present in people with type 2 diabetes. This approach means there 
is often a gap between what is reported in RCTs and what is reported by 
patients. This is where digital technology can help bridge the gap between 
pharmacological intervention and real-world patient experience. Digital 
communities, for example, can provide real-world evidence on medication 
side effects. As an example, health community Diabetes.co.uk provides 
medication side effect data back to pharmaceutical organizations through 
a mobile application in the form of analysis of patient discussion and 
reported side effects. The world’s second-most commonly prescribed 
drug for diabetes, Metformin, for instance, has a side effect of diarrhea 
reported to affect 1 in 10 people taking the drug. Real-world evidence from 
Diabetes.co.uk members demonstrates this is 400% more common and 
reported by over 48% of people with type 2 diabetes.[124]
Real-world evidence has historically been viewed as anecdote by the 
medical community. However, the datafication of patient lives now means 
that data is directly received from devices, wearables, and sensors, ensuring 
that data cannot be misreported. Real-world evidence is growing at a pace 
that healthcare is struggling to keep up with. Digital health platforms and 
the aggregation of data also calls into question previous paradigms of 
medicine. The Low Carb Program from Diabetes Digital Media, for instance, 
was able to aggregate data from 100,000 people to demonstrate that a low-
carbohydrate diet could be used to place type 2 diabetes into remission. 
Type 2 diabetes was considered, 5 years ago, to be a chronic and progressive 
disease. Big, real-world evidence is proving that it doesn’t have to be.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care