220 Privacy: Who Can See My Data?
Conversations of data ownership naturally lead to who can see your 
data. The key is in ensuring only approved services and organizations 
have access to your data. For instance, it is unlikely you would want a life 
insurance company to be given your medical data without your consent, 
particularly if there was data that could influence your coverage.
Data sharing between applications is commonplace, with APIs 
enabling accessibility and faster connectivity between independent 
services. For instance, users can import nutrition data from apps like 
MyFitnessPal into their diabetes management or fitness apps. These 
services often replicate user data among a variety of independent 
architectures, which leads to concerns over managing approved data 
access. Applications that enable data integration must also provide the 
facility to decouple patient data. Systems must be able to verify imported 
data for data governance, auditing, and patient safety.
The debacle surrounding Facebook and Cambridge Analytica went on 
to demonstrate that even if one trusts an aggregator of data, it is possible 
that third parties are engaging with that very data without your knowledge. 
Facebook requested Cambridge Analytica to delete its Facebook user data. 
Even though Cambridge Analytica agreed to the request and said they had 
deleted the user data, they were later demonstrated not to have deleted 
the data.[83] This act of deception leads to questions of accountability, the 
ramifications of data leaks, and who is accountable in situations of third-  
party data leaks.
Moreover, even if data is anonymized, it may not guarantee privacy. 
Netflix recently published 10 million movie rankings from 500,000 
members as part of a challenge to improve the Netflix recommendation 
system. Although data was anonymized to remove personal details of 
members, researchers at the University of Texas were able to de-  anonymize 
some of the Netflix data through comparing similar rankings and time Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce