11Both patients and healthcare professionals generate a tremendous 
amount of data. Phones collect metrics such as blood pressure, 
geographical location; steps walked, nutritional diaries; and other 
unstructured data such as conversations, reactions, and images.
It’s not just digital or clinical data either. Data extraction techniques 
can be applied to paper documentation, or images scanned, to process the 
documents for synthesis and recall.
Healthcare professionals collect health biomarkers alongside other 
structured metrics. Regardless of the source of data, to learn, data must 
be turned into information. For example, an input of a blood glucose 
reading from a person with diabetes into an app has far more relevance 
when blood glucose level targets are known by the system so that it can be 
understood whether the input met the recommended target range or not.
In the twenty-first century, almost every action leaves some form of 
transactional footprint. The Apple iPhone 6 is over 32,000 times faster than 
the Apollo-era NASA computers that took man to the moon. Not only are 
computers smaller than ever, but they are also more powerful than ever. With 
organizations capitalizing on sources of big data, there has been a shift toward 
embedding learnings from data into every aspect of the user experience—from 
buying a product or service to the user experience within an app.
The value of data is understood when it is taken in its raw form and 
converted into knowledge that changes practice. This value is driven by 
project and context. For example, the value may be as the result of faster 
identification of shortfalls in adherence, compliance, and evidence-based 
care. It may be better sharing of data and insights within a hospital or 
organization or more customized relationships with patients to drive 
adherence, compliance, and boost self-care. Equally, it may be to avoid 
more costly treatments or costly mistakes.Chapter 1  What Is artIfICIal Intell IgenCe?