333 Ethical Implications of Predictive Analytics
Predictive analytics enables intelligent classifiers to predict the risk 
of disease. The collection of a varied patient dataset—including 
conversations, health markers, demographics, and behavior—enables 
the development of a sophisticated model that can be used to refine 
predictions further. One of the unintended consequences of the project 
was discovered when deploying an AI model that predicted the risk of a 
patient having pancreatic cancer. Pancreatic cancer typically effects 1 in 
10,000 people and is frequently misdiagnosed. Often, patients receive a 
diagnosis when it’s too late. A pancreatic cancer AI model was developed 
using a clinical dataset of health metrics, engagement, and behavior data 
and first predicted the likelihood of poor patient metabolic health. Should 
patients meet the threshold for poor metabolic health, the model evaluates 
the risk of the patient having pancreatic cancer.
Communicating this information to users was a first-time problem 
for the organization. All relevant stakeholders, including all members 
of the Medical Advisory Panel, were prompted for their input on this 
topic. Predictive analytics had previously been used to inform patients 
of possible hypertension or increased risk of conditions based on 
lifestyle. However, informing patients of their risk of pancreatic cancer 
was considered to be unethical, particularly as we did not want to create 
additional mental health concerns or anxieties.
How should a user be told of a possible life-changing concern? The 
key action for this communication is to nudge the patient to see their 
doctor or physician as soon as possible. The factor for success in this case 
was determined to be user friction. The less friction there is between the 
user and communicating party, the more successful the engagement. 
Stakeholders from behavioral economics were vital in testing and 
confirming an engaging communication to inform the user that their data 
fell outside expected norms without raising fear. To do this, the prediction 
was framed against patient and population demographic and medical Chapter 8  Case studies