257In the UK. for example, if a doctor’s surgery or clinic were to enable 
the patient to realize type 2 diabetes remission, the surgery or clinic would 
fail to receive the money it would have for the drugs no longer prescribed 
to the patient. Personal biases can also complicate matters. In the UK, for 
example, doctors involved in assessing which drugs should be prescribed 
to NHS patients were found by The Telegraph to have received £100,000 
per year from pharmaceutical companies.[116]
Volume-based care is focused on a finite amount of money for a 
population. With populations growing and resources stretched, the 
evolution toward value-based care has been expedited. Healthcare is now 
in a transition toward patient-based care, which is synonymous with value, 
rather than volume.
Tseng et al. defined the value in healthcare to be the quality of care, 
typically measured through healthcare outcomes.[117] A value metric 
also for consideration is patient experience or patient-centeredness. 
Patient-  centeredness is an important but not necessarily dominant quality 
measure for value-based care. Patient-centered care utilizes a multifaceted 
approach, revolving around the patient, their goals, and the wider family in 
decisions and evaluations. There are several domains to patient-centered 
care, which includes patient-centeredness.
Patient-centered care is a collaborative and multifaceted approach 
involving delivering health and social care focused on patient experience 
and patient outcomes. Patient-centered care focuses on empowering 
patients with the knowledge and experience, skills, and confidence to 
manage and optimize their health. Care is compassionate, personalized, 
coordinated around the patient, and respectful of the patient’s 
worldview. These goals may appear commonsense for healthcare 
practitioners. However, they have not always been performed as standard 
practice. Healthcare has typically been reductionist in its approach, 
addressing a sum rather than the whole and acting for patients rather 
than with patients.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care