265people taking the same dose of the same drug might respond differently. 
Using personalized medicine, a right combination of a drug and its dose 
can be selected for everyone. This approach to medicine is not new, and 
healthcare professionals have been using this approach since the time 
of Hippocrates. However, the hyper-  personalization achievable from the 
use of the patient genome and its falling cost—and medical data from 
health records, wearable technology, and the health IoT—has roused the 
public interest once again. It has never before been possible to predict 
the risk of disease, how the human body will respond to a particular 
medication, or print treatments out of materials other than ink. The 
combination of these technologies will fuel an era of personalized care 
and healthcare innovation.
Predictive tools can be used to evaluate health risks and develop 
personalized healthcare plans to mitigate patient health risks, prevent 
disease, manage disease, and treat a disease precisely if it occurs. As 
healthcare becomes increasingly personalized for patients in both 
treatment and service delivery, it is critical that access is widened to ensure 
participation from all groups of society.
Diagnostic tests, such as blood tests, are typically used to identify 
appropriate treatments based on a patient’s physiological analysis. The 
selection of optimal therapies will be increasingly personalized to the 
patient genome. Healthcare providers will be able to diagnose current 
illnesses, predict future risks of diseases, and identify predicted response 
to treatments and subtle traits within an instant. Genetic testing has 
started to make an impact in personalized medicine; DNA results are 
limited to being imported into services that can personalize treatment 
regimes, diet plans, or education to a patient. Currently, DNA test results 
take weeks to receive. An era of instant genetic test results will empower 
patients to make informed choices about treatment, services, products, 
medications, and outcomes.
Raising serious ethical issues, the decision to have a genetic test and 
the implications of its results deserves careful preparation and thought. Chapter 7  Future o F health Care