232deception and lack of transparency. Precedents such as these from the 
world’s largest companies demonstrate that internal and external auditing 
is required to validate the integrity and ethics of algorithms and indeed 
their organizations.
There is a genuine concern that AI may learn to act immorally not only 
from its creators but also from its experience.
The Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale of Lausanne’s Laboratory of 
Intelligent Systems in Switzerland conducted a project that monitored 
robots designed to collaboratively search for positive resources and ignore 
dangerous items.[95] Robots were designed as genetic agents equipped 
with sensors and a light that was used to flag the identification of a positive 
resource, which was finite in number. Each agent’s genome dictated 
its response to stimulus and was subject to hundreds of generations of 
mutations. Agent learning was reinforced by the agent receiving positive 
marks for identifying positive resources and negative marks for its 
proximity to poisonous items. The top 200 highest performing genomes 
were mated and mutated at random to produce the next generation of 
agents. In their first generation, agents switched their lights on when 
they discovered a positive resource. This enabled other agents to find the 
positive resource. Due to the limited number of positive resources, not 
all agents were able to benefit. Overcrowding meant that some agents 
would also be distanced from the positive resource they initially found. 
By the 500th generation, the majority of agents had evolved to keep their 
light switched off when they discovered a positive resource, and a third 
of agents evolved to act in a way that was the exact opposite of their 
programming. Some agents had grown to identify lying agents that had 
an aversion to the light. Agents that were initially designed to cooperate 
eventually ended up lying to each other due to scarcity.
These concerns are amplified when applied to incentivized clinical 
decision-support systems that could generate increased profits for their Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce