209and accepted. The adoption is also driven by the latest 
generation of data scientists and university graduates 
aware of the safety and capabilities of open source data.
Novel solutions to problems developed through machine learning 
are themselves leading to questions of morality and ethics. Currently, 
governance is moving at the pace of the industry itself. There are many 
scenarios within AI for which there are no precedents, regulations, or laws. 
As a result, it is paramount to consider the ethical and moral implications 
of creating intelligent systems.
The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that the prevalence of 
chronic disease will rise to 57% of the global population by 2050.[72]  
Unfortunately, the WHO also reports that there is a global, growing 
shortage of healthcare workers, which by 2035 will rise to 12.9 million.[73]  
Lack of professionals to provide healthcare services paints a stark 
image of the future with grave consequences for humanity. Healthcare 
professional shortages are being offset through AI, digital interventions, 
IoT, and other digital technologies that cannot only replace manual and 
cognitive working tasks but can also improve the reach, precision, and 
availability of healthcare. At the same time, advancements in the detection 
and diagnosis of diseases, genomics, pharmacology, stem cell and organ 
therapy, digital healthcare, and robotic surgery are expected to minimize 
the cost of treating illness and disease. As AI penetrates humanity’s day-  
to- day activities, philosophical, moral, ethical, and legal questions are 
raised. This is amplified in healthcare, where clinical decisions can mean 
the difference between life and death. Even if AI can aid diagnosis of 
conditions or predict future mortality risk, will humans ever prefer an AI’s 
advice over their doctor? As humankind becomes accustomed to living 
side-by-side to intelligent systems, there are a host of hurdles to overcome.Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce