274Connected medicine provides a wealth of opportunity in solving novel 
health problems, particularly with disease management and elderly care.
In 2015, the United Nations approximated 1.2 in 10 people were over 
the age of 65. Projections estimate that this will jump to 22% by 2050.[132] 
Healthcare expenditure on the elderly is a mounting concern, as it accounts 
for a higher share of healthcare expenditure compared to other age groups. 
Equally, non-communicable diseases such as type 2 diabetes and obesity 
are pandemics, with the WHO estimating 600 million people will develop 
type 2 diabetes by 2050.[133] About 1 in 4 people suffer from two or more 
chronic conditions.[134] With rising pressure on governments, payers, and 
manufacturers to reduce healthcare costs, elderly and long-term care require 
solutions that are prepared for the impending rise in numbers. The Internet of 
Medical Things (medical IoT) demonstrates a tremendous potential to help.
 Disease and Condition Management
Non-communicable diseases including type 2 diabetes, hypertension, 
and cardiovascular disease can be monitored by both the patient and 
healthcare team. Heart monitors can detect heart rate variability and alert 
the healthcare professional in real time. The same concept is liberating 
for parents of children with type 1 diabetes using smart blood glucose 
monitors. Blood glucose measurements are sent directly to the cloud 
where parents can access their children’s blood glucose in near real 
time and be alerted to potential hypoglycemic events. Digital apps can 
be delivered to reverse type 2 diabetes, manage epilepsy, and improve 
quality of life.
Novel utilization of technology can be used to minimize the risk of 
health concerns and their subsequent healthcare costs. Elderly care 
can be delivered through digital apps. Risks such as falling, for instance, 
can be mitigated through fall detection and emergency assistance. 
Accelerometers found in phones or watches can be used to detect falls 
or seizures, triggering notifications to carers of an emergency, its details, Chapter 7  Future o F health Care