104This has been the traditional approach to machine learning: 
establishing a data science team that includes members experienced in 
languages such as Python and R. Members with experience in machine 
learning will typically be more impactful than those who are beginners 
to machine learning concepts. Engineers develop an understanding 
of the appropriate machine learning techniques to employ given 
certain problems through experience. This experience can prove vital 
in avoiding wasted time, resources, and exploration. Engineers with 
fundamentals in computer science will typically be familiar with many 
of the concepts present in machine learning. Choosing a programming 
language can influence the APIs and standard libraries you can use in 
your implementation. Enthusiasts may want to avoid using ready-made 
algorithms and coding the implementations themselves to gain greater 
knowledge of the mathematics, statistics, and logic involved.
In many instances where time is constrained, time for engineering 
enthusiasm is limited. As a result, cloud-based services such as Google 
AI, Microsoft Azure, IBM Watson, and a host of other providers allows the 
provider to take care of the algorithm; and many provide visual interfaces 
that enable the user to attempt particular machine learning techniques 
on the data uploaded. Cloud-based vendors offering data mining and 
machine learning applications are growing and available at a low cost. One 
of the benefits of using such vendors is the ability to try more than one type 
of model for an experiment and compare the results, allowing you to find 
the best solution for your problem task.
For those with more traditional programming experience, almost all 
offer API (or web service) creation facilities, allowing you to create an 
interface to engage with the hosted model. All that is required to integrate 
with APIs is an efficient traditional programmer or web developer.
As the world adopts open source, consider browsing for 
implementations that already exist through GitHub, Reddit, and other 
machine learning forums.Chapter 3  What Is Ma ChIne Learn Ing?