52Analytics 1.0 took the form of traditional analytics on small, slower 
velocity datasets, often in the form of spreadsheets and static documents. 
This is suitable for little data. Typical analytics were descriptive and report-
based. Data would usually be structured in nature. This drove business 
intelligence in the 1990s with predefined queries and detailed or historic 
views—typically driven by web dashboards leveraging structured data like 
customer data, behavioral data, sales data, patient records, and so forth. 
Data about production processes, sales, interactions, and transactions 
were collected, aggregated, and analyzed within traditional relational 
databases. In the Analytics 1.0 era, data scientists spent much of their time 
preparing data for analysis rather than performing analytics themselves.
Analytics 2.0 marked the integration of big data with traditional 
analytics, with interfaces to support the querying of big datasets in real 
time. Big data analytics began in the 2000s, which facilitated competitive 
insight through complex queries combined with predictive views 
leveraging both structured and unstructured data such as social media, 
behavioral data, and the growing variety of user data. Big data that 
couldn’t fit or be analyzed fast enough on a centralized platform would 
be processed with frameworks such as Hadoop, an open source software 
framework for fast batch data processing across parallel servers both in the 
cloud or on-premise.
Unstructured data would be supported through more than just 
SQL (Structured Query Language) databases, supporting key and 
value, document, graph, columnar, and geospatial data. Other big data 
technologies introduced during this period include “in memory” analytics 
for fast analysis whereby data is managed and processed in memory rather 
than on disk.
Today, vast amounts of data are being created at the edge of the 
network, and the traditional ways of doing analytics are no longer viable. 
Organizations that engage with consumers—whether they make things, 
move things, consume things, or work with customers—have increasing Chapter 2  Data