310techniques to automatically detect signs of diabetic foot concerns, alert the 
patient, and support communication and assessment by the healthcare 
team. Image recognition technology for diabetic foot concerns would be 
revolutionary, particularly considering this machine learning experience 
could improve ulceration healing time, cost, and risk of amputations—as 
this is related to how early ulceration is detected. The model has achieved 
high accuracy in detecting subtle areas of bruising and cracked heels, 
which can soon develop into areas of foot ulceration.
A cloud-based system was developed to allow remote use of the 
application such that any device with an Internet browser was able to 
upload an image alongside a standardized protocol. The output would 
be a list of any concerns detected, the referral pathway most suited to 
the concern, and education, if relevant. The model is constantly refined 
through a machine learning feedback loop that optimizes and retrains the 
model periodically with random subsets of labelled data, including the 
data received from the web-based system.
 Project Aims
The aims of our project are to further develop and validate this machine 
learning technology, including the deep learning neural network used to 
predict the risk of foot concerns and provide precise medicine to patients. 
The convolutional neural networks used for multiple predictions can 
become more precise through its use and feedback loop from users. As the 
user base is largely healthcare professionals and carers, the learning can 
be scaled up and validated by the healthcare professional for appropriate 
triage. The project also aims to deliver a service provision to patients, 
which is only possible when the model has reached maximum, and ideally 
near-absolute, accuracy. Reducing error is a key priority for the project. 
Grading schemes and standardized protocols support the model to 
develop greater precision and recall. The ability to identify ulceration and 
other foot concerns earlier would accelerate diagnosis, treatment,  Chapter 8  Case studies