302control room where, depending on the individual need, family members, 
volunteers, emergency response staff, and social services are notified.
 Smart Hospitals
A smart hospital is one that is connected, much like the smart home. The 
objective of a smart hospital is to provide clinical excellence, an efficient 
supply chain, and superb patient experience—facilitated with technology. 
Smart hospitals will use a continuous learning ecosystem, ranging across 
many areas including electronic data collection and health records, 
digital technology, robotics, 3-D printing, unstructured data, and robust 
analytics. Somewhat ironically, mass use of technology and AI will enable 
patients to become more actively involved in their treatment decisions. 
Non-emergency consultations will take place on the Internet, with AI 
prioritization enabling the right doctor, with the right skills and training, to 
treat the patient. Treatment will be blended between offline, physical care 
and digital care—where adherence and accountability can be quantified 
and maintained. Growing data and large-scale analytics will continue to 
personalize digital treatments for patients.
On attending a hospital, an automated and streamlined admission 
reduces patient waiting time. On admission, patients will be tagged with 
a clinical-grade wearable to track vital signs through the inpatient stay. 
Metrics are all sent wirelessly to a dashboard visible to your medical 
team. Any anomalies or causes for concern are detected and prioritized. 
Hospitals and surgeries will become hubs of data, with hospitals working 
with business to extract value from the data—regarding improving 
efficiency, minimizing mistakes, and for improving treatment and 
device decisions. Healthcare will be delivered as a service, with patients 
incentivized with cryptocurrency to maintain sensible and healthy lifestyle 
choices. All relevant data will be anonymized and accessible to digital 
health partners and internal departments to enable continuous learning 
from each patient’s experience.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care