258Organizations like Buurtzorg Neighbourhood Care in the Netherlands 
are an exemplars of patient-centered care. The organization delivers 
care to 80,000 patients a year with 10,000 nurses, 21 coaches, and two 
managers.[118] The collaborative approach focuses on empowering 
patients through relationships with caregivers. Over time, patients see 
improvements in health status while the total external care time required 
is reduced. Patients and families are enabled with the skills and confidence 
to look after themselves.
Although two distinct philosophies, patient-centered care and 
value-based care are becoming synonymous. Definitions of success 
incorporating patient-centered outcomes, perspectives, experiences, and 
preferences are positively influencing quality and delivery of care.
Value-based care does not mean cheap or economy care. Indeed, care 
is evaluated through the quality of patient experience and outcomes; and 
the model reshapes how care is received by patients.
Wellness and prevention are emphasized in value-based care. Lifestyle, 
behavior, and environmental factors account for 90% of disease risk.[119] 
This has been evidenced by the growing prevalence of type 2 diabetes 
across the world. With growing pressure on healthcare resources, lifestyle 
medicine has silently refocused efforts on the role of lifestyle as medicine. 
Evidence demonstrates that activity, nutrition, sleep, and stress all impact 
physical and emotional health markers.[120] Lifestyle medicine’s focus 
on lifestyle and behavior enables healthcare professionals to deal with 
reversible, non-communicable diseases such as type 2 diabetes and 
hypertension. Rather than treating the patient in a reductionist approach, 
the patient is provided with holistic, compassionate care. The prescription 
of lifestyle medicine is already taking place in healthcare, with digital 
applications prescribed to treat disease. Type 2 diabetes patients, for 
example, may be prescribed the Low Carb Program app from Diabetes 
Digital Media, demonstrated to place type 2 diabetes into remission 
for 1 in 4 patients.[121] Lifestyle interventions are typically safe, easy 
to implement, and scalable. Growing levels of chronic disease can be Chapter 7  Future o F health Care