318per day to meet their self-selected goals. The program encourages 
participants to make behavior changes based on “ Action Points” or 
behavior-change goals at the end of each module. These goals are 
supported with resources that are available to download including 
information sheets, recipes, and suggested food substitution ideas.  
The LCP online platform also includes digital tools for submitting  
self-monitoring and device-driven data on a number of different 
variables including blood glucose levels, blood pressure, mood, sleep, 
food intake, and body weight. Weekly automated feedback is provided 
to users based on their use of the program through e-mail notifications, 
and participants are notified when the next week’s module has been 
opened. Lessons are taught through videos, written content, or podcasts 
of varying lengths. The program stresses the importance of regular 
contact with the participants’ healthcare providers for adjustments in 
medications in weeks 1, 2, and 10. After the 10 weeks of modules have 
been opened, participants continue to have access to the education 
content as well as the ability to continue to track their health (glycemic 
control, weight). The content and strategies used in the program build 
off of prior research and theory. For example, evidence suggests that goal 
setting can act as an effective behavior change strategy used to improve 
adherence to lifestyle intervention programs in obesity management 
programs. The program therefore encourages participants to select a 
goal at the beginning of the program (such as to lose weight, reduce 
medication dependency, or make healthier choices for their whole 
family). Participants are also prompted to consider how their health 
would benefit from attaining their goal. Throughout the program, 
participants are periodically prompted to consider how close they are 
to attaining their goal. The program further reinforces behavior change 
through integrated tracking, whereby program users are encouraged to 
track their health data including mood, food intake, blood glucose levels, 
weight, sleep, and HbA1c. According to the control theory of behavior 
change, monitoring goal progress—that is, evaluating one’s ongoing Chapter 8  Case studies