259mitigated with a simple approach delivered in an engaging and effective 
setting.
Instead of reacting to events, there is a preventative, lifestyle-first 
approach to health in value-based care. The focus is on patient wellness, 
healthcare quality, and efficiency. This is where patient data, digital health, 
and AI hold a fountain of promise. The emphasis on efficiency ensures 
that the approach is scalable and effective, enabling providers to reduce 
healthcare costs and improve patient clinical health outcomes. Prevention 
of disease through quitting smoking, nutritional change, lifestyle change, 
activity, sleep, and identifying genetic risk factors reduces the burden on 
healthcare resources. Wellness is becoming incentivized. It has become 
the best interest of insurance companies and healthcare providers to 
monitor their patients’ health more closely. Start-ups and digital technology 
companies are developing digital health tools that are disrupting the 
traditional doctor–patient relationship and have enabled providers to 
become third actors involved in facilitating sustained health. The goal 
of value-based care is to standardize healthcare processes through best 
practices and to democratize access and quality of care. Mining of data and 
historical evidence can determine which methods work and which don’t.
Keeping people well reduces healthcare delivery costs and optimizes 
the use of resources. For instance, when managing a chronic condition 
such as type 2 diabetes, value-based care uses a collaborative and 
multidisciplinary approach to managing the disease to prevent  
diabetes-  related complications. Patients engage with one healthcare team 
that is aware of patient progress and health status. The healthcare team 
may contain the patient’s diabetes nurse, dietician, behavior health coach, 
and other professionals to support patient progress. The team would set 
patient-centered goals and help a patient with the following:
• Maintain blood glucose control.
• Introduce a digital community of people with type 2 
diabetes for support.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care