300and organs can travel shorter distances to go directly to where they need 
to be, within campuses or across larger distances. Drones can also be used 
to locate and identify, particularly in remote locations. One use case for 
drones is as a flying medication toolbox in cases of emergency. Critical 
care in the minutes after a stroke, trauma, or heart failure is essential to 
accelerate recovery and prevent death. An ambulance drone prototype, 
developed by Tu Delft, combined a heart defibrillator, medication, and 
two-way radio that could be dispatched to a patient to speed up the 
response before the first responder.[165]
Current restrictions in the use of drones are reducing their potential. 
It may be some time before flight restrictions, legislation, and functional 
issues such as drone battery life and drone load are resolved.
 Smart Places
Intelligent homes, hospitals, places, and things promise to change the 
way we live. Ubiquitous connectivity and an expanding sensor base 
provide a wealth of opportunity to people, patients, and providers alike. 
Improvements in patient lifestyle and healthcare have contributed to 
growing numbers of centenarians over the past 30 years. In the United 
Kingdom alone, the number of people living to 100 increased by 65%.[166]  
These breakthroughs have come at a cost to healthcare; and smart places, 
and smart things, enable scalable opportunities to improve health and 
social care—reducing costs per capita while personalizing the experience 
to the patient. Rather than going through the process of connecting 
and integrating apps, sensors, or devices, connected places will use 
automated sensors that do not require the user’s constant attention, 
collecting tremendous amounts of real-time data. Facial recognition, voice 
recognition, responsive notifications, and data-based suggestions will 
become the norm. Aggregation and analytics platforms will streamline and 
simplify decision-making processes in a rapidly changing environment. Chapter 7  Future o F health Care