269 Connected Medicine
Wearables and the IoT hold the key to connected medicine. Data 
captured by sensors in these contraptions are playing an increasingly 
powerful role in healthcare, facilitating the development of patient-  
centric healthcare systems. Many factors are accelerating the acceptance 
of wearable healthcare solutions, particularly their use in clinical trials 
and academic studies to monitor patient health and lifestyle factors. For 
example, studies can record participants’ health vitals using an Android 
Watch, Apple Watch, Garmin, Fitbit, or another smartwatch device. 
Participants use apps to record their lifestyle habits, nutrition, activity, 
and medication adherence and to monitor medication side effects among 
others. Wearables and patient data are beginning to be used by insurance 
companies to incentivize wellness. Insurance companies have historically 
targeted such insurance products toward digital-savvy buyers, offering the 
latest gadgets to incentivize health improvements. However, incentivized 
insurance products will become commonplace for wider populations, 
proving particularly effective in the combat against non-communicable 
diseases. The delivery of connected, digital healthcare opens an 
opportunity to monitor, manage, and reverse disease, broadening the risk 
portfolio and creating a longer-living, reduced morbidity population.
As sensors become faster, smaller, and more capable, patient health 
records profiles will eventually comprise of detailed sleep analyses, 
details of continuous blood glucose monitoring, heart rate, blood 
pressure, and approximate calorie burn. A smartwatch will combine 
a variety of diagnostic tools, able to monitor blood pressure, heart 
rate variability, blood glucose, ketones, and more. Health sensors will 
become embeddable, biodegradable, and constantly connected, playing 
critical roles in such tasks as patient care. It is worth noting that evidence 
demonstrates fitness trackers have a limited engagement lifetime and do 
not improve patient weight loss.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care