230 Protecting Against Mistakes
Intelligence comes from learning, whether you are a human or machine. 
And intelligent machines, just like humans, learn from mistakes. Data 
scientists will typically develop machine learning models with a training, 
testing, and validation phase to ensure systems are detecting the correct 
patterns within a defined tolerance. The validation phase of machine 
learning model development is unable to cover all possible permutations 
of parameters that may be received in the real world. These systems can be 
fooled in ways that humans wouldn’t be. Governance and regular auditing 
is required to ensure that AI systems perform as intended and that people 
cannot influence the model to use it for their own ends.
The incorrect classification of predictions can lead to scenarios where 
the outcome is a false positive or false negative. The impact of both should 
be considered in the context of your domain. Take for instance an incorrect 
diagnosis of breast cancer. In a false positive scenario, a patient would be 
informed they had breast cancer when they did not. Being informed that 
this classification was incorrect will come to some relief to the patient. 
A false negative would result in a patient’s disease progression and the 
eventual correct re-diagnosis. The mental and physical trauma as a result 
of a false negative prediction should be considered. Patients should always 
be informed of the level of accuracy of results.
Information governance for systems that will be used by patients 
(patient-facing), whether predictive or otherwise, should provide robust 
risk mitigation procedures for mistakes in outcomes. Emotional or 
psychological patient support should be considered for those experiencing 
trauma as the result of the incorrect diagnosis.
As well as acting as a catalyst for innovation, the speed at which agile 
digital technologies are rushed to the market is also AI’s biggest pitfall. 
Technology company LG infamously unveiled an AI bot at CES 2018  
(Consumer Electronics Show, an annual trade show organized by 
the Consumer Technology Association) that ignored the presenter’s Chapter 6  ethiCs of  intelligen Ce