297tokens could be created and distributed to patients through the blockchain to 
share the value of the savings and be treated as a tradable currency.
Individuals could earn tokens through behaviors such as going to the 
gym, reaching their step goal, attending education sessions, engaging 
in mindfulness, completing a particular sports event, or adhering to 
medication or digital therapeutics. The ecosystem rewards positive 
behaviors with an asset, or token of value. The value of the token could be 
fixed. Extending this concept, positive health behaviors could be extended 
to the point where patients have health token savings accounts that could 
be used to transact in hospitals.
 Patient Record Access
Patients are demanding access to their health record. This poses a 
significant challenge as to how to best share sensitive medical data with 
unknown third parties. For third parties, there is also a challenge to verify 
the integrity of the data while ensuring privacy for the patient. Presenting 
patient records on an appropriately permitted blockchain would give 
cryptographic assurance on data quality without any need for human 
involvement. Providers or consumers uploading health data would 
generate transactions. Users provide a signature and timestamp, alongside 
a private key to access data. By using digital signatures, all records stored 
on the blockchain can be identified and used to create a comprehensive 
patient health record. The use of digital signatures and cryptographic 
encryption ensures data travel securely and are accessible only by those 
with the relevant public keys. By using blockchain technology, each 
addition to the EHR can be logged, with an immutable, auditable trail 
of transactions, while ensuring the most current version of the record is 
used. Patients would be able to verify all attempts to access or process 
data. Blockchain’s decentralized structure enables any approved 
stakeholder to join the ecosystem, without the need for data integration 
or manipulation concerns.Chapter 7  Future o F health Care