Machine Learning and AI for Healthcare
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-3798-4   ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-3799-1
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3799-1
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018967454
Copyright © 2019 by Arjun Panesar
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or 
part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, 
and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, 
or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark 
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, 
and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no 
intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if 
they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not 
they are subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of 
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal 
responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, 
express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
Managing Director, Apress Media LLC: Welmoed Spahr
Acquisitions Editor: Celestin Suresh John
Development Editor: Matthew Moodie
Coordinating Editor: Divya Modi
Cover designed by eStudioCalamar
Cover image designed by Freepik (www.freepik.com)
Book imagery designed by Krystal Sidwell
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York,  
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, 
e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is a 
California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance Inc 
(SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware  corporation.
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit http://www.apress.
com/rights-permissions.
Apress titles may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional use. eBook 
versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our Print 
and eBook Bulk Sales web page at http://www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary material referenced by the author in this book is 
available to readers on GitHub via the book’s product page, located at www.apress.com/ 
978-1-4842-3798-4. For more detailed information, please visit http://www.apress.com/
source-code.
Printed on acid-free paperArjun Panesar
Coventry, UK