12 
  
  
Figure 2: (a) Hexagonal unit cell and (b) atomic structur e of Ga - and N -polar GaN . The arrows 
represent the direction of the spontaneous  polarization dipole, P, in the GaN  crystal . From "Recent 
progress in metal -organic chemical vapor deposition of (0001) N -polar group -III nitrides", S. 
Keller et al., Semiconductor Science and Technology, Volume 29, Number 11, 113001, August 
2014, DOI: 10.1088/0268 -1242/29/11/113001, IOP Publishing. Reproduced with permission. All 
rights reserved  [34].  
 
Table 1 reports the main parameters of GaN , as compared with other semiconductor materials, 
including Si, GaAs , SiC, AlN, diamond and Ga2O3. The materials are ordered with increasing 
energy gap E G, from left to right. Excluding the three semiconductors for which commercial 
devices are not available (gallium oxide, diamond , and aluminum nitride), GaN  is the 
semiconductor with the largest energy  gap, the largest critical field, and the highest saturation 
velocity. As a consequence, it is an ideal candidate for the fabrication of power semiconductor 
devices, capable of operati ng at high temperature and voltage levels.  
Figure 3 (a) reports the relation between breakdown field and energy gap  for the semiconductor 
materials in Table 1. As can be noticed, breakdown field has a power -law dependence on the 
energy gap, in the form 𝐸𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡∝𝐸𝐺2.3. This dependence is consistent with previous reports in the 
literature  [35], and demonstrates the great advantage of using wide bandgap semiconductors for 
fabricating electron devices with high breakdo wn voltage.  
Since a single parameter does not fully describe the properties of a material, s emiconductor s are 
typically compared by using figures of merit: the most commonly used are the Johnson FOM, for 
high-speed devices, and the Baliga FOM, for high pow er devices. With regard to the first, it is 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354