79 
 for GaN  p-i-n diodes by researchers from Kyoto University  [228] . The study set forth important 
design instructions , partic ularly the angle of the bevel, the thickness and the doping of the GaN  
layers, etc.  
Bulk GaN  substrates are typically around 350 -400 µm thick and serve the purpose of providing a 
lattice and CTE matched template for epitaxial growth of GaN  layers. However, after the growth 
of the low defective GaN  layers, the bu lk GaN  substrate could be effectively removed and reused. 
This concept was demonstrated by introducing a thin i -InGaN layer between the bulk GaN  
substrate and a p -i-n heterostructure  [268]  (Figure 48(a)). This i -InGaN layer can be photo -
electrochemically etched resulting in an epitaxial liftoff from the bulk GaN  substrate. The epitaxial 
layers can then be bonded to a high thermal conductivity material and processed further . The bulk 
GaN  substrate can then be reused many times for growing new epitaxial layers by a similar process. 
The p -i-n diodes fabricated by using this method demonstrated an excellent R on,sp  of 0.2 -0.5 
mΩcm2 and a BV of 1300 V similar to a control device  fabricated without epitaxial lift off, thus 
confirming no degradation in the performance as a result of this special fabrication process.  
These results revealed the excellent progress made for GaN  PiN diodes providing important 
insights into the material  properties like critical electric field, reliability, avalanche capability, etc. 
Si and SiC devices normally employ junction termination extension structures formed by selective 
p/n- type doping by ion implantation to achieve reliable devices. Due to the difficulties involved 
in achieving selective doping in GaN , several other methods based on N 2/H2 plasma treatment, 
field plate deposition and ion implantation schemes to form resistive regions around the anode 
were employed to obtain high BV devices.  
 
7.3.1.2  Schottky Barrier Diodes (SBDs):  
Unlike PiN diodes, SBDs are unipolar devices, which find applications in power converters by 
virtue of their low turn -on voltage as well as absence of reverse recovery charge. Due to the 
absence of a p -type layer, and thus c onductivity modulation, SBDs normally have a higher R ON 
compared to PiN diodes  [271] . The reverse leakage current is also higher as  the reverse voltage is 
held by the depletion at the metal -semiconductor Schottky barrier.  Vertical GaN  SBDs on sapphire 
substrates were first reported in 2000 with a BV as high as 550 V  [272], [273] . In 2001, vertical 
GaN  SBDs on bulk GaN  substrate were demonstrated by incorporating a Mg+-ion implanted p -
guard rings at the edge of the Schottky contacts. The device presented a R on,sp  of 3.01 mΩcm2 and 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354