70 
 7 Vertical GaN  device structures   
7.1 Why Vertical GaN ? 
The most common GaN -based power device s available presently are GaN  HEMTs, which have 
been discussed in detail in the previous sections. GaN  HEMTs rated for 650 V /900 V  breakdown 
voltage (BV) and maximum output DC current (I DS) as high as 150 A are availab le commercially  
[212] –[214]  for a broad spectrum of applications, such as on -board battery chargers, hi gh-
efficiency and high -density power converters, solar panel inverters, among many others.  
However, the lateral topology of HEMTs present s some pertinent limitations related to reliability 
and breakdown voltage  scaling, which hinder the usability of these  devices for high voltage 
applications requiring breakdown voltages above 700 V, for example in electric and hybrid electric 
vehicles (EVs and HEVs), photovoltaic (PV) inverters, wind turbines, traction systems for trains, 
to name a few.  
Most of the limita tions associated with GaN  HEMTs arise from the lateral electron flow between 
the source and drain terminals, very close to the device surface. The density of electrons in the 
channel is sensitive to the presence of surface traps, that may degrade the elect rical performance  
[215] –[217]  of the transistors . This leads to issues like current collapse and dynamic degradation 
of the on resistance, which are more severe with increasing the BV rating of the device  (see 
Section s 8.2 and 9). In addition, the lateral nature of the transport results in a very inhomogeneous 
distribution of the electric field in the device, peaking in specific regions  (e.g. the edge of the gate, 
or of the field plate, on the drain side). This may enhance electron trapping at surface states, and 
may lead to premature breakdown of the semiconductor  and of  dielectrics . This ultimately 
degrades the forward and reverse performance of the device  [217], [218] , and limits its full voltage 
blocking potential. For traditional GaN  HEMTs, the BV is dictated by the gate to drain spacing 
(provided this value is smaller than the drain -to-substrate BV) and thus larger breakdown voltages 
require larger d evice sizes, which also increases the device cost. Another major concern is that 
GaN  HEMTs are in general normally -on devices : this is not desirable for power electronics 
applications from a safety perspective  and for simplicity of the gate drivers , which are currently 
designed for normally -off devices. As discussed in Section 6.2, Several methods to achieve 
normally -OFF operation have been developed i ncluding cascode  [219] –[221]  configuration (based 
on GaN  HEMT combined with a Si MOSFET), fluorine ion implantation  [81], [91], [97]  under the 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354