102 
 sidewall aligned along the (b) a -plane and (c) m -plane, after TMAH wet treatment. Notice the 
much smoother m -plane sidewalls compared to the a -plane  (adapted from [333] ) 
 
GaN -on-Si vertical power MOSFETs have been also demonstrated, with the first demonstration 
being from Liu et al. in 2017  [332]  (Figure 68(a)). Normally -off operation with a threshold voltage 
of 6.3 V, which is ideal for power converter applications, along with an ON/OFF ratio of over 108 
were achieved. The device presented a low Ron,sp of 6.8 mΩcm2 and a BV of 645 V which is 
comparable to bulk GaN  power MOSFETs. The first demonstration of fully -vertical MOSFETs 
was subsequently devised by Khadar et al.  [333]  (Figure 68(b)). The method involved a robust 
fabrication process including selective substrate removal underneath the MOSFET followed by 
ohmic contact deposition  and copper electroplating to provide strength to the thin free standing 
epitaxial GaN  layers. An Ron,sp of 5 mΩcm2 and a BV of 520 V was obtained. These devices 
exhibited 2.8x -higher current density and 3x -lower Ron,sp as compared to quasi -vertical contro l 
power MOSFETs, due to absence of current crowding. Also, insights into the impact of hard mask 
selection for gate trench etching and gate trench alignment to either the m - or a-plane sidewall, on 
the output current density was analyzed ( Figure 69). Devices having gate trench aligned along the 
m-plane provided 3x -higher output current as opposed to those with gate trench aligned along the 
a-plane. The use  of a metal mask for gate trench etching provided a high inversion channel field -
effect mobility of 41 cm2/Vs for electrons.  
GaN -on-Si technology offers a unique advantage for the possible integration of several different 
devices on the same chip to reali ze integrated circuits (IC) which have evident benefits like smaller 
IC foot print, greatly reduced parasitic capacitance and resistance arising from wire bonding of 
discrete devices leading to higher efficiency, lower cost, etc. To date several different integration 
schemes on GaN -on-Si lateral technology has been demonstrated with HEMTs  [334] –[337] . Liu 
et al. demonstrated the first vertical monolithically integrated device  [338]  in 2018, where a 
freewheeling Schottky barrier diode was integrated with the power MOSFET ( Figure 70), to 
overcome the lossy body diode by using a fast low turn -on voltage SBD. In several topologies of 
power converters, such as buck/boost converters, voltage -source inverters, and resonant 
converters, where an inductive load is controlled by switches, a freewheeling diode parallel to the 
power MOSFET is required to allow a reverse flow of current when the supply current to the load 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354