36 
 charge flowing towards the gate. Figure 13 (b) shows the schematic gate -charging curve, during a 
turn-on event, i.e. when the device switches from the off -state (high drain voltage, zero current) to 
the on -state (low -drain voltage, high current). At  device turn -on, the gate-source voltage 
𝑉𝐺𝑆 increases ; when 𝑉𝐺𝑆 reaches the threshold voltage 𝑉𝑡ℎ, current starts flowing through the 
device. At the same time, the gate -source capacitance  𝐶𝐺𝑆 is charged , until the 𝑉𝑀𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟  voltage  (and 
the corresponding plateau) is reached. At this point, 𝐶𝐺𝑆 is completely charged, and the drain 
current reaches the value fixed by the circuit. At the same time, 𝑉𝐺𝑆 becomes almost constant, and 
the drive current starts charging the Miller capacitance 𝐶𝐺𝐷. This process goes on until  the 
capacitance 𝐶𝐺𝐷 is fully charged. When both 𝐶𝐺𝑆 and 𝐶𝐺𝐷 are fully charged, the gate voltage starts 
increasing again. Through this experimental procedure the charges 𝑄𝐺𝑆 and 𝑄𝐺𝐷 can be calculated. 
The gate charge 𝑄𝐺𝑆+𝑄𝐺𝐷 is the minimum charge required to turn on the transistor  [66], and is 
thus representative of the switching losses.  
A low value of 𝑄𝐺𝑆+𝑄𝐺𝐷 results in the device’s ability to achieve high commutation speed 
(dV/dt), and in a substantial reduction in switching losses  [67]. A low gate charge also results in a 
reduced gate drive power for GaN  devices, compared to Si components  [68]. Since, as stated 
above, the dc losses depend on the 𝑅𝑜𝑛𝑊𝐺 product, and the ac losses are proportional to 𝑄𝐺/𝑊𝐺 
[37], the 𝑅𝑜𝑛∙𝑄𝐺 product is an important parameter describing the switching efficiency of a given 
device.  In a recent paper  [1], Chen et al. compared devices based on Si, SiC and GaN  in terms of 
figures of merit. They showed that, for devices with comparable on -resistance, the 𝑅𝑜𝑛∙𝑄𝐺 
product can be around 3800  𝑚Ω∙nC for a Si superjunction MOSFET, in the range 1950 −
3480  𝑚Ω∙nC for SiC-based FETs, and around 290 −300  𝑚Ω∙nC for a E -mode GaN  transistor. 
This result indicates that GaN  E-mode HEMTs can contribute to a substantial reduction in 
switching losses, compared to conventional semiconductor transistors.  
A further advantage of GaN -based transistors is the absence of reverse -recovery charge. Si -based 
power transistors have an intrinsic body diode, whose presence results in a large reverse recovery 
charge during commutation. For a Si superjunction (SJ) MOSFET, the product of on -resistance 
(RDS,ON ) and reverse -recovery charge (Q rr) can be in excess of 300 m µC [1]. On the other hand, 
lateral GaN  devices are based on the high -electron mobility transistor (HEMT) concept, and do 
not have any body diode. HEMTs are majority carrier devices, and the lack of minority carriers 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354