85 
 achieved by having alternate undoped and p -type regions below the anode contact which can be 
easily formed for Si and SiC by ion implantation methods. Since ion implantation of dopants to 
GaN  is very difficult, other meth ods to achieve JBS structures were pursued. Cornell University 
created a trench JBS diode by selectively etching away portions of p -GaN  layer form a p -i-n diode 
followed by Schottky contact formation  [288] , as presented in Figure 52(a). The reduced surface 
field (RESURF) effect at the Schottky surface as a result of the adjoining p -GaN  layers were 
elaborately studied using TCAD ( Figure 52(b)). Hayashida et. al. from Mitsubishi Electric 
Corporation demonstrated a merged p -i-n Schottky diode  [290]  based on a trench JBS diode 
achieving a BV of 2 kV along with surge current capability. However, the leaka ge current was as 
high as 10-3 A/cm2 at ~ 750 V and reached 10 A/cm2 at 2000 V which needs to be further improved.  
Ion implantation methods have also been tried to achieve JBS structures in GaN . First reported in 
2016 by Koehler et.  al [291] , the p -doped regions were formed by Mg ion implantation followed 
by symmetrical multi -cycle rapid thermal annealing (MRTA) for act ivation. The JBS action was 
confirmed from reverse bias measurements, which presented much improved leakage current and 
BV as compared to a normal SBD. Shortly after, Zhang et al. demonstrated vertical GaN  JBS 
diodes  [289]  by (a) Mg implantation into n -GaN  to form p -wells and (b) Si implantation into p -
GaN  to form n -wells ( Figure 53). The implantation and the activation scheme was similar to that 
used by Koehler et al.  Ron,sp values of 1.5 -2.5 mΩcm2 and 7 -9 mΩcm2 were observed for the Mg 
implanted and Si implanted JBS diodes. Both sets of devices provided 100x -reduction in reverse 
leakage current at high reverse bias and presented a BV of 500 -600 V.  
Trench Metal Barrier Schottky (TMBS) diodes first demonstrated i n GaN  by Zhang et al. in 2016  
[292]  represents a device topology which can provide a better control of the reverse leakage current 
in an SBD. A TMBS diode consists of a trench metal insulator semiconductor (MIS) structure as 
shown in Figure 54(a). The MIS structure does not contribute to the forward conduction phase bu t 
in the reverse bias condition, the two adjacent MIS structures deplete the semiconductor region 
between them , thus reducing the leakage current and improving the BV. However, since the 
Schottky contact is formed only in a portion of the anode, the R on,sp is higher than in a conventional 
SBD with Schottky contact in the entire anode area. The leakage current can be controlled by 
optimizing the trench depth and the TMBS pillar width ( Figure 54(b)). But too deep a trench will 
also result in premature breakdown of the SiN x dielectric layer due to electric field peaking at the 
trench bottom corner. To address this issue, argon -implanted field rings were employed to protect 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354