162 
 percolation process, leading to the generation of localized shunt path s between drain and substrate. 
[617]  
 
9.2.2.4  Buffer decomposition experiments  
 
When a lateral power device  is biased in the off -state,  a large voltage drop is present in all the 
layers from drain to substrate, which usually include the AlN nucleation layer, an AlGaN buffer 
and a ca rbon-doped GaN  buffer. Understanding which of these layers has the strongest impact on 
the vertical breakdown voltage and on device reliability is a critical task for improving the final 
behavior. This can be done by testing separate structures, where the growth has been stopped after 
each of the single layers above the Si substrate , to form AlN/ Si, AlGa N/AlN/ Si, and 
C:GaN /AlGaN/AlN/ Si stacks .[618]  [619]  This way, the variation in reliability (and charge 
trapping) induced by each layer can be analyzed independently. In order to do this, a mandatory 
technical requirement is the processing of good ohmic contacts on top of each layer, a non -trivial 
task on low -conductivity and wide -bandgap material s. 
The analysis  of AlN layers directly grown on a Si substrate indicated a breakdown field of 3.25 
MV/cm, which is significantly lower than that of high-quality  crystalline  AlN. The difference is 
ascribed to the presence (and high density) of vertical leakage paths, involving V -pits and 
threading dislocations. This value further decreases with temperature  (see Figure 92) [619] . To 
explain this temperature dependence, the failure voltage was pl otted against the leakage current. 
Samples  with higher leakage sho wed a lower breakdown voltage, and a lower  breakdown field , of 
the AlN nucleation la yers. The flow of current at localized defects may lead to premature 
breakdown. This argument was used to explain why the breakdown field of AlN grown on Si (3.25 
MV/cm) is much lower than that of high quality crystalline AlN (up to 12 MV/cm).  
In addition, it was demonstrated that the AlN/ Si structures show trapping of negative charge, which 
has been ascribed to the injection of electrons from the Si substrate towards deep traps located in 
the AlN. By adding an AlGaN layer on top of the AlN, it is possible to significantly reduce the 
density of defects, and this results in a more uniform sample -to-sample leakag e current. A strong 
increase in the breakdown voltage can be reached by adding a C: GaN  layer on top of the stack. In 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354