53 
 presented still negative VTH (at 1μA/mm) and degraded on -resistance due to the very s mall fin 
width required to achieve normally -off operation  [110], [118] –[120] . Recently, a tri -gate device 
with 20 nm -wide fins in combination with a large work -function gate metal stack (Pt/Au) 
successfully showed full normally -off operation with a VTH of 0.64 V (at 1μA/mm) and a 
competitive RON of 7.4 Ω·mm  [121] . To achieve such performance, however, very high -resolution 
lithographic processes are required both to define the fin width (which sets VTH) and to reduce the 
gap in -between fins (which degrades RON). Since, at the moment, the lithographic resolution in 
power devices foundries is still in the order of several hundreds of nm, it is interesting to find 
solutions to increase the minimum required wfin.  
A promising approach consists of combining the tri -gate architecture with conventional methods 
to achieve n ormally -off operation such as recessed gate and p-GaN  cap. This allows to achieve 
large positive VTH values while keeping the benefits of the tri -gate architecture and relaxing the 
lithographic requirements. The first demonstration of such an approach appeared in 2012  [122]  
with the integration of the tri -gate architecture with AlGaN barrier recess, f ollowed by a more 
recent work  [123]  in 2019 which showed promising VTH of 1.4 V (at 1μA/mm) and RON of 7.3 
Ω·mm. Besides, the tri -gate architecture can also be integrated with the pGaN cap approach, 
allowing to further increase VTH with respect to the planar case and relax the trade -off between VTH  
and the heterostructure sheet resistance  [124] . Finally, the tri -gate architecture can also be 
combined with promising p -type oxides, such as NiO, which can be conformably deposited aro und 
the fin and help to further shift the device VTH  without the need of complex pGaN regrowth  [125] . 
 
6.2.6 Commercial perspective  
At the moment, commercial GaN  normally -off devices are based either on the cascode or the pGaN 
technology. Cascode devices have demonstrated high reliability, obtaining several automotive 
certifications, and present large gate swing and robustness, which is highly appreciated by circuit 
designers used to work with Si devices. On the other hand,  the introduction of the Si low-voltage 
device may lead to more complex and costly packaging. In parallel, normally -off GaN  devices 
with a pGaN cap structure allow to achieve normally -off operation with a good reliability and quite 
simple fabrication. Howe ver, the pGaN technology may present some limitations in terms of gate 
swing. While fluorine implantation seems to have lost steam due to long -term and high -
temperature reliability concerns, gate recess could leverage on  the trade -off found for pGaN 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354