26 
 GaN  (n-type), considering the presence of surface states and of donor charges (figure adapted from 
[49]) 
 
5 Band diagrams and charge density in AlGaN/ GaN  
heterostructures  
 
The core of a GaN -based HEMT is the AlGaN/ GaN  heterostructure. Both the GaN  and the AlGaN 
layers are typically left undoped, to minimize electron scattering at impurities. Based on the 
consideration s above, undoped GaN  has a wea k n-type conductivity, with electron densities that 
depend on the quality of the epitaxy, and that – even in the best case – are higher than 1015 cm-3 
[49] (early GaN  films were showing a high n -type conductivity, in the range of 1017-1018 cm-3 [59], 
[60]). Optimizing the background electron density in lateral and vertical HEMTs requires a tuning 
of the growth process, and the control of the resid ual impurities (such as carbon, see for instanc e 
[61]). 
Figure 9 shows the charge distribution, the electric field profile, and a schematic band diagram for 
an AlGaN/ GaN  heterostructure used in HEMT technology . In the figure, 𝑡 is the thickness of the 
AlGaN layer, while the 2DEG is supposed to be located at a position 𝑑, a few nanometers far from 
the heterojunction, on the GaN  side. 
At the surface of the AlGaN  layer, the total charge is determined by the sum of the charge of the 
surface donors and of the polarization charge of the AlGaN layer, 𝑞𝑁𝐷𝐷+−𝑄𝜋(𝐴𝑙𝐺𝑎𝑁 ). At the 
AlGaN/ GaN  heterojunction, the total charge is given by the difference between the po larization 
charges of AlGaN and GaN , i.e. 𝑄𝜋(𝐴𝑙𝐺𝑎𝑁 )−𝑄𝜋(𝐺𝑎𝑁 ). For gallium polar material, this is a positive 
number, since AlGaN has a higher polarization, compared to GaN . In the triangular potential well 
formed near the heterojunction, on the GaN side, a 2 -dimensional electron gas is formed. For 
simplicity, we consider this sheet of charge to be located in 𝑥=𝑑 (position of the centroid of the 
electron distribution).  
The value of 𝑑 can be easily determined by solving the Schroedinger equation i n the triangular 
potential well formed at the AlGaN/ GaN  interface,  that is schematically represented in Figure 10.  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354