174 
  
9.5.1 Proton irradiation  
 
The irradiation with protons can cause a wide range of effects in GaN -based devices, which can 
be related to the creation of new defects (or to the increase in concentration of pre -existing ones) 
caused by the interaction between the crystal lattice and the energetic protons.  
The increase in defect concentration leads to a lowering of the mobility of the material, due to the 
scattering between the carriers and the defects, and to a reduction in carrier density, caused by the 
charge trapping in the defects and by the corresponding electrostatic effects. On the final devices, 
this corresponds to an increase in on -resistance, a positive shift in th e threshold voltage, a reduction 
in the saturation current and in the peak transconductance value. The larger defect concentration 
causes a worsening of the dynamic behavior, due to increased density of states available for the 
trapping of charge.  
In some cases, the dynamic RON is found to be decreased rather than increased by the proton 
irradiation  [645] : on irradiated devices an increase in off -state leakage is observed, indicating an 
increase in the unintentionally -doped GaN  layer conductivity. This conductivity increase leads to 
an increased deionization rate, thus r educing the dynamic on -resistance .[645]  
The level of damage depen ds on the energy of the protons, and it is found to be higher for lower 
energy [646], [647] . This behavior may seem unexpected, but is related to the larger non -ionizing 
energy loss of the lower energy particles in the barrier and channel region, whereas higher energy 
protons cause damage deeper in the device structure. Con cerning the number of irradiated protons, 
a typical threshold value (at 1.8 MeV) for the variation in device performance is a fluence of 1012-
1013 p+/cm2 at 1.8 MeV [648] –[650] , 5×109 p+/cm2 at 40  MeV [651] . Based on the energy 
dependence discussed above , the lower threshold fluence at higher energy is unexpected, and may 
be related to different device structure and quality in the various papers. It is wo rth pointing out 
that values for variation in dynamic performance may be lower than the ones reported for variation 
in DC characteristics  [652] . 
Specific defects created by proton irradiation include both deep donor and deep acceptor levels, as 
well as de -hydrogenation and reconfiguration of O N-H complexes. [653], [654]  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354