62 
 Furthermore, the effects of Si removal were investigated by Raman thermometry  [167], [168] , 
which revealed a worsening of the thermal performance. A significant improvement of the thermal 
dissipation is obtained after the AlN and copper deposition.  
 
 
6.5 Future perspectives  
As the AlGaN/ GaN  power technology is reaching its maturity and increasing i ts market share, the 
research on this topic is likely to follow two parallel paths. On one hand, there will be a growing 
interest on the aspects directly related to the realization of a successful commercial product such 
as trapping, reliability, stability , packaging, and circuit operation. On the other hand, researchers 
will continue to come up with novel device structures and designs to improve performance and 
take full advantage  of the GaN  material properties for future generations of high efficiency  devices. 
Under this point of view, a few recent promising directions are presented below which are rapidly 
growing and offer a significant advance in device performance.   
 
6.5.1 AlGaN channel HEMTs  
Ultra -wide band gap materials such as AlN (6.2 eV) and related Al -rich AlGaN channel could 
allow for further improvement, especially in terms of voltage and temperature operations. This is 
primarily due to their much higher critical electric field resultin g from a wider bandgap (see Figure 
3). In addition, the use of an AlN back barrier would enable to both increase the electron 
confinement in the transist or channel and enhance the thermal dissipation. It has already been 
demonstrated that for extremely high temperature electronics, the properties of Al -rich transistors 
[169] –[171] are showing favorable comparisons to conventional wide bandgap materials. Despite 
the difficulty to achieve very high voltage operations due to the material quality and the ability to 
implement high Al content above 50%, some recent attempts showed the premise of voltage 
enhancement with AlGaN channels together with superior thermal stability.  
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354