166 
 9.3 SEMI -ON-state  
 
In real operating conditions, a power switch is not limited only to ON-state and OFF-state bias 
points. During the turn-ON and turn -OFF transitions, the presence of the internal and parasitic 
capacitances prevents an instantaneous variation of the voltage at the terminals of the device, 
therefore a relatively high voltage at the drain can still be present when the gate  voltage is already 
close to the threshold value. This bias condition is called SEMI -ON-state, because the conductive 
channel is partially formed. Depending on the residual drain voltage during the transition, in SEMI -
ON-state state a relatively large amou nt of electrons in the channel can be accelerated by a large 
electric field, causing the flow of highly -energetic  (hot)  carriers in the device that can be 
detrimental for its reliability.  
The main effects a SEMI -ON-state stress can cause on a transistor in clude a worsening of the 
isolation properties of the gate diode, threshold voltage shifts, increase in ON-resistance, decrease 
in transconductance peak value, change  in peak electric field, knee walkout and increase in drain -
lag transient amplitude [628], [629] . These changes may be ascrib ed to  the increase in defect 
concentration close to the channel region, shown in Figure 94, caused by the energy exchange 
between the hot electrons and t he crystal lattice, as can be detected by several deep level 
characterization techniques applied during stress [629] . The specific microscopic configuration of 
the deep level causing the detected variations can change depending on the device growth 
condition s, structure and processing.  Recent papers investigated the effect of hot electrons on the 
dynamic on -resistance of AlGaN/ GaN  high-electron mobility transistors subject to semi -on stress. 
The additional dynamic -Ron detected in semi -on state was ascribed to hot -electron trapping at th e 
passivation/AlGaN interface [630].  
Specific circuits  [453], [631] –[633]  can be used to test the degradation of GaN  HEMTs induced 
by hot -electrons. A promising approach was proposed in  [633], [634] , based on the use of 
switching setup s capable of monitoring on -wafer the effects of semi -on stress. By tuning th e 
capacitance at the drain node, it is possible to control the amount of energy/charge released during 
hard switching events, and to evaluate the effect of stress on the devices. The comparison of results 
obtained via different techniques [537] , indicated that hot -electron trapping is a very fast process, 
that takes place in few nanoseconds. The developed methodologies allowed to assess the trajectory 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354