23 
  
In a GaN  layer, polarization charges are present on each unit cell. As schematically depicted in 
Figure 7, the internal polarization charges cancel each other. Only the 𝑄𝜋 and −𝑄𝜋 at the N - and 
Ga-faces remain, and form a charge dipole  (Figure 7 (c)). Based on the numbers given in Table 3, 
the spontaneous polarization charge in GaN  has values in the range 1.8−2.1∙1013 𝑒−/𝑐𝑚2. In 
absence of other char ges, the polarization charge would lead to the presence of a dipole, resulting 
in a fairly high electric field, in the range of MV/cm. Such dipole is screened through the formation 
of a screening dipole  (𝑄𝑠𝑐𝑟). In absence of the screening dipole, a non -physical situation would 
form. As discussed in [49], a first hypothesis would be that t he scre ening dipole originates  from 
ions from the atmosphere ( 𝐻+,𝑂𝐻−); however, the dipole is present also in material grown in 
atmosphere free of counter ions, like during molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) growth.  
A different interpretation  can be given by consid ering the presence of donor states at the surface 
of the GaN  layer  [57], [58] , as schematically represented in Figure 8 (a). In absence of 
compensating charge, due to the presence of the polarization dipole ±𝑄𝜋, an electric field is present 
in the GaN  layer, and the band diagram shows a linear slope ( Figure 8 (b)). If the GaN  layer is 
sufficiently thick, the do nor states pins the Fermi level at the surface (at the donor level 𝐸𝐷𝐷), and 
the screening charge 𝑁𝐷𝐷+ at the surface is formed. The presence of a surface level 𝐸𝐷𝐷 has been 
proved also experimentally  [49]. Realistic GaN  layers typically have a n -type conductivity, as 
mentioned above. The ionized (bulk) donors also contribute to the overall charge balance . For a 
thick GaN  layer (see Figure 8 (d)), the bands are nearly flat (corresponding to negligible field), 
apart from the surface region. The polarization charge −𝑄𝜋 at the surface is compensated by the 
positive charge of the ionized surface defects 𝑁𝐷𝐷+ and by the total density of charges in the 
depleted n -type GaN  [49]. 
 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354