171 
 and the Si breakdown field define the ESD robustness. If the ESD testing is carried out in forward 
conduction mode, the limiting factor is the high local power dissipation.  
In a state -of-the-art transistor, the list of the possible effects caused by an ESD/EOS event extends 
beyond contact and substrate damage, depending on device structure and test conditions [639] . In 
normally -ON devices and gate grounded testing configuration, the melting of the gate metal and 
the formation of cracks from s ource to drain can be observed. In the case of shorter events (< 10 
ns), the heating of the device is not high enough to lead to metal melting and catastrophic failure. 
Instead, several damaged regions can be found at the drain side of the gate edge, attri buted to the 
converse piezoelectric effect caused by the high electric field during the event. Another possible 
failure mode is the breakdown of the parasitic diode between the gate finger and the drain and 
source contacts at the mesa edge.  
If the gate rel iability is not the main goal of the analysis, it is possible to test devices without the 
gate metal [639] . If a mesa -type isolation is not present, the migration of the contact metal from 
drain to source, leading to a drain -source short, is a relevant process, especially at the corners of 
the contac ts, where the electric field is the highest. The process is started by the melting of the 
metal at the high power dissipation condition, which is expected to happen at temperatures 1.5x to 
4x lower than the GaN  one. If a mesa isolation is present, the shor t-circuit instead forms along the 
channel, due to the presence of surface states that act as low -energy path s for the metal migration.  
One of the main shortcomings with ESD/EOS testing on transistors is the fact that a single pulse 
is applied to the device under test, whereas it was demonstrated that GaN -based devices suffer 
from cumulative effects [639] . Another problem is that the protocol is usually based only on gate -
floating an d gate -grounded configurations. Unfortunately, in the real application the gate voltage 
will sweep the entire operating range, and there is no way to guarantee that the ESD event will 
happen only when the device is biased in one of the two tested configura tions. For this reason, in 
a three -terminal device it is important to analyze the dependence of the robustness on the applied 
gate voltage [640] . 
As shown in Figure 97 (a), when the ESD event is applied in OFF-state and SEMI -ON-state, the 
catastrophic failure of the device always takes place at the same voltage on the device under test. 
This finding is consistent with  a failure related to reaching the breakdown electric field of the 
material, which always happens at the same drain -source voltage regardless of the applied gate 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354