54 
 devices and result in good performance. Thanks to current and future research efforts, it is expected 
that the technology will improve, and that the current issues regarding the GaN  etched interface 
and the high -quality gate dielectric layer will be solved . Such research could strongly benefit also 
the tri -gate technology which faces similar issues regarding the sidewalls interface quality and the 
gate dielectric. Besides, the development of GaN  logic (both DCLF  [126] –[129]  and CMOS  [130] –
[132] ) will require the ad option of higher -resolution lithographic lines, which would allow for a 
reduction of the minimum fin width, making the tri -gate and its combination with gate recess a 
viable future technology.   
 
6.3 Breakdown mechanisms  
Converters based on MOSFET have the abi lity to survive a limited exposure to voltages above the 
device rating, according to the specified avalanche energy rating. However, lateral GaN  HFETs 
do not have the potential for avalanche breakdown  [133] , because they do not rely on a p -n junction 
for blocking voltage and may experience catastrophic dielectric breakdown when exposed to 
sufficient overvoltage [134] . This breakdown is des tructive and non -recoverable.  
The main sources of leakage current and related breakdown voltage (V BR) for an AlGaN/ GaN  
HEMT power transistor on Si substrate are the following (see Figure 28):  
• Punch -through effect reflecting a parasitic electron injection into the buffer.  
• Leakage current through the passivation layer and/or due to a surface related conduction.   
• Vertical breakdown, through the total buffer thickness, that can be due to a poor doping 
compensation of the buffer.  
Different approaches have been developed in order to mitigate these leakage paths and associated 
premature breakdown while avoiding trapping effects.  
 - The use of high -quality dielectric for surface passivation reduces leakage at the surface and at 
the interface with the barrier  [135] . 
- Proper doping compensation into the buffer layers, generally carbon or iron doping  [136] –[138]  
enables to significantly enhance the buffer resistivity and consequently avoid the carrier injection. 
Furthermore, back barrier  [139], [140]  based on graded AlGaN or AlN material have been 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354