141 
 9 Degradation  processes in GaN  devices  
 
The possible device type s and structures based on GaN  have a huge variety, as well as many 
applications, and therefore a high number of possible degradation and failure modes  may take 
place . In this section, we will review the most relevant ones , with reference to lateral and vertical 
devices . The discussion will be organized based on the operating condition s that lead to the 
detected effects. In the first part, the ON-state and OFF-state bias conditions will be discussed, since 
they are the most relevant ones for a power devic e. Then, the transition between the two phases 
will be considered , leading to additional degradation in the  SEMI -ON-state. Finally, reliability in 
realistic  environment will be analyzed, including the study of electrostatic discharge ( ESD ) and 
electrical o verstress ( EOS ) events, and radiation hardness.  
 
9.1 ON-state  
 
The on -state bias condition can be heavily stressful for several reasons. A large gate overdrive is 
usually desired, in order to increase the channel carrier density and, therefore, the maximum 
current levels, but this leads to a high voltage drop and electric field across the gate stack. 
Moreover, although the desired voltage drop on the device should be zero  in on -state, to ensure 
maximum power transfer and no power loss, real devices may have vol tage drops in the range of 
hundreds of millivolts. At the high operating current levels, this may cause  a significant power 
dissipation and self -heating , that can be detrimental for long -term operation.  
 
9.1.1 Extrinsic degradation: the role of dielectrics  
 
A high gate overdrive can be dangerous for insulated gate devices, where the electric field in the 
gate dielectric has to be engineered in order not to exceed the breakdown value  [566] . 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354