92 
  
In a traditional vertical trench gate MOSFET with a n -p-i-n heterostructure, the channel region is 
formed by the n -p-i sidewall of the trench gate structure ;  on the applicat ion of a positive gate bias 
above the threshold voltage, an inversion sheet charge of electrons is formed in the p -GaN  layer 
adjacent to the gate dielectric. Since the channel is formed by dry etching, the field effect mobility 
of the inversion channel ele ctrons is degraded by the defects in the sidewall formed during the 
etching process.  In order to alleviate this issue, Prof. Mishra’s group at UCSB devised a technique  
[311]  whereby a thin undoped GaN  layer is regrown in the gate trench region by MOCVD, 
followed by in -situ Al 2O3 dielectric deposition as shown in Figure 59(a). The initial reports on 
these devices presented 60% reduction in  Ron,sp as compared to traditional trench gate MOSFETs. 
A normally -off operation with a threshold voltage of 2 V was also achieved along with a BV of 
195 V. Subsequent devices [309]  on bulk GaN  substrates provided a higher BV of 990 V aided by 
a low damage gate trench etchin g process. Ji et al. reported large -area (0.2 mm2) OGFETs with an 
output current close to 0.5 A and a BV of 320 V. Further optimizations on the growth, design and 
fabrication of these devices resulted in OGFETs presenting a record channel mobility of 185 
cm2/Vs and a low Ron,sp of 2.2 mΩcm2 [310]. The adoption of a novel double field plate design 
helped achieving a high BV of 1.4 kV for a single device and 0.9 kV for a large -area (0.2 mm2) 
device ( Figure 59(b)). Variations of the OG -FET have been reported by other groups as well. Li 
et. al. reported [312], [313]  on an trench MOSFET similar to the OGFET but with an MBE regrown 
channel rather than by MOCVD. The main aim was to improve on the issue of re -passivation of 
p-GaN  during regrowth of the interlayer b y MOCVD. They could achieve a record high BV of 
600 V among GaN  transistors with a MBE regrown channel along with reduced thermal budget.  
 
7.3.1.6  GaN  vertical fin power transistors : 
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354