177 
 10 Conclusions  
 
In summary, with this tutorial paper we reviewed the properties and advantages of GaN , and the 
characteristics, technology and reliability of GaN -based transistors. These devices are expected to 
play a significant role in next -generation power converters: competition with Si and SiC is 
expected to become stronger and stronger in the coming years. A substantial improvement in 
device technology will be possible through extensive research, both at academic and industrial 
levels.  
If on one hand current GaN  transistors can significantly i mprove the performance and reliability 
of switching mode power converters, next -generation scaled devices will enable monolithic 
integration, thus paving the way for the fabrication of miniaturized and MHz -range power 
converters. Further competition with Si and SiC will come from the development of vertical GaN  
transistors, which have a great potential for high power/high voltage application s, and can be 
fabricated on inexpensive and large substrates.  
A deep understanding of material and device properties w ill allow to further extend the operating 
ranges of the devices, thus enabling robust kV -range operation (for large -size devices) and sub -
microsecond switching (for scaled transistors). Finally, a deep knowledge of trapping and 
reliability -limiting process es will allow to push the devices to the limits, thus fully exploiting the 
competitive advantage of GaN , as a ground -breaking semiconductor for power electronics.  
This paper provides a comprehensive overview on the properties of GaN  and related devices, a nd 
can be used as a reference for researchers willing to enter this interesting and complex field, or 
looking for an update on the most recent advancements on device technology.  
 
 
  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354