18 
 4 Polarization charges in GaN  
 
Controlled doping of wide bandgap semiconductors is not always straightforward: typically, 
mobile carriers in FET are induced through impurity doping, i.e. by introducing foreign atoms in 
a semiconductor lattice. The energy distance between the dopant level and the related band ( 𝐸𝐶−
𝐸𝐷 for a donor level at energy 𝐸𝐷, or 𝐸𝐴−𝐸𝑉 for an acceptor level at energy 𝐸𝐴) represents the 
dopant binding (or ionization) energy. The best dopants are relatively shallow, with binding 
energies in the range 0.01 eV – 0.05 eV. For GaN , only shallow donors are available ( Si, 𝐸𝐶−
𝐸𝐷=0.015 eV), while the conventional acceptor is magnesium, that creates a level 0.16 eV above 
the valence band energy. As a consequence, it is relatively easy to achieve high electron 
concentrations, whereas for reaching high hole densities dopant levels in  excess of 1019 𝑐𝑚−3 are 
required.  It is worth noticing that even high quality GaN  has a residual n -type (unintentional) 
conductivity, resulting in carrier densities in the range 1015−1017 𝑐𝑚−3, depending on material 
properties . Such residual conductiv ity has been ascribed to native defects of the semiconductor 
(e.g. point defects, vacancies, antisites), and impurities (like carbon, oxygen, hydrogen)  [42]. The 
suppression of such defect -induced free carriers is very important for the fabrication of highly -
insulating GaN  layer, to be used in devices with extremely high blocking voltage s. 
Contrary to conventional semiconductors, GaN  has a unique advantage, that helps obtaining high 
carrier densities even in absence of intrinsic doping : GaN , in fact, is a polar material, and exhibits 
strong polarization effects.  
As already mentioned , the wurt zite crystal of III -N semiconductors, which are typically grown 
epitaxially along the (0001) orientation, leads to the existence of polarization fields, that are both 
spontaneous and piezoelectric. With zero external field, the total polarization 𝑃 is equ al to the sum 
of the spontaneous polarization 𝑃𝑠𝑝 and of the piezoelectric (or strain -induced) polarization 𝑃𝑝𝑧. 
Bernardini et al. [46] investigated the polarization in GaN  layers along the (0001) axis.  Nitrogen 
has a higher electronegativity , compared to gallium. As a consequence, Ga and N atoms have 
anionic (+) and cationic ( -) characteristics, gene rating a spontaneous polarization 𝑃𝑠𝑝 along the 
(0001) axis  [37]. Wurtzite is the crystal arrangement with highest symmetry compatible with the 
presence of spontaneous polarization [46]–[48]. The arrangement of the cation and an ion 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354