82 
 accumulation on the leakage current of GaN  SBDs  [279] . In their study, initial failure of SBDs at 
low voltages were ascribed to leakage current p ath through polygonal pits created by C impurity 
accumulation during the growth process. Their group also perfected the method of achieving low 
impurity levels in m -plane GaN , approaching c -plane values by using a quartz -free flow channel  
[280] . In 2019, they reported on the effect of drift la yer thickness on BV, along with the 
demonstration of vertical GaN  SBD with the highest reported BV of 2.4 kV for a drift layer 
thickness of 30 µm  [281] . A reduction in the effective d onor concentration with increasing the 
thickness of the drift layer was observed by secondary -ion mass spectrometry ( SIMS ), and is 
believed to have a positive effect on achieving such a high BV. In a recent publication, their group 
presented their results on SBDs with a drift layer compensated for the un -intentional n -type doping 
by introducing Mg dopants during the growth  [282] . The resulting SBDs provided more than 3x -
higher BV as compared to a non -compensated SBD, but the on-state current and R on,sp suffered as 
a result of the high resistivity of the drift layer. Arizona State University investigated ways to 
balance the interplay between R on,sp and BV with the introduction of double drift layers (DDL) for 
SBDs  [283] . Basically, the SBDs consisted of an unintentionally -doped (UID) drift layer on the 
top and a slightly doped drift layer at the bottom. The UID drift layer at the top could suppress the 
peak electric field at the Schottky met al – UID interface and thus improve the BV.  
Several implantation -based termination methods were demonstrated in the recent years. Han et al.  
demonstrated a planar nitridation based -termination , by subjecting the area around the Schottky 
contact to a N 2 plasma from a plasma -enhanced chemical vapor deposition system (PECVD)  [284] . 
From ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, it was inferred that the Fermi level at the GaN  surface 
which underwent the N 2 plasma treatment, went down by 0.68 eV possibly by the passivation of 
the Ga dangling bonds and thus, an enlarged energy barrier h eight and/or effective barrier thickness 
is presented at the junction edge. This suppressed the thermionic field emission (TFE)/ tunneling 
at this region , and the leakage current reduced as a result. The SBDs with this termination scheme 
presented 4 orders  of magnitude lower leakage current as compared to a control SBD with no 
termination and improved the BV from 335 V to 995 V. These devices also provided excellent 
switching behavior with current -collapse free operation and zero reverse recovery characteri stics 
[285] . Han et al., also demonstrated fluorine implanted edge termination schemes for GaN  SBDs 
based on the principle that the implanted fluorine ions act as fixed negative ions in GaN  [286]  
(Figure 51(a)). This results in spreading of the electric field and prevents th e localized peaking at 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354