34 
  
In a GaN -based transistor, a gate metal is placed on an AlGaN/ GaN  heterostructure; the  resulting 
schematic structure is shown in Figure 12 (a). For a power semiconductor device, the most critical 
parameters are the on -resistance 𝑅𝑜𝑛 (that needs to be as low as possible, to minimize the resistive 
losses in power converters) and the breakdown voltage ( 𝑉𝑏𝑟, that must be sufficiently high to 
ensure good reliability ). In AlGaN/ GaN  HEMTs, these two parameters are strongly correlated: 
carriers are generated by polarization, and the breakdown voltage scales with the distance between 
the gate and drain (𝐿𝐺𝐷) [37]. In an first-order  approximation , the on -resistance of the device is 
the sum of the channel resistance ( 𝑅𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙 , originated from 2DEG under the gate) and of the 
drain -side access region ( 𝑅𝑑𝑟𝑎 𝑖𝑛), according to the following equation  [37]: 
 𝑅𝑜𝑛=𝑅𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙 +𝑅𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛=𝐿𝐺
𝑊𝐺∙1
𝑞𝜇𝑛𝑠+𝐿𝐺𝐷
𝑊𝐺∙1
𝑞𝜇𝑛𝑠 29 
 
 
It is worth noticing that in this calculation the contribution of the source and contact resistance is 
neglected, with no loss of generality. The off -state voltage is supported by the gate -drain access 
region; at the breakdown voltage, the relation between  gate-drain spacing and the breakdown 
voltage is 𝐿𝐺𝐷=𝑉𝑏𝑟/𝐸𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡, and we can write:  
 𝑅𝑜𝑛=𝑅𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙 +𝑅𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 =1
𝑊𝐺1
𝑞𝜇𝑛𝑠(𝐿𝐺+𝑉𝑏𝑟
𝐸𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡) 30 
 
 
In high-voltage  devices, the gate -drain spacing is typically l onger than the gate length. Figure 12 
(b) reports the variation of the on -resistance (multiplied by the gate width 𝑊𝑔) as a function of the 
target breakdown voltage for devices having different gate lengths (0.25 µm and 1 µm). For 
mobility and sheet charge density values of 1400 cm2/Vs and 1 013 cm-2 were used. As can be 
understood , for low -breakdown voltage devices (corresponding to devices with a short gate -drain 
distance), the on -resistance is strongly determined by the gate length. Decreasing the gate length 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354