8 
 with breakdown voltages above 1 kV  [26]–[28], and proposed possible fabrication processes to 
target this voltage range. kV-range GaN  transistors will co mpete with SiC-based devices, in the 
industrial, automotive and photovoltaic application environments.  
As will be described in detail in the paper, current GaN  devices have typically a lateral layout. 
Several key aspects related to device design, fabricati on and performance must be discussed in 
detail, to understand how the performance of the transistors can be optimized through careful 
device design : this will be done extensively in the following sections of this paper . For introductory 
purposes, we remind  here that i n a HEMT c urrent flows between drain and source through a 2 -
dimensional electron gas (2DEG), which is formed at the heterojunction between an AlGaN barrier 
and a GaN  layer.  Figure 1 (a) reports the schematic structure of a GaN -based HEMT, showing the 
main layers that constitute the structure. Power GaN  devices are typically grown on a Si substrate, 
to minimize cost and maximize yield. Growing GaN  on a Si substrate is particularly complicated, 
due to: a) the large mismatch of the in -plane thermal expansion coefficient (2.6x10-6 K-1 for Si and 
5.59x10-6 K-1 for GaN  [29]), that may lead to cracki ng of the GaN  layer during the cooling -phase 
after the epitaxial growth; b) the large lattice mismatch ( around 16 % for Si(111))  [30], [31] , that 
may result in the propagation of dislocation s through the GaN  epitaxial layers, with consequent 
defect generation. A careful optimization of the buffer is nee ded in order to limit the propagation 
of such defects towards the 2DEG region; Figure 1 (b) reports a cross sectional SEM image of the 
epitaxial layers of a GaN -based transistor. As can be noticed, the use of a step -graded buffer in 
combination with an AlN nucleation layer is use d to release the strain and prevent the 
formation/propagation of dislocations.  
The lateral structure described in Figure 1 may have some limitations, whe n extremely high 
breakdown voltages and/or power densities are targeted. First, in a lateral transistor the breakdown 
voltage scales with the gate-drain spacing. Thus, devices with a high breakdown voltage can be 
fabricated, but will be more resistive and will use a wider semiconductor area, thus resulting in a 
higher device cost.  Second, the density of electrons in the 2DEG can be strongly influenced by 
surface charges: for this reason, the performance of the final devices is strongly dependent on the 
process and backend.  To solve the limitation of GaN  lateral devices, vertical device structures  are 
currently being explored and investigated, in line with what has been done with Si and SiC 
components. In a vertical device  (see a schematic structure in Figure 1 (c)), current flows through 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354