68 
 Super Junction (SJ) devices have revolutionized silicon power devices leading to unprecedented 
performance well beyond the one -dimensional material limit  [194], [195] . It is thus likely that 
eventually power devices based on other semiconductor material will embrace this technology too. 
In particular, the demonstration of SJs realized with wide bandgap (WBG) semiconductors would 
result in a major further improvement fo r power devices performance  [196] –[198]. 
The realization of conventional vertical SJ ( Figure 42) in GaN  is however not straightforward due 
to difficult technological challenges, among wh ich the inefficient Mg -based p-doping of GaN  is 
one of the most relevant. On the one side, the reduced Mg activation ratio results in relatively low 
doping concentrations, which, combined with the difficult control of the exact doping level, make 
charge -matching extremely challenging. On the other side, the absence of efficient implantation 
doping and high -quality p-GaN  regrowth , hinder the realization of the typical vertical SJ pillars. 
These challenges make the demonstration of vertical GaN  SJ devices still out of reach and, until 
more efficient p -GaN  doping is achieved, it is unlikely that this technology could progress 
significantly.  
Yet, alternati ve solutions to realize SJ devices have been proposed in AlGaN/ GaN  lateral 
architectures. In these structures, it is possible to obtain a two -dimensional electron and hole gas 
(2DEG and 2DHG) of equal concentration thanks to the presence of matching polarization charges. 
Such devices are typically referred to as polariza tion super junctions (PSJs) ( Figure 43) and can 
result in similar behavior to conventional, doping -based SJs, thus yielding much -improved off -effect transistors", Wiley & Sons, Copyright 2017 WILEY -VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 
Weinheim  [193] . 
 
Figure 43 Schematic illustration of a PSJ structure.  Reprinted from: H. Kawai et  al., "Low cost 
high voltage GaN  polarization superjunction field effect transistors", Wiley & Sons, Copyright 
2017 WILEY -VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim  [193] . 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354