73 
 higher than Si or SiC, these devices hav e been shown to pass reverse leakage tests, high 
temperature reverse bias (HTRB), high temperature operating life (HTOL), temperature humidity 
bias (THB), temperature cycling (TC) and inductive avalanche ruggedness stress tests  [245], which 
is of paramount importance from the point of view of commercialization of these devices in the 
future. This section aims to summarize the research development on vertical GaN  devices, 
providing an extensive review encompassing the fabrication and performance of various vertical 
devices reported till today. The development of vertical devices on sapphire and bulk GaN  will be 
first presented followed by the recent development of GaN -on-Si vertical devices.  
 
7.3 Vertical device architectures:  
7.3.1 Developm ent of vertical devices on sapphire and bulk GaN  
7.3.1.1  PiN diodes:  
P-i-N junctions are ubiquitous structures that compose many electronic devices. In wide -band -gap 
semiconductors however, the large turn -on voltage and high reverse recovery times of such diodes 
due to the large band gap hinders their applications in efficient power electronics. Even though 
Schottky diodes are preferable in power applications, due to their low turn -on voltage and reverse 
recovery time during switching transients, PN junctions are a lso an integral part of a number of 
modern vertical power devices, including IGBTs, junction barrier Schottky (JBS) diodes, merged 
p-i-n Schottky diodes, junction termination extensions (JTEs), etc. and thus merits a 
comprehensive study. Furthermore, the well -known and simple physics of p -n junctions is helpful 
in elucidating various material parameters, such as critical electric field (E c), doping density, 
impact ionization coefficients, generation -recombination rates, mobility of electro n and holes, 
temperature related effects, etc.  [246]  These properties are of utmost importance for the design 
and understanding of the power device.  
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354