129 
 transistors for RF amplifiers because it can result in transconductance compression and output 
conductance increase  [374], [518], [519] .  
Most recent works on this issue proposed that the kink effect can be caused by (i) impact ionization 
of traps in the channel or the barrier , with consequent emission of electrons  [374], [520], [521]  (ii) 
trapping of holes generated by trap -assisted tunneling into C -related traps  [487], [522] , (iii) field-
enhanced ionization of AlGaN barrier traps un der the gate and near the GaN /AlGaN interface  
[459] . 
 
8.8 Traps characterization techniques  
Within this section an overview of different techniques adopted for the characterization of trapping 
phenomena will be provided. Pulsed IV characteri zation will initially be introduced. Even if it does 
not provide a quantitative characterization of traps activation energies, it is a widely used tool to 
highlight the presence of trapping phenomena. Deep -Level Transient Spectroscopy and Deep -
Level Optica l Spectroscopy will then be discussed. Their combination provides the 
characterization of trap levels located within the full gap of GaN . Nevertheless, specific test 
structures are needed , making them difficult to apply directly on actual transistors. 
Char acterization techniques based on the monitoring of device drain current evolution will then be 
introduced and the different methods will be commented. Monitoring of drain current for emission 
process characterization suppose s that the emission process take s place when the device is biased 
in on -state. If traps experience said emission when the device is biased in off -state, it would be 
thus impossible to properly characterize them. On -the-fly characterization overcome this issue , 
allowing for the characteri zation of traps experiencing charge emission during off -state operation. 
Interface states can be characterized by specific measurement based on capacitance -voltage (C -V) 
and conductance -voltage (G -V). Finally, photoluminescence (PL) measurement technique w ill be 
briefly described.  
8.8.1 Pulsed IV  
As previously introduced, trap characterization can be carried out by means of several techniques . 
The most important measurement adopted to quickly identify the presence of trapping phenomena 
is pulsed -IV (PIV)  characte rization. The concept of this measurement is rather simple. The device 
is hold into a quiescent bias point  (QBP) , also called baseline, with its source terminal grounded. 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354