11 
 Figure 1: (a) schematic representation of the structure of a lateral GaN  high-electron mobility 
transistor (HEMT). The main layers constituting the structure are shown, as well as the three 
contacts of source (S), gate (G) and drain (D) . (b) Cross -sectional SEM images o f the epi -structure 
of GaN  HEMT on Si. Reprinted from "Strain Analysis of GaN  HEMTs on (111) Silicon with Two 
Transitional Al xGa1−xN Layers", Y. Cai et al., https://doi.org/10.3390/ma11101968, licensed under 
CC BY 4.0  [32]. (c) schematic representation of a vertical GaN  trench -MOSFET  
 
3 Gallium nitride: properties and physical parameters  
 
GaN , along with its InGaN and AlGaN alloys, represents an excellent material for both 
optoelectronics and electronics. In the early GaN  era, the research efforts on GaN  have been driven 
by the need of fabricating high -efficiency short -wavelength  (blue/violet)  LEDs. GaN  has a direct 
bandgap of 3.4 eV, thus being ideal for manufacturing ultraviolet  optoelectroni c devices. In 
addition, the energy gap of III -N alloys  can be tuned between the 0.7 eV of InN and the 6.2 eV of 
AlN thus, in principle, allowing fabrication of LEDs with ultraviolet (UVA, UVB, UVC), visible 
and infrared emission.  
Contrary to other semicond uctors, like InP or GaAs, III -N semiconductors typically have a 
wurtzite crystal, with its characteristic hexagonal shape  (see Figure 2). It can be easily understood 
that this lattice arrangement does not have an inversion plane perpendicular to the c -axis (0001) 
and, for this reason, the surfaces have either atoms from group III (In, Ga, Al), or nitrogen atoms  
[33]. The nature of the surfaces has a fundamental importance, since it determines the polarity of 
the polarization charges, as will be discussed in the following.   
 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354