152 
 threshold voltage is also observed sometimes, due to the presence of traps in the cap and barrier 
layer. [597]  
The important conclusion comes from the comparison between devices stressed in DC and RF 
conditions, showing different degradation modes and a stronger degradation in the RF case. [597]  
This suggests that, even for power devices, it may be important to test the degradation not only in 
ON-state, OFF-state and SEMI -ON-state separately, but to test it also in the real switching pattern, to 
take into account the interplay between the different mechanisms and time dependence occurring 
in the various bias points of the switching locus .[599]  
 
 
9.2 OFF-state  
 
The OFF-state bias condition can be highly stressful for a power device, due to the high electric 
field present, on average, in the blocking region and peak ing in critical device regions , such as the 
sharp corners and the gate edge. The electric field can cause damage to materials that are part of 
the device without being the semiconductor itself, such as the insulators for passivation and gate 
isolation. Oth er processes may involve the breakdown of GaN  itself . In addition, i nteraction with 
the external atmosphere may promote field -assisted chemical reactions. In some cases, the high 
electric field can also be present together with a high current density, such  as during avalanche 
conduction. In the following, we will discuss all these possibilities.  
 
9.2.1 Extrinsic degradation: the role of dielectrics  
 
As discussed in section 9.1.1 , degradation of the dielectrics is usually present in ON-state stress 
conditions, since the voltage drop across the  gate insulator is the highest, whereas in OFF-state 
stress the large voltage drop in the depleted semiconductor mitiga tes the electric field across the 
gate stack . Therefore, some of the results already presented in section 9.1.1  still hold, even when 
a larger bias is  applied : the better reliability of engineered bilayer insulators, [339], [572]  the 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354