161 
 It is also suggested that an exclusion zone can appear around the pits, w here no additional 
degradation spots can be formed, as the result of the consumption of mobile species in the 
electrochemical reaction. [613]  
 
9.2.2.3  Time -dependent breakdown  of GaN  epitaxial stacks  
 
The results presented in section 9.1.2  for the p -GaN  degradation show trends comparable to the 
ones reported in section 9.1.1  for the time -dependent dielectric breakdown degradation, namely 
the Weibull distribution of the failure time and its exponential dependence on the stress voltage. 
One can t hen wonder if GaN  itself, when deeply depleted, can behave as a dielectric and experience 
a TDDB -like degradation process. In general, detecting a TDDB process in a full GaN  power 
device can be complex, due to the large number of parts and materials it is composed of, each of 
them possibly contributing to the degradation as discussed in this Section 9. Moreover, if a device 
is not fully vertical, both a  lateral and a vertical electric field are present, further complicating the 
analysis. Therefore, even though the presence of GaN  TDDB was suggested in the past, no 
demonstration excluding other possible causes was provided. [614], [615]  For this reason, the first 
conclusive d emonstration of time -dependent dielectric breakdown in the GaN  itself was done on 
optoelectronic devices. [616]  LEDs have an intrinsic vertical structure, no complex parts such as 
field plates, gate with various geometries, blocking dielectrics or engineered passivati on, and are 
already at a high technology readiness level, allowing for testing of stable and reliable devices 
with no reliability and behavioral issues, which is not the case for fully -vertical power devices. 
The experimental tests, carried out in reverse bias condition, confirm that GaN  behaves as a leaky 
dielectric when deeply depleted, that the time -to-failure has an exponential dependence on the 
stress electric field , and that it is Weibull distributed. [616]  The extrapolated shape parameter β is 
4.43, confirming t hat the devices under test show an  intrinsic failure behavior.  Consistent  results 
were obtained also on GaN -on-Si stacks used for the fabrication of GaN  transistors. It was 
demonstrated that when submitted to drain -to-substrate (2 terminal) stress, AlGaN/ GaN  transistors 
can show a time -dependent degradation, which is Weibull distributed, significantly  field-
dependent and weakly thermally activated (Ea=0.2 5 eV). Degradation was ascribed to a 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354