132 
 While DLTS is still one of the most used techniques , it also shows some limitations. Impurity 
levels with a large activation energy result in a low emission rate , leading to transients with large , 
time co nstants who se evaluation could be masked by slow drifts  [528] . A novel methodology was 
thus introduced in  [529]  with the name of deep-level optical spectroscopy (DLOS). DLOS is based 
on photostimulated capacitance transients measurements after electri cal, thermal, or optical 
excitation of the sample. By increasing the energy of the photons impinging on the device , the 
optical cross section  for the transition between the deep level and the conduction and valence band  
can be extracted . DLOS can provid e information not only about the ionization energies of the 
levels, but also about the electron -phonon interaction and temperature dependence of the levels, 
i.e., about their relations with each band  [529] . 
Due to its wide band -gap, the characterization of GaN  material has typically carried out by 
combining both DLTS and DLOS measurements. DLTS is adopted for evaluating levels with 
activation energies below approximately 1  eV, while deeper levels are typically investigated by 
means of DLOS [474], [530], [531] . The combination of the two measurement techniques allows 
a full investigation of the trap level within the whole GaN  band -gap. 
8.8.3 Current transients  
DLTS and DLOS techniques are typically applied to large area diode s, in order to have a well 
measurable cap acitance value. When three terminal devices are tested, these techniques suffer 
from the low device capacitance (typically in the pF range) , making them less appealing for trap 
characterization. Furthermore, the electric field distribution in actual transi stors in normal bias 
conditions can be significantly different from that in large area diodes. Consequently, while DLTS 
and DLOS can definitely provide useful information on crystal impurities, they might not be able 
to provide a clear indication on the ef fects of said impurities on actual device dynamic operation. 
Trapping sensing in DLTS and DLOS is provided by evaluating capacitance transients induced by 
depletion region variations linked to the emission of trapped charge. On an actual device, the effect  
of charge emission can be monitored by evaluating the drain current evolution as the emission 
process takes place. In fact, an emission of trapped electrons will lead to a decrease in the fixed 
negative charge within the device , leading to an increase in its 2DEG concentration  [532] , and, 
therefore, an increase in its d rain current. Drain current transients (DCTs) are typically evaluated 
by monitoring the device current in on-state, after applying for a certain time a different bias 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354