65 
 characteristics of transistors with regrown non -alloyed contacts showed a significant current 
density increase above 100 mA/mm as compared to identical devices with partially etched barrier 
and annealed contacts (see Figure 39). This is clearly resulting from the drastic drop of the contact 
resistances. In spite of these obstacles, preliminary results show that contact resistivity will 
improve over time and that advanced approaches such as the etch and regrowth processes will 
ensure successful achievement at even higher Al -composition.  
 
6.5.2 Multi -channel devices  
 
Figure 40: (a) Three -dimensional schematics of the multi -channel power device, featuring 
multiple parallel channels, controlled 3 -dimensionally by a tri -gate electrode. (b) FIB cross -
section and schematics of the multi -channel nanowires covered by the tri -gate structure along 
the AB line in figure (a). The scale bar is 100 nm. (c) Top SEM image of the tri -gate area which 
includes, starting from the source side,  an e-mode region achieved by 15 nm -wide nanowires, 
and a slanted region terminated on 100 nm -wide d -mode nanowires for optimal electric field 
management . Reprinted by permission from: Springer Nature, Nature electronics, "Multi -
channel nanowire devices fo r efficient power conversion", L. Nela et al., Copyright 2021  [178] . 
Despite the recent progress, the performance of AlGaN/ GaN  devices is still far from  the theoretical 
limit predicted for the GaN  materials  [179] . A direct way to improve the device’s performance is 
represented by increasing its carrier concentration, which directly leads to a reduced on -resistance. 
Multiple
2DEG
channelsSource Drain Gate
SubstrateBuffer layers(a)
E-mode
Gate
Slanted
Field plate
D-mode 
Termination
250 nmA
B
Metal
(c)
Planar
region
Oxide Nanowires
Multi -channel Nanowires
 3D C ontrol
wfin
 wtrench
(b)
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354