10 
 power (Baliga FOM) devices are also introduced. Finally, the properties of AlGaN/ GaN  
heterostructures, and the related band diagrams are described in d etail, and first -order formulas for 
the calculation of sheet electron charge and threshold voltage are introduced. In Section  6,  the 
properties, stru cture and characteristics of lateral GaN  devices are discussed. Specific details is 
given to the various approaches for normally -off operation, to the main device parameters, and to 
the optimization of the b uffer. A perspective on AlN -based devices and on possible strategies to 
increase the breakdown voltage is given , also by discussing devices with local substrate removal . 
Section 7 deals with GaN  vertical devices. First, the advantages of vertical GaN  transistors are 
described. Attention is then given to the choice of the substrate ( GaN -on-GaN  vs GaN -on- Si) for 
vertical device manufacturing. Then, the various vertical device architectures are discuss ed and 
compared, in terms of performance and structural parameters. In Section 8, the stability of GaN  
devices is analyzed in detail. Specific focus is given to the role of surface traps, barrier traps and 
buffer traps in modifying the main device parameters, to present a clear overview of the topic.  A 
complete overview of the dominant defects and deep levels in GaN  is given in Section 8.1, to 
provide an exhaustive view of the problem.  Finally, Se ction 9 describe s the most relevant 
degradation processes that can limit the lifetime of GaN -based transistors. Specific attention will 
be towards the  degradation mechanisms induced by exposure to off -state stress, semi -on state 
regime, and on -state degradation (with focus on gate reliability for p -GaN  and insulated -gate 
devices).  
Through a pedagogical approach, this paper helps the reader understanding  the advantages of GaN  
technology, and getting familiar with the main performance, design, and reliability aspects.  
  
 
  
AlGaN barrier
uid-GaN channel
Buffer layer(s)
AlNnucleation layer
Si-substrateS G D
-----------------------------------------Surface passivation
Metaln+
p
n-drift regionpn+
n+GaN and substrateOxideS S G
D(a)                                (b)                           (c)
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354