130 
 Synchronous and short voltage pulses, typically in the 100  ns-10 us range with a duty -cycle in the 
0.1 %-1 % range, are applied to the gate and drain terminals to evaluate the device I -V 
characteristic s. The basic idea is that   traps are not able to reach their equilibrium condition during 
the short duration of the pulses. Therefore, the m easurement yields the I -V characteristics of the 
device obtained with the traps fill ed at the  condition set by the quiescent bias point. Since trap 
filling condition strongly depend on the applied voltages, comparing pulsed I -V obtained at 
different quiescent bias points quickly allows to evaluate the presence and in some way the amount 
of trapping phenomena. A typical set of pulsed I -V is performed by comparing at least three or 
more different quiescent bias points  [445], [523], [524] : (i) the V GS=0 V,V DS=0 V QBP, which 
sets also the reference of the “fresh” device conditions; (ii) gate-lag effect is then evaluated with a 
QBP  where V GS is held below the device threshol d voltage and V DS=0 V; (iii) drain -lag effect is 
finally evaluated by a QBP  with the device in off -state conditions and large V DS. Obviously, many 
other combinations can be considered by the three reported are the most used for device 
characterization. PIV characterization quickly offers an overview on device operation and a 
qualitative evaluation of the reduced device performance due to trapping phenomena. Some 
information on trap spatial localization might also be obtained by comparing results from differ ent 
QBPs . If the device experiences a threshold voltage shift, trapping phenomena are likely to be 
confined within the device buffer layer and/or the barrier or insulator layer under  the gate terminal 
[500] . On the other hand, a decrease in its transconductance might be related to an increase in 
access region resistance which might be induced by surface, barrier, or buffer traps  [445] .  
8.8.2 DLTS/DLOS  
Trap investigation has been an important topic since the beginning of the semiconductor device 
development. Capacitance transients are used to obtain information about an impurity level in the 
depletion regi on of a Schottky barrier or p -n junction . The measurement consists in observing the 
capacitance transient associated with the return to thermal equilibrium of the occupation of the 
level , following an initial nonequilibrium condition  [525], [526]  [Williams_JAP_1966, 
Sah_SolidState_1970]. One can thus measure the time constant of this capacitance transient as a 
function of temperature and obtain the activation energy for the level. An alternative method 
named deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) was introduced in  [527]  (see Figure 77). DLTS 
is still based on capacitance transients but it allows a faster characterization. The essential feature 
of DLTS is the ability to set an emissi on rate window such that the measurement apparatus only 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354