136 
 8.8.3.4  Bias conditions  
DCTs can be recorded with a sensing condition lying in the linear  [423], [539], [540]  or in the 
saturation region  [445], [541], [542] . Significantly different results might be obtained when 
comparing results obtained in the linear and saturation region  [536] . Nevertheless, an accurate 
evalu ation of the different DCTs response might be useful for spatially localize traps as suggested 
by [535] : a sensing condition in the linear region of the device with reasonably high V GS should 
highlight the effect of traps located within the device access regions . On the other hand , sensing 
in saturation near the pinch -off voltage, i.e. at low current level so that the effect of device access 
region can be minimized, should be more sensitive to th e effect of traps located beneath the gate 
contact. Other phenomena that might significantly affect the results of DCTs analysis could be the 
presence of mechanisms affecting the DCTs time constants, i.e. device self -heating and electric 
field enhanced emi ssion mechanisms. Self -heating by raising the local device temperatures 
enhances carrier emission process leading thus to an erroneous evaluation of the emission process . 
In other words, the de -trapping appears faster than it should be at the applied base -plate 
temperature  [543] . Similarly field enhanced emission mechanisms such as Poole -Frenkel 
phenomena [544]  will lead to an error like that introduced by device self -heating. Therefore, DCTs 
results needs to be carefully reviewed to avoid an erroneous estimation of the activation energy 
associated with the trap level causing the observed DCTs. Based on the comments and issues 
reported in this section, the authors would like to suggest that , to have an accurate estimation of 
the trap activation energy , VDS voltages applied during the sensing condition should be as low as 
possible , in order to reduce self -heating and electric field related enhanced emission.  The use of 
pulsed -drain current tra nsient (P -DCT) methodologies can also be effective to this aim, since the 
device is kept at zero bias during recovery, and short voltage pulses are used to sense the on -
resistance during the de -trapping phase  [537]. 
8.8.3.5  Analysis of DCTs for time constant extraction  
The extraction of time constants at different temperature s is the process leading to the construction 
of the Arrhenius plot from which the trap activation energy is obtained. Several techniques can be 
used to this aim . A multi -exponential  approach  [539] can be adopted by least -square fitting the 
experimental data with the sum of several exponential functions, typically in the amount of few 
hundreds, with different amplitudes and time constants as described in the following equation  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354