9 
 the bulk of the material, thus allowing high current and power densities. The density of electrons 
in the channel is modul ated through a metal -oxide -semiconductor (MOS) stack, and a p -type body 
is usually employed to shift the threshold voltage towards more positive values. The breakdown 
voltage of a vertical GaN  transistor depends on the thickness of the lightly -doped drift region, and 
not on the size and area of the device as in a lateral transistor. Vertical GaN  devices represent the 
latest development in GaN  technology, and the reader will find interest in the related concepts and 
applications, described in this paper.  
As for every technology, there are some physical processes that may limit the performance and the 
reliability of GaN  devices. The on-resistance of a GaN  transistors (and thus the density of electrons 
in the 2DEG ) strongly depends on the intrinsic (spontaneous and piezoelectric) polarization 
charges of GaN , as well as on the presence of charges trapped at surface states (e.g. in the 
passivation layer or at the interface between the passivation layer and the AlGaN b arrier) or in 
buffer states. For this reason, it is of fundamental importance to know and manage the surface - 
and buffer -related trapping phenomena that may limit the dynamic performance of GaN  
transistors, leading to a recoverable increase in on -resistanc e (dynamic -Ron problem) . Trapping 
in the epitaxial layers and/or at the gate -stack may result in positive - or negative -bias threshold 
instability (PBTI or NBTI) , and the related processes must be investigated and understood to be 
able to fabricate fast and  reliable devices.  
Finally , GaN -based transistors are operated at field, temperature, and frequency levels which are 
unimaginable for conventional Si devices. Electric fields can be in excess of 3 MV/cm, and channel 
temperatures can be above 300 °C during operation, if lightweight heat dissipators are used. Such 
conditions may favor sudden or time -dependent breakdown phenomena, leading to the failure of 
the devices. Further more , operation at high frequencies may exacerbate the degradation processes 
related to hard switching events. For this reason, it is of utmost importance to understand the 
degradation processes of GaN  power devices, and to identify ways and strategies for improving 
the robustness of the components.  
This tutorial paper presents a detailed overview on the physics, performance and reliability of 
GaN -based power devices. In the Section 3-5, the properties and physical parameters of GaN  are 
discussed , to help the reader understand ing the unique advantages offered by GaN  compared to 
other semiconductors. The main figures of merit (FOM) for high speed (Johnson FOM) and high 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354