95 
 nm. The device works by accumulation of electro ns rather than by inversion as in the case of trench 
gate MOSFETs and high electron mobility of 150 cm2/Vs was obtained in the accumulation layer. 
Zhang et al.  [314]  further optimized the fin width to obtain a higher BV of 1200 V and a lower 
Ron,sp of 0.2 mΩcm2 , normalized to the total device area ( Figure 60(b)). Large area devices with a 
current capability of 10 A and a BV of 800 V were also demonstrated simultaneously. Switching 
characteristics  [317]  of these fin power FETs with a BV of 1200 V and output current capability 
of 5 A were compared against commercial 0.9 -1.2 kV class Si and SiC power transistors,  revealing 
the lowest input capacitance ( CISS), output capacitance ( COSS), gate charge ( QG), gate to drain 
charge ( QGD), and reverse recovery charge ( Qrr). These devices exhibited high-frequency ( ∼MHz) 
switching capabilities and superior switching figure o f merits (FOMs) as compared to Si and SiC 
devices used for comparison.  However, these devices break catastrophically , which is possibly due 
to the absence of p -GaN  layers to modulate the electric field peaks. Also, the fabrication and 
control of the fin wi dth could increase the fabrication complexity compared to other vertical 
devices. Since the threshold voltage  is relatively low ~ 1V, a well -designed gate driver is required 
to ensure fail -safe operation.  Recently, fin -FET and nanowire -based structures based on a npn 
vertical stack have been proposed to obtain robust normally -off operation  [318], [319] : the 
integration of a p -type layer in a 3D stack (either nanowire - or fin -based) was demonstrated to be 
a good strategy for achieving robust normally -off operation, also under gate -stress experiments  
[320]  (Figure 63). 
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354