115 
 8.2 Trapping mechanisms  
Traps influence the electrical behavior of transistors since  they are characterized by relatively long 
capture/emission times  [356]  and thus they cha rge up or discharge following fast bias changes 
more slowly than device capacitances that govern the “prompt” device response.   
Regardless of the nature of traps, i.e. whether they are associated to intrinsic crystallographic 
defects, unintentional or int entional impurities or defect -impurity complexes, only those traps that 
have a chance to change their charge state during the device functioning through capture or 
emission of mobile carriers can induce electrical effects of concern for the dynamic device 
performance. Based on these considerations, trapping mechanisms can be categorized as the 
combination of a trap location  plus an associated charging/discharging path and type of involved 
mobile carriers.  
Traps can virtually be located in any semiconductor or dielectric layer as well as at interfaces, but 
locations that have more frequently been associated with harmful effects for GaN  transistors 
include the device surface and the passivation within the gate -drain access region, the barrier, the 
buffer (incl uding the interface with the barrier layer), and, if present, the gate dielectric (including 
the interface with the underlying semiconductor). The reported charging/discharging paths include 
all leakage currents from the device terminals (gate, source, dra in, substrate), the 2DEG at the 
barrier/buffer interface in HEMTs and unrecessed or partially -recessed MIS -HEMTs or the 
channel at the dielectric/ GaN  interface in fully -recessed MIS -HEMTs, charge redistribution 
processes within floating C -doped buffer, as well as high -field mechanisms like field-enhanced  
emission, trap impact ionization, and Zener trapping. One or more of these paths can be activated 
depending on the applied device bias.  
Two general remarks that will apply to all effects described below, a re as follows.  
1) Since all GaN  transistors relevant for applications are n -channel field -effect transistors, traps 
can induce a reduction in the source -to-drain channel conductivity and, through this, in the drain 
current, if the negative trapped charge i ncrease s or the positive one decreases. These changes can 
either be the result of electron capture or hole emission. On the other hand, an increase in the 
channel conductivity and drain current can be promoted by electron emission or hole capture.  
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0061354