TICrepresents NLI examples where inference pro-
cess is internal to the provided text; further divided
into three categories lexical ,syntactic
andfactivity .LOGICAL denotes examples
where inference may involve processes external
to text, and grouped under Connectives , and De-
duction .Connectives involve categories such
asnegation, boolean, quantifiers,
conditionals andcomparatives .De-
duction involves different types of reasoning
such as relational, spatial, causal,
temporal , andcoreference .KNOWLEDGE
indicates examples where external ( world ) or
commonly assumed ( commonsense ) knowledge
is required for inferencing. For detailed deﬁnitions,
we refer the readers to Joshi et al. (2020).
Extending TaxiNLI. We extend the taxonomy
by adding back the (pruned) Numerical category.
We also add a high-level category PRAGMATIC ,
with two sub-categories pre-supposition
andimplicatures . Templates belonging to
factivity fall under the more general capabil-
ity pre-supposition.
3.2 Template Generation for Reasoning
Categories
We aim to test the minimal expected functionali-
ties along each reasoning type individually. Auto-
matic template creation from public datasets is not
straightforward, as examples in public NLI datasets
represent multiple capabilities (Joshi et al., 2020).
Even targeted datasets such as Winograd Schema
Challenge (Levesque et al., 2012) may require care-
ful re-annotation, as examples may require lexical
or boolean reasoning. Instead, we resort to manu-
ally creating templates and use human annotations
to verify the correctness of templated instances. As
and when required, we extend the list of basic key
placeholders (and corresponding lexicon) provided
by the CHECK LISTtool, such as,fPROFESSIONg
= {doctor, actor, politician, :::},fCOM ADJg=
{smarter, taller :::},fCITYg= {Paris, New York
:::}3. We share the list of templates (target phe-
nomena and generated data) with the dataset. Here,
we discuss some challenges we face during tem-
plate creation, and highlight interesting templates
(displayed in Tab. 1).
Linguistic. ForSyntactic , our templates test dif-
ferent types of ellipsis (T2) that require syntactic
understanding of the premise and the hypothesis.
3The complete list is in Appendix.Paraphrasing is hard to test individually, as most
paraphrases in existing-paraphrase corpora (Dolan
and Brockett, 2005; Iyer et al., 2017) are not nec-
essarily entailments, and such paraphrases may in-
volve lexical changes as well.
Logical. ForBoolean , apart from testing log-
icaland (^),or(_); we test ordered resolution
as well (T3, T4). Quantiﬁer templates test the un-
derstanding of universal (all,8), and existential
(some, none;9;:9) quantiﬁcation, and the effects
of interchanging them. For Coreference , we come
up with representative templates to test gendered
(T5), animate vs. inanimate resolution. For Spatial
templates, we utilize the list of spatial prepositions
and adverbs indicating relative positions (near, far,
above, below, left, right). We include a set of
templates testing cardinal directions (north, east,
south and west); and some requiring comparison
of distances (T6, requiring both Spatial and Nu-
merical understanding). Temporal templates cover
relative occurrences of events using prepositions,
such as before ,after , and until. Another set of
templates test the understanding of time in the day
(8AM comes before 2PM), month or year. We add
templates for temporally ordered events (A hap-
pened and then B happened, T7) which require
the inference of earliest or latest events. Causal
template creation is tricky since often reasoning
beyond form is required. However, with speciﬁc
controls placed, we can generate accurate causal
premise-hypothesis pairs. We use a set of action-
verb pairs which are complementary (e.g. give-
take, give-receive, etc.) to describe corresponding
actions between 2 entities and an object (T8). This
still results in limited test cases. Explorations into
leveraging knowledge graphs such as ConceptNet,
ATOMIC (Speer et al., 2016; Sap et al., 2019) to
retrieve appropriate causal action phrases could be
a way to tackle the issue. Most LOGICAL cate-
gory templates implicitly test the Relational (de-
ductive reasoning with relations in text) capability,
and hence we add three representative templates.
Templates falling under Numerical test a basic un-
derstanding of counting (T9, T10), addition, sub-
traction and numerical comparison.
Knowledge. ForTaxonomic , we require tem-
plates where a taxonomic hierarchy (external to
text) is implicitly required to infer the hypothesis.
Templates either require to infer A is a type of B
(“P: A has some properties. H: A is a type of B.”;)
or utilise that information (similar to Talmor et al.