Our contributions are the following. 1) First, we
create a template-based test-suite1(194 templates,
184k examples) for the NLI task by extending a
recently published reasoning taxonomy for NLI
(Joshi et al., 2020), and benchmark SOTA NLI sys-
tems that reveals new interesting facts about them.
2) We observe inconsistencies in the performance
of the models within templates as well as across
similar templates (perturbations of the same tem-
plate), 3) performance inconsistency within tem-
plates (across varying lexicon) reveals new biases
for BERT, and 4) Through a user study using sim-
ulation experiments, we provide an indication of
human judgement about how inconsistencies affect
predictability of models. Particularly, our experi-
ments collectively indicate that RoBERTa is more
“robust" (indeed!) and predictable than BERT.
2 Related Work
The conﬂicting performance of Transformer-based
PTLMs in large natural language understanding
benchmarks and targeted phenomena-wise tests
have led to a wave of work in probing and attempt-
ing to understand these models. Extensive probing
tasks have been implemented in order to investigate
how and where (within the model) linguistic infor-
mation has been encoded (Tenney et al., 2019a,b;
Hewitt and Manning, 2019; Jawahar et al., 2019;
Liu et al., 2019a; Kim et al., 2019). However, the ef-
fectiveness of the leading evaluation methodology,
aka probing tasks, have come into question. For
example, Ravichander et al. (2020) cautions that
BERT may not understand some “concepts” even
though probing studies may indicate otherwise.
At a semantic level, and more speciﬁcally with
respect to the NLI task, inference datasets have
been curated focusing on testing a range of rea-
soning capabilities (Poliak et al., 2018; Richardson
et al., 2019). Several work (McCoy et al., 2019;
Kaushik et al., 2020; Glockner et al., 2018) de-
veloped targeted evaluation sets to adversarially
challenge these large PTLMs and demonstrated
shortcomings. However, these methods rely on
the aggregate statistic of accuracy to assess perfor-
mance, which makes it tricky to pinpoint where ex-
actly the model is failing, and how to remedy the is-
sues (Wu et al., 2019). The recent work by Ribeiro
et al. (2020) takes a different route. Inspired by
software testing, authors propose creation of a set
of model-agnostic test cases that capture basic ex-
1We will make the dataset available for public use.pected functionality from a trained system. The
revelation that SOTA systems fail on such minimal
functionality tests has motivated the community
to look at behavioral testing methodologies more
closely, through which we can deﬁne capabilities
and test them individually in a scalable manner.
Language understanding tasks such as NLI in-
troduces two additional challenges. Understanding
requires a set of theoretically well-deﬁned types of
reasoning capabilities, as put forward by the theo-
ries of semantics and logic (Sowa, 2010; Wittgen-
stein, 1922). Such types deﬁne the necessary capa-
bilities that an NLU (or NLI) system should pos-
sess; some of which are missing in the CHECK LIST
work (Ribeiro et al., 2020). A goal of evaluation is
also to develop a holistic intuition about model’s be-
havior, and the behavioral summary from CHECK -
LISTby itself may not be sufﬁcient in achieving
such a goal. These central challenges are relevant
for all NLU tasks, and constitute the primary focus
of our work.
3 A C HECK LISTfor the NLI task
The CHECK LISTmethodology (Ribeiro et al.,
2020) assists users in testing NLP models by cre-
ating templates for a variety of linguistic capabili-
ties, coupled with test types (Minimal Functionality
tests (MFTs), Invariance tests (INVs), and Directed
Expectation tests (DIRs)) which make the corre-
sponding capability easy to test. These templates
can then be used to generated multiple examples
using the CHECK LISTtool2. An example CHECK -
LISTtemplate for NLI task, is shown in Table 2.
Here NAME, ADJ are placeholders. Correspond-
ing lexicons are: {NAME} = {Alexia, John, Mia,
...}, {ADJ} = {good, bad, kind, ...}. Synonym(.)
stands for a synonym of the word (from WordNet).
The capabilities discussed in Ribeiro et al. (2020)
are targeted to test the robustness of NLP systems
against a minimal set of properties that are neces-
sary yet feasible to check. However in tasks such
as NLI, inferencing often requires (one or more)
linguistic and logical reasoning capabilities. Our
goal is to test the systems against such reasoning
types. Even if some reasoning types are deemed not
necessary, such tests cumulatively should inform
about the systems’ abilities in a holistic manner.
This presents us with two challenges for templated
test-suite generation for the NLI task (or tasks that
require different types of reasoning): 1) careful
2https://github.com/marcotcr/checklist