(from Premise and hypothesis) are highlighted us-
ing LIME output. The variations are created by
varying where the nearest neighbors come from.
In Stage 1, we choose the nearest neighbors from
the MultiNLI validation set and Stage 2 includes
nearest neighbors from CheckListNLI dataset re-
spectively (barring the corresponding test template
examples). To calculate nearest neighbors, we use
the underlying system’s (BERT/RoBERTa) ﬁnal
hidden-layer embeddings (corresp. to [CLS] to-
ken) and calculate cosine distances.
Task, Metrics and Participants. In this study,
we restrict ourselves to simulation questions, where
the participants are asked to simulate ( anticipate )
an underlying blackbox system’s (instructions in
Fig. 3) prediction given explanation and the input.
Since Transformers often show different types of
bias and its not known whether they follow hu-
man reasoning, we track two metrics: 1) predic-
tion accuracy, 2) mutual agreement score. Con-
suming such examples and being able to gener-
alize based on explanations on nearest neighbors
require a certain amount of analytical reasoning
skills. Hence, instead of going to crowd-sourced
platforms, we choose a total of 10 International Lin-
guistics Olympiad participants9. Such participants
are trained on analytical text-based puzzle solving,
but not trained in formal Linguistics or Logic.
5.1 Findings and Observations
Figure 4: Average Accuracy and Mutual pairwise
agreement for participants (out of 125).
In Figure 4, we report results from Stages 1 and
2 for BERT (referred to as B1, B2) and Stage 2
for RoBERTa (R2). The average prediction accu-
racy of the participants increase from 58:76:8
(out of 125) to 61:46:8from Stage B1 to B2.
Similarly, average mutual agreement among par-
ticipants increases from 74:75to79:8, showing
9https://www.ioling.org/that the nearest neighbors from CheckListNLI (rep-
resenting disentangled phenomena) enable better
explanation. Upon interviewing participants, some
mentioned their responses in stage B1 was often
“random”. This is intuitive as MNLI examples are
often quite complex with long sentences. So, we
repeat only stage 2 for RoBERTa (R2). For R2,
we clearly see a 12:5%improvement in prediction
accuracy with a 2:62% improvement in agreement
score. This indicates that even though inconsisten-
cies exists for both models, participants were able
to anticipate RoBERTa’s behavior better.
We also recorded responses about the different
stages of study from participants. Most partici-
pants found that nearest neighbor examples were
most relevant for B2 (5 out of 8) and R2 (4 out
of 8). The LIME-based highlights and predicted
labels were both useful in B2 and R2. A partici-
pant commented that "The highlighted words and
predictions were very helpful. Relied completely
on both". Interestingly, the participants were only
told that the systems are different for B2 and R2,
without revealing any further detail. But, most
people ( 60%) found that its easier to predict the
system’s behavior for R2. Participants mentioned
that task interface was easy to navigate and they
had no difﬁculty understanding the instructions.
6 Conclusion
Following the recent XAI literature (Jacovi et al.,
2021), we aim to quantify progress towards more
predictable natural language understanding models
(especially PTLMs). To this end, we select the NLI
task which requires reasoning, and conduct detailed
behavioral analysis of state-of-the-art NLI systems.
We adapt and extend a recently proposed taxonomy
for NLI ( TAXINLI). Through a templated test-suite
(194 templates, 17 reasoning types), we observe
that for both BERT and RoBERTa, model inconsis-
tencies can be found both across templates (i.e., log-
ical, lexical perturbation of templates) and within
templates while only varying lexicon. Furthermore,
we design a human study where we ask humans to
predict model behavior given behavioral informa-
tion about NLI systems. A 12:5%increase in hu-
man prediction accuracy for RoBERTa over BERT
provides an indication that, despite ﬁne-grained in-
consistencies, RoBERTa is more predictable than
BERT. Our work shows how behavioral informa-
tion may help quantify progress towards systems
with more predictable (therefore trusted; (Jacovi