lyze BERT, DistilBERT and RoBERTa’s capability-
wise and intra-template performance.
Capability-wise Performance. The capability-
wise average accuracy of the models are shown
in Figure 1(a). We observe that all models per-
form well on Lexical, Syntactic and Presupposition
capabilities. Within the Logical category, the re-
sults are comparably poor and inconsistent across
both the capabilities and model dimension. The
same holds for the Knowledge categories and Im-
plicature templates. For further analysis, we mark
a template as passed if the model’s accuracy is
above 80%, asunsure if the accuracy is in middle
bins ( 20-80%), and failed if less than 20%. For
negation , all models fail on template containing
“but not” (P: Janet, but not Stephen, is a dancer.
H: Stephen is a dancer.) For boolean , we observe
that BERT and DistilBERT are unsure on ordered
resolution; whereas RoBERTa is biased towards en-
tailment label ( unsure for contradiction). Moreover
for RoBERTa, the bias shifts towards contradiction
with the addition of “not” in the hypothesis even
if the correct label is entailment (P: Margaret and
Robert are from America and Russia respectively.
H: Margaret is not from Russia.). For comparative ,
all models fail on template with insufﬁcient infor-
mation (P: Philip is more handsome than Frances.
Philip is more handsome than Kevin. H: Kevin is
more handsome than Frances.). BERT and Distil-
BERT are unsure on reasoning about hypothesis in
the presence of superlative adjective in the premise
(P: Among Emily, Daniel, and Joseph, the bravest
is Daniel. H: Emily is braver than Daniel.) Dis-
tilBERT fails on a template (P: John is taller than
Mia. H: Mia is taller than John.) when the place-
holders are reversed. Such perturbations are more
common for Quantiﬁer . BERT and DistilBERT fail
when “all” is replaced by “some” in the hypothesis.
Within numerical , RoBERTa seems better at count-
ing, however it fails when the hypothesis refers to
an incorrect count. BERT and DistilBERT mod-
els seems unsure for all counting-related templates.
All models struggle with templates related to ad-
dition and subtraction (often showing label bias).
Under Spatial , all models struggle with cardinal
directions and spatial relations (left, right). Inter-
estingly, RoBERTa fails at spatial distance com-
parisons (while being able to compare number of
coins under Numeric). Within Temporal , all mod-
els are unable to compare year of birth and time of
the day. A surprising observation is that BERT issensitive to the lexical substitution of “before” (“af-
ter”) with “earlier than” (“later than”). RoBERTa is
able to accurately reason “A happened before/after
B” over two to three events, whereas BERT and
DistilBERT results are unsure . All models fail to
detect the “ﬁrst” or the “last” event in a sequence.
Within coreference RoBERTa is able to accurately
resolve male and female names. Lastly, for Causal
templates, RoBERTa seems more accurate than
both BERT and DistilBERT. For knowledge tem-
plates, all models consistently suffer. On probing
implicature templates, we observe that models vary
between logical (P: Silverware and plate lie on the
table. Barbara asked for the plate. H: Barbara also
asked for the silverware.; predicting neutral over
contradiction) and implicative (P: Some of the balls
are purple in colour. H: All of the balls are purple
in colour.; predicting contradiction over neutral),
depending on the template.
Intra-Template Performance. In Figure 1(b),
we plot the histogram of number of templates
across different accuracy bins. The middle bins (20-
80) indicate that models are unsure on the tested
phenomena. This happens most often for BERT
(58/194) and DistilBERT (52/194) compared to
RoBERTa (28/194). We analyzed the bias of BERT
across the vocabulary of placeholders. We exam-
ine the template P: {NAME1}, but not {NAME2},
is a {PROFESSION}. H: {NAME2} is a {PRO-
FESSION}. Template accuracy highly varies when
profession is ﬁxed to engineer ( 0%), dancer ( 9%)
vs. doctor ( 80%) and professor ( 92%). Com-
pared to professions, we see only limited varia-
tions, when names are restricted to male vs. female
names. Similar effects are seen for adjectives in P :
{NAME1} is {ADJ}. {NAME2} is {COM ADJ}.
H : {NAME2} is {COM ADJ} than {NAME1}.
Template accuracy varies when adjectives ﬁxed to
bigger ( 0%), sweeter ( 16%), vs. creepier ( 100% ).
To dive deeper, we ﬁrst analyze the effect of
placeholders on template accuracy using Linear
Regression as a surrogate model for feature impor-
tance. The feature vector is a one-hot representa-
tion created using the concatenation of placehold-
ers, top 20 other words (using BOW) and template
label. We show the coefﬁcients for placeholders in
Fig. 2 (rare placeholders are omitted). Placeholders
COLOR and ACTION have high positive coefﬁ-
cients as they co-occur with quantiﬁer, syntactic,
and pre-supposition templates where the models
perform well. Similarly, high negative coefﬁcient