Trusting RoBERTa over BERT: Insights from CheckListing the Natural
Language Inference Task
Ishan Tarunesh
Samsung Korea
ishantarunesh@gmail.comSomak Aditya andMonojit Choudhury
Microsoft Research India, Bengaluru, India
{t-soadit,monojitc}@microsoft.com
Abstract
The recent state-of-the-art natural language un-
derstanding (NLU) systems often behave un-
predictably, failing on simpler reasoning exam-
ples. Despite this, there has been limited fo-
cus on quantifying progress towards systems
with more predictable behavior. We think that
reasoning capability-wise behavioral summary
(proposed in Ribeiro et al. (2020)) is a step to-
wards bridging this gap. We create a C HECK -
LISTtest-suite (184K examples) for the Nat-
ural Language Inference (NLI) task, a repre-
sentative NLU task. We benchmark state-of-
the-art NLI systems on this test-suite, which
reveals ﬁne-grained insights into the reason-
ing abilities of BERT and RoBERTa. Our
analysis further reveals inconsistencies of the
models on examples derived from the same
template or distinct templates but pertaining
to same reasoning capability, indicating that
generalizing the models’ behavior through ob-
servations made on a CheckList is non-trivial.
Through an user-study, we ﬁnd that users were
able to utilize behavioral information to gener-
alize much better for examples predicted from
RoBERTa, compared to that of BERT.
1 Introduction
According to sociologists and the XAI literature
(Jacovi et al., 2021), a pre-requisite to extrinsic
human-AI trust establishment is for users to be able
toanticipate the model’s behavior. In NLP, while
we expect pre-trained language models (PTLM)
to power agents interacting with humans, often
Transformers-based state-of-the-art architectures
(BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and its variants) behave
unpredictably showing poor generalization abili-
ties for simpler non-adversarial examples (Kaushik
et al., 2020; Richardson et al., 2020) while achiev-
ing state-of-the-art in complex examples requiring
composite reasoning (Wang et al., 2018). This
has motivated researchers to re-think evaluation
Work done when author was a student at IIT Bombay.methodologies, which is a key component of extrin-
sictrust. Recently, inspired by behavioral testing
(Beizer, 1995), authors in (Ribeiro et al., 2020) pro-
posed creation of template-based test-suites, called
CHECK LIST, that has a broader coverage ranging
from the minimal expected functionality to more
complicated tests across a range of capabilities.
Moving beyond capability-wise probing and cloze-
task formulations, the methodology produces a be-
havioral summary that aggregates different short-
comings of the SOTA models across capabilities in
a disentagled manner. In this work, we hypothesize
that the behavioral summary using the CHECK LIST
method for a natural language understanding task
will help humans form a holistic intuition, that will
in turn form the basis of quantifying the predictabil-
ityof models through humans.
To test this central hypothesis of our work, we
choose the Natural Language Inferencing (NLI)
task as it tests reasoning capabilities explicitly, and
create a CHECK LISTthat enables evaluation of
whether NLI systems exhibit such reasoning ca-
pabilities. In the process, we extend the list of
capabilities in Ribeiro et al. (2020) to cover more
interesting linguistic and logical reasoning phenom-
ena (such as causal, spatial, pragmatic) required in
NLI (or similar tasks). We discuss how we come up
with templates for such reasoning capabilities. The
evaluation results on CHECK LISTtest-suite pro-
vide a ﬁne-grained disentangled view of a model’s
capabilities, untangling the effects of different phe-
nomena. However, for models such as BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019b),
we discover capability-wise and intra-template in-
consistencies. Even though, the average aggregate
accuracies tell a clear story, such inconsistencies
are found in most systems we evaluated. As a
potential resolution, we design a human study and
through a simulation experiment (Lage et al., 2019),
we see how human judgement can be used to quan-
tify model predictability.arXiv:2107.07229v1  [cs.AI]  15 Jul 2021