Figure 2: Figure showing the regression coefﬁcients for
common placeholders for all three models.
for YEAR is due to models being unable to com-
pare year of birth. Placeholders MALE NAME and
FEMALE NAME turns out to be interesting hav-
ing negative coefﬁcient for BERT and DistilBERT,
and near-zero coefﬁcient for RoBERTa. This is
intuitive as RoBERTa is better at resolving gen-
dered coreferences. Interestingly, NAME is more
negative in BERT, showing the hidden effect of
how varying names can affect BERT more than
RoBERTa. Similarly, models perform decently
on templates involving comparative (COM ADJ)
while struggling in templates involving superlatives
(SUP ADJ). The behavioral analysis gives us an in-
dication that RoBERTa-large may indeed be more
robust and accurate, but inter-template inconsisten-
cies begs for further exploration.
5 Consulting Humans to Quantify Model
Inconsistency
The inconsistencies observed for both BERT and
RoBERTa begs the question as to how to quantify
the progress towards models with increased pre-
dictable behavior7. Inspired by the recent XAI liter-
ature (Gilpin et al., 2018; Lipton, 2018; Lage et al.,
2019), we design a human study where humans
are shown different types of post-hoc behavioral
information and asked to predict system’s behavior
on new examples. This premise presents us with
many dimensions of control, which may affect the
outcome of the study: 1) the level of abstraction
of behavioral information, 2) example-based (lo-
cal) vs. global summary, 3) interface design (or
presentation of such information), 4) baseline ex-
planation, 5) choice of test examples, 6) task (veri-
ﬁcation, simulation or counterfactual), 7) choice of
participants.
7Training machine learning models to predict behavior
adds more confounders that can affect the analysis.
Figure 3: Landing Page Instructions to participants.
Study in https://bit.ly/3huowZG
Local Explanations and Interface Design.
From multiple pilot studies using global behavioral
summary (such as Template-wise accuracy scores),
and relevant template-level local summaries8, we
observe that global template-wise accuracies have
large cognitive load for participants, and template-
wise aggregate accuracies are hard to comprehend
(and predict) without the knowledge of the lexi-
con that the keywords represent (owing to intra-
template inconsistencies). Hence, in this study, we
ﬁxate on providing local example-based explana-
tions. For the explanations interface design, we
follow Lage et al. (2019). Through various pilot
studies, authors in Lage et al. (2019) found that the
use of three intuitive boxes – namely, the input box,
the explanation box, and the question box; makes
the information easier to follow. We observe that
this vastly improves relative to our earlier pilot stud-
ies based on Google Forms-based questionnaire.
Test Example Selection and Baseline. To
choose test examples, we choose 25 test templates
from CheckListNLI carefully by balancing tem-
plates representing different accuracy buckets, and
ensuring inclusion of multiple capability-templates.
For each template, we show 5 random test exam-
ples. As a baseline, we consider example-based
LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) explanations. For
each test example, ﬁve nearest neighbor examples
are chosen, where the top three attended words
8Detailed in Appendix. Current study (Stage B1):
checklist-nli.herokuapp.com/A