et al., 2021)) behavior.
Ethics Statement
As our work involves human study of the behavior
of a blackbox NLI system, we took an Internal Re-
view Board (IRB) approval from our organization
for the study and asked for all necessary consent. A
consent form was shared with all participants, and
all participants formally agreed to participate by
electronically signing the form. To the best of our
knowledge we ensured that the study did not ex-
pose them to any possible harmful content (in text,
images or other forms). We also did not collect or
share any personally identiﬁable information.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Pratik Joshi for contribution
to coreference templates. We would also like to
thank Sebastian Santy, Saujas Vadguru and Aalok
Sathe for attempting and providing useful insights
during human study pilots.
References
Boris Beizer. 1995. Black-box testing: techniques for
functional testing of software and systems . John Wi-
ley & Sons, Inc.
Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Chaitanya
Malaviya, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ari Holtzman, Han-
nah Rashkin, Doug Downey, Wen tau Yih, and Yejin
Choi. 2020. Abductive commonsense reasoning. In
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions .
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
4171–4186.
Bill Dolan and Chris Brockett. 2005. Automati-
cally constructing a corpus of sentential paraphrases.
InThird International Workshop on Paraphrasing
(IWP2005) . Asia Federation of Natural Language
Processing.
Leilani H Gilpin, David Bau, Ben Z Yuan, Ayesha Ba-
jwa, Michael Specter, and Lalana Kagal. 2018. Ex-
plaining explanations: An overview of interpretabil-
ity of machine learning. In 2018 IEEE 5th Interna-
tional Conference on data science and advanced an-
alytics (DSAA) , pages 80–89. IEEE.Max Glockner, Vered Shwartz, and Yoav Goldberg.
2018. Breaking NLI systems with sentences that re-
quire simple lexical inferences. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,
pages 650–655, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
H. P. Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In Pe-
ter Cole and Jerry L. Morgan, editors, Syntax and
Semantics: Vol. 3: Speech Acts , pages 41–58. Aca-
demic Press, New York.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and
Weizhu Chen. 2020. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced
bert with disentangled attention.
John Hewitt and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. A
structural probe for ﬁnding syntax in word repre-
sentations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4129–4138, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Shankar Iyer, Nikhil Dandekar, and Kornel Csernai.
2017. First quora dataset release: Question pairs.
Alon Jacovi, Ana Marasovi ´c, Tim Miller, and Yoav
Goldberg. 2021. Formalizing trust in artiﬁcial intel-
ligence: Prerequisites, causes and goals of human
trust in ai. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Confer-
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ,
FAccT ’21, page 624–635, New York, NY , USA. As-
sociation for Computing Machinery.
Ganesh Jawahar, Benoît Sagot, and Djamé Seddah.
2019. What does BERT learn about the structure
of language? In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 3651–3657, Florence, Italy. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Paloma Jeretic, Alex Warstadt, Suvrat Bhooshan, and
Adina Williams. 2020. Are natural language infer-
ence models IMPPRESsive? Learning IMPlicature
and PRESupposition. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 8690–8705, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Pratik Joshi, Somak Aditya, Aalok Sathe, and Monojit
Choudhury. 2020. Taxinli: Taking a ride up the nlu
hill. In CoNLL .
Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2009. Speech
and Language Processing: An Introduction to Nat-
ural Language Processing, Computational Linguis-
tics, and Speech Recognition , second edition. Pear-
son Prentice Hall.
Divyansh Kaushik, Eduard Hovy, and Zachary C Lip-
ton. 2020. Learning the difference that makes
a difference with counterfactually-augmented data.
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR) .