ﬁcient information to reconstruct input images by a paired
decoder. Many variants of auto-encoders [ 12,15] have been
proposed in literature but all of them stick to essentially the
same idea of reconstructing input data at the output end, and
thus we classify them into the Auto-Encoding Data (AED)
paradigm illustrated in Figure 1(a).
On the other hand, GANs learn the feature representa-
tion in an unsupervised fashion by generating images from
input noises with a pair of adversarially trained generator
and discriminator. The input noises into the generator can
be viewed as the feature representations of its output, s-
ince they contain necessary information to produce the cor-
responding images through the generator. To obtain the
“noise” feature representation for each image, an encoder
can be trained to form an auto-encoder architecture with the
generator as the decoder. In this way, given an input image,
the encoder can directly output its noise representation pro-
ducing the original image through the generator [ 6,8]. This
combines the strength of both AED and GAN models. Re-
cently, these models become a popular alternative to auto-
encoders in many unsupervised and semi-supervised tasks,
as they can generate the distribution of photo-realistic im-
ages as a whole so that better feature representations can be
derived from the trained generator.
Besides auto-encoders and GANs, various paradigms of
self-supervised learning methods exist without using man-
ually labeled data. These methods create self-supervised
objectives to train the networks. For example, Doersch et
al. [5] propose to train neural networks by predicting the
relative positions of two randomly sampled patches. Mehdi
and Favaro [ 18] report to train a convolutional neural net-
work by solving Jigsaw puzzles. Image colorization has
also been used as a self-supervised task to train convolu-
tional networks in literature [ 30,17]. Instead, Dosovitskiy
et al. [ 7] train neural networks by discriminating among
a set of surrogate classes artiﬁcially formed by applying
various transformations to image patches, while Gidaris et
al. [10] attempt to classify image rotations of four discrete
angles. These approaches explore supervisory signals at
various levels of visual structures to train networks without
manually labeling data. Unsupervised features have also
been extracted from videos by estimating the self-motion of
moving objects between consecutive frames [ 1].
In contrast, we are motivated to learn unsupervised
feature representations by Auto-Encoding Transformation-
s(AET) rather than the data themselves. Speciﬁcally, by
sampling some operators to transform images, we seek to
train auto-encoders that can directly reconstruct these op-
erators from the learned feature representations between o-
riginal and transformed images. We believe as long as the
trained features are sufﬁciently informative, we can decode
the transformations from the features that well encode vi-
sual structures of images. As compared with the conven-tional paradigm of Auto-Encoding Data (AED) in Figure 1,
AET focuses on exploring dynamics of feature represen-
tations under different transformations, thereby revealing
not only static visual structures but also how they would
change by applying different transformations. Moreover,
there is no restriction on the form of transformations ap-
plicable in the proposed AET framework. This allows us
to ﬂexibly explore a large variety of transformations, rang-
ing from simple image warping to any parametric and non-
parametric transformations. We will demonstrate the AET
representations outperform the other unsupervised model-
s in experiments, greatly pushing the state-of-the-art unsu-
pervised method much closer to the upper bound set by the
fully supervised counterparts.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We
ﬁrst review the related work in Section 2, and then formally
present the proposed AET model in Section 3. We conduct
experiments in Section 4to compare its performances with
the other state-of-the-art unsupervised models. Finally, we
summarize conclusions in Section 5.
2. Related Work
Auto-Encoders. The use of auto-encoder architecture in
learning representations in an unsupervised fashion has
been extensively studied in literature [ 13,14,27]. These
existing auto-encoders are all based on reconstructing the
input data at the output end through a pair of encoder and
decoder. The encoder acts as an extractor of features usu-
ally compactly representing the most essential information
about input data, while a decoder is jointly trained to recov-
er the input data upon the extracted features. The idea is that
a good feature representation should contain sufﬁcient in-
formation to reconstruct the input data. A wide spectrum of
auto-encoders have been proposed following this paradigm
of auto-encoding data (AED). For example, the variation-
al auto-encoder [ 15] explicitly introduces probabilistic as-
sumption about the distribution of features extracted from
data. Denoising auto-encoder [ 27] aims to learn more ro-
bust representation by reconstructing original inputs from
noise-corrupted inputs. Contrastive Auto-Encoder [ 26] pe-
nalizes abrupt changes of representations around given da-
ta, thus encouraging representation invariance to small per-
turbation on input data. Zhang et al. [ 29] present a cross-
channel auto-encoder by reconstructing a subset of data
channels from another subset with the cross-channel fea-
tures being concatenated as data representation. Hinton et
al. [12] propose a transforming auto-encoder in the context
of capsule nets, which is still trained in the AED fashion by
minimizing the discrepancy between the reconstructed and
target images. Conceptually, this differs from the proposed
AET that aims to learn unsupervised features by directly
minimizing the input and output transformations in an end-
to-end auto-encoder architecture.
2548