Generative Adversarial Nets. Besides the auto-encoders,
Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) become popular for
training network representations of data in an unsupervised
fashion. Unlike the auto-encoders, GANs attempt to direct-
ly generate data from noises drawn from a random distri-
bution. By viewing the sampled noises as the coordinates
over the manifold of real data, one can use them as the fea-
tures to represent data. For this purpose, one usually needs
to train a data encoder to ﬁnd the noise that can generate
the input images through the GAN generator. This can be
implemented by jointly training a pair of mutually inverse
generator and encoder [ 6,8]. A prominent characteristic of
GANs that make them different from auto-encoders is they
do not rely on one-to-one reconstruction of input data at
the output end. Instead, they focus on discovering and gen-
erating the entire distribution of data over the underlying
manifold. Recent progress has shown the promising gener-
alization ability of regularized GANs in generating unseen
data based on the Lipschitz assumption on the real data dis-
tribution [ 23,2], and this shows great potential of GANs in
providing expressive representation of images [ 6,8,9].
Self-Supervised Representation Learning. In addition
to auto-encoders and GANs, other unsupervised learning
methods explore various self-supervised signals to train
deep neural networks. These self-supervised signals can
be directly derived from data themselves without having
to be manually labeled. For example, Doersch et al. [ 5]
use the relative positions of two randomly sampled patch-
es from an image as self-supervised information to train the
model. Mehdi and Favaro [ 18] propose to train a convolu-
tional neural network by solving Jigsaw puzzles. Noroozi
et al. [ 19] learn counting features that satisfy equivalence
relations between downsampled and tiled images, and Gi-
daris et al. [ 10] train neural networks by classifying image
rotations in a discrete set. Dosovitskiy et al. [ 7] train C-
NNs by classifying a set of surrogate classes, each of which
is formed by applying various transformations to an indi-
vidual image. However, the resultant features could over-
discriminate visually similar images as they always belong
to different surrogate classes, and the training cost is much
more expensive as every training example results in an in-
dividual surrogate class. The idea of self-supervised learn-
ing has been employed to train feature representations for
videos through the self-motion of moving objects [ 1]. In
summary, this type of approaches train networks using self-
supervised objectives instead of manually labeled data.
3. AET: The Proposed Approach
We elaborate on the proposed paradigm of auto-
encoding transformations (AET) in this section. First, we
will formally present the formulation of AET in Section 3.1.
Then we will instantiate AET with different genres of trans-
formations in Section 3.2.3.1. The Formulation
Suppose that we sample a transformation tfrom a dis-
tributionT(e.g., image warping, projective transformation
and even GAN-induced transformation, c.f. Section 3.2for
more details). It is applied to an image xdrawn from a data
distribution X, resulting in the transformed version t(x)of
x.
Our goal is to learn an encoder E:x/mapsto→E(x),
which aims to extract the representation E(x)for a sam-
plex. Meanwhile, we wish to learn a decoder D:
[E(x),E(t(x))]/mapsto→ˆt, which gives an estimate ˆtof input
transformation by decoding from the encoded representa-
tions of original and transformed images. Since the predic-
tion on the input transformation is made through the encod-
ed features rather than the original and transformed images,
it forces the model to extract expressive features as a proxy
to represent images.
The learning problem of Auto-Encoding Transforma-
tions (AET) now boils down to jointly training the feature
encoderEand the transformation decoder D. To this end,
let us choose a loss function ℓ(t,ˆt)that quantiﬁes the dif-
ference between a transformation tand its estimate ˆt. Then
the AET can be solved by minimizing this loss as
min
E,DE
t∼T,x∼Xℓ(t,ˆt)
where the transformation estimate ˆtis a function of the en-
coderEand the decoder Dsuch that
ˆt=D[E(x),E(t(x))],
and the expectation Eis taken over the sampled transforma-
tions and data. Like in training other deep neural networks,
the network parameters of EandDare jointly updated over
mini-batches by back-propagating the gradient of the loss ℓ.
3.2. The AET Family
A large variety of transformations can be easily incorpo-
rated into the AET formulation. Here we discuss three gen-
res, parameterized, GAN-induced and non-parameterized
transformations, to instantiate the AET models.
Parameterized Transformations. Suppose that we have a
family of transformations T={tθ|θ∼Θ}with their pa-
rametersθsampled from a distribution Θ. This equivalent-
ly deﬁnes a distribution of parameterized transformations,
where each transformation can be represented by its param-
eter and the loss ℓ(tθ,tˆθ)between transformations can be
captured by the difference in terms of their parameters. For
example, many transformations such as afﬁne and projec-
tive transformations can be represented by a parameterized
matrixM(θ)∈R3×3between homogeneous coordinates
of images before and after transformations. Such a matrix
captures the change of geometric structures caused by a giv-
en transformation, and thus it is straightforward to deﬁne
2549