ℓ(tθ,tˆθ) =1
2/bardblM(θ)−M(ˆθ)/bardbl2
2to model the difference
between the target and the estimated transformations. In
experiments, we will compare different instances of param-
eterized transformations in this category and demonstrate
they can yield competitive performances on training AET.
GAN-Induced Transformations. One can choose other
forms of transformations without explicit geometric impli-
cations like the afﬁne and the projective transformations.
Let us consider a GAN generator that transforms an input
over the manifold of real images. For example, in [ 24], a
local generator G(x,z)is learned with a sampled random
noisezthat parameterizes the underlying transformation
around a given image x. This effectively deﬁnes a GAN-
induced transformation such that tz(x) =G(x,z)with
the transformation parameter z. One can directly choose
the lossℓ(tz,tˆz) =1
2/bardblz−ˆz/bardbl2
2between noise parameter-
s, and train a network Dto decode the parameter ˆzfrom
the features E(x)andE(tz(x))by the encoder network
E. Compared with the classical transformations that change
low-level appearance and geometric structures in images,
the GAN-induced transformations can change high-level se-
mantics in images. For example, the GANs have demon-
strated their ability of manipulating attributes such as ages,
hairs, genders and wearing glasses in facial images as well
as changing the furniture layout in bedroom images [ 25].
This enables AET to explore a richer family of transforma-
tions to learn more expressive representations.
Non-Parametric Transformations. Even if a transforma-
tiont∈ T is hard to parameterize, we can still deﬁne the
lossℓ(t,ˆt)by measuring the average difference between the
transformations of randomly sampled images. Formally,
ℓ(t,ˆt) =E
x∼Xdist(t(x),ˆt(x)) (1)
wheredist(·,·)is a distance between two transformed im-
ages, and the expectation is taken over random samples. For
an input non-parametric transformation t, we also need a
decoder network that outputs a transformation ˆtto estimate
the input transformation. This can be done by choosing
a parameterized transformation tˆθasˆtto estimate t. Al-
though the non-parametric tmay not fall in the space of pa-
rameterized transformations, such an approximation should
be enough for unsupervised learning since our ultimate goal
is not to obtain an accurate estimate of input transformation;
instead, we aim at learning a good feature representation to
give us the best estimate that can be achieved in the param-
eterized transformation space.
Note that parameterized transformations can also be
plugged into Eq. ( 1) to train the corresponding AET by min-
imizing this loss function. However, in experiments, we
ﬁnd the performance is not as good as the AET trained with
the parameter-based loss. This is probably caused by the
Figure 2: An illustration of the network architectures for
training and evaluating AET on the CIFAR-10 dataset.
fact that the loss ( 1) cannot accurately reﬂect the actual dif-
ference between transformations unless a sufﬁciently large
number of images are sampled. Thus, we suggest using the
parameter-based loss for the AET with parameterized trans-
formations.
We have shown that a wide spectrum of transformations
can be adopted in training AET. In this paper, we will focus
on the parameterized transformations as they do not involve
training extra models like GAN-induced transformations, or
require choosing auxiliary transformations to approximate
non-parametric forms. This allows us to make a straightfor-
ward and fair comparison with the unsupervised methods
in literature as shown in the experiments. Moreover, the
GAN-induced transformations greatly rely on the quality
of transformed images, but existing GAN models are stil-
l unable to generate high-quality images with ﬁne-grained
details at a high resolution. Thus, we leave it in future to s-
tudy the GAN-induced and non-parametric transformations
for training the AET representations.
4. Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the proposed AET model on
the CIFAR-10, ImageNet and Places datasets by comparing
it against different unsupervised methods. Unsupervised
learning is usually evaluated indirectly based on the clas-
siﬁcation performance by using the learned representations.
For the sake of fair comparison, we follow the test protocols
widely adopted in literature.
4.1. CIFAR­10 Experiments
First, we evaluate the AET model on the CIFAR-10
dataset. We consider two different transformations – afﬁne
and projective transformations – to train AET, and name
the resultant models AET-afﬁne and AET-project for brevi-
ty, respectively.
2550