AET vs. AED: Unsupervised Representation Learning by Auto-Encoding
Transformations rather than Data
Liheng Zhang1,∗,Guo-Jun Qi1,2,†, Liqiang Wang3, Jiebo Luo4
1Laboratory for MAchine Perception and LEarning (MAPLE)
http://maple-lab.net/
2Huawei Cloud,3University of Central Florida,4University of Rochester
guojun.qi@huawei.com
http://maple-lab.net/projects/AET.htm
Abstract
The success of deep neural networks often relies on a
large amount of labeled examples, which can be difﬁcult to
obtain in many real scenarios. To address this challenge,
unsupervised methods are strongly preferred for training
neural networks without using any labeled data. In this
paper, we present a novel paradigm of unsupervised repre-
sentation learning by Auto-Encoding Transformation (AET)
in contrast to the conventional Auto-Encoding Data (AED)
approach. Given a randomly sampled transformation, AET
seeks to predict it merely from the encoded features as ac-
curately as possible at the output end. The idea is the fol-
lowing: as long as the unsupervised features successful-
ly encode the essential information about the visual struc-
tures of original and transformed images, the transforma-
tion can be well predicted. We will show that this AET
paradigm allows us to instantiate a large variety of trans-
formations, from parameterized, to non-parameterized and
GAN-induced ones. Our experiments show that AET great-
ly improves over existing unsupervised approaches, set-
ting new state-of-the-art performances being greatly clos-
er to the upper bounds by their fully supervised counter-
parts on CIFAR-10, ImageNet and Places datasets. Our
source codes are available at https://github.com/
maple-research-lab/AET .
1. Introduction
The great success in applying deep neural networks to
image classiﬁcation, object detection and semantic segmen-
tation has inspired us to explore their full ability in a wide
variety of computer vision tasks. Unfortunately, training
∗The work was done while L. Zhang was interning at Huawei Cloud.
†Corresponding author: G.-J. Qi. Email: guojunq@gmail.com
(a) Auto-Encoding Data (AED)
(b) Auto-Encoding Transformation (AET)
Figure 1: An illustrative comparison between AED and
AET, where AET attempts to estimate the input transfor-
mation rather than the data at the output end. This forces
the encoder network Eto extract the features that contain
the sufﬁcient information about visual structures to decode
the input transformation.
deep neural networks often requires a large amount of la-
beled data to learn adequate feature representations for visu-
al understanding tasks. This greatly limits the applicability
of deep neural networks when only a limited amount of la-
beled data is available for training the networks. Therefore,
there has been an increasing interest in literature to learn
deep feature representations in an unsupervised fashion to
solve emerging visual understanding tasks with insufﬁcient
labeled data.
Among the efforts on unsupervised learning methods,
the most representative ones are Auto-Encoders and Gen-
erative Adversarial Nets (GANs) [ 11]. The former trains an
encoder network to output feature representations with suf-
1
2547