Sensors 2020 ,20, 3344 2 of 18
computational complexity and consistent performance of the recognition system. It has been suggested
that deep neural architectures are more advantageous than shallow neural architectures [ 1–6]. The key
dierences are described in Table 1. The deep learning ﬁeld is ever evolving, and some of its variants
are autoencoders, CNNs, recurrent neural networks (RNNs), recursive neural networks, deep belief
networks and deep Boltzmann machines. Here, we introduce a convolutional neural network,
which is a speciﬁc type of deep neural network having wide applications in image classiﬁcation,
object recognition, recommendation systems, signal processing, natural language processing, computer
vision, and face recognition. The ability to automatically detect the important features of an object
(here an object can be an image, a handwritten character, a face, etc.) without any human supervision
or intervention makes them (CNNs) more e cient than their predecessors (Multi layer perceptron
(MLP), etc.). The high capability of hierarchical feature learning results in a highly e cient CNN.
Table 1. Shallow neural network vs deep neural network.
Factors Shallow Neural Network (SNN) Deep Neural Network (DNN)
Number of hidden layers- single hidden layer (need to be fully
connected).- multiple hidden layers (not
necessarily fully connected).
Feature Engineering- requires a separate feature
extraction process.
- some of the famous features used in
the literature include local binary
patterns (LBPs), histogram of oriented
gradients (HOGs), speeded up robust
features (SURFs), and scale-invariant
feature transform (SIFT).- supersedes the handcrafted
features and works directly on the
whole image.
- useful in computing complex
pattern recognition problems.
- can capture complexities inherent
in the data.
Requirements- emphasizes the quality of features
and their extraction process.
- networks are more dependent on the
expert skills of researchers.- able to automatically detect the
important features of an object
(here an object can be an image,
a handwritten character, a face,
etc.) without any human
supervision or intervention.
Dependency on data volume - requires small amount of data. - requires large amount of data.
A convolutional neural network (CNN) is basically a variation of a multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
network and was used for the ﬁrst time in 1980 [ 7]. The computing in CNN is inspired by the human
brain. Humans perceive or identify objects visually. We (humans) train our children to recognize
objects by showing him /her hundreds of pictures of that object. This helps a child identify or make
a prediction about objects he /she has never seen before. A CNN works in the same fashion and is
popular for analyzing visual imagery. Some of the well-known CNN architectures are GoogLeNet
(22 layers), AlexNet (8 layers), VGG (16–19 Ali), and ResNet (152 layers). A CNN integrates the feature
extraction and classiﬁcation steps and requires minimal pre-processing and feature extraction e orts.
A CNN can extract a uent and interrelated features automatically from images. Moreover, a CNN
can provide considerable recognition accuracy even if there is only a little training data available.
Design particulars and previous knowledge of features are no longer required to be collected.
Exploitation of topological information available in the input is the key beneﬁt of using a CNN model
towards delivering excellent recognition results. The recognition results of a CNN model are also
independent of the rotation and translation of input images. Contrary to this, thorough topological
knowledge of inputs is not exploited in MLP models. Furthermore, for a complex problem, MLP is not
found to be appropriate, and they do not scale well for higher resolution images because of the full
interconnection between nodes, also called the famous phenomenon of the “curse of dimensionality”.
In the past few years, the CNN model has been extensively employed for handwritten digit
recognition from the MNIST benchmark database. Some researchers have reported accuracy as good
as 98% or 99% for handwritten digit recognition [ 8]. An ensemble model has been designed using
a combination of multiple CNN models. The recognition experiment was carried out for MNIST