Sensors 2020 ,20, 3344 4 of 18
end-to-end text recognition using multi-layer CNNs and achieved excellent performance on benchmark
databases, namely, ICDAR 2003 and Street View Text [ 34]. Recently, Shi et al. integrated the advantages
of both the deep CNN (DCNN) and recurrent neural network (RNN) and named it conventional
recurrent neural network (CRNN). They applied CRNN for scene text recognition and found it
to be superior to traditional methods of recognition [ 35]. Badrinarayanan et al. proposed a deep
convolution network architecture for semantic segmentation. The segmentation architecture is known
as SegNet and consists of an encoder network, a decoder network and a pixel-wise classiﬁcation layer.
The proposed method used max-pooling indices of a feature map while decoding and observed good
performance. The method is also analyzed and compared with existing techniques for road scene and
indoor understanding [ 36–38]. CNN has shown remarkable abilities in o ine handwritten character
recognition of Arabic language [ 39]; handwritten Tamil character recognition [ 40]; Telugu character
recognition [ 41], handwritten Urdu text recognition [ 42,43], handwritten character recognition in Indic
scripts [44] and Chinese handwritten text recognition [45–47].
Recently, Gupta et al. in [ 48] proposed a novel multi-objective optimization framework for
identifying the most informative local regions from a character image. The work was also evaluated on
isolated handwritten English numerals, namely, MNIST images, along with three other popular Indic
scripts, namely, handwritten Bangala numerals and handwritten Devanagari characters. The authors
used features extracted from a convolutional neural network in their model and achieved 95.96%
recognition accuracy. The work of Nguyen et al. in [ 49] used a multi-scale CNN for extracting
spatial classiﬁcation features for handwritten mathematical expression (HME). The local features
and spatial information of HME images were used for clustering HME images. The work observed
high performance for the CROHME dataset. They (authors) also concluded that classiﬁcation can be
improved by training the CNN with a combination of global max pooling and global attentive pooling.
Ziran et al. [ 50] developed a faster R-CNN-based framework for text /word location and recognition
in historical books. The authors evaluated these deep learning methods on Gutenberg’s Bible pages.
The handwritten character recognition problem is intelligently addressed in the work of Ptucha et
al. [51] by the introduction of an intelligent character recognition (ICR) system using a conventional
neural network. The work was evaluated on French-based RIMES lexicon datasets and English-based
IAM datasets, showing substantial improvement.
The performance of CNNs depends mainly on the choice of hyper-parameters [ 52], which are
usually decided on a trial-and-error basis. Some of the hyper-parameters are, namely, activation
function, number of epochs, kernel size, learning rate, hidden units, hidden layers, etc. These parameters
are very important as they control the way an algorithm learns from data [ 53]. Hyper-parameters di er
from model parameters and must be decided before the training begins.
ResNet-52 [ 54], GoogleNet [ 55], VGG-16 [ 56] and AlexNet [ 57] are some popular CNN models that
have a total of 150, 78, 57 and 27 hyper-parameters, respectively. A bad choice for hyper-parameters
can incur a high computation cost and lead to poor CNN performance. The researcher’s expertise plays
an important role in deciding on the conﬁguration of hyper-parameters and requires an intelligent
strategic plan. This creates several questions about CNN design for handwriting recognition tasks.
How is CNN better in extracting distinct features from handwritten characters? What e ect do
dierent hyper-parameters have on CNN performance? What is the role of design parameters in
improving CNN performance? In order to guide future research in the handwriting recognition ﬁeld,
it is important to address these questions.
3. Convolutional Neural Network Architecture
A basic convolutional neural network comprises three components, namely, the convolutional
layer, the pooling layer and the output layer. The pooling layer is optional sometimes. The typical
convolutional neural network architecture with three convolutional layers is well adapted for the
classiﬁcation of handwritten images as shown in Figure 1. It consists of the input layer, multiple hidden
layers (repetitions of convolutional, normalization, pooling) and a fully connected and an output layer.