Sensors 2020 ,20, 3344 8 of 18
3.5. Activation Layer
Just like regular neural network architecture, CNN architecture also contains the activation
function to introduce the non-linearity in the system. The sigmoid function, rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLu)
and Softmax are some famous choices among various activation functions exploited extensively in
deep learning models. It has been observed that the sigmoid activation function might weaken the
CNN model because of the loss of information present in the input data. The activation function used
in the present work is the non-linear rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLu) function, which has output 0 for
input less than 0 and raw output otherwise. Some advantages of the ReLu activation function are its
similarity with the human nerve system, simplicity in use and ability to perform faster training for
larger networks.
3.6. Classiﬁcation Layer
The classiﬁcation layer is the last layer in CNN architecture. It is a fully connected feed forward
network, mainly adopted as a classiﬁer. The neurons in the fully connected layers are connected to all
the neurons of the previous layer. This layer calculates predicted classes by identifying the input image,
which is done by combining all the features learned by previous layers. The number of output classes
depends on the number of classes present in the target dataset. In the present work, the classiﬁcation
layer uses the ‘softmax’ activation function for classifying the generated features of the input image
received from the previous layer into various classes based on the training data.
3.7. Gradient Descent Optimization Algorithm
Optimization algorithms are used to optimize neural networks and to generate better performance
and faster results. The algorithm helps in minimizing or maximizing a cost function by updating
the weight /bias values, which are known as learning parameters of a network, and the algorithm
updating these values is termed as the adaptive learning algorithm. These learning parameters directly
inﬂuence the learning process of a network and have an important role in producing an e cient
network model. The aim of all the optimization algorithms is to ﬁnd the optimum values of these
learning parameters. The gradient descent algorithm is one such optimization algorithm. Recent
classiﬁcation experiments based on deep learning reported excellent performance with the progress in
learning parameter identiﬁcation [63–69].
Gradient descent, as the name implies, uses an error gradient to descend along with the error
surface. It also allows a minimum of a function to be found when a derivative of it exists and there is
only one optimum solution (if we expect local minima). The gradient is the slope of the error surface
and gives an indication of how sensitive the error is towards the change in the weights. This sensitivity
can be exploited for incremental change in the weights towards the optimum. Gradient descent is
classiﬁed into three types, namely, batch gradient descent, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and
mini-batch gradient descent.
The SGD algorithm works faster and has been extensively used in deep learning
experiments [70–74] . The SGD algorithm avoids redundant computation better than the batch gradient
descent algorithm. The algorithm steps for updating the learning parameter for each training data bit
are as follows (Algorithm 1):
Algorithm 1 Learning Parameters Update Mechanism
1:Input: (x(i),y(i))as training data; as learning rate;rE()is a gradient of loss (error) function E()with
respect to the parameter; momentum factor ( m)
2:Output: For each training pair, update the learning parameters using the equation
=-.rE(;x(i);y(i))
3:ifstopping condition is met
4:return parameter.