Sensors 2020 ,20, 3344 3 of 18
digits, and an accuracy of 99.73% was reported [ 9]. Later, this “7-net committee” was extended to
the “35-net committee” experiment, and the improved recognition accuracy was reported as 99.77%
for the same MNIST dataset [ 10]. An extraordinary recognition accuracy of 99.81% was reported
by Niu and Suen by integrating the SVM (support vector machine) capability of minimizing the
structural risk and the capability of a CNN model for extracting the deep features for the MNIST digit
recognition experiment [ 11]. The bend directional feature maps were investigated using CNN for in-air
handwritten Chinese character recognition [ 12]. Recently, the work of Alvear-Sandoval et al. achieved
a 0.19% error rate for MNIST by building diverse ensembles of deep neural networks (DNN) [ 13].
However, on careful investigation, it has been observed that the high recognition accuracy of MNIST
dataset images is achieved through ensemble methods only. Ensemble methods help in improving the
classiﬁcation accuracy but at the cost of high testing complexity and increased computational cost for
real-world application [14].
The purpose of the proposed work is to achieve comparable accuracy using a pure CNN
architecture through extensive investigation of the learning parameters in CNN architecture for
MNIST digit recognition. Another purpose is to investigate the role of various hyper-parameters
and to perform ﬁne-tuning of hyper-parameters which are essential in improving the performance of
CNN architecture.
Therefore, the major contribution of this work is in two respects. First, a comprehensive evaluation
of various parameters, such as numbers of layers, stride size, kernel size, padding and dilution,
of CNN architecture in handwritten digit recognition is done to improve the performance. Second,
optimization of the learning parameters achieved excellent recognition performance on the MNIST
dataset. The MNIST database has been used in this work because of the availability of its published
results with di erent classiﬁers. The database is also popular and mostly used as a benchmark database
in comparative studies of various handwritten digit recognition experiments for various regional and
international languages.
The novelty of the proposed work lies in the thorough investigation of all the parameters of
CNN architecture to deliver the best recognition accuracy among peer researchers for MNIST digit
recognition. The recognition accuracy delivered in this work employing a ﬁne-tuned pure CNN model
is superior to the recognition accuracies reported by peer researchers using an ensemble architecture.
The use of ensemble architecture by peer researchers involves increased computational cost and high
testing complexity. Hence, the proposed pure CNN model outperforms the ensemble architecture
oered by peer researchers both in terms of recognition accuracy as well as computational complexity.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the related work in the ﬁeld
of handwriting recognition; Sections 3 and 4 describe CNN architecture and the experimental setup,
respectively; Section 5 discusses the ﬁndings and presents a comparative analysis; and Section 6
presents the conclusion and suggestions for future directions.
2. Related Work
Handwriting recognition has already achieved impressive results using shallow networks [ 15–24].
Many papers have been published with research detailing new techniques for the classiﬁcation of
handwritten numerals, characters and words. The deep belief networks (DBN) with three layers
along with a greedy algorithm were investigated for the MNIST dataset and reported an accuracy of
98.75% [ 25]. Pham et al. applied a regularization method of dropout to improve the performance
of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) in recognizing unconstrained handwriting [ 26]. The author
reported improvement in RNN performance with signiﬁcant reduction in the character error rate (CER)
and word error rate (WER).
The convolutional neural network brings a revolution in the handwriting recognition ﬁeld and
delivered the state-of-the-art performance in this domain [ 27–32]. In 2003, Simard et al. introduced
a general convolutional neural network architecture for visual document analysis and weeded out
the complex method of neural network training [ 33]. Wang et al. proposed a novel approach for