are typically applied to mitigate these challenges.
An important observation of ours is that the unsatisfying
performance in GZSL that still nevertheless exists is closely
related to the cross-dataset bias [ 50]. GZSL models usu-
ally extract visual features from coarse- and ﬁne-grained
benchmarks (e.g., AWA1 [ 26] and CUB [ 53]) using a convo-
lutional neural network (CNN) backbone (e.g., ResNet-101
[16]) pre-trained on ImageNet [ 58]. However, cross-dataset
bias, where the data collection procedure can be biased by
human or systematic factors, can lead to a distribution mis-
match between two datasets, e.g., Auklets are found in the
CUB dataset but not in ImageNet. Thus, it is unwise to
directly transfer knowledge from ImageNet to a new dataset
for GZSL without any further sequential learning, because
cross-dataset bias limits knowledge transfer and results in
the extraction of poor-quality visual features from GZSL
benchmarks, as shown in Fig. 1. Further, the larger the bias
between ImageNet and the GZSL benchmark, the poorer
the knowledge transfer and feature extraction. Since there
is a more obvious bias for ﬁne-grained datasets (e.g., CUB),
these typically yield inferior performance to coarse-grained
datasets (e.g., AWA) for all GZSL methods. The negative
effect of cross-dataset bias on the performance of GZSL has
been further validated experimentally. In [ 59], Xian ﬁne-
tuned a ResNet pre-trained on ImageNet using seen classes
from GZSL benchmarks. Before ﬁne-tuning, f-V AEGAN
achieved a harmonic mean of 64.6% and 63.5% on FLO
and AWA2, respectively, while these numbers increased to
75.1% and 65.2% afterward, as shown in Table 4. However,
Xian did not analyze or discuss this phenomenon. Further,
although ﬁne-tuning may alleviate the cross-dataset bias to
a certain degree, it inevitably results in other severer prob-
lems, e.g., overﬁtting [ 17,28]. Thus, properly addressing
the problem of cross-dataset bias in GZSL has become very
necessary. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to
identify this as an open issue in GZSL, which will be tackled
in this paper.
To address the above challenges, we propose a novel
GZSL method, termed feature reﬁnement for generalized
zero-shot learning (FREE), to further boost the performance
of GZSL. FREE reﬁnes visual features in a uniﬁed genera-
tive model, which simultaneously beneﬁts semantic!visual
learning, feature synthesis, and classiﬁcation. Speciﬁ-
cally, we take f-V AEGAN [ 59] as a baseline to learn a
semantic!visual mapping. To improve the visual features
of seen and unseen class samples, we employ a feature re-
ﬁnement (FR) module, which can be jointly optimized with
f-V AEGAN to effectively avoid the drawbacks of ﬁne-tuning.
Since class label information is available, we introduce a
self-adaptive margin center loss (SAMC-loss) to explicitly
encourage intra-class compactness and inter-class separabil-
ity that can adapt to different datasets, i.e., coarse-grained
and ﬁne-grained, and guide FR to learn discriminative class-relevant features. Thus, the distributions of different classes
can be easily separated, as shown in Fig. 1. To better learn
semantically-relevant and more discriminative visual fea-
tures, a semantic cycle-consistency loss is also added after
the restitution of features. From the residual information
[16], we further concatenate the discriminative features of
various layers in FR to extract the fully reﬁned features.
To summarize, this paper provides the following impor-
tant contributions: (1)We propose a novel GZSL method,
termed feature reﬁnement for generalized zero-shot learning
(FREE), to address the problem of cross-dataset bias, which
can further boost the performance of GZSL. To achieve
this goal, a feature reﬁnement (FR) module that cooperates
with semantic!visual mapping in a uniﬁed framework is
explored. Importantly, the two modules can be jointly op-
timized. (2)We propose a self-adaptive margin center loss
(SAMC-loss) to explicitly encourage intra-class compactness
and inter-class separability. The SAMC-loss also cooperates
with a semantic cycle-consistency constraint to enable FR to
learn more discriminative class- and semantically-relevant
representations, which are especially important for GZSL.
(3)Extensive experimental results on ﬁve benchmarks, i.e.,
CUB, SUN, FLO, AWA1, and AWA2, clearly demonstrate
the advantages of the proposed FREE over its baseline and
current state-of-the-art methods.
2. Related Work
Visual-Semantic Domain Gap. The required knowledge
transfer from seen to unseen classes for GZSL relies on
semantic embedding. One key task is to bridge the visual
and semantic domains [ 26,1,2,52,11,51]. Since visual
features in various forms may convey the same concept, the
distribution of instances in the visual space is often distinct
from that of their underlying semantics in the semantic space.
Thus, there is typically a gap between the two domains,
known as the visual-semantic domain gap problem of GZSL
[52]. Common space learning [ 7,67,56,52,15], model
parameter transfer [ 6,13,20] and direct mapping [ 1,2,11,
57,59,38,18,32,8,12] are often used to bridge this gap.
Early mapping works [ 1,2] were carried out by either a
classiﬁer or a regression model, depending on the semantic
representation adopted. Most recent mapping works, in
contrast, are based on generative models (e.g., V AEs [3, 47,
34], GANs [ 57,31,29,43,46,65], and generative ﬂows
[49]). These models not only learn visual-semantic mapping,
but also generate a great number of feature samples of unseen
classes for data augmentation.
Seen-Unseen Bias. GZSL methods inevitably encounter a
seen-unseen bias problem [ 47,59,49,49,33,66,10,55,20,
30,4,63,62]. As only seen data is involved during training,
most generative GZSL models tend to overﬁt to seen classes
[33,9,36], i.e., the unseen data generated tends to have the
same distribution as the seen categories. This heavily ham-
123