Figure 2. A schematic overview of FREE. (a) FREE consists of a feature generating V AEGAN (f-V AEGAN), a feature reﬁnement (FR)
module, and a classiﬁer. In Stage 1, f-V AEGAN aims to learn the semantic!visual mapping (G) for visual feature generation, while FR
tries to learn discriminative representations for the real/synthesized seen visual features. The two are jointly optimized. In Stage 2, we reﬁne
the real seen visual features and the real/synthesized unseen visual features with the trained FR, and they are then fed into a classiﬁer for
classiﬁcation. (b) Proposed FR module. FR learns discriminative features utilizing the SAMC-loss and semantic cycle-consistency loss, and
its discriminative features in various layers are then concatenated to extract the fully reﬁned features.
pers the classiﬁcation performance of unseen classes. In [ 33],
Liu proposed the Deep Calibration Network (DCN) to enable
simultaneous calibration of deep networks on the conﬁdence
of source classes and the uncertainty of target classes. Zhang
et al. [66] employed a co-representation network to learn a
more uniform visual embedding space, effectively bypassing
the bias problems and improving classiﬁcation. Maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) based methods optimize the dis-
tribution between real seen features and synthesized unseen
features to tackle the bias problem explicitly [5, 49].
Cross-Dataset Bias. While datasets are expected to resem-
ble the probability distribution of the real world, the data
collection procedure can be biased by human and system-
atic factors, leading to a distribution mismatch between two
datasets. Thus, the knowledge transfer from one dataset (e.g.,
ImageNet) to other new datasets (e.g., GZSL benchmarks)
is limited, which results in the extraction of poor-quality
visual features on the new datasets. This is known as cross-
dataset bias [ 50]. Domain adaptation techniques can be used
to reduce this bias [ 22,40], but they are not applicable to
GZSL, as the features of GZSL benchmarks are extracted
from a pre-trained CNN backbone before sequential learning
is conducted. Additionally, although ﬁne-tuning is a typical
method to alleviate this problem, it inevitably results in other
severer issues, including inefﬁciency and overﬁtting [ 17,28].
Thus, we attempt to essentially circumvent cross-dataset bias
and improve semantic!visual mapping in a uniﬁed network
using feature reﬁnement for GZSL classiﬁcation.3. Method
Motivation. As shown in Fig. 1, the cross-dataset bias lim-
its knowledge transfer from ImageNet to GZSL benchmarks,
resulting in poor-quality visual features being extracted from
the GZSL benchmarks (e.g., CUB [ 53]) by a pre-trained
CNN backbone. This hampers the semantic!visual learn-
ing, feature synthesis, and GZSL classiﬁcation. As a result,
the upper bound of the recognition performance of GZSL on
both seen and unseen classes is potentially limited. Although
ﬁne-tuning may alleviate this issue to a certain degree, it in-
evitably results in other severer problems [ 17,44,28]. For
example, it is difﬁcult to ﬁne-tune on a new small dataset,
and it is easy for the model to overﬁt to seen classes, which
ultimately is not conducive to the generalization of GZSL.
These observations prompt us to speculate that the cur-
rent poor performance of GZSL is closely related to the
cross-dataset bias. The experimental results of ﬁne-tuning
in [59,38] further support this claim. In other words, we
believe that, by alleviating the cross-dataset bias, the visual
features of GZSL benchmarks will be enhanced, enabling us
to also further improve the GZSL classiﬁcation. To this end,
we propose a novel method, termed feature reﬁnement for
generalized zero-shot learning (FREE). Our strategy is to uti-
lize class label supervision and a semantic cycle-consistency
constraint to guide the proposed feature reﬁnement (FR)
module to learn class- and semantically-relevant feature rep-
resentations in a uniﬁed network. FR can effectively reﬁne
124