2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)
FREE: Feature Reﬁnement for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Shiming Chen1, Wenjie Wang1, Beihao Xia1, Qinmu Peng1, Xinge You1, Feng Zheng2, Ling Shao3
1Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), China
2Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), China
3Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IIAI), UAE
{shimingchen,pengqinmu,youxg}@hust.edu.cn zfeng02@gmail.com ling.shao@ieee.org
Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) has achieved
signiﬁcant progress, with many efforts dedicated to over-
coming the problems of visual-semantic domain gap and
seen-unseen bias. However, most existing methods di-
rectly use feature extraction models trained on ImageNet
alone, ignoring the cross-dataset bias between ImageNet
and GZSL benchmarks. Such a bias inevitably results in
poor-quality visual features for GZSL tasks, which poten-
tially limits the recognition performance on both seen and
unseen classes. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effec-
tive GZSL method, termed feature reﬁnement for generalized
zero-shot learning (FREE), to tackle the above problem.
FREE employs a feature reﬁnement (FR) module that in-
corporates semantic !visual mapping into a uniﬁed gener-
ative model to reﬁne the visual features of seen and unseen
class samples. Furthermore, we propose a self-adaptive
margin center loss (SAMC-loss) that cooperates with a se-
mantic cycle-consistency loss to guide FR to learn class- and
semantically-relevant representations, and concatenate the
features in FR to extract the fully reﬁned features. Exten-
sive experiments on ﬁve benchmark datasets demonstrate the
signiﬁcant performance gain of FREE over its baseline and
current state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/shiming-chen/FREE .
1. Introduction
A key challenge of artiﬁcial intelligence is to generalize
machine learning models from seen data to unseen scenarios.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a typical research topic targeting
this goal [ 25,27,41]. ZSL aims to classify the images of
unseen classes by constructing a mapping relationship be-
tween the semantic and visual domains. It is usually based
on the assumption that both seen and unseen classes can be
Corresponding author
Figure 1. The core idea of our FREE. The cross-dataset bias be-
tween ImageNet and GZSL benchmarks (e.g., CUB) is harmful for
feature extraction from GZSL benchmarks, which results in poor-
quality visual features for unsatisfying performance in GZSL. Our
FREE reﬁnes the visual features and improves the semantic!visual
mapping using feature reﬁnement (FR) in a uniﬁed network for
GZSL classiﬁcation.
described through a set of semantic vectors, e.g., sentence
embeddings [ 45], and attribute vectors [ 26], in the same se-
mantic space. According to their classiﬁcation range, ZSL
methods can be categorized into conventional ZSL (CZSL)
and generalized ZSL (GZSL) [ 58]. CZSL aims to predict un-
seen classes, while GZSL can predict both seen and unseen
classes. Recently, GZSL has attracted more attention as it is
more realistic and challenging. We are thus also interested
in the GZSL setting in this paper.
GZSL has achieved signiﬁcant progress, with many
efforts focused on the problems of visual-semantic do-
main gaps [26,1,2,52,51,61] and seen-unseen bias
[57,37,66,64,49,38,36,19]. Semantic embedding
[33,8,31,66,34] or generative methods (e.g., variational
autoencoders (V AEs) [ 3,47], generative adversarial nets
(GANs) [ 57,31,60,65,21,51], and generative ﬂows [ 49])
122