251
1 3 Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics  
1. Independent multi-disciplinary ethics advisory board responsible for providing 
the core infraethics as described:
a. The development of a principle-based ethical code through a process of dis-
cussion and negotiation that treats ethical patients (i.e. individuals, businesses 
and environments that may be impacted by the systems produced by the AI 
company in question) as real interlocutors, who can genuinely impact the 
design of the system (Aitken et al., 2019; Arvan, 2018; Durante, 2015).
b. The setting out of a process that needs to be followed at validation, verifica-
tion and evaluation stages of algorithmic Design to ensure pro-ethical design 
by: (i) defining contextually the specific meaning of each of the principles in 
the ethical code; and (ii) providing an appropriate range of proven-effective 
translational tools which can be selected to translate from principles to prac-
tice, according to the contextually specific definitions. This process and selec-
tion of translational tools must include an element of ethical foresight analysis 
(Floridi & Strait, 2020), and mechanisms for closing down, and rectifying 
the consequences of a system that is found to be in breach of the principles 
(Morley et al., 2020). It must also recognise that positive, ethical features are 
open to progressive increase, that is an algorithm can be increasingly fair, and 
fairer than another algorithm or a previous version, but makes no sense to say 
that it is fair or unfair in absolute terms (compare this to the case of speed: it 
makes sense to say that an object is moving quickly, or that it is fast or faster 
than another, but not that it is fast in absolute terms).
c. Conducting regular audits of the whole behaviour of the company—not just 
the end product once launched—to see whether it is genuinely committed to 
ethical conduct; whether AI practitioners are following the defined process; 
and whether the final output is ethically justifiable according to contextually-
defined principles.
2. The internal company employees (the AI practitioners themselves) responsible 
for providing the ‘customised software,’ namely:
a. Contextually defining the principles;
b. Identifying the appropriate tools, and putting them to use whilst designing a 
specific algorithmic system;
c. Documenting how the process was followed, in public, and justifying why 
specific decisions were made, when and by who.
In theory, distributing the responsibility for operationalising AI ethics in this 
manner may overcome many (although definitely not all) of the limitations of 
current approaches described above. However, whether it works in practice is 
yet to be seen. It is also important to note that, because AI systems learn and 
update their internal decision-making logic over time, code-audits (as described 
in 1c above) need to be complemented with continuous functionality and impact 
audits. However, such audits inevitably impose both financial and administrative 
costs (Brundage et  al., 2020). Care should therefore be taken to not put undue