244 J. Morley et al.
1 3
compliance purposes and then forgotten about. This encourages ethics by ‘tick-box’ 
and introduces the risk of writing ethics into the business case and coding them 
out by the time the algorithmic system is deployed (Morley et al., 2019). Instead, 
the ethical implications of an algorithmic system should be regularly evaluated, at 
a minimum as part of three distinct phases: validation, verification and evaluation. 
The first phase (validation) is concerned with whether the right algorithmic system 
is being developed; the second phase (verification) is concerned with whether the 
algorithmic system is being developed in the right way; and the third phase (evalu-
ation) is concerned with whether the algorithmic system is continuing to operate in 
the right way once deployed, needs to be revised, or can be improved (redacted). 
Thus, unless ethical evaluation becomes an integral part of a system’s operation 
(Arnold & Scheutz, 2018), there is no guarantee that pro-ethical translational tools 
will have any positive impact on the ethical implications of AI systems. Indeed, they 
could have a negative impact by fostering a false sense of security and consequential 
complacency.
This critique of AI ethics principlism and translational tools and methods raises 
the question whether the entire pro-ethical design endeavour is futile, if even with 
technical guidance, AI ethics is difficult or impossible to embed in the process of 
algorithmic design, development, deployment, and use. However, the experience of 
other applied ethics fields (for example, medical ethics and research ethics) shows 
that it is possible to operationalise abstract ethical principles successfully for the 
purpose of protecting individuals, groups, society and the environment from particu-
lar social harms and incentivising the best outcomes. The effort is not futile. With 
this reassurance in mind, the next pertinent question becomes: how can AI ethics be 
usefully operationalised for AI practitioners? The next section offers a way forward.
3.1  Box 1: The Digital Catapult AI Ethics Framework
The DCEF was developed by the Digital Catapult’s independent ethics board fol-
lowing consultation with a number of Digital Ethicists and other experts. The 
framework consists of four levels, and is intended to help AI start-ups working 
with the Digital Catapult to define and translate, transparently and contextually, 
high-level ethical principles into practice. The first level, therefore, consists of 
the five unifying high-level principles identified by Floridi et al., (2018): benefi-
cence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice, explicability. The second level con-
sists of seven interpretations (or contextual definitions) of these principles identi-
fied through documentary analysis consultation with AI practitioners and those 
affected by AI systems. The third level operationalises Habermas’s concept of 
discourse ethics (Buhmann et al., 2019), i.e. an approach that seeks to establish 
normative values and ethical truths through open discourse, and consists of a 
series of questions that are designed to encourage AI practitioners to conduct eth-
ical foresight analysis (Floridi & Strait, 2020). The fourth level provides access to 
more practical, and less discursive tools e.g. python libraries designed to identify 
bias in data. The connections between the levels are shown below. Companies