241
1 3 Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics  
of these tools are severely limited in terms of usability. The development of these 
translational tools and methods may have been useful for enabling individual groups 
of researchers/companies to raise internal awareness of AI ethics and to examine 
different interpretations of ethical principles. However, this impact has not been suf-
ficiently tested and the external validity of all the tools/methods identified remains 
questionable. There is, as of yet, little evidence that the use of any of these trans-
lational tools/methods has an impact on the governability of algorithmic systems. 
As such, we cannot yet know whether they help disadvantaged groups in society be 
heard and enabled to embed and protect their values in design tools, and then into 
the resultant AI systems. Consequently, we concluded that the existing translational 
tools and methods fail to operationalise AI ethics effectively. Almost all translational 
tools are either too flexible or too strict in the following sense (Arvan, 2018). When 
something (ethical tools, methods or guidelines) is too flexible it does little to protect 
against the risks of ethics shopping and ethics washing (Floridi, 2019b). In contrast, 
if the same something is too strict, and is implemented in a top-down and non-flex-
ible way, it fails to account for the fact that sometimes there is no social consensus 
about what is the ‘right’ way to interpret or apply ethics or ethical principles—this 
instead depends on how aggregate views of society are collected and which voices 
are included (Allen et al., 2000; Baum, 2017). This overall conclusion (too flexible 
or strict) forces the AI ethics community to face the difficult question: if, even with 
technical guidance (such as that provided in IEEE’s Ethically Aligned Design stand-
ards (The IEEE Global Intiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems, 
2019)) AI ethics is challenging to embed in the process of algorithmic Design, is the 
entire pro-ethical design (Floridi, 2019a) endeavour rendered futile? And, if no, then 
how can AI ethics be made useful for AI practitioners?
In the following pages, we seek to answer these questions by exploring why prin-
ciples and technical translational tools are still needed even if they are limited, and 
how these limitations can be potentially overcome by providing theoretical ground-
ing of a concept that has been termed ‘Ethics as a Service’.2 Specifically, the sec-
tions ‘lowering the level of abstraction’ and ‘limits of principlism and translational 
tools’ explain in more detail the limitations of principlism and existing translational 
tools and methods. The section titled ‘a series of compromises’ outlines the compro-
mises that must be made to enable the practical operationalisation of AI ethics. The 
section ‘Outlining Ethics as a Service’ provides the theory underpinning the concept 
of ‘Ethics as a Service’. The final section concludes the article, highlighting where 
further research is needed.
2 As will become clear through the development of the ‘Ethics as a Service’ concept in the following 
pages—our use of the concept is one grounded in the theory of Habermas’s discourse ethics (Heath, 
2014; Mingers & Walsham, 2010; Rehg, 2015) and Floridi’s distributed responsibility (Floridi, 2016). 
This makes our interpretation of the concept distinct from the technocratic interpretation espoused by 
Google and other large tech firms claiming that they can ‘audit customers’ AI systems for ethical integ-
rity’ (Simonite, 2020). This paper should not, therefore, be read as being in support of such claims.