242 J. Morley et al.
1 3
2  Lowering the Level of Abstraction
AI ethical guidance documents have been produced by a range of stakeholders, from 
technology companies, professional bodies and standards-setting bodies to gov -
ernments and research organisations (Whittlestone et  al., 2019). According to the 
Global Inventory of AI Ethics Guidelines, managed by Algorithm Watch, there are 
now more than 160 documents in existence (Alglorithm Watch, 2020). Whilst it is 
possible to summarise the principles contained within these documents as benefi-
cence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice and explicability (Floridi & Cowls, 
2019), the range of concepts covered is vast and includes transparency; fairness; 
responsibility; privacy; freedom; trust; sustainability; dignity and solidarity (Jobin 
et al., 2019).
This variation, and consequential confusion, is perhaps to be expected. Many of 
the ethical harms that the principles in these documents purport to protect against 
are poorly understood because they are described too vaguely (Clarke, 2019). The 
vagueness of statements such as ‘AI systems may be discriminatory’ results in broad 
and generic rather than deep and specific responses. Additionally, as Carrillo (2020, 
p. 3) explains: ‘beyond the basic underlying principles and common elements, ethi-
cal conceptions and principles vary across traditions, cultures, ideologies, systems 
and countries. In the end, if the expression ‘ethics’ in itself is universal, the con-
tent of ‘the ethical’ evolves and includes variable and flexible standards in accord-
ance with the evolution of times and societies.’ The risks that arise from this lack of 
clear ethical guidance are many and include: ethics washing; ethics shopping; ethics 
dumping; ethics shirking and ethics lobbying (Floridi, 2019b). Hence, ethical princi-
ples have been accused of being too flexible (or too undefined) to be of practical use 
to AI practitioners (Mittelstadt, 2019; Whittlestone et al., 2019). The accusation is 
mistaken insofar as the ethical principles should be seen as providing the foundation 
and not the details of ethical practices, in a way comparable to what a Constitution 
does when compared to specific legislation. It would be mistaken to criticise the 
Constitution of a country for being of no direct practical use in the regulation of 
medical appliances, for example. This is why a promising and reasonable approach 
to the problem of not-yet actionable AI ethical principles is to bring ethical guidance 
down to the Design level, by providing tools and methods that translate the ‘what’ of 
AI ethics into the ‘how’ of technical specifications. In doing so we can hope to cre-
ate a bridge between abstract principles and technical implementations (Hagendorff, 
2020). This is the solution that we explored in our previous research (Morley et al., 
2019) and it is also the solution Digital Catapult are exploring in practice with the 
Digital Catapult AI Ethics Framework3 (Box  1). In both this theoretical and applied 
work, we have concluded that this lowering of abstraction is, at best, a partial solu-
tion. Whilst translational tools and methods do help to lower the level of abstraction, 
they leave a number of other issues unresolved, and can be manipulated by repre-
hensible actors (Aïvodji et al., 2019).
3 LF is chair of Digital Catapult’s Independent Ethics Board. LK, EA and FG were employees of Digital 
Catapult at the time of writing. JM’s work on applied AI ethics is partially funded by Digital Catapult.