252 J. Morley et al.
1 3
burden on certain sectors in society (Koene et al., 2019). One way to balance the 
need for audits with incentives for innovation is to introduce a progressive level 
of AI governance that is proportional to the risk level associated with a specific 
combination of technology and context. Therefore, testing of the concept must 
involve experimentation to find the proportionate degree of oversight for different 
AI solutions. For this reason (and others), further research is urgently needed on 
how to evaluate translational tools and, in doing so, evaluate the current impact 
of the AI ethics endeavour in order to highlight further ways in which it could be 
improved. To start this research, a partial pilot of “Ethics as a Service,” which 
includes the Digital Catapult AI Ethics framework (Box  1), ethics consultations 
and an Independent multi-disciplinary ethics advisory board is being trialed by 
Digital Catapult. We would encourage others to develop partial or complete pilots 
of the concept, so that answers to the following questions might be developed:  
how should members of the independent ethics board be selected; should mem-
bers of the board be paid for their time or would this introduce conflicts of inter -
est; should the independent ethics board be the same group who conducts the 
audit, or would this introduce problematic incentives to make their work appear 
more successful than it is in reality; where does the responsibility sit for deciding 
to stop development of an AI solution if it is found to be harmful; how does the 
implementation of Ethics as a Service vary between companies of different sizes 
(e.g., start-up vs. large established company) and working in different sectors; 
how do the benefits/drawbacks vary in these different contexts? We would ask 
that those working on these, and other questions, publicly report on the successes 
and failures so that a commons of knowledge related to ‘best ethical practice’ can 
be established.
6  Conclusion
As Thomsen (2019) states, ‘ethics for AI cannot be expected to be any simpler than 
ethics for humans.’ Indeed, it may be more complicated, since it adds to it further 
technical issues. Research ethics and medical ethics have always involved a com-
bination of the law, ethical governance policies, practices, and procedures, with 
contextual discursive and procedural support. This combination approach has ena-
bled these branches of applied ethics to find a good balance between being too strict 
and too flexible, and between too centralised and too devolved. Therefore, it seems 
reasonable to hypothesise that AI ethics would benefit from an equally customis-
able approach, and that if this balance can be achieved then the pro-ethical Design 
endeavour may succeed. At the very least shifting the focus of AI ethics away from 
principles to procedural regularity will make AI ethics seem more relatable to AI 
practitioners. Encouraging a procedural approach can, for example, help make the 
parallels between AI ethics and other quality assurance processes, such as safety 
testing, clearer and thus make it more obvious why careful consideration needs to 
be given to each Design decision. We hope that the idea of Ethics as a Service, as 
outlined in the article, has at least highlighted this.