243
1 3 Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics  
In the following section we explore the limitations of translational tools in 
more detail. The Digital Catapult AI Ethics Framework (Box  1) can be considered 
an illustrative example of what we mean by ‘translational tool’. The discussion is 
deliberately generalised and we recognise that some of the limitations we discuss 
can be overcome by combining the use of translational tools with other offerings. 
For example, the Digital Catapult’s AI Ethics Framework is offered alongside more 
hands-on ethics consultations. This should be kept in mind so that we do not appear 
too critical and so that the motivation for us expanding on the concept of ‘Ethics as a 
Service’ in Sect. 5 is clear.
3  Limits of Principlism and Translational Tools
The first limitation to highlight, is that translational tools and methods are extra-
empirical. This means, as explained by Fazelpour and Lipton (2020), that they may 
set standards against which algorithmic practices are assessed, without themselves 
being subject to empirical evaluation. This leaves the translational tools vulnerable 
to manipulation. AI practitioners may choose the translational tool that aligns with 
what is for them the most convenient epistemological understanding of an ethical 
principle, rather than the one that aligns with society’s preferred understanding 
(Krishnan, 2019). For example, certain types of ‘explanation’ can be used to obfus-
cate rather than illuminate (Aïvodji et al., 2019) patterns of injustice. In short, stated 
motivations for using a specific translational tool might not reflect actual motivation 
(Schiff et al., 2020).
Second, many of the existing translational tools and methods are ‘diagnostic’ 
but not ‘prescriptive’. For example, they might identify whether a dataset is biased, 
but offer very little support to AI practitioners on how to overcome the issue. Oth-
ers, as McMillan and Brown (2019) indicate, present ‘technical fixes’ to what are in 
essence socially-derived harms. Furthermore, when the parameters for the ‘diagno-
sis’ of fairness, transparency or accountability are set by the AI practitioners them-
selves, the potential for objective critique is easily lost and so the aim of the transla-
tional tool or method ceases to ‘ensure the algorithmic system meets the criteria of 
social preferability’ (Floridi & Taddeo, 2016) (and therefore ethical justifiability). 
Instead, the aim of the translational tool or method becomes to ‘ensure the algo-
rithmic system meets the practitioner’s optimal criteria’ (Terzis, 2020). As Martin 
(2019, p. 842) attests ‘delegating a task to a technology [in this instance a ‘transla-
tional’ tool or method] does not remove the associated responsibility for that task. 
It is [still] a value-laden decision…’ In short, according to Fazelpour and Lipton, 
(2020, p. 58), when used in this way, translational tools and methods: (a) can lead 
to systematic neglect of some [unethical] injustices and distort our understanding 
of others; (b) do not by themselves offer sufficient practical guidance about what 
should be done, sometimes leading to misguided mitigation strategies; (c) do not, by 
themselves, make clear who, among decision-makers is responsible for intervening 
to right specific [unethical]injustices (our additions in brackets).
Finally, too often these translational tools are positioned or perceived by AI 
practitioners as a ‘one-off’ test: something that just needs to be completed for