249
1 3 Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics  
Code review and internal checks for reliability and robustness are already common 
practices within software engineering. Furthermore, internal auditing of this nature 
would mitigate the risks associated with external auditing (or fully-external ethical 
review boards) of ethically desensitising, de-skilling, and de-responsabilising com-
pany employees, and instead force companies to make their own critical choices and 
assume explicit responsibilities (Floridi, 2016). Yet, it is also undeniable that inter -
nal auditors may face conflicts of interest that make it hard for them to maintain an 
independent and objective opinion (Raji et al., 2020). This is especially true when 
there are currently limited incentives for companies to rigorously examine the impli-
cations behind technologies that are both profitable and powerful (Katyal, 2019). 
Thus, just as it was necessary to find a compromise between mechanisms that are 
too flexible or too strict, it seems that there is also a need to find a compromise 
between completely devolved and completely centralised responsibility for holding 
the ethical governance process itself accountable.
The solution here lies in the creation of a multi-agent system where the responsi-
bility is distributed across different agents (individuals, companies) in a way that (a) 
aggregates the possibly good actions, so that the latter might reach the critical mass 
necessary to make a positive difference to the targeted environment and its inhabit-
ants, and (b) isolates possibly negative actions (e.g., attempts to ethics wash), so that 
they never reach the necessary threshold to breach the fault-tolerance level of the 
overall system and undermine its effectiveness as an ethical governance mechanism 
(Floridi, 2013, 2016). This may seem overly theoretical, but it is actually a practi-
cally feasible approach, and a pragmatic analogy can be found in cloud computing, 
as explained in the next section.
5  Outlining Ethics as a Service
Cloud computing, the on-demand delivery of various computing services over the 
internet, has three models of service: Software as a Service (SaaS), Infrastructure as 
a Service (IaaS), and Platform as a Service (PaaS).
Software as a Service is the model of cloud computing that consumers are most 
readily familiar with. All aspects of the service are managed by a third-party, there 
are few customisation opportunities, and often there is a high risk of vendor lock-
in. In our analogy regarding AI ethical governance, this would represent the fully 
devolved model of governance (and one that is too strict). A third party would be 
responsible for dictating the set of ethical principles, for outlining the process that 
must be followed at each of the validation, verification, evaluation stages, and for 
conducting an ethical audit to see whether the process was followed correctly and 
whether this resulted in the expected positive outcomes.
Infrastructure as a Service, in comparison, represents the fully centralised gov -
ernance model (and one that is too flexible). In cloud computing, servers, network 
operating systems, and storage are all provided via a dashboard or application 
programme interface (API), so that users have complete control over the entire 
infrastructure. In terms of ethical governance, this would involve the AI practi-
tioners being responsible for both developing the AI ethics principles as well as