248 J. Morley et al.
1 3
4.2  Finding a Compromise Between Devolved and Centralised Responsibility
One often highlighted option for avoiding these potential issues—derived from 
a lack of accountability and transparency—is to rely on external algorithmic 
audits5 (Holstein et  al., 2018; Mökander et  al., forthcoming). In theory, the pro-
cess described above could be managed internally by the company in question but 
audited by a third party (Mökander et  al., forthcoming). Several auditing mecha-
nisms have been proposed as means of examining the inputs and outputs of algo-
rithms for bias and other harms (Cath, 2018; Sandvig, 2014). For example, ‘Aequi-
tas’ is an open source toolkit which audits algorithms for bias and fairness (Saleiro 
et al., 2018) and ‘Turingbox’ is a proposed platform that would audit the explain-
ability of an algorithmic system (Epstein et al., 2018). As these technical methods, 
and more human-based methods such as ‘sock-puppet’ auditing (Sandvig, 2014), 
have gained visibility, the perceived importance of the role they will play in ethical 
governance has also increased. In the UK, for example, the Information Commis-
sioner’s Office is developing an AI auditing framework that seeks to ensure organi-
sations have measures in place to be compliant with data protection requirements, 
and mitigate risks associated with (amongst other issues) fairness, accuracy, secu-
rity, and fundamental rights (Binns, 2018). Similarly, auditing firm PwC includes 
ethical audit as a key component of its responsible AI Framework (Oxborough et al., 
2019). It is clear, therefore, that external ethical auditing will be a key component of 
any form of operationalised AI ethics.
However, there remain limitations. Proposed external auditing mechanisms typi-
cally focus on specific parts of the system, rather than looking at the overall sys-
tem function (Cath, 2018), and so do little to address the risks of ‘unpredictability’ 
described above. Audits cannot guarantee to reveal all aspects of a system (Kroll, 
2018), and so may miss the inputs that are the most harmful. In addition, they are 
typically conducted after a system has already been deployed, and so may have 
already had a negative impact (Raji et al., 2020). And, finally, audits may be rendered 
not viable without legislative change due to legal concerns regarding protection of 
consumer data or trade secrets (Katyal, 2019; Kroll et al., 2017). Moreover, it is dif-
ficult to quantify indirect externalities that accumulate over time (Rahwan, 2018). 
External auditors may therefore not only lack access but also resources, know-how 
and computational power to review AI systems (Kroll, 2018). Raji et al. (2020) dis-
cuss these limitations in detail and also note that the agile nature of AI development 
and typical lack of documentation challenges auditability. Furthermore, they stress 
how the lack of foresight analysis typically included in external post-hoc audits 
minimises the chances for audits to prevent future harms. They argue that internal 
audits, conducted by a dedicated team of organisational employees—but not the AI 
practitioners themselves—with full access to data and a focus on ethical foresight 
could be a pragmatic alternative. There is certainly some promise in this proposal. 
5 We recognise that currently the word ‘audit’ is often used in a rather loose and confusing manner. In 
this context we simply define audit as ‘a structured process whereby an entitles’ present or past behaviour 
is assessed for consistency with relevant principles or norms’ (Brundage et al., 2020).