247
1 3 Ethics as a Service: A Pragmatic Operationalisation of AI Ethics  
own subjectivity and biases within a given set of circumstances (Terzis, 2020). 
By enabling the development of this understanding, a reflective process can help 
illuminate why unethical outcomes may occur so that the appropriate mitiga-
tion or avoidance strategy can be put in place (Fazelpour & Lipton, 2020). From 
this perspective, the practical operationalisation of AI ethics becomes less about 
the paternalistic imposition of inflexible standards that ignore context and more 
about procedural regularity and public reason that can be adapted and shared 
across contexts and societies (Binns, 2018; Kroll et al., 2017). In practice, struc-
tured identification and transparent communication of tradeoffs help organisa-
tions arrive at resolutions that, even when imperfect, are at least publicly defen-
sible (Whittlestone et al., 2019).
An operationalisation of AI ethics focused on procedural regularity and pub-
lic reason would commit a company producing algorithmic systems to:
(a) justifying all design decisions to a set of common principles agreed through an 
inclusive and discursive process that involves all individuals, groups and envi-
ronmental representatives likely to be directly or indirectly affected by the AI 
products of a specific company or research group. These principles should be 
reviewed periodically (e.g., annually);
(b) following a set and repeatable procedure to define and translate each of the 
agreed upon principles into technical standards in a way that achieves an accept-
able level of ethical justifiability and environmental sustainability within the 
specific context; and
(c) ensuring appropriate oversight is in place at the validation, verification and 
evaluation stages.
Companies operationalising AI ethics in this way would use translational tools 
and ethical principles in the same way each time (and at repeated intervals to 
cover validation, verification, evaluation) but accept that the exact way in 
which they are applied is contextually dependent. This kind of shift away from 
abstract rules towards negotiated ethics has already been seen in arguments for 
a move from privacy by design to privacy engineering. Privacy engineering, as 
described by Alshammari and Simpson (2017, p. 162), is a ‘means of apply -
ing engineering principles and process in developing and maintaining systems 
in a systematic and repeatable way, with a view to achieving acceptable levels 
of privacy protection’ without assuming that the way that this is achieved will 
be the same in each instance or immutable through time or different contexts. 
Additionally, this approach to operationalisation covers the five pillars of good 
ethical governance set out by Winfield and Jirotka (2018) by turning AI ethics 
into a ‘collaborative process, developed and iteratively (re)configured through 
material practices and continued negotiations’ (Orr & Davis, 2020, p. 731). 
However, if the responsibility for the whole process still sits with just the AI 
practitioners themselves, there remains a risk that the operationalisation process 
itself becomes subject to manipulation and may be used solely for ethics wash-
ing purposes.