240 J. Morley et al.
1 3
1 Introduction
As the range of potential uses for Artificial Intelligence (AI), in particular machine 
learning (ML), has increased, so has awareness of the ethical issues posed by the 
design, development, deployment and use of AI systems (henceforth collapsed into 
‘Design’). Issues such as privacy, fairness, accountability, accessibility, environmen-
tal sustainability, and transparency are now not just discussed in academic literature 
but also in mainstream media. This increased awareness has led to the realisation 
that existing ‘hard’ governance mechanisms (such as legislation and other regula-
tory frameworks, e.g. ISO requirements) alone provide insufficient protection to 
individuals, groups, society, and the environment. Similarly, these mechanisms 
alone do not sufficiently incentivise the Design of socially preferable and environ-
mentally sustainable AI. In an attempt to overcome these limitations, governments, 
private sector organisations, and others have focused on the development of ‘soft’ 
governance mechanisms such as ethics codes, guidelines, frameworks, and policy 
strategies (Redacted, 2018; Schiff et  al., 2020). The development of these largely 
principle-based documents has been an important and necessary phase in the evo-
lution of AI governance (Mulgan, 2019; Raab, 2020). However, it has become 
increasingly clear that highly abstract principles provide little protection from poten-
tial harms related to AI when AI practitioners have no guidance on how to design 
and deploy algorithms within these ethical boundaries (Clarke, 2019; Orr & Davis, 
2020). In other words, a significant gap exists between theory and practice within 
the AI ethics field (Ville et  al., 2019). This is not unusual in ethics (consider for 
example the development of bioethics), where changes are sometimes theory-led, 
and can partly be explained by the relative ‘newness’ of the concept of AI ethical 
principles in the public policy domain1: < 20% of all the AI ethics documents are 
more than four-years old (Jobin et al., 2019). However, it may also be a result of the 
desire by influential private-sector organisations to ‘ethics wash’ (Floridi, 2019b) in 
an attempt to keep the ethics of AI a self-regulated field and delay legislative inter -
vention (Butcher & Beridze, 2019).
In previous work (Morley et al., 2019), we analysed whether it may be possible 
to start closing this gap between the ‘what’ and the ‘how’ of AI ethics by identify -
ing the methods and tools already available to help AI developers, engineers, and 
designers (collectively ‘practitioners’ (Orr & Davis, 2020)) know not only what to 
do or not to do, but also how to do it, or avoid doing it, by adopting an ethical per -
spective (Alshammari & Simpson, 2017). We plotted the tools in a typology, match-
ing them to ethical principles (beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice and 
explicability) and to stages in the algorithm development pipeline. Although we 
found that numerous tools and methodologies exist to help AI practitioners translate 
between the ‘what’ and the ‘how’ of AI ethics, we also found that the vast majority 
1 Differentiating between public policy and research domains is important here. AI researchers have long 
been aware of the ethical implications of algorithms. Both Alan Turing and Norbert Wiener were writing 
on the topic as early as 1940. It has taken a longer time for policymakers, regulators and legislators to 
become interested in the topic.