246 J. Morley et al.
1 3
4  A Series of Compromises
Thus far we have seen that the need to Design AI solutions pro-ethically is well 
recognised, and that the field of AI-ethics now has a solid foundation comprised of 
principle-based governing documents and translational tools and methods. Develop-
ing this foundation has been essential and the individual components remain highly 
valuable. However, pro-ethical Design practices remain difficult to operationalise 
practically as the Goldilocks Level of Abstraction has not yet been found. Attempts 
thus far remain either too flexible or too strict. To overcome these limitations, 
the ‘just right’ Level of Abstraction needs to be identified by making a series of 
compromises.
4.1  Finding a Compromise Between Too Flexible and Too Strict
Raab (2020) argues that when prescriptive guidelines are implemented in a top-
down and non-flexible fashion, this gives the misleading impression that it is pos-
sible to take a formulaic approach to the application of ethical norms, principles and 
general rules to specific instances. In reality, the argument continues, applied ethics 
requires judgement. Specifically, it requires an ability to consider how risks, con-
flicting rights and interests, and social preferability varies depending on a particular 
context. The ethical implications of deploying an AI system in a healthcare setting 
are unlikely to be the same as the ethical implications of deploying an AI system 
in an educational setting. Similarly, the boundaries of social preferability within 
Europe may not be the same as the boundaries within Asia and these boundaries 
may change with time or with type of algorithm, or even with stage of development. 
Finally, ethical guidelines that are too strict portray algorithmic systems as static 
products of code and data that once deployed continue to operate in the same way as 
intended and have only the intended (positive) effects. Ananny and Crawford (2018) 
point out the reality is that algorithmic systems are assemblages of human and non-
human actors which have many non-deterministic impacts. To understand (and 
therefore govern) the ethical implications requires understanding how the whole sys-
tem works—including what may happen once the system is deployed and used by 
entities, or for purposes, other than the original practitioners or stated purpose.
With this in mind, if AI ethics is to be operationalised in a way that is useful 
to AI practitioners and simultaneously protective of individuals, groups, society 
and the environment, then the operationalisation must: (a) happen at the appro-
priate Level of Abstraction (where translational tools are neither too flexible, nor 
too strict); and (b) must not consist solely of a one-off tick-box exercise com-
pleted only at the beginning of the Design process. Developing a practical pro-
ethical Design approach that meets these two criteria is not simple, but it is not 
impossible. It requires a shift in the way that AI ethics is framed. The practice 
of AI ethics should not be seen as an end-goal that can be objectively achieved, 
observed, quantified, or compared. Instead it should be seen as a reflective 
development process, which also aims to help AI practitioners understand their