SUet al. : DAENs FOR HYPERSPECTRAL UNMIXING 4315
TABLE III
SAD S(INRADIANS )AND RESALONG WITHTHEIR STANDARD DEVIATIONS OBTAINED BY DIFFERENT METHODS
FOR THE MANGROVE DATA FROM 10 MC R UNS,W HERE THE BEST RESULTS ARE IN BOLD
Fig. 2. Estimated endmember signa tures by the proposed method for a
problem with 4 endmembers, 3364 pixels, 10 outliers, and SNR =20 dB,
along with the references from the USGS library.
Fig. 3. 45 ×45 pixel subscene of the Mangrove data used in our experiment.
identiﬁed by a ground survey of the study area, including
Avicennia, Bruguiera ,Excoecaria ,a n d Phoenix . The Man-
grove data, as shown in Fig. 3, include 137 ×187 pixels and
155 bands, with a spatial resolution of 30 m. For detailedinformation of the Mangrove data, we refer to [52].
In our experiment, a subscene with 45 ×45 pixels of
the Mangrove data has been used to further evaluate theproposed DAEN. Following [52], the considered subscene
contains 4 endmembers, i.e., m=4.
Table III presents the obtained quantitative results from
the Mangrove data. It can be seen that the proposed DAENachieved very promising results for the four considered man-
grove spices. However, the other competitors ended up withFig. 4. Unmixing results for the subs cene of the Mangrove data, where the
data are projected onto the ﬁrst two principal components (PCs).
errors when detecting or estimating the endmembers. This isdue to the fact that according to our observation, the Mangrove
scene contains many outliers across the whole image, which
brings a lot of difﬁculties for ge neral unmixing methods. This
point was veriﬁed by our experiment, in which we detected a
total of 17 outliers. For illustrative purposes, Fig. 4 scatterplots
the unmixing results obtained by the considered methods,
in which the detected outliers are also illustrated. In Fig. 4,
we can observe that the proposed DAEN produced goodunmixing results for this data set, while all the other methods
r e s u l t e di np r o b l e m s .
Finally, for illustrative purposes, the estimated endmem-
ber signatures, along with their ground references, and thecorresponding abundance maps obtained by the proposed
DAEN are shown in Fig. 5. Effective results can be observedfrom Fig. 5.
In summary, our experiments with this challenging Man-
grove data set demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
DAEN for real scenarios with outliers, which is a general
situation in real problems.
B. Experiment With the Samson Data Set
In this experiment, we use the Samson data set that includes
156 bands covering the wavelengths from 0.401 to 0.889 μm
and 95 ×95 pixels, as shown in Fig. 6, for validation [53].
There are three endmembers, including soil, tree, and water,
in the ground truth image.
Table IV demonstrates the obtained quantitative results
for the considered methods. It can be observed that the