SUet al. : DAENs FOR HYPERSPECTRAL UNMIXING 4321
Antonio Plaza (M’05–SM’07–F’15) received the
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer engineer-
ing from the Hyperspectral Computing Laboratory,
Department of Technology of Computers and Com-
munications, University of Extremadura, Cáceres,Spain, in 1999 and 2002, respectively.
He is currently the Head of the Hyperspec-
tral Computing Laboratory, Department of Technol-ogy of Computers and Communications, Universityof Extremadura. He is currently one of the top
cited authors in Spain and in the University of
Extremadura. He has guest edited 10 special issues on hyperspectral remote
sensing for different journals. His research interests include remotely sensedhyperspectral image analysis, signal pro cessing, and efﬁcient implementations
of large-scale scientiﬁc problems on high-performance computing architec-tures, including commodity Beowulf c lusters, heterogeneous networks of
computers and clouds, and specialized co mputer architectures such as ﬁeld-
programmable gate arrays or graphical processing units.
Dr. Plaza was a member of the Editorial Board of the IEEE Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Newsletter from 2011 to 2012 and IEEE Geoscience and
Remote Sensing Magazine in 2013. He was also a member of the Steering
Committee of the IEEE J
OURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH
OBSERV ATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING . He is a fellow of IEEE for the
contributions to hyperspectral data pro cessing and parallel computing of Earth
observation data. He was a recipient of a recognition as an OutstandingAssociate Editor of the IEEE A
CCESS in 2017. He is a reviewer of 500 man-
uscripts for over 50 different journals. He served as the Editor-in-Chief forthe IEEE T
RANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING from
2013 to 2017. He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE A CCESS .H es e r v e d
as the Director of Education Activities for the IEEE Geoscience and RemoteSensing Society (GRSS) from 2011 to 2012 and the President of the SpanishChapter of the IEEE GRSS from 2012 to 2016.
Andrea Marinoni (S’07–M’11–SM’16) received
the B.S., M.Sc. (cum laude) , and Ph.D. degrees
in electronic engineering from the University ofPavia, Pavia, Italy, in 2005, 2007, and 2011,
respectively.
From 2013 to 2018, he was a Research Fellow
with the Telecommunications and Remote Sensing
Laboratory, Department of Electrical, Computer, and
Biomedical Engineering, University of Pavia. From
2015 to 2017, he was a Visiting Researcher withthe Earth and Planetary Image Facility, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel; the School of Geography andPlanning, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China; the School of Com-puter Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; the Institute of RemoteSensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; and
the Instituto de Telecomunicacoes, Instituto Superior Tecnico, Universidade
de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. He is currently an Associate Professor withthe Earth Observation Laboratory, Department of Physics and Technology,UiT–The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway. His research interests
include efﬁcient nonlinear signal processing applied to multimodal remote
sensing, Earth observation interpreta tion, and Big Data mining, analysis, and
management for human–environment interaction assessment.
Dr. Marinoni serves as a reviewer for several major journals and conferences
sponsored by the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society, the IEEECommunications Society, the IEEE Signal Processing Society, the IEEEInformation Theory Society, the International Association of Pattern Recog-
nition, the International Society on Urban Health, and the American Medical
Informatics Association.
Paolo Gamba (SM’00–F’13) received the Laurea
(cum laude) and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engi-
neering from the University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy,in 1989 and 1993, respectively.
He is currently a Professor of telecommunications
with the University of Pavia, where he leads the
Telecommunications and Remote Sensing Labora-
tory and serves as a Deputy Coordinator of the Ph.D.
School in Electronics and Computer Science. He hasbeen invited to give keynote lectures and tutorials in
several occasions about urban remote sensing, data
fusion, EO data, and risk management.
Dr. Gamba has been the organizer and Technical Chair of the biennial
GRSS/ISPRS Joint Workshops on Remo te Sensing and Data Fusion over
Urban Areas since 2001. He was the Chair of the Data Fusion Committee
of the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society from 2005 to 2009.He serves as a GRSS Vice President for Professional Activities, the Chair
of the Chapters Committee, and the Chair of the Symposium Awards Com-
mittee. He was the Editor-in-Chief of IEEE G
EOSCIENCE AND REMOTE
SENSING LETTERS from 2009 to 2013. He has been the Guest Editor of
special issues of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE
SENSING , the IEEE J OURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN REMOTE SENSING
APPLICA TIONS ,t h e ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing ,
theInternational Journal of Information Fusion ,a n dt h e Pattern Recognition
Letters on the topics of Urban Remote Sensing, Remote Sensing for Disaster
Management, and Pattern Recognition in Remote Sensing Applications.
Somdatta Chakravortty received the B.Tech.
degree in civil engineering from Kanpur University,Kanpur, India, in 1997, the M.Tech. degree in infor-mation technology from Bengal Engineering andScience University, Sibpur, India, in 2002, and the
Ph.D. degree in computer science and engineering
from Calcutta University, Kolkata, India, in 2017.
She is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Informa tion Technology, Maulana
Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology,Kolkata, India. She has several research projects
funded by the Department of Science and Technology, University Grants
Commission, and All India Council of Technical Education, Government ofIndia, which focuses on research relate d to hyperspectral image analysis. Her
research interests include hyperspect ral image analysis, algorithm develop-
ment, and image fusion.
Dr. Chakravortty is a member of profe ssional societies such as the Indian
Society of Remote Sensing, the Computer Society of India, and the Instituteof Engineers.