IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2019 4309
DAEN: Deep Autoencoder Networks
for Hyperspectral Unmixing
Yuanchao Su ,Student Member, IEEE ,J u nL i ,Senior Member, IEEE , Antonio Plaza ,Fellow, IEEE ,
Andrea Marinoni ,Senior Member, IEEE ,P a o l oG a m b a ,Fellow, IEEE , and Somdatta Chakravortty
Abstract — Spectral unmixing is a technique for remotely
sensed image interpretation that expresses each (possibly mixed)
pixel as a combination of pure spectral signatures (endmembers)and their fractional abundances. In this paper, we develop anew technique for unsupervised unmixing which is based ona deep autoencoder network (DAEN). Our newly developedDAEN consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part of the networkadopts stacked autoencoders (SAEs) to learn spectral signatures,so as to generate a good initialization for the unmixing process.In the second part of the network, a variational autoencoder(V AE) is employed to perform blind source separation, aimedat obtaining the endmember signatures and abundance fractionssimultaneously. By taking advantage from the SAEs, the robust-ness of the proposed approach is remarkable as it can unmixdata sets with outliers and low signal-to-noise ratio. Moreover,the multihidden layers of the V AE ensure the required constraints(nonnegativity and sum-to-one) when estimating the abundances.The effectiveness of the proposed method is evaluated using bothsynthetic and real hyperspectral data. When compared with otherunmixing methods, the proposed approach demonstrates verycompetitive performance.
Index Terms — Deep autoencoder network (DAEN), deep
learning, endmember identiﬁcation, hyperspectral unmixing,variational autoencoder (V AE).
Manuscript received July 18, 2018; revised November 4, 2018,
December 19, 2018 and December 29, 2018; accepted December 29,
2018. Date of publication January 28, 2019; date of current version
June 24, 2019. This work was supported in part by the National NaturalScience Foundation of China under G rant 61771496, in part by the Guangdong
Provincial Natural Science F oundation under Grant 2016A030313254, and in
part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under
Grant 2017YFB0502900. (Corresponding author: Jun Li.)
Y . Su is with the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Urbanization
and Geo-Simulation, Center of Integrated Geographic InformationAnalysis, School of Geography and P lanning, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510275, China (e-mail: suych3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn).
J. Li is with the College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan
University, Changsha 410082, China, and also with the Key Laboratoryof Visual Perception and Artiﬁcial Intelligence of Hunan Province,
Changsha 410082, China (e-mail: lijun48@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
A. Plaza is with the Hyperspectral C omputing Laboratory, Department
of Technology of Computers and Communications, Escuela Politécnica,
University of Extremadura, 10071 Cáceres, Spain (e-mail: aplaza@unex.es).
A. Marinoni is with the Earth Observa tion Group, Centre for Integrated
Remote Sensing and Forecasting for Arctic Operations, Department of Physicsand Technology, UiT–The Arctic University of Norway, 9037 Tromsø, Norway
(e-mail: andrea.marinoni@unipv.it).
P. Gamba is with the Telecommunications and Remote Sensing Laboratory,
Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, University
of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy (e-mail: paolo.gamba@unipv.it).
S. Chakravortty is with the Departm ent of Information Technology, Maulana
Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology, Kolkata 700064, India (e-mail:csomdatta@rediffmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TGRS.2018.2890633I. I NTRODUCTION
HYperspectral images have been extensively used in a
wide variety of applications, including classiﬁcation,
target detection, environmental monitoring, precision agricul-ture, and so on [1]–[3]. However, due to the relatively low
spatial resolution of hyperspectral images, many pixels aremixed by several materials, which brings difﬁculties to the
characterization of hyperspectra l data, leading to inaccuracies
in the understanding and quantiﬁcation of the considered
scenes [4], [5].
In order to deal with mixed pixels, many algorithms have
been proposed for hyperspectral unmixing [1]. Hyperspectral
unmixing refers to any process t hat separates the pixel spec-
tra from a hyperspectral image into a collection of pureconstituent spectra, called endmembers, and a set of abun-
dance fractions. At each pixel, the endmembers are generallyassumed to represent the pure materials, and the abundances
represent the percentage of each endmember [6].
Unmixing algorithms rely on speciﬁc mixing models, which
can be characterized as either linear or nonlinear [7]. Linear
spectral mixing (LSM) holds wh en the mixing scale is macro-
scopic and the photon reaching the sensor has interacted
with just one material [8]. In contrast, non-LSM (NLSM)considers physical interactions between the light scattered
by multiple materials in the scene. These interactions may
happen at a multilayered level or at a microscopic (or intimate)level [9], [10]. In recent years, a new trend is to incorpo-
rate linear and nonlinear models for unmixing. For instance,
in [11] and [12], nonlinearity is regarded as a penalty termof a linear objective function. In [13], the hyperspectral data
are projected on hyperplanes representing the nonlinearities.
Although NLSM is more faithful to the imaging mechanism of
instrument, there are many challenges remaining. For instance,
retrieving a reliable estimate of the actual areal proportions ofthe endmembers in the NLSM requires the use of complex
metrics, which needs to consider the prior knowledge of the
scene [1]. Furthermore, the high computational cost is beyondthe reach of many techniques [1] . Therefore, most unmixing
algorithms belong to the LSM category. Despite its simplicity,it provides very good approximations of the light scattering
mechanisms in many real scenarios [14].
Regardless of the availability of training samples, most
unmixing methods can be classiﬁed into two categories,
i.e., handcrafted and learning based. In this paper, we usehandcrafted to denote traditional algorithms, which derive
0196-2892 © 2019 IEEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistri bution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.