Information 2020 ,11, 243 18 of 21
able to obtain 99.99% training accuracy and 99.91% testing accuracy in the binary classiﬁcation
experiment. Moreover, we obtained 99% training accuracy and 93.88% testing accuracy in the ﬁve-class
classiﬁcation experiment.
7. Conclusions
In this paper, we compared di erent classiﬁers on the NSL-KDD dataset for both binary and
multi-class classiﬁcation. We considered SVM, random forest, and the LSTM-RNN model. We have
shown that our proposed model produced the highest accuracy rate of 96.51% and 99.91% for binary
classiﬁcation using 122 features and an optimal set of 99 features, respectively. The LSTM-RNN
obtained higher accuracy than the SVM in binary classiﬁcation. However, random forest was the best
classiﬁer among all in that case. However, using the 99-feature set, we were able to get testing accuracy
similar to that of RF.
In addition, we achieved a testing accuracy of 82.68% using the 122-feature set and 93.88%
accuracy while using the 99-feature set in multi-class classiﬁcation. When compared with the SVM and
random forest, LSTM-RNN performed the best in multiclass classiﬁcation experiments. Our LSTM-
RNN-with-GA model achieved a 10% higher accuracy than random forest in that experiment. Using the
GA improves the performance of the LSTM-RNN classiﬁer signiﬁcantly. Finally, we conclude that
LSTM-RNN is suitable for large datasets. With small datasets having few features, the performance
of LSTM-RNN is not very noticeable. However, enhanced with the GA, LSTM-RNN performs
comparatively better than traditional machine learning approaches.
In this research, all the experiments were executed using a Windows platform. In this experiment,
we did not record the training time. In future, we will execute all the experiments in a GPU-based
system for obtaining a faster training time. Another future work should include using a more recent
dataset such as UNSW-NB15 to verify the e ciency of the LSTM-RNN model. Another example
for future work will be developing a framework for collecting real-time network data, labeling the
dataset with expert knowledge, and then applying the proposed LSTM-RNN classiﬁer on that dataset.
Additionally, we will extend our experiments for comparing the performance of LSTM_RNN-with-GA
to those of other deep-learning approaches, such as CNN-LSTM, STL, deep belief network (DBN),
on the latest datasets.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: P .S.M. and P .C.; methodology: P .S.M. and P .C.; software, P .S.M., P .C.
and K.R.; validation: P .S.M., P .C., X.Y., and K.R.; formal analysis: P .S.M. and X.Y.; investigation: P .S.M.; resources:
P .S.M., K.R.; data curation: P .S.M. and P .C.; writing—original draft preparation: P .S.M. and P .C.; writing—review
and editing: X.Y., P .S.M., P .C. and A.E.; visualization: X.Y. and P .S.M.; supervision: X.Y.; Project administration:
X.Y.; funding acquisition: X.Y. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: National Science Foundation: CNS-1900187.
Acknowledgments: This work is partially supported by the NSF under grant CNS-1900187. Any opinions,
ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reﬂect the views of the NSF.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Appendix A
True positive (TP): The model correctly predicts anomalous records as anomalous.
True negative (TN): The model correctly predicts normal records as normal.
False positive (FP): The model incorrectly predicts a normal instance as an anomaly.
False negative (FN): The model incorrectly predicts negative instances. In other words, the model
predicts an anomalous instance as normal.
True positive rate (TPR or detection rate): The percentage of positive instances that are
correctly predicted.
TPR =TP
TP+FN