Information 2020 ,11, 243 11 of 21
To build the LSTM-RNN model, ﬁrst we selected hyper-parameters and optimizers for both binary
and multi-class classiﬁcation. We determined the following hyper-parameters: batch size, the number
of epochs, learning rate, dropout, and activation function.
a. Batch size is the number of training records in one forward and one backward pass.
b. An epoch means one forward and one backward pass of all the training examples.
c. Learning rate is the proportion of the weights that are updated during the training of the
LSTM-RNN model. It can be chosen from the range [0.0–1.0].
d. Dropout is a regularization technique, where randomly selected neurons are ignored during
training. The selected neurons are temporarily removed on the forward pass.
e. The activation function converts an input signal of a node in a neural network to an output
signal, which is then used as the input of the next hidden layer and so on. To ﬁnd the output of a
layer, we calculated the sum of the products of inputs and their corresponding weights, applied
the activation function to that sum, and then fed that output as an input to the next layer.
A suitable optimizer plays a very crucial part in classiﬁcation. From various available optimizers,
we selected stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for multiclass classiﬁcation and the Adam optimizer for
binary classiﬁcation. SGD provides a lower computational cost than other gradient descent optimizers
used in multiclass classiﬁcation. Because other optimizers, such as the batch gradient descent and
mini-batch gradient descent optimizers, use all the training samples for completing one iteration,
they are computationally expensive to use. The advantage of SGD is that it uses only one batch for
each iteration.
The Adam optimizer is easy to implement and computationally e cient because the decision is in
binary and it requires less memory to implement.
Step 4: Prediction and performance metrics calculation
After ﬁtting the model using the training dataset and testing dataset, we obtained the testing
accuracy rate and loss value of the classiﬁer. The testing dataset is used as a validation set to get an
unbiased estimate of accuracy during the learning process. Then we used the predict_classes module
of Keras to get the prediction matrix of the model; that is the classes predicted by the model. At this
point, the expected classes have been deﬁned in the original KDDTest +dataset and the predicted
classes. Next, we calculated the classiﬁcation metrics such as precision, recall, f-score, true positive rate
(TPR), false-positive rate (FPR), and confusion matrix from the expected and predicted classes matrix.
These metrices are explained in Appendix A.
Step 5: Evaluation by performance analysis
We performed Step 4 for both SVM and RF classiﬁers and then evaluated the performances of
SVM, RF, and LSTM-RNN by comparing the metrics.
4.2. Experiment Environment Setup
TensorFlow and Keras were used to implement the LSTM-RNN model, and scikit-learn was used
to implement SVM and RF. Two types of classiﬁcations have been performed to study the performance
of the LSTM-RNN model: binary and multi-class /5-category. Binary classiﬁcation gives normal and
anomaly detection results and multi-class /5-category classiﬁcation gives normal, DoS, Probe, R2L and
L2R attack detection results. These two types of classiﬁcations have been performed using a set of
122 features and an optimal set of 99 features. The optimal set of 99 features was obtained using the
genetic algorithm.
To prevent overﬁtting in LSTM-RNN, we introduced several dropout amounts during the training
of the model. While experimenting with two and three hidden layers, we randomly selected 1% of
the neurons to drop out. We dropped out 10%–15% of the neurons while experimenting with four
and ﬁve hidden layers. A dropout of 20%–30% was performed while experimenting with six, seven,
and eight hidden layers. We have adjusted the dropout percentage for the hidden layers through
several executions of the same experiment. We executed each experiment at least four times in di erent