Information 2020 ,11, 243 9 of 21
Feature selection from the dataset is the process of ﬁnding the most relevant feature-set for
the future predictive model implementation. This technique was used to identify and remove the
unneeded, redundant, and irrelevant features that do not contribute or decrease the accuracy of the
future predictive model implementation for the classiﬁcation.
Optimal feature selection is one of the most important tasks in developing an excellent NIDS
because some features can bias the classiﬁer to identify a particular class, and that may increase the
amount of misclassiﬁcation. To minimize the misclassiﬁcation rate, to minimize the training time,
and to maximize the accuracy of the classiﬁer, we have applied a GA in our experiment. Using a GA,
we have obtained an optimal subset of 99 features from the original 122 features. After applying the
GA, insigniﬁcant data are removed from the original features set. The GA selects only a subset of
relevant features. Accuracy is used as the ﬁtness function in this research. We have calculated the
maximum, minimum and average accuracy of the training dataset according to their labels. The GA
provided a set of solutions by performing recombination and mutation of the features and selected
the features with maximum, minimum, and average accuracy. The subset of features that gives the
maximum accuracy was selected as the optimal feature set. We then prepared our training and testing
datasets with this optimal feature set.
The ﬂow-chart of the GA implementation is shown in Figure 4.
Information  2020 , 11, 243 9 of 21 
 unneeded, redundant, and irrelevant features that do  not contribute or decrease the accuracy of the 
future predictive model implementation for the classification. 
Optimal feature selection is one of the most important tasks in developing an excellent NIDS 
because some features can bias the classifier to identify a particular class, and that may increase the 
amount of misclassification. To minimize the misclassification rate, to minimize the training time, 
and to maximize the accuracy of the classifier, we have applied a GA in our experiment. Using a GA, we have obtained an optimal subset  of 99 features from the original 122 features. After applying the 
GA, insignificant data are removed from the original  features set. The GA selects only a subset of 
relevant features. Accuracy is used as the fitness function in this research. We have calculated the 
maximum, minimum and average accuracy of the training dataset according to their labels. The GA 
provided a set of solutions by performing recombin ation and mutation of the features and selected 
the features with maximu m, minimum, and average accuracy. The subset of features that gives the 
maximum accuracy was selected as the optimal feature set. We then prepared our training and testing 
datasets with this optimal feature set. 
The flow-chart of the GA implementation is shown in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4. The flowchart of genetic algorithm implementation. 
The GA is a heuristic optimization method and it  was implemented to find the best feature-set 
from the NSL-KDD datasets us ing the DEAP (distributed Evolutionary Algorithms  in Python) 
evolutionary computation framework [32].  
Initialize the population: The NSL-KDD datasets were mapped into 122 features in this 
experiment. The GA initializes the population of 10 individual feature-sets, each time randomly 
selected from the total 122 features. Each of the 10 individual feature-sets is represented as a feature 
vector with 122 attributes. Each attribute from the fe ature-set contains either a value 1 that represents 
that the feature is included in the individual, or a value 0 that represents the feature is not included 
in the individual. 
Fitness value assignment: After the initialization of the population, the GA assigns the fitness 
for each individual feature-set. Here the logistic regression (LR) is used for training the model. The 
LR model gets trained from each individual featur e-set and evaluates the selection error. The lowest 
selection error represents the highest fitness. The GA ranks each individual feature-set according to 
its fitness.  
Selection of individual for the next generation: After the fitness value assignment, the selection 
operator chooses the individuals that recombine late r for the next generation. The selection operator 
selects the individuals according to their fitness leve ls. The number of selected individuals is N/2, N 
being the population size; i.e., almost half of the individuals will get selected in this step.  
Crossover:  In this phase, the GA recombines the selected individuals to generate a new 
population from almost half of the population already selected fr om the previous steps, although, 
the total number of features in the new population  will remain the same. Here the GA chooses the 
best combination of feature-set from the N/2 individuals through uniform crossover method.  
Mutation: The GA performs mutation to diversify the population and to prevent premature 
convergence. The GA flips the value of the attrib utes of the input individual and returns the new 
individual. In this experiment, the probability of each attribute to be flipped is set to 0.05. The 
Figure 4. The ﬂowchart of genetic algorithm implementation.
The GA is a heuristic optimization method and it was implemented to ﬁnd the best feature-set from
the NSL-KDD datasets using the DEAP (distributed Evolutionary Algorithms in Python) evolutionary
computation framework [32].
Initialize the population: The NSL-KDD datasets were mapped into 122 features in this
experiment. The GA initializes the population of 10 individual feature-sets, each time randomly
selected from the total 122 features. Each of the 10 individual feature-sets is represented as a feature
vector with 122 attributes. Each attribute from the feature-set contains either a value 1 that represents
that the feature is included in the individual, or a value 0 that represents the feature is not included in
the individual.
Fitness value assignment: After the initialization of the population, the GA assigns the ﬁtness
for each individual feature-set. Here the logistic regression (LR) is used for training the model. The LR
model gets trained from each individual feature-set and evaluates the selection error. The lowest
selection error represents the highest ﬁtness. The GA ranks each individual feature-set according to
its ﬁtness.
Selection of individual for the next generation: After the ﬁtness value assignment, the selection
operator chooses the individuals that recombine later for the next generation. The selection operator
selects the individuals according to their ﬁtness levels. The number of selected individuals is N /2,
N being the population size; i.e., almost half of the individuals will get selected in this step.
Crossover: In this phase, the GA recombines the selected individuals to generate a new population
from almost half of the population already selected from the previous steps, although, the total number