Information 2020 ,11, 243 2 of 21
when detecting unknown or new attacks. In an anomaly-based NIDS, heuristic methods are used
for detecting unknown attacks. When a deviation is observed in normal tra c, the anomaly-based
NIDS classiﬁes the tra c as an intrusion; this tends to produce a high false-positive rate. Despite this,
anomaly-based NIDSs have wide acceptance in research because of the theoretical potential in the
identiﬁcation of novel attacks.
Machine learning approaches such as support vector machine (SVM) and decision tree (DT) were
used on the 1998 DARPA intrusion detection dataset [ 2]. In research reported in [ 3] and [ 4], the authors
used a decision tree-based model on the NSL-KDD datasets. Random forests (RF) [ 5], k-means [ 6],
naïve Bayes (NB) [ 7], multilayer perceptrons [ 8], and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) [ 9] have also
been used in developing NIDSs. Deep learning approaches have been successfully used in voice,
image, and face detection [10,11].
Commonly used deep learning-based approaches include the deep neural network (DNN) [ 12,13],
the recurrent neural network (RNN) [ 14,15], the convolutional neural network (CNN) [ 16], the deep
belief network (DBN) [ 17], and long short-term memory (LSTM) [ 18–21]. In [ 22], a deep learning-based
technique called self-taught learning (STL) was applied to the NSL-KDD dataset to develop an e ective
NIDS. Using the LSTM-RNN method gave a high detection rate on the KDD Cup’99 datasets [ 18].
Research showed that LSTM-RNN performed better than SVM, KNN (K-nearest neighbors), Bayes,
probabilistic neural networks (PNNs), and some other neural network models.
In developing a ﬂexible and e ective NIDS for unknown attacks, it is di cult to select a proper
feature set from the network tra c dataset. The features of one class of attack may not be applicable to
another class of attack because of the changing nature of attack scenarios. In [ 19], a researcher applied
post-pruned DTs and backward elimination for feature selection. They applied the J4.8 decision tree
algorithm which moves the nodes up towards the root of the tree and discards other nodes on the way.
After building the ﬁrst tree from the training set with all features, those features were removed from
the dataset which were not part of the tree.
To extract relevant features from the training set, feature selection is performed to eliminate the
insigniﬁcant training features, as emphasized in [ 23]. In that research, the authors showed that a chosen
set of features may highly a ect the accuracy of a classiﬁer. Feature selection can be done through three
approaches, namely, as a ﬁlter, as a wrapper, or as in an embedded way. The ﬁlter approach selects the
most signiﬁcant features regardless of the model used. Its main advantages are low execution time
and its ability to solve the over-ﬁtting problem. The wrapper approach combines related features into
a subset. Its main beneﬁt is its ability to consider the interaction between features although it has
a high execution time and is prone to over-ﬁtting. Finally, the embedded approach investigates the
interaction between the features in a deeper manner than the wrapper, so it can produce an optimal
subset of signiﬁcant features, although it has a high execution time also.
In this research, we developed a new NIDS by combining GA for optimal feature selection and
LSTM-RNN. The NIDS was used to classify the NSL-KDD dataset, a benchmark dataset for NIDSs.
Both binary and multi-class /5-category classiﬁcation was done in this experiment. The hyper-parameter
set may a ect the performance of an LSTM-RNN classiﬁer. Through several experiments, an optimal
hyper-parameter set, which includes learning rate, batch size, epoch, optimizer, activation function,
and loss function, was established for the LSTM-RNN model dataset.
Results show that applying the GA gave a much higher accuracy than using the original feature
set. Furthermore, results show that LSTM-RNN with the GA classiﬁer can learn all attack classes in the
training data. The classiﬁer could detect a large number of all attacks accurately from the test data.
Therefore, LSTM-RNN with the GA can decrease the amount of misclassiﬁcation over what results
when using the entire feature set. Performance metrics such as training accuracy and testing accuracy,
precision, recall, f-score, true positive rate (TPR), false-positive rate (FPR) and confusion matrix were
calculated in this research. A comparison of the performance of LSTM-RNN (with the GA) with SVM
and random forest was also conducted. The results show that LSTM-RNN performs very well in both