Information 2020 ,11, 243 5 of 21
blocks. Each memory block has at least one memory cell. Figure 2 demonstrates one cell in a basic
LSTM network.
The memory cells activate with the regulating gates. These gates control the incoming and outgoing
information ﬂow. A forget-gate is placed between an input gate and an output gate. Forget gates can
reset the state of the linear unit if the stored information is no longer needed. These gates are simple
sigmoid threshold units. These activation functions range from 0 to 1.
The output ycj(t)of an LSTM memory cell show in Figure 2 is computed as:
ycj(t)=youtj(t)h
scj(t)
where youtjis the output gate activation, scjis the internal state of the output gate, and his the hidden
layer output.
Information  2020 , 11, 243 5 of 21 
 The memory cells activate with the regulating gates. These gates control the incoming and 
outgoing information flow. A forget-gate is placed between an input gate and an output gate. Forget 
gates can reset the state of the linear unit if the stored information is no longer needed. These gates 
are simple sigmoid threshold units. These activation functions range from 0 to1.  
The output 𝑦௖ೕ(𝑡) of an LSTM memory cell show in Figure 2 is computed as: 
𝑦௖ೕ(𝑡)= 𝑦௢௨௧ ೕ(𝑡)ℎ(𝑠 ௖ೕ(𝑡))  
where 𝑦௢௨௧ ೕ is the output gate activation, 𝑠௖ೕ is the internal state of the output gate, and h is the 
hidden layer output. 
 
Figure 2. One cell in a basic LSTM network. 
2.1.3. Genetic Algorithm (GA) 
GAs are inspired by the concept of Darwin’s theory of evolution and execute evolutionary 
biology techniques, such as selection, mutation, recombination, and inheritance to solve a given problem. GA is a heuristic search method used for finding optimal solutions. 
A GA [28] generates a pool of possible solutions for a given problem. It then creates a group of 
features/individuals randomly from the given pr oblem. The individuals are then evaluated with 
evaluation functions provided by the programm er. These evaluation functions include some 
recombination and mutations, just as in natural gene tics. Each of the solutions is assigned a fitness 
value, and the filtered individuals give a higher chance to fit into the model, thereby providing a list 
of good solutions rather than just one. GAs perf orm well in a large dataset where there are various 
features.  
GAs provide various advantages in machine learning applications. They are used mostly in 
feature selection when many features need to be considered to predict a class in a classification 
problem. GAs can manage a data set with many features, and they do not need any specific 
knowledge about the problem. A GA randomly gene rates solutions by recombination and mutation 
of the given features. Though this requires a lot of computation for building a predictive model, it can select the best subset of the features. As a result, using the GA solution, the NIDS model needs 
less execution time than when us ing the complete feature sets.  
In this research, an NSL-KDD dataset is used which contains 125,973 records for training and 
22,544 records for testing. Since a GA performs well on a large dataset, we applied GAs in this 
research to find the features that give near-optim al solutions. This not only minimized the training 
and testing time but also gave a high detection rate , a high true positive rate, and a low false alarm 
rate. A high positive rate and low false alarm rate  indicates an ideal NIDS system. The outcomes of 
using GAs are presented in Section 5. 
  
Figure 2. One cell in a basic LSTM network.
2.1.3. Genetic Algorithm (GA)
GAs are inspired by the concept of Darwin’s theory of evolution and execute evolutionary biology
techniques, such as selection, mutation, recombination, and inheritance to solve a given problem.
GA is a heuristic search method used for ﬁnding optimal solutions.
A GA [ 28] generates a pool of possible solutions for a given problem. It then creates a group
of features /individuals randomly from the given problem. The individuals are then evaluated
with evaluation functions provided by the programmer. These evaluation functions include some
recombination and mutations, just as in natural genetics. Each of the solutions is assigned a ﬁtness
value, and the ﬁltered individuals give a higher chance to ﬁt into the model, thereby providing a
list of good solutions rather than just one. GAs perform well in a large dataset where there are
various features.
GAs provide various advantages in machine learning applications. They are used mostly in
feature selection when many features need to be considered to predict a class in a classiﬁcation problem.
GAs can manage a dataset with many features, and they do not need any speciﬁc knowledge about the
problem. A GA randomly generates solutions by recombination and mutation of the given features.
Though this requires a lot of computation for building a predictive model, it can select the best subset
of the features. As a result, using the GA solution, the NIDS model needs less execution time than
when using the complete feature sets.
In this research, an NSL-KDD dataset is used which contains 125,973 records for training and
22,544 records for testing. Since a GA performs well on a large dataset, we applied GAs in this research
to ﬁnd the features that give near-optimal solutions. This not only minimized the training and testing
time but also gave a high detection rate, a high true positive rate, and a low false alarm rate. A high
positive rate and low false alarm rate indicates an ideal NIDS system. The outcomes of using GAs are
presented in Section 5.