Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving: Opportunities and Challenges
pinpoint areas where trafﬁc-related fatalities and injuries
are reduced. Effective cooperative intersection manage-
ment is based on the coordination mechanism between
V2V and V2I.
Cooperative sensing increases the autonomous vehicle
sensing range through V2X communication. Meanwhile,
cooperative sensing also helps in cutting the cost of build-ing autonomous driving. As vehicles rely more on the
sensors deployed on roadside infrastructure, the cost of
on-vehicle sensors is reduced. In the future, sensor infor-
mation may become a service to the vehicle provided by
the roadside infrastructure.
V2X networking infrastructure is also a very impor-
tant aspect of cooperative autonomous driving. Hetero-
geneous vehicular network (HetVNET) [94] is an initialwork on networking infrastructure to meet the communi-
cation requirements of the ITS. HetVNET integrates LTE
with DSRC [95] because relying on the single wireless
access network cannot provide satisfactory services in
dynamic circumstances. In [96], an improved protocolstack is proposed to support multiple application scenar-
ios of autonomous driving in HetVNET . In the protocol,
the authors redeﬁned the control messages in HetVNET tosupport autonomous driving.
Similarly , the vehicular delay-tolerant network (VDTN)
[97] is an innovative communication architecture, which
is designed for scenarios with long delays and sporadic
connections. The idea is to allow messages to be for-warded in short-range WiFi connections and reach the
destination asynchronously . This property enables VDTN
to support services and applications even when there isno end to end path in current Vehicular Ad hoc Network
(VANET). Dias et al. [98] discuss several cooperation
strategies for VDTN. The challenge for cooperation in
VDTN is how to coordinate the vehicle node to share their
constrained bandwidth, energy resources, and storage withone another. Furthermore, an incentive mechanism that
rewards or punishes vehicles for cooperative behavior is
proposed.
In order to support seamless V2X communication, han-
dover is also a very important topic for V2X networking
infrastructure. Due to the dynamic changing of the net-
working topology and the relatively small range of the
communication coverage, the handover mechanism in acellular network is no longer suitable for VANET . Based on
proactive resource allocation techniques, Ghosh et al. [99]
propose a new handover model for VANET . With the helpof proactive handover, cooperative services are migrated
through RSUs with the moving of the vehicle. Hence,
proper designing of proactive handover and resource allo-cation is essential for developing reliable and efﬁcient
cooperative systems.
The development of edge computing in the automotive
industry is also very inspiring. Automotive Edge Comput-
ing Consortium (AECC) is a group formed by automotivecompanies to promote edge computing technologies in
future automobiles [100]. According to an AECC whitepaper from 2018, the service scenarios include intelli-
gent driving, HD map, V2Cloud cruise assist, and several
extended services like ﬁnance and insurance. In addition,
the white paper discusses the service requirements interms of data source, the volume of data generated in the
vehicle, target data trafﬁc rate, response time, and required
availability .
C. Challenges
In order to guarantee the robustness and safety of
autonomous driving systems, autonomous vehicles are
typically equipped with numerous expensive sensors and
computing systems, leading to extremely high costs and
preventing ubiquitous deployment of autonomous vehi-
cles. Hence, V2X is a viable solution in decreasing the costsof autonomous driving vehicles as V2X enables information
sharing between vehicles and computation ofﬂoading to
RSUs. There are several challenges in achieving coopera-tive autonomous driving. Here, we discuss the challenges
and our vision for application scenario of cooperative
decision and cooperative sensing.
1) Cooperative Decision: The challenge of cooperative
decisions is handling the dynamic changing topology
with a short-range coverage of V2X communications. The
design of VDTN is a good hint to solve this challenge.
Effective proactive handover and resource allocation arepotential solutions. Also, the coming 5G wireless com-
munication [101] also provides a way to handle this
challenge.
2) Cooperative Sensing: The main challenge of coopera-
tive sensing is sharing the information from infrastructure
sensors to autonomous vehicles in real time, and the otherchallenge is to dynamically trade off the cost of infrastruc-
ture sensors and on-vehicle sensors. For the ﬁrst chal-
lenge, the promising edge computing technology is used to
solve the problem [71] because edge computing enables
the edge node(vehicle) and edge server(infrastructure) toconduct computation and compression to provide real-
time performance. In addition, the tradeoff of cost on
infrastructure sensors and on-vehicle sensors will be deter-mined by the automobile market. Both the government
and companies will invest much money to support edge
intelligence.
V. VEHICULAR EDGE SECURITY
The previous sections reviewed innovations in an edge
computing infrastructure to make autonomous driving
computing more efﬁcient in terms of performanceand energy consumption. As mentioned above, each
autonomous vehicle is equipped with or supported by
dozens of computing units in the edge and cloud to process
the sensor data, to monitor the vehicles’ status and to
control the mechanical components. Hence, the securitythreats against these computing units are of paramount
concern. Speciﬁcally , the attacks targeting autonomous
1710 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019