Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving: Opportunities and Challenges
that although power-hungry accelerators like GPUs pre-
dictably deliver the computation at low latency , their
high power consumption, further magniﬁed by the cool-
ing load to meet the thermal constraints, signiﬁcantlydegrades the driving range and fuel efﬁciency of the
vehicle. Finally , the authors indicated that computational
capability remains the bottleneck that prevents them frombeneﬁting from the higher system accuracy enabled by
higher resolution cameras.
Interestingly , in their pioneering architectural explo-
ration work, the authors discussed above both concluded
that localization and perception are the computing bottle-necks and heterogeneous computing is a feasible approach
to accelerate these workloads. For localization accelera-
tion, Tang et al. [38] proposed a heterogeneous architec-
ture for SLAM [38]. The authors ﬁrst conducted a thorough
study to understand visual inertial SLAM performance
and energy consumption on existing heterogeneous SoCs.
The initial ﬁndings indicate that existing SoC designs
are not optimized for SLAM applications, and systematicoptimizations are required in the IO interface, the memory
subsystem, as well as computation acceleration. Based on
these ﬁndings, the authors proposed a heterogeneous SoCarchitecture optimized for visual inertial SLAM applica-
tions. Instead of simply adding an accelerator, the authors
systematically integrated direct IO, feature buffer, and a
feature extraction accelerator. To prove the effectiveness
of this design, the authors implemented the proposedarchitecture on a Xilinx Zynq UltraScale MPSoC and were
able to deliver over 60 frames/s performance with average
power less than 5 W . These results verify that the pro-posed architecture is capable of achieving performance and
energy consumption optimization for visual inertial SLAM
applications.
Similarly , to solve the localization computing problem,
Zhang et al. [39] proposed an algorithm and hardwarecodesign methodology for visual–inertial odometry (VIO)
systems, in which the robot estimates its ego-motion (and
a landmark-based map) from the onboard camera andIMU data. The authors argued that scaling down VIO to
miniaturized platforms (without sacriﬁcing performance)
requires a paradigm shift in the design of perception algo-
rithms, and the authors advocated a codesign approach
in which algorithmic and hardware design choices aretightly coupled. In detail, the authors characterized the
design space by discussing how a relevant set of design
choices affects the resource-performance tradeoff in VIO.Also, the authors demonstrated the result of the codesign
process by providing a VIO implementation on specialized
hardware and showing that such implementation has thesame accuracy and speed of a desktop implementation
while requiring a fraction of the power.
Besides academic research, PerceptIn has released
a commercial production SLAM system titled
DragonFly
+[40]. DragonFly +is an FPGA-based real-time
localization module with several advanced features:
1) hardware synchronizations among the four imagechannels as well as the IMU; 2) a direct IO architecture
to reduce off-chip memory communication; and 3) a fully
pipelined architecture to accelerate the image processing
frontend. In addition, parallel and multiplexing processingtechniques are employed to achieve a good balance
between bandwidth and hardware resource consumption.
Based on publicly available data, for processing four-way 720p images, DragonFly
+achieves 42 frames/s
performance while consuming only 2.3 W of power.
In comparisons, Nvidia Jetson TX1 GPU SoC achieves
9 frames/s at 7 W and Intel Core i7 achieves 15 frames/s
at 80 W . Therefore, DragonFly +is 3×more power efﬁcient
and delivers 5 ×of computing power compared to Nvidia
TX1, and 34 ×more power efﬁcient and delivers 3 ×of
computing power compared Intel Core i7.
For perception acceleration, most recent research has
focused on the acceleration of deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). To enable CNN accelerators to sup-
port a wide variety of different applications with sufﬁ-
cient ﬂexibility and efﬁciency , Liu et al. [41] proposed a
novel domain-speciﬁc instruction set architecture (ISA) for
neural network accelerators. The proposed ISA is a load-
store architecture that integrates scalar, vector, matrix,logical, data transfer , and control instructions, based on a
comprehensive analysis of existing neural network accel-
eration techniques. The authors demonstrated that the
proposed ISA exhibits strong descriptive capacity over a
broad range of neural network acceleration techniques andprovides higher code density than general-purpose ISAs
such as x86, Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipeline
Stages (MIPS), and GPGPU.
Realizing that data movement is a key bottleneck for
CNN computations, Chen et al. [42] presented a dataﬂow
to minimize the energy consumption of data movement
on a spatial architecture. The key is to reuse local data
of ﬁlter weights and feature map pixels, or activations,in the high-dimensional convolutions, and minimize data
movement of partial sum accumulations. The proposed
dataﬂow adapts to different CNN shape conﬁgurations andreduces all types of data movement by maximally utilizing
processing engine (PE) local storage, spatial parallelism,
and direct inter-PE communication. Through the CNN
conﬁgurations of AlexNet, evaluation experiments show
that the proposed dataﬂow for more energy efﬁcientthan other dataﬂows for both convolutional and fully
connected layers.
Also, memory access latency and throughput are often
bottlenecks for neural network computations. One tech-
nique that has the potential to be used for the main
memory is the metaloxide resistive random access memory(ReRAM). Moreover, with the crossbar array structure,
ReRAM performs matrix–vector multiplication more efﬁ-
ciently and has been widely studied in accelerations of
CNN applications. To accelerate CNN computations from
the memory side, Chi et al. [43] proposed a processor-
in-memory (PIM) architecture to accelerate CNN appli-
cations in ReRAM based main memory . In the proposed
1704 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019