Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving: Opportunities and Challenges
is, the artiﬁcial simulation of the scene and the real scene
still has some differences. There are still many unexpected
events in the real scene that cannot be simulated in a sim-
ulator. Therefore, if real trafﬁc data are used to reproducethe real scene, better test results will be achieved compared
to the artiﬁcial simulation of the scene.
However, the major problem of replaying real-world
data is the computing power required to process it. In
order to reproduce the scene of every section of the real
world on the simulator, the autonomous vehicles need to
collect the information of each section of the road. This
amount of data cannot be processed on single machines.In addition, in each scene, it is further broken down into
basic fragments and rearrange the combinations of these
fragments to generate more test cases. However , this wouldgenerate even more data and add more burden to the
simulation platform which is already stressed.
2) HD Map Generation: As detailed in [25], HD maps
are generated in the following steps.
Pose Estimation: For map data collection vehicles, getting
accurate poses (location and orientation) of the vehicles is
key to generating HD maps. If the poses of the vehicles col-lecting map data are inaccurate, it is impossible to produce
precise maps. Once we have the accurate poses of the data-
collecting vehicles, and with accurate sensor installation
information such as how the sensors are mounted and their
relative angles to the vehicle frame, we could calculate theaccurate poses of the generated point clouds.
Map Data Fusion: Once we have accurate poses, the next
step is map data fusion. Map data here includes LiDAR 3-D point clouds and camera images. In this step, multiple
scans of point clouds are calibrated and then aligned to
generate denser point clouds, and the generated point
clouds and captured images are then registered to each
other. This way , we could use the point clouds to getthe 3-D location of objects and use the registered images
to extract semantic information. Note that, point clouds
accurately provide 3-D positions but usually do not allowsemantic information extraction, while on the other hand,
images are great for semantic information extraction.
By combining point clouds and captured images, we allow
both accurate poses extraction and semantic information
extraction.
Three-Dimensional Object Location Detection: For basic
road elements whose geometry and precise locations are
important (e.g., lane boundaries, curbs, trafﬁc lights,overpasses, railway tracks, guardrails, light poles, speed
bumps, even potholes, etc.), we need to register their
precise 3-D locations and geometries in the HD maps.
Semantics/Attribute Extraction: At last, we extract
semantics and attributes from captured data and integrate
these into the HD Maps. The semantic information includes
lane/road model construction, trafﬁc signs recognition and
their association with lanes, the association of trafﬁc lightswith lanes, road marking semantics extraction, road ele-
ments, and so on.3) Model Training: The second application this
infrastructure needs to support is ofﬂine model training.
As we use different deep learning models in autonomous
driving, it is imperative to provide updates that willcontinuously improve the effectiveness and efﬁciency of
these models. However, since the amount of raw data
generated is enormous, we would not be able to achievefast model training using single servers.
One effective way to achieve high performance is
through the utilization of heterogeneous computing and
high-throughput storage systems. As described in [23],
Liu et al. integrated a distributed computing platform,
a heterogeneous computing acceleration layer , and a dis-
tributed storage layer together to deliver an extremely
high-performance and high-throughput distributed train-ing engine. Speciﬁcally , to synchronize the nodes, at the
end of each training iteration, this system summarizes
all the parameter updates from each node, performs cal-
culations to derive a new set of parameters, and then
broadcasts the new set of parameters to each node sothey start the next iteration of training. It is the role of
the parameter server to efﬁciently store and update the
parameters.
III. INNOVA TIONS ON THE VEHICULAR
COMPUTING EDGE
In this Section, we review the latest progress in the
design of edge computing systems for autonomous driving
applications. First, we start with benchmark suites avail-
able for evaluating edge computing system designs. Sec-
ond, we review different approaches in designing com-puter architectures for autonomous driving workloads.
Third, we describe the designs of runtime layers for efﬁ-
cient mapping of incoming workloads onto heterogeneouscomputing units. Fourth, we discuss the designs of middle-
ware for binding different autonomous driving functional
modules. Last, we present three examples of autonomous
driving edge computing systems.
A. Benchmark T ools
To improve a computing system, the most effective tool
is a standard benchmark suite to represent the workloads
widely used in the target applications. The same princi-ple applies when it comes to designing and improving
edge computing systems for autonomous vehicles. Cur-
rent research in this area is divided into two categories:data sets and workloads. KITTI [26], [27] was the ﬁrst
benchmark data set related to autonomous driving. It is
composed of rich vision sensor data with labels, suchas monocular/stereo image data and 3-D LiDAR data.
According to different data types, it also provides a ded-
icated method to generate the ground truth and to cal-
culate the evaluation metrics. KITTI was built for evalu-
ating the performance of algorithms in the autonomousdriving scenario, including but not limited to visual odom-
etry , lane detection, object detection, and object tracking.
1702 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019