Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving
In addition to KITTI, there are some customized bench-
mark data sets for each algorithm, such as the Technical
University of Munich Red Green Blue-Depth (TUM RGB-
D) [28] for RGB-D simultaneous localization and mapping(SLAM), PASCAL3D [29] for 3-D object detection, and
the MOTChallenge benchmark [30], [31] for multitarget
tracking. These kinds of data sets serve as very good datasources for stressing edge computing systems.
Another class of related benchmark suites is designed
to benchmark the performance of novel hardware archi-
tectures and software framework, which usually consists
of a set of computer vision kernels and applications.The San Diego Vision Benchmark Suite (SD-VBS) [32]
and MEVBench [33] both are performance benchmark
suites for mobile computer vision system. SD-VBS providessingle-threaded C and MATLAB implementations of nine
high-level vision applications. MEVBench is an extended
benchmark based on SD-VBS. It provides single-threaded
and multithreaded C
++ implementations of 15 vision
applications. However, these two benchmarks are priorworks in the ﬁeld, so they are not targeted toward hetero-
geneous platforms such as GPUs and did not contain novel
workloads, such as the deep learning algorithms. SLAM-Bench [34] concentrates on using a complete RGB-D SLAM
application to evaluate novel heterogeneous hardware.
It takes KinectFusion [35] as the implementation and pro-
vided C
++,O p e n M P , OpenCL, and CUDA versions of key
function kernels for heterogeneous hardware. These effortsare a step in the right direction, but we still need a compre-
hensive benchmark that contains diverse workloads that
cover varied application scenarios of autonomous vehicles(like the MAVBench [126] for micro aerial vehicle system
benchmarking) to evaluate the autonomous driving edge
computing systems as we mentioned above.
CAVBench is a released benchmark suite specially devel-
oped for evaluating autonomous driving computing systemperformance [36]. It summarizes four application scenar-
ios on CAVs: autonomous driving, real-time diagnostics,
in-vehicle infotainment, and third-party applications, andchooses six classic and diverse real-world on vehicle appli-
cations as evaluation workloads, which are SLAM, object
detection, object tracking, battery diagnostics, speech
recognition, and edge video analysis. CAVBench takes four
real-world data sets as the standard input to the six work-loads and generates two categories of output metrics. One
metric is an application perspective metric, which includes
the execution time breakdown for each application, help-ing developers ﬁnd the performance bottleneck in the
application side. Another is a system perspective metric,
which is the Quality of Service–Resource Utilization curve(QoS-RU curve). The QoS-RU curve is used to calculate
the matching factor (MF) between the application and the
computing platform on autonomous vehicles. The QoS-
RU curve is considered as a quantitative performance
index of the computing platform that helps researchersand developers optimize on-vehicle applications and CAVs
computing architecture. We hope to see more research inthe area of benchmarking for autonomous vehicle work-
loads, but currently , CAVBench serves as a good starting
point to study edge computing systems for autonomous
driving.
As autonomous driving is still a fast developing
ﬁeld, we hope to see continuous effort to incorporate
more dynamic workloads and data to cover emergingautonomous driving usage scenarios. In addition, stan-
dardized scoring methods are required (but still missing)
to rank different edge computing systems based on differ-
ent optimization metrics.
B. Computing Architectures
Once we have standard benchmark suites, we start
developing suitable architectures for autonomous driving
workloads. Liu et al. [1] proposed a computer architec-
ture for autonomous vehicles which fully utilizes hybrid
heterogeneous hardware. In this work, the applications for
autonomous driving are divided into three stages: sens-ing, perception, and decision-making. The authors com-
pared the performance of different hardware running basic
autonomous driving tasks and concluded that localizationand perception as the bottlenecks of autonomous driving
computing systems, and they also identiﬁed the need for
different hardware accelerators for different workloads.
Furthermore, the authors proposed and developed an
autonomous driving computing architecture and softwarestack that is modular, secure, dynamic, high-performance,
and energy-efﬁcient. By fully utilizing heterogeneous com-
puting components, such as CPU, GPU, and DSP ,t h e i r
prototype system on an ARM Mobile SoC consumes 11 W
on average and is able to drive a mobile vehicle at 5 mph.
In addition, the authors indicated that with more comput-
ing resources, the system would be able to process more
data and would eventually satisfy the need of a production-level autonomous driving system.
Similarly , Lin et al. [37] explored the architectural
constraints and acceleration of the autonomous drivingsystem. The authors presented and formalized the design
constraints of autonomous driving systems in performance,
predictability , storage, thermal, and power when building
autonomous driving systems. To investigate the design
of the autonomous driving systems, the authors devel-oped an end-to-end autonomous driving system based on
machine learning algorithmic components. Through the
experiments on this system, the authors identiﬁed threecomputational bottlenecks, namely , localization, object
detection, and object tracking. To design a system which
meets all the design constraints, the authors also exploredthree different accelerator platforms to accelerate these
computational bottlenecks. The authors demonstrated that
GPU, FPGA, and ASIC-accelerated systems could effec-
tively reduce the tail latency of these algorithms. Based
on these acceleration systems, the authors further exploredthe tradeoffs among performance, power , and scalability
of the autonomous driving systems. Their conclusion is
Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019 |P ROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 1703