Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving
1) Sensing: Normally , an autonomous vehicle consists of
several major sensors. Since each type of sensor presents
advantages and drawbacks, the data from multiple sensors
must be combined. The sensor types include the following.
a) GNSS/IMU: The global navigation satellite system
and inertial measurement unit (GNSS/IMU) system helps
autonomous vehicles localize themselves by reporting both
inertial updates and a global position estimate at a highrate, e.g., 200 Hz. While GNSS is a fairly accurate local-
ization sensor at only 10 Hz, its update rate is too slow to
provide real-time updates. Now , although an IMU’s accu-
racy degrades with time and thus cannot be relied upon
to provide accurate position updates over long periods,it provides updates more frequently—at, or higher than,
200 Hz. This should satisfy the real-time requirement.
By combining GNSS and IMU, we provide accurate andreal-time updates for vehicle localization.
b) LiDAR: Light detection and ranging (LiDAR) is
used for mapping, localization, and obstacle avoidance.
It works by bouncing a beam off surfaces and measuring
the reﬂection time to determine distance. LiDAR is used to
generate HD maps, localize a moving vehicle against HDmaps, detect obstacles ahead, and so on.
c) Cameras: Cameras are mostly used for object
recognition and object tracking tasks, such as lane detec-
tion, trafﬁc light detection, pedestrian detection, and more.To enhance autonomous vehicle safety , existing imple-
mentations usually mount eight or more cameras around
the car , and we use cameras to detect, recognize, and
track objects in front, behind, and on both sides of the
vehicle. These cameras usually run at 60 Hz and, whencombined, generate around multiple gigabytes of raw data
per second.
d) Radar and Sonar: The radar and sonar system is
used for the last line of defense in obstacle avoidance.The data generated by radar and sonar show the distance
from the nearest object in front of the vehicle’s path. When
we detect that an object is not far ahead and that there
may be a danger of a collision, the autonomous vehicle
should apply the brakes or turn to avoid the obstacle.Therefore, the data generated by radar and sonar do not
require much processing and are usually fed directly to
the control processor—not through the main computationpipeline—to implement such urgent functions as swerving
and applying the brakes.
2) Perception—Localization: The perception subsystem
consumes incoming sensor data to understand the vehi-
cle’s environment. The main tasks in autonomous driving
perception include localization, object detection, objecttracking, and so on.
While GNSS/IMU is used for localization, GNSS pro-
vides fairly accurate localization results but with a slow
update rate; IMU provides a fast update with less accu-
rate results. We use Kalman ﬁltering to combine theadvantages of the two and provide accurate and real-time
position updates [4]. Nonetheless, we cannot solely relyon this combination for localization for three reasons:
1) the accuracy is only about one meter; 2) the GNSS
signal has multipath problems, which means that the
signal may bounce off buildings and introduce morenoise; and 3) GNSS requires an unobstructed view of the
sky so it fails to work in closed environments such as
tunnels.
Cameras are used for localization. The pipeline line of
Vision-based localization is simpliﬁed as follows: 1) by tri-
angulating stereo image pairs, a disparity map is obtained
and used to derive depth information for each point; 2) by
matching salient features between successive stereo imageframes in order to establish correlations between feature
points in different frames, the motion between the past
two frames is estimated; and 3) by comparing the salientfeatures against those in the known map, we derive the
current position of the vehicle [5].
LiDAR is used for localization, relying heavily on a parti-
cle ﬁlter [6]. The point clouds generated by LiDAR provide
a “shape description” of the environment, but it is hardto differentiate individual points. By using a particle ﬁlter,
the system compares a speciﬁc observed shape against the
known map to reduce uncertainty . To localize a movingvehicle relative to these maps, we apply a particle ﬁlter
method to correlate the LiDAR measurements with the
map. The particle ﬁlter method has been demonstrated to
achieve real-time localization with 10-cm accuracy and is
effective in urban environments.
3) Perception—Object Recognition and Tracking: In recent
years, we have seen the rapid development of deep learn-ing technology , which achieves signiﬁcant object detec-
tion and tracking accuracy . A convolution neural network
(CNN) is a type of deep neural network (DNN) that is
widely used in object recognition tasks. A general CNN
evaluation pipeline usually consists of the following layers:1) the convolution layer uses different ﬁlters to extract
different features from the input image. Each ﬁlter con-
tains a set of “learnable” parameters that will be derivedafter the training stage; 2) the activation layer decides
whether to activate the target neuron; 3) the pooling layer
reduces the spatial size of the representation to reduce the
number of parameters and consequently the computation
in the network; and last, 4) the fully connected layerconnects all neurons to all activations in the previous
layer [7].
Once an object is identiﬁed using a CNN, next comes
the automatic estimation of the trajectory of that object as
it moves—or, object tracking. Object tracking technology
is used to track nearby moving vehicles, as well as peoplecrossing the road, to ensure the current vehicle does not
collide with moving objects. In recent years, deep learning
techniques have demonstrated advantages in object track-
ing compared to conventional computer vision techniques.
By using auxiliary natural images, a stacked autoencoderis trained ofﬂine to learn generic image features that are
more robust against variations in viewpoints and vehicle
Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019 |P ROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 1699