Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving
Table 1 Summary of Computing Edge Designs
the middleware should enable a smooth edge client
and cloud communication. Third and most importantly ,
the middleware should be secure and reliable to guarantee
the quality of service and autonomous vehicle safety .
E. Case Studies
To simultaneously enable multiple autonomous driving
services, including localization, perception, and speech
recognition workloads on affordable embedded systems,
Tang et al. designed and implemented Π-Edge, a complete
edge computing framework for autonomous robots and
vehicles [68]. The challenge of designing such a system
include the following: managing different autonomous
driving services and their communications with minimal
overheads, fully utilizing the heterogeneous computingresources on the edge device, and ofﬂoading some of the
tasks to the cloud for energy efﬁciency .
To achieve these, ﬁrst, the authors developed a run-
time layer to fully utilize the heterogeneous computing
resources of low-power edge computing systems; second,
the authors developed an extremely lightweight middle-
ware to manage multiple autonomous driving services and
their communications; third, the authors developed anedge-cloud coordinator to dynamically ofﬂoad tasks to the
cloud to optimize client system energy consumption.
OpenVDAP is another real-world edge computing
system which is a full-stack edge-based platform including
vehicle computing unit, an isolation-supported and
security and privacy-preserved vehicle operation system,
an edge-aware application library , as well as task
ofﬂoading and scheduling strategy [71]. OpenVDAP allowsconnected and autonomous vehicles (CAVs) to dynamically
examine each task’s status, computation cost, and the
optimal scheduling method so that each service could beﬁnished in near real time with low overhead. OpenVDAP is
featured as a two-tier architecture via a series of systematic
mechanisms that enable CAVs to dynamically detectservice status and to identify the optimal ofﬂoading des-
tination so that each service could be ﬁnished at the right
time. In addition, OpenVDAP offers an open and free edge-
aware library that contains how to access and deploy edge-
computing-based vehicle applications and various commonused AI models, thus enabling researchers and developers
to deploy , test, and validate their applications in the realenvironment. Novel applications such as AutoVAPS beneﬁt
from it [72]. AutoVAPS is an Internet-of-Things (IoT)-
enabled public safety service, which integrates body-worn
cameras and other sensors on the vehicle for public safety .
HydraOne is an indoor experimental research and
education platform for edge computing in CAVs scenar-
ios [127]. HydraOne is a full-stack research and education
platform from hardware to software, including mechanical
components, vision sensors, as well as computing and com-munication system. All resources on HydraOne are man-
aged by the Robot Operating System [76], and the data
analytics on HydraOne is managed by OpenVDAP ,w h i c h
is a full-stack edge based platform [71]. HydraOne has
three key characteristics: design modularization, resource
extensibility , and openness, as well as function isolation,which allows users to conduct various research and educa-
tion experiments of CAVs on HydraOne.
IV. INNOVA TIONS ON THE V2X
INFRASTRUCTURE
One effective method to alleviate the huge computing
demand on autonomous driving edge computing systems
is V2X technologies. V2X is deﬁned as a vehicle commu-nication system that consists of many types of communica-
tions: V2V , vehicle-to-network (V2N), vehicle-to-pedestrian
(V2P), V2I, vehicle-to-device (V2D), and vehicle-to-grid(V2G). Currently , most research focuses on V2V and V2I.
While conventional autonomous driving systems require
costly sensors and edge computing equipment within the
vehicle, V2X takes a different and potentially complimen-
tary approach by investing in road infrastructure, thusalleviating the computing and sensing costs in vehicles.
With the rapid deployment of edge computing facilities
in the infrastructure, more and more autonomous drivingapplications have started leveraging V2X communications
to make the in-vehicle edge computing system more efﬁ-
cient. One popular direction is cooperative autonomousdriving. The cooperation of autonomous driving edge
computing system with V2X technology makes it pos-
sible to build a safe and efﬁcient autonomous driving
system [73]. However, the application and deployment
of cooperative autonomous driving systems are still openresearch problems. In this section, we discuss the evolution
of V2X technology and present four case studies of V2X
Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019 |P ROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 1707