Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving: Opportunities and Challenges
positions. Then, the ofﬂine-trained model is applied for
online tracking [8].
4) Decision: In the decision stage, action prediction,
path planning, and obstacle avoidance mechanisms are
combined to generate an effective action plan in real time.
One of the main challenges for human drivers when navi-
gating through trafﬁc is to cope with the possible actions ofother drivers, which directly inﬂuences their own driving
strategy . This is especially true when there are multiple
lanes on the road or at a trafﬁc change point.
To make sure that autonomous vehicles travel safely in
these environments, the decision unit generates predic-
tions of nearby vehicles and then decides on an action
plan based on these predictions. To predict the actions
of other vehicles, we generate a stochastic model ofthe reachable position sets of the other trafﬁc partici-
pants and associate these reachable sets with probability
distributions [9].
Planning the path of an autonomous, responsive vehicle
in a dynamic environment is a complex problem, especially
when the vehicle is required to use its full maneuvering
capabilities. One approach would be to use deterministic,
complete algorithms to search all possible paths and utilizea cost function to identify the best path. However, this
requires enormous computational resources and may be
unable to deliver real-time navigation plans. To circum-vent this computational complexity and provide effective
real-time path planning, probabilistic planners have been
utilized [10].
Since safety is of paramount concern in autonomous
driving, we should employ at least two levels of obsta-cle avoidance mechanisms to ensure that the vehi-
cle will not collide with obstacles. The ﬁrst level is
proactive and based on trafﬁc predictions. The trafﬁcprediction mechanism generates measures like time-to-
collision or predicted-minimum-distance. Based on these
measures, the obstacle avoidance mechanism is triggered
to perform local path replanning. If the proactive mech-
anism fails, the second-level reactive mechanism, usingradar data, takes over . Once the radar detects an obstacle
ahead of the path, it overrides the current controls to avoid
the obstacle [11].
B. Vehicular Edge Subsystem
The vehicular edge subsystem integrates the above-
mentioned algorithms together to meet real-time and
reliability requirements. There are three challenges to
overcome: 1) the system needs to make sure that the
processing pipeline is fast enough to consume the enor-
mous amount of sensor data generated; 2) if a part ofthe system fails, it needs to be robust enough to recover
from the failure; and 3) the system needs to perform all
the computations under energy and resource constraints.
1) Hardware Architecture: First, we review the exist-
ing computer architecture for autonomous driving tasks.A more detailed review is found in [1]. The Nvidia PX
platform is the current leading GPU-based solution for
autonomous driving [12]. Each PX 2 consists of two Tegra
systems-on-chip (SoCs) and two Pascal graphics proces-sors. Each GPU has its own dedicated memory , as well as
specialized instructions for DNN acceleration. To deliver
high throughput, each Tegra connects directly to the PascalGPU using a PCI-E Gen 2
×4 bus (total bandwidth:
4.0 GB/s). In addition, the dual CPU-GPU cluster is con-
nected over the gigabit Ethernet, delivering 70 Gb/s. With
optimized I/O architecture and DNN acceleration, each
PX2 is able to perform 24 trillion deep-learning calcula-tions every second.
Texas Instruments’ TDA provides a DSP-based solution
for autonomous driving. A TDA2x SoC consists of twoﬂoating-point C66x DSP cores and four fully program-
mable vision accelerators, which are designed for vision
processing functions. The vision accelerators provide eight-
fold acceleration on vision tasks compared to an ARM
Cortex-15 CPU while consuming less power [13]. Similarly ,CEVA XM4 is another DSP-based autonomous driving com-
puting solution. It is designed for computer vision tasks
on video streams. The main beneﬁt for using CEVA-XM4 isenergy efﬁciency , which requires less than 30 mW for a
1080p video at 30 frames/s [14].
Altera’s Cyclone V SoC is one ﬁeld-programmable gate
array (FPGA)-based autonomous driving solution, which
has been used in Audi products. Altera’s FPGAs are opti-mized for sensor fusion, combining data from multiple sen-
sors in the vehicle for highly reliable object detection [15].
Similarly , Zynq UltraScale MPSoC is also designed forautonomous driving tasks [16]. When running CNN tasks,
it achieves 14 images/s/W , which outperforms the Tesla
K40 GPU (4 images/s/W). Also, for object tracking tasks,
it reaches 60 frames/s in a live 1080p video stream.
MobilEye EyeQ5 is a leading application-speciﬁed inte-
grated circuit (ASIC)-based solution for autonomous
driving [17]. EyeQ5 features heterogeneous, fully pro-
grammable accelerators, where each of the four accelera-tor types in the chip is optimized for their own family of
algorithms, including computer-vision, signal-processing,
and machine-learning tasks. This diversity of accelerator
architectures enables applications to save both computa-
tional time and energy by using the most suitable corefor every task. To enable system expansion with multiple
EyeQ5 devices, EyeQ5 implements two PCI-E ports for
interprocessor communication.
2) Real-Time Operating Systems: A real-time operating
system (RTOS) is a special operating system intended toserve real-time applications, such as industrial, automo-
tive, aviation, military , and so on [18]. QNX is a popular
commercial RTOS widely used in the automotive indus-
try . The QNX kernel contains only CPU scheduling, inter-
process communication, interrupt redirection, and timers.Everything else runs as a user process, including a special
process known as proc that performs process creation
1700 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019