Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving: Opportunities and Challenges
on-chip heterogeneous computing resources but also the
cloud to achieve high performance and energy efﬁciency .
To verify its effectiveness, the authors have deployed
PIRT on a production mobile robot to demonstrate thatfull robotic workloads, including autonomous navigation,
obstacle detection, route planning, large map generation,
and scene understanding, are efﬁciently executedsimultaneously with 11 W of power consumption.
The runtime layer connects autonomous driving soft-
ware and hardware, but there are several upcoming chal-
lenges in the design of runtime systems for autonomous
driving. First, as the computing system becomes moreheterogeneous, the runtime design becomes more com-
plicated in order to dynamically dispatch incoming work-
loads. Second, as more edge clouds become available,t h er u n t i m es y s t e mn e e d st ob ec l o u d - a w a r ea n da b l et o
dispatch workloads to edge clouds. Third, the runtime
shall provide a good abstraction to hide all the low-level
implementations.
D. Middleware
Robotic systems, such as autonomous vehicle systems,
often involve multiple services, with a lot of dependencies
in between. To facilitate the complex interactions between
these services, to simplify software design, and to hide
the complexity of low-level communication and the het-
erogeneity of the sensors, a middleware is required.
An early design of robotic middleware is Miro, a distrib-
uted object-oriented framework for mobile robot control,
based on Common Object Request Broker Architecturetechnology (COBRA) [63]. The mirocore components have
been developed under the aid of Adaptive Communications
Environment, an object-oriented multiplatform framework
for OS-independent interprocess, network, and real-time
communication. Mirocore provides generic abstract ser-vices like localization or behavior engines, which is applied
on different robot platforms. Miro supports several robotic
platforms including Pioneers, B21, robot soccer robots, andvarious robotic sensors.
ORCA is an open-source component-based software
engineering framework developed for mobile robotics with
an associated repository of free, reusable components
for building mobile robotic systems [64]. ORCA ’s projectgoals include enabling software reuse by deﬁning a set of
commonly-used interfaces; simplifying software reuse by
providing libraries with a high-level convenient applicationprogram interface (API); and encouraging software reuse
by maintaining a repository of components.
Urbi is open-source cross-platform software used to
develop applications for robotics and complex systems
[65]. Urbi is based on the UObject distributed C
++
component architecture. Urbi includes the urbiscriptorchestration language, a parallel and event-driven script
language. In this design, UObject components are pluggedinto urbiscript as native objects to specify their interactions
and data exchanges. UObjects are linked to the urbiscriptinterpreter, or executed as autonomous processes in
“remote” mode, either in another thread, another process,
a machine on the local network, or a machine on a
distant network.
RT -middleware is a common platform standard for dis-
tributed object technology based robots based on dis-
tributed object technology [66]. RT -middleware supportsthe construction of various networked robotic systems
through the integration of various network-enabled robotic
elements called RT -components. In the RT -middleware,
robotics elements, such as actuators, are regarded as RT -
components, and the whole robotic system is constructedby connecting these RT -components. This distributed archi-
tecture helps developers to reuse the robotic elements and
boosts the reliability of the robotic system.
OpenRDK is an open-source software framework for
robotics for developing loosely coupled modules [67].
It provides transparent concurrency management, inter-
process via sockets, and intraprocess via shared memory .
Modules for connecting to simulators and generic robotdrivers are provided.
The above-mentioned middleware projects mostly
focused on providing a software component managementframework for mobile robots and they were not used in
autonomous vehicles. On the other hand, ROS has been
widely used in autonomous vehicle development [21],
mainly due to the popularity of ROS amount robotic devel-
opers and the richness of its software packages. However ,as discussed in Section II, at its current state, ROS is not
suitable for the production deployment of autonomous
vehicles as it suffers from performance, reliability , andsecurity issues.
PerceptIn Operating System (PIOS) is a developed
extremely light-weighted middleware to facilitate the com-
munications between services on production low-speed
autonomous vehicles [68]. PIOS builds on top of Nanomsg,a networking library written in C that allows for easy
integration of shared memory , transmission control pro-
tocol (TCP)/IP , in-process messaging, and web sockets
while retaining efﬁciency [69]. Compared to ROS, PIOS
is extremely lightweight, able to achieve a startup memory
footprint of merely 10 KB, which is negligible comparing
to 50 MB of ROS startup footprint.
OpenEI [70] is a lightweight software platform to equip
edges with intelligent processing and data sharing capa-
bility . Due to the computing power limitation, weak data
sharing, and collaborating, the deployment of artiﬁcialintelligence (AI)-based algorithms has faced many chal-
lenges. The goal of OpenEI is that any hardware, such
as Raspberry Pi, will become an intelligent edge afterdeploying OpenEI.
The middleware layer facilitates communication
between different autonomous driving services, but we
summarize several challenges. First, the middleware
should impose minimal computing overhead and memoryfootprint, thus making it scalable. Second, as some
autonomous driving services may stay in edge clouds,
1706 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019