Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving: Opportunities and Challenges
Table 3 Security Threats and Defense Technologies of CAVs
needs to receive the control message from the driver and
send the status to the screen (UI), so the media playerusually has a connection to the CAN. The attackers easily
ﬂash the malicious code to a CD; when the driver plays
the CD, the malicious code attacks the CAN bus [113].
In addition, the attackers utilize the Bluetooth interface
in the vehicle. Modern vehicles support Bluetooth connec-tions to smartphones. The attackers use smartphones to
upload malicious applications via Bluetooth to take over
the CAN bus, or they sniff the vehicle status via Bluetooth.It is important to note that the attackers use this interface
to attack the vehicle remotely .
Once the attacker hijacks the CAN bus, there are secu-
rity threats to the CAN network [111]. First is broadcast
trouble. The CAN message is broadcast to all nodes, and
the attackers capture and reverse-engineer these messages
and inject new messages to induce various actions. Second
is a denial-of-service (DoS) attack. The CAN protocol isextremely vulnerable to the DoS attack because of the lim-
ited bandwidth. In addition to message ﬂooding attacks,
if one hijacked node keeps claiming highest priority inthe network, it will cause all other CAN nodes to back
off, and the whole CAN network will crash. Last is no
authentication ﬁelds. The CAN message does not contain
the authentication ﬁelds, which means that any node sends
a packet to any other node without an authenticationprocess so the attackers use this to control any node in
the CAN network.
D. V2X Security
With V2X, vehicles access the Internet to obtain
real-time trafﬁc data (e.g., real-time map and weather
data) or leverage the cloud computing for autonomousdriving [23], and the vehicle also communicates with other
nodes in the V2X network via some emerging technologies
(e.g., DSRC and LET -V) [114]. This V2X network creates
many new application scenarios for the CAV , but it also
brings more security problems to the vehicles [115]–[117].
The traditional Internet and ad hoc networks suffer
from many security threats, which may occur in theV2X network but with different manifestations. DoS and
distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks are two basic attackmethods on the Internet. In V2X networks, every node is
an attacker or a victim, causing various trafﬁc problems
[118]. If the infrastructure is the victim, it cannot provide
real-time service for the nearby vehicles. In contrast,
if the vehicle is the victim, it cannot receive the messagesfrom the infrastructure or cloud, and the DoS attack
also interferes with the performance of other tasks on the
vehicle, causing unacceptable latency of some autonomousdriving applications [102].
In V2X networks, the attackers create multiple vehicles
on the road with the same identity or remain anonymous,which we call the Sybil attack [119]. The Sybil attack
may enforce the vehicles running on the road to make
way for the fake vehicles and prevent other vehicles from
driving on this road because they are deceived to think
there is a trafﬁc jam. Information forgery is also a commonattack; a vehicle changes its identity or sends fabricated
messages to V2X networks, thus preventing itself from
being detected or to shirk their responsibilities [120].There are many other traditional network threats, such
as a replay attack and a block hole attack, but the attack
method is similar to the threats mentioned above.
The V2X network brings new types of network nodes,
such as the infrastructure and pedestrian so it will havenew threats that are rare on the traditional Internet. The
ﬁrst one is about privacy . The communication between
V2P and V2I may be based on some short-range protocol(Bluetooth low energy (BLE) and DSRC); if access authen-
tication is not strict, privacy of drivers and pedestrians will
be exposed [121]. The second one is about infrastructure.
If infrastructure (RSU) has been attacked and fake trafﬁc
information is broadcast, it inﬂuences the running state ofthe nearby vehicle.
E. Security for Edge Network and Platforms
Security is a critical topic for edge computing, so sev-
eral works on security for the edge computing system insome general scenarios may provide solutions for security
1712 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019