Edge Computing for
Autonomous Driving:
Opportunities and Challenges
This article surveys the designs of autonomous driving edge computing systems. In
addition, it presents the security issues in autonomous driving as well as how edgecomputing designs can address these issues.
By S HAOSHAN LIU,Senior Member IEEE ,LIANGKAI LIU,JIETANG,Member IEEE ,
BOYU,Member IEEE ,YIFAN WANG,AND WEISONG SHI,Fellow IEEE
ABSTRACT |Safety is the most important requirement for
autonomous vehicles; hence, the ultimate challenge of design-
ing an edge computing ecosystem for autonomous vehicles is
to deliver enough computing power, redundancy, and secu-
rity so as to guarantee the safety of autonomous vehicles.Speciﬁcally, autonomous driving systems are extremely com-
plex; they tightly integrate many technologies, including sens-
ing, localization, perception, decision making, as well as thesmooth interactions with cloud platforms for high-deﬁnition
(HD) map generation and data storage. These complexities
impose numerous challenges for the design of autonomous
driving edge computing systems. First, edge computing sys-
tems for autonomous driving need to process an enormousamount of data in real time, and often the incoming data from
different sensors are highly heterogeneous. Since autonomous
driving edge computing systems are mobile, they often havevery strict energy consumption restrictions. Thus, it is imper-
ative to deliver sufﬁcient computing power with reasonable
energy consumption, to guarantee the safety of autonomous
vehicles, even at high speed. Second, in addition to the edge
system design, vehicle-to-everything (V2X) provides redun-dancy for autonomous driving workloads and alleviates strin-
Manuscript received February 10, 2019; revised April 6, 2019; accepted
May 5, 2019. Date of publication June 24, 2019; date of current version
August 5, 2019. (Corresponding author: Jie Tang.)
S. Liu andB. Yu are with PerceptIn, Fremont, CA 94539 USA.
L. Liu andW. Shi are with the Department of Computer Science, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI 48202 USA.
J. Tang is with the School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China
University of Technology, Guangzhou 510330, China (e-mail:
cstangjie@scut.edu.cn).
Y. Wa n g is with Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202 USA, and also with
the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100190, China.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JPROC.2019.2915983gent performance and energy constraints on the edge side.
With V2X, more research is required to deﬁne how vehi-
cles cooperate with each other and the infrastructure. Last,
safety cannot be guaranteed when security is compromised.
Thus, protecting autonomous driving edge computing systemsagainst attacks at different layers of the sensing and comput-
ing stack is of paramount concern. In this paper, we review
state-of-the-art approaches in these areas as well as explorepotential solutions to address these challenges.
KEYWORDS |Connected and autonomous vehicles (CAVs);
edge computing; heterogeneous computing; security; vehicle-
to-everything (V2X); vehicular operating system.
I.INTRODUCTION
The design goal of autonomous driving edge computing
systems is to guarantee the safety of autonomous vehicles.
This is extremely challenging, as autonomous vehiclesneed to process an enormous amount of data in real
time (as high as 2 GB/s) with extremely tight latency
constraints [1]. For instance, if an autonomous vehicle
travels at 60 miles per hour (mph), and thus about 30 m
of braking distance, this requires the autonomous drivingsystem to predict potential dangers up to a few seconds
before they occur . Therefore, the faster the autonomous
driving edge computing system performs these complexcomputations, the safer the autonomous vehicle is.
Speciﬁcally , autonomous driving systems are extremely
complex; they tightly integrate many technologies, includ-
ing sensing, localization, perception, decision making,
as well as the smooth interaction with cloud platforms forhigh-deﬁnition (HD) map generation and data storage [2].
These complexities pose many challenges for the design
of autonomous driving edge computing systems, just to
0018-9219 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publi cations/rights/index.html for more information.
Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019 |P ROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 1697