Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving: Opportunities and Challenges
for autonomous driving: convoy driving, cooperative lane
change, cooperative intersection management, and coop-
erative sensing.
A. Evolution of V2X T echnology
In the development of V2X technology , many researchers
have contributed solutions to speciﬁc challenges of V2X
communication protocols. The intervehicle hazard warn-
ing (IVHW) system is one of the earliest studies to take the
idea of improving vehicle safety based on communication
[74]. The project is funded by the German Ministry of Edu-cation and Research and the French government. IVHW
is a communication system in which warning messages
are transmitted as broadcast messages in the frequencyband of 869 MHz [75]. IVHW takes a local decision-
making strategy . After the vehicle receives the message,
it will do relevant checks to decide whether the warning
message is relevant and should be shown to the driver. The
majority of the research efforts have been made on thedesign of relevance check algorithms. However, as IVHW
takes a broadcast mechanism to share the message,
there is a huge waste in both bandwidth and computingresources.
Compared with the broadcast message in IVHW , ad hoc
networking is a better solution to support multihop inter-
vehicle communication [76]. FleetNet is another research
project taking the idea of vehicle communication [77], andit is based on ad hoc networking. In addition, the FleetNet
project also wants to provide a communication platform
for Internet-protocol-based applications. FleetNet is imple-mented based on the IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN system
[78]. For V2V communication, if two vehicles are not
directly connected wirelessly , it would need other vehicles
to forward the message for them. Designing the routing
and forwarding protocol is a major challenge. In orderto meet the requirements for adaptability and scalability ,
FleetNet proposed a position-based forwarding mecha-
nism. The idea is to choose the next hop to forward themessage based on the geographical location of the vehicle.
CarTALK 2000 is also a project working on using an ad
hoc communication network to support co-operative driver
assistance applications [79]. There is a major challenge
for ad hoc-based routing in V2V communication becausethe vehicle network topology is dynamic and the number
of vehicles is frequently changing [80]. In order to solve
the problem, a spatial aware routing algorithm is proposedin CarTALK 2000, which takes spatial information like
underlying road topology into consideration. Compared
with FleetNet, CarTALK 2000 achieves better performanceas it uses spatial information as additional input for routing
algorithm. Another similar part of CarTALK 2000 and
FleetNet is that they are both based on WLAN technology .
AKTIV is another project that is the ﬁrst one tried to apply
cellular systems in driving safety applications [81]. Oneof the reasons that FleetNet and CarTALK 2000 project
built their system based on WLAN technology is that thelatency of safety-related applications required is less than
500 ms. However, with the assumption that a long-term
evolution (LTE) communication system is greatly further
developed, cellular systems are a good choice for sparsevehicle networking.
Meanwhile, several research projects have focused on
warning applications based on V2V communication. Wire-less local danger warning (WILLWARN) proposed a risk
detection approach based on in-vehicle data. The warning
message includes obstacles, road conditions, low visibility ,
and construction sites [82]. Unlike other projects focus-
ing on the V2X technology itself, WILLWARN focuses onenabling V2X technology in some speciﬁc scenario such
as the danger spot. Suppose some potential danger is
detected in a speciﬁc location, but there is no vehiclewithin the communication range that supports the V2X
communication technology to share the warning mes-
sage [83]. To share warning messages, WILLWARN pro-
posed a decentralized distribution algorithm to transmit
the warning message to vehicles approaching the dangerspot through V2V communication. The project Network
on Wheels (NoW) was one work which takes the idea
of FleetNet to build vehicle communication based on802.11 WLAN and ad hoc networking [84]. The goal of
NoW is to set up a communication platform to support both
mobility and Internet applications. For example, a hybrid
forwarding scheme considering both network layer and
application layer is developed. Also, security and scalabilityissues are discussed in NoW .
As the infrastructure also plays a very important part
in V2X technology , several efforts focus on building safetyapplications based on the cooperation with infrastructure.
SAFESPOT is an integrated project that is aimed at using
roadside infrastructure to improve driving safety [85].
Through combining information from the on-vehicle sen-
sors and infrastructure sensors, SAFESPOT detects danger-ous situations and shares the warning messages in real
time. Also, the warning forecast is improved from the
milliseconds level to the seconds level, thus giving thedriver more time to prepare and take action. Five appli-
cations are discussed in SAFESPOT , including hazard and
incident warning, speed alert, road departure prevention,
cooperative intersection collision prevention, and safety
margin for assistance and emergency vehicles [86].
In 2007, a nonproﬁt organization called the Car 2 Car
Communication Consortium (C2C-CC) was set up to com-
bine all solutions from different former projects to makea standard for V2X technology . Since 2010, the focus of
work on V2X technology has moved from research topics to
the real environment deployment of the whole intelligenttransportation system (ITS). One of the most popular
deploy projects is sim
TD[73], targeted on testing the V2X
applications in a real metropolitan ﬁeld. In simTD,a l l
vehicles connect with each other through dedicated short-
range communications (DSRC) technology that is based onIEEE 802.11p. Meanwhile, vehicles also communicate with
roadside infrastructure using IEEE 802.11p. The system
1708 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019