Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving
Table 2 Evolution of V2X Communication Technology
architecture of simTDis divided into three parts: the ITS
vehicle station, the ITS roadside station, and the ITS
central station. Applications for testing in simTDinclude
trafﬁc situation monitoring, trafﬁc ﬂow information and
navigation, trafﬁc management, driving assistance, local
danger alert, and Internet-based applications.
Cellular V2X (C-V2X) is designed as a uniﬁed connec-
tivity platform which provides low-latency V2V and V2I
communications [87]. It consists of two modes of commu-
nications. The ﬁrst mode uses direct communication links
between vehicles, infrastructure, and pedestrian. The sec-ond mode relies on network communication, which lever-
ages cellular networks to enable vehicles to receive infor-
mation from the Internet. C-V2X further extends the com-munication range of the vehicle and it supports the higher
capacity of data for information transmission for vehicles.
B. Cooperative Autonomous Driving
Cooperative autonomous driving is divided into two
categories: one is cooperative sensing and the other is
cooperative decision [88]. Cooperative sensing focuses on
sharing sensing information between V2V and V2I. This
data sharing increases the sensing range of autonomousvehicles, making the system more robust. The cooperative
decision enables a group of autonomous vehicles to coop-
erate and make decisions.
Several studies have focused on the exploration of
applications for cooperative autonomous driving. In [88],
four use cases including convoy driving, cooperative lanechange, cooperative intersection management, and coop-
erative sensing are demonstrated. According to the design
of AutoNet2030 [89], a convoy is formed of vehicles on
multilanes into a group and the control of the whole group
is decentralized. The safety and efﬁcient control of theconvoy require high-frequency exchanges of each vehicle’s
dynamic data. As shown in Fig. 4, a roadside edge serverand a cloud server are used to coordinate and manage the
vehicles and convoys to go through crossroads safely . One
convoy control algorithm in [90] only exchanges dynamicinformation of the nearby vehicle rather than for all the
vehicles within a convoy . This design makes the algorithm
easy to converge.
Cooperative lane change is designed to make vehi-
cles or convoys to collaborate when changing lanes. Proper
cooperative lane change cannot only avoid trafﬁc accidents
but it also reduces trafﬁc congestion [91]. MOBIL [92] is
a general model whose objective is to minimize overallbraking induced by lane changes.
Cooperative intersection is also helpful for safe driving
and trafﬁc control. The World’s Smartest Intersection inDetroit [93] focuses on safety and generates data that
Fig. 4. V2X communications in crossroads.
Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019 |P ROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 1709