Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving
and memory management by operating in conjunction
with the microkernel [19]. This is achieved by two key
mechanisms—subroutine-call-type interprocess communi-
cation and a boot loader that loads an image which con-tains not only the kernel but also any desired collection of
user programs and shared libraries. There are no device
drivers in the kernel.
Another popular commercial RTOS is VxWorks, which
is designed for use in embedded systems requiring real-
time, deterministic performance and, in many cases, safety
and security certiﬁcation [20]. VxWorks supports mul-
tiple architectures including Intel architecture, POWERarchitecture, and ARM architectures. VxWorks have been
used in multicore asymmetric multiprocessing, symmetric
multiprocessing, and mixed modes.
Both QNX and VxWorks use real-time kernels for
mission-critical applications subject to real-time con-
straints, which guaranty a response within predeﬁned time
constraints. While QNX is based on a message passing
architecture, VxWorks utilizes a shared memory architec-ture. Message passing is fundamental to the kernel design,
which allows the system to pass information from one
task to another or to several others in the system. Sharedmemory architecture refers to a system that has its own
private address space for physically distributed memories.
On kernel design, QNX uses a microkernel, and VxWorks
uses a monolithic kernel. A microkernel leverages system
calls to manage basic services such as address space man-agement, thread management, and interprocess communi-
cations. A monolithic kernel manages all the basic services
and user-deﬁned services including interprocess commu-nications in protected kernel space. Therefore, using a
monolithic kernel design, VxWorks is self-contained.
On priority scheduling under QNX, all the processes run
on a priority-driven preemptive basis, meaning the process
with the highest priority gets to access the CPU ﬁrst andthe priorities range from 0 to 31. The scheduling occurs in
real time, and every thread inherits its parent’s priority by
default. VxWorks, on the other hand, uses only two typesof scheduling algorithms, preemptive priority-based and
round-robin scheduling.
3) Middleware: On top of the RTOS, we need a mid-
dleware layer to bind different autonomous driving ser-vices together. To achieve this, most existing autonomous
driving solutions utilize the robot operating system (ROS)
[21] or modiﬁed versions of ROS. Speciﬁcally , ROS is acommunication middleware that facilitates communica-
tions between different parts of an autonomous vehicle
system. For instance, the image capture service publishesmessages through ROS, and both the localization service
and the obstacle detection service subscribe to the pub-
lished images to generate position and obstacle updates.
Although ROS is a popular choice for the operating sys-
tem in autonomous vehicle systems, in practice, it suffersfrom a few problems. The ﬁrst one is reliability; ROS has
a single master and no monitor to recover failed nodes.Fig. 3. Autonomous driving cloud architecture.
Performance is second; when sending out broadcast mes-
sages, it duplicates the message multiple times, leading toperformance degradation. Security is also a concern; it has
no authentication and encryption mechanisms. Although
ROS 2.0 promised to ﬁx these problems, it has not yet
been extensively tested, and many features are not yet
available. Most importantly , for a piece of software to runsecurely and reliably in vehicles, it needs to meet cer-
tain automotive-grade standards, such as ISO26262 [22].
Unfortunately , an automotive-grade middleware is stillmissing today .
C. Cloud Subsystem
Autonomous vehicles are mobile systems that, there-
fore, need a cloud subsystem to beneﬁt from the extra
computing power of a cloud subsystem. The two main
functions provided by the cloud include distributed com-
puting and distributed storage. Such a cloud subsystemhas several applications, including simulation, which is
used to verify new algorithms, HD map production, and
deep learning model training [23]. Note that due to thelimitations on communication bandwidth, latency , and reli-
ability , currently , we only perform ofﬂine computing tasks
on the cloud. With more advancements in communication
infrastructure, we enable more edge-cloud cooperation in
real-time computing tasks.
1) Simulation: The ﬁrst application of a cloud platform
system is a simulation. There are two main kinds of
simulation technologies. The ﬁrst type is to simulate the
environment based on synthetic data; these simulators are
mainly used for the control and planning, especially atthe initial development stage of the algorithm. The second
type of simulator is based on real data playback to verify
the function and performance of different components,which is mainly used in the iterative process of algorithm
development. Take planning and control algorithm devel-
opment for example, with ofﬂine simulations, we verify theeffectiveness of planning and control algorithms, especially
with different corner cases. Then, once the algorithms pass
all the simulation scenarios, we deploy the algorithms in a
vehicle for real-time execution.
As described in [24], the core problem of the sim-
ulator lies in how realistically we simulate the actual
driving environment. No matter how good the simulator
Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019 |P ROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 1701