Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving: Opportunities and Challenges
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Shaoshan Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in computer engineering from the University of California at Irvine,Irvine, CA, USA, in 2010.
He was a Founding Member of Baidu USA, Sunnyvale, CA,
USA, and the Baidu Autonomous Driving Unit, where he wasin charge of system integration of autonomous driving systems.He is currently the Founder and CEO of PerceptIn, Fremont, CA,USA, a company focusing on providing visual perception solutionsfor autonomous robots and vehicles. He has authored or coau-thored more than 40 high-quality research papers. He holds morethan 150 U.S. international patents on robotics and autonomousdriving. He is also the Lead Author of the best-selling textbookCreating Autonomous Vehicle Systems , which is the ﬁrst technical
overview of autonomous vehicles written for a general computingand engineering audience. His current research interests includecomputer architecture, deep learning infrastructure, robotics, andautonomous driving.
Dr. Liu co-founded the IEEE Special Technical Community
on Autonomous Driving Technolo gies to bridge communications
between global autonomous driving researchers and practition-ers and serves as the Founding Vice President. He is an ACMDistinguished Speak and an IEEE Computer Society DistinguishedSpeaker.
Liangkai Liu received the B.S. degree in telecommunication engi-
neering from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2017. He is cur-rently working toward the Ph.D. degree at Wayne State University,Detroit, MI, USA.
His current research interests include edge computing, distrib-
uted systems, and autonomous driving.
Jie Tang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in computer
science from the National University of Defense Technology, Chang-sha, China, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science fromthe Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2012.
She was a Visiting Researcher with the Embedded Systems
Center, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA, anda Research Scientist with Intel China Runtime Technology Lab,Beijing. She is currently an Associate Professor with the School ofComputer Science and Engineering, South China University of Tech-nology, Guangzhou, China. Her current research interests includeresearch on computer architecture, autonomous driving, cloud, andrun-time system.Dr. Tang is a Founding Member and the Secretary of the IEEE
Computer Society Special Technical Community on AutonomousDriving Technologies.
Bo Yu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electronic
technology and science from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China,in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Microelectronics,Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2012.
He is currently the CTO of PerceptIn, Fremont, CA, USA, a com-
pany focusing on providing visual perception solutions for roboticsand autonomous driving. His current research interests includealgorithm and systems for robotics and autonomous vehicles.
Dr. Yu is a Founding Member of the IEEE Special Technical
Community on Autonomous Driving.
Yifan Wang received the B.S. degree in electronic information
engineering from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 2014. He iscurrently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Institute of Com-puting Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
His current research interests include computer architecture,
edge computing, and connected and autonomous vehicles.
Weisong Shi (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer
engineering from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 1995, and thePh.D. degree in computer engineering from the Chinese Academyof Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2000.
He is currently the Charles H. Gershenson Distinguished Faculty
Fellow and a Professor of computer science with Wayne StateUniversity, Detroit, MI, USA. His current research interests includeedge computing, computer systems, energy efﬁciency, and wire-less health.
Dr. Shi was a recipient of the National Outstanding Ph.D. Disser-
tation Award of China and the NSF CAREER Award.
1716 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019