Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving
problems in CAV scenarios. The related work is divided into
two categories: network in edge and running environment
for edge computing.
Bhardwaj et al. [122] proposed ShadowNet, which
deploys the edge functions on the distributed edge
infrastructure and aggregates that information about the
IoT trafﬁc to detect an imminent IoT -DDoS. ShadowNetdetects IoT -DDoS ten times faster than existing approaches
and also prevents 82
%of trafﬁc to enter the Internet
infrastructure, reducing security threats. Yi et al. [123]
summarized the method that uses the software-deﬁned
network (SDN) to solve edge network security problems,such as network monitoring and intrusion detection and
network resource access control. This kind of work will
help us solve the related network threats in CAV scenarios.
Ning et al. [124] evaluated several trusted execution
environments (TEEs) on heterogeneous edge platforms,
such as Intel SGX, ARM TrustZone, and AMD SEV , and
deployed the TEEs on edge computing platform to efﬁ-
ciently improve the security with a low-performance over-head [124]. Kernel level resource auditing tool (KLRA)
[125] is a KLRA for IoT and edge operating system security .
KLRA takes ﬁne-grained events measured with low costand reports the relevant security warning the ﬁrst time
when the behavior of the system is abnormal with this
device. This kind of work will help us solve the security
problems in the operating system on CAVs.
VI. CONCLUSION
Safety is the most important requirement for autonomous
vehicles; hence, the challenge of designing an edge com-
puting ecosystem for autonomous vehicles is to deliverenough computing power, redundancy , and security to
guarantee the safety of autonomous vehicles. In this paper ,
we reviewed recent advancements and presented chal-
lenges in building edge computing systems for autonomous
vehicles, mainly in three categories: edge computing sys-tem designs, V2X applications, and autonomous vehicle
security .
In edge computing system designs, we face a system-
atic challenge for delivering more computing power with
reasonable energy consumption, to guarantee the safety of
autonomous vehicles, even at high speed. First, as moreautonomous driving edge computing workloads emerge,
we need to continue developing standard benchmarks
to more accurately evaluate edge computing systems.
Second, although we have seen some recent progressin utilizing heterogeneous computing architectures for
autonomous driving workloads, more research is required
to improve the edge computer architecture for autonomous
driving. The aim is to deliver more computing power with alimited chip area and energy budget. Third, with the evolu-
tion of computer architectures, we need to design runtime
layers for efﬁcient mapping of the incoming dynamic work-loads. Fourth, a reliable, robust, and production-quality
middleware is still missing to bind various autonomous
driving services together . For large-scale deployment of
autonomous vehicles, we hope to see more production-
quality full-edge computing systems that incorporate inno-vations in these layers.
V2X enables information sharing between vehicles and
computation ofﬂoading to RSUs. Hence, V2X not onlyalleviates the stress on edge computing systems but also
provides redundancy for sensing, perception, and decision
tasks. Therefore, we see V2X as an effective way to improve
the safety of autonomous vehicles. Yet, several technical
challenges remain such as how the edge computing sys-tems on different vehicles cooperate to make sensing and
planning decisions, and how to share the information from
infrastructure sensors to autonomous vehicles in real time,as well as to dynamically trade off the cost on infrastruc-
ture sensors and on-vehicle sensors. With more research
exploring V2X technologies, we hope to see more industrial
standards emerging to deﬁne how vehicles cooperate with
each other and with the infrastructure.
The safety of autonomous vehicles is at risk if security
is compromised at any level. As each autonomous vehicle
is equipped with numerous sensors and computing units,an attacker targets one of the sensors, the computing sys-
tems, the control systems, or the communication networks
to confuse, blind, or even take over control of the vehicle
under attack, leading to catastrophic accidents. Hence,
the challenge is to guarantee security at all levels of thestack. Although in recent years there have been some
interesting proposals regarding protecting the security of
autonomous vehicles, such as sensor fusion, more researchis required before we deploy autonomous vehicles on a
large scale. We hope to see more research on deﬁning
attack surfaces against autonomous driving edge com-
puting ecosystems and proposals to protect autonomous
vehicles from these attacks. Most importantly , we urgentlyneed industrial security veriﬁcation standards to certify
whether an autonomous vehicle is secure enough to run
on public roads.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Liu, J. Tang, Z. Zhang, and J.-L. Gaudiot,
“Computer architectures for autonomous driving,”
Computer , vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 18–25, 2017.
[2] S. Liu, J. Peng, and J.-L. Gaudiot, “Computer , drive
my car!” Computer , vol. 50, no. 1, p. 8, 2017.
[3] S. Liu, L. Li, J. Tang, S. Wu, and J.-L. Gaudiot,
“Creating autonomous vehicle systems,” Synth.
Lect. Comput. Sci. , vol. 6, no. 1, p. 186, 2017.
[4] S. Huang and G. Dissanayake, “Convergence and
consistency analysis for extended Kalman ﬁlter
based SLAM,” IEEE Trans. Robot. ,v o l .2 3 ,n o .5 ,pp. 1036–1049, Oct. 2007.
[5] H. Durrant-Whyte and T . Bailey , “Simultaneous
localization and mapping: Part I,” IEEE Robot.
Autom. Mag. , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 99–110,
Jun. 2006.
[6] J. Levinson, M. Montemerlo, and S. Thrun,
“Map-based precision vehicle localization in urban
environments,” in Robotics: Science and Systems ,
vol. 4. 2007, p. 1.
[7] A .K r i z h e v s k y ,I .S u t s k e v e r ,a n dG .E .H i n t o n ,
“ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep convolutionalneural networks,” in P r o c .A d v .N e u r a lI n f .P r o c e s s .
Syst. , 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[8] L. Bertinetto, J. Valmadre, J. F . Henriques,
A. Vedaldi, and P . H. Torr , “Fully-convolutional
siamese networks for object tracking,” in Proc. Eur .
Conf. Comput. Vis. Springer , 2016, pp. 850–865.
[9] D .F e r g u s o n ,M .D a r m s ,C .U r m s o n ,a n dS .K o l s k i ,
“Detection, prediction, and avoidance of dynamic
obstacles in urban environments,” in Proc. IEEE
Intell. V ehicles Symp. , Jun. 2008, pp. 1149–1154.
[10] S. M. LaValle, Planning Algorithms .C a m b r i d g e ,
Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019 |P ROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 1713