Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving
vehicles could cause terrible trafﬁc accidents, threatening
both personal and public safety . In this Section, we review
recent advancements in the security of autonomous vehi-
cles, including sensor security , operating system security ,control system security , and communication security . These
security problems cover different layers of the autonomous
driving edge computing stack.
A. Sensors Security
The autonomous vehicles are equipped with various sen-
sors (camera, GNSS, LiDAR, etc.) to enable the perception
of the surrounding environments. The most direct securitythreats against autonomous vehicles are attacks against
the sensors. With this attack method, attackers generate
incorrect messages or completely block sensor data so as tointerfere in the autonomous driving without hacking into
the computing system. According to the working principle
of sensors, the attackers have many speciﬁc attack methods
to interfere, blind, or spoof each of them [102].
A camera is the basic visual sensor in autonomous
driving systems. Modern autonomous vehicles are usually
equipped with multiple cameras with the same or different
lenses [1], [26]. In general, many autonomous drivingperception workloads take camera images as inputs, for
example, object detection and object tracking. The attack-
ers place fake trafﬁc lights, trafﬁc signs, and trafﬁc objects
(cars or pedestrians) to spoof autonomous vehicles and
let them make the wrong decisions [103]. The camerasare also interfered with infrared so the attackers use high-
brightness IR laser to blind the cameras, thus preventing
these cameras from providing effective images for theperception stage [103], [104].
Autonomous vehicles use GNSS and inertial navigation
system (INS) sensors to update vehicles’ real-time loca-
tions. Typical attacks against GNSS sensors are jamming
and spooﬁng. The attackers could use out-of-band or in-band signals to intentionally interfere with the function of
the GNSS receiver [105]. They also deploy GNSS trans-
mitter near the autonomous vehicles to deceive the GNSSreceiver by replicating original signals and providing false
locations [103], [105]. In addition, the INS sensors are
sensitive to magnetic ﬁelds, so an extra and powerful
magnetic ﬁeld could effectively interfere with the INS
sensors to produce incorrect orientation of the vehiclesunder attack.
LiDAR provides point clouds of the vehicle’s surround-
ings to generate 3-D sensing data of the environments.LiDAR measures distance to a target by illuminating
the target with pulsed laser light and measuring the
reﬂected pulses. A smart surface that is absorbent or reﬂec-tive deceives LiDAR sensors to miss real obstacles in
trafﬁc [102], and light laser pulse illuminating the LiDAR
could also manipulate the data sensed by the LiDAR,
deceiving the LiDAR to sense objects in incorrect posi-
tions and distances [103]. For ultrasonic sensors andradars, which are mostly used for passive perception and
the last line of defense for the autonomous vehicles,Yan et al. [106] have successfully spoofed and jammed
these two kinds of sensors in the Tesla Autopilot system
via the speciﬁc signal generator and transmitter.
B. Operating Systems Security
One widely used autonomous vehicle operating system
is ROS. Attackers target ROS nodes and/or ROS messages.
In the ROS running environment, there is no authentica-
tion procedure for message passing and new node creation.The attackers use the IP addresses and ports on the master
node to create a new ROS node or hijack an existing
one without further authentication [107]. If service onthe node keeps consuming system resources, for example,
memory footprint or CPU utilization, it will impact the
performance of other normal ROS nodes, even crashing the
whole autonomous driving system. The attackers also use
the controlled ROS node to send manipulated messages todisturb other nodes running and output.
For the attacks on ROS messages, the ﬁrst security threat
is message capture. The attackers monitor and record everyROS message topics via the IP address and port on the mas-
ter node. The recorded data are stored in the ROS bag ﬁle,
and the attackers play the ROS bag ﬁle to resend history
ROS messages, which will affect current ROS messages
communication [107]. The message passing mechanism ofROS is based on the socket communication so the attackers
sniff the network packets to monitor and intercept the ROS
messages remotely without hacking in the master node[108], [109]. The attacks on ROS messages do not need
to start or hijack a ROS node, but the security threat level
is not lower than the attack with the ROS node method.
C. Control Systems Security
In modern vehicles, many digital devices and
mechanical components are controlled by electroniccontrol units (ECUs). The ECUs are connected to each
other via the digital buses, which form the in-vehicle
network. Controller area network (CAN) is the primarybus protocol in the vehicle [110]. CAN is the typical bus
topology; there is no master/slave node concept in the
CAN bus so any node connected to the CAN bus can send
a message to any other node. Thus, the CAN network
usually uses the priority to control accesses to the bus. TheCAN network is isolated to the external network, but the
attackers hack the digital devices in the vehicle to attack
the CAN and ECUs indirectly , which is very dangerous tothe vehicle and the public.
There are many attack surfaces of the CAN bus. First is
the onboard diagnostics (OBD)-II port, which is used forvehicle status diagnostics, ECU ﬁrmware update, and even
vehicle control. The OBD-II port is connected to the CAN
bus, so the attackers use the OBD-II device and diagnostic
software to sniff the message on the bus or control the
vehicle [111], [112]. The attackers easily gain access tothe CAN bus through OBD-II ports. Second is the media
player (e.g., CD player) in the vehicle. The media player
Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019 |P ROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 1711