Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving: Opportunities and Challenges
name a few . First, they need to enable the interactions
between the functional modules with low overheads, and
this requires a lightweight operating system. Second, they
need to process an enormous amount of data in real time,and often the incoming data from different sensors are
highly heterogeneous. In addition, since they are mobile
systems, they often have very strict energy consumptionrestrictions. This requires a high-performance and energy-
efﬁcient hardware system.
In addition to the edge system design, vehicle-to-
everything (V2X) technologies should also get involved
in the communication of the edge system. V2X providesredundancy for autonomous driving workloads; it also
alleviates stress on the edge computing system. We believe
this is a promising approach, but the key is to identifya sweet spot between the tradeoffs of fully relying on
the edge computing system versus fully relying on the
V2X infrastructure. Hence, exploring how V2X enables
autonomous vehicles to cooperate with each other and
with the infrastructure remains an open research topic.
Having a high-performance and energy-efﬁcient edge
computing system is not enough, as attackers may turn an
autonomous vehicle into a dangerous weapon by hackinginto any layer of the autonomous driving sensing and
computing stack. More research is required to identify all
possible attack surfaces as well as protection mechanisms
before autonomous vehicles are released on public roads.
To summarize, the overarching challenge of
autonomous driving edge computing systems design
is to efﬁciently integrate the functional modules, including
interactions with edge servers and V2X infrastructure,to process a massive amount of heterogeneous data in
real time, within a limited energy budget, and without
sacriﬁcing the security of the users. In this paper,
we review state-of-the-art approaches in these areas
as well as explore potential solutions to address thesechallenges.
Before delving into the details of the autonomous
driving edge computing system designs, let us ﬁrst deﬁnethe autonomous driving computing ecosystem. As illus-
trated in Fig. 1, each autonomous vehicle is equipped
with an edge computing system, which integrates all the
real-time functional modules, such as localization, percep-
tion, planning and control, and so on. Then, each vehiclecommunicates with edge servers, and eventually with the
central cloud, through existing 3G/4G/5G communica-
tion networks. In addition, the vehicles can communicatewith the road side units (RSUs) through either the 5G
networks or the dedicated short-range communications
(DSRC) networks; this is a typical vehicle-to-infrastructure(V2I) scenario. Moreover, the vehicles can communicate
with each other through the DSRC networks, and this is a
typical vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) scenario.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
In Section II, we review the background of autonomousdriving technologies and help readers understand the com-
plexities of autonomous driving systems. In Section III,
Fig. 1. Autonomous driving edge computing architecture.
the latest progress on the designs of autonomous drivingedge computing systems is presented and discussed. In
Section IV , we focus on how V2X alleviates the stress on
edge computing systems. In Section V , we review security
issues in autonomous driving and how edge computingdesigns address these issues. We conclude in Section VI.
II. AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
TECHNOLOGIES
As detailed in [3], autonomous driving is not one tech-
nology but rather an integration of many technologies.
As is shown in Fig. 2, the autonomous driving technol-
ogy stack consists of three major subsystems: algorithms,
including sensing, perception, and decision; a vehicularedge subsystem, including the operating system and hard-
ware platform; and a cloud platform, including data stor-
age, simulation, HD mapping, and deep learning modeltraining.
A. Algorithm Subsystem
The algorithm subsystem extracts meaningful informa-
tion from sensor raw data to understand its environment
and dynamically make decisions about its actions.
Fig. 2. Autonomous driving technology stack.
1698 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019