Liuet al. : Edge Computing for Autonomous Driving
design, a portion of ReRAM crossbar arrays is conﬁgured
as accelerators for CNN applications or as normal memory
for larger memory space. The microarchitecture and cir-
cuit designs are provided enable the morphable functionswith an insigniﬁcant area overhead. Beneﬁting from both
the PIM architecture and the efﬁciency of using ReRAM
for CNN computation, the proposed design achieved sig-niﬁcant performance improvement and energy savings,
demonstrating the effectiveness of CNN accelerations from
the memory side.
We have seen much recent progress on acceleration
localization and perception functions, with many stud-ies focused on reconﬁgurable fabrics [44]–[48]; how-
ever, with limited chip area, it is inefﬁcient to integrate
one accelerator for each perception and localization task.Therefore, the efﬁcient utilization of reconﬁgurable fab-
rics is a major challenge for autonomous driving edge
computing design. For instance, the object tracking task
is triggered by the object recognition task and the trafﬁc
prediction task is triggered by the object tracking task. Thedata uploading task is also not needed all the time since
uploading data in batches usually improves throughput
and reduces bandwidth usage. To optimize for chip areaand power consumption, one way is to have these tasks
time-share an FPGA chip in the system. It has been demon-
strated that using partial-reconﬁguration techniques [49],
an FPGA soft core could be changed within less than a few
milliseconds, making time-sharing possible in real time.
In the near future, as more autonomous driving work-
loads and usage scenarios emerge, we look forward to the
designs of more accelerators targeted for these workloads.Also, we expect to see more exploration studies on the
cache, memory , and storage architectures for autonomous
driving workloads. In addition, hardware security for
autonomous driving is of utmost importance. Within a
decade, the research community and the industry shall beable to come up with a “general-purposed” architecture
design for autonomous driving workloads.
C. Runtime Systems
With heterogeneous architectures ready for autonomous
driving tasks, the next challenge is how to dispatch
incoming tasks to different computing units at runtime to
achieve optimal energy efﬁciency and performance. Thisis achieved through a runtime layer. Designing runtime
for heterogeneous autonomous driving systems is a whole
new research area with tremendous potentials, as mostexisting runtime designs focus on either mapping one
algorithm to one type of accelerators or on scheduling for
homogeneous systems or heterogeneous systems with asingle accelerator.
Several existing designs focus on mapping one deep
learning or computer vision workload to heterogeneous
architectures: Hegde et al. [50] propose a framework
for easy mapping of CNN speciﬁcations to acceleratorssuch as FPGAs, DSPs, GPUs, and Reduced Instruction Set
Computer (RISC) multicores. Malik et al. [51] comparethe performance and energy efﬁciency of computer
vision algorithms on on-chip FPGA accelerators and GPU
accelerators. Many studies have explored the optimization
of deep learning algorithms on embedded GPU or FPGAaccelerator [52], [53]. There have also been many
projects on optimizing computer vision related tasks
on embedded platforms. Honegger et al. [54] propose
FPGA acceleration of embedded computer vision. Satria
et al. [55] perform platform-speciﬁc optimizations of
face detection on embedded GPU-based platform and
reported real-time performance. Vasilyev et al. [56]
evaluate computer vision algorithms on programmablearchitectures. Nardi et al. [57] present a benchmark suite
to evaluate dense SLAM algorithms across desktop and
embedded platforms in terms of accuracy , performance,and energy consumption. However, these designs did not
consider the complexity of integrating the various kinds of
workloads into a system and only focus on mapping one
task to different accelerators.
Other existing designs focus on scheduling for hetero-
geneous architectures with one accelerator that has been
broadly studied for single-ISA multiprocessors, such as
asymmetric multicore architectures, i.e., big and smallcores, and multi-ISA multiprocessors such as CPU with
GPU. On the single-ISA multiprocessor side, much work
has been done at the operating system level to map work-
load onto most appropriate core type in run time. Koufaty
et al. [58] identiﬁed that the periods of core stalls is a
good indicator to predict the core type best suited for
an application. Based on the indicator, a biased schedule
strategy was added to operating systems to improve systemthroughput. Saez et al. [59] proposed a scheduler that adds
efﬁciency specialization and thread-level parallelism (TLP)
specialization to operating systems to optimize throughput
and power at the same time. Efﬁcient specialization maps
CPU-intensive workloads onto fast cores and memory-intensive workloads onto slow cores. TLP specialization
uses fast cores to accelerate a sequential phase of parallel
applications and use slow cores for the parallel phase toachieve energy efﬁciency . On the asymmetric multicore
architectures side, Jiménez et al. [60] proposed a user-level
scheduler for CPU with GPU like system. It evaluates and
records the performance of a process on each PE at the ini-
tial phase. Then, based on this history information, it mapsthe application onto the best suited PE. Luk et al. [61]
focus on improving the latency and energy consumption of
a single process. It uses dynamic compilation to character-ize workloads, determines optimal mapping, and generates
codes for CPUs and GPUs.
Unlike existing runtime designs, Liu et al. [62] proposed
PerceptIn Runtime (PIRT), the ﬁrst runtime framework
that is able to dynamically map various computer vision
and deep learning workloads to multiple accelerators and
to the cloud. The authors ﬁrst conducted a comprehensive
study of emerging robotic applications on heterogeneousSoC architectures. Based on the results, the authors
designed and implemented PIRT to utilize not only the
Vol. 107, No. 8, August 2019 |P ROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 1705