Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy (2022) 25:11–22 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11019-021-10062-z
SCIENTIFIC CONTRIBUTION
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills 
for AI‑driven digital personal assistants
Marianna Capasso1  · Steven Umbrello2 
Accepted: 16 November 2021 / Published online: 25 November 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Traditional medical practices and relationships are changing given the widespread adoption of AI-driven technologies across 
the various domains of health and healthcare. In many cases, these new technologies are not specific to the field of healthcare. 
Still, they are existent, ubiquitous, and commercially available systems upskilled to integrate these novel care practices. 
Given the widespread adoption, coupled with the dramatic changes in practices, new ethical and social issues emerge due to 
how these systems nudge users into making decisions and changing behaviours. This article discusses how these AI-driven 
systems pose particular ethical challenges with regards to nudging. To confront these issues, the value sensitive design (VSD) 
approach is adopted as a principled methodology that designers can adopt to design these systems to avoid harming and 
contribute to the social good. The AI for Social Good (AI4SG) factors are adopted as the norms constraining maleficence. 
In contrast, higher-order values specific to AI, such as those from the EU High-Level Expert Group on AI and the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals, are adopted as the values to be promoted as much as possible in design. The use 
case of Amazon Alexa's Healthcare Skills is used to illustrate this design approach. It provides an exemplar of how designers 
and engineers can begin to orientate their design programs of these technologies towards the social good.
Keywords Artificial intelligence · Nudging · Medical AI · Technoethics
Introduction
Digital health provides clinicians, patients, caregivers, and 
care-receivers, generally construed, as well as the whole 
health system with new tools and possibilities, ranging from 
the use of wearables and connected medical devices such 
as smartwatches and activity trackers (Lu et al. 2019) to 
the spread of AI decision-making systems, such as chatbots, 
digital personal assistants or persuasive apps that can help in 
monitoring health metrics (Valtolina et al. 2020; Zhang and 
Wan 2019). The future potential for such systems in health-
care seems high due to the far-reaching implications that the diagnosis and prevention capabilities of AI-driven systems 
may have in integrating or even replacing more traditional 
medical practices and relationships.
Now, during the pandemic, AI is also helping to provide 
personalised information and recommendations for patients 
who have symptoms of COVID-19 (Buoy Health 2021). 
Specifically, AI-driven digital personal assistants—e.g., 
Google Assistant, Apple Siri, Amazon Alexa—are now used 
in a wide variety of scenarios—such as consumer markets, 
work, smart homes and others—and with advanced intelli-
gence and interaction capabilities, they assist users in their 
tasks (Maedche et al. 2016). The novelty of such technolo-
gies is that they have also begun to prove their potential as 
digital health tools for monitoring, consulting, and providing 
tips and guidance, thus as intermediaries between the health-
care system as a whole and the public (Sezgin et al. 2020).
The scope of this paper is to analyse AI-driven digital 
personal assistants that are now upskilled with healthcare 
capabilities by looking at a particular case study, that is, 
Amazon Alexa's new Healthcare Skills. This will be done 
with the help of a multi-tiered value sensitive design (VSD) 
approach by evaluating a specific case of a new Amazon  * Steven Umbrello 
 s.umbrello@tudelft.nl
 Marianna Capasso 
 marianna.capasso@santannapisa.it
1 Scuola Superiore Sant’ Anna, Piazza Martiri della Libertà 33, 
56127 Pisa, Italia
2 Department of Values, Technology, & Innovation, School 
of Technology, Policy & Management, Delft University 
of Technology, Jaffalaan 5, 2628 BX Delft, The Netherlands