16 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
or 'investigations': conceptual, empirical and technical, as 
shown in Fig.  2.
Conceptual investigations involve (1) identifying both 
direct and indirect stakeholders that are or will be affected 
by the system and (2) formulating working definitions and 
prima facie value tensions that may arise. Empirical investi-
gations examine stakeholders' contexts and emerging values, 
eliciting their values and reformulating the working defini-
tions of the conceptual investigations as necessary. Finally, 
technical investigations look at the discrete technology in 
question, determining how the architecture of the technology 
can support or constrain the values in question.
Tools like the values hierarchy formulated by van de Poel 
(2013) are useful in helping designers to translate what are 
often abstract values into more tangible design requirements 
(see Fig.  3). A values hierarchy is fundamentally built on 
three primary layers: 1) values, which are often general and 
understood as needing to be promoted and designed for as 
much as possible; 2) norms, which are boundary conditions 
or prescriptions for action, and 3) design requirements, as 
specific technical requirements that should be designed for 
as much as possible.VSD for responsible nudging
To illustrate how the VSD approach can be used to design 
responsible nudging, we take up the example of Amazon's 
Alexa digital personal assistant as the use case. Likewise, 
given work that has already been done on adapting the VSD 
approach to AI-driven technologies, we adopt the general 
design program formulated by Umbrello and van de Poel 
(2020) as the starting point (Umbrello and van de Poel 
2021 ). Figure  4 outlines how designers can begin their inves-
tigations in their design program. Albeit differing from one 
project to another, the proposed framework provides the gen-
eral outline that practitioners can follow to ensure they touch 
on the fundamental points presented in this framework.
The four stages of the iterative process are: (1) context, 
(2) value identification, (3) formulating design requirements, 
and (4) prototyping. For the sake of space, we take up the 
approach directly and illustrate its application to the use case 
of Amazon's Alexa. In the last part of the article, we aim to 
discuss and explore the design of the Amazon Alexa Health-
care Skills prototype, albeit ex post facto in this case, using 
the framework described above (Fig.  4).
Fig. 2  The recursive VSD 
tripartite framework employed 
in this study. Source, Umbrello 
(2020)Conceptual Investigations
Valu es from both the relevant  
philosop hical lit erature and those 
explicitly elicit ed from stakeh olders are 
determin ed and investig ated. 
Technical Investigations
The technical limitation s of the 
techno logy itself are evaluated for how 
they support or co nstrain identified 
values and design requirem entsEmpirical Investigations
Stakeholder valu es are empirically 
evaluated through socio-cultural norms 
and transl ated into potential design 
requiremen ts
Design Requirement sNorm sValuesValu e
Norm
Design  
Requir ementDesign  
Requir ementDesign  
Requir ementDesign  
Requir ementNorm Norm Norm
Fig. 3  Values hierarchy. Source: van de Poel (2013)