12 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
Alexa’s Healthcare Skill: i.e., the provision of digital health 
nudges—or recommended courses of action and sugges-
tions—that are personalised to users. To do this, this paper is 
divided into the following sections. §2 explores the notion of 
nudging and its application in digital environments. §3 intro-
duces a multi-tiered value sensitive design (VSD) approach 
as a means of designing AI-driven digital personal assistants 
that incorporate digital health nudges to not only avoid doing 
harm by operationalising the AI for Social Good (AI4SG) 
principles as norms but to actively promote social good. It 
does this by operationalising higher-order values such as the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 
the EU High-Level Expert Group on AI (HLEG AI) values. 
The case study of Amazon Alexa’s new Healthcare Skills 
is illustrated through the four-stage iterative process of a 
combined AI4SG-VSD approach, which are respectively: 
(1) context, (2) value identification, (3) formulating design 
requirements, and (4) prototyping. Finally, §4 provides some 
conclusions.
Digital nudging in healthcare
The notion of nudging derives from the work of Thaler and 
Sunstein (2009), which advocates a liberal and paternalistic 
choice architecture. A nudge is described as "any aspect of 
the choice architecture that predictably alters people's behav -
iour without forbidding any options or significantly changing 
their economic incentive" (Thaler and Sunstein 2009, p. 6). 
Nudging uses behavioural sciences and economics princi-
ples to elicit beneficial behaviours from individuals, without 
undermining their deliberative choice and freedom. A nudge 
overcomes agents' cognitive defects, or lack of information 
and behavioural biases, and steers them towards target acts 
that are deemed to be good for them (Sunstein 2017).
The term "digital nudging" emerged only recently in 
engineering and computer systems literature and is defined 
as the "use of user-interface design elements to guide peo-
ple's behaviour in digital choice environments" (Weinmann 
et al. 2016). There are several technological systems in 
healthcare that use and rely on the assumptions of nudging. 
Among these, there are apps that send notifications based 
on nudge design to prevent the progression of mild cogni-
tive impairment in elderly patients (Pietrabissa et al. 2019). 
Other examples that fall more squarely in digital nudging 
in the healthcare context include AI-driven digital personal 
assistants to support diagnosis and monitoring. Such systems 
influence and manage users' behaviours and have a signifi-
cant impact on both caregivers and care receivers, as well 
as their families.
Indeed, market-driven corporations such as Apple, 
Google or Amazon are now incorporating data-driven and 
personalised nudges in their products. AI-driven digital personal assistants are an example of such products. For 
example, users can be ‘nudged’ by Amazon’s Alexa, 
which can collect users’ data and preferences, shape differ -
ent aspects of their choice environment and push towards 
desired results, thus having considerable power in affect-
ing decision-making processes in a vast realm of contexts, 
from business and markets to other sensitive domains such 
as healthcare (Cai 2020).
However, little research has been conducted on whether 
digital nudges improve the efficacy of healthcare (Byambas -
uren et al. 2018). Conversely, a growing concern has been 
raised that apps and other AI medical tools may track, col-
lect, and share data in opaque and potentially misaligned 
ways (Loria 2019).
Digital nudges follow the same principles and modali-
ties of nudges as such. However, the fundamental difference 
between traditional nudges and digital nudges lies in the 
latter allowing for greater versatility and opportunities for 
choice architects due to the more dynamic, informational, 
and automated character of the digital environment (Meske 
et al. 2019). In addition, new digital patient-centric nudges, 
with tools such as simplifications, default settings, deci-
sion staging, feedback, reminders and others, offer virtual 
medical care and assistance in and outside hospitals and 
in domestic or commercial care practices even outside the 
healthcare domain (Meske et al. 2019).
Using Big Data and Predictive Analytics techniques, a 
digital nudge is ubiquitous, emergent, interconnected, and 
capable of continuously reconfiguring itself due to its feed-
back from its environment and interactions with users and 
other systems. As a matter of fact, Big Data nudges have 
been defined as a special kind of nudge: hypernudges due to 
their networked and dynamic nature (Yeung 2017).
Nudging is not merely a value-free and neutral tool: 
indeed, scholars have already recognised that nudges always 
contain value judgements and deal with a dominant under -
standing of societal values or norms that are considered mor -
ally or politically acceptable by choice architects (Prainsack 
2020; McMahon 2015; Jones et al. 2013).
In the digital realm, tech companies or private actors 
may constitute choice-architects with an external, inde-
pendent and, in some instances, unaligned values-metrics 
relative to those of their nudgees' goals and values. Indeed, 
in certain cases, digital nudges could steer the behaviour 
of human users away from what may benefit them, leading 
to a disparity between their actions and goals (Burr et al. 
, 2018). In particular, in the healthcare context, the intro-
duction of new actors and new digital practices mediated 
by AI-driven systems can shape the responsibility, roles 
and credibility of both health professionals and patients, 
leading to a reconfiguration of the entire healthcare sys-
tem (van Wynsberghe and Li 2019). Scholars have raised 
concern about the "Googlization of health” research that