17
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills for AI‑driven digital personal…
1 3
Context analysis
In 2019 Amazon announced a new partnership with the UK's 
National Health Service (NHS). This partnership enabled 
Amazon's digital personal assistant Alexa to offer NHS 
health advice to users at home (Department of Health and 
Social Care 2019). Moreover, in the new Alexa Healthcare 
Skills announced in collaboration with six health companies, 
Amazon says that now Alexa can follow the US Health Insur -
ance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) 
and transmit and receive protected health information. These 
new Alexa Skills are designed to help users manage different 
healthcare needs such as the coordination and scheduling 
of appointments, care plans, healthcare account informa-
tion, the tracking and monitoring of vitals and symptoms, 
and, finally, the receiving of insights and Health Nudges—or 
recommended courses of action and suggestions—that are 
personalised to them (Jiang 2019). Furthermore, during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, Amazon released additional Alexa 
features to help users stay at home, providing information 
and guidance about the virus (Amazon 2020).
The sociocultural contexts in which a technology is being 
developed is crucial to assess its design and deployment. For 
example, Amazon is not a healthcare company but can now 
handle health data and patient information. Likewise, Alexa 
is a general AI-driven digital personal assistant, commonly 
used for a wide variety of purposes, like playing music or 
giving information about the weather, among many other 
things. In the case of Alexa's new Healthcare Skills, the 
context of use, which can be understood as the motivating 
force beyond its development, includes a diverse range of 
factors: the need to reduce the pressure and burden on NHS, 
healthcare companies and clinicians, mainly by providing information on common illness, the need to render easily 
accessible and valuable health information and tools espe-
cially to vulnerable groups such as elderly and frail patients 
at home and in residential and nursing homes, differently-
abled patients, or, generally, to those who cannot always get 
access to care or know how and when to get such access, 
the need to improve patients' adherence to their medicines 
(Beaney and Kalorai 2020), and for more accurate, preven-
tive and personalised medicine and more beneficial health 
outcomes (Chan et al. 2019). As such, with the addition of 
healthcare skills, it might be argued that this blurs the line 
between different contexts, namely recreational contexts and 
those of healthcare. The introduction of AI-driven digital 
personal assistants can improve the effectiveness of health 
communication and monitoring. Still, concerns may arise 
during their use in practice, based on the need for a com-
prehensive infrastructure that helps the integration between 
different contexts and health systems and health organisa-
tions, the compliance to exchange health data and personal 
information, and so on.
Value identification
Values that are to be promoted by the design Ensuring that 
the AI4SG-VSD approach avoids harming and actively 
contributing to social good requires gearing the approach 
towards collective socially desirable ends. This type of 
explicit adaptation is currently lacking in the existent pro-
posals for AI4SG. In a similar fashion to Umbrello and 
van de Poel ( 2020 ), we adopt an explicit gearing towards 
the SDGs as the best estimation of collectively beneficial 
societal ends given that the UN developed them to favour 
collective action for all countries (UN Task Team on the Fig. 4  AI4SG-VSD design 
process. 2021 Source: Umbrello 
and van de Poel (2021)