13
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills for AI‑driven digital personal…
1 3
opened the way to tech companies such as Google, Ama-
zon, and Facebook to collect, track, and store health data 
(Sharon 2016; 2021). Health data are not solely created by 
clinicians in electronic medical records but now extend to 
encompass data from fitness and health apps, behavioural 
data tracked in digital environments, data based on online 
interactions, and the contents amassed on social networks, 
among others.
Therefore, a question of crucial importance in collect-
ing and using healthcare data is the nature and value of 
those data as inherently public data (c.f., Prainsack 2020). 
Whereas individual health data would (and should) continue 
to be treated as private (i.e., individual) health data, the data 
can also be read as public data, given that its collection and 
use in AI-driven systems have a public impact. Despite pro-
ponents of nudging tend to focus on individuals and their 
freedom of choice—since nudges are primarily described as 
individual interventions that help to promote more rational 
and healthy behaviours—the use of nudges may profoundly 
impact institutional and social structures (see Lepenies and 
Małecka 2015). On the extensive literature on nudging in 
healthcare, very little engage with social determinants of 
health and often mislead the public nature of nudges (Mac-
Kay and Quigley 2018).
Behavioural influences such as nudging techniques are 
always positioned in a more extensive system, where poli-
cymakers or private actors and governments layout values 
and norms, preferences, and political or social factors. The 
effects of digital nudges within the healthcare field are thus 
not merely visible on an individual level; they are equally 
effective and persistent on a collective level and need a jus-
tification on the values they underpin and promote.
Thus, it is essential to make explicable the values that are 
articulated by digital nudges – general social values or val-
ues tailored for the individual (c.f., Barton and Grüne-Yanoff 
2015) or a specific group (stakeholder contextual values) 
– and align AI-driven systems in the field of healthcare to 
not only avoid doing harm (nonmaleficence) but to actively 
contribute to social good (beneficence). Specifically, in the 
healthcare domain, there is a need to identify and regulate 
the different sources of influences such as digital nudges 
in the broader social environment and to assess ex-ante the 
peculiarities and the relevant values inherent to the care 
practices that such influences are going to interfere with.
It is not only the public nature of digital nudges at stake, 
but the question about the public nature and value of health 
that should benefit society as a whole and prevent persons 
or groups of people from experiencing undue harm. In this 
sense, when engaging in a discourse on AI-driven systems 
that incorporate digital health nudges that should actively 
contribute to social good, one cannot disregard the question 
of what may count as a just healthcare system and the recon-
sideration of an individualistic approach to health.The COVID-19 pandemic has shown the need to initi-
ate a thorough discussion on health and healthcare's role 
in citizens’ lives. For example, the necessity of thinking 
public health as a social good has been in the recent efforts 
of the World Health Organization, which was engaged in 
providing countries all over the globe equitable access to 
vaccines (WHO 2020). Furthermore, in recent years, many 
scholars have tried to frame health in terms of a global pub-
lic good, seeing in it not a private good but rather a con-
cept that requires innovative collective action at the global 
level (Moon et al. 2017; Abdalla et al. 2020). Public goods 
are non-excludable and non-rival, meaning that no one is 
excluded from their consumption, and one person’s con-
sumption does not prevent anyone else from benefiting them 
(Smith 2003). If we translate this discourse on health and 
healthcare’s role in citizens lives, the access to healthcare 
and treatments should not be arbitrarily limited but consid-
ered inherently public: i.e., no one is excluded from it and 
is not-rivalrous. The healthcare ecosystem is increasingly 
becoming an ‘e-health ecosystem’. This e-health ecosys-
tem can be understood as a socio-technical system that is 
composed of an entanglement of technical, social, and insti-
tutional dimensions and stakeholders that in collaboration 
provide values and services (Nykänen 2017). For this rea-
son, society as a whole is expected to create and maintain a 
healthcare ecosystem that can correctly evolve, approximate 
towards being a public good, and can assist individuals in 
the above sense. However, beyond such consideration on 
individual access to healthcare and treatments, health can 
also be understood as public, aimed to fit the characteristics 
of non-excludability and non-rivalry. Although there are 
many different conceptualisations of public health through 
the lens of the conception of public goods, these have also 
led to criticisms (Bernstein and Randall 2020). Still, the 
importance of the concept and practice of public health pri-
marily depend on structural conditions and on the collective 
call for action to address and provide health-related public 
goods, public health programs, and policies (Giubilini and 
Savulescu 2019; Anomaly 2021).
In particular, the proposal of framing health as a global  
public good can be a means to include other sectors and 
regulators beyond the healthcare system itself in the design 
and justification of health policies, strategies and plans. The 
social determinants of health and their implications should 
be included in a new and more comprehensive approach to 
monitoring, implementing and evaluating health, understood 
not as the sum of individual goods of specific persons but as 
both the outcome and pre-condition of much broader socio-
economic processes and practices. To ensure global access 
and benefit concerning health and healthcare, it would be 
effective to identify a rationale, methodologies, and means to 
account for the challenge of fair and democratic redistribu-
tion, as well as social justice.