18 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
Post 2015 Agenda 2013). Amazon's Alexa new Healthcare 
Skills design can be said to be part of an extensive network 
to support UN SDG #3, Ensuring healthy lives and promot-
ing well-being at all ages. In particular, it may encourage 
SDG target 3.8: the achievement of universal health cov -
erage, including financial risk protection, access to quality 
essential healthcare services and access to safe, effective, 
quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for 
all (United Nations n.d.).
Values that should be respected, in particular, those 
values that have been identified concerning AI: respect for 
human autonomy, prevention of harm (nonmaleficence), 
fairness and explicability This second level of values are 
values that are to be promoted, especially concerning AI. 
First, a classic tenet of bioethics is the principle of auton-
omy, understood as the right that individuals have to make 
free and meaningful decisions about their treatments. With 
AI, this principle is blurred, according to Floridi et al. 
(2018) because it implies a balance between the decision-
making power that individuals retain for themselves and 
what they decide to delegate to systems such as AI (Floridi 
et al. 2018). The access to health data sets and the provision 
of medical advice and information are no longer restricted 
to the dynamics of the healthcare system nor the recipro-
cal relationship between clinicians and patients. Indeed, big 
tech corporations such as Amazon can answer and suggest 
health-related questions and behaviours. AI-driven sys-
tems can store, archive, collect, and analyse data in new 
and unprecedented modalities, which we already defined as 
hypernudges, raising concerns about privacy and individual 
autonomy. Without explicit informed consent, Amazon can 
monitor users' routine to improve its service (Cuthbertson 
2019) and thus has the potential capacity to utilise and share 
data even for commercial and marketing purposes not related 
to health issues. The involvement of such private actors and 
automated systems in healthcare can thus entail a loss of 
control on personal data and a downplaying of care receivers' 
meaningful choices concerning treatments and assistance.
In this scenario, the emphasis on the value of human 
autonomy can help address the issue of data management on 
the part of external providers and explore the role that digi-
tal nudges may have in the decision-making processes and 
cognitive capabilities of their nudgees. For example, a pilot 
study in Staffordshire has explored the potential of Amazon 
Alexa for patients with diabetes or with other health and 
dependence needs such as anxiety and depression. The study 
has reported that Alexa can have hugely positive effects for 
both patients and family carers, such as an increased sense 
of independence and management of long-term conditions 
(Chambers and Beaney 2020).
Nonmaleficence involves understanding systems' capabili-
ties and limitations to avoid possible harms caused by over -
using or misusing AI technologies (Floridi et al. 2018). In the case of Amazon Alexa, privacy concerns are just one of 
the possible harms. Strictly related to the case under exami-
nation, we may also include other risks such as the unnec-
essary appointments and concerns on the part of patients, 
the possible disappearance of certain medical and caregiver 
professions, the reconfiguration of expertise and responsi-
bilities in and outside the healthcare system, the intercon-
nection of different domains and different values-metrics, 
and the predominant and potential worrisome impact that 
a market-driven system such as a private tech corporation 
may have on shaping healthcare agendas and research (see 
Sharon 2016; 2021).
The value of fairness aims to eliminate unfair discrimi-
nation and ensure that the use of AI creates shared ben-
efits (or at least sharable) and avoids further harms, such 
as the undermining of existing social structures (Floridi 
et al. 2018). Amazon Alexa or similar digital personal 
assistants may exacerbate existing (digital) health divides 
between those who can afford them and those who cannot 
(Stokes-Lampard 2019). Moreover, there is no safeguard to 
prevent the possibility for third parties or hackers and mali-
cious actors to steal data. Beyond the individual level of 
the nudgee and their right to privacy and healthcare, what 
is at stake is the collective dimension of justification on the 
means and modalities of possible interventions in health-
care. Therefore, there is reason to frame the issue of digital 
nudging also in terms of its socio-political relevance, with 
the aim to regulate and promote relational and equal forms 
of accessibility to digital health data and democratic—as 
open to discussion and contestation—modalities of control 
on those latter.
Finally, the value of explicability implies a need to under -
stand AI-driven systems and thus make them intelligible 
and not opaque. There is also a need to hold to account the 
decision-making processes of AI, finding at least one agent 
that can be considered accountable for how the system works 
(Floridi et al. 2018). This is a complex issue due to the vast 
number of people and organisations that deploy and develop 
such technologies and to the fact that AI working is often 
difficult to understand and interpret by those agents.
In cases that involve AI, predictive analytics, profil-
ing and hypernudges, generally understood, traditional 
informed consent or the manifest and transparent charac-
ter of the publicity principle are often not sufficient ele-
ments to preserve and respect users' deliberative choices 
and freedom (Yeung 2015 ; Sunstein 2017). Beyond the 
individual level of users' behaviours, what is at stake in 
the use of digital health nudging is the nature and public 
value of health data and the social, economic and political 
consequences and factors this may entail, as some schol-
ars have recently suggested (Prainsack 2020). And beyond 
the issues of transparency and publicity, we should 
assess and promote modalities that make the adoption