19
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills for AI‑driven digital personal…
1 3
of AI-driven systems and technological influences-types 
such as digital nudges also explainable by public agencies 
and stakeholders to citizens (Pasquale 2015; Santoni de 
Sio and Mecacci 2021).
Context-specific values that are not covered by (1) 
and (2) and derive from the analysis of the specific con-
text in phase, particularly values held by stakeholders  
The last class of values is related to stakeholders' values 
and preferences. In the healthcare domain, the nature of 
care activity is conceived as a response to the needs of 
the 'other' or care receiver to determine the values to be 
included in systems design (see van Wynsberghe 2016). 
Digital personal assistants such as Alexa may mediate 
and radically change the patient-provider relationship and 
the specific care practice that the latter aims to enforce. 
For example, as a virtual clinician at home, Amazon 
Alexa can be used to overcome loneliness and isolation 
and provide social support (Chambers and Beaney 2020). 
Or, more broadly, digital personal assistants can affect 
the users' willingness to disclose aspects of personal and 
clinical life in various ways compared to the more tra-
ditional interaction that a patient may have with human 
caregivers (Debajyoti et al. 2020). Therefore, the value 
of social companionship—and, consequently, considering 
technological systems as social agents or entities—as a 
context-specific value should be put in a sharper focus. 
According to the recent work of Friedman et al. (2019), in 
the possible VSD tools, which are appropriated from the 
social sciences and can be used to investigate and recon-
struct stakeholders' experiences, are included the use of 
values scenarios or sketches, or value-oriented semi-
structured interviews or even the deployment of models 
for informed consent online (Friedman and Hendry 2019). 
These may be appropriate methods for identifying new 
emerging values or validating design solutions that can 
consider different descriptions and understandings of care 
practices and the different usage patterns and perceptions 
across age groups (Oh et al. 2020).Design requirements
Among the host of VSD methodologies available for value 
analysis, a values hierarchy (Fig.  3) is particularly apt at 
visualising how higher-level values can be translated through 
norms and into design requirements. Naturally, the hierar -
chy can function both top-down (values →  norms →  design 
requirements) as well as bottom-up (design requirements → 
norms→  values) depending on the specifics of the design 
programs in which it is used. Figure  5 is an example of how 
a higher-level value can be translated through two of the 
AI4SG norms that are most relevant to it (c.f., Fig.  1) and 
into more tangible design requirements.
In Fig.  5, the value of Fairness is chosen as the exemplar 
of how to illustrate the usefulness of a values hierarchy as 
a tool for translating abstract values into concrete design 
requirements. As one of the higher-level values of the EU 
HLEG, fairness here can be translated through at least two 
AI4SG norms (2 and 6), illustrated in Fig.  1, and into some 
example design requirements that align with this value 
and its associated norms. Naturally, this is one of a host of 
examples of how this translation can be done. Of course, the 
design requirements or even values (depending on the direc-
tion of the hierarchy being undertaken) changes as a function 
of the various contextual factors of any given design domain. 
Simply put, the illustration is not an exhaustive exercise but 
rather 'opens up' the design space for multiple ways that 
designers can reach common goals. Receiver-contextual-
ised intervention (AI4SG #3) and Receiver-contextualised 
explanation and transparent purposes (AI4SG #4) over -
lap into the value of Fairness  also, given that it can come 
into delicate tension with the requirements on the limits of 
transparency as such for the safeguard against the manipu-
lation of predictors (AI4SG #2). This is to say that both 
the values and the norms co-vary and co-constitute one 
another and, to reiterate, are not rank-ordered but actually 
operationalise each other. For this reason, such exercises 
like this allow engineers to more clearly delimit the possible 
requirements needed for a salient design aligned with the 
Design RequirmentsNorm sValuesFairne ss
(1)Safeguards 
against the 
manipulations of 
predictors  
(AI4SG #2)
Limit access to 
ex-post facto data 
modification s 
after results 
displa yEarly detection 
of user future 
engage ment level  
viz. supervised 
learningautomation of ex 
post facto user 
personalisation  
(system 
responsiveness)(1)Situa tional  
fairness [AI4SG  
#6]
(1)end-to-end 
encyrption between 
caregiver and care 
reciever-
pseudonymizati on 
of subject data with 
central processing 
archetecture(1)M odality for data 
subjiect information 
Rectification and 
erasure (e.g., GDPR 
Article 17)Clear terms of use 
and UI/UX 
integration
Fig. 5  Translating the value of Fairness to design requirements through AI4SG norms