14 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
A multi-tiered value sensitive design (VSD) approach 
that operationalises higher-order values such as the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
and the EU High-Level Expert Group on AI (HLEG AI) 
values can constitute a reasonable solution to the issue 
of strengthening global responsibility and governance to 
improve health. Higher-order values like those expressed 
by SDGs and those higher-level values specific to AI, 
like those described by HLEG AI, can serve as a good 
approximation of what we consider a collective action 
to individuate public goods to be promoted at the global 
level.
This approach has two aims. First, it aims to reconfig-
ure the healthcare system by introducing new actors and 
indicators that determine and make explicit the values to 
be promoted as public and collectively beneficial. Sec-
ond, it aims to identify norms and design requirements 
for AI-driven systems—in this specific case, AI-driven 
digital personal assistants—to better monitor and promote 
health equity and an inclusive, transparent and account-
able development of socio-technical systems globally.Towards AI for social good
As already mentioned, digital nudging is a continually grow -
ing practice within the domain of health care, technology, 
and their intersection. However, given the potentially delete-
rious consequences of misaligned digital nudging, as well as 
its potential boons if employed responsibly, it makes sense 
that the responsible innovation of AI-driven digital per -
sonal assistants in the field of healthcare to be aligned with 
a design approach that is principled on similar commitments 
to avoid harm and actively contribute to doing good. There-
fore, many scholars are now attempting to identify techni -
cal requirements for AI-driven systems to ensure that these 
technologies are designed to protect and promote relevant 
ethical and societal values in healthcare (Mittelstadt et al. 
2016; London 2019; Vayena et al. 2018).
Floridi et al. (2020) provide what is arguably the most 
comprehensive set of norms for guiding designers of AI-
driven systems to avoid (most) harms (Umbrello and van 
de Poel 2021). The seven factors—AI4SG norms—are a set 
of principles that are particularly relevant for the design of 
AI towards social good (Floridi et al. 2020). Table  1 lists 
the AI4SG factor along with a summative imperative that 
Table 1  AI for social good meaning and factors
AI4SG factor AI4SG factor imperative
1. Falsifiability and incremental deployment AI4SG designers should identify falsifiable requirements and test them in 
incremental steps from the lab to the “outside world” (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 
7)
2. Safeguards against the manipulation of predictors AI4SG designers should adopt safeguards that (i) ensure that non-causal 
indicators do not inappropriately skew interventions and (ii) limit, when 
appropriate, knowledge of how inputs affect outputs from AI4SG systems to 
prevent manipulation (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 8)
3. Receiver-contextualised intervention AI4SG designers should build-decision-making systems in consultation with 
users
interacting with and impacted by these systems; with understanding of users’
characteristics, of the methods of coordination, and the purposes and effects 
of an
intervention, and with respect for users’ right to ignore or modify interventions 
(Floridi et al. 2020, p. 9)
4. Receiver-contextualised explanation and transparent purposes AI4SG designers should choose a Level of Abstraction for AI explanation that 
fulfils the desired explanatory purpose and is appropriate to the system and 
the receivers; then deploy arguments that are rationally and suitably persua-
sive for the receivers to deliver the explanation and ensure that the goal (the 
system’s purpose) for which an AI4SG system is developed and deployed is 
knowable to receivers of its outputs by default (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 14)
5. Privacy protection and data subject consent AI4SG designers should respect the threshold of consent established for the 
processing of datasets of personal data (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 16)
6. Situational fairness AI4SG designers should remove from relevant datasets variables and proxies 
that are irrelevant to an outcome, except when their inclusion supports inclu-
sivity, safety, or other ethical imperatives (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 18)
7. Human-friendly semanticisation AI4SG designers should not hinder the ability for people to semanticise (that 
is, to give meaning to and make sense of) something (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 
19)