15
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills for AI‑driven digital personal…
1 3
Floridi et alia state that designers must follow to put these 
factors into practice.
The seven norms should not be read as rank-ordered, 
but mutually co-varying and co-constituting one another in 
design paradigms. Similarly, and more relevant to the spe-
cific types of technologies in question, they seamlessly map 
onto the higher-level, more abstract values of the EU High-
Level Expert Group on Artificial intelligence (HLEG AI): 
human autonomy, prevention of harm, fairness and explica-
bility (see Fig.  1) (High-Level Expert Group on AI 2019).
For the sake of space, this article does not discuss in 
depth the definitions or examples of the seven factors; 
Floridi et alia do so already at length (Floridi et al. 2020). 
However, what is important here is that the AI4SG fac-
tors function like norms as per van de Poel's (2013) char -
acterisation of norms as being framed as 'maximising' or 
'minimising' specific values or design requirements, thus 
bridging the gap between abstract values (e.g., HLEG AI, 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
and concrete design requirements (van de Poel 2013). More 
clearly stated, the above shows that the norms via AI4SG 
factors provide a bridge between higher-level AI values like 
those of the HLEG AI and more technical design require-
ments. However, for this approach to be operationalised by 
designers, a principled design methodology is required to 
allow this bridging between abstract values and norms to be 
adopted systematically. For this reason, we adopt the value 
sensitive design (VSD) approach to technology design as 
the methodology of choice. VSD is a principled approach to technology design that seamlessly incorporates the 'val-
ues-norms-design requirements' structure as a foundational 
method (van de Poel 2013).
Value sensitive design
As mentioned, this article aims to adopt and illustrate a 
multi-tiered VSD methodology to design AI-driven digi-
tal personal assistants that responsibly incorporate digital 
nudges within healthcare. Thus, the HLEG AI principles 
are understood as the more general values from which more 
specific values can be derived for doing good. At the same 
time, the normative AI4SG factors are used as the bound-
ary conditions for avoiding harm (c.f., Umbrello and van 
de Poel 2021).
Currently, there are over two decades worth of scholarship 
directly on the VSD approach that explore its philosophical 
foundations (Winkler and Spiekermann 2018 ), methodologi -
cal issues and capabilities (Le Dantec et al. 2009), as well 
as its potential applications to existing and future technolo-
gies (Umbrello and De Bellis 2018). Value sensitive design 
is often defined as "a theoretically grounded approach to 
the design of technology that accounts for human values 
in a principled and comprehensive manner throughout the 
design process" (Friedman et al. 2013, p. 2). The primary 
methodological objective of VSD is an explicit investiga-
tion and incorporation of moral values in design. It does 
this through the recursive feedback of three iterative stages 
Human 
Autonomy
(1)Receiver-
contextualized  
intervention (AI4SG  
#3)
(1)Privacy 
protec tion and data 
subject consent 
(AI4SG #5 )
(1)Human-friendly 
semanticisation 
(AI4SG #7 )Prevention 
of Harm
(1)Falsifiability and 
incremental 
deployme nt
(2)(AI4SG #1)
(1)Privacy 
protec tion and data 
subject consent 
(AI4SG #5 )Fairness
(1)Safeguards 
against the 
manipulations of 
predictors (AI4SG  
#2)
(1)Situational  
fairness (AI4SG #6 )Explicability
(1)Receiver-
contextualized  
explanation and 
transparent 
purposes (AI4SG  
#4)
(1)Human-friendly 
semanticisation 
(AI4SG #7 )
Fig. 1  Relationship between higher-order values of the EU HLEG on AI and AI4SG norms. 2021 Source: Umbrello and van de Poel (2021)