to include noisy data, and a new evaluation metric is proposed to evaluate the robustness of
few-shot classiﬁcation methods.
Ma et al. [ 73] provided a geometric interpretation of Prototypical Network, regarding it as a
Voronoi diagram. Moreover, the authors extended this perspective and proposed the Cluster-
to-Cluster Voronoi Diagram (CCVD), which can ensemble models learned with diﬀerent data
augmentation, built on single or multiple feature transformations, and using linear or nearest
neighbor classiﬁer.
2.2.2 Point-based learnable prototypes
Ravichaandran et al. [ 74] adopted an implicit way to learn class representation instead of
determining class prototypes as in the aforementioned methods. The prototype is modeled as a
learnable and parameterized function of feature embedding of labeled samples in the class and is
obtained by minimizing a loss which measures the distance between the feature embedding of a
sample and the class prototype. Meanwhile, the function is shot free, that is, it allows sample
sizes of classes in novel data to be unbalanced. In [ 75], prototypes are represented as weighted
averages of feature embeddings, but diﬀerent from [ 22,45] discussed in the previous section,
weights are learned end-to-end via episodic training. Moreover, instead of using image-level
features, [ 75] combines local descriptors of one class following the idea of DN4 and learn multiple
weight vectors to generate multiple prototypes per class. Das and Lee proposed a two-stage
approach for generating class prototypes [ 76]. In the ﬁrst stage, feature embeddings are learned,
from which coarse prototypes of base and novel classes can be obtained from mean embeddings.
In the second stage, the novel class prototype is reﬁned through a meta-learnable function of its
own prototype and related base prototypes.
Besides the above methods, TapNet [ 77] explicitly modeled class prototypes as learnable
parameters. Prototypes and feature embeddings are learned simultaneously on the base dataset
following the training procedure of Prototypical Network. In addition, to make prototypes and
feature embeddings more speciﬁc to the current task, both of them are projected into a new
classiﬁcation space via a linear projection matrix. The projection matrix is obtained by using a
linear nulling operation and does not include any learnable parameter. Luo et al. [ 78] proposed
to learn prototypes of base and novel classes simultaneously by including the support set of novel
classes in the training process. In each episode, local prototypes are generated from the sample
synthesis module, which aims to increase the diversity of novel classes. They are then used in
the registration module to update the global prototypes towards better separability. The query
image is classiﬁed by searching for the nearest neighbor among global prototypes. As both base
and novel prototypes are learned, the method can be readily applied to the generalized few-shot
learning setting. Chen et al. [ 79] shared the same aim of learning base and novel prototypes,
but additionally took advantage of the semantic correlations among these classes. A Knowledge
Graph Transfer Network (KGTN) is proposed, which employs a gated graph neural network to
represent class prototypes and correlations as nodes and edges, respectively. By propagating
through the graph, information from correlated base classes is used to guide the learning of novel
prototypes. This work is extended in [ 80] to the multi-label classiﬁcation setting, which employs
the attention mechanism and an additional graph for learning class-speciﬁc feature vectors. In [ 81],
the Shared Object Concentrator (SOC) algorithm was proposed to learn a series of prototypes
for each novel class from local features of support images. The ﬁrst prototype is learned to
have the largest cosine similarity with one of the local features, the second prototype has the
second largest value, and so forth. The query image is classiﬁed according to the weighted sum
of similarities between its local features and all prototypes, with weights decaying exponentially
to account for the decreasing inﬂuence of prototypes. Zhou et al. [ 82] proposed the Progressive
12