of the novel dataset, and used to classify instances from both base and novel classes. XtarNet
contains three meta-learners. The MetaCNN module adapts feature embeddings for each task.
The MergeNet module produces weights for mixing pre-trained features and meta-learned features.
As the classiﬁcation is performed by comparing the mixed features with class prototypes, the
TconNet module adapts prototypes of base and novel classes to improve discriminability. Rahman
et al. [55] proposed a uniﬁed approach for zero-shot learning, generalized zero-shot learning and
few-shot learning, which classiﬁes a query image based on the similarity between its semantic
representation and the textual features of each class. The semantic representation is a combination
of two parts – one is a linear combination of base samples’ semantic features, and the other one
is based on the linear mapping learned from support images.
2.1.4 Feature learning with data augmentation
Data augmentation is a strategy that expands the support set in an artiﬁcial or model-based
way with label preserving transformations, and thus is well-suited when the support samples are
limited. One commonly used method is deformation [ 56,57,58], such as cropping, padding, and
horizontal ﬂipping. Besides this, generating more training samples [ 59,60] and pseudo labels [ 61]
are also popular techniques to augment data.
In few-shot learning, there is one class of works which places the data augmentation process
into a model, that is, they embed a generator that can generate the augmented data to learn
or imagine the diversity of data. Wang et al. [ 62] constructed an end-to-end few-shot learning
method, in which the training data goes through two streams to output – one is from the original
data to the classiﬁer directly, and the other one is from the original data to a ‘hallucination’
network to augment data and then from the augmented data to classiﬁer. Zhang et al. [ 63]
developed a saliency-based data generation strategy. The Saliency Network obtains foregrounds
and backgrounds of an image, which are used to achieve the hallucination for the image.
In [64], a much simpler feature synthesis strategy is proposed, which synthesizes novel features
by perturbing the semantic representations (i.e., word vectors of class labels) and projecting them
into the visual feature space. In addition, when learning the projection function, a competitive
learning formulation is adopted to push the synthesized sample towards the center of the most
likely unseen class and away from that of the second best class.
2.1.5 Multi-task feature learning
Besides generating more training data, some works tried to exploit auxiliary information of
samples to perform multi-task learning, which creates a regularization eﬀect and helps learn
discriminative features.
As brieﬂy discussed above, TADAM [ 25] used an auxiliary task of training a normal global
classiﬁer on the base dataset to co-train the few-shot classiﬁer; the task is sampled with a
probability during the training process. Gidaris et al. [ 65] proposed a few-shot learning method
combining self-supervised learning. In speciﬁc, support samples are artiﬁcially rotated to diﬀerent
number of degrees. A shared feature embedding is learned through two branches of networks,
one for the original classiﬁcation task and the other for identifying the rotation degree. Zhu
et al. [66] suggested that base and novel classes, despite being disjoint, can be connected by
some visual attributes. Based on this insight, they used attribute learning as an auxiliary task.
Visual attributes are provided as additional information during training, and the embedding
network is learned to correctly predict both attribute labels and class labels. [ 67] also utilized
attribute information, but in a richer way which requires an additional prediction of common
and diﬀerent attributes between an image pair. Moreover, the neural architecture search was
ﬁrst introduced to few-shot learning for automatically identifying the optimal operation from
10