Motivated by the observation that the interested object may locate only in a region of an image
and at diﬀerent positions across images, a series of improvements on feature embedding have
been proposed, such as by learning local features [ 42] and encoding the position information [ 43].
The former type of methods, while can be applied to generic few-shot image classiﬁcation, are
particularly eﬀective for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation. Thus, we will discuss them separately
in the next subsection and only focus on position encoding methods here. Wu et al. [ 43] proposed
the Position-Aware Relation Network (PARN) to reduce the sensitivity of Relation Network
(which will be introduced in Section 2.3.2) to the spatial position of semantic objects. PARN
adopts deformable convolutional layers to extract more eﬀective features which ﬁlter out unrelated
information like the background, and a dual correlation attention module to incorporate each
spatial position of an image with the global information about the compared image and the
image itself, so that the subsequent convolution operations, even subject to local connectivity,
can perceive and compare semantic features in diﬀerent positions. Compared with standard
ways of overcoming position sensitivity, such as by using larger kernels or more layers, PARN is
more parameter eﬃcient. Xu et al. [ 44] proposed the ConstellationNet which extracts part-based
features and encodes the spatial relationship between these representations by using self-attention
with an explicit, learnable positional encoding. The spatial relationship between diﬀerent parts
of the image has also been encoded in [45] by using a capsule network.
2.1.2 Learning task-agnostic features for ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation
Fine-grained image classiﬁcation aims to distinguish diﬀerent sub-categories under the same
basic-level category. It is particularly challenging due to the subtle diﬀerences between diﬀerent
sub-categories and large variance in the same sub-category which may result from variations in
the object’s pose, scale, rotation, etc. Therefore, for eﬀective classiﬁcation, several methods have
been proposed to extract local features, multi-scale features, and second-order features.
In deep nearest neighbor neural network (DN4) [ 42], the feature embedding module extracts
multiple local descriptors from an image, which are essentially the feature maps learned via
CNNs prior to adding the ﬁnal image-level pooling layer. The classiﬁcation is performed at an
image-to-class level, meaning that the local descriptors from support images of the same class are
put into one pool, kNNs in each class pool are searched for each query local descriptor, and the
total distance over all local descriptors and kNNs is the distance between the query image and the
corresponding class. The method is shown to be particularly eﬀective on ﬁne-grained datasets,
and the idea of learning local descriptors has been adopted in other ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation
methods [ 46]. The Adaptive Task-aware Local representations Network (ATL-Net) [ 47] improved
DN4 by selecting local descriptors with learned thresholds and assigning them diﬀerent weights
based on episodic attention, which brings more ﬂexibility than using kNNs and adjusts for the
discriminability between classes, respectively. In contrast to learning one feature embedding over
spatially local patches, COMET [ 48] learns multiple embedding functions over various parts of
input features. A set of ﬁxed binary masks, termed concepts, are applied to input features to
separate an image into human-interpretable segments. For each concept, a feature embedding is
learned to map masked features into a new discriminative feature space. The query image is
classiﬁed according to the distances aggregated from all concept-speciﬁc spaces.
The Multi-Scale Metric Learning (MSML) network [ 49] also constructs multiple feature
embeddings, but diﬀerent from COMET, each embedding corresponds to a diﬀerent scale of the
image. The similarity between support and query features at each scale is computed using the
Relation Network.
Huang et al. [ 46] proposed the Low-Rank Pairwise Alignment Bilinear Network (LRPABN)
which aligns features spatially and extracts discriminative, second-order features. After learning
8