this review in Section 4.
1 The Framework of Few-Shot Image Classiﬁcation
1.1 Notation and deﬁnitions
Weﬁrstestablishthenotationandgiveauniﬁeddeﬁnitionofvarioustypesoffew-shotclassiﬁcation
by generalizing the deﬁnition of few-shot learning [12].
Few-shot classiﬁcation involves two datasets, base dataset andnovel dataset . The novel
dataset is the dataset on which the classiﬁcation task is performed. The base dataset is an
auxiliary dataset used to facilitate the learning of the classiﬁer by transferring knowledge. We
useDbase=f(Xi; Yi);Xi2Xbase; Yi2YbasegNbase
i=1to denote the base dataset, where Yiis the
class label of instance Xi; in the case of image classiﬁcation, Xidenotes the feature vector of
theith image. The novel dataset is denoted similarly by Dnovel =f(~Xj;~Yj);~Xj2Xnovel;~Yj2
YnovelgNnovel
j=1.DbaseandDnovelhave no overlap in the label space , i.e.,Ybase\Ynovel =;.
To train and test the classiﬁer, we split Dnovelinto the support set DSand the query set DQ.
Deﬁnition 1. Suppose the support set DSis available, and the sample size of each class in
DSis very small (e.g., from 1 to 5). The few-shot classiﬁcation task aims to learn from DS
a classiﬁer f:Xnovel!Y novelthat can correctly classify instances in the query set DQ. In
particular, if DScontains Cclasses and Klabeled examples per class, the task is called C-way
K-shot classiﬁcation ; if the sample size of each class in DSis one, then the task is called
one-shot classiﬁcation .
Before presenting the next deﬁnition, we introduce the concept of domain. A domainconsists
of two components, namely a feature space Xand a marginal distribution P(X)overX[18].
Deﬁnition 2. A few-shot classiﬁcation task is called cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation
if the base dataset and the novel dataset come from two diﬀerent domains, i.e., Xbase6=Xnovelor
P(X)6=P(~X), where X2Xbaseand ~X2Xnovel.
Deﬁnition 3. Thegeneralized few-shot classiﬁcation task aims to learn a classiﬁer f:
Xnovel[Xbase!Y novel[Ybasethat can correctly classify instances in the query set DQ, where
DQincludes instance-label pairs from Dbasein addition to existing pairs from Dnovel.
1.2 Evaluation procedure of few-shot classiﬁcation
We provide a general procedure to evaluate the performance of a classiﬁer for C-way K-shot
classiﬁcation in Algorithm 1. The evaluation procedure includes many episodes (i.e., tasks). In
each episode, we ﬁrst randomly select Cclasses from the novel label set, and then randomly select
Ksamples from each of the Cclasses to form a support set and Msamples from the remaining
samples of those Cclasses to form a query set. Let X(e)andY(e)denote the set of instances and
the set of labels in the query set at the eth episode, respectively. A learning algorithm returns a
classiﬁer f(jDbase;D(e)
S)upon receiving the base dataset and the eth support set, which predicts
labels of query instances as ^Y(e)=f(X(e)jDbase;D(e)
S). Let a(e)denote the classiﬁcation accuracy
on the eth episode. The performance of a learning algorithm is measured by the classiﬁcation
accuracy averaged over all episodes.
3