max pooling, convolution, identity mapping, etc for layers in the feature embedding network and
attribute learning network.
2.2 Learning class representations
Early few-shot metric learning methods such as Siamese Network and Matching Network classify
a query sample by measuring and comparing its distance to support samples. However, since
support samples are scarce, they have limited capacity in representing the novel class. To alleviate
this issue, some researchers propose to use class prototypes, which serve as reference vectors
for each class. Prototypes can be constructed by taking simple or weighted average of feature
embeddings, or learned in an end-to-end manner so as to further improve their representation
ability. Besides point-based prototypes, some works consider the distribution of each class or use
subspaces as class representations.
2.2.1 Feature embeddings-based prototypes
Prototypical Network [ 68] is a classical method that performs classiﬁcation by calculating the
Euclidean distance to class prototypes in the learned embedding space. It builds on the hypothesis
that there exists an embedding space in which each class can be represented by a single prototype
and all instances cluster around the prototype of their corresponding classes. In [ 68], the
prototype of each class is set as the mean of feature embeddings of support samples in the class.
Feature embeddings, and thus class prototypes, are learned using episodic training with the
objective of minimizing the cross entropy loss. In [ 69], the class prototype is represented using
the covariance matrix of feature embeddings. A covariance-based metric is also proposed to
measure the similarity between the query and the class.
To make use of both labeled support samples and unlabeled samples, Ren et al. [ 22] proposed
semi-supervised Prototypical Network, which is the ﬁrst work of semi-supervised few-shot learning.
The method adopts soft k-means to compute assignment score of unlabeled samples and computes
the prototype as the mean of weighted samples based on assignment scores.
Considering that the dataset may exhibit multi-modality and multiple prototypes would be
more suitable in this scenario, Inﬁnite Mixture Prototypes (IMP) [ 70] modeled multiple clusters
in each class, and each cluster is modeled as a Gaussian distribution. Concretely, the probability
that a sample follows the Gaussian distribution of each cluster determines which cluster the
sample is assigned into. Moreover, the cluster variance of the Gaussian distributions, which needs
to be learned, can aﬀect the number of class prototype and performance of IMP.
Wu et al. [ 45] proposed to compute query-dependent prototypes. An attentive prototype is
computed for each query as the weighted average of support samples and the weights are given by
the Gaussian kernel with the Euclidean distance between the query and the support samples. As
support samples that are more relevant to the query have greater inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation,
the method is more robust to outliers in support samples. Query-dependent prototypes have
also been studied in CrossTransformers (CTX) [ 71], but they are computed separately for each
spatial location. In other words, a local region of a query image is compared with an attentive
prototype speciﬁc to this query and region, and the overall distance between the query and the
prototype is the averaged distances over all local regions. Moreover, self-supervised episodes are
constructed to train CTX.
Lu et al. [ 72] focused on enhancing the robustness of prototypes against outliers and label
noises and proposed the Robust attentive proﬁle Networks (RapNets). The network transforms
raw feature embeddings into correlation features in a nonparametric way, and then inputs these
features into a parametric bidirectional LSTM and fully-connected network to generate attention
scores which serve as weights to combine support images. Moreover, training episodes are revised
11