of Conditional Neural Adaptive Processes (CNAPS) [ 30], the classiﬁcation is performed based
on the Mahalanobis distance between query instances and class prototypes. Task-speciﬁc class-
speciﬁc covariance matrices are estimated as convex combinations of sample covariance matrices
estimated from instances of the task and instances of the class, regularized toward an identity
matrix. Transductive Episodic-wise Adaptive Metric (TEAM) [ 89] learned task-speciﬁc metric
from support and query samples. TEAM contains three modules, namely a feature extractor,
a task-speciﬁc metric module, and a similarity computation module. The task-speciﬁc metric
module learns a Mahalanobis distance to shrink the distance between similar pairs and enlarge
the distance between dissimilar pairs, following the objective function of the pioneering metric
learning method [33].
Nguyen et al. [ 90] proposed a dissimilarity measure termed SEN, which combines the Euclidean
distance and the diﬀerence in the L2-norm. Minimizing this measure will encourage feature
normalization and consequently beneﬁt the classiﬁcation performance [ 91]. DeepEMD [ 92]
combined a structural distance over dense image representations, Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD)
and convolutional feature embedding to conduct few-shot learning. The optimal matching ﬂow
parameters in EMD and the parameters in the feature embedding are trained in an end-to-end
fashion. Xie et al. [ 93] introduced the Brownian Distance Covariance (BDC) metric, a new
distance measure founded on the characteristic function of random vectors. The metric has a
closed-form expression for discrete feature vectors and can be computed easily by ﬁrst computing
the BDC matrix for every image and then calculating the inner product between two BDC
matrices. The computation of BDC matrices also only involves standard matrix operations
and can be formulated as a pooling layer, thus endowing the method with high computational
eﬃciency and ease of integrating with other few-shot classiﬁcation methods.
2.3.2 Learning similarity scores via neural networks
The Relation Network [ 12] is the ﬁrst work of introducing a neural network to model the similarity
of feature embeddings in few-shot learning. It consists of an embedding module and a relation
module. The embedding module builds on convolutional blocks for mapping original images
into an embedding space, and the relation module consists of two convolutional blocks and two
fully-connected layers for computing the similarity between each pair of support and query images.
The learnable similarity measure enhances the model ﬂexibility. Li et al. [ 94] pointed out that a
single similarity measure may not be suﬃcient to learn discriminative features for ﬁne-grained
image classiﬁcation and thus proposed the Bi-Similarity Network (BSNet) which complements
the relation module by a cosine module, forcing features to adapt to two similarity measures
of diverse characteristics and consequently generating a more compact feature space. Relation
Network and subsequent methods all use class labels to form binary supervision, indicating
whether the image pair comes from the same class. Zhang et al. [ 95] argued that such binary
relations are not suﬃcient to capture the similarity nuance in the real-world setting and therefore
proposed a new method termed Absolute-relative Learning (ArL) which, in addition to binary
relations, constructs continuous-valued relations from attributes of images, such as colors and
textures.
Diﬀerent from Relation Network, Semantic Alignment Metric Learning (SAML) [ 96] adopted
the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) network for computing the similarity score. Speciﬁcally,
SAML contains a feature embedding module and a semantic alignment module. In the semantic
alignment module, a relation matrix at the level of local features is ﬁrst computed by using
ﬁxed similarity measures and an attention mechanism, and then fed into a MLP network which
outputs the similarity score between the query and the support class.
Recently, some researchers adopt Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to implement few-shot
14