Hierarchical Reﬁnement (PHR) method to update prototypes iteratively using all novel data. In
each iteration, support images and a random subset of query images are embedded into features
at local, global and semantic levels, and a loss function deﬁned over these hierarchical features is
used to reﬁne prototypes for better inter-class separability. As each update is based on a random
subset of queries, the method is less likely to overﬁt to noisy query samples, though it implicitly
assumes the availability of a large number of queries.
Sun et al. [ 83] proposed to treat prototypes as random variables. The posterior distributions
of latent class prototypes are learned by using amortized variational inference, a technique
which enables prototype learning to be formulated as a probabilistic generative model without
encountering severe computational and inferential diﬃculties.
2.2.3 Distribution or subspace-based representations
Considering that single point-based metric learning is sensitive to noise, Zhang et al. [ 84] proposed
a variational Bayesian framework for few-shot learning and used the Kullback-Leibler divergence
to measure the distance of samples. The framework can compute the conﬁdence that a query
image is assigned into each class by estimating the distribution of each class based on a neural
network.
Simon et al. [ 85] proposed Deep Subspace Network (DSN) to represent each class using a
low-dimensional subspace, constructed from support samples via singular value decomposition.
Query samples are classiﬁed according to the nearest subspace classiﬁer, that is to assign the
query to the class which has the shortest Euclidean distance between the query and its projection
onto the class-speciﬁc subspace. The method is shown to be more robust to noises and outliers
than Prototoypical Network.
2.3 Learning distance or similarity measures
Methods reviewed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2 focus on learning a discriminative feature embedding
or obtaining an accurate class representation. For classiﬁcation, they mostly adopt a ﬁxed
distance or similarity measure, such as the Euclidean distance [ 68] and the cosine similarity [ 7].
More recently, researchers propose to learn parameters in these ﬁxed measures or deﬁne novel
measures so as to further improve the classiﬁcation accuracy. Moreover, considerable eﬀort has
been made to learn similarity scores by using fully-connected neural networks or Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs).
2.3.1 Learning or selecting an analytical distance or similarity measure
In TADAM [ 25], Oreshkin et al. mathematically analyzed the eﬀect of metric scaling on the loss
function. Since then, many works tune the scaling parameter via cross-validation [ 47,86]. Zhu
et al. [87] proposed to use two diﬀerent scaling parameters for the ground-truth class and other
classes to enforce the same-class distance is much smaller than the diﬀerent-classes distance.
Moreover, the scaling parameters are gradually tuned every few episodes, which implements the
idea of self-paced learning to learn from easy to hard. Chen et al. [ 88] proposed to learn the
scaling parameter in a Bayesian framework. By assuming a univariate or multivariate Gaussian
prior and applying the stochastic variational inference technique for approximating the posterior
distribution, a scaling parameter or a scaling vector can be learned respectively, which scales
the distance equally over all dimensions or diﬀerently for each dimension. Task-speciﬁc scaling
vectors can also be learned by learning a neural network from the task to variational parameters.
The traditional Mahalanobis distance decorrelates and scales features using the inverse of
the covariance matrix. In Simple CNAPS [ 31], after extracting features using the architecture
13