convolutional layers as the sub-network to extract high-level features from two images and
employed the weighted L1distance as the distance between the two feature vectors. Weights
of the network, as well as those of component-wise distance, are trained using the conventional
technique of mini-batch gradient descent.
The Matching Network [ 7] encoded support and query images using diﬀerent networks in the
context of the entire support set, and it ﬁrst introduced episodic training to few-shot classiﬁcation.
A support image is embedded via a bidirectional LSTM network, which takes account of not only
the image itself but also other images in the set; a query image is embedded via an LSTM with
an attention mechanism to enable dependency on the support set. However, the sequential nature
of bidirectional LSTM results in feature embeddings that will change with diﬀerent ordering
of samples in the support set. This issue can be sidestepped, such as by applying a pooling
operation [ 35] or using self-attention [ 36]. The classiﬁcation mechanism of Matching Network is
suitable for few-shot learning. The network outputs a label distribution by computing a convex
combination of one-hot label vectors of all support samples, with coeﬃcients deﬁned by using a
softmax over cosine similarities; the class with the highest probability is selected as the predicted
class. Another valuable contribution of [ 7] is the episode-based training strategy, which has been
adopted by many subsequent works. Following the idea of meta-learning, the training phase on
the base dataset should mimic the prediction phase where only few support samples are available.
That is, gradient updates should be performed on episodes with Cclasses randomly sampled
from the base label set and Kexamples for each class.
The episodic training strategy closes the gap between training and test distributions and thus
alleviates the issue of overﬁtting to few labeled training images. This can also be addressed from
a diﬀerent perspective by utilizing query instances (i.e., excluding query labels) via transductive
inference. Transductive Propagation Network (TPN) [ 37] is the ﬁrst work adopting transductive
inference for few-shot learning and introduced the idea of label propagation. Concretely, the
network contains a feature embedding module and a graph construction module. The graph
construction module, taking feature embeddings as inputs, learns a label propagation graph
to exploit the manifold structure of support and query samples. In particular, a kNN graph
is constructed according to the Gaussian kernel whose length-scale parameters are learned in
an example-wise manner. Based on the graph, labels are propagated from the support set to
the query set; a closed-form solution of label propagation is used to speed up the prediction
procedure. The Poisson Transfer Network (PTN) [ 38] improved the label propagation scheme by
applying the Poisson learning algorithm [ 39], which has been theoretically proved to be more
stable and informative, especially in the case of very few labels. PTN is primarily designed for
semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁcation with additional unlabeled data than query samples, and it
further enhances the feature embeddings through contrastive self-supervised learning and reﬁnes
the inference procedure by using a graph-cut method.
The aforementioned methods, designed for classifying novel data from the same domain,
degrade when novel data comes from diﬀerent domains [ 27]. Tseng et al. [ 40] noticed that this
is caused by the large discrepancy between the feature distributions in diﬀerent domains and
proposed to simulate various feature distributions in the training stage as a general solution to
enhancethedomaingeneralizationabilityofmetriclearningmethods. Thisisachievedbyinserting
multiple feature-wise transformation layers into the feature extractor; each transformation
simulates one distribution, and the hyperparameters of aﬃne transformations can be tuned
via a meta-learning approach so that they are optimal to a particular metric learning method
and capture the complex variation in feature distributions. Li et al. [ 41] proposed to learn a
universal feature representation that works well for multiple domains. The technique of knowledge
distillation is applied, where a multi-domain network is learned to generate universal features
which align with features from multiple single-domain networks up to a linear transformation.
7