labeled samples or class representations; samples of the same class are expected to locate close
together in the embedding space and samples of diﬀerent classes should be far apart. Note that
the above methods can be applied simultaneously, for example learning feature embeddings of
metric learning methods by using a meta-learning strategy [7].
In this paper, we present a review of recent deep metric learning methods for few-shot image
classiﬁcation. Metric learning methods deserve special attention as they do not require learning
additional parameters for new classes once the metric is learned, and thus able to avoid overﬁtting
to the few labeled samples of new classes in few-shot learning. They have also demonstrated
impressive classiﬁcation performance on benchmark datasets. Moreover, in this review we
decouple metric learning into three learning stages, namely learning feature embeddings, learning
class representations, and learning distance measures. Such decomposition facilitates exchange
of ideas between researchers from two underpinning communities: few-shot image classiﬁcation
and deep metric learning. For example, latest developments in learning generalizable feature
embeddings can be adopted for few-shot image classiﬁcation, and the idea of learning prototypes,
one type of class representations, can be extended for long-tailed visual recognition [13].
A number of surveys on few-shot learning (FSL) have been published or preprinted. [ 14] is the
ﬁrst survey on small sample learning, summarizing methods for diﬀerent small sample learning
scenarios, including zero-shot learning and FSL, and for various tasks, such as image classiﬁcation,
object detection, visual question answering, and neural machine translation. Since the survey was
conducted early in 2018, it includes relatively limited work on few-shot classiﬁcation, particularly
metric learning methods. [ 15] provides the ﬁrst comprehensive review on FSL. In addition
to deﬁning FSL and distinguishing it from related machine learning problems, the authors
discuss FSL from the fundamental perspective of error decomposition in supervised learning
and classify all methods in terms of augmenting the training data for reducing the estimation
error, learning models from prior knowledge for constraining the hypothesis space and reducing
the approximation error, and learning initializations or optimizers which improve the search
for the optimal hypothesis within the hypothesis space. The survey has limited coverage on
metric learning methods and categorize them all under learning embedding models, which does
not fully describe the merits of these methods. [ 16] is another comprehensive survey, reviewing
literature over a long period from the 2000s to 2020 as well as summarizing applications of FSL
in various ﬁelds. It includes early, non-deep approaches of metric learning methods and, since the
survey emphasizes on meta-learning methods, categorizes most recent, deep approaches under
meta-learning as learning-to-measure. Compared with [ 16] which links diﬀerent meta-learning
metric learning methods to three classical methods, our review provides a deeper insight into
how metric learning methods evolve in order to generalize better and be more applicable in the
settings that mimic the reality more closely. Moreover, the rapid development of FSL leads to
a considerable amount of methods proposed since the publications of [ 15] and [16]. These new
approaches have been discussed in this review. [ 17] is the latest review on FSL published in
2021, but it is entirely devoted to meta-learning approaches and has very little overlap with our
work. In short, this paper provides an up-to-date review of deep metric learning methods for
few-shot image classiﬁcation and a careful examination of diﬀerent components of these methods
to understand their strengths and limitations.
The rest of this review is organized as follows. Firstly for completeness, in Section 1 we give
the deﬁnition of few-shot classiﬁcation and introduce the evaluation procedure and commonly
used datasets. Secondly, in Section 2 we review classical few-shot metric learning algorithms
and recent inﬂuential works published from 2018 to 2022. In the light of the procedure of
metric learning, these methods are classiﬁed into learning feature embeddings, learning class
representations, and learning distance or similarity measures. Finally, we discuss some remaining
challenges in existing methods and directions for further developments in Section 3 and conclude
2