classiﬁcation. Like the above reviewed works, GNN-based methods also use a neural network to
model the similarity measure, while its advantage lies in the rich relational structure on samples
[97]. Garcia et al. [ 98] proposed the ﬁrst GNN-based neural network for few-shot learning, short
for GNN-FSL here. It contains two modules, a feature embedding module and a GNN module.
In the GNN module, a node represents a sample, and more speciﬁcally, equals the concatenation
of features of the sample and its label. For a query sample, its initial label in the ﬁrst GNN layer
uses uniform distribution over K-simplex ( Kis number of classes in few-shot learning), and its
predicted label in the last GNN layer is used for computing the loss function.
Like GNN-FSL, Edge-labeling Graph Neural Network (EGNN) [ 97] also contains a feature
embedding module and a GNN module with three layers. However, rather than labeling nodes,
EGNN learns to label edges in GNN layers so that it can cluster samples explicitly by employing
the intra-cluster similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity. In EGNN, each GNN layer has its
own loss function that is computed based on edge values in the layer, and the total loss is the
weighted sum of loss functions of all GNN layers. The Transductive Relation-Propagation graph
neural Network (TRPN) [ 99] explicitly modeled the relation of support-query pairs by treating
them as graph nodes. After relation propagation, a similarity function is learned to map the
updated node to a similarity score, which represents the probability that the support and query
samples are of the same class. The class with the highest sum of scores is the predicted class. The
Hierarchical Graph Neural Network (HGNN) [ 100], aimed at modeling the hierarchical structure
within classes, ﬁrst down-samples support nodes to build a hierarchy of graphs and then performs
up-sampling to reconstruct all support nodes for prediction.
The previous GNN-based methods focus simply on the relation between a pair of samples. In
Distribution Propagation Graph Network (DPGN) [ 101], the global relation between a sample and
all support samples is considered by generating a distribution feature from the similarity vector. A
dual complete graph is built to proceed sample-level and distribution-level features independently,
and a cyclic update policy is used to propagate between the two graphs. Information from the
distribution graph reﬁnes sample-level node features and hence improves the classiﬁcation based
on their edge similarities.
3 Challenges and Future Directions
Even though few-shot metric learning methods have achieved the promising performance, there
remains several important challenges that need to be dealt with in the future.
1. Improving generalized feature learning on few samples Regarding feature learning,
in the existing few-shot metric learning methods, or even in the entire few-shot learning methods,
researchers mostly try to learn discriminative feature based on the attention mechanism, data
augmentation, multi-task learning and so on. To learn feature with good generalization ability
from few labeled examples, new ways of evaluation and feature learning need to be developed.
2. Rethinking the use of episodic training strategy While episodic training is a common
practice to train metric learning methods in the few-shot learning setting, it is rigid to require
each training episode to have the same number of classes and images as the evaluation episode;
in fact, [ 68] observed the beneﬁt of training with a larger number of classes. Moreover, the
model gets updated after receiving an episode without regard to its quality and thus is prone
to poorly sampled images like outliers. [ 102] is the ﬁrst attempt to alleviate this problem by
exploiting the relationship between episodes; more solutions are needed to identify episodes that
are high-quality and useful to the novel task. Furthermore, we notice that episodic training can
result in models that underﬁt the base dataset. One possible reason is that, by using episodic
15