ﬁrst-order features from base images, the method trains a two-layer Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
network with two designed feature alignment losses to transform the positions of image features
of a query image to match those of a support image, and designs a low-rank pairwise bilinear
pooling layer which adapts the self-bilinear pooling [ 50] to extract second-order features from a
pair of support and query images. The classiﬁcation is performed as in the Relation Network. In
the follow-up work, [ 51] improves the spatial alignment part by using the cross-channel attention
to generate spatially matched support and query features and groups features in the convolutional
channel dimension before the pooling layer as each group corresponds to a semantic concept.
2.1.3 Learning task-speciﬁc features
Methods reviewed in the preceding sections generate the same feature embedding for an image,
regardless of the subsequent classiﬁcation task. While this avoids the risk of overﬁtting, these
generic features may not be suﬃciently discriminative to distinguish novel classes. To this end,
task-speciﬁc embedding models have been proposed to adapt features to the particular task; it
should be noted that the adaptation is learned on the base dataset and does not involve any
re-training on the novel dataset.
TADAM [ 25] is the ﬁrst metric learning method which explicitly performs task adaptation.
Exploiting the technique of conditional batch normalization, it applies a task-speciﬁc aﬃne
transformation to each convolutional layer of a task-agnostic feature extractor. The task is
represented by the mean of class prototypes, and the scale and shift parameters of the aﬃne
transformation are generated from a separate network, called the Task Embedding Network
(TEN). As TEN introduces more parameters and causes diﬃculty in optimization, the training
scheme is revised to add the standard training, i.e., to distinguish all classes in the base dataset,
as an auxiliary task to the episodic training.
Li et al. [ 35] proposed a meta-learning approach that can adapt weights of Matching Network
to novel data. The proposed LGM-Net consists of a meta-learner termed MetaNet and a task-
speciﬁc learner termed TargetNet. The MetaNet module learns to produce a representation of
each task from the support set and construct a mapping from the representation to weights of
TargetNet. The TargetNet module, set as the Matching Network, embeds support and query
images and performs classiﬁcation. The proposed meta-learning strategy can be potentially
implemented to adapt network parameters of other metric learning methods. Wu et al. [ 52] also
proposed to learn task-speciﬁc parameters, but they combined the idea with local features. The
proposed Task-aware Part Mining Network (TPMN) learns to generate parameters of ﬁlters used
for extracting part-based features.
Diﬀerent from the above two works which generate parameters for task-speciﬁc embedding
layers, Li et al. [ 53] proposed to modify the generic features output from the task-agnostic
embedding layers. A task-speciﬁc feature mask is generated from the Category Traversal Module
(CTM), which includes a concentrator unit and a projector unit to extract features for intra-
class commonality and inter-class uniqueness, respectively. It is noted that CTM can be easily
embedded into most few-shot metric learning methods, such as Matching Network, Prototypical
Network, and Relation Network; the latter two methods will be introduced in the following
sections. Ye et al. [ 36] also proposed to adjust features directly, but instead of applying a
mask, set-to-set functions are used to transform a set of task-agnostic features into a set of
task-speciﬁc ones. These functions can model interactions between images in a set and hence
enable co-adaptation of each image. Four set-to-set function approximators are presented in [ 36],
and the one with Transformer, termed FEAT, is shown to be most eﬀective.
Yoon et al. [ 54] proposed XtarNet to learn task-speciﬁc features for a new setting of generalized
few-shot learning, where the model is trained on the base dataset, adapted given the support set
9