Deep Metric Learning for Few-Shot Image Classiﬁcation:
A Review of Recent Developments
Xiaoxu Li∗1,2, Xiaochen Yang3, Zhanyu Ma†2, and Jing-Hao Xue4
1School of Computer and Communication, Lanzhou University of Technology, China.
2Pattern Recognition and Intelligent System Laboratory, School of Information and
Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China.
3School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Glasgow, UK.
4Department of Statistical Science, University College London, UK.
Abstract
Few-shot image classiﬁcation is a challenging problem that aims to achieve the human
level of recognition based only on a small number of training images. One main solution to
few-shot image classiﬁcation is deep metric learning. These methods, by classifying unseen
samples according to their distances to few seen samples in an embedding space learned by
powerful deep neural networks, can avoid overﬁtting to few training images in few-shot image
classiﬁcation and have achieved the state-of-the-art performance. In this paper, we provide
an up-to-date review of deep metric learning methods for few-shot image classiﬁcation from
2018 to 2022 and categorize them into three groups according to three stages of metric
learning, namely learning feature embeddings, learning class representations, and learning
distance measures. With this taxonomy, we identify the novelties of diﬀerent methods and
problems they face. We conclude this review with a discussion on current challenges and
future trends in few-shot image classiﬁcation.
Image classiﬁcation is an important task in machine learning and computer vision. With
the rapid development of deep learning, recent years have witnessed breakthroughs in this
area [1,2,3,4]. Such progress, however, hinges on collecting and labeling a vast amount of data
(in the order of millions), which can be diﬃcult and costly. More severely, this learning mechanism
is in stark contrast with that of humans, where one or few examples suﬃce for learning a new
concept [ 5]. Therefore, to reduce the data requirement and imitate human intelligence, many
researchers started to focus on few-shot classiﬁcation [ 6,7,8], i.e., learning a classiﬁcation rule
from few (typically 1-5) labeled examples.
The biggest challenge in few-shot classiﬁcation is a high risk of model overﬁtting to the
few labeled training samples. To alleviate this problem, researchers have proposed various
approaches, such as meta-learning methods, transfer learning methods, and metric learning
methods. Meta-learning methods train a meta-learner on many diﬀerent classiﬁcation tasks to
extract generalizable knowledge, which enables rapid learning on a new related task with few
examples [ 7,9]. Transfer learning methods presume shared knowledge between the source and
target domains, and ﬁne-tune the model trained on abundant source data to ﬁt few labeled target
samples [ 10,11]. Metric learning methods learn feature embeddings [ 6] and/or distance measures
(or inversely, similarity measures) [ 12] and classify an unseen sample based on its distance to
∗Equal contribution
†Corresponding author: Zhanyu Ma (email: mazhanyu@bupt.edu.cn)
1arXiv:2105.08149v2  [cs.CV]  27 Jun 2022