training, methods adopt continual learning on plenty of tasks sampled from the base dataset
and suﬀer from catastrophic forgetting [ 103,104], i.e., the model learned from previous tasks
is supplanted after learning on a new task. Therefore, how to avoid this problem and enhance
the model ﬁtting ability of metric learning methods on both base and novel datasets remains a
challenge.
3. Enhancing stability to support samples and robustness to adversarial perturba-
tions and distribution shifts Despite the continuous improvement in classiﬁcation accuracy,
few-shot classiﬁcation methods are vulnerable in various scenarios, hindering their usage in
safety-critical applications such as medical image analysis. Prior works show that existing
methods are non-robust to input or label outliers [ 72], adversarial perturbations (i.e., small,
visually imperceptible changes of data that fool the classiﬁer to make incorrect predictions)
added to support [ 105] or query images [ 106], and distribution shift between support and query
datasets [ 107]. In [108], it is demonstrated that even non-perturbed and in-distribution support
images can signiﬁcantly deteriorate the classiﬁcation accuracy of several popular methods. Fur-
ther exploration of vulnerability in existing approaches and design of robust and stable models
will be very valuable.
4. Developing metric learning methods for cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation
While base and novel datasets may come from diﬀerent domains in practice, currently only few
works focus on cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation. More recently and severely, [ 109] reported
that all meta-trained methods, including the reviewed work [ 40], are outperformed by the simple
transductive ﬁne-tuning in the presence of a large domain shift, speciﬁcally, when training on
natural images and evaluating beyond them, such as on agriculture and satellite images. The
diﬃculty is that the base data and the novel data usually have diﬀerent metric spaces. Therefore,
how to alleviate domain shift between the training and evaluation phases needs to be explored in
the future.
4 Conclusions
This paper presents a review of recent few-shot deep metric learning methods. We provide the
deﬁnitions and a general evaluation framework for few-shot learning, then categorize and review
representative approaches, and ﬁnally summarize the main challenges. Based on these challenges,
several new directions can be further explored in the future.
References
[1]A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep convolu-
tional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 1097–
1105, 2012.
[2]K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014.
[3]C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke,
and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,” in IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 1–9, 2015.
[4]J. Gu, Z. Wang, J. Kuen, L. Ma, A. Shahroudy, B. Shuai, T. Liu, X. Wang, and G. Wang,
“Recent advances in convolutional neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.07108 , 2015.
16