18
region. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst step aims to reduce the total
computation workload of the network while the second step
aims to compress the intermediate data for transmission.
Coded computing for cooperative edge inference: Cod-
ing theory can be leveraged to address the communication
challenges of distributed inference in edge AI systems. For
example, Zhang and Simeone [136] considered distributed
linear inference in mobile edge AI system, where the model
is partitioned among several edge devices that compute the
inference results cooperatively for each device. It was shown
in [136] that coding is efﬁcient in reducing the overall
computation-plus-communication latency.
E. General Edge Computing System
Beyond the edge AI system architectures mentioned above,
there are also edge AI systems based on a general computing
paradigm, namely, MapReduce. MapReduce [188] is a general
distributed computing framework that is able to achieve paral-
lel speedups on a variety of machine learning problems during
training and inference procedures [213]. The MapReduce-like
distributed computing framework takes the distributed data
input and distributed model deployment into account jointly.
In [214], the convolutional neural network was implemented
based on the MapReduce framework to accelerate its training
process. Ghoting et al. [215] proposed SystemML based on
the MapReduce framework to support distributed training
for a broad class of supervised and unsupervised machine
learning algorithms. [30] proposed a communication-efﬁcient
wireless data shufﬂing strategy for supporting MapReduce-
based distributed inference tasks.
Dataset
Split
node 1 node 2 node
Fig. 7. MapReduce computation model [30].
In the MapReduce-like distributed computing framework as
shown in Fig. 7, there are generally three phases (i.e., a map
phase, a shufﬂe phase, and a reduce phase) to complete a
computational task. In the map phase, every computing node
computes a map function of the assigned data simultaneously,generating a number of intermediate values. In the shufﬂe
phase, nodes communicate with each other to obtain some
intermediate values for computing the output function. Subse-
quently, in the reduce phase, each node computes the assigned
output function according to the available intermediate values.
However, there are two main bottlenecks in such a distributed
computing framework. One is the heavy communication load
in the shufﬂe phase, and another is the straggler delay caused
by the variability of computation times at different nodes.
To address these problems, coding has been proposed as a
promising approach by exploiting abundant computing re-
sources at the network edge [137]. In recent years, coding
techniques are becoming a hot area of research for reducing the
communication cost of data shufﬂing, as well as reducing the
computing latency by mitigating straggler nodes, as reviewed
below.
Coding techniques for efﬁcient data shufﬂing: Coding
techniques for shufﬂing data in the MapReduce-like distributed
computing framework were ﬁrst proposed in [138], which
considered a wireline scenario where each computing node
can obtain the intermediate values from other nodes through
a shared link. In [29], the authors extended the work in
[138] to a wireless setting, where the computing nodes are
able to communicate with each other via an access point.
A scalable data shufﬂing scheme was proposed by utilizing
a particular repetitive pattern of placing intermediate values
among devices, reducing the communication bandwidth by
factors that grow linearly with the number of devices. To
improve the wireless communication efﬁciency (i.e., achieved
data rates) in the data shufﬂe phase, a low-rank optimization
model was proposed in [30] by establishing the interference
alignment condition. The low-rank model is further solved
by an efﬁcient difference-of-convex-functions (DC) algorithm.
Both [29] and [30] considered the communication load min-
imization problem under the wireless communication setting
with a central node.
There are also some works considering the problem of
reducing the communication load in data shufﬂing under
the wireless communication scenario without a coordinating
center. That is, the computing nodes can communicate with
each other through an shared wireless interference channel.
For example, assuming perfect channel state information, a
beamforming strategy was proposed in [139] based on side
information cancellation and zero-forcing to trade the abundant
computing nodes for reducing communication load, which
outperforms the coded TDMA broadcast scheme based on
[138]. This work was further extended in [140] to consider
imperfect channel state information. The paper [141] proposed
a dataset cache strategy and a coded transmission strategy for
the corresponding computing results. The goal is to minimize
the communication load characterized by latency (in seconds)
instead of channel uses (in bits), which is more practical in
wireless networks. In [142], the authors noted that to trade
abundant computation for the communication load, the compu-
tational tasks must be divided into an extremely large number
of subtasks, which is impractical. Therefore, they proposed to
ameliorate this limitation by node cooperation and designed