2
Fig. 1. Illustration of edge AI including edge training and edge inference.
ware resources of edge devices. A promising solution is to
incorporate cooperation among edge nodes to accomplish
edge AI tasks that require intensive computation and large
storage sizes. This can be achieved by exploiting different
data storage and processing capabilities for a wider range
of intelligent services with distinct latency and bandwidth
requirements [14], as shown in Fig. 1. For example, based
on federated learning [15], we can use multiple devices to
train an AI model collaboratively. Speciﬁcally, each device
only needs to compute a local model according to its own
data samples, before sending the computation results to a
fusion center, where the global AI model is aggregated and
updated. The new AI model will be transmitted back to each
device for training at the next epoch. Such solutions exploit
on-device computing power in a collaborative way, which,
however, requires signiﬁcant communication overheads during
the model updating process. In addition, some computation-
intensive AI inference tasks can only be accomplished by task-
splitting among edge devices and edge servers [16], which also
incurs heavy communication cost. Therefore, the enormous
communication overhead presents a major bottleneck for edge
AI.
To unleash its full potential, the upcoming edge AI [9], [17]
shall rely on advances in various aspects, including the smart
design of distributed learning algorithms and system architec-
tures, supported by efﬁcient communication protocols. In this
article, we survey the communication challenges in designing
and deploying AI models and algorithms in edge AI systems.
Speciﬁcally, we provide a thorough survey on communication-efﬁcient distributed learning algorithms for training AI models
on edges. In addition, we provide an overview of edge AI
system architectures for communication-efﬁcient edge training
and edge inference. In the next section, we start with the
motivations and identify major communication challenges in
edge AI. A paper outline will also be provided.
II. M OTIVATIONS AND CHALLENGES
In this section, we present the motivations and identify key
communication challenges of edge AI. Interplays among com-
putation mechanisms, learning algorithms, as well as system
architectures, are revealed.
A. Motivations
During the past decades, the thriving mobile internet has
enabled various mobile applications such as mobile pay,
mobile gaming, etc. These applications in turn led to an
upsurge of mobile devices and mobile data, which prompts
the prosperity of AI for greatly facilitating daily life. As the
key design target, the 5G roll-out has focused on several key
services for connected things : enhanced mobile broadband
(eMBB), ultra reliable low latency communications (URLLC),
and massive machine type communications (mMTC). In con-
trast, futuristic 6G networks [11] will undergo a paradigm
shift from connected things toconnected intelligence . The
network infrastructure of 6G is envisioned to fully exploit the
potential of massive distributed devices and the data generated
at network edges for supporting intelligent applications [9].