13
Fast aggregation via over-the-air computation: Over-
the-air computation is an efﬁcient approach to compute a func-
tion of distributed data by exploiting the signal superposition
property of the wireless multiple access channel [189]. As
shown in Fig. 5, we are able to jointly consider communication
and computation to reduce the communication costs signiﬁ-
cantly. In particular, the function that can be computable via
over-the-air computation is called the nomographic function
[190]. In distributed machine learning, we ﬁrst compute the
local updates (e.g., gradients and model parameters) at each
worker, and aggregate these values over the wireless channel.
For aggregation functions that fall into the class of nomo-
graphic functions, we are able to improve the communication
efﬁciency by exploiting over-the-air computing. It should be
noted that digital modulation schemes for over-the-air compu-
tation are advocated in [191], [192], [193], [194] due to its
easier implementation on the existing communication systems
and its less stringent requirement of synchronization compared
to anolog schemes.
To improve the communication efﬁciency for federated
learning, Yang et al. [21] proposed to adopt the over-the-
air computation approach for fast model aggregation instead
of the traditional communication-and-computation separation
method. This is motivated by the fact that the aggregating func-
tion is a linear combination of updates from distributed mobile
devices, which falls into the set of nomographic functions.
Using transceiver design by exploring the signal superposition
property of a wireless multiple access channel, over-the-air
computation can improve the communication efﬁciency and
reduce the required bandwidth. In addition, the joint device
selection and beamforming design problem was considered
in [21], for which sparse and low-rank optimization methods
were proposed, yielding admirable performance of the pro-
posed over-the-air computation for fast model aggregation.
The efﬁciency of over-the-air computation for fast aggrega-
tion in federated edge learning has also been demonstrated in
[84], which characterized two trade-offs between communica-
tion and learning performance. The ﬁrst one is the trade-off
between the updated quality measured by the receive SNR and
the truncation ratio of model parameters due to the proposed
truncated-channel-inversion policy for deep fading channels.
The second one is the trade-off between the receive SNR
and the fraction of exploited data, namely, the fraction of
scheduling cell-interior devices if the data distributed over
devices uniformly. In [195], over-the-air computation based
on MIMO, i.e., multi-antenna techniques, is further adopted in
high-mobility multi-modal sensing for fast aggregation, where
the receive beamforming is designed based on the differential
geometry approach.
Based on over-the-air computation, Amiri and Gunduz [85]
proposed a gradient sparsiﬁcation and random linear projection
method to reduce the dimension of gradients due to limited
channel bandwidth. It was shown that such an approach
results in a much faster convergence of the learning process
compared with the separate computation and communication
based approaches. This work was further extended to wireless
fading channels in [86].Aggregation frequency control with limited bandwidth
and computation resources: The learning process includes
the local updates at different devices and the global aggrega-
tion at the fusion center. We can aggregate the local updates
at the interval of one or multiple local updates, such as
adopting the federated averaging algorithm [18]. The aggre-
gation frequency should be carefully designed by weighing
the limited computation resources at devices locally and the
limited communication bandwidth for global data aggregation.
To this end, Wang et al. [87] provided a convergence bound
of gradient-descent based federated learning from a theoretical
perspective. Based on this convergence result, the authors
proposed a control algorithm that learns the data distribution,
system dynamics, and model characteristics, which can be
used to dynamically determine the frequency of global ag-
gregation in real time to minimize the learning loss under
a ﬁxed resource budget. Zhou and Cong [88] established
the convergence results of the distributed stochastic gradient
descent algorithm that is averaged after Ksteps for nonconvex
loss functions. The convergence rate in terms of the total
run time instead of the number of iterations was investigated
in [89], which also proposed an adaptive communication
strategy that starts with a low aggregation frequency to save
communication costs, followed by increasing the aggregation
frequency to achieve a low error ﬂoor.
Data reshufﬂing via index coding and pliable index
coding: Data reshufﬂing [196], [197] is a recognized approach
to improve the statistical performance of machine learning
algorithms. Randomly reshufﬂing the training data at each
device makes the distributed learning algorithm go over the
data in a different order, which brings statistical gains for non-
IID data [198]. However, in edge-AI systems, its communica-
tion cost is prohibitively expensive. There are a sequence of
works focusing on reducing the communication cost of data
reshufﬂing.
To reduce the communication cost of data reshufﬂing, Lee
et al. [90] proposed a coded shufﬂing approach based on index
coding. This approach assumes that the data placement rules
are pre-speciﬁed. The statistical learning performance can be
improved provided a small number of new data points updated
at each work, which motivates the proposal of a pliable index
coding based semi-random data reshufﬂing approach [91] for
more efﬁcient coding schemes design. It claims that the new
data for each device is not necessarily in a speciﬁc way and
each data is required at no more than cdevices (which is
called thec-constraint). The pliable data reshufﬂing problem
was also considered in wireless networks [92]. It was further
observed that at per round it is not necessary to update a
new data for all mobile devices, and the authors proposed
to maximize the number of devices that are refreshed with
a new data point. This approach turns out to reduce the
communication cost considerably with a slight sacriﬁce of the
learning performance.
Straggler mitigation via coded computing: In practice,
some devices may be stragglers during the computation of the
gradients, i.e., it takes more time for these devices to ﬁnish the
computation task. By carefully replicating data sets on devices,