8
1) Minimizing Communication Round: We ﬁrst consider an
extreme case. The distributed optimization approach with the
minimum communication round, i.e., only one communication
round, is that each device performs independent optimization.
For example, each node adopts SGD to compute local model
parameters, and a server then averages these model parameters
in the end. As shown in [157], the overall run time decreases
signiﬁcantly as the number of devices increases for some
learning tasks. Subsequently, it was shown in [158] that this
one-round communication approach can achieve the same
order-optimal sample complexity in terms of mean-squared
error of model parameters as the centralized setting under a
reasonable set of conditions. The order-optimal sample com-
plexity can be obtained by performing a stochastic gradient-
based methods on each devices [158]. However, one round
communication restricts the ability to exchange information
during training, which is in general not sufﬁcient for training
large models (e.g., DNNs) to achieve the target accuracy in
practice.
In general settings where devices upload their local gradi-
ents to a fusion center at each iteration, it is critical to reduce
the communication round by accelerating the convergence rate
of the algorithm. Shamir and Srebro [159] proposed to accel-
erate mini-batch SGD by using the largest possible mini-batch
size that does not hurt the sample complexity, and it shows that
the communication cost decreases linearly with the size of the
mini-batch. Yuan et al. [36] proposed an amortized variance-
reduced gradient algorithm for a decentralized setting, where
each device collects data that is spatially distributed and
all devices are only allowed to communicate with direct
neighbors. In addition, a mini-batch strategy is adopted by
[36] to achieve communication efﬁciency. However, it has
been shown in [160], [161] that too large mini-batch sizes
will result in a degradation in the generalization of the model.
In practice, additional efforts should be taken to reduce this
generalization drop. For instance, it was shown in [162] that
training with large minibatch sizes up to 8192 images achieves
the same accuracy as small mini-batch settings by adjusting
learning rates as a function of mini-batch size. This idea was
also adopted by [163] to train DNNs for automatic speech
recognition tasks using large batch sizes in oder to accelerate
the total training process.
The statistical heterogeneity of data hinders the fast con-
vergence of ﬁrst-order algorithms. To address this issue, there
have been lots of efforts. Arjevani and Shamir [164] studied
the scenarios where each device has access to a different
subset of data to minimize the averaged loss function over
all devices. They established a lower bound on the rounds
of communication, which is shown to be achieved by the
algorithm of [165] for quadratic and strongly convex functions.
But how to design optimal algorithms in terms of communica-
tion efﬁciency for general functions remains an open problem.
By utilizing additional storage space of devices, Lee et al.
[37] proposed to assign two subsets of data to each device.
The ﬁrst subset is from a random partition and the second
subset is randomly sampled with replacement from the overall
datasets. Since each device has access to both data subsets,
the authors proposed a distributed stochastic variance reducedgradient method to minimize the communication round, in
which the batch gradients are computed in parallel on different
devices and the algorithm utilizes the local data sampled with
replacement to construct the unbiased stochastic gradient in
each iterative update. For non-convex optimization problems,
Garber et al. [166] proposed a stochastic distributed algorithm
to solve the principal component analysis problem, which
gives considerable acceleration in terms of communication
rounds over previous distributed algorithms.
2) Minimizing Communication Bandwidth: Another series
of works focus on reducing the size of local updates from each
device, thereby reducing the overall communication cost. In
the following, we review three representative techniques, i.e.,
gradient reuse, gradient quantization, and gradient sparsiﬁca-
tion.
Gradient reuse: To minimize a sum of smooth loss
functions distributed among multiple devices, considering that
the gradients of some devices vary slowly between two con-
secutive communication rounds, a lazily aggregated gradient
(LAG) method was proposed by [45] which uses outdated
gradients of these devices at the fusion center. Speciﬁcally,
theses devices upload nothing during this communication
round, which is able to reduce communication overheads per
round signiﬁcantly. Theoretically, it was shown in [45] that
LAG achieves the same order of convergence rates as the
batch gradient descent method under the cases where the loss
functions are strongly-convex, convex, or nonconvex smooth.
If the distributed datasets are heterogeneous, LAG can achieve
a target accuracy with considerably less communication costs
measured as the total number of transmissions over all the
devices in comparison with the batch gradient descent method.
In addition, a similar gradient reuse idea was adopted in
distributed reinforcement learning to achieve communication
efﬁcient training [46].
Gradient quantization: To reduce the communication
cost of gradient aggregation, some scalar quantization methods
have been proposed to compress the gradients by a small
number of bits instead of using ﬂoating-point representation.
To estimate the mean of the gradient vectors collected from
devices, Suresh et al. [167] analyzed the mean squared error
for several quantization schemes without probabilistic assump-
tions on the data from the information theoretic perspective.
In the view of distributed learning algorithms. Alistarh et
al.[168] has investigated the quantized stochastic gradient
descent (QSGD) to study the trade-off between communication
costs and convergence guarantees. Speciﬁcally, each device
can adjust the number of bits sent per iteration according to
the variance added to the device. As demonstrated in [168],
each device can transmit no more than 2:8n+ 32 bits per
iteration in expectation, where nis the number of model
parameters, while the variance is only increased by a factor
of2. Compared to full precision SGD, using approximately
2:8nbits of communication per iteration as opposed to 32n
bits will only result in at most 2more iterations, which leads
to bandwidth savings of approximately 5:7. For distributed
training the shallowest neural networks consisting of a single
rectiﬁed linear unit, it was shown in [169] that the quantized