15
performance in several deep reinforcement learning tasks
compared with the standard fully-connected communication
topology. Speciﬁcally, it was observed in [107] that the Erdos-
Renyi graph topology with 1000 devices can compete with the
standard fully-connected topology with 3000 devices, which
shows that the machine learning performance can be more
efﬁcient if the topology is carefully designed. Considering that
different devices may require different times to carry out local
computation, Neglia et al. [108] analyzed the inﬂuences of
different network topologies on the total runtime of distributed
subgradient methods, which can determine the degrees of the
topology graph, leading to the faster convergence speed. They
also showed that a sparser network can sometimes result in
signiﬁcant reduction of the convergence time.
One common alternative to the fully connected network
topology is to employ a ring topology [109], where each
device only communicates with its neighbors that are arranged
in a logical ring. More concretely, each device aggregates
and passes its local gradients along the ring such that all
devices have a copy of the full gradients at the end. This
approach has been adopted in distributed deep learning for
model updating [110], [111]. However, the algorithm deployed
on the ring topology are inherently sensitive to stragglers
[112]. To alleviate the effects of stragglers in the ring topology,
Reisizadeh et al. [112] proposed to use a logical tree topology
for communication, based on which they mitigated stragglers
by gradient coding techniques. In the tree topology, there are
several layers of devices, where each device communicates
only with its parent node. By concurrently transmitting mes-
sages from a large number of children nodes to multiple parent
nodes, communication with the tree topology can be more
efﬁcient than that with the ring topology.
C. Model Partition Based Edge Training Systems
While data partition based edge training systems have
obtained much attention in both academia and industry, there
is also an important line of works designing edge AI systems
based on partitioning a single machine learning model and
deploying it distributedly across mobile devices and edge
servers. In such systems, each node holds part of the model
parameters and accomplish the model training task or the
inference task collaboratively. One main advantage of model
partition in the training process is the small storage size needed
for each node. In this system, the machine learning model
is distributedly deployed among multiple computing nodes,
with each node evaluating updates of only a portion of the
model’s parameters. Such method is particularly useful in the
scenarios where the machine learning model is too large to be
stored in a single node [200], [201]. Another main concern
of model partition during training is the data privacy when
the data at each node belongs to different parties. However,
model training with model partition based architectures also
poses heavy communication overhead between edge devices.
Model partition across a large number of nodes
to balance computation and communication: A line of
works [113], [114], [115] have considered the model par-
tition across edge nodes with heterogeneous hardware andcomputing power. In [113], a reinforcement learning approach
was proposed for deploying the computing graph onto edge
computing devices, which, however, is time and resource
intensive. To avoid the huge computation cost of reinforcement
learning based approach, Harlap et al. [114] proposed the
PipeDream system for automatically determining the model
partition strategy of DNNs. Furthermore, injecting multiple
mini-batches makes the system converge faster than using a
single machine or using the data partition approach. While
PipeDream stresses the hardware utilization of edge devices,
each device should maintain multiple versions of model pa-
rameters to avoid optimization issues caused by the staleness
of parameters with asynchronous backward updates. This
hinders scaling to much bigger models for PipeDream. To
address this problem, the GPipe system was proposed in [115]
with novel batch-splitting and re-materialization techniques,
which is able to scale to large models with little additional
communication overhead.
Model partition across the edge device and edge server
to avoid the exposure of users’ data: In practice, powerful
edge servers are often owned by service providers, but users
may be relunctant to expose their data to service providers for
model training. The observation that a DNN model can be split
between two successive layers motivates researchers to deploy
the ﬁrst few layers on the device locally and the remaining
layers on the edge server to avoid the exposure of users’ data.
Mao et al. [116] proposed a privacy-preserving deep learning
architecture where the shallow part of a DNN is deployed on
the mobile device and the large part is deployed on the edge
server. Gupta and Raskar [202] designed a model partition
approach over multiple agents, i.e., multiple data sources and
one supercomputing resource, and further extended it to semi-
supervised learning cases with few labeled sample. A particu-
lar DNN model for face recognition is trained and evaluated on
a Huawei Nexux 6P phone with satisfactory performance. In
[117], a partition approach named ARDEN was proposed by
taking both privacy and performance into consideration. The
model parameters at mobile device are ﬁxed and differential
privacy mechanism is introduced to guarantee the privacy of
the output at mobile device. Before uploading the local output,
deliberate noise is added to improve the robustness of DNN,
which is shown to be beneﬁcial for the inference performance.
Vertical architecture for privacy with vertically par-
titioned data and model: In most industries, data is often
vertically partitioned, i.e., each owner only holds partial data
attributes. Data isolation becomes a severe bottleneck for col-
laboratively building a model due to competition, privacy, and
administrative procedures. Therefore, much attention is being
paid on privacy-preserving machine learning with vertically
partitioned data [19]. During the training, the model is also
vertically partitioned and each owner holds a part of model
parameters. Therefore, vertical architecture of AI is proposed
and studied for privacy-preserving machine learning where
each node has access to different features of common data
instances and maintains the corresponding subset of model
parameters. What makes it worse is that the label of each data
instance is only available to nodes belonging to one party.