14
Edge 
DevicesInput Pre-
processingTransmit 
SymbolTransmit 
Beamformer
Wireless Channel
++
AWGN Receive 
Beamformer
Post-
processing
Output
Coordinating Center
Fig. 5. Illustration of fast aggregation via over-the-air computation. We exemplify it with a simple single-antenna system for computing f(PK
i=1gi(di))
fromKdistributed edge devices.
Tandon et al. [93] proposed to encode the computed gradients
to migrate stragglers, while the amount of redundancy data
depends on the number of stragglers in the system. In [94],
straggler tolerance and communication cost were considered
jointly. Therefore, compared with [93], the total runtime of
the distributed gradient computation is further reduced by
distributing the computations over subsets of gradient vector
components in addition to subsets of data sets. Raviv et al.
[95] adopted tools from classic coding theory, i.e., cyclic MDS
codes, to achieve favorable performance of gradient coding
in terms of the applicable range of parameters and in the
complexity of the coding algorithms. Using Reed-Solomon
codes, Halbawi et al. [96] made the learning system more
robust to stragglers compared with [93]. The performance
with respect to the communication load and computation load
required for mitigating the effect of stragglers was further
improved in [97]. Most of straggling mitigation approaches
assumed that the straggler devices have no contribution to the
learning task. In contrast, it was proposed by [98] to exploit
the non-persistent stragglers since they are able to complete a
certain portion of assigned tasks in practice. This is achieved
by transmitting multiple local updates from devices to the
fusion center per communication round instead of only one
local updates per round.
In addition, approximate gradient coding was proposed in
[95] where the fusion center only requires an approximate
computation of the full gradients instead of an exact one,
which reduces the computation from the devices signiﬁcantly
while preserving the system tolerance to stragglers. However,
this approximate gradient approach typically results in a slower
convergence rate of the learning algorithm compared with the
exact gradient approach [99]. When the loss function is the
squared loss, it was proposed in [100] to encode the second
moment of the data matrix with a low density parity-check
(LDPC) code to mitigate the effect of the stragglers. They also
indicated that the moment encoding based gradient descent
algorithm can be viewed as a stochastic gradient descent
method, which provides opportunities to obtain convergence
guarantees for the proposed approach. Considering the general
loss function, it was proposed in [101] to distribute the data to
the devices using low density generator matrix (LDGM) codes.
Bitar et al. [99] proposed an approximate gradient coding
scheme by distributing data points redundantly to devicesbased on a pair-wise balanced design, simply ignoring the
stragglers. The convergence guarantees are established and the
convergence rate can be improved with the redundancy of data
[99].
2) Decentralized System Mode: In the decentralized mode,
a machine learning model is trained with a number of edge
devices by exchanging information directly without a cen-
tral node. A well known decentralized information exchange
paradigm is the gossip communication protocol [199], by ran-
domly evoking a node as a central node to collect updates from
neighbour nodes or broadcast its local update to neighbour
nodes. By integrating the gossip communication protocols into
the learning algorithms, Elastic Gossip [102] and Gossiping
SGD [103] [104] [105] were proposed.
One typical network topology for decentralized machine
learning is the fully connected network, where each device
communicates directly with all other devices. In this scenario,
each device maintains a local copy of the model parameters
and computes its local gradients that will be sent to all
other devices. Each device can average the gradients received
from every other devices and then perform local updates.
In each iteration, the model parameters will be identical at
all devices if each device starts from a same initial point.
This process is essentially the same as the classical gradient
descent at a centralized server, so the convergence can be
guaranteed as in the centralized settings. However, such a fully
connected network suffers a heavy communication overhead
that grows quadratically in the number of devices, while the
communication overhead is linear in the number of devices
for centralized settings. Therefore, network topology design
plays a key role in alleviating the communication bottleneck
in decentralized scenarios. In addition, the convergence rate of
the decentralized algorithm also depends on the topology of
network [106]. We should note that the decentralized edge
AI system suffers from the same issues as the system in
distributed mode since each device acts like a fusion center.
There have been several works demonstrating that some
carefully designed topologies of networks achieve better per-
formance than the fully connected network. It has been em-
pirically observed in [107] that using an alternative network
topology between devices can lead to improved learning