3
In recent years, a new trend is to move computation
tasks from the cloud center towards network edges due to
the increasing computing power of edge nodes [13]. In the
upcoming 5G wireless systems, there are a growing number of
edge nodes, varying from base stations (BSs) to various edge
devices such as mobile phones, tablets, and IoT devices. The
computational capabilities of edge mobile devices have seen
substantial improvements thanks to the rapid development of
mobile chipsets. For example, mobile phones nowadays have
comparable computing power as computing servers a decade
ago. In addition, edge servers have the potential to provide
low-latency AI services for mobile users which are infeasible
to be directly implemented on devices. Since edge servers
have relatively less powerful computation resources than cloud
centers, it is necessary to employ joint design principles across
edge servers and edge devices to further reduce execution
latency and enhance privacy [13]. The advances in edge
computing thus provides opportunities for pushing AI frontiers
from the cloud center to network edges, stimulating a new
research area known as edge AI , including both AI model
training and inference procedures.
Training at network edges is challenging and requires
coordinating massive edge nodes to collaboratively build a
machine learning model [18]. Each edge node usually has
access to only a small subset of training data, which is the
fundamental difference from traditional cloud-based model
training [19]. The information exchange across edge nodes in
edge training results in high communication cost, especially in
the wireless environment with limited bandwidth. This brings a
main bottleneck in edge training. It is interesting to note that a
number of works have revisited the communication theory for
addressing the communication challenges of edge training. The
connection between data aggregation from distributed nodes in
edge training and the in-network computation problem [20] in
wireless sensor networks has been established in [21], which
proposed an over-the-air computation approach for fast model
aggregation in each round of training for on-device federated
learning. In wireless communication systems, limited feedback
[22] from a receiver to a transmitter is critical to reducing the
information bits for realizing channel agile techniques that
require channel knowledge at the transmitter. A connection
between limited feedback in wireless communication and the
quantization method was established in [23] for reducing the
data transmission cost in edge training, which borrows ideas
from the widely adopted Grassmannian quantization approach
for limited feedback.
Edge inference, i.e., performing inference of AI models
at network edges, enjoys the beneﬁts of low-latency and
enhanced privacy, which are critical for a wide range of AI
applications such as drones, smart vehicles, and so on. As
such, it has drawn signiﬁcant attention from both academia
and industry. Recently, deep learning models have been ac-
tively adopted in a number of applications to provide high-
quality services for mobile users. For example, AI technologies
have shown promises in healthcare [24], such as detection
of heart failure [25] with recurrent neural network (RNN)
and decisions about patient treatment [26] with reinforcement
learning. However, deep neural network (DNN) models oftenhave a huge number of parameters, which will consume
considerable storage and computation resources. A typical
example is the classic convolutional neural network (CNNs)
architecture named AlexNet [2], which has over 60 million
parameters. Therefore, model compression approaches [27],
[28] have attracted much attention for deploying DNN models
at network edges. It should also be noted that the power
budget on edge devices is also limited, which stimulates
research pursuits on energy-efﬁcient processing of deep neural
networks from signal processing perspective [8]. For IoT
devices without enough memory to store the entire model,
coding techniques shed light on the efﬁcient data shufﬂing for
distributed inference across edge nodes [29], [30].
B. Performance Measurements and Unique Challenges of
Edge AI
The typical procedures for providing an AI service include
training a machine learning model from data, and perform-
inginference with the trained model. The performance of
a machine learning model can be measured by its model
accuracy, which can potentially be improved by collecting
more training data. However, training a machine learning
model from massive data is time consuming. To train a model
efﬁciently, distributed architectures are often adopted, which
will introduce additional communication costs for exchanging
information across nodes. The computation and communica-
tion costs grow extremely high for high-dimensional models
such as deep neural networks. In addition, low-latency is also
critical for inference in applications such as smart vehicles,
smart drones, etc. We thus summarize the key performance
measurements of edge AI in terms of model accuracy and
total latency .
In the cloud center, cloud computing servers are connected
with extremely high bandwidth networks and the training data
is available to all nodes. Fundamentally distinct from cloud
based AI, edge AI poses more stringent constraints on the
algorithms and system architectures.
Limited resources on edge nodes: Instead of the large
amount of powerful GPUs and CPUs integrated servers
at the nodes of cloud-based AI, there are often limited
computation, storage, and power resources on edge de-
vices, with limited link bandwidth among a large number
of edge devices and the edge servers at base stations and
wireless access points. For example, the classic AlexNet
[2], which is designed for computer vision, has over 60
million parameters. With 512 V olta GPUs interconnected
at the rate of 56Gbps, the Alexnet can be trained within
record of 2.6 minutes in the data center of SenseTime
[31]. As one of the most powerful GPUs in the world,
one V olta GPU has 5,120 cores. However, the Mali-G76
GPU on Huawei Mate 30 Pro, one of the most powerful
smart phones, has only 16 cores. The theoretical maximal
speed envisioned in 5G is 10Gbps and the average speed
is only 50Mbps.
Heterogeneous resources across edge nodes: The vari-
abilities in hardware, network, and power budget of edge
nodes imply heterogeneous communication, computation,