1
Communication-Efﬁcient Edge AI: Algorithms and
Systems
Yuanming Shi, Member, IEEE, Kai Yang, Student Member, IEEE, Tao Jiang, Student Member, IEEE,
Jun Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE, and Khaled B. Letaief, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has achieved remarkable
breakthroughs in a wide range of ﬁelds, ranging from speech
processing, image classiﬁcation to drug discovery. This is driven
by the explosive growth of data, advances in machine learning
(especially deep learning), and easy access to vastly powerful
computing resources. Particularly, the wide scale deployment of
edge devices (e.g., IoT devices) generates an unprecedented scale
of data, which provides the opportunity to derive accurate models
and develop various intelligent applications at the network edge.
However, such enormous data cannot all be sent from end devices
to the cloud for processing, due to the varying channel quality,
trafﬁc congestion and/or privacy concerns. By pushing inference
and training processes of AI models to edge nodes, edge AI
has emerged as a promising alternative. AI at the edge requires
close cooperation among edge devices , such as smart phones and
smart vehicles, and edge servers at the wireless access points
and base stations, which however result in heavy communication
overheads. In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey of
the recent developments in various techniques for overcoming
these communication challenges. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst identify
key communication challenges in edge AI systems. We then
introduce communication-efﬁcient techniques, from both algo-
rithmic and system perspectives for training and inference tasks
at the network edge. Potential future research directions are also
highlighted.
Index Terms —Artiﬁcial intelligence, edge AI, edge intelligence,
communication efﬁciency.
I. I NTRODUCTION
With the explosive growth in data and the rapid advance-
ments of algorithms (e.g., deep learning), as well as the
step-change improvement of computing resources, artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) has achieved breakthroughs in a wide range
of applications, including speech processing [1], image classi-
ﬁcation [2] and reinforcement learning [3], etc. AI is expected
to affect signiﬁcant segments of many vertical industries and
our daily life, such as intelligent vehicles [4] and tactile robots
[5]. In addition, it is anticipated that AI could add around
Y . Shi and T. Jiang are with the School of Information Science and
Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China (e-mail:
fshiym,jiangtao1g@shanghaitech.edu.cn).
K. Yang is with the School of Information Science and Technology, Shang-
haiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China, also with the Shanghai Institute
of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200050, China, and also with the University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e-mail: yangkai@shanghaitech.edu.cn).
J. Zhang is with the Department of Electronic and Information Engi-
neering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong (E-mail: jun-
eie.zhang@polyu.edu.hk).
K. B. Letaief is with the Department of Electronic and Computer Engineer-
ing, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong (E-mail:
eekhaled@ust.hk). He is also with Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.16 percent or about $13 trillion to the global gross domestic
product (GDP) by 2030, compared with that of 2018 [6].
The explosive data growth generated by the massive number
of end devices, e.g., smart phones, tablets and Internet-of-
Things (IoT) sensors, provides opportunities and challenges
for providing intelligent services. It is predicted that there
will be nearly 85 Zettabytes of usable data generated by all
people, machines and things by 2021, which shall exceed
the cloud data center trafﬁc (21 Zettabytes) by a factor of
4[7]. Moreover, delay-sensitive intelligent applications, such
as autonomous driving, cyber-physical control systems, and
robotics, require fast processing of the incoming data. Such ex-
tremely high network bandwidth and low latency requirements
would place unprecedented pressures on traditional cloud-
based AI, where massive sensors/embedded devices transfer
collected data to the cloud [8], often under varying network
qualities (e.g., bandwidth and latency). In addition, privacy is
a major concern for cloud-based solutions. To address these
problems, one promising solution, edge AI [9], [10], comes to
the rescue.
Futuristic wireless systems [11] mainly consist of ultra-
dense edge nodes, including edge servers at the base stations
and wireless access points, and edge devices such as smart
phones, smart vehicles, and drones. Edge AI pushes inference
and training processes of AI models to the network edge
in close proximity to data sources. As such, the amount of
data transferred to the cloud will be signiﬁcantly reduced,
thus alleviating the network trafﬁc load, latency and privacy
concerns. Although training an AI model (e.g., deep neural
networks) generally requires intensive computing resources,
the rapid development of mobile edge computing can provide
cloud-computing capabilities at the edge of the mobile network
[12], [13], and make the application of AI to edges much
more efﬁcient. In addition, computational capabilities of edge
servers and edge devices continue to improve. Notable exam-
ples include the deployment of neural processing unit (NPU)
in Kirin 970 smart phone chips and the Apple’s bionic chip
A12, which substantially accelerate AI computations on edge
devices. In a nutshell, the advances of mobile edge computing
platforms and the improvement of computing power of the
edge nodes make edge AI a feasible solution.
Nevertheless, pushing AI towards the edge is a non-trivial
task. The most straightforward way of realizing edge AI
without any communication load, i.e., deploying the full AI
models on edge devices, is often infeasible when the size
of the AI model (e.g., DNNs) is too large or the com-
putational requirement is too high, given the limited hard-arXiv:2002.09668v1  [cs.IT]  22 Feb 2020