12
and investigated for efﬁcient training and inference. This
section gives a comprehensive survey of different edge AI
systems and topics therein. It starts with a general discussion
on different architectures, and then introduces them one by
one.
A. Architectures of Edge AI Systems
We summarize the main system architectures of edge AI
into four categories. According to the availability data and
model parameters, data partition based edge training systems
and model partition based edge training systems are two com-
mon system architectures for efﬁciently training at network
edges. To achieve low-latency inference, computation ofﬂoad-
ing based edge inference systems is a promising approach by
ofﬂoading the entire or a part of inference tasks from resource
limited edge devices to proximate edge servers. There are also
edge AI systems deﬁned by general computing paradigms,
which can be termed as general edge computing systems.
Data partition based edge training systems: For data
partition based edge training systems, the data is massively dis-
tributed over a number of edge devices, and each edge device
has only a subset of the whole dataset. Then the edge AI model
can be trained by pooling the computation capabilities of edge
devices. During training, each edge device holds a replica
of the complete AI model to compute a local update. This
procedure often requires a centralized coordinating center, e.g.,
an edge server, for scheduling a number of edge devices,
aggregating the local updates from edge devices, etc. There
are also works considering decentralized systems where edge
devices communicate with each other directly. Edge training
systems with a central node are usually called distributed
system modes, while systems without a central node are called
decentralized system modes, as demonstrated in Fig. 4.
(a) Distributed mode
 (b) Decentralized mode
Fig. 4. Two different types of edge training systems.
Model partition based edge training systems: In model
partition based edge training systems, each node does not
have replica of all the model parameters, i.e., the AI model
is partitioned and distributed across multiple nodes. Model
partition is needed when very deep machine learning models
are applied. Some works proposed to balance computation and
communication overhead via model partition for accelerating
the training process. Furthermore, model partition based edge
training systems garner much attention for preserving the data
privacy during training when each edge node can only accessto partial data attributes for a common set of user identities.
It is often referred to as vertical federated learning [19].
To preserve data privacy, it is proposed to train a model
through the synergy of the edge device and edge server by
performing simple processing at the device and uploading the
intermediate values to a powerful edge server. This is realized
by deploying a small part of model parameters on the device
and the remaining part on the edge server to avoid the exposure
of users’ data.
Computation ofﬂoading based edge inference systems:
To enable low-latency edge AI services, it is critical to deploy
the trained model proximate to end users. Unfortunately, it
is often infeasible to deploy large models, especially DNN
models, directly on each device for local inference due to the
limited storage, computation and battery resources. Therefore,
a promising solution is to push the AI model and massive
computations to proximate edge servers, which prompts the re-
cent proposal of computation ofﬂoading based edge inference
systems [13]. We divide the works on computation ofﬂoading
based edge inference systems into two classes, i.e., deploying
the entire model on an edge server, and partitioning the model
and deploying across the edge device and edge server.
General edge computing systems: Beyond the systems
mentioned above, there are also edge AI systems deﬁned by
general computing paradigms, e.g., MapReduce [188]. The
MapReduce-like frameworks often consider distributed data
input and distributed model deployment jointly for accelerating
distributed training or inference. In such systems, reducing the
communication overhead for data shufﬂing between multiple
nodes becomes a critical task. Interestingly, coding technique
plays a critical role in scalable data shufﬂing [138], [30] as
well as straggler mitigation [142].
In the remaining part of this section, we discuss the important
topics and involved techniques that address the communication
challenges for these system architectures.
B. Data Partition Based Edge Training Systems
In data partition based edge training systems, each device
usually has a subset of the training data and a replica of the
machine learning model. The training can be accomplished
by performing local computation and periodically exchanging
local updates from mobile devices. The main advantage of
such a system is that it is applicable to most of the model
architectures and scales well. The main drawback is that the
model size and the operations that are needed to complete
the local computation are limited by the storage size and
computation capabilities of each device. In the following, we
separately discuss distributed and decentralized system modes.
1) Distributed System Mode: In the distributed system
mode, each edge device computes a local update according to
its local data samples, and the central node shall periodically
aggregate local updates from edge devices. The communi-
cation bottleneck comes from aggregating the local updates
from mobile devices and straggler devices. The efforts for
addressing the communication challenges in distributed data
partition based training systems are listed as follows: