16
Vaidya and Clifton [118] proposed a privacy-preserving k-
means algorithm in the vertical architecture with secure multi-
party computation. Kantarcioglu and Clifton [119] studied
the secure association rules mining problem with vertically
partitioned data. A linear regression model was taken into
consideration in [120], and multi-party computation protocols
were proposed with a semi-trusted third party to achieve secure
and scalable training. For privacy-preserving classiﬁcation
with support vector machine (SVM), Yu et al. [121] considered
the dual problem of SVM and adopted a random perturbation
strategy, which is suitable only for nodes belong to more
than three parties. A privacy-preserving classiﬁcation approach
based on decision tree was proposed in [122], which adopts
secure multi-party computation procedures including commu-
tative encryption to determine if there are any remaining
attributes and secure cardinality computation of set intersec-
tion. For classiﬁcation with logistic regression, the problem
becomes even more difﬁcult because of the coupled objective
function as well as the gradient. To address this problem,
Hardy et al. [123] proposed to use Taylor approximation to
beneﬁt from the homomorphic encryption protocol without
revealing the data at each node.
D. Computation Ofﬂoading Based Edge Inference Systems
The advancement of edge computing makes it increasingly
attractive to push the AI inference task to network edge to
enable low-latency AI services for mobile users [13]. However,
the power consumption and storage for DNN models is often
unbearable for mobile devices such as wearable devices.
Fortunately, ofﬂoading the task from edge devices to powerful
edge servers emerges as an antidote [13], [130], [131], [133].
One solution is to ofﬂoad the entire inference task to an edge
server, which is termed as server-based edge inference , as
shown in Fig. 6(a). It is particularly suitable for resource
limited IoT devices. In this case, the entire AI models are
deployed on edge servers and edge devices should upload
their input data to edge servers for inference. For latency and
privacy concerns, another alternative is ofﬂoading only a part
of the task to the edge server, and the edge server computes the
inference result based on the intermediate value computed by
the edge device. We refer to it as device-edge joint inference as
shown in Fig. 6(b). This edge device and edge server synergy
can be achieved by performing simple processing at the device
and the remaining part at the edge server.
1) Server-Based Edge Inference: In the scenario where the
models are deployed on the edge servers, the devices send the
input data to the edge, the edge servers compute the inference
results according to the trained models, and the inference
results are then sent back to the devices. The main bottleneck
is the limited communication bandwidth for data transmission.
To reduce the real-time data transmission overhead of uplink
transmission in bandwidth-limited edge AI systems, an effec-
tive way is to reduce the volume of data transmitted from
devices without hurting the inference accuracy. In addition,
cooperative downlink transmission of multiple edge servers
has been proposed to enhance the communication efﬁciency
for edge inference.
(a) Server-based edge inference
(b) Device-edge joint inference
Fig. 6. Computation ofﬂoading based edge inference systems.
Partial data transmission: To realize cloud based visual
localization for mobile robots in real time, it is important to
control the volume of the data through the network. Therefore,
Ding et al. [124] used an data volume reduction method pro-
posed by [125] for multi-robot communication, which employs
sparsiﬁcation methods to compress the data. In a cloud-based
collaborative 3D mapping system, Mohanarajah et al. [126]
proposed to reduce bandwidth requirements by sending only
the key-frames as opposed to all the frames produced by
the sensor, and Chen et al. [127] proposed to determine and
ofﬂoad key-frames for object detection by utilizing heuristics
such as frame differences to select the key-frames. These
approaches are useful in reducing the communication cost
when we are able to exploit the structure of the speciﬁc tasks
and the associated data.
Raw data encoding: Data encoding has been widely
used in compressing the data volume. For example, traditional
image compression approaches (e.g., JPEG) can compress data
aggressively, but they are often optimized from the perspec-
tive of human-visual, which will result in an unacceptable
performance degradation in DNN applications if we use a
high compression ratio. Based on this observation, to achieve
a higher compression ratio, Liu et al. [128] proposed to
optimize the data encoding schemes from the perspective
of DNNs based on the frequency component analysis and
rectiﬁed quantization table, which is able to achieve a higher
compression ratio than the traditional JPEG method without
degrading the accuracy for image recognition. Instead of using