19
an efﬁcient scheme for task assignment. Prakash et al. [143]
investigated coded computing for distributed graph processing
systems, which improves performance signiﬁcantly compared
with the general MapReduce framework by leveraging the
structure of graphs.
Coding techniques for straggler mitigation: Another
line of work focuses on addressing the straggler problem in
distributed computing by coding techniques. Mitigating the
effect of stragglers utilizing coding theory was ﬁrst proposed
in [142] for a wired network. The main idea is to leverage re-
dundant computing nodes to perform computational subtasks,
while the computation result can be correctly recovered as
long as the local computation results from any desired subset
of computing nodes are collected. This work was extended
to wireless networks [144], where only one local computing
node can send its computation results to the fusion center at a
time. The paper [145] proposed a sub-task assignment method
to minimize the total latency which is composed of the latency
caused by wireless communication between different comput-
ing nodes and the fusion center and the latency caused by the
variability of computation time of different devices. Most of
the above works focused on linear computations (e.g., matrix
multiplication). However, to realize the distributed inference
on state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms (e.g., DNN),
non-linear computation should be taken into consideration. As
a result, the work [146] proposed a learning-based approach to
design codes that can handle the stragglers issue in distributed
non-linear computation problems.
V. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
This paper presented a comprehensive survey on the com-
munication challenges and solutions in edge AI systems, which
shall support a plethora of AI-enabled applications at the
network edge. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst summarized communica-
tion efﬁcient algorithms for distributed training AI models on
edge nodes, including zeroth-order, ﬁrst-order, second-order,
and federated optimization algorithms. We then categorized
different system architectures of edge AI systems, including
data partition based, and model partition based edge training
systems. Next, we revisited works bridging the gap between
computation ofﬂoading and edge inference. Beyond these sys-
tem architectures, we also introduced general edge computing
deﬁned AI systems. The communication issues and solutions
in such architectures were extensively discussed.
The activities and applications of edge AI are growing
rapidly, and a number of challenges and future directions are
listed below.
Edge AI hardware design: Hardware of edge nodes
determines the physical limits of AI systems, for which
there are a growing amount of efforts on edge AI hard-
ware design. For example, Google edge tensor processing
unit (TPU) is designed for high-speed inference at the
edge. Nvidia has rolled out Jetson TX2 for power-efﬁcient
embedded AI computing. Nevertheless, these hardwares
mainly focus on performing the entire task, especially
edge inference locally. In the future, a variety of edgeAI hardwares will be customized for different AI system
architectures and applications.
Edge AI software platforms: The past decade has
witnessed the blossom of AI software platforms from
top companies for supporting cloud-based AI services.
Cloud-based AI service providers are trying to include
edge nodes into their platforms, though edge nodes only
serve as simple extensions of cloud computing nodes cur-
rently. Google Cloud IoT, Microsoft Azure IoT, NVIDIA
EGX, and Amazon Web Services (AWS) IoT are able to
connect IoT devices to cloud platforms, thereby managing
edge devices and processing the data from all kinds of
IoT devices.
Edge AI as a service: For different ﬁelds and applica-
tions, there are a variety of additional design targets and
constraints, thereby requiring domain-speciﬁc edge AI
frameworks. Edge AI will be a service infrastructure that
integrates the computation, communication, storage and
power resources at network edges to enable data-driven
intelligent applications. A notable example in credit
industry is FATE [216], an industrial grade federated
learning framework proposed by Webank. A number of
federated learning algorithms [217], [218] were designed
to break data isolation among institutions and to preserve
the data privacy during edge training. Another represen-
tative attempt of edge AI for smart healthcare is NVIDIA
Clara [219], which delivers AI to healthcare and life
sciences with NVIDIA’s EGX edge computing platform.
Since Clara features federated learning, it supports an
innovative approach to collaboratively build a healthcare
AI model from hospitals and medical institutions, while
protecting patient data.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We sincerely thank Prof. Zhi Ding from the University of
California at Davis for insightful and constructive comments
to improve the presentation of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, and G. Hinton, “Speech recognition with
deep recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics
Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP) , pp. 6645–6649, 2013.
[2] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. (NeurIPS) , pp. 1097–1105, 2012.
[3] K. Arulkumaran, M. P. Deisenroth, M. Brundage, and A. A. Bharath,
“Deep reinforcement learning: A brief survey,” IEEE Signal Process.
Mag. , vol. 34, pp. 26–38, Nov. 2017.
[4] J. Zhang and K. B. Letaief, “Mobile edge intelligence and computing
for the internet of vehicles,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 108, pp. 246–261, Feb.
2020.
[5] S. Haddadin, L. Johannsmeier, and F. D. Ledezma, “Tactile robots as
a central embodiment of the tactile internet,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 107,
pp. 471–487, Feb. 2019.
[6] J. Bughin and J. Seong, “Assessing the economic impact of artiﬁcial
intelligence,” ITUTrends Issue Paper No. 1 , Sep. 2018.
[7] Cisco, “Cisco global cloud index: Forecast and methodology, 2016-
2021 white paper,” Nov. 2018.
[8] V . Sze, Y .-H. Chen, T.-J. Yang, and J. S. Emer, “Efﬁcient processing
of deep neural networks: A tutorial and survey,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 105,
pp. 2295–2329, Nov. 2017.
[9] Z. Zhou, X. Chen, E. Li, L. Zeng, K. Luo, and J. Zhang, “Edge
intelligence: Paving the last mile of artiﬁcial intelligence with edge
computing,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 107, pp. 1738–1762, Aug. 2019.