7
Coordinating Center
User 1
User
Local computation: gradient -free oracle, e.g.,
User 2
(a) Zeroth-order method
User 1
User
User 2
Local computation: local gradient 
Coordinating Center
 (b) First-order method
User 1
User
User 2
Local computation: Approximate Newton -type update
Coordinating Center
(c) Second-order method
User 1
User
User 2
Local computation: multiple steps of (stochastic) gradient descentCoordinating Center
 (d) Federated Optimization
Fig. 3. Illustration of different optimization methods for model training. As a typical example, a generalized linear model is trained where each node ihas
one data instance xi. That is, the target is to optimize minw1
KPK
i=1l(wTxi), where lis the loss function. The ﬁrst-order derivative of function `is
denoted as `0. a) Zeroth-order method: only the function value can be evaluated during training [147]. b) First-order method: gradient descent. c) Second-order
method: DANE [51]. d) Federated optimization: federated averaging algorithm [18].
convergence rate of the mean squared error of solutions is
established in terms of the communication costs, i.e., the
number of per-node transmissions to neighboring nodes in
the network, instead of the iteration number. The subsequent
work [154] improved the convergence rate under additional
smoothness assumptions. Quantization techniques are also
adopted to reduce the communication cost per communication
round. The paper [155] considered a distributed gradient-
free algorithm for multi-agent convex optimization, where
the agents can only exchange quantized data information
due to limited bandwidth. In the extreme case considered
in [156], each estimated gradient is further quantized into 1
bit, which enjoys high communication efﬁciency in distributed
optimization scenarios.
B. Communication-Efﬁcient First-Order Methods
First-order optimization methods are the most commonly
used algorithms in machine learning, which are mainly based
on gradient descent methods as shown in Fig. 3(b). The idea
of gradient descent methods is to iteratively update variables
in the opposite direction of the gradients of the loss function at
that point with an appropriate step size (a.k.a., a learning rate).
As the computational complexity at each iteration scales withthe number of data samples and the dimension of the model
parameter, it is generally infeasible to train large machine
learning models with tremendous amount of training data
samples on a single device. Therefore, distributed training
techniques have been proposed to mitigate the computation
cost, with additional communication costs. Meanwhile, as the
training dataset becomes larger and larger, stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) method emerges as an appealing solution, in
which only one training sample is used to compute the gradient
at each iteration. In edge AI systems with inherently isolated
data, distributed realizations of SGD will play a key role and
should be carefully investigated.
To apply ﬁrst-order methods in large-scale distributed edge
AI systems, the substantial demand for communication among
devices for gradient exchange is one of the main bottlenecks.
One way to address this issue is to reduce the communication
round by accelerating the convergence rate of the learning
algorithms. Another approach is to reduce the communication
overhead per round, which includes gradient reuse method,
quantization, sparsiﬁcation, and sketching based compression
methods. These two approaches are elaborated in the follow-
ing.