17
standard video encoding techniques, it was argued in [129] that
data collection and transmission schemes should be designed
jointly in vision tasks to maximize an end-to-end goal with
a pre-trained model. Speciﬁcally, the authors proposed to
use DNNs to encode the high dimensional raw data into a
sparse, latent representation for efﬁcient transmission, which
can be recovered later at the cloud via a decoding DNN. In
addition, this coding process is controlled by a reinforcement
learning algorithm, which sends action information to devices
for encoding in order to maximize the predication accuracy of
the pre-trained model with decoded inputs, while achieving
communication-efﬁcient data transmission. This novel data
encoding idea is a promising solution for realizing real-time
inference in edge AI systems.
Cooperative downlink transmission: Cooperative trans-
mission [203] is known as an effective aproach for improv-
ing the communication efﬁciency via proactive interference-
aware coordination of multiple base stations. It was proposed
in [130] to ofﬂoad each inference task to multiple edge
servers and cooperatively transmit the output results to mobile
users in downlink transmission. A new technology named
intelligent reﬂecting surface (IRS) [204] emerges as a cost-
effective approach to enhance the spectrum efﬁciency and
energy efﬁciency of wireless communication networks, which
is promising in facilitating communication-efﬁcient edge in-
ference [205]. It is achieved by reconﬁguring the wireless
propagation environment via a planar array to induce the
change of the signals’ amplitude and/or phase. To further
improve the performance of the cooperative edge inference
scheme in [130], Hua et al. [131] proposed the IRS-aided
edge inference system and designed a task selection strategy
to minimize both the uplink and downlink transmit power
consumption, as well as the computation power consumption
at edge servers.
2) Device-Edge Joint Inference: For many on-device data,
such as healthcare information and users’ behaviors, privacy
is of a primary concern. Thus, there emerges the idea of
edge device and edge server synergy, which can be termed
asdevice-edge joint inference , by deploying the partitioned
DNN model over the mobile device and the powerful edge
server. By deploying the ﬁrst few layers locally, a mobile
device can compute the local output with simple processing,
and transmit the local output to a more powerful edge server
without revealing any sensitive information.
An early work [206] considered the partition of the im-
age classiﬁcation pipeline and found that executing feature
extraction on devices and ofﬂoading the rest to the edge
servers achieves optimal runtime. Recently, Neurosurgeon has
been proposed in [16], where a DNN model is automatically
split between a device and an edge server according to
the network latency for transmission and the mobile device
energy consumption at different partition points, in order to
minimize the total inference time. Different methods have been
developed [207], [208] to partition a pre-trained DNN over
several mobile devices in order to accelerate DNN inference on
devices. Bhardwaj et al. [209] further considered memory and
communication costs in this distributed inference architecture,for which model compression and network science-based
knowledge partitioning algorithm are proposed to address
these issues. For robotics system where the model is parti-
tioned between the edge server and the robot, the robot should
take both local computation accuracy and ofﬂoading latency
into account, and this ofﬂoading problem was formulated in
[210] as a sequential decision making problem that is solved
by a deep reinforcement learning algorithm.
In the following, we review the main methods for further
reducing the communication overhead for the model partition
based edge inference.
Early exit: Early exit can be used to reduce communi-
cation workloads when partitioning DNNs, which has been
proposed in [132] based on the observation that the features
learned at the early layer of the network can be often sufﬁcient
to produce accurate inference results. Therefore, the inference
process can exit early if the data samples can be inferred with
high conﬁdence. This technique has been adopted in [133]
for distributed DNN inference over the cloud, the edge and
devices. With early exit, each device ﬁrst performs the ﬁrst
few layers of an DNN, and ofﬂoads the rest of computation to
the edges or the clouds if the outputs of the device do not meet
the accuracy requirements. This approach is able to reduce
the communication cost by a factor of over 20compared
with the traditional approach that ofﬂoads all raw data to the
cloud for inference. More recently, Li et al. [211] proposed an
on-demand low-latency inference framework through jointly
designing the model partition strategy according to the het-
erogeneous computation capabilities between a mobile device
and edge servers, and the early exit strategy according to the
complicated network environment.
Encoded transmission and pruning for compressing
the transmitted data: In a hierarchical distributed architec-
ture, the main communication bottleneck is that the transmis-
sion of intermediate values between the partition point since
the intermediate data can be much larger than the raw data.
To reduce the communication overhead of intermediate value
transmissions, it was proposed in [134] to partition a network
at an intermediate layer, whose features are encoded before
wireless transmissions to reduce their data size. It shows that
partitioning a CNN at the end of the last convolutional layer
where the data communication requirement is less coupled
with feature space encoding enables signiﬁcant reduction in
communication workloads. Recently, a deep learning based
end-to-end architecture was proposed in [212], named Bot-
tleNet++. By jointly considering model partition, feature com-
pression and transmission, BottleNet++ achieves up to 64x
bandwidth reduction over the additive white Gaussian noise
channel and up to 256x bit compression ratio in the binary
erasure channel, with less than 2% reduction in accuracy,
compared with merely transmitting intermediate data without
feature compression.
Network pruning, as discussed in Section III-D2, has been
exploited in reducing the communication overhead of inter-
mediate feature transmissions. For example, a 2-step pruning
approach was proposed in [135] to reduce the transmission
workload at the network partition point by limiting the pruning