9
stochastic gradient method converges to the global optima
at a linear convergence rate. Seide et al. [170] proposed
to quantize the gradient using only one bit, achieving a
10 times speed-up on distributed training of speech DNNs
with a small accuracy loss. Theoretically, Bernstein et al.
[171] provided rigorous analysis for the sign-based distributed
stochastic gradient descent algorithm, where each device sends
the sign information of the gradients to a fusion center and the
sign information of the aggregated gradients signs is returned
to each device for updating model parameters. This scheme
is shown to achieve the same reduction in variance as full
precision distributed SGD and converge to a stationary point
of a general non-convex function.
As pointed out in [172], [173], scalar quantization methods
fail under decentralized networks without a central aggregation
node. To address this issue, extrapolation compression and
difference compression methods were proposed in [172], and
a gradient vector quantization technique was proposed in
[173] to exploit the correlations between CNN gradients.
Vector quantization [174] by jointly quantizing all entries
of a vector can achieve the optimal rate-distortion trade-off,
which, however, comes at the price of high complexity that
increases with the vector length. Interestingly, it was found
in [23] that Grassmannian quantization, a vector quantization
method that has already been widely adopted in wireless
communication for limited feedback, can be applied for gra-
dient quantization. Limited feedback is an area of studying
efﬁcient feedback of quantized vectors from a receiver to a
transmitter for channel adaptive transmission schemes since
the communication cost of feedback is extremely high in
massive MIMO communication systems. This motivated [23]
to develop an efﬁcient Grassmannian quantization scheme for
high-dimensional gradient compression in distributed learning.
Additionally, Jiang et al. [175] proposed to use quantile
sketch, a non-uniform quantization method for gradient com-
pression. Sketch is a technique of approximating input data
with a probablistic data structure. In [175], the gradient values
are summarized into a number of buckets, whose indices are
further encoded by a binary representation since the number
of buckets is relatively small.
Gradient sparsiﬁcation: The basic idea behind gradient
sparsiﬁcation is to communicate only important gradients ac-
cording to some criteria. This is based on the observation that
many gradients are normally very small during training. Strom
[176] proposed to leave out the gradients below a predeﬁned
constant threshold. Chen et al. [47] proposed AdaComp via
localized selection of gradient residues, which automatically
tunes the compression rate depending on local activity. It
was demonstrated that AdaComp can achieve a compression
ratio of around 200for fully-connected layers and 40for
convolutional layers without noticeable degradation of top-1
accuracy on ImageNet dataset. Deep gradient compression was
proposed in [38] based on a gradient sparsiﬁcation approach,
where only gradients exceeding a threshold are communicated,
while the remaining gradients are accumulated until they
reach the threshold. Several techniques including momentum
correction, local gradient clipping, momentum factor masking,and warm-up training are adopted to preserve the accuracy.
This deep gradient compression approach is shown to achieve
a gradient compression ratio from 270to600without
losing accuracy for a wide range of DNNs and RNNs [38].
In [177], to ensure the sparsiﬁed gradient to be unbiased, the
authors proposed to drop some coordinates of the stochas-
tic gradient vectors randomly and amplify the rest of the
coordinates appropriately. For both convex and non-convex
smooth objectives, under analytic assumptions, it was shown in
[178] that sparsifying gradients by magnitude with local error
correction provides convergence guarantees. Thus, providing
a theoretical foundation for numerous empirical results on
training large-scale recurrent neural networks on a wide range
of applications.
C. Communication-Efﬁcient Second-order Methods
First-order algorithms only require the computation of
gradient-type updates, and thus reduce the amount of local
computation at each device. But the main drawback is that
the required number of communication rounds is still huge
due to the slow convergence rate. It thus motivates to exploit
second-order curvature information into distributed learning
algorithms to improve the convergence rate for edge training.
However, exact second-order methods require the computation,
storage and even communication of a Hessian matrix, which
results in tremendous overhead. Therefore, one has to resort to
approximate methods such as illustrated in Fig. 3(c) [51]. The
works on communication-efﬁcient second-order methods can
be categorized into two types. One is to maintain a global
approximated inverse Hessian matrix in the central node,
and the other line of works propose to solve a second-order
approximation problem locally at each device.
A common approach to develop approximate second-order
methods is to take the merits of the well-known quasi-
Newton method, namely Limited-memory Broyden Fletcher
Goldfarb Shanno (L-BFGS) [179], which avoids the high cost
of computing the inversion of Hessian matrix via directly
estimating the inverse Hessian matrix. In learning with large
amounts of training data, it is a critical problem to develop a
mini-batch stochastic quasi-Newton method. However, directly
extending L-BFGS to a stochastic version does not result
in a stable approximation of the inverse Hessian matrix.
Schraudolph et al. [48] developed a stochastic L-BFGS for
online convex optimization without line search, which is often
problematic in a stochastic algorithm. But there may be a
high level of noise in its Hessian approximation. To provide
stable and productive Hessian approximations, Byrd et al. [49]
developed a stochastic quasi-Newton method by updating the
estimated inverse Hessian matrix every Literations using sub-
sampled Hessian-vector products. The inverse Hessian matrix
maintained in a central node is updated by collecting only
a Hessian-vector product update at each device. Moritz et
al.[50] proposed a linearly convergent stochastic L-BFGS
algorithm via obtaining a more stable and higher precision
estimation of the inverse Hessian matrix, but it requires higher
computation and communication overhead at each round.
Another main idea of communication-efﬁcient second-order
methods is to solve a second-order approximation problem