10
at each device without maintaining and computing a global
Hessian matrix. To reduce the communication overhead at each
round, Shamir et al. [51] proposed a distributed approximate
Newton-type method named as “DANE” by solving an ap-
proximate local Newton system at each device with a global
aggregation step, which only requires the same communication
bandwidth as ﬁrst-order distributed learning algorithms. Sub-
sequently, the algorithm “DiSCO” proposed in [52] solved a
more accurate second-order approximation at per communica-
tion round by approximately solving the global Newton system
with a distributed preconditioned conjugate gradient method.
It reduces the communication rounds compared with “DANE”,
while the computation cost at the master machine grows
roughly cubically with the model dimension. Wang et al. [53]
proposed an improved approximate Newton method “GIANT”
to further reduce the communication round via conjugate
gradient steps at each device, which is shown to outperform
“DANE” and “DiSCO”. Note that the communication of these
approaches involves the transmission of a global update to
each device and the aggregation of local update from each
device at per round, both with the same size as the number
of model parameters. However, the convergence results of
“DANE”, “DiSCO”, and “GIANT” require a high accuracy
solution to the subproblem at each device. An adaptive dis-
tributed Newton method was proposed in [54] by additionally
transmitting a scalar parameter accounting for the information
loss of distributed second-order approximation at per round,
which outperforms “GIANT” in numerical experiments.
D. Communication-Efﬁcient Federated Optimization
In the edge training system, the local dataset at each device
is usually only a small subset of the overall dataset. Further-
more, the rapid advancement of CPUs and GPUs on mobile
devices makes the computation essentially free in comparison
to the communication cost. Thus, a natural idea is to use
additional local computation to decrease the communication
cost. Federated optimization [15] is a framework of iteratively
performing a local training algorithm (such as multiple steps
of SGD as illustrated in Fig. 3(d)) based on the dataset at
each device and aggregating the local updated models, i.e.,
computing the average (or weighted average) of the local up-
dated model parameters. This framework provides additional
privacy protection for data, and has the potential of reducing
the number of communication rounds for aggregating updates
from a large number of mobile devices. The concern of data
privacy and security is becoming a worldwide major issue,
especially for emerging high-stake applications in intelligent
IoT, which prompted governments to enact new regualtions
such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [32].
There are a line of works studying federated optimization algo-
rithms [55], [18], [57] to reduce the communication rounds. In
addition, a number of model compression methods have been
proposed to reduce the model size, either during the local
training process or compressing the model parameters after
local training, which can further reduce the communication
cost of aggregation for federated optimization [180]. These
methods are reviewed in this part.1) Minimizing Communication Round: Jaggi et cl. [55]
proposed a framework named “CoCoA” by leveraging the
primal-dual structure of a convex loss function of general
linear models with a convex regularization term. In each
communication round, each mobile device performs multiple
steps of a dual optimization method based on local dataset
in exchange for fewer communication rounds, followed by
computing the average of updated local models. Motivated
by [55], authors in [57] further proposed a communication-
efﬁcient federated optimization algorithm called “MOCHA”
for multi-task learning. By returning an additional accuracy
level parameter, it is also capable of dealing with straggling
devices. However, these algorithms are not suitable for a
general machine learning problem when the strong duality fails
or the dual problem is difﬁcult to obtain.
The Federated Averaging (FedAvg) [18] algorithm is an-
other communication-efﬁcient federated optimization algo-
rithm by updating local model at each device with a given
number of SGD iterations and model averaging. It is gen-
eralized from the traditional one-shot averaging algorithm
[181] that is applicable only when the data samples at each
device are drawn from the same distribution. In per round
of communication, each device performs a given number of
steps of SGD with a global model as the initial point, and
the aggregated global model is given by the weighted average
of all local models. The weights are chosen as the sizes
of the local training dataset, which is shown to be robust
to not independently and identically distributed (non-IID)
data distribution and unbalanced data across mobile devices.
Wang and Joshi [182] provided the convergence result of the
FedAvg algorithm to a stationary point. To reduce the costly
communication with the remote cloud, edge server assisted
hierarchical federated averaging was proposed in [183]. By
exploiting the highly efﬁcient local communications with edge
servers, it achieves signiﬁcant training speedup compared with
the cloud-based approach. With infrequent model aggregation
at the cloud, it also achieves higher model performance than
edge-based training, as data from more users can be accessed.
For the FedAvg algorithm, the steps of local SGD at each
device should be chosen carefully given the existence of
statistical heterogeneity, i.e., when the local data across devices
are non-IID. If too many steps of SGD are performed locally,
the learning performance will be degraded. To address this
problem, the FedProx algorithm [56] was proposed by adding
a proximal term in the local objective function to restrict the
local updated model to be close to the global model, instead of
initializing each local model with the global updated at each
communication round. Its convergence guarantees are also
provided via characterizing the heterogeneity with a device
dissimilarity assumption. Numerical results demonstrate that
FedProx is more robust to the statistical heterogeneity across
devices.
2) Minimizing Communication Bandwidth: Transmitting
the model parameters per communication round generally
results in a huge communication overhead since the number of
model parameters can be very large. Therefore, it is important
to reduce the model size to alleviate the communication
overhead [180]. To this end, model compression is one of the