J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 16 of 23
and analysis, it can be seen that the model can better plan the path in line with the actual
navigation speciﬁcations in different marine environment.
J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16 of 24 
 
   
(c) 2000th iteration. ( d) 3000th iteration. 
Figure 8. Path planning results under different iterations. ( a) 500th iteration; ( b) 1000th 
iteration; ( c) 2000th iteration; ( d) 3000th iteration. 
In order to verify the credibility and effe ctiveness of the model, this paper selects 
other complex marine environment for the expe rimental verification of ship path plan-
ning. Figure 9 shows the path planning result s of the model in marine environment case 
1. Figure 9a shows the initial environment of  marine environment case 1, and Figure 9b 
shows the path planning results after 3000 it erations. The starting point coordinates of 
the ship are (86, 265) and the target point c oordinates are (326, 45). It can be seen from 
Figure 9b that the trajectory planned by th e model avoids the obstacles and keeps a safe 
distance from the obstacles, and finally reaches the target point safely. Figure 10 shows 
the path planning results of the model in ma rine environment case 2. Figure 10a shows 
the initial environment of marine environmen t case 2, and Figure 10b shows the path 
planning results after 3000 iterations. The star ting point coordinates of the ship are (110, 
70) and the target point coordinates are (800, 4 70). It can be seen from Figure 10b that the 
path planned by the model can reach the target position safely, which is in line with the 
specifications and requirements of the ac tual navigation. Through the above experi-
mental verification and analysis, it can be s een that the model can better plan the path in 
line with the actual navigation specifications in different marine environment. 
  
(a) Initial marine environmental information ( b) 3000th iteration in case 1 
Figure 9. Path planning results in case  1 of marine environment. ( a) Initial marine environmental 
information; ( b) 3000th iteration in case 1. 
Figure 9. Path planning results in case 1 of marine environment. ( a) Initial marine environmental
information; ( b) 3000th iteration in case 1.
J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  17 of 24 
 
   
(a) Initial marine environmental infomation ( b) 3000th iteration in case 2 
Figure 10. Path planning results in case  2 of marine environment. ( a) Initial marine environmental 
information; ( b) 3000th iteration in case 2. 
On the other hand, this research applies result of path planning to the obstacle po-
tential map in three-dimensional environment, as shown in Figure 9. Different colors in 
the figure indicate the level of potential energy. In the figure, the red represent positive 
potential energy and it corresponds to the relevant obstacles. The potential energy of 0 in blue represents the navigable sea area. The high er the potential energy value is, the larger 
the influence range of obstacles is, and vice versa. The interaction process between the 
actual predicted path and the marine environment can be better observed from the 
graph. 
Figure 11a,b shows the initial obstacle potential images in the actual marine envi-
ronment, as well as the initial positions of the ship's starting point and target point. Fig-
ure 11c shows the ship's course along the path predicted. It can be seen that the current 
ship does not reach the area with high potentia l energy value, that is, there is no collision 
with obstacles. Figure 11d sh ows the effect picture of the path predicted by the model. 
The predicted complete path does not reach the area with high potential energy value, 
that is avoids the obstacle area and finally reaches the target safely . 
  
(a) ( b) 
 
 
(c) ( d) 
Figure 11. Combination of obstacle potential and DQN-based ship path planning. ( a) Initial marine environment of 
obstacle potential; ( b) Initial position of starting point and target point; ( c) Model prediction path process; ( d) Model 
prediction end of path 
Figure 10. Path planning results in case 2 of marine environment. ( a) Initial marine environmental
information; ( b) 3000th iteration in case 2.
On the other hand, this research applies result of path planning to the obstacle potential
map in three-dimensional environment, as shown in Figure 9. Different colors in the ﬁgure
indicate the level of potential energy. In the ﬁgure, the red represent positive potential
energy and it corresponds to the relevant obstacles. The potential energy of 0 in blue
represents the navigable sea area. The higher the potential energy value is, the larger the
inﬂuence range of obstacles is, and vice versa. The interaction process between the actual
predicted path and the marine environment can be better observed from the graph.
Figure 11a,b shows the initial obstacle potential images in the actual marine environ-
ment, as well as the initial positions of the ship’s starting point and target point. Figure 11c
shows the ship’s course along the path predicted. It can be seen that the current ship
does not reach the area with high potential energy value, that is, there is no collision with
obstacles. Figure 11d shows the effect picture of the path predicted by the model. The
predicted complete path does not reach the area with high potential energy value, that is
avoids the obstacle area and ﬁnally reaches the target safely.
4.3. Path Smoothing
Trajectory data compression algorithms are generally divided into two categories: one
is to linearize the motion trajectory by segments [ 26], which is the most commonly used
algorithm due to its simple algorithm form and low computational complexity, the other is
nonlinear trajectory ﬁtting [ 27], which is closer to the real track, but faces the problems of
complex algorithm and large amount of calculation. Because the ship’s trajectory is along
the established path and the real path is composed of several channel points, the linear