J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 13 of 23
4. Experimental Veriﬁcation and Result Analysis
In this section, the reliability and effectiveness of the path planning model of coastal
ships are veriﬁed by simulation experiments. It mainly includes the establishment of
training experimental environment and the setting of algorithm parameters, the model
prediction of path and the smooth processing of path.
4.1. Experimental Environment Construction and Algorithm Parameter Setting
Based on the electronic chart platform, this paper selects the real sea environment
as the environment space of model training. Using the grid method in Section 3.1.1, the
marine environment is rasterized with 0.1 nautical mile as the grid size, and ﬁnally the
marine environment is quantiﬁed as “0” and “1” format data. Then, a 400 350 two-
dimensional simulation environment is built, based on the quantized data in Python. In this
two-dimensional coordinate system, each coordinate position corresponds to the quantized
marine environment information, each coordinate can be mapped to each element of the
environmental state, which can be used to represent the navigable area and no navigation
area. At the same time, in the simulation environment, each coordinate position uses 0
or 1 to represent the current environment state value, where 0 represents the navigable
area of the ship, which is displayed as a white area in the environment model; 1 represents
the obstacle, which is the non-navigable area, which is displayed as a black area in the
environment model.
Figure 7 shows the two-dimensional simulation training marine environment required
for the experiment. Figure 7a shows the real marine environment information, including
the information of the ocean, shore-based islands and sunken ships. Figure 7b shows
the corresponding simulation experiment environment information of the real marine
environment after processing by the grid method. On the other hand, the safe driving
distance of the ship is related to the size of the ship itself. Large ships often need a long
safe distance and take action earlier. Therefore, this paper expands the obstacles in the
marine environment, and increases the boundary of the obstacles by 0.1 nautical miles on
the basis of the original proportion.
J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 24 
 
 quantized marine environment information, each coordinate can be mapped to each 
element of the environmental state, which ca n be used to represent the navigable area 
and no navigation area. At the same time, in the simulation environment, each coordinate 
position uses 0 or 1 to represent the curren t environment state value, where 0 represents 
the navigable area of the ship, which is di splayed as a white area in the environment 
model; 1 represents the obstacle, which is the non-navigable area, whic h is displayed as a 
black area in the environment model. 
Figure 7 shows the two-dimensional simulation training marine environment re-
quired for the experiment. Figure 7a shows the real marine environment information, 
including the information of the ocean, shore- based islands and sunken ships. Figure 7b 
shows the corresponding simulation experime nt environment information of the real 
marine environment after processing by the grid method. On the other hand, the safe 
driving distance of the ship is related to the size of the ship itself. Large ships often need a 
long safe distance and take action earlier. Therefore, this paper expands the obstacles in 
the marine environment, and increases the boundary of the obstacles by 0.1 nautical 
miles on the basis of the original proportion. 
  
(a) Real marine environment. ( b) Simulation experi ment environment. 
Figure 7. Two-dimensional simulation trai ning marine environment: ( a) real marine environment; 
(b) simulation experiment environment. 
The goal of the model is composed of two pa rts: goal orientation and action decision. 
When there are no or few obstacles in the marine environment, the action decision made 
by the model will guide the ship to approach the target point quickly until it reaches the 
target point. When the obstacles in the marine environment affect the ship approaching 
the target point, the model helps the ship to avoid the obstacles and move towards the 
target point by action decision-making, and improves the quality of action deci-
sion-making through the interaction between the ship and the environment and the con-
straints of rules in the navigation process.  The parameter settings of the model in the 
training process are shown in Table 1. Among them, only a part of the neurons in the ac-
tivation function ReLu will be activated at the same time, which makes the network very 
sparse and efficient. Therefore, the sparse model implemented by ReLu can better fit the 
data and learn the relevant features autonomo usly. Because the activa tion function ReLu 
has the advantages of simple calculation, hi gh training efficiency and overcoming the 
gradient disappearance, it is selected as the ac tivation function of the neural network of 
the algorithm. It can better enhance the ship's  autonomous learning ability, speed up the 
model training speed, and realize the stability and effectiveness of path planning. 
Table 1. Model training para meter definition. 
Figure 7. Two-dimensional simulation training marine environment: ( a) real marine environment;
(b) simulation experiment environment.
The goal of the model is composed of two parts: goal orientation and action decision.
When there are no or few obstacles in the marine environment, the action decision made
by the model will guide the ship to approach the target point quickly until it reaches the
target point. When the obstacles in the marine environment affect the ship approaching
the target point, the model helps the ship to avoid the obstacles and move towards the