J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 14 of 23
target point by action decision-making, and improves the quality of action decision-making
through the interaction between the ship and the environment and the constraints of rules
in the navigation process. The parameter settings of the model in the training process are
shown in Table 1. Among them, only a part of the neurons in the activation function ReLu
will be activated at the same time, which makes the network very sparse and efﬁcient.
Therefore, the sparse model implemented by ReLu can better ﬁt the data and learn the
relevant features autonomously. Because the activation function ReLu has the advantages
of simple calculation, high training efﬁciency and overcoming the gradient disappearance,
it is selected as the activation function of the neural network of the algorithm. It can better
enhance the ship’s autonomous learning ability, speed up the model training speed, and
realize the stability and effectiveness of path planning.
Table 1. Model training parameter deﬁnition.
Parameters Name Parameters Value Description
Action space size 8 Optional action of the ship
Learning rate a 0.01 Learning rate of neural network
Decay factor g 0.9 Decay factor of cumulative reward
Exploration rate # 1 Exploration rate of action
Explore decay rate 0.995 Exploration decay rate of action
Experience replay memory D 10,000 Stores historical experience data
Sample size Dmin 512 Size of extracted empirical data
Hidden layers size 3 Size of hidden layers in networks
Number of neurons 128 Number of neurons in hidden layer
Activation function ReLu Neuron activation function
4.2. Model Validation Results
In order to verify the effectiveness of the coastal ship path planning model based on
optimized DQN, this chapter introduces the ship path planning results under different
training iterations, as shown in Figure 8. The black area represents the type of obstacle,
that is area where the ship is prohibited from sailing, and the white area represents the
navigable sea area. At the same time, the initial position of the ship is set as (183, 239) and
the green dot is used to indicate the initial position. The target point position is (283, 268)
and the target position is indicated by a red ﬁve-pointed star. The planned path of the ship
is represented by a solid blue line.
J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 24 
 
 Sample sizeminD  512 Size of extracted empirical data 
Hidden layers size 3 Size of hidden layers in networks 
Number of neurons 128 Number of neurons in hidden layer 
Activation function ReLu Neuron activation function 
4.2. Model Validation Results 
In order to verify the effectiveness of the coastal ship path planning model based on 
optimized DQN, this chapter introduces the sh ip path planning results under different 
training iterations, as shown in Figure 8. The black area represents the type of obstacle, that is area where the ship is prohibited from sailing, and the white area represents the 
navigable sea area. At the same time, the initial position of the ship is set as (183, 239) and 
the green dot is used to indicate the initial position. The target point position is (283, 268) 
and the target position is indicated by a re d five-pointed star. The planned path of the 
ship is represented by a solid blue line. 
As shown in Figure 8a, in the initial 500 iterations, although the planned path finally 
reached the target point, there were more turn  back paths. This is because the DRL algo-
rithm in training is through constant trial and error behavior, so as to find the optimal 
solution, so there will be more trial and erro r behavior in the early stage of training. On 
the other hand, ships constantly exploring in  the early stage, which cannot accurately 
judge the obstacles and target areas in the environment, and there are many exploration 
behaviors when facing obstacles. Therefore, it can be seen from the figure that there are 
many turn back phenomena in the path planned by the model. Figure 8b shows the pre-
diction result after 1000 iterations. The model gradually plans the path with less redun-
dant paths and reaches the target point. Howe ver, the planned path passes through some 
obstacles and collides with obstacles many times in the process, which obviously does 
not meet the requirements of the ship safety  regulations. Figure 8c shows the prediction 
result after 2000 iterations. After continuous self-learning, the predicted path is guaran-
teed in terms of safety , and the collision phenomenon is gradually reduced, and finally it 
reaches the target position successfully. However, the planned path still fluctuates greatly, and the corner angle is too large to meet th e actual navigation requirements. Figure 8d 
shows the result after 3000 iterations. The sh ip does not pass through the obstacles and 
successfully avoids all obstacles, and finally reaches the target point. At this time, the planned path fluctuation is weak, and gradually tends to be stable. This is because the 
random exploration rate of action space is re served, so there is slight fluctuation in the 
whole path. 
  
(a) 500th iteration. ( b) 1000th iteration. 
Figure 8. Cont .