J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 17 of 23
compression algorithm is more suitable for the ship’s actual path, and also can save some
computing resources. Among many linear compression algorithms, the Douglas–Peucker
algorithm is the most representative.
J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  17 of 24 
 
   
(a) Initial marine environmental infomation ( b) 3000th iteration in case 2 
Figure 10. Path planning results in case  2 of marine environment. ( a) Initial marine environmental 
information; ( b) 3000th iteration in case 2. 
On the other hand, this research applies result of path planning to the obstacle po-
tential map in three-dimensional environment, as shown in Figure 9. Different colors in 
the figure indicate the level of potential energy. In the figure, the red represent positive 
potential energy and it corresponds to the relevant obstacles. The potential energy of 0 in blue represents the navigable sea area. The high er the potential energy value is, the larger 
the influence range of obstacles is, and vice versa. The interaction process between the 
actual predicted path and the marine environment can be better observed from the 
graph. 
Figure 11a,b shows the initial obstacle potential images in the actual marine envi-
ronment, as well as the initial positions of the ship's starting point and target point. Fig-
ure 11c shows the ship's course along the path predicted. It can be seen that the current 
ship does not reach the area with high potentia l energy value, that is, there is no collision 
with obstacles. Figure 11d sh ows the effect picture of the path predicted by the model. 
The predicted complete path does not reach the area with high potential energy value, 
that is avoids the obstacle area and finally reaches the target safely . 
  
(a) ( b) 
 
 
(c) ( d) 
Figure 11. Combination of obstacle potential and DQN-based ship path planning. ( a) Initial marine environment of 
obstacle potential; ( b) Initial position of starting point and target point; ( c) Model prediction path process; ( d) Model 
prediction end of path 
Figure 11. Combination of obstacle potential and DQN-based ship path planning. ( a) Initial marine environment of obstacle
potential; ( b) Initial position of starting point and target point; ( c) Model prediction path process; ( d) Model prediction end
of path.
4.3.1. Douglas–Peucker Algorithm
The Douglas–Peucker algorithm, referred to as DP algorithm, is an algorithm that
approximately represents a curve as a series of points and reduces the number of points [ 28].
It was proposed by Douglas and Peucker in 1973 and perfected by other scholars in the
following decades.
The basic idea of DP algorithm is as follows: the ﬁrst and last positions of each curve
are connected by imaginary connecting lines, the distance between all points and the
straight line is calculated, and the maximum distance value dmaxis found. Compared with
the limit threshold dmaxbyDmax, the appropriate points are retained and the points that
do not meet the requirements are removed. The steps of the algorithm are as follows:
1. Connect a straight line, AB, between two points A and B at the beginning and end
of a trajectory curve, which is the chord of the curve, traverse all other points on the
curve, calculate the distance from each point to the line AB, ﬁnd the point C with the
maximum distance, and mark the maximum distance as dmax.
2. The distance dmaxis compared with the pre-deﬁned threshold Dmax. Ifdmax<Dmax,
the AB curve segment is approximated and the curve segment is processed.
3. Ifdmax>Dmax, the curve AB is divided into AC and CB at point C, and the two
sections are processed in steps (1) (2) respectively.
4. When all the curves are processed, the broken line formed by connecting each seg-
mentation point in turn is the path of the original curve.
The DP algorithm has a simple structure and high computational efﬁciency. It is a
post compression method which needs to deﬁne the starting point and target point, and
is an ofﬂine compression method. In the aspect of ship path planning, the initial path
obtained by the planning is smoothed by DP algorithm, which will be more suitable for