J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 6 of 23
convergence speed and stability of the algorithms, and ensure the safety and economy of
the coastal ship navigation process.
3. Model of Coastal Ship Path Planning
3.1. Environmental Status Information Processing
3.1.1. Gridding of Marine Environment
The grid method is a discrete modeling method. Its basic idea is to use a series of grids
with a certain resolution to represent the environment, and mark these grids separately to
complete the system modeling of the environment. The key of the grid method is to identify
the map, because of its simple data structure and strong current, it is convenient for spatial
analysis and surface simulation, and is conducive to the creation and maintenance of grid
map. On the other hand, the size of the grid partition is negatively related to the amount
of environmental information storage. When the grid partition is larger, the resolution of
the environment will decline, and the optimal path may be missed in the dense obstacle
environment. When the grid partition is smaller, the resolution of the environment is
higher, and the ability to deal with the dense obstacles is stronger, but the online planning
algorithm needs longer calculation time. At present, many researchers apply the grid
method to ship path planning, and it is still one of the more widely used methods [25].
Figure 2 shows the process of using grid method to process marine environmental in-
formation. Among them, Figure 2a shows the state information before marine environment
gridding, including the land and ocean information; Figure 2b shows the state information
after marine environment gridding, and uses grid to label non navigable areas.
J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 24 
 
 ciency and slow convergence speed of the algori thm. In order to solve the problems of slow 
convergence speed and long training period of  traditional reward function, this paper 
combines the COLREGS and referring to the actual navigation rules of ships, by setting the potential energy reward of the target point to the ship, adding the reward area near the 
target point and adding the danger area near  the obstacle, So as to improve the conver-
gence speed and stability of the algorithms, an d ensure the safety and economy of the 
coastal ship navigation process. 
3. Model of Coastal Ship Path Planning 
3.1. Environmental Status Information Processing 3.1.1. Gridding of Marine Environment 
The grid method is a discrete modeling method. Its basic idea is to use a series of 
grids with a certain resolution to represent the environment, and mark these grids sepa-
rately to complete the system modeling of the environment. The key of the grid method is 
to identify the map, because of its simple da ta structure and strong current, it is conven-
ient for spatial analysis and surface simulation, and is conducive to the creation and 
maintenance of grid map. On the other hand, the size of the grid partition is negatively related to the amount of environmental information storage. When the grid partition is 
larger, the resolution of the environment will decline, and the optimal path may be 
missed in the dense obstacle environment. When  the grid partition is smaller, the resolu-
tion of the environment is higher, and the ability to deal with the dense obstacles is 
stronger, but the online planning algorithm needs longer calculation time. At present, many researchers apply the grid method to ship path planning, and it is still one of the 
more widely used methods [25]. 
Figure 2 shows the process of using grid method to process marine environmental 
information. Among them, Figure 2a shows the state information before marine envi-
ronment gridding, including the land and ocea n information; Figure 2b shows the state 
information after marine environment gridding, and uses grid to label non navigable areas. 
  
(a) 
Before gridding of marine environment.  ( b) After gridding of marine environment.  
Figure 2. Gridding process of marine environmental: ( a) before gridding of marine environment; 
(b) after gridding of marine environment. 
In this paper, the grid method is used  to treat the marine environment into a 
two-dimensional simulation oc ean environment, and the spec ific values are used to rep-
resent the navigable area and the obstacle ar ea, where the value 0 represents the naviga-
ble area, which is displayed as the white area  in the simulation en vironment; the value 1 
represents the obstacle, that is the non-navi gable area, which is displayed as the black 
area in the simulation environment. In the two-dimensional coordina te system, each co-
ordinate point corresponds to a state of the ship. There are only two states of the ship, 
navigable and prohibited. The marine envi ronment information is extracted and pro-
cessed as shown in Figure 3. 
Figure 2. Gridding process of marine environmental: ( a) before gridding of marine environment; ( b)
after gridding of marine environment.
In this paper, the grid method is used to treat the marine environment into a two-
dimensional simulation ocean environment, and the speciﬁc values are used to represent
the navigable area and the obstacle area, where the value 0 represents the navigable area,
which is displayed as the white area in the simulation environment; the value 1 represents
the obstacle, that is the non-navigable area, which is displayed as the black area in the
simulation environment. In the two-dimensional coordinate system, each coordinate point
corresponds to a state of the ship. There are only two states of the ship, navigable and
prohibited. The marine environment information is extracted and processed as shown in
Figure 3.
3.1.2. Ship Navigation in Accordance with COLREGS
The COLREGS must be considered before applying marine environmental information
to path planning model, so as to ensure the practicability and effectiveness. Only according
to COLREGS, the ship path planning can be applied to the actual navigation process. When
a ship makes a decision from the perspective of the first person based on its environmental
observation information, it is called “self-ship”, while other ships and obstacles nearby are
regarded as “other ships”. When the self-ship’s surrounding environment information is a
navigable area, the ship should consider the economic cost and design the path according