J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 2 of 23
The coastal ship path planning is aimed to obtain a collision free and constrained path
in a speciﬁc environment, considering various factors. The ship path planning is divided
into static and dynamic global path planning and local path planning. The paper of global
path planning mainly provides a general macro path solution for ship navigation, and
more geographic location information and meteorological information will be considered
in the course of path formulation [ 4]. Local path planning is mainly to avoid dynamic
obstacles in speciﬁc scenarios, and conduct real-time collision avoidance through a series
of decisions [5].
This paper aims to solve the problem of global path planning of ships under coastal
environmental conditions, which is an important part of the autonomous development of
intelligent ships. In the development of ship decision-making system, this paper proposes a
coastal ship path planning model based on deep Q network (DQN) algorithm, and veriﬁes
the robustness and efﬁciency of the model in the actual environment of electronic charts.
In this study, we divide the ship path planning problem into three sub problems:
1. Processing of environmental information
Environmental processing is to divide the marine environment under study into
navigable areas and non-navigable areas, and to identify the environmental characteristics
of each location to complete the final modeling of the marine environment. Environmental
status information mainly includes marking navigable areas, marking non-navigable areas,
and establishing obstacle information. The grid method [ 6] is a commonly used environment
modeling method. Its basic idea is to use a grid with a certain resolution to represent the
environment, and to identify the meaning of these grids to complete the system modeling
of the environment.
2. Path search
Searching for a path means to predict a feasible path from the starting point to the
target point without collision through a speciﬁc algorithm model based on the established
environmental model. In all the predicted paths, through the optimization function itera-
tively constrained the normativity of the path, and ﬁnally selected an optimal path that
satisﬁes the constraint conditions from all feasible paths as the actual ship path.
3. Path smoothing
In the actual navigation of a ship, not only the economy of the path must be considered,
but the safety of the ship’s navigation must be ensured at the same time. For example, the
ship cannot pass through complicated obstacles and the turning angle of the ship should
not be too large. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate and optimize the optimal path. If the
planned path passes through the middle of the obstacles, or the turning angle of the ship
is too large at some place, these phenomena are not in line with the safe navigation rules
of the ship, and the path needs to be smoothed. Through smooth processing, the obtained
path will be more in line with the actual navigation specifications of the ship, and the safety
of the ship’s navigation will be improved.
According to the above analysis, the paper on the independent path planning of
coastal ships can be divided into the following aspects. Firstly, it is necessary to process the
environmental state information, distinguish navigable area and non-navigable area, and
expand the complex obstacle area. Then, according to the established marine environment
model, an appropriate intelligent algorithm is selected to search the optimal path. Finally,
the safety and economy of the path are evaluated, and the relevant path smoothing method
is adopted to make the planned path more in line with the actual navigation speciﬁcations.
The remaining sections of the paper are organized as follows. Related works are
presented in Section 2. The optimization of DQN algorithm and the path planning model
of coastal ships is presented in Section 3. Experimental veriﬁcation and result analysis are
presented in Section 4. The paper is concluded in Section 5.