J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 3 of 23
2. Related Research
With the development of shipping industry, more and more researchers pay attention
to the path planning of coastal ships. At present, the path planning algorithms of coastal
ships mainly include traditional non-intelligent algorithms, bionic intelligent algorithms
and machine learning algorithms.
Traditional non-intelligent algorithms mainly include the velocity obstacles (VO) al-
gorithm, A* algorithm and the artificial potential field (APF) algorithm. Kuwata et al. [ 7]
used the VO algorithm and combined with Convention on the International Regulations for
Preventing Collisions at Sea (COLREGS) [ 8] to present an autonomous planning algorithm
for unmanned surface vehicles (USV) to navigate safely in dynamic. The experimental re-
sults show that USV can better avoid obstacles and path planning, but there will be multiple
minimum values, which leads to the situation that the optimal solution cannot be obtained.
Petres et al. [ 9] uses the APF method to construct a virtual gravitational field to guide the
ship to the target waypoint. By transforming the navigation restricted area into a virtual
obstacle area and constructing a virtual repulsion field, this method realizes the obstacle
avoidance and autonomous path planning in complex navigation environment. This APF
has the advantages of simple algorithm structure and high computational efficiency, but
it is easy to fall into local minimum and target point oscillation. Campbell et al. [ 10] pro-
posed a real-time path planning method for USV based on an improved A* algorithm. The
algorithm is integrated in the decision-making framework and combined with COLREGS.
The results show that the method achieves real-time path planning for USV in complex
navigation environments. However, this method relies on the design of the grid map, and
the spacing and number of grids will directly affect the calculation speed and accuracy of
the algorithm. Xue et al. [ 11] combined with the COLREGS international maritime collision
avoidance rules, and proposed a path planning method based on the APF method. The
experimental results show that this method can effectively achieve ship path search and
collision avoidance. However, this method is difficult to deal with the problems of path
planning and collision avoidance in an unknown and restricted navigation environment.
The traditional non-intelligent algorithms usually have the advantages of simple structure
and less computation, but in some cases, there are multiple minima, which cannot guarantee
the optimal solution.
Bionic intelligent algorithms mainly include the ant colony optimization (ACO) algo-
rithm and genetic algorithm (GA). Xin et al. [ 12] improved the traditional particle swarm
optimization (PSO) algorithm through three methods: random group inversion, adap-
tive control acceleration coefficient and linear descent inertia weight method, and used
the improved algorithm for path planning. Experiments show that the improved algo-
rithm solves the premature problem of particle swarm optimization. Xin et al. [ 13] also
introduced a strategy of increasing the number of offspring of GA algorithms by using
multi-domain inversion, which effectively improved the local search capabilities of GA algo-
rithms. Experiments show that the path planned by the improved algorithm is shorter and
the convergence speed is faster. However, this method usually needs to continuously adjust
the initial population parameters to avoid falling into the local optimum. Ding et al. [ 14]
extracted the navigation environment information of ships in the electronic chart and carried
out experimental modeling. The PSO algorithm was used to carry out unmanned ship path
planning with path distance as the constraint condition. However, this method is prone
to premature convergence and the loss of diversity of the population in the search space.
Lazarowska et al. [ 15] showed a ship path planning method based on ACO algorithm. By
changing the path planning problem to dynamic optimization, collision risk and voyage
loss were taken as objective functions, and the optimal path and collision avoidance strategy
were obtained under dynamic obstacle environment. However, such bionic intelligent
algorithms usually need more prior knowledge and a large amount of calculation, which
leads to the problems of long calculation time and local minimum, so it is mainly used in
the auxiliary decision-making of path planning.