J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 5 of 23
of all the behavior spaces of the ship in any state; Prepresents the probability that the ship
will reach the next state after choosing action, which can be expressed as a conditional
probability formula P(s,s0) =P(s0js,a);Rrepresents the reward function, the real-time
reward obtained after the ship chooses action; grepresents the reward discount factor, and
the return value at the next moment is attenuated according to this factor, where g2(0, 1). It
can be seen that the process of ship’ path planning is a learning and decision-making process
of strengthening learning. The ship selects an action according to the current state, which
will affect the environment, and receives the feedback (reward or punishment) from the
environment. The ship selects the next action according to the current feedback information
and action strategy, and enters into the new environmental state. The principle of action
selection is to maximize the positive feedback given by the environment.
DRL combines the perception ability of deep learning with the decision-making ability
of reinforcement learning, and can realize direct control from the original input to the output
through the end-to-end learning method, which has strong versatility [ 22]. Among them,
the most representative is the DQN algorithm [23]. In the case of unknown environmental
information, it can obtain reasonable behavior decisions by virtue of self-learning ability, and
has strong universality and learning ability. On the other hand, DQN algorithm combines
convolutional neural network with Q-learning in traditional reinforcement learning. In
order to alleviate the instability of value function representation in nonlinear network, DQN
mainly improves the traditional Q-learning algorithm in three aspects: (1) Using experience
replay. At each time step, the sample information obtained by the Agent interacting with
the environment is stored in the experience buffer pool. During training, each time a small
batch of samples are randomly selected from the pool and the stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) algorithm is used to update the network parameters. This method greatly reduces the
correlation between the samples and improves the stability of the algorithm. (2) The DQN
algorithm uses neural network to approximate the current value function, and uses a single
network to generate the target Q value, which becomes the target value network. After the
introduction of the target value network, the Q value of the target value network remains
unchanged for a period of time, which reduces the correlation between the current value
network Q value and the target Q value, and improves the stability of the network. (3) DQN
algorithm reduces the reward value and error term to a limited interval, ensuring that both
the Q value and the gradient value are in a reasonable range. When solving various tasks
based on state awareness, DQN uses the same set of network models, parameter settings
and training algorithms, and has achieved good results, which fully shows that it has strong
adaptability and stability [24].
DRL method is gradually being applied to the transportation ﬁeld with its strong self-
learning ability and function ﬁtting ability, especially in areas such as unmanned driving
and path planning. In the marine ﬁeld, some scholars have applied DRL related algorithms
to surface unmanned vehicle and other aspects and have achieved good results. Therefore,
DRL has broad application prospects and room for expansion in the marine ﬁeld.
However, there are few studies on path planning of coastal ships based on DRL. Part
of the research focuses on the combined use of DRL and traditional algorithms, such as
combining DRL with APF to get an algorithm model. Because a reasonably designed
reward function in DRL plays a key role in the effect of the entire model, thus guiding
the ship to learn autonomously to avoid obstacles and reach the target point. Therefore,
the combination of DRL and traditional algorithms weakens the main role of the reward
function to a certain extent, which may lead to failure to learn the optimal path planning
strategy. On the other hand, some DRL based path planning models use the distance
between the ship and the object as a constant reward value, which will lead to low learning
efﬁciency and slow convergence speed of the algorithm. In order to solve the problems
of slow convergence speed and long training period of traditional reward function, this
paper combines the COLREGS and referring to the actual navigation rules of ships, by
setting the potential energy reward of the target point to the ship, adding the reward area
near the target point and adding the danger area near the obstacle, So as to improve the