J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 4 of 23
Machine learning methods mainly include neural network and reinforcement learning.
Zhou et al. [ 16] proposed a USV autonomous path planning based on deep reinforcement
learning (DRL). At the same time, the USV motion model and collision risk assessment strat-
egy were integrated into the path planning. The algorithm was veriﬁed by experiments in
the constructed simulation environment and the actual ocean environment. Chen et al. [ 17]
introduced a path planning and maneuvering method for unmanned cargo ships based on
Q-learning. This method obtains the optimal behavior strategy through reward guidance,
and through continuous training and learning, the ship can obtain the optimal path. How-
ever, this method cannot solve the problem of high-dimensional space, large q-table may
lead to slow convergence. Zhang et al. [ 18] offered an autonomous navigation decision
model based on hierarchical DRL in order to realize ship path planning in port environ-
ment. The model mainly includes scene partition layer and navigation decision layer. The
experimental results show that the improved DRL algorithm can effectively improve the
safety and obstacle avoidance ability of ship path planning. Yu et al. [ 19] used the improved
DRL method to solve the problem of trajectory tracking control of underwater vehicles. The
method is composed of an action selection network and an action evaluation network, and
constantly modiﬁes the action strategy. The experimental results show that the algorithm
can solve the problem of trajectory tracking of underwater vehicles in complex curves to a
certain extent. In order to solve the problem of path planning and autonomous obstacle
avoidance of maritime surface ships (MASS) in uncertain environments, Wang et al. [ 20]
proposed a decision-making model of MASS behavior based on improved DRL was pro-
posed. The APF is used to improve the network structure of DRL. The simulation results
show that the path planned based on the improved DRL meets the actual navigation
speciﬁcations, and improves the learning and adaptive obstacle avoidance ability of MASS.
The DRL overcomes the shortcomings of other algorithms, such as the large amount of
computation and the need for a certain number of prior samples. At the same time, it also
has strong learning ability and stability. However, there will be the problem of training
time stamp and slow convergence speed.
The Markov decision process (MDP) is a typical decision process model. Usually in
MDP , the decision maker (Agent) relies on a certain action strategy to perform an action
in the environment, and the environment generates a new state and reward for the corre-
sponding action after the Agent performs the action. Among them, a mapping of Agent
from state to action is called action strategy pq,pq(atjst)represents the probability of Agent
choosing action atunder the condition of state stat a certain moment. The reward Rcan
also be called reward value, which is a kind of feedback information from the environment
to the action, which tells the Agent the quality of its action selection. Therefore, reinforce-
ment learning [ 21] in discrete time can essentially be regarded as MDP . The principle of
reinforcement learning is shown in Figure 1.
J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 24 
 
 Machine learning methods mainly include neural network and reinforcement learn-
ing. Zhou et al. [16] proposed a USV autonomous path planning based on deep reinforce-
ment learning (DRL). At the same time, th e USV motion model and collision risk assess-
ment strategy were integrated into the path planning. The algorithm was verified by ex-
periments in the constructed simulation envi ronment and the actual ocean environment. 
Chen et al. [17] introduced a path planning  and maneuvering method for unmanned cargo 
ships based on Q-learning. This method obtains the optimal behavior strategy through 
reward guidance, and through continuous training and learning, the ship can obtain the optimal path. However, this method cannot solve the problem of high-dimensional space, 
large q-table may lead to slow convergence. Zhang et al. [18] offered an autonomous nav-
igation decision model based on hierarchical DR L in order to realize ship path planning in 
port environment. The model mainly includes  scene partition layer and navigation deci-
sion layer. The experimental results show that the improved  DRL algorithm can effectively 
improve the safety and obstacle avoidance ability of ship path planning. Yu et al. [19] used 
the improved DRL method to solve the problem of trajectory tracking control of under-
water vehicles. The method is composed of an action selection network and an action 
evaluation network, and constantly modifies the action strategy. The experimental results 
show that the algorithm can solve the problem of trajectory tracking of underwater vehi-
cles in complex curves to a certain extent. In  order to solve the problem of path planning 
and autonomous obstacle avoidance of mariti me surface ships (MASS) in uncertain envi-
ronments, Wang et al. [20] proposed a deci sion-making model of MASS behavior based on 
improved DRL was proposed. The APF is used to improve the network structure of DRL. 
The simulation results show that the path planned based on the im proved DRL meets the 
actual navigation specifications, and improves  the learning and adaptive obstacle avoid-
ance ability of MASS. The DRL overcomes the sh ortcomings of other algorithms, such as 
the large amount of computation and the need for a certain number of prior samples. At the same time, it also has strong learning ability and stability. However, there will be the 
problem of training time stamp and slow convergence speed. 
The Markov decision process (MDP) is a ty pical decision process model. Usually in 
MDP, the decision maker (Agent) relies on a certain action strategy to perform an action 
in the environment, and the environment generates a new state and reward for the cor-
responding action after the Agent performs the action. Among them, a mapping of Agent 
from state to action is called action strategy
θπ,   ()|ttasθπ  represents the probability of 
Agent choosing actionta under the condition of statets at a certain moment. The reward
R can also be called reward value, which is  a kind of feedback information from the 
environment to the action, which tells the Ag ent the quality of its action selection. 
Therefore, reinforcement learning [21] in discrete time can essentially be regarded as 
MDP. The principle of reinforcement learning is shown in Figure 1. 
Agent
Environmentstate reward    action 
 
Figure 1. Reinforcement learning schematic. 
The coastal ship path planning problem can be defined based on the sequential deci-
sion-making problem. The MDP su itable for ship path planning  can be defined by the fol-
Figure 1. Reinforcement learning schematic.
The coastal ship path planning problem can be defined based on the sequential decision-
making problem. The MDP suitable for ship path planning can be defined by the following
elements: (S,A,P,R,g). Among them, Srepresents the state information of the ship in a
limited space; Arepresents the action space that the ship can perform, that is, the collection