J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 210 19 of 23
Table 2. The number of path corners and path length before and after optimization by DP .
Before Optimization After Optimization
Number of path corners 6 1
Path length/meter 137.612 111.318
4.4. Comparative Analysis of Experimental Results
In this section, by comparing the traditional DQN algorithm with the algorithm
proposed in this paper, the number of training iterations and steps of the model are
compared and analyzed, as shown in Figure 14.
J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  20 of 24 
 
 of round steps of the proposed algorithm began to decrease around the 200th round, 
showing a gradual convergence trend, while the traditional DQN algorithm began to 
show a convergence trend around the 450th roun d. At the same time, it can be seen that 
the number of round steps of the traditional DQN algorithm is maintained at about 138 
steps and does not converge to the minimum number of steps, but the proposed algo-
rithm has converged to the mi nimum number of steps of about 103 steps, which shows 
that the path calculated by the traditiona l DQN algorithm has more  redundancy. In the 
later training process, the proposed algo rithm has smaller fluctuation frequency and 
better stability than the traditional DQN algo rithm. Experimental results show that the 
proposed algorithm has faster iteration speed and better decision-making ability, and can 
quickly reach the target point with less steps. 
  
Figure 14. The convergence trend comparison results of step iteration. 
On the other hand, the length of path trajectory and the number of path corners de-
termine the safety and economy of path planning, and the time of path planning also determines whether the path can be used in time. In this research, the optimized DQN 
algorithm is compared with other path planning algorithms from three aspects: path 
length, number of corners and planning time. 
The other path planning algorithms used in this paper include the following six: 
traditional DQN algorithm, Q-learning algorithm [17], deep deterministic policy gradient 
(DDPG) algorithm [19], A* algorithm, BUG2 algorithm and APF algorithm. In the same 
marine environment, this paper analyzes and compares the experimental results and 
performance data of the abov e algorithms. Among them, the action space of Q-learning 
algorithm and traditional DQN algorithm is th e same as that of the algorithm proposed 
in this paper. The action space of the DDPG algorithm is ( −35 ° and 35 °) and the contin-
uous action output is obtained. 
Figure 15 shows the path planning result of  different algorithms in the same marine 
environment. Figure 15a is the path planning result of 3000 rounds of training based on the traditional DQN algorithm. It can be seen from the figure that the ship can autono-
mously learn to plan a safer path, but the path has more redundant corners, which in-
creases the risk of driving the ship and does not conform to the actual navigation speci-
fications of the ship meet the requirements of path economy. Figure 15b is the path 
planning result of 3000 rounds of training based on the traditional Q-learning algorithm. It can be seen from the figure that the ship finally plans a path, but there are still many 
redundant corners in the path, and the algori thm training takes a long time due to the 
size limitation of Q-table. Figure 15c is the path planning result of 3000 rounds of training based on the traditional DDPG algorithm. It ca n be seen from the figure that the path 
planned is a curve. This is because the re sult obtained by DDPG algorithm is the con-
Figure 14. The convergence trend comparison results of step iteration.
The abscissa in the figure represents the number of training iterations, the ordinate
represents the number of steps required from the starting point to the target point of each
iteration. The blue dotted line represents the iterative trend result of traditional DQN algo-
rithm, and the red solid line represents the iteration trend result of the algorithm proposed
in this paper. The graph clearly and intuitively shows the convergence speed and training
effect of the two algorithms. It can be seen from the figure that the number of round steps
of the proposed algorithm began to decrease around the 200th round, showing a gradual
convergence trend, while the traditional DQN algorithm began to show a convergence trend
around the 450th round. At the same time, it can be seen that the number of round steps of
the traditional DQN algorithm is maintained at about 138 steps and does not converge to
the minimum number of steps, but the proposed algorithm has converged to the minimum
number of steps of about 103 steps, which shows that the path calculated by the traditional
DQN algorithm has more redundancy. In the later training process, the proposed algorithm
has smaller fluctuation frequency and better stability than the traditional DQN algorithm.
Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm has faster iteration speed and better
decision-making ability, and can quickly reach the target point with less steps.
On the other hand, the length of path trajectory and the number of path corners deter-
mine the safety and economy of path planning, and the time of path planning also determines
whether the path can be used in time. In this research, the optimized DQN algorithm is
compared with other path planning algorithms from three aspects: path length, number of
corners and planning time.
The other path planning algorithms used in this paper include the following six:
traditional DQN algorithm, Q-learning algorithm [ 17], deep deterministic policy gradient
(DDPG) algorithm [ 19], A* algorithm, BUG2 algorithm and APF algorithm. In the same
marine environment, this paper analyzes and compares the experimental results and
performance data of the above algorithms. Among them, the action space of Q-learning