Zadeh’s Type-2 Fuzzy Logic Systems: Precision
and High-Quality Prediction Intervals
Yusuf G ¨uven
Control and Automation Eng. Dept.
Istanbul Technical University
Istanbul, T ¨urkiye
guveny18@itu.edu.trAta K ¨okl¨u
Control and Automation Eng. Dept.
Istanbul Technical University
Istanbul, T ¨urkiye
koklu18@itu.edu.trTufan Kumbasar
Control and Automation Eng. Dept.
Istanbul Technical University
Istanbul, T ¨urkiye
kumbasart@itu.edu.tr
Abstract —General Type-2 (GT2) Fuzzy Logic Systems (FLSs)
are perfect candidates to quantify uncertainty, which is crucial for
informed decisions in high-risk tasks, as they are powerful tools
in representing uncertainty. In this paper, we travel back in time
to provide a new look at GT2-FLSs by adopting Zadeh’s (Z) GT2
Fuzzy Set (FS) definition, intending to learn GT2-FLSs that are
capable of achieving reliable High-Quality Prediction Intervals
(HQ-PI) alongside precision. By integrating Z-GT2-FS with the
α-plane representation, we show that the design flexibility of
GT2-FLS is increased as it takes away the dependency of the
secondary membership function from the primary membership
function. After detailing the construction of Z-GT2-FLSs, we pro-
vide solutions to challenges while learning from high-dimensional
data: the curse of dimensionality, and integrating Deep Learning
(DL) optimizers. We develop a DL framework for learning dual-
focused Z-GT2-FLSs with high performances. Our study includes
statistical analyses, highlighting that the Z-GT2-FLS not only
exhibits high-precision performance but also produces HQ-PIs
in comparison to its GT2 and IT2 fuzzy counterparts which
have more learnable parameters. The results show that the Z-
GT2-FLS has a huge potential in uncertainty quantification.
Index Terms —general type-2 fuzzy sets, design flexibility,
accuracy, uncertainty, prediction interval, deep learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep Learning (DL) has achieved significant success in
various applications. Yet, the main focus is on accuracy which
is inadequate in high-risk tasks. Hence, employing Uncertainty
Quantification (UQ) is essential [1]–[4]. For UQ, General
Type-2 (GT2) Fuzzy Logic Systems (FLSs), and also its
simplified version Interval Type-2 (IT2), are perfect candidates
as they are powerful tools in representing uncertainty thanks
to their Membership Functions (MFs) defined with GT2 Fuzzy
Sets (FSs) [5]–[8]. While Zadeh (Z) initially defined GT2-FSs
[9], [10], the fundamental research studies started with the
GT2-FS definition of Mendel & John (MJ) [11]. Yet, the wide
deployment of MJ-GT2-FSs was catalyzed by the zSlices/ α-
plane representation [12], [13], driven by two key aspects: (1)
the shape parameterization of Secondary MF (SMF) of GT2-
FS based on its Primary MF (PMF), and (2) the equivalence of
GT2-FLSs with a collection of α-plane associated IT2-FLSs.
This work was supported by MathWorks®in part by a Research Grant
awarded to T. Kumbasar. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommen-
dations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the MathWorks, Inc.Rather than exploding the huge potential of IT2/GT2 FSs in
UQ, the mainstream learning methods for IT2/GT2 FLSs focus
predominantly on accuracy improvements [14]–[18]. Recently,
there has been a shift in focus, and the IT2 and GT2 FSs
have been exploited as an opportunity for UQ. In [19], a DL
framework is presented via a composite loss that utilizes the
Type-Reduced Set (TRS) and output of IT2-FLSs to learn
predictors capable of generating Prediction Intervals (PIs).
Whereas for MJ-GT2-FLS [20], a composite loss is proposed
that associates the support of SMFs (i.e. PMFs) for UQ while
the shape for accurate pointwise estimation.
In this paper, we present a fresh look at GT2-FLSs through
the perspective of Zadeh’s GT2-FS definition, aiming to
develop high-performing GT2-FLSs with UQ capability. We
show that through the deployment of Z-GT2-FS rather than
MJ-GT2-FS, the dependence of the SMF’s shape on interval-
valued primary membership grade is eliminated and thus
provides more design flexibility. In this context, we first
provide the mathematical foundations of the SMF and PMF
which are both defined with Type-1 FSs. Then, we integrate
theα-plane method into the Z-GT2-FS to define the output of
the Z-GT2-FLS. In this context, to define α-planes, we define
theα-cuts of SMF and then extract equivalent LMF and UMF
corresponding to α-planes of the Z-GT2-FS to directly use the
output formulation defined via α-plane representation.
To address the challenges of learning from high-dimensional
data, we propose an approach to mitigate the impact of the
curse of dimensionality on the Z-GT2-FLS learning process.
The method involves adjusting PMF in proportion to the input
dimension. Also, to satisfy the constraints arising from the
definitions of FSs during learning, we present parameterization
tricks so that learning GT2-FLSs with built-in unconstrained
DL optimizers is feasible.
Within the scope of this study, we present a DL framework
to learn a dual-focused Z-GT2-FLS that not only yields
accurate point-wise predictions but also excels in generating
High-Quality (HQ) PI. To show the superiority of the proposed
approach alongside Z-GT2-FLS, we analyze and compare the
learning performance of the Z-GT2-FLS on high-dimensional
datasets. This comparison includes its MJ-GT2 and IT2 fuzzy
counterparts that have a higher number of Learnable Param-
eters (LPs). The statistical performance analysis demonstratesarXiv:2404.12800v1  [cs.LG]  19 Apr 2024