original E-BERT- E-BERT- ERNIE Know-
BERT replace concat Bert
Jean Marais French French French french french
Daniel Ceccaldi Italian French French french italian
Orane Demazis Albanian French French french french
Sylvia Lopez Spanish French Spanish spanish spanish
Annick Alane English French French english english
Table 1: Native language (LAMA-T-REx:P103) of
French-speaking actors according to different models.
Model size is BASE .
We also test ERNIE (Zhang et al., 2019)6and
KnowBert W+W (Peters et al., 2019),7two
entity-enhanced BERT BASE-type models.8E-BERT,
ERNIE and KnowBert have entity vocabularies of
size 2.7M, 5M and 470K, respectively. As this
might put KnowBert at a disadvantage, Table 3
also reports performance on the subset of questions
whose gold subject is known to KnowBert.
4.3 Evaluation measure
We use the same evaluation measure as Petroni
et al. (2019): For a given k, we count a question
as1if the correct answer is among the top- kpre-
dictions and as 0otherwise. Petroni et al. (2019)
call this measure Precision@k (P@k). Since this is
not in line with the typical use of the term “preci-
sion” in information retrieval (Manning et al., 2008,
p. 161), we call the evaluation measure Hits@k.
Like Petroni et al. (2019), we ﬁrst average within
relations and then across relations.
4.4 LAMA-UHN
Imagine a person who claims to know a lot of facts.
During a quiz, you ask them about the native lan-
guage of actor Jean Marais. They correctly answer
“French.” For a moment you are impressed, until
you realize that Jean is a typical French name. So
you ask the same question about Daniel Ceccaldi (a
French actor with an Italian-sounding name). This
time, the person says “Italian.”
If this quiz were a QA benchmark, the person
would have achieved a respectable Hits@1 score
of 50%. Yet, you doubt that they really knew the
ﬁrst answer.
6https://github.com/thunlp/ERNIE
7https://github.com/allenai/kb
8ERNIE and KnowBert are uncased models. We therefore
lowercase all questions for them and restrict predictions to the
intersection of their wordpiece vocabulary with lowercased
LLAMA . As a result, ERNIE and KnowBert select answers
from18K candidates (instead of 21K), which should work
in their favor. We verify that all lowercased answers appear
in this vocabulary, i.e., ERNIE and KnowBert are in principle
able to answer all questions correctly.Qualitative inspection of BERT’s answers to
LAMA suggests that the model often behaves less
like a KB and more like the person just described.
In Table 1 for instance, BERT predicts native lan-
guages that are plausible for people’s names, even
when there is no factual basis for these predictions.
This kind of name-based reasoning is a useful strat-
egy for getting a high score on LAMA, as the cor-
rect answer and the best name-based guess tend to
coincide (e.g., people with Italian-sounding names
frequently speak Italian). Hence, LAMA in its cur-
rent form cannot differentiate whether a model is
good at reasoning about (the surface form of) entity
names, good at memorizing facts, or both. To quan-
tify the effect, we create LAMA-UHN (UnHelpful
Names), a subset of LAMA where overly helpful
entity names are heuristically deleted:
Heuristic 1 (string match ﬁlter). We ﬁrst delete
all KB triples (questions) where the correct answer
(e.g., Apple ) is a case-insensitive substring of the
subject entity name (e.g., Apple Watch ). This af-
fects 12% of all triples, and up to 81% for individ-
ual relations (see Table 2, top).
Heuristic 2 (person name ﬁlter). Entity names
can be revealing in ways that are more subtle than
string matches. As illustrated by our Jean Marais
example, a person’s name can be a useful prior for
guessing their native language and by extension,
their nationality, place of birth, etc. We therefore
use cloze-style questions to elicit name associations
inherent in BERT, and delete triples that correlate
with them.
The heuristic is best explained via an example.
Consider again ( Jean Marais ,native-language ,
French ). We whitespace-tokenize the subject’s
surface form Jean Marais into Jean andMarais .
If BERT considers either name to be a common
French name, then a correct answer is insufﬁcient
evidence for factual knowledge about the entity
Jean Marais . On the other hand, if neither Jean
norMarais are considered French, but a correct
answer is given regardless, we consider it sufﬁcient
evidence of factual knowledge.
We query BERT with “[X] is a common name
in the following language: [MASK].” for [X] =
Jean and [X] = Marais . (Depending on the rela-
tion, we replace “language” with “city” or “coun-
try”.) If French is among the top-3 answers for
either question, we delete the original triple. We
apply this heuristic to T-REx:P19 (place of birth),