spans with the predicted entity. Our previous ex-
ample might be partially decoded as:
Tony Adams (footballer) and P ##latt are both injured
and will miss England ’s opening 1998 FIFA World Cup
qualiﬁer ...
In the next iteration, decoded entities ( bold) are
represented byEE-BERT in the input, while non-
decoded spans continue to be represented by
EBERT (see Figure 4). We set the maximum num-
ber of iterations to J= 3, as there were no im-
provements beyond that point on the dev set.
Baselines: Wikipedia2Vec-BERT. We train
two additional baseline models that combine BERT
and Wikipedia2Vec without vector space align-
ment:
Wikipedia2Vec-BERT-MLM: BERT and its pre-
trained MLM head, ﬁnetuned to predict non-
aligned Wikipedia2Vec vectors. In practice,
this means replacing EE-BERT withEWikipedia
in Eq. 2. Embedding the [E-MASK] token
with non-alignedEWikipedia led to a drop in
dev set micro F1, therefore we report this base-
line with the standard [MASK] token.
Wikipedia2Vec-BERT-random: Like Wikipe-
dia2Vec-BERT-MLM, but the MLM head is
replaced by a randomly initialized layer.
Data. We train and evaluate on AIDA, a news
dataset annotated with Wikipedia URLs (Hoffart
et al., 2011). To ensure coverage of the necessary
entities, we include all gold entities and all genera-
tor candidates in the entity vocabulary LEnt, even
if they fall under the Wikipedia2Vec link threshold
(see Section 3.3). While this is based on the unreal-
istic assumption that we know the contents of the
test set in advance, it is necessary for comparability
with Peters et al. (2019), Kolitsas et al. (2018) and
Broscheit (2019), who also design their entity vo-
cabulary around the data. See Appendix for more
details on data and preprocessing. We evaluate
strong match F1, i.e., a prediction must have the
same start, end and entity (URL) as the gold stan-
dard. URLs that redirect to the same Wikipedia
page are considered equivalent.
Hyperparameters. We train for 10 epochs with
the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov and Hutter,
2018) and a linear learning rate scheduler (10%
warmup), and we select the best epoch on the dev
set. We tune peak learning rate and batch size on
the dev set (see Appendix).
previous iterations, and n=jfX: argmaxa[p(ajX)]6=gj.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10Training epoch
0.800.850.90F1 E-BERT-MLM
Wikipedia2Vec-BERT-MLM
Wikipedia2Vec-BERT-randomFigure 5: AIDA dev set micro F1 after every epoch.
P R F1
E-BERT-MLM 21.1 61.8 31.5
w/ standard [MASK] token 23.3 65.2 34.3
Wikipedia2Vec-BERT-MLM 1.3 8.3 2.3
Wikipedia2Vec-BERT-random 1.3 6.8 2.2
Table 6: Unsupervised AIDA dev set micro precision /
recall / F1 (%), before ﬁnetuning. Results are without
iterative reﬁnement.
Results and discussion. Table 5 shows that E-
BERT-MLM is competitive with previous work
on AIDA. The aligned entity vectors play a key
role in this performance, as they give the model a
good initialization for predicting entities from con-
text. When we remove this initialization by using
non-aligned entity vectors (Wikipedia2Vec-BERT
baselines), we get worse unsupervised performance
(Table 6), slower convergence during ﬁnetuning
(Figure 5), and a lower ﬁnal F1 (Table 5).
6 Conclusion
We introduced E-BERT , an efﬁcient yet effective
way of injecting factual knowledge about entities
into the BERT pretrained Language Model. We
showed how to align Wikipedia2Vec entity vec-
tors with BERT’s wordpiece vector space, and how
to feed the aligned vectors into BERT as if they
were wordpiece vectors. In doing so, we made no
changes to the BERT encoder itself. This stands in
contrast to other entity-enhanced versions of BERT,
such as ERNIE or KnowBert, which add encoder
layers and require expensive further pretraining.
We set a new state of the art on LAMA, a recent
unsupervised QA benchmark. Furthermore, we
presented evidence that the original BERT model
sometimes relies on the surface forms of entity
names (rather than “true” factual knowledge) for
this task. To quantify this effect, we introduced
LAMA-UHN, a subset of LAMA where questions
with helpful entity names are deleted.
We also showed how to apply E-BERT to two
supervised tasks: relation classiﬁcation and entity
linking. On both tasks, we achieve competitive
results relative to BERT and other baselines.