E-BERT: Efﬁcient-Yet-Effective Entity Embeddings for BERT
Nina Poerneryand Ulli Waltingeryand Hinrich Sch ¨utze
Center for Information and Language Processing, LMU Munich, Germany
yCorporate Technology Machine Intelligence (MIC-DE), Siemens AG Munich, Germany
poerner@cis.uni-muenchen.de | inquiries@cislmu.org
Abstract
We present a novel way of injecting factual
knowledge about entities into the pretrained
BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019): We align
Wikipedia2Vec entity vectors (Yamada et al.,
2016) with BERT’s native wordpiece vector
space and use the aligned entity vectors as if
they were wordpiece vectors. The resulting
entity-enhanced version of BERT (called E-
BERT ) is similar in spirit to ERNIE (Zhang
et al., 2019) and KnowBert (Peters et al.,
2019), but it requires no expensive further pre-
training of the BERT encoder. We evaluate
E-BERT on unsupervised question answering
(QA), supervised relation classiﬁcation (RC)
and entity linking (EL). On all three tasks, E-
BERT outperforms BERT and other baselines.
We also show quantitatively that the original
BERT model is overly reliant on the surface
form of entity names (e.g., guessing that some-
one with an Italian-sounding name speaks Ital-
ian), and that E-BERT mitigates this problem.
1 Introduction
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and its successors (e.g.,
Yang et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2019); Wang et al.
(2019b)) continue to achieve state of the art per-
formance on various NLP tasks. Recently, there
has been interest in enhancing BERT with factual
knowledge about entities (Zhang et al., 2019; Pe-
ters et al., 2019). To this end, we introduce E-
BERT : We align Wikipedia2Vec entity vectors (Ya-
mada et al., 2016) with BERT’s wordpiece vector
space (Section 3.1) and feed the aligned vectors
into BERT as if they were wordpiece vectors (Sec-
tion 3.2). Importantly, we do not make any changes
to the BERT encoder itself, and we do no additional
pretraining. This stands in contrast to previous
entity-enhanced versions of BERT, such as ERNIE
or KnowBert, which require additional encoder pre-
training.In Section 4, we evaluate our approach on
LAMA (Petroni et al., 2019), a recent unsupervised
QA benchmark for pretrained Language Models
(LMs). We set a new state of the art on LAMA,
with improvements over original BERT, ERNIE
and KnowBert. We also ﬁnd that the original BERT
model is overly reliant on the surface form of en-
tity names, e.g., it predicts that a person with an
Italian-sounding name speaks Italian, regardless of
whether this is factually correct. To quantify this ef-
fect, we create LAMA-UHN (UnHelpfulNames),
a subset of LAMA where questions with overly
helpful entity names were deleted (Section 4.4).
In Section 5, we show how to apply E-BERT
to two entity-centric downstream tasks: relation
classiﬁcation (Section 5.1) and entity linking (Sec-
tion 5.2). On the former task, we feed aligned entity
vectors as inputs, on the latter, they serve as inputs
andoutputs. In both cases, E-BERT outperforms
original BERT and other baselines.
Summary of contributions.
•Introduction of E-BERT: Feeding entity vec-
tors into BERT without additional encoder
pretraining. (Section 3)
•Evaluation on the LAMA unsupervised QA
benchmark: E-BERT outperforms BERT,
ERNIE and KnowBert. (Section 4)
•LAMA-UHN: A harder version of the LAMA
benchmark with less informative entity names.
(Section 4.4)
•Evaluation on supervised relation classiﬁca-
tion (Section 5.1) and entity linking (Sec-
tion 5.2).
•Upon publication, we will release LAMA-
UHN as well as E-BERT BASE and E-
BERT LARGE .1
1https://github.com/anonymizedarXiv:1911.03681v2  [cs.CL]  1 May 2020