CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
Figure 1. Context adaptation. A network layer hlis augmented
with additional context parameters (red) initialised to 0before
each adaptation step and updated by gradient descent during each
inner loop and at test time. Network parameters (green) are only
updated in the outer loop and shared across tasks. Hence, they stay
ﬁxed at test time. By initialising to 0, the network parameters
associated with the context parameters (blue) do not affect the
output of the layer before adaptation. After the ﬁrst adaptation step
they modulate the rest of the network to solve the new task.
3.4. Context Parameter Initialisation
When learning a new task, have to be initialised to some
value,0. We argue that, instead of meta-learning this
initialisation as well, a ﬁxed 0is sufﬁcient: in (9), if both
(l;)
j;i and0are meta-learned, the learned initialisation
ofcan be subsumed into the bias parameter b, and0
can be set to a ﬁxed value. Hence, the initialisation of the
context parameters does not have to be meta-learned and
parameter copies are not required during training. In our
implementation we set the initial context parameter to a
vector ﬁlled with zeros, 0=0= [0;:::; 0]>.
Furthermore, not updating the context parameters in the
outer loop allows for a more ﬂexible and expressive gradient
in the inner loop. Consequently, CA VIA is more robust to
the inner loop learning rate, in(5). Before an inner loop
update, the part of the model associated with does not
affect the output (since they are inputs and initialised at 0).
During the inner update, only changes and can affect the
output of the network at test time. Even if this update is
large, the parameters (l;)
k;ithat connect to the rest of the
model (shown in blue in Figure 1), are automatically scaled
during the outer loop. In other words, (l;)
k;icompensates in
the outer loop for any excessively large inner loop update of
. However, doing large gradient updates in every outer loop
update step as well would lead to divergence and numerical
overﬂow. In Section 5.1, we show empirically that the
decoupling of learning andcan indeed make CA VIA
more robust to the initial learning rate compared to also
learning the initialisation of the context parameters.4. Related Work
One general approach to meta-learning is to learn the algo-
rithm or update function itself (Schmidhuber, 1987; Bengio
et al., 1992; Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle,
2017). Another approach is gradient-based meta-learning,
which learns a model initialisation such that at test time, a
new task can be learned within a few gradient steps. Ex-
amples are MAML (Finn et al., 2017a) and its probabilistic
variants (Grant et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2018; Finn et al.,
2018); REPTILE (Nichol & Schulman, 2018), which does
not require second order gradient computation; and Meta-
SGD (Li et al., 2017), which learns the per-parameter inner
loop learning rate. The main difference to our work is that
CA VIA adapts only a few parameters at test time, and these
parameters determine only input context.
Closely related are MT-Nets (Lee & Choi, 2018), which
learn which parameters to update in MAML. MT-Nets learn:
an M-Net which is a mask indicating which parameters to
update in the inner loop, sampled (from a learned probability
distribution) for each new task; and a T-net which learns
a task-speciﬁc update direction and step size. CA VIA is
a simpler, more interpretable alternative where the task-
speciﬁc and shared parameters are disjoint sets.
Additional input biases to MAML were considered by Finn
et al. (2017b), who show that this improves performance on
a robotic manipulation setting. By contrast, we update only
the context parameters in the inner loop, and initialise them
to0before adaptation to a new task. Rei (2015) propose a
similar approach in the context of neural language models,
where a context vector represents the sentence that is cur-
rently being processed (see also the Appendix of Finn et al.
(2017a)). Unlike CA VIA, this approach updates context
parameters in the outer loop, i.e., it learns the initialisation
of. This coupling of the gradient updates leads to a less
ﬂexible meta-update and is not as robust to the inner loop
learning rate like CA VIA, as we show empirically in 5.1.
Silver et al. (2008) proposed context features as a component
of inductive transfer, using a predeﬁned one-hot encoded
task-specifying context as input to the network. They show
that this works better than learning a shared feature extractor
and having separate heads for all tasks. In this paper, we
instead learn this contextual input from data of a new task.
Such context features can also be learned by a separate
embedding network as in, e.g., Oreshkin et al. (2018) and
Garnelo et al. (2018), who use the task’s training set to
condition the prediction network. CA VIA instead learns the
context parameters via backpropagation through the same
network used to solve the task.
Several methods learn to produce network weights from
task-speciﬁc embeddings or labelled datapoints (Gordon
et al., 2018; Rusu et al., 2019), which then operate on the