CA VIA: Fast Context Adaptation via Meta-Learning
(a) Direction
(b) Velocity
Figure 5. Performance of CA VIA and MAML on the RL Cheetah experiments. Both agents were trained to perform one gradient update,
but are evaluated for several update steps. Results are averaged over 40randomly selected tasks.
method with similar architecture and experimental protocol
is VERSA (Gordon et al., 2018), which learns to produce
weights of the classiﬁer, instead of modulating the network.
The current state-of-the-art results in Mini-Imagenet is (to
the best of our knowledge) the method LEO Rusu et al.
(2019) who use pre-trained feature representations from a
deep residual network (He et al., 2016) and a different exper-
imental protocol. CA VIA can be used with such embeddings
as well, and we expect an increase in performance.
In conclusion, CA VIA can achieve much higher accura-
cies than MAML by increasing the network size, without
overﬁtting. Our results are obtained by adjusting only 100
parameters at test time (instead of >30;0000 like MAML),
which embed the ﬁve different classes of the current task.
5.3. Reinforcement Learning
To demonstrate the versatility of CA VIA, we also apply it
to two high dimensional reinforcement learning MuJoCo
(Todorov et al., 2012) tasks using the setup of Finn et al.
(2017a). In the ﬁrst experiment, a Cheetah robot must run in
a particular, randomly chosen direction (forward/backward),
and receives as reward its speed in that direction. In the sec-
ond experiment, the Cheetah robot must run at a particular
velocity, chosen uniformly at random between 0:0and2:0.
The agent’s reward is the negative absolute value between
its current and the target velocity. Each rollout has a length
of200, and we use 20rollouts per gradient step during train-
ing, and a meta-batchsize of 40tasks per outer update. As
in Finn et al. (2017a), our agents are trained for one gradient
update, using policy gradient with generalised advantage
estimation (Schulman et al., 2015b) in the inner loop and
TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015a) in the outer loop update.
Following the protocol of Finn et al. (2017a), both CA VIA
and MAML were trained for up to 500 meta-iterations, and
the models with the best average return during training were
used for evaluation. For these tasks, we use 50context pa-
rameters for CA VIA and an inner-loop learning rate of 10.
We found that starting with a higher learning rate helps forRL problems, since the policy update in the outer loop has
a stronger signal from the context parameters.
Figure 5 shows the performance of the CA VIA and MAML
agents at test time, after up to three gradient steps (averaged
over 40randomly selected test tasks). Both models keep
learning for several updates, although they were only trained
for one update step. CA VIA outperforms MAML on both
domains after one gradient update step, while updating only
50parameters at test time per task compared to >10;000.
For the Cheetah Velocity experiment, MAML catches up
after three gradient update steps.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
CA VIA is a meta-learning approach that separates the model
into task-speciﬁc context parameters and parameters that are
shared across tasks. We demonstrated experimentally that
CA VIA is robust to the inner loop learning rate and yields
task embeddings in the context parameters. CA VIA out-
performs MAML on challenging regression, classiﬁcation,
and reinforcement learning problems, while adapting fewer
parameters at test time and being less prone to overﬁtting.
We are interested in extending our experimental evaluation
to settings with multi-modal task distributions, as well as
settings where more generalisation beyond task identiﬁca-
tion is necessary at test time. One possible approach here is
to combine CA VIA with MAML-style updates in the future:
i.e., having two separate inner loops (producing iandi),
and one outer loop.
We are interested in extending CA VIA to more challenging
RL problems and exploring its role in allowing for smart
exploration in order to identify the task at hand, for ex-
ample building on the work of Gupta et al. (2018) who
use probabilistic context variables, or Stadie et al. (2018),
who propose E-MAML for RL problems, an extension for
MAML which accounts for the effect of the initial sampling
distribution (policy) before the inner-loop update.