Sensors 2021 ,21, 3726 4 of 14
and prevent possible diseases. Furthermore, doctors, having direct access to the data and
results of AI algorithms, can prepare medical plans and any interventions on therapies.
Figure 1. Pneulytics framework architecture.
3.1. Adopted IoT Devices
The aim of our research is to investigate the adoption of smart building and health
devices for monitoring purposes, especially regarding quality of life and wellbeing measure-
ments. For instance, Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) is represented by a collection and
combination of different measurements to identify the quality of an indoor environment.
With this purpose, we set up an intelligent monitoring system able to observe, capture and
process both environmental and body measurements. Thanks to the Internet of Things
sensors, it is possible to retrieve and exchange such data easily, due to the interconnection
between the sensors and a common data storage platform.
Considering the set of IoT sensors adopted for the platform, we have focused on the
possibility of accessing raw data captured by the sensors. Particularly, we focused on both
wearable devices, connected and actively managed by the patients, and environmental
devices, physically installed at the patients’ home, which will be part of a future version of
the platform.
Regarding wearable IoMT devices, for the ﬁrst proof-of-concept study, we adopted
the H&S cloud platform HealthPlatform v3 (CompuGroupMedical), which is able to access
aggregated monitoring data and provide authorized access to the end user. The H&S
proprietary platform is certiﬁed medical device CE IIA and equipped with a data center
certiﬁed ISO 27001 and ISO 13485. Data management activities are compliant with GDPR
and CE Medical Device 5/2020.
Among the available devices, our proof-of-concept platform includes:
• A dedicated smartphone with the proprietary app (Mhealth, certiﬁed IIA class) run-
ning on it,
• An electrocardiogram (ECG) patch also providing day/night movement monitoring,
• A pulse meter providing oximetry monitoring,
• A weight scale,
• A sphygmomanometer for blood pressure monitoring,
• A spirometer for peak ﬂow and FEV1 parameters.
Communication between sensors and mobile devices is based on Bluetooth Low
Energy, a protocol used in the IoT context [ 36]. In particular, the patient wears the medical
sensor and starts monitoring the associated health parameter. The sensor autonomously
connects to the mobile device and sends data to it. Finally, the mobile device displays
the measurement and uploads it directly to the cloud for data storage. The list of devices
reported is the complete one of the Pneulytics architecture, but in this work, we have
only used some of the devices mentioned; in particular, the pulse meter, the weight scale,
the sphygmomanometer, the spirometer and the smartphone. In future versions, the