Sensors 2021 ,21, 3726 8 of 14
The resulting rules give intuitive indications about the quality of the breathing per-
formance (through the PEF classiﬁcation). One may argue the triviality of the knowledge
extraction, as having good or bad breathing performance independent of body pressure
and heart rate may be expected, even by non-expert in the ﬁeld. However, the following
statements should be highlighted. First of all, the synthesis made on all the features is
useful in front of several sources of information (as in [ 5]); in this case, the LLM automat-
ically concentrates the attention on a quite small subset of features. This is captured by
both feature ranking and value ranking, not shown here, which give a clear indication of
the most signiﬁcant feature and ranges of values for each feature in mapping the output
classes. This results in quite simple and clear rules for PEF modeling. Despite the fact that
some rules may be intuitive for the expert of the ﬁeld, thus posing doubts on the novelty of
the knowledge extraction, some others may shed new light on the phenomenon in terms of
variables involved and inherent thresholds.
5. Data Augmentation through GANs
In order to build synthetic data, to be coherent with the same (unknown) multi-
dimensional probability distribution generating the available (real) dataset, the following
methodology has been applied. In deep learning, the term autoencoder deﬁnes a neural
network (NN) trained to approximately copy the input to the output. The model is usually
forced to give priority to some speciﬁc aspects of the data. It is composed of two parts:
• An encoder function, h=f(x): it describes the code to represent the input,
• A decoder function, r=g(h), which produces the reconstruction.
Traditionally, they were used for dimensionality reduction and feature ranking. More
recently, they have been applied to generative models. They may be thought of as a special
case of feedforward networks, and they can be trained using the very same strategies.
Learning a not-complete representation is commonly known as an under-complete au-
toencoder. It forces the autoencoder to capture the most salient features. On the other
hand, giving too much capacity to the model leads to failing to learn anything useful (just
a simple copy).
In this context, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have the purpose of generat-
ing new, synthetic data (data augmentation). They learn the distribution of the training set
and can generate new data never seen before. They generate the whole output all at once,
differently from other types of generative models, such as recurrent NNs that generate one
element at a time.
The underlying algorithmic principle is based on game theory. The game is posed
between a generator network and a discriminator network. The generator uses the encoder–
decoder scheme to build synthetic data. The discriminator infers the separation between
real and synthetic data. More speciﬁcally, the discriminator learns to become better at
distinguishing real from synthetic data; the generator learns to generate better data to
fool the discriminator. In particular, we implemented a conditional GAN. We imposed a
condition on both the generator and discriminator inputs. The condition is in the form of a
one-hot vector version of the classes:
• In the generator, we associate the noise to a particular class;
• In the discriminator, we classify the rows as real or fake based on real and fake data
and their corresponding labels.
Training the discriminator and generator in conditional GAN is similar to training a
discriminator and generator in simple GAN. The only difference is that both the generated
fake and real are conditioned with their corresponding one-hot labels. Figure 2 reports a
schema about the implemented conditional GAN.