Sensors 2021 ,21, 3726 3 of 14
size-ﬁts-all alert systems may not be able to effectively support physicians in monitoring
their patients as speciﬁc patients may have speciﬁc ‘desired’ ranges for their biomarkers,
and physicians can obtain a limited insight into the patient status. There is an urgent
need for novel, intelligent systems able to monitor patients in an individualized way.
The integration of AI algorithms, speciﬁcally explainable AI (xAI) methods that are able
to generate predictive models of the patient’s health, can introduce a revolution in this
ﬁeld [ 30,31]. The generation of models in the form of intelligible rules (if-then-else) can
help physicians understand the factors leading to better/worse outcomes in their patients
and, also, can help identify countermeasures to limit the risk of deterioration by modifying
speciﬁc biomarkers, as identiﬁed by the model rules, to lead them within the desired
limits. This type of approach not only enables a deeper understanding of the factors that
determine the evolution of the patient status but it also enables the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc
countermeasures and therapeutic approaches on an individual basis.
3. Pneulytics Framework
The Pneulytics framework is aimed at monitoring patients affected by COPD by
combining innovative technologies and artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms. COPD is a com-
mon, widespread, preventable and treatable disease associated with persistent respiratory
symptoms (such as dyspnoea, cough, expectoration) and airway obstructions due to in-
duced lung damage, such as from cigarette smoke and environmental pollutants. COPD
patients are generally treated with topically administered medications, such as transdermal
patches or small adhesive strips, to avoid worsening and relieve symptoms and increase
lung function. Unfortunately, nowadays, it is difﬁcult to actually assess how consistent
patient outcomes in clinical research and in real life are, mainly due to poor adherence
to treatments and misuse of drug inhalers [ 32]. Failure to use inhalers is associated with
an increase in possible relapses and worsening of COPD, and the combination of poor
adherence and misuse of inhalers can increase the risk of death [32,33].
In recent years, technological improvements have been introduced that allow remote
patient monitoring and enable direct interaction between patients and healthcare profes-
sionals [ 34,35]. For example, there are smart inhalers that can record and digitize key
aspects of patient monitoring, such as medication intake and parameters related to proper
use of the inhaler (e.g., peak inspiratory ﬂow, duration of inspiratory phase, orientation
of the inhaler). Through these smart inhalers, doctors are able to acquire information on
treatment adherence and correct/improper use of the inhaler and then monitor the patient
in detail. The Pneulytics framework integrates the analysis of smart inhaler data with the
analysis of patient monitoring data from IoMT and clinical data from follow-up visits.
Despite technological advances, it is not yet possible to carry out an accurate analysis
of the health of patients by carrying out remote monitoring. To achieve a fair level of
monitoring of patients’ vital parameters, the Pneulytics framework aims to combine IoMT
devices with innovative artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms with the aim of preventing and
treating diseases, in this speciﬁc case COPD, through remote monitoring, performed
directly by doctors and health entities. The Pneulytics prototype is composed of some
hardware components used for the collection of patient parameters, obtained through
IoMT devices, and a software part for the accurate processing of the data recovered from
the sensors through machine learning algorithms, speciﬁcally explainable AI [ 5], combined
with historical data. In the previous work, data were focused only on a smart inhaler,
while in this work, we elaborated data retrieved by other IoMT as described in Section 3.1.
The proposed technological platform is shown in Figure 1.
In detail, patients wear sensors for monitoring parameters relating to the disease under
analysis during their day. All sensors are currently connected to a smartphone, which
periodically sends data to the cloud platform where the data are stored. In combination
with patient sensors, environmental sensors will be introduced to assess how the living
environment can affect the disease. Subsequently, after retrieving patient data, ad hoc AI
algorithms are performed to develop predictive models that can be used to identify, deﬁne