Sensors 2021 ,21, 3726 5 of 14
smartphone will also be used to set up validated questionnaires for the patients, such as
the COPD assessment test.
Regarding environmental monitoring, our setup includes, for each environment
(home, ofﬁce, etc.),
• A central node receiving data from the other nodes,
• Physical sensors distributed in the environment able to retrieve different measures,
• A set of modules demanded to provide connectivity to analog equipment like win-
dows or radiators,
• An outdoor weather station.
Particularly, while the central node is represented by a Raspberry Pi 4 Model B,
the following sensor types and models are considered:
• Temperature and humidity (Sparkfun, SI7021);
• Atmospheric pressure (AZ Delivery, BMP180);
• Air speed (Modern Device, Wind Sensor Rev. C);
• CO measurement (Sparkfun, MQ7);
• CO 2measurement (Sparkfun, CSS811);
• Formaldehyde concentration (Seeedstudio, Grove HCHO);
• Concentration of ﬁne dust (Honeywell, HPMA115S0-XXX);
• Redundancy (Bosch, BME680);
• Weather station (PCE Italia, PCE FWS 20).
Finally, regarding analog equipment monitoring, we used AZDelivery, ESP8266 plus
ESP-01 and DHT22 plus AM2302. The communication between sensors and the central
node is based on Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT), an ad hoc IoT communi-
cation protocols. Sensors distributed in the environment retrieve information every 5 min
and send the data to the central node. The central node encapsulates the data into a single
packet and sends the entire packet to a web server every 15 min. The data retrieved by the
ambient sensors are not considered in this work since we are implementing the system, but
they will be the scope of future works.
Thanks to the distributed sensors, we are able to observe and process multiple metrics,
both referring to the conditions of the patients and the underlying environment. In addition,
data aggregation and processing through AI methodologies is able not only to combine
information from different components for a common analysis, but also to identify potential
relationships among the data.
4. The Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approach
The information acquired on the IoMT platform is exploited to infer knowledge
extraction of the quality of the medical treatment through AI. This implies a machine
learning formulation of the problem.
A prediction function f((),)is deﬁned in order to model the mapping between
collections of sensor measurements and their impact on the evolution of the disease over
time. A canonical supervised learning problem is posed to this aim, whose target is a
medical key performance indicator, coherent with the disease of interest.
The techniques refer to eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) (or intelligible analytics ),
which means understandable machine learning. It helps human experts of the ﬁeld enter
the logic of the machine learning process and elaborate the knowledge extraction even more
(cognitive machine learning). An example of this is argument of the following performance
evaluation, in which rules are compared and understood under different conditions of the
reference dataset (baseline versus data augmentation).
Technically speaking, a supervised classiﬁcation problem consists of ﬁnding the
best boundary function Y(x)separating points in classes (good and bad treatment here).
Under the XAI paradigm, the Y(x)model is described by a set of mintelligible rules
rk,k=1,. . .,m, of the type if(premise )then (consequence ), where ( premise ) is a logical