Sensors 2021 ,21, 3726 7 of 14
data augmentation approach. Such indicators are still considered statistically valid and
suitable for further interpretation by the medical staff. We ﬁrstly start with data collection
without adversarial machine learning and show the baseline rules available from LLM
inference. Once more, it is worth noting that XAI offers support to the understanding of
model evolution under different conditions (baseline vs. augmentation).
The following data are structured in a database for further LLM inference (the
Rulex platform has been used: http://www.rulex.ai, accessed on 26 May 2021). Data
are collected every day for three consecutive months: oxygen ,body temperature ,heart
rate ,heart rate master ,weight ,Body Mass Index ,FEV1 ,PEF,MAP,diastolic blood
pressure ,systolic blood pressure . FEV1 is the forced expiratory volume in 1s, i.e., the
volume of air (in liters) exhaled in the ﬁrst second during forced exhalation after maximal
inspiration. PEF is the Peak Expiratory Flow, i.e., the maximum ﬂow (or velocity) that can
be achieved when performing a forced exhalation that is initiated after a full inspiration,
measured in liters per minute or liters per second. As an alternative to systolic blood
pressure, MAP deals with the average artery pressure on a cardiac cycle. Two sources of
information are available for the heart rate as well: from the oximeter and the sphygmo-
manometer; the feature corresponding to the latter device is denoted by the sufﬁx ’master’
(i.e., heart rate master).
The classiﬁcation problem deals with PEF under and over a threshold of 400 L
per minute.
As each rule deﬁnes a speciﬁc stratiﬁcation of data, the potential statistical signiﬁcance
should be assessed. The validation procedure follows [ 5] by exploiting the Fisher’s Exact
Test (FET), which is suitable for a small amount of data.
4.3. Baseline
Real data are collected in a period of two months on a daily basis. After cleaning raw
data, the collection of features is poor as only 43 samples are available. This is, however, not
uncommon in digitalization of clinical practice. The following rules are inferred by LLM
and pass the FET test. The covering and error of a rule are denoted by Cand r, respectively.
The baseline data reported is not calculated through the GAN approach. The data are
retrieved from a single patient monitored twice a day through all sensors available in
a period of 3 months. The patient is a 45-year-old male. The quantity of information
retrieved by IoMT is “longitudinal” as it is related to time-series physiological signals.
Measurements propagate over time in such a way that every subject may constitute an
independent stochastic process on its own, independently of the other subjects. It is also
multivariate as it covers several sensors (as the ones coming from the outlined COPD pilot).
This constitutes a novelty with respect to traditional augmentation studies, such as on
electrocardiogram (ECG) [ 40], cough [ 41] or epileptic seizure [ 42] univariate traces. The
augmentation of a set of IoMT subjects should be performed subject-by-subject [ 40,43]
or between couples of signals [ 44]. The multivariate nature of an IoMT dataset, coming
from a single subject, would preclude the joint augmentation of two subjects. This allows
preserving the original correlation among the variables in each subject. In other words,
the one-subject-many-signals setting introduces an additional order of dimensionality in
data augmentation. IoMT drives a new information framework in ICT for medicine as
clinical trials are typically based on a “vertical” basis, namely, clinical samples (e.g., exams
at the hospital) do not cover a time longitudinal comparable with the one of IoMT (To
some extent, this recalls the concept of precision medicine, in which the treatment should
be specialized for the speciﬁc state of the subject under investigation (i.e., according to its
genetic baggage); in that case, the joint mapping of clinical and genetic data drives the
medical intervention, independently of the approaches chosen for the other subjects.).
if((heart rate <74)^(diastolic pressure >67))then high (C = 43%) (r = 4.5%)
if((FEV 1<2.23))then low (C = 41%) (r = 4.7%)