Sensors 2021 ,21, 3726 2 of 14
Moreover, data must be well structured and in large quantities to develop accurate and
precise algorithms capable of identifying the disease timely and precisely to prevent possi-
ble serious consequences. However, in real-world settings, the amount of data collected
through monitoring devices may be insufﬁcient to train predictive algorithms, for example,
due to irregular use of devices, misuse, or lack of compliance and adherence to the moni-
toring program [ 7]. Data augmentation can potentially help mitigate these problems. Data
augmentation techniques are often used to generate new data by transforming existing
datasets or by generating new synthetic data, always starting from real and existing data [ 8].
In healthcare, data augmentation has been applied, for example, to signals and images to
improve disease detection and prediction [ 9–12]. In order to achieve this purpose, in recent
years, a new concept called Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) has emerged that
offers an innovative method for data augmentation [ 13]. In the ﬁeld of machine learning,
two neural networks, called discriminator and generator, are trained to generate new data
having the same distribution as the initial dataset [ 14]. GAN shows promising results
in image generation tasks, and as such, it has been applied in image-related problems
such as texture synthesis, domain translation, and image completion [ 15–18]. For example,
with GAN, it is possible to obtain a neural network capable of generating hyper-realistic
human faces, as demonstrated in different research works [19–21].
In the healthcare world, GAN techniques are mainly used for the generation of new
synthetic health data, mainly used in AI projects and activities [ 22]. The main goal of this
application is the generation of new data for machine learning (ML) and AI algorithms
to make up for the possibility of a lack of data. The use of GAN would lead to a large
production of data in compliance with the criticalities of the case. Furthermore, these data
can be shared between various entities as being synthetic, and they do not contain personal
data, thus privacy issues could vanish.
Given the importance of a sufﬁciently large dataset in the healthcare context to im-
plement reﬁned machine learning algorithms capable of identifying diseases according
to different vital parameters, we decided to use a GAN algorithm to perform data aug-
mentation on a small initial dataset. The purpose of this process is to simulate additional
individuals monitored in their different vital parameters to verify how the machine learn-
ing algorithm responds and improves itself with a greater amount of data (obviously, the
ﬁnal purpose is to reﬁne the symptoms/pathology identiﬁcation mechanism).
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reports an outline of
the research gap, giving a clear context to the objectives of the work. Section 3 deeply
describes the proposed Pneulytics framework, the data collection approach and IoMT
devices. Section 4 details the artiﬁcial intelligence algorithm, while Section 5 introduces an
application of data augmentation and discusses the possible next steps in this topic. Finally,
Section 8 concludes the paper.
2. Research Gap
Today, more than ever, due to population aging, the increasing burden of chronic
conditions and multimorbidity in older adults, and the COVID-19 pandemic, the healthcare
systems need to be dramatically innovated, especially by the introduction of technologies
that may enable organized and decentralized management of patients, particularly of those
who need continuous follow up due to their chronic conditions ( e.g., [23,24] ). Recently, we
have witnessed a rapid evolution in the ﬁelds of the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT),
data processing and fusion, and telemedicine [ 25]. The ﬁeld of IoMT has opened new
opportunities for patient monitoring and remote service provision, particularly in older
adults with chronic diseases [ 26,27]. However, the rise of the IoMT has also brought new
challenges in terms of, for example, privacy, security, and computing capabilities [28] .
Nonetheless, the current availability of multi-sensors systems natively integrated with AI is
scarce. Currently available telemedicine systems are capable of sensing and communication
through a data hub, but they typically have limited processing capabilities (e.g., detection
of parameters exceeding desired ranges to deliver alerts) [ 29]. These simpliﬁed, one-