Sensors 2021 ,21, 3726 6 of 14
product (AND,^) ofdkconditions clk,with lk=1k,. . .,dk, and ( consequence ) provides
a class assignment for the output, i.e., ˆy=g(x).
The decision making process of Decision Tree ( DT) consists of splitting the dataset
available at the node into two subsets (two branch nodes) according to a speciﬁc criterion.
Statistical metrics, such as information gain, deﬁne the criteria and infer the quality of a
split at a node. The logic behind the decision tree can be easily understood because it shows
a tree-like structure that, in turn, can be easily converted into rules (chapter 9 of [37]).
The Logic Learning Machine ( LLM ) [31] deals with clustering data samples after
mapping them into a boolean space (latticization) from which the derivation of rules is
readly available. The discretization of the data space before latticization is essential to
reduce quantity of information, still preserving the quality of it [ 38], thus opening the door
to big data support.
Differently from DT [ 37], in which some polarization on most meaningful features
and low robustness to unbalanced datasets may arise, the LLM clusterization process
helps to look at the underlying phenomenon under different angles, still joining all the
variables involved. From the preliminary results, reported in [ 30], the LLM revealed very
good results compared with those of the most known learning techniques. Moreover,
the computational complexity of the method is kept low through the adoption of proper
greedy procedures. Therefore, the LLM model may also be adopted in the analysis of
large datasets (i.e., having many inputs and/or examples). Notice that the LLM approach
presents further interesting features such as the possibility of dealing with categorical
inputs and the determination of the relevance of each variable. This last property allows
the identiﬁcation and elimination of redundant attributes.
4.1. LLM Computational Cost
The LLM ﬁrstly converts original data into binary strings (Boolean space) and then
maps groups of strings into rules. The rule extraction process is based on clustering of
strings in the new space. The resulting machine learning model consists of the overall
set of extracted rules. The granularity of the clusters is proportional to the precision (and
potential overﬁtting) of the model and inversely proportional to the generalization to new
data. Therefore, a trade-off is typically considered between precision and generalization
by accepting clusters large enough to contain a small classiﬁcation error. That means a
cluster contains points of a given class in prevalence, but it also contains a small proportion
of points of the other classes. Overlapping classes in large clusters lead to less precision
but higher generalization and more synthesis of the model.
Since every cluster is later converted into a rule, the most signiﬁcant rules (i.e., rules
with higher covering of data) are derived from large clusters and vice-versa. Small clusters
are of interest however, as they may provide rules representing anomalies or singularities
in the data. The LLM setting, therefore, follows those principles by tuning the number of
extracted rules as a trade-off between synthesis and generalization (fewer rules with high
covering) and precision (more rules with low covering).
The supplementary material of [ 39] may help with the understanding of this, as it
shows an example of binarization, clustering and rule extraction. The setting of the overall
process has an impact in computational terms as well. More precision requires a higher
computational cost. Mathematically speaking, Section VI.A of [ 31] deals with closed-form
expressions of the computational cost that approximately follows O(m2n2), where n is
the length of the binary strings and m is the size of the training set. In practice, manual
inspection is typically applied in order to stop the computation when a plateau becomes
evident in terms of precision, number and covering of the rules.
4.2. Data Collection and Validation
This section reports the results obtained by monitoring patients through the devices
outlined in Section 3.1. A single COPD subject is considered, and we provide analysis in
terms of data augmentation. Moreover, we show how GAN could be used to perform a