Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:8
Agent
EnvironmentAction ai
State siReward γi
State si+1 
Figure 4 Artiﬁcial neural network. Figure 5 Reinforcement learning.
information at diﬀerent levels, such as “whole”, “parts”, and “sub -parts”. Extensive research is needed
on how to extract complete semantic information, namely the intrins ic semantics, in the future.
3.1.3Reinforcement learning
As mentioned above, it is possible to learn some basic knowledge (conc epts) through sensory information,
but sensory information is far from enough to acquire common-sen se knowledge. An agent can acquire
such capability only through their interaction with the environment, which results in intelligent behaviors
arising from a generic objective to maximize the reward. The paradig m is recognized as reinforcement
learning (RL), which is the most basic human learning behavior, and an important path towards true AI.
Reinforcementlearningaimstosimulatesuchlearningbehaviorofhum anbeings. Itconstantlyinteracts
with the environment through the “trial-and-error”mechanism to learn eﬀective strategies, which largely
mirrors the operating mechanisms of the feedback system by which the human brain makes decisions (see
Figure5). RL has become a signiﬁcant approach that may lead to breakthro ughs in artiﬁcial intelligence.
A recent study in [ 42] proposed that an agent can learn through the experience of tria l-and-error by
maximizing the reward, which can drive an agent to exhibit general AI abilities.
Formally, reinforcement learning is usually recognized as a random co ntrol process, i.e., the interaction
process between an agent and the environment. In the learning pr ocess, the agent explores the envi-
ronments by performing actions following a speciﬁc policy, and perce iving the consequences accordingly.
The decision process can be modeled as a Markov decision process (M DP). The purpose is to search for
the best policy for a given MDP, i.e., the policy that can maximize the rew ard. Many achievements have
been made in video games [ 43,44], chess and card games [ 45,46], robot navigation and control [ 47,48],
human-computer interaction, and other ﬁelds. In these cases, t he AI systems approach or even surpass
human levels in some tasks [ 49,50], which demonstrates that powerful reinforcement learning could be a
possible solution to general artiﬁcial intelligence.
The success stories in reinforcement learning such as Go and video g ames are relatively simple. In
these tasks, the environment is fully observable and the feedback is deﬁnite; the state is mainly discrete,
with clear regulations; and a large amount of data can be obtained at a low cost. These all match the
requirements of the current artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms. Neve rtheless, for the tasks of high uncer-
tainty, incomplete information, and insuﬃcient data, the performa nce of current reinforcement learning
algorithms tends to degenerate signiﬁcantly. In this section, we en umerate only some of the typical
challenges for the current state of reinforcement learning, and e numerate our work in these directions.
(1) Reinforcement learning in partially observable Markov decision pr ocesses (POMDPs). In real-
world problems, the agent cannot reliably identify complete informat ion about the environment; i.e.,
the information is incomplete. Formally, it can be modeled as a more nat ural model of POMDP for
sequential decision-making under uncertainty. As for POMDP, the agent might need to consider all the
previous observations and actions, rather than just the curren t state of reinforcement learning in MDP.
Existing POMDP solutions optimize the policies by exploiting the inner str uctures in value functions
using a belief-state MDP by deﬁning beliefs over the unknown parame ters. However, the complexity
of the problem could increase exponentially, making the algorithms inf easible. Recently, we proposed a
novel algorithm by estimating the unobservable states via a probab ilistic inference [ 51]. Speciﬁcally, we