Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:7
to the degree of conﬁdence, and then the system outputs the ﬁn al answers. Watson also learned to
understand “questions” through 155 live competitions with humans and 8000 experiments.
3.1.2Perception
Symbolism uses a symbol system as a model of the human mind in order to achieve reasoning similar
to that of humans. But, from the cognition perspective, they are fundamentally diﬀerent in terms of
the symbol grounding problem [ 35]. In the machine symbol system, the “objects” and “relations” of
the objective world are represented by symbols. But the symbol it self has no meaning. We have to
assign it artiﬁcial semantics, i.e., the externally imposed “parasitic se mantics”, which are not known to
the machine. This is completely diﬀerent from the “intrinsic semantics ” that exists in the human brain.
“Intrinsic semantics” is mainly acquired through senses (audio, visu al, etc.) and the interaction between
senses and movement, with very few exceptions (some atomic conc epts and common sense are innate).
They can translate iconic representations and categorical repre sentations into symbolic representations.
That is what deep learning is supposed to do. Unfortunately, curre nt deep learning models are not up to
the task. This is because deep learning deals with a low-level feature space, which is very diﬀerent from
semantic space. Only “local fragments” with no explicit semantics ca n be learned in this space. These
fragments are not combinational and therefore cannot be used a s “intrinsic semantic” representations of
“objects”. In other words, the current deep learning can achiev e only “sensation” but not perception
unless it can learn the invariant parts of an object. Taking the obje ct “dog” for example, it needs to
learn about the head, legs, tail, and other parts of a dog. The comb ination of these parts then forms the
“intrinsic semantics” of a dog. The basic idea is that, with knowledge a s the guide, sensory information
is raised from a feature vector space to a semantic symbol space, as shown in Figure 2. There has been
a lot of research in this area [ 36–39].
Thepreliminaryprogresscanbeillustratedbytheworkofourteam. In[40],wedescribehowtoimprove
the performance of image classiﬁcation by using a triple generative a dversarial network (Triple-GAN).
It consists of three components: (1) a classiﬁer Cthat (approximately) characterizes the conditional
distribution pc(y|x)≈p(y|x), where yis a label and xis data; (2) a class-conditional generator Gthat
(approximately) characterizes the conditional distribution pg(x|y)≈p(x|y); and (3) a discriminator D
that distinguishes whether a pair ( x,y) comes from the true distribution p(x,y). All the components
are parameterized as neural networks. The desired equilibrium is th at the joint distributions deﬁned by
the classiﬁer and the generator converge to the true data distrib ution. If the utility function is properly
designed, with Triple-GAN, the generator can learn the represent ation of an “object” in the sample (i.e.,
prior knowledge) in an unsupervised (or weakly supervised) manner . The prior knowledge is used to
improve the performance of the classiﬁer. This study shows that t he prior knowledge of “objects” can
be learned through ANN’s unsupervised learning, which is the “intrins ic semantics” of the “objects”.
Using this prior knowledge with “intrinsic semantics” to improve the re cognition rate of the classiﬁer will
fundamentally solve the contradiction between “where” and “what ” that exists in computer vision. This
will facilitate learning with small data and improve its robustness and g eneralization.
There is an alternative way to address the problem. Let us go back t o the artiﬁcial neural network used
for deep learning (Figure 4). In the case of vision, an ANN is rather simple compared to human vis ual
neural networks. It has neither feedback connections, horizon tal connections, and inhibitory connections
on the same layer, nor complex mechanisms such as sparse discharg e (coding), memory, and attention. If
we can introduce these mechanisms into ANN, it will gradually improve t he perceptual ability of an AI
system. Since we know very little about the working mechanism of the brain’s visual neural networks,
currently we can only explore it step-by-step along the path of “Br ian Inspired Computing”.
There is some exploratory work at present. Take one project in ou r group as an example. As described
in [41], the mechanism of sparse discharge (coding) is applied to the calcula tion of each layer of ANN.
There are six layers in the network, including Gabor ﬁltering and Max p ooling. In each layer, we intro-
duce sparse regularization in the optimization procedure, which enc ourages the ANN to select the more
representativefeatures. When we train the networkusing images such as“human”, “car”, “elephant”and
“bird”, with simple backgrounds, neurons on the output layer of th e neural network respond strongly
to the outline of “face”, “car”, “elephant”, and “bird”, which rep resent these “categories”. In other
words, the semantic information of “whole object” is extracted, y ielding the “symbolic representation”
accordingly.
Nevertheless, these methods can only extract semantic informat ion as a whole, but not the semantic