Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:13
integrate data and knowledge that can help overcome the brittle na ture of current AI models, which may
fail when presented with cases not included in the training phase.
3.2.3Bayesian deep learning
As shown in Figure 6, visual and auditory signals are processed in the feature space, w here the features
are often insuﬃcient in capturing semantics. One promising way to inc rease the amount of semantics in
feature representation is to incorporate knowledge into deep lear ning. Below, we will take Bayesian deep
learning as an example to illustrate the idea.
As stated before, deep neural networks are insuﬃcient in charac terizing the uncertainty in observing
empirical data. Such uncertainty, as well as the unknown physical process underlying the data, makes
it diﬃcult to judge the correctness of the outputs of deep learning methods. Meanwhile, because the
available data is basically ﬁnite and often ﬁxed, the uncertainty of th e model increases as the model
size quickly grows (e.g., networks with billions or trillions of parameters ). Therefore, there exist many
models that perform well on training data, but much less satisfacto rily on testing data. Bayesianmachine
learning (or Bayesian learning in short) provides an elegant framewo rk to consider prior knowledge as
well as the uncertainty of both the data and the model. It can grad ually reﬁne the understanding of the
data (or task) when more evidence arrives, which is known as increm ental learning. Such a paradigm can
suﬃciently leverage knowledge during learning, and it can not only pro vide an estimate of the prediction
conﬁdence, but also improve the eﬃciency and accuracy of learning .
The formal deﬁnition of Bayesian learning is as follows. Let Ddenote all the data. Given the observed
data set d⊂D, it calculates the posterior probability distribution of each hypothe sis via Bayes’ rule in
(6) [12,77] as
p(hi|d) =αp(d|hi)p(hi), (6)
wherep(hi) is the prior distribution (before seeing the data), and p(d|hi) is the likelihood of dgiven the
hypothesis hi. With the posterior distribution, we can make a prediction on unknow n variable Xas
p(X|d) =/summationdisplay
ip(X|d;hi)p(hi|d) =/summationdisplay
ip(X|hi)p(hi|d), (7)
where the hypothesis space is assumed to be ﬁnite for simplicity; for continuous hypothesis spaces, the
summation will be integral.
OnechallengeofBayesianlearninginvolvescomputation; whenthehy pothesisspaceishuge,Eq.( 7)can
be infeasible, which hinders practical application. A common solution is to use approximation inference
algorithms, which fall into two main categories: variational inferenc e and Monte Carlo methods [ 78]. In
addition, there are some common approaches to simplifying the calcu lation: (1) instead of marginalizing
over all hypotheses when predicting X, use only a single hypothesis hithat maximizes p(hi|d), known as
maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate; (2) by assuming a uniform prio rp(hi), the MAP estimator can
be further simpliﬁed as ﬁnding a hypothesis that maximizes p(hi|d), known as the maximum likelihood
estimate (MLE); (3) if not all variables are observable, i.e., some var iables are hidden, it is typical to
adopt the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm to solve the MLE p roblem as in ( 8). The EM
algorithm alternates between two steps: the E-step uses the obs erved data Xand current estimate of
model parameters θ(i)to calculate the posterior of hidden variable p(Z=z|x;θ(i)), and the M-step
updates the model parameters θ(i+1)according to the inferred zandxas
θ(i+1)= argmax
θ/summationdisplay
zp(Z=z|x;θ(i))L(x,Z=z|θ). (8)
Bayes’ rule in ( 7) is a procedure that implies the posterior distribution from a given pr ior and data
likelihood. In order to incorporate knowledge more ﬂexibly, we propo se a framework of regularized
Bayesian inference (RegBayes) [ 79]. RegBayes is built on a variational formulation of Bayes’ rule [ 80],
and we introduce the notion of posterior regularization to directly c onstrain the property of the targeted
post-dataposteriordistribution. Underauniﬁedformulation, Reg Bayescanveryﬂexiblyconsiderdomain
knowledge (e.g., the knowledge in ﬁrst-order logic [ 81]) or the objective of the task (e.g., max-margin loss
for classiﬁcation [ 82]).
Bayesian deep learning integrates the fundamental principle of Bay esian inference and representa-
tion learning via deep neural networks as illustrated in Figure 8. There are two types of integration: