Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:4
the past 30 years, gradually forming mature theories and technolo gies of deep learning. The important
advances in this period can be summarized as follows. The ﬁrst is grad ient descent, an algorithm that
was originally proposed by the French mathematician Cauchy [ 18] in 1847, and improved as an enhanced
and usable version by the Russian mathematician Nesterov [ 19] in 1983. The second is the BP (back
propagation) algorithm, which is customized for ANN. BP was ﬁrst pr oposed by Linnainmaa [ 20], a
Finnish student, in his master’s thesis in 1970; in 1986, Rumelhart et a l. [21] conducted a systematic
analysis. These two algorithms infuse new power into ANNs’ learning a nd training. Together with
threshold logic and the Hebb learning rule, they constitute the four pillars of ANNs. In addition to the
four pillars, there is a series of important studies, including better lo ss functions (e.g., the cross-entropy
cost function [ 22]), algorithm improvement (e.g., regularization to prevent overﬁttin g [23]), new forms
of networks (e.g., convolution neural networks (CNN) by Fukushim a (Japan) [ 24,25] in 1980, recurrent
neural networks [ 26], long short-term memory neural networks [ 27], and deep belief nets (DBN) [ 28]).
These methods together have opened a new era of second-gener ation AI based on deep learning [ 29].
Data-based learning has a solid mathematical foundation. To illustra te this foundation, let us take a
simple example of supervised learning, which can be formalized into the following regression problem.
We extract samples ( xi,yi)i.i.d.←−(X,Y) from database D. The purpose is to estimate the input-output
mapping function as f:X→Yin the samples. That is, the algorithm searches for and selects a fun ction
f∗from the function family (hypothesis space) F={fθ:X−→Y;θ∈A}such that it is close to the
truefon average. In deep learning, this alternative function family is expr essed as a deep neural network
described by
f∗= arg min
fθ∈FED[l(fθ(x),y)], (2)
wherelis the loss function.
In general, there are three basic assumptions in parametric learnin g. (1) Independence: the selection
of the loss function and function family F(or neural network structure) is data-independent. (2) Large
capacity: there is a huge number of samples, i.e., ( xi,yi)i= 1,...,n,n→ ∞. (3) Completeness:
the training samples are complete and noiseless. If all the assumptio ns are satisﬁed, f∗will eventually
convergetotheoptimalfunction faswehaveanincreasingnumberoftrainingsamples. Ifwehaveenou gh
data with a suﬃcient level of quality, f∗can approximate any function because of the universality of deep
neural network.
Therefore, using deep learning to ﬁnd the function behind the data has a solid theoretical basis. This
assertion has been borne out in many practical applications. For ex ample, in the standard image library
ImageNet (20000 categories, 14 million images), the error rate of im age recognition was as high as 50% in
2011. By 2015, Microsofthad reduced the errorrateto 3.57%by u sing deep learningmethods; this is even
lower than the typical human error rate of 5.1% [ 30]. The speech recognition rate with a background of
lownoise wasgenerallyabout 80%before 2001, but it reachedover9 5%in 2017, meeting the requirements
of commercialization. In March 2016, the Google AlphaGo program de feated world Go champion Lee
Sedol, which represented another pinnacle of the second-genera tion AI. Go is known as one of the most
challenging games for AI because of its complexity; before 2015, th e strongest Go computer program
could only play at the level of a human at the amateur 5 dan level. More impressively, these results
require no domain knowledge, but only the input of a Go board as an ima ge.
The success of AlphaGo can be attributed to the following factors. The ﬁrst is data. AlphaGo-Zero
has taught itself tens of millions of Go games through reinforcement learning. In comparison, human
Go masters have played only 30 million eﬀective games over 1000 years . The second is algorithms,
including Monte-Carlo tree search [ 30], deep learning, and reinforcement learning [ 31]. The third is
computingpower. AlphaGoranonadistributedcomputersystemco mposedof1920CPUsand280GPUs.
Therefore, the second generation of AI is also called data-driven m ethods. Among the scholars who have
made signiﬁcant contributions to the creation of second-generat ion AI, the following ﬁve have received
the Turing award. They are L. G. Valiant (2010), J. Pearl (2011), and Y. Bengio, G. G. Hinton, Y.
LeCun (2018). The year of the award is indicated in the brackets.
However, since 2014, many limitations of deep learning methods have been revealed, indicating that its
path to AI has encountered a bottleneck. Take an example, which o ur group discovered, that illustrates
the vulnerability of the deep learning method. In [ 32], we present the results of an attack on the Inception
V3deepnetworkusingthemomentumiterativefastgradientsignme thod(MI-FGSM).Anoiselessoriginal
image called Albis Mons was correctly classiﬁed by the deep network wit h 94.39% conﬁdence. We used
the MI-FGSM method to generate adversarial noise after 10 itera tions, and then added the noise to the