Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:14
Z
XfDNN 
Figure 8 A general framework of deep Bayesian models with DNN as funct ion approximator.
(1) perform Bayesian inference over deep neural networks (e.g., Bayesian neural networks and Gaussian
processes), with the main objectives of calculating uncertainty an d avoiding overﬁtting; and (2) use deep
neural networks as a nonlinear function approximator to improve t he capacity of Bayesian models; ex-
amples include generative adversarial networks (GANs), variation al auto-encoder (VAE), and invertible
network-based ﬂow models. The ﬁrst type of integration was pione ered by Hopﬁeld, Hintion, and their
students in 1990s [ 83,84]. Back then, due to the limitation on computing power and training dat a, net-
works of medium size typically had a high risk of overﬁtting. Therefor e, one major motivation was to
perform Bayesian inference to protect neural networks from ov erﬁtting and select proper models. In the
era of deep learning, as the network depth increases, Bayesian me thods have attracted further attention,
which led to major progress on eﬃcient algorithms for Bayesian deep networks. One major challenge
involvesthe over-parameterizationof neural networksin Bayesia ninference. To addressthis challenge, we
havedeveloped variousmethods, including implicit variationalinferen ce [85,86]and functional variational
inference [ 87].
As for the second type of integration, we know that a simple random variable zcan be transformed
into a more complex random variable y=f(z) through a function f. Whenfis a bijective function, the
distribution of ywill bep(x) =p(z)|dz
dy|. We have used this trick when drawing samples from Gaussian
and many other distributions, where the function foften has some simple analytical form. However,
when we deal with complex data, the function fis unknown and may be very complicated. Therefore,
we desire to directly learn ffrom empirical data. By leveraging the expressiveness of deep net works,
we can parameterize fas a deep network, and learn an optimal transforming function fθunder some
task-related objective. As illustrated in Figure 8, this idea has been shown eﬀective in practice, with
many representative examples such as VAE, GAN, and ﬂow-based m odels. Even when trained under a
fully unsupervised setting, such models can generate high-quality n atural images or faces.
Onekeydiﬀerenceamongthesemodelsisthetransformingfunction ofdeﬁning y. InVAE, y=fθ(z)+ǫ,
whereǫis a noise variable (e.g., white Gaussian noise), while in GAN and ﬂow-base d models, there is
no explicit noise variable. This diﬀerence leads to diﬀerent strategies to estimate parameters. VAE and
ﬂow-based models adopt MLE, while GAN formulates the learning as a m in-max game via adversarial
training. Similar to the ﬁrst-type of integration, though such meth ods are powerful, they also raise
various challenges on inference and learning. For instance, the tra ining of GAN is often unstable, facing
gradient vanishing or explosion issues. We investigated this issue and presented a stabilizing approach to
train GAN by drawing inspiration from control theory [ 88]. On the other hand, ﬂow-based models adopt
an invertible transforming function, which can lead to a “dimensionalit y bottleneck” [ 89]. One possible
solution is to augment the dimension by performing variational infere nce (e.g., [ 89]).
It is clear from the above illustration that Bayesian deep learning pro vides powerful modeling language
to conjoin the advantages of probabilistic inference and represen tation learning via deep networks, while
the key challenges are on inference and learning algorithms. Recent ly, much progress has been made on
algorithms (see above). Meanwhile, various probabilistic programmin g libraries have been designed to
support the development and deployment of Bayesian deep learning models. One early example is the