Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:9
Speech, Image Text 
Raising Embedding Continuous
feature
vector
spaceContinuous
quasi-semantic
vector
spaceDiscrete 
semantic 
symbol 
space 
Figure 6 Single-space model.
propose sequential variationalsoft Q-learning networks(SVQNs ) which formalizes the inference of hidden
states and maximum entropy reinforcement learning under a uniﬁed graphical model. Experimental
results demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our algorithms under th e partially observable MDPs. However,
it remains a challenging problem to reduce the computational complex ity and speed up the convergence.
(2) The integration of domain knowledge in reinforcement learning. S imilar to perceptual tasks, it is
criticaltointegratedomainknowledgewithreinforcementlearning. However,withoutproperlyharnessing
domain knowledge, reinforcement learning faces many problems, su ch as slow convergence, high sampling
complexity, and low generalization. These problems could be address ed by introducing human knowledge
intothelearningprocess,whichisalsoinlinewiththehumanmindingener aldecision-makingprocedures.
One possible solution is relational reinforcement learning, which endo ws the agent with both knowledge
representation in the form of the (probabilistic) ﬁrst-order logic a nd reinforcement learning in complex
and uncertain worlds. In [ 52], our group proposed to integrate human knowledge, which is repre sented as
computable symbolic expressions, with reinforcement learning as a p osterior regularization. Experiments
demonstrate that we greatly improved the performance of reinfo rcement learning, and our method won
the championship in the FPS competition in 2018 [ 53].
(3) The integration of game theory and reinforcement learning. At its early stage, reinforcement
learning was designed for single-agent tasks in stochastic stationa ry environments. However, there may
exist multiple agents for policy learningin numerous domains, due to eit her the complexity of tasks or the
decentralization inherent in video games, robotics, distributed con trols, etc. A basic learning framework
to describe multi-agent systems involves introducing game theory in to reinforcement learning. Game
theory characterizes the strategic interactions between the ag ents. The combination of game theory and
reinforcement learning provides a generic method to model the coo peration and competition between
multiple agents. Examples include zero-sum/non-zero-sum games a nd complete/incomplete information
decision-making in a multi-agent system; the latter proves to be of v alue, e.g., AlphaStar [ 44]. Our group
alsoconductedexploratoryresearchinthisareabymodelingtheex plorationofanRL-agentwithinagame
theory framework [ 54]. We present a posterior sampling algorithm with the technique of cou nterfactual
regret minimization (CFR), which is a novel design of interaction stra tegies for the RL agent with a
provably theoretical guarantee.
Moreover, reinforcement learning is challenged by the gap between the simulated and real worlds, the
dilemma of exploration-exploitation, better world modeling technique s for planning, etc. Compared with
the success of supervised learning, the development of reinforce ment learning is still at its early stage and
is confronted with numerous unsolved problems.
3.2 Single-space model
In a single space model, both symbolic and sub-symbolic processing is c onducted in a single vector space,
as shown in Figure 6. It can make better use of the computing power of a computer, th ereby increasing
the processing speed, which is why it is called a computer-style model. The problem is that there exist
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent mechanisms between deep learning and the hum an brain’s learning, which results
in major limitations in deep learning, such as interpretability and robus tness. We discuss a few key issues
below.
3.2.1The vectorization of symbols
Knowledge is usually expressed in the form of discrete symbols in natu ral language. In order to build a
single-space model, we must ﬁrst transform the symbolic words, ph rases, sentences, and chapters, as well
astheknowledgegraph,intovectorrepresentations. Thereexis tvariousmethodsforwordtransformation,