Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:5
original image, yielding an adversarial sample accordingly. Due to the small amount of noise added, the
resulting adversarial sample is almost indistinguishable from the origin al image from human observation.
However, the deep network identiﬁed the adversarial sample as a “ dog” with 99.99% conﬁdence.
Why is deep learning so vulnerable, unsafe, and easily deceived? The r eason can only be found in deep
learning itself. The success or failure of deep learning is closely relate d to the above three assumptions.
Due to the uncertainty of observed and measured data, the obta ined data inevitably is incomplete and
contains noise. In this case, the choice of neural network struct ure (function family) is signiﬁcant. If
the network structure is too simple, there is a risk of under-ﬁtting , but it will also be over-ﬁtting if
the network structure is too complex. Recent work on regularizat ion methods can reduce the risk of
over-ﬁtting to some extent. But if the data quality is poor, it will inev itably lead to a serious decline in
generalization ability.
In addition, the “black box” characteristic of deep learning is anoth er reason for its poor generalization
ability. Taking image recognition as an example, deep learning can only ﬁ nd recurring local fragments
(patterns), whereas ﬁnding semantically meaningful parts prove s to be diﬃcult. In [ 33], we investigated
the classiﬁcation of birds’ images using the deep network VGG-16. T he inputting of a bird’s image
neuron 147# in the pool layer 5 of the network showed a strong res ponse. The response corresponded
to a local feature of the bird’s head in the image. The network uses t his local feature as the main
basis for distinguishing birds and other objects. Obviously, it is not a n invariant semantic feature of
“birds”. Therefore, when inputting adversarial samples of comple tely diﬀerent semantics (e.g., ﬁgures,
beer bottles, horses, etc.) but with features similar to that of a bir d’s head, neuron 147# also produces
a strong response. The network then mistakenly identiﬁed the adv ersarial samples as “birds”.
3 Third-generation artiﬁcial intelligence
The ﬁrst generation of knowledge-driven AI uses three factors o f knowledge, algorithm and computing
power to construct an AI. The second generation of data-driven AI uses three diﬀerent factors of data,
algorithms, and computing power. Therefore, the ﬁrst- and seco nd- generations of AI simulate human
intelligent behaviors in only one aspect, and each generation has its o wn limitations. In order to build
an AI that can reﬂect intelligent human behaviors, we need to build ro bust and explainable AI theories,
and develop safe, reliable, and extensible AI technology, i.e., the thir d-generation of AI. The key idea
is to combine the knowledge-driven methods of the ﬁrst generation and the data-driven methods of the
second-generation, in order to construct a more powerful AI by simultaneously using the four elements of
knowledge, data, algorithms, and computing power. Currently, th ere is a dual-space model. At present,
there are two schemes of a dual-space model and a single-space mo del.
3.1 Dual space model
The dual-space model is shown in Figure 2. It is a brain-style model, in which a symbolic model (space)
simulates rational behaviors, and the sub-symbolic model (space) simulates perceptual behaviors. These
two models are seamlessly integrated into the human brain. If this int egration could be achieved in
computers, it would be possible for AI to achieve human-like intelligent behaviors. In order to achieve
this goal, the following three problems need to be solved.
3.1.1Knowledge and reasoning
Knowledge(including common sense)and reasoningarethe foundat ionsofrationalbehaviors. Knowledge
andreasoninghavewitnessedsigniﬁcantprogressintheﬁrst-gen erationAI,whichusessymbolicmodelsto
simulate such human behaviors. However, problems in knowledge rep resentation and reasoning methods
need to be further addressed. An example of recent progress is t he IBM DeepQA project [ 34]. It proved
to be such a winning formula that the Watson dialog system, based on DeepQA, won the American
TV quiz show “Jeopardy!” by overwhelming the champions Ken Jenning s and Brad Rutter in February
2011. It is worth reviewing the following experience of the Watson dia logue system with respect to
knowledge representation and reasoning methods. The system inc ludes (1) a method to automatically
generate structured knowledge representation from a large num ber of unstructured texts, (2) a method
of representing uncertain knowledge based on a knowledge quality s core, and (3) uncertainty reasoning
based on the integration of multiple reasoning models.