Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:3
x1
x2
xjyω
Figure 1 Perceptron.
In general, mathematical tools for the processing of discrete sym bols are lacking. It is non-trivial to
apply mathematical tools other than mathematical logic, which is one of the main reasons that it is
diﬃcult to execute symbolic AI eﬃciently on computers. Knowledge-d riven strong AI can only solve
speciﬁc problems on a case-by-case basis. It is still a controversia l issue as to whether there is a general
weak approach that can be applied to a wide range of problems, name ly artiﬁcial general intelligence.
In addition, the acquisition of knowledge from original data (including text, images, speech, and video)
is mainly operated manually at present, and therefore is of low eﬃcien cy. Therefore, it is important to
explore eﬀective automatic methods of knowledge acquisition.
Moreover, the current intelligent systems cannot understand th e world and behave reasonably in an
unpredictable environment due to the absence of common sense, w hich is recognized as one of the most
signiﬁcant barriers between the current AI algorithms and a more g eneral AI system. How common sense
is acquired, expressed, and inferred remains a challenging problem. Admittedly, the construction of a
practical common-sense library is akin to the “Manhattan Project ” of AI since the amount of common
sense is huge and introducing it into AI will require tremendous amoun t of time and eﬀort.
2 Second-generation artiﬁcial intelligence
Howissensoryinformation(e.g., vision, audio, andtouch)storedinm emoryandhowdoesitaﬀect human
behaviors? There are two schools of thought. One is that this infor mation is represented in some coded
way in memory (in neural networks), with the representative samp le of research on the symbolic AI. The
other is that sensory stimuli are not stored in memory, but instead create stimulus-response connections
(channels) in neural networks that lead to intelligent behaviors. Th is is known as the connectionist
claim, which is the foundation for connectionist AI. In 1958, Rosenb latt [13,14] built a perceptron—the
prototype of an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)–based on the ide a of connectionism. The inspiration for
the perceptron comes from two sources. One is from the mathema tical model of neurons proposed by
McCulloch and Pitts [ 15] in 1943—the “threshold logic” circuits, which convert the input of n eurons into
discrete values, usually known as the M-P model. The other is from th e Hebb learning rule proposed by
Hebb [16] in 1949, which is that “simultaneously ﬁring neurons are connected together”. The perceptron
function is shown in Figure 1, which can be formulated as
y=

0,if/summationtext
jwjxj/lessorequalslantb,
1,if/summationtext
jwjxj> b,(1)
wherebis the threshold value and wis the weight.
The founders of AI were aware of the idea of connectionism from th e very beginning. For example,
McCarthy et al. [ 5] raised the question “How can a set of (hypothetical) neurons be a rranged so as
to form concepts?” and states “Considerable theoretical and ex perimental work has been done on this
problem. ...But the problem needs more theoretical work”. The perceptron h as only one hidden layer,
which is too simple. Minsky and Papert [ 17] pointed out that the perceptron can only solve linearly
separable problems; even if the number of hidden layers is increased , it is diﬃcult to use the perceptron
because there is no eﬀective learning algorithm.
This criticism of the perceptron was fatal, which resulted in the nasc ent connectionism AI falling to
a low point for more than a decade. During this diﬃcult period, with the continuous eﬀorts of many
researchers, great progress has been made in both neural netw ork models and learning algorithms over