Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:11
3.2.2The improvement of deep learning
Recently, much work has been done to overcome the limitations in the current deep learning techniques
in terms of explainability and robustness. In this subsection, we will e laborate on representative work by
our group.
Explainability. The black-box nature of the recent deep learning models challenges their use in
mission-critical scenarios such as healthcare and self-driving vehic les. Therefore, explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence (XAI) has attracted signiﬁcant attention from numero us researchers. XAI aims to generate
high-quality interpretable or human-understandable explanations of AI decisions. The key challenge
for XAI is to bridge the gap between the feature space and the sem antic space, with the latter being
interpretable for human beings [ 61]. The core idea of machine-learning technologies is to map the raw
data to a suitable internal representation or feature vector to r ealize purposes such as classiﬁcation or
regression, no matter whether they are working with early algorith ms based on hand-crafted features or
the current deep learning algorithms based on feature learning. Ho wever, feature vectors generally are
not interpretable to human beings. In contrast, a human generally makes decisions in semantic space
using their background knowledge, which has signiﬁcant diﬀerences with data in a feature space in terms
of the inherent structures. The purpose of explainable artiﬁcial in telligence is to bridge the gap between
the feature space and semantic space.
Atpresent, themotivation andtechniquesforexplainablemodelsar ediverseandsometimesdiscordant.
The previous work broadly falls into two categories. The ﬁrst categ ory comprises post-hoc interpretable
techniques which focus on explaining predictions without elucidating t he inner mechanisms. Common
approaches include natural language explanations, visualizations o f learned representations, and expla-
nations by using examples.
The second type, explainable artiﬁcial intelligence, attempts to dev elop transparent models with the
aim of investigating how the model works at diﬀerent levels, i.e., the en tire model, individual components
(e.g., parameters), and the training algorithm. The key challenge fo r the transparent models is to
investigate the processes of how humans make decisions and enhan ce the unconscious features to a
more structured symbolic concept representation. Both types o f methods are in the process of rapid
development, and play important roles in the study of interpretabilit y.
Visualization is a common approach to generating the post-hoc inter pretation for an artiﬁcial intelli-
gence algorithm. Now that deep learning is recognized as a kind of “bla ck-box” method, since the inner
mechanism is opaque and “unexplainable”, we can use the tool of visu alization to open the “black box”
such that everything will be clear. In order to provide users with a t ool to better understand, diagnose,
and reﬁne deep CNNs, Liu et al. [ 62] proposed to formulate a deep CNN as a directed acyclic graph
(DAG), and presented a novel hybrid visualization that integrates a DAG with rectangle packing, ma-
trix visualization, and a biclustering-based edge bundling method. We further have developed a visual
analytics system, named CNNVis, which is one of the ﬁrst tools for th e visual analysis of deep learning
models. CNNVis has attracted widespread attention from both indu stry and academia. More recently,
we also proposed to analyze training dynamics, which provide a tool t o understand the failure cases and
to assist in debugging in the training process, with an example of a DGM Tracker that can assist experts
in understanding the training dynamic of the deep generative models .
The parameter redundancy in deep neural networks poses the gr eatest hindrance to interpretability by
humans. Apopularwaytotackleparameterredundancy, and ther ebybetter explaina model, istoextract
the important sub-components by using machine learning technique s. In order to extract the structured
subnetworks, we borrow ideas from network pruning techniques, and obtain a partial structure of the
original full model with comparable predictive performance [ 63]. Speciﬁcally, the critical subnetworks
can be recognized as a group of important channels such that the p erformance would deteriorate severely
if the subnetworks were suppressed to zero. By formulating the p roblem under a knowledge distillation
framework[ 64], we associatea controlgatewith the layer’soutput channels, whic h reﬂectsthe importance
of each channel in the network. After solving the problem, we ﬁnd t he semantic concepts contained in the
criticalsubnetworkrepresentations; i.e., the subnetworksreﬂe ct consistentinput patterns in the intraclass
samples, which can help identify outlier examples in the dataset and in t he more accurate and reasonable
explanatory regions.
The aforementioned methods focus on the post-hoc interpretat ion of the models which seek an expla-
nation of the prediction but may be farfetched in general. It remain s a question whether the explanation
conforms to the internal mechanism of the neural networks. Due to the inherent diﬀerence between the