Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:15
CNN
Image
How many types of
layers are located
below the continent
crust?
TF-
IDFQuestion
Tectonic 
plates
motionKeywords:
crust,
continental,
layers,...
Text GraphSAGE
Text coding modular Merging two
word embedding Multi-modal inference modular Keyword attention Question self-attention Bilinear pooling Answer “2” 
Figure 9 (Color online) The architecture of image-text Question-An swer system.
“ZhuSuan”library[ 90]1). Finally,intermsofapplication,Bayesiandeeplearninghasbeenused forvarious
tasks with promising results, including time-series forecasting, sem i-supervised learning, unsupervised
learning, few-shot learning, and continual learning.
3.2.4Calculation in a single space
As shown in Figure 6, it is diﬃcult for us to calculate the embedded vector from text and t he feature
vector from visual (image) or/and auditory in a single vector space . This is because the words of the
text lose a lot of semantics when they are converted from symbols t o vectors after embedding, and the
features extracted from visual (or/and auditory) perception g enerally belong to low-level features with
no semantics.
We take an “essay-level image-text question answering” task fro m our team [ 91] as an example to
introduce a preliminary attempt in this ﬁeld. More work can be referr ed to in [ 92,93]. Both images and
text in an “essay-level image-text question answering” task must be processed in a single vector space.
As shown in Figure 9, the task is to answer the question “How many types of layers are lo cated below the
continental crust?” based on the given image. In addition to the te xtual representation of the question,
there is also an essay “Tectonic Plates Motion” related to the image.
First, we use the word embedding based on skip-gram to transform words represented by discrete
symbols in “the problem” and “essay” into vectors. After the image is processed by the ResNet, we
use the high-layer feature vector to represent the image [ 57]. Then, the word vectors in “question” and
“essay” are fused with the feature vectors of “image” to predict the “answer”. For better integration, the
“key words” in “problem” and “essay” are ﬁrst identiﬁed through t he attention mechanism since these
keywords can better reﬂect the theme (semantics) of the “prob lem”. Based on the keywords, the spatial
attention mechanism is used to ﬁnd the features of the key areas in the image, since these key areas are
moreconsistent with the theme expressed by the keywords. More over,we use multimodal bilinear pooling
as the integration method. The current performance of machine “ image-text QA” is not comparable to
that of human beings. In the case of multiple-choice questions, for example, the level achieved so far is
only slightly better than random guesses.
1)https://zhusuan.readthedocs.io/.