Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:2
However, most of these early expert systems were too simple and f ar from practical. This remained
the case until May 1997, when IBM Deep Blue defeated the chess ch ampion Kasparov. This marked a
new stage of symbolic AI as being truly capable of solving problems with the development of a large-scale
system.
Symbolic AI can also be applied to machine learning such as inductive lear ning. Taking inductive
logic programming (ILP) [ 8] as an example, we will show the mechanism of symbolic AI-based mach ine
learning. InILP,machinelearningisconsideredasknowledge-based inductivelearning,i.e., searchingfora
hypothesis in the hypothesis space. The hypothesis should include a s many positive examples as possible,
exclude negative examples as much as possible, and be consistent wit h background knowledge. In ILP,
the positive and negative samples (instances), background knowle dge, and hypotheses are expressed in
the form of ﬁrst-order logic clauses (programs). Generally, the h ypothesis space is huge, which makes ILP
learning quite diﬃcult. In some cases, the background knowledge ca n eﬀectively restrict the hypothesis
space to make learning more feasible. Obviously, an agent can learn m ore eﬀectively and eﬃciently if
it has more background knowledge. Moreover, Riguzzi et al. [ 9] proposed probabilistic inductive logic
programming (PILP) to deal with uncertainty.
With background knowledge appropriately harnessed, knowledge- driven methods are robust, and are
more eﬀective when the data is insuﬃcient and can be easily transfer red to diﬀerent domains. Take
transfer learning [ 10] as an example. One can update or transfer the knowledge learned from one scenario
to another to achieve cross-domain or cross-task generalization . Speciﬁcally, we can ﬁrst identify the
general knowledge that can be transferred across domains or ta sks, along with the speciﬁc knowledge for
asingledomainortaskfromthetrainingenvironment(includingtrainin gdataandmethods). Inthiscase,
the general knowledge can be used to improve the performance of the target domain or task. The general
knowledge can be transferred to the target domain in the following w ays: (1) examples available in the
source domain, (2) features that can be shared between the sou rce and target domains, (3) available parts
of the source domain model, (4) speciﬁc rules shared between entit ies in the source domain. Therefore,
knowledge plays an essential role in transfer learning, which is the re ason that knowledge-based methods
can be easily generalized across diﬀerent domains and tasks.
Besides Feigenbaum and Reddy (1994), Minsky (1969), McCarthy ( 1971), Newell and Simon (1975)
havealsomade greatcontributionsto the creationofsymbolicAI, a nd wonTuringawardsuccessively(the
yearsareindicatedinbrackets). TaketheIBMDeep Blueprograma sanexample. Thesuccessoftheﬁrst-
generation AI stems from the following aspects. (1) Knowledge and experience. The evaluation function
was split into 8000 parts (parameters). The system determined th e optimal values for these parameters
by analyzing over 4000 positions and 700000 grandmaster games. I t also uses the endgame database
which includes a large number of six-piece endgames and ﬁve or fewer piece positions. Additionally,
the program’s chess knowledge was ﬁne-tuned by grandmaster Jo el Benjamin. (2) Algorithm. Deep
Blue executes the α-βsearch algorithm in parallel, which eﬀectively improved the search eﬃc iency.
(3) Computing power. Using IBM RS/6000 SP2 with 11.38 GFLOPS, Dee p Blue can examine 200
million moves per second or 50 million positions within three minutes.
Symbolic AI has a solid foundation in cognitive psychology. It gains str ength by taking the symbol
system as the model of human higher mental activity. Symbols are c haracterizedby compositionality, i.e.,
simple atomic symbols may combine and form complex symbol strings. S ince each symbol corresponds
to a semantic meaning, the compositionality of symbols objectively re ﬂects that of semantic objects, such
as how to combine simple components into a whole. Composability is the b asis for reasoning. Therefore,
symbolic AI is as interpretable as human rational behaviors, which ma kes it easy to understand. Yet,
symbolic AI also has obvious limitations. At present, the existing meth ods can only solve deterministic
problems with complete information in a structured environment. IB M’s Deep Blue chess program, which
embodies the achievementofsuch methods, beats humans in aperf ect information game-thesimplest case
of games. However, human cognitive behavior, such as decision-ma king, usually takes place in a complex
environment with imperfect information. Symbolic AI is far from solvin g such problems. For example, it
is diﬃcult for a computer to process the human knowledge represen ted in natural language (by discrete
symbols). Therefore, it is necessary to develop new technologies o f knowledge representation. Existing
knowledge representation methods, such as production rules or lo gic programs, are easy for computers
to handle. However, these methods are simple but limited in their expr ession, which makes it diﬃcult
to describe more complex and uncertain knowledge. Moreover, the current research is mainly limited to
logicalreasoningandotherdeterministicmethods. Morecomplexkn owledgerepresentationandreasoning
methods, such as knowledge graphs [ 11] and probabilistic reasoning [ 12], remain open problems.