Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:12
latent feature space for deep learning and the human interpretab le semantic space, it is imperative to
bridge the two spaces in order to derive a more transparent AI mod el. To address this issue, our group
proposes to improve the interpretability of the DNNs by leveraging t he rich semantic information de-
scribed by human knowledge [ 65]. By extracting a set of semantically meaningful topics from the hum an
descriptions, we propose to integrate them into the model with an in terpretive regularization, yielding
a model with more interpretable feature vectors. The result show s that human-interpretable knowledge
can guide the learning procedure of a deep neural network, yielding an interpretable representation.
Robustness. The growing sophistication of AI techniques has dramatically empowe red AI systems,
but, as a byproduct, it also brings about potential new vulnerabilitie s. Adversarial attacks on an AI
system can generate imperceptible perturbations which can deceiv e an AI model and signiﬁcantly alter
itsresponse. Inthis case, itisessentialtoidentify thevulnerabilitie s, andfurtherimprovethedefensibility
of an AI system functionally and substantially [ 66].
To deal with the threat of adversarial examples, extensive resea rch has been conducted on building
robust models to defend against adversarial attacks. Such work can be roughly classiﬁed into three
categories.
(1) Input transformation. Several defenses adopt transform ation on the inputs before feeding them to
the classiﬁer [ 67], or project adversarial examples onto the data distribution [ 68]. Among these methods,
the denoiser-based method has attracted wide attention due to it s plug-and-play nature that does not
change the structures or properties of the models. However, a d enoiser with good performance on general
Gaussian noise may fail to remove adversarial perturbations. Also , the small residual perturbation
could be ampliﬁed to a large magnitude in the top layers, which is the so- called “error ampliﬁcation
eﬀect” and leads to mistakes in prediction. In order to solve this pro blem, our group proposed a novel
method for a high-level representation guided denoiser (HGD) [ 69], which tries to minimize the diﬀerence
between the outputs of the target model induced by the original a nd the adversarial examples at the
top levels. Experiments demonstrate that HGD consistently produ ces more robust feature representation
by suppressing the progressive ampliﬁcation of adversarial noise a cross the layers. In the NeurIPS2017
competition on adversarial machine learning, our HGD solution won ﬁr st place and outperformed the
alternative models by a large margin.
(2) Robust training. Robust training is a basic strategy for defend ing against adversarial attacks by
augmenting training data with a batch of adversarial examples. The problem can be formulated as a
min-max optimization problem, in which the goal of the inner maximizatio n is to ﬁnd the adversarial
examples while the outer minimization aims to train a robust classiﬁer [ 70]. However, most of the existing
AT methods solve the inner maximization problem based on a speciﬁc at tack algorithm, yielding poor
generalization for other unseen attacks. Recent work has demon strated that even methods with state-of-
the-art robustness against commonly used attacks can still be de feated by other attacks [ 71]. To address
this issue, we propose a novel framework of adversarial distribut ional training (ADT) which learns an
adversarial distribution to characterize the potential adversar ial examples around a natural example [ 72].
Throughtheoreticalanalysisandempirical evaluation, wedemonst ratedthat ourADT trainingalgorithm
can lead to a more robust AI model that can resist adversarial exa mples, especially the ones generated
by unseen attacks.
(3) Model enhancement. Another category of methods is to train a more robust deep learning model
by modifying the network structure, the activation function, or t he loss function of the models. Among
these, the model ensemble is an eﬀective defense strategy in prac tice [73,74]. However, the general
ensemble model may fail to defend against adversarial attacks be cause the adversarial examples have
strong transferability among diﬀerent models. To address this issu e, our group proposed to introduce an
adaptive diversity promoting(ADP) regularizationto boost the dive rsity amongthe diﬀerent models [ 75].
Inparticular,weintroducedalogarithmofensemblediversity(LED) termintotheADP,whichencourages
the non-maximal predictions of each member to be mutually orthogo nal, while at the same time preserves
the maximalprediction consistentwith the groundtruth. Extensiv eresults onvariousdatasetsverifythat
our method can improve adversarial robustness signiﬁcantly while m aintaining state-of-the-art accuracy
on normal examples.
However, most of these methods are heuristics that have been su bsequently shown to fail to defend
against the more powerful adversaries. One of the major reason s is that most of the current deep
learningusesfunction approximationalgorithms,whichingeneralar eunequipped tounderstandtheinner
mechanism of human-like intelligence [ 76]. Therefore, it is imperative to pursue a variety of techniques
that can explain their rationale, and characterize the strength an d weakness. An alternative path is to