Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:16
Continuous
feature
vector
spaceDiscrete 
semantic 
symbolic 
space Continuous 
quasi-semantic 
vector 
space Top-down 
RaisingProjection
Abstraction Embedding 
Bottom-up 
Figure 10 Triple-space integration model.
4 Conclusion
Inordertorealizethird-generationAI, weproposeatriple-space modelwhichisanintegrationofthedual-
space and single space models. Speciﬁcally, the dual-space model us es a brain-like working mechanism.
If it can be realized, the machine will behave in an interpretable and ro bust manner that will be close
to that of the brain. For the dual-space model, the visual/auditory sensory signals (feature vectors) are
upgraded to concepts (discrete symbols). Then concepts (symb ols) are generated by perception. Symbols
havetheir grounding,and symbolsandsymbolicreasoninghavetheir intrinsic semantics. The problemsof
interpretabilityand robustnesscanbe solvedfundamentally. Neve rtheless, the symbolgroundingproblem
is a diﬃcult task that needs to be explored.
The dual-space model imitates the working mechanism of the brain, b ut, because we know very little
about the working mechanism of the brain, there are some uncerta inties in this path. One question is
whether the “intrinsic semantics” obtained via reinforcement learn ing is the same as that acquired by
human perception. Can machines also be conscious? Despite these d iﬃculties, we believe that, as long
as the machine takes a step in this direction, it will be closer to real AI .
In a single space model, both symbolic and sub-symbolic processing is c onducted in a single vector
space. In addition to the need to raise (visual, auditory, etc.) vect or representation from feature space
into semantic space, it is also necessary to ensure that the semant ics will not be lost when the word
(or sentence, chapter, etc.) is embedded. In general, a single-sp ace model is based on deep learning,
which can make full use of computing power, and in some aspects can demonstrate better performance
than humans. However, there still exist great uncertainties abou t the potential for improvements to deep
learning, due to the fundamental limitations in terms of its interpret ability and robustness. However, we
believe that every step of improvement in deep learning will promote t he development of AI.
Considering the above uncertainties, the best strategy is to proc eed along these two routes at the same
time, through the integration of the three spaces: continuous fe ature vector space, discrete semantic
symbolic space, and continuous quasi-semantic vector space as is illu strated in Figure 10. In this way,
we can maximize the use of brain-like working mechanisms, and make fu ll use of the computing power of
the computer, which is expected to result in a more powerful AI, i.e., the third-generation AI.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundat ion of China (Grant No. 61620106010).
References
1 Simon H A. Models of Man. New York: Wiley & Sons, 1957
2 Newell A, Simon H A. Computer science as empirical inquiry: symbols and search. Commun ACM , 1976, 19: 113–126
3 Newell A. Physical Symbol Systems. Cogn Sci , 1980, 4: 135–183
4 Fodor J A. Methodological solipsism considered as a resear ch strategy in cognitive psychology. Behav Brain Sci , 1980, 3:
63–73
5 McCarthy J, Minsky M L, Rochester N, et al. A proposal for the Dartmouth summer research project on artiﬁcial intelligen ce.
1955, 27: 4
6 Lindsay, Robert K, Bruce G. Applications of Artiﬁcial Inte lligence for Organic Chemistry: The Dendral Project. New Yo rk:
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1980