Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
38 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 selection of feature -maps can play an important role in improving  the gener alization of the 
network. In this section, feature -maps and channels will be interchangeably used as many 
researchers have used th e word channels for the feature -maps. 
4.5.1  Squeeze and Excitation Network  
Squeeze and Excitation N etwork (SE-Network) was reported by Hu et al.  (Hu et al. 2018a) . They 
proposed a new b lock for the selection of feature -maps (commonly known as channel s) relevant 
to object discrimination. This new block was named as  SE-block  (shown in Fig.  10), which 
suppresses the less important feature -maps , but  gives high weightage to  the class specifyi ng 
feature -maps . SE-Network reported a record decrease in error on the ImageNet dataset.  SE-block 
is a processing unit that is design ed generically and therefore , can be added in any CNN 
architecture before the convolution la yer. The working of this block consists of  two operations; 
squeeze and excitation. Convolution kernel captu res information locally, but it  ignores the 
contextual relation of features (correlation) that are outside of this receptive field  (LeCun et al. 
2015) . Squeeze operation is performed to get a global view of  feature -maps. The  squeeze block 
generates feature -map wise statistics (also known as feature -map motifs  or descriptors ) by 
suppressing spatial information of the convol ved input. As g lobal average pooling  has the 
potential to learn  the extent of target object effectively  (Lin et al. 2013; Zhou et al. 2016) , 
there fore, it is employed by the squeeze operation  
(.)sqg  using the following equation  (15): 
                                                       
,1( ) ( , )k k k
l sq l l
pqs g f p qPQ== F                              (15) 
where,  
k
ls represents a feature  descriptor  for kth feature -map of lth layer , and  
PQ
defines the spatial dimension  of feature -map 
k
lF . Whereas output of squeeze operation  
1,...,KK
l l l ss=S
 for K number of convol ved feature -maps  for lth layer is assigned to the 
excitation operation  
(.)exg , which models motif -wise interdependencies by exploiting gating 
mechanism. Excitation operation  assigns weights to feature -maps using  two layer feed forward 
NN, which is mathematically expressed in equation (16 ).                                                 
                                                 
1 2 1 ( ) ( , ( , ))
gk k k
l ex l s t ly g g g+== S w S w                               (16) 
In equation (16 ), 
1k
ly+ denotes weig htage  for input feature -map 
1k
l+F of next layer  (l +1), 
where  
(.)tg  and 
(.)
gsg  apply  the ReLU  based non -linear transformation  and sigmoid gate,