Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
55 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 extracting different levels of semantic represen tation s. Similarly, concepts such as batch 
normalization, dropout, and new activation functions are also worth mentioning.  
• The potential of  a CNN as a generative learner is exploi ted in image segmentation tasks, 
where it has shown good results  (Kahng et al. 2019) . The exploitation of generative 
learnin g capabilities of CNN s at feature extraction stages can boost the representation al 
power of the model. Similar ly, new paradigms are needed that can enhance the learning 
capacity of CNN by inco rporating informative feature -maps that can be  learned  using  
auxiliary learners at the intermediate stages of CNN  (Khan et al. 2018a) .  
• In the human visual system, attention is  one of the important mechanisms in cap turing 
information from images.  The a ttention mechanism operates in such a way that it not 
only extract s the essential information from image but al so store s its contextual relation  
with other components of image  (Bhunia et al. 2019) . In the future, resear ch may be 
carried out in the direction that preserves the spatial relevance of object s along with their 
discriminating features at later stages of learning.  
• The learning capacity of CNN is generally enhanced by increasing  the size of the 
network , and it can be done in a reasonable time with the help of the current advanced  
hardware technology  such as Nvidia DGX -2 supercomputer . However, the training of 
deep and high capacity architectures is still a significant overhead on memory usage and 
computation al resources  (Lacey et al. 2016; Sze et al. 2017; Justus et al. 2019) . 
Consequently, we still require  many  improv ement s in hardware technology  that can 
accelerate research in CNNs . The main concern with CNNs  is the run -time applicability. 
Moreover,  the use of CNN is hindered in small hardware, especially in mobile devices , 
because of its high computational cost. In this regard, different hardware accelerators are 
needed for reducing both execution time and po wer consumption  (Geng et al. 2019) . 
Some of the very interesting accelerators are already proposed. For exa mple,  Application 
Specific Integrated Circuits, FPGA, and Eyeriss are well known  (Moons and Verhelst 
2017) . Moreover, different operations have been performed to minimize the  hardware 
resources in terms of chip area and energy requirement , by reduci ng floating -point 
precision of op erands and ternary quantization  or minimizing  the number of matrix 
operations. N ow it is also time to redirect research towards hardware -oriented 
approximation models  (Geng et al. 2019) .