Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
7 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 A typical CNN architecture generally comprises alternate layers of convolution and 
pooling followed by one or more fully connected layers at the end. In some cases, a fully 
connec ted layer is replaced with a global average pooling layer. In addition t o different mapping 
functions, different regulatory units such as batch normalization and dropout are also 
incorporated to optimize CNN performance (Bouv rie 2006) . The arrangement of CNN 
components plays  a fundamental role in designing new architectures and thus achieving 
enhanced performance. This section briefly discusses the role of these components in a CNN 
architecture.  
2.1 Convolutional  layer  
The convol utional layer is composed of a set of convolutional  kernels where each neuron acts as 
a kernel. However, if the kernel is symmetric, the convolution operation becomes a correlation 
operation (Ian Goodfellow et al. 2017) . Convolutional kernel works by dividing the image into 
small slices,  commonly known as receptive fields. The division of an image into small blocks 
helps in extracting featu re motifs. Kernel convolves with the images using a specific set of 
weights by multiplying its elements with the corresponding elements of the receptiv e field 
(Bouvrie 2006) . Convolution operation can be expressed as follows :      
 
                                            
,( , ) ( , ). ( , )kk
l c l
c x yf p q i x y e u v=                                       (1) 
where, 
( , )ci x y  is an element of the input image tensor 
CI , which is element wise 
multiplied b y 
( , )k
le u v  index of the kth convolutional kernel 
lk  of the lth layer. Whereas output 
feature -map of the kth convolutional operation can be expressed as  
(1,1),..., ( , ),..., ( , )k k k k
l l l l f f p q f P Q=F
. The different m athematical symbols  used are defined in 
Table 1.  
Due to weight sharing ability of convolutional operation, different sets of features within 
an image can be extracted by sliding kernel with the same set of weights on the image and thus 
makes CNN parameter efficient as compa red to the fully connected networks. Convolution 
operation may further be cate gorized into different types based on the type and size of filters, 
type of padding, and the direction of convolution (LeCun et al. 2015) .