Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
32 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 network and information that is preserved. DenseNet  has a narrow layer structure;  however , it 
become s parametrically expensive with an increase  in a number  of feature -maps.  Information 
flow in the network improves by provi ding each layer direct access to the gradients through the 
loss function. Direct admittance to gradient incorporates a regularizing effect, which reduces 
overfitting on tasks with smaller training sets.                                         
4.4 Width bas ed Multi -Connection CNNs  
During 2012 -2015, the focus  was mainly  on exploiting the power  of depth , along with the 
effectiveness  of multi -pass regulatory connections in network regularization  (Srivastava et al. 
2015a; He et al. 2015a) . However,  Kawaguchi et al. reported that  the width of the network  is also 
important (Kawaguchi et al. 2019) . Multilayer perceptron gained the advantage of mapping 
complex functions over perceptron by making parallel use of m ultiple processing units within a 
layer. This suggests  that width is an essential  parameter in defining principles of learning along 
with depth. Lu et al. (2017), and Hanin and Sellke  (2017) have recently shown that NNs with 
ReLU activation fun ction have t o be wide enough to hold universal approximation propert y 
along with  an increase  in depth  (Hanin and Sellke 2017) . Moreover,  a class of continuous 
functions on a compact set cannot be arb itrarily well approximated by an arbitrarily deep 
network , if the maximum width of the network is not larger than the input dimension  (Lu et al. 
2017b; Nguyen et al. 2018) . Although , stacking of multiple layers (increasing depth) may learn 
diverse feature representations , but may not necessarily increase the learning  power of the NN. 
One major problem linked with deep a rchitecture s is that some layers or processing units may 
not learn useful features. To tackle this problem, the focus of research shifted from deep and 
narrow  architectu re towards  thin and  wide architectures.  
4.4.1  Wide  ResNet  
It is concerned that t he main drawback associated with deep residual networks is the feature 
reuse problem in which some feature transformations  or blocks may contribute very little to 
learning  (Srivastava et al. 2015b) . This problem was addressed by Wide ResNet  (Zagoruyko and 
Komodakis 2016) . Zagoruyko  and Komodakis  suggested that  the main learning potential of deep 
residual networks is due to  the residual units, whereas depth has a supplement ary effect. Wide 
ResNet  exploited  the power  of the residual blocks by making ResNet wide rather than deep  (He