Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
34 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 Pyramid al Net increase s the width gradual ly per residual unit. This strategy enables pyramidal 
Net to  cover all possible locations instead of maintaining the same spatial dimension within each 
residual block  until down -sampling occurs . Because of a gradu al increase  in the depth of features 
map in a top -down  fashion , it was named  as pyramid al Net . In pyramidal network , depth of 
feature -maps is regulated by factor
l , and is computed using equation ( 12).  
                                              
116 1,
21l
lif l
dd if l nn
−= 
=+   +                                           (12) 
where, 
ld  denotes  the dimen sions of 
thl  residual block  and 
n describes the  number of the 
residual  block , where as  
 is a step size and 
n regulate s the increase  in depth. The depth 
regulating factor tries to distribute the burden of increase  in depth of feature -maps. Residual 
connections were inserted in between the layers by using zero-padde d identity mapping. The 
advantage  of zero-padded  identity mapping is that it needs less number of parameter s as 
compared to the projection -based shortcu t connection, hence may result in better generalization  
(Wang et al. 2019) . Pyramidal Net uses two different approaches for  the widening  of the 
network , including addition  and multiplication based widening. The difference between the two 
types of widening is that  additive pyramidal structure  increases linearly , whereas  multiplicative  
one increases geometrically (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015; Xu et  al. 2015a) . However,  a major 
problem with Pyramidal Net is that with the increase in width , a quadratic times increase in both 
space and time  occurs . 
4.4.3  Xception  
Xception  can be considered as  an extreme I nception architecture, which exploits  the idea  of 
depthwise separable convolution (Chollet 2017) . Xception modified the original inception block 
by making it wider and replacing  the different spatial dimensions (1x1, 5x5, 3x3) with a single  
dimension (3x3)  followed by a 1x1 convolution to regulate computational comp lexity .  
The Architecture of the Xception block is shown in Fig.  8. Xception makes  the network  
computationally efficient by decoupling spatial and feature -map ( channel ) correlation , which is 
math emat ically expressed in equation (13 & 14 ). It works by first  mapping  the convolved outp ut