Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
18 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 to make them appropriate for resource -constrained environments. Prominent modifications are 
knowledge distillation, training of small networks, or squeezi ng of pre -trained networks (such as 
pruning, quantization, hashing, Huffman codin g, etc.) (Chen et a l. 2015; Han et al. 2016; Wu et 
al. 2016; Frosst and Hinton 2018) . GoogleNet exploited the idea of small networks, which 
replaces the conventional convolution with point -wise group convolution operation to make it 
computationally efficient. Similarly, S huffleNet used point -wise group convolution but with a 
new idea of channel shuffle that significantly reduces the number of operations without affecting 
the accuracy. In the s ame way, ANTNet proposed a novel architectural block known as 
ANTBlock, which at low computational cost, achieved good performance on benchmark datasets 
(Howard et al. 20 17; Zhang et al. 2018a; Xiong et al. 2019) . 
From 2012 up till now, many improvements have been reported in CNN architectures. As 
regards the architectural advancement of CNNs, recently, the focus of research has been on 
designing of new blocks that can bo ost network representation by exploiting feature -maps or 
manipulating inp ut representation by adding artificial channels. Moreover, along with this, the 
trend is towards the design of lightweight architectures without compromising the performance 
to make C NN applicable for resource constraint hardware.  
 
4 Architectural innovation s in CNN  
Different improvements in CNN architecture have been made from 1989 to date. These 
improvements can be categorized as parameter optimization, regularization, structural 
refor mulation, etc. However, it is observed that the main thrust in CNN perfor mance 
improvement came from the restructuring of processing units and the designing of new blocks. 
Most of the innovations in CNN architectures have been made in relation to depth and  spatial 
exploitation. Depending upon the type of architectural modificat ions, CNNs can be broadly 
categorized into seven different classes, namely; spatial exploitation, depth, multi -path, width, 
feature -map exploitation, channel boosting, and attention -based CNNs. The taxonomy of CNN 
architectures is pictorially represented i n Fig. 4. Architectural details of the state -of-the-art CNN 
models, their parameters, and performance on benchmark datasets are summarized in Table 2. 
On the other hand, different on line resources on deep CNN architectures, vision -related dataset, 
and thei r implementation platforms are mentioned in Table 3. In addition to this, the strengths 
and weaknesses of various architectures based on their category are presented in Table 5a -g.