Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
41 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 discernable  information in the input  may affect  CNN ’s performance as a discriminator . For t his 
purpose, the concept of channel boosting (input channel dimension) using auxiliary learners is 
introduced in CNN s to boost the representation of the network  (Khan et al. 2018a) .  
4.6.1  Channel B oosted CNN using TL  
In 2018, Khan et al. proposed a new CNN architecture  named as Channel boosted CNN  (CB-
CNN )based on the idea of boosting the number of input channels for improving the 
representational  capacity of the network  (Khan et al. 2018a) . The Block diagra m of CB -CNN is 
shown in Fig.  11. Channel boosting is performed by artificially creating extra channels  (known 
as aux iliary channels)  through  auxiliary deep generative models and then exploiting it through 
the deep discriminative models. CB-CNN is mathematically expressed in equation (20 & 21). 
                                                     
1 ( , ,..., )B k C Mg=I I A A                                       (20) 
                                                            
( , )k
l c B lg=F I k                                              (21) 
In equation (20 ), 
CI  represents the  original input  channel s, where  
MA  is an artificial 
channel generated by  Mth auxiliary learner . Whereas 
(.)kg  is used as a combiner function that 
concatenates the original input channel s with auxiliary channels to generates the channel boosted 
input 
BI  for the discriminator . Equation (21 ) shows the kth resultant feature -map 
k
lF, which is 
generated by convolving  the boosted input  
BIwith kernel  
lkof lth layer.  
Bengio et al.  in 2013 , empirically showed  that data representation plays an important role 
in determining the performance of a classifier , as different representations may present  different 
aspects  of information  (Bengio et al. 2013) . For improving  the representation of the data, Khan et 
al. exploited the power  of TL and deep generative learners  (Qiang Yang et al . 2008; Vincent et 
al. 2008; Hamel and E ck 2010) . Generative learners attempt to characterize the data generating 
distribution during the learning  phase . In CB -CNN, AEs are used as the generative  learner s to 
learn explanatory factors of variation behind  the data. The c oncept  of inductive TL is used in a 
novel way to build a boosted input representation by augmenting learned distribution of the input 
data with the  original channel space ( input  channels). CB -CNN encodes  channel -boosting  phase 
into a generic block , which is inserted at the start of  a deep  network . CB-CNN provides the 
concept that TL can be used at both generation and discrimination stages. The significance of the 
study is that multi -deep learners are used, where generativ e learning models are used as auxiliary 
learners.  These leane rs enhance the representational capacity of deep CNN based discriminator.