Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
45 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 via the serial learning process helps in the reduction of the parameter s as well as  computational 
cost. Due to the simplici ty of CBAM , it can be integrated easily with any CNN architecture.  
4.7.3  Concurrent Spatial and C hannel Excitation M echanism  
In 2018, Roy et al.  extend ed the work of Hu et al.  by incorporating  the effect  of spatial 
information in combinat ion with feature -map (channel ) information to make it applicable to 
segmentation tasks  (Roy et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2018a) . They introduce d three different modules: 
(i) squeezing  spatially and exciting feature -map information  (cSE), (ii) squeezing feature -map 
and exciting spatial information  (sSE), and (iii) concurrent squeeze and excitation  of spatial and 
feature -map information  (scSE ). In this work, AE based convolutional NN was used for 
segmentation , whereas proposed modules were  inserted after the encoder and decoder layer s. In 
the cSE module , the same concept as that of SE-block  is exploite d. In this module, the scaling  
factor is derived based on  the combination of  feature -maps used for  object detection. As spatial 
information has an important role in segmentation , therefore in the sSE module , the spatial 
locality has been given more importa nce than feature -map information. For this purpose, 
different combinations of feature -maps are selected  and exploited spatially to use them  for 
segmentation. In the last module , scSE , attention to each feature -map, is assigned by deriving 
scaling factor bo th from spatial and feature -map information and thus to highlight the object -
specific feature -maps [117] selectively  (Roy et al. 2018) .  
5 Applications of CNN s 
CNN s have been successfully applied to  different ML relate d tasks,  namely object detection, 
recognition , classification, regression, segmentation, etc ., (Batmaz et al. 2019; Chouhan a nd 
Khan 2019; Wahab et al. 2019) . However, CNN generally needs a large amount of data for 
learning. All of the areas mentioned earlier in which CNN has shown tremendous success have 
relatively sufficient labeled data, such as traffic sign recognition, seg mentation of medical  
images, and the detection of faces, text, pedestrians, and human s in natural images. Some of the 
interesting  applications of CNN are discussed below.  
5.1 CNN based  computer vision and related  applications   
Computer vision  (CV)  focuses  on developing an artificial system that can process visual data , 
including i mages and videos and can effectively understand , and extract useful information f rom