Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
22 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 rotation, and variation of po sition and scale. LeNet is a feed -forward NN that constitutes of five 
alternating lay ers of convolutional and pooling, followed by two fully connected layers. In early 
2000, GPU was not commonly used to speed up training, and even CPUs were slow (Potluri et 
al. 2011) . The main limitation of traditional multilayere d fully connected NN was that it 
considers each pixel as separate input and applies a transformation on it, which was a substantial 
computational burden, specifically at t hat time (Gardn er and Dorling 1998) . LeNet exploited the 
underlying basis of the image that the n eighboring pixels are correlated to each other and feature 
motifs are distributed across the entire image. Therefore, convolution with learnable parameters 
is an effective  way to extract similar features at multiple locations with few parameters. Learning 
with sharable parameters changed the conventional view of training where each pixel was 
considered as a separate input feature from its neighborhood and ignored the correl ation among 
them. LeNet was the first CNN architecture, which not only reduced the nu mber of parameters 
but was able to learn features from raw pixels automatically.  
4.1.2  AlexNet  
LeNet (LeCun et al. 1995)  though, begin the history of deep CNNs, but at that time, CNN was 
limited to hand digit recognition tasks and didn’t perform well to all cl asses of images. AlexNet 
(Krizhevsky et al. 2012)  is considered as the first deep CNN architecture, which showed 
groundbreaking results for image classific ation and recognition tasks. AlexNet was proposed by 
Krizhevesky et al., which enhanced the learning capacity of the CNN  by making it deeper and by 
applying several parameter optimizations strategies (Krizhevsky et al. 2012) . The basic 
architectural design of AlexNet is show n in Fig. 5. In early 2000, hardware limitations curtailed 
the learning capacity of deep CNN architectures by restricting them to small size. In order to get 
the benefit of the representational capacity of deep CNNs, Alexnet was trained in parallel on two 
NVIDIA GTX 580 GPUs to overcome shortcomings of the hardware.  
In AlexNet, depth was extended from 5 (LeNet) to 8 layers to make CNN app licable for 
diverse categories of images. Despite the fact that generally, depth improves generalization for 
different r esolutions of images but, the main drawback associated with an increase in depth is 
overfitting. To address this challenge, Krizhevesky et al. (2012) exploited the idea of Hinton 
(Dahl et al. 2013; Srivastava et al. 2014) , whereby their algorithm randomly skips some 
transforma tional units during training to enforce the model to learn more robust features. In 
addition to this, ReLU was employed as a non -saturating activation function to improve the