Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
57 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 specifically  that of  deep CNN in high energy physics will grow  (Aurisano et al. 2016; 
Madrazo et al. 201 9).  
8 Conclusion  
CNN has made remarkable progress, espec ially in image processing and vision -related tasks, and 
has thus revived the interest of researchers  in ANNs. In this context, several research works have 
been carried out to improve CNN’s performance on such tasks. T he advancements in CNNs can 
be categori zed in different ways, including activation, loss function, optimization, regularization, 
learning algorithms, and innovations in architecture. This paper reviews advancement in the 
CNN architectures, especially based  on the design patterns of the processi ng units and thus has 
proposed the taxonomy for recent CNN architectures. In addition to the categorization of CNNs 
into different classes, this paper also covers the history of CNNs, its applications, challenges, and  
future directions.  
The learning capac ity of CNN is significantly improved over the years by exploiting 
depth and other structural modifications. It is observed in recent literature that the main boost in 
CNN performance has been achieved by replacing the  conventional layer structure with bloc ks. 
Nowadays, one of the paradigms of research in CNN architectures is the development of new 
and effective block architectures. The role of a block in a network can be that of an auxiliary 
learner. These auxiliary le arners either exploit spatial or featur e-map information or even boost 
input channels to improve performance. These blocks play a significant role in boosting CNN 
performance by making problem -aware learning.  
Moreover, the block -based architecture of CNN e ncourages learning in a modular fashion  
and thereby, making architecture simpler and more understandable . The concept of the block 
being a structural unit is going to persist and further enhance CNN performance. Additionally, 
the idea of attention and expl oitation of channel information, in add ition to spatial information, is 
expected to gain more importance.  
Acknowledgments  
The authors would like to  thank  Pattern Recognition lab  at DCIS , and PIEAS  for providing them  
computational facilities.  The authors express their gratitude to M . Waleed Kha n of PIEAS for the 
detailed discussion related to the Mathematical description of the different CNN architectures.