Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
56 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 • Deep CNN has a large number of hyper -paramete rs such as activation function, kernel 
size, number of neurons per layers, and arrangement of layers , etc. The selection of 
hyper-parameters and the evaluation  time of a deep network , make  parameter tuning 
quite a difficult  job. Hyper -parameter tuning  is a tedious and intuition driven task, which 
cannot be defined via explicit formulation. In this regard, Genetic algorithms  can also be 
used to automatically optimize  the hyper -parameter s by performing search es both in a 
random fashion as well as by  directing  search by utilizing  previous results  (Young et al. 
2015; Sug anuma et al. 2017; Khan et al. 2019) .  
• In order  to overcome hardware limitations, the concept  of pipeline parallelism can be 
exploited to scale up deep C NN training. Google group has proposed a distributed ML 
library  GPipe  (Huang et al. 2018)  that offers  a  model parallelism option for training . In 
the future , the concept of pipelining can be used  to accelerate the training of large  models 
and to scale the performance without tuning hyper -parameters.  
• In the future , it is expected that the potential of cloud -based platforms will be exploited 
for the development of computationally intensive CNN  appli cations  (Akar et al. 2019 ; 
Stefanini et al. 2019) . Deep and wide CNNs present  a critical challenge in implementing 
and executing them  on resource -limited  devices . Cloud computing not only allow s 
dealing  with a massive amount of data but also leverage s the benefit of  high 
computat ional efficiency at a negligible cost . World -leading companies such as Amazon, 
Microsoft, Google, and IBM offer the public cloud computing facilities  at high 
scalability, speed , and flexibility  to train resource -hungry CNN architectures . Moreover, 
the cloud environment  make s it easy to configure libraries both for re searchers and new  
practitioners.  
• CNN s are mostly used for image processing applications , and therefore, the 
implementation of the state-of-the-art CNN architectures on sequential  data require s the 
conversion of 1D -data into 2D -data. Due to the good feature extraction ability and 
efficient computations with the limited number of parameters, the trend  of using 1D -
CNNs is being promoted for sequential data  (Vinayakumar et al. 2017; Madrazo et al. 
2019) . 
• Recently high energy physicists at CERN have also been utilizing the learning capability 
of CNN for the analysis of particle colli sions. It is expected that the use of ML and