Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
24 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 unsupervised autoencoder (AE) by visualizing the image c lasses generated by the neurons of last 
layer (Le et al. 2011) . DeconvNet works in the same manner as the forward pass CNN but 
reverses the order of convolutional and pooling operation. This reverse mapping projects the 
output of the convolutional layer back to visually perceptible image patterns, consequently gives 
the neuron -level interpretation of the internal feature representation learned at each layer 
(Simonyan et al. 2013; Grün et al. 2016) .  
The idea of feature visualization proposed by ZfNet was experimentally validated on 
AlexNet using DeconvNet, which showed that only a few neu rons were active. In contrast, other 
neurons were dead (inactive) in the first and second layers of the network. Moreover, it showed 
that the features extracted by the second layer exhibited aliasing artifacts. Based on these 
ﬁndings, Zeiler and Fergus adj usted CNN topology and performed parameter optimization. 
Zeiler an d Fergus maximized the learning of CNN by reducing both the filter size and stride to 
retain the maximum number of features in the ﬁrst two convolutional layers. This readjustment 
in CNN top ology resulted in performance improvement, which suggested that fe atures 
visualization can be used for the identification of design shortcomings and for timely adjustment 
of parameters.  
4.1.4  VGG  
The successful use of CNNs in image recognition tasks has ac celerated the research in 
architectural design. In this regard, Si monyan et al. proposed a simple and effective design 
principle for CNN architectures. Their architecture, named as VGG, was modular in layers 
pattern (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015) . VGG was made 19 layers deep compared to AlexNet 
and ZfNet to simulate the relation of depth with the  representational capacity of the network 
(Krizhevsky et al. 2012; Zeiler and Fergus 2013) . ZfNet , which was a frontline network of 2013 -
ILSVRC competition, suggested that small size filte rs can improve the performance of the 
CNNs. Based on these findings, VGG replaced the 11x11 and 5x5 filters with a stack of 3x3 
filters layer and experimentally demo nstrated that concurrent placement of small size (3x3) 
filters could induce the effect of t he large size filter (5x5 and 7x7). The use of the small size 
filters provides  an additional benefit of low computational complexity by reducing the number of 
parame ters. These findings set a new trend in research to work with smaller size filters in CNN. 
VGG regulates the complexity of a network by placing 1x1 convolutions in between the 
convolutional layers, which, besides, learn a linear combination of the resultan t feature -maps.