Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
11 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 proposed activation function is MISH , which has shown  better performance  than ReLU  in most 
of the recently proposed deep networks on benchmark datasets  (Misra 2019) .  
2.4 Batc h normalization  
Batch n ormalization  is used to address the issues related to the internal covariance shift  within 
feature -maps. The internal covariance shift is a change  in the distribution  of hidden units’ values, 
which  slow s down the convergence (by forcing learning rate to small value) and requires careful 
initialization of parameters. Batch normalization for  a transformed feature -map 
k
lF  is shown in 
equation (4). 
                                                               
2k
k lB
l
B
−=
+FN                                                      (4) 
In equation (4 ), 
k
lN represents  normalized feature -map,  
k
lF is the input feature -map, 
B
and 
2
B  depict mean and variance  of a feature -map for a mini batch respectively . In order to 
avoid division by zero, 
  is added for numerical stability. Batch norma lization unifies the 
distribution of feature -map values by setting  them to zero mean and unit variance (Ioffe and 
Szegedy 2015) . Furthermore, it smoothen s the flow of gr adient and acts as a regulating  factor, 
which thus helps in  improving the generalization of the network .  
2.5 Dropout  
Dropout introduces  regularization within  the network, which ultimately improves generalization 
by randomly skipping some units or connections with a certai n probability. In NN s, multiple 
connections that learn a non -linear relation are so metimes co -adapted, which cause s overfitting  
(Hinton et al. 2012b) . This random dropping of some connections or units produces several 
thinned network architectu res, and finally , one representative network is selected with small 
weights. Th is selected architecture is then considered as an approximation  of all of the proposed 
networks  (Srivastava et al. 2014) . 
2.6 Fully c onnected  layer  
Fully connected layer is mostly used at the end of the network for classification. Unlike pooling 
and conv olution, it is a global operation . It takes input from feature extraction stages  and