Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
53 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
  
Table 5f Major challenges associated with implementation of Channel Boosting based CNN architectures.  
Channel  
Boosting  The learning of CNN also relies on the input representation. The lack of diversity and absence of class discer nable 
information in the input may affect CNN performance. For this purpose, the concept of channel boosting (input channel 
dimension) using auxil iary learners is introduced in CNN to boost the representation of the network (Khan et al. 2018a) . 
Architecture  Strength  Gaps  
Channel 
Boosted CNN 
using  Transfer 
Learning  
 • It boosts the number of input channels for improving the representational  capacity of 
the network  
• Inductive Transfer Learning is used in a novel way to build a boosted input 
representation for CNN  • Increases in computational load 
may hap pen due to the 
generation of auxiliary channels  
 
Table 5g Major challenges associated with implementation of Attention based CNN architectures.  
Attention  Attention Networks advantages to choose which patch is the area of the focus or most important in an image  
Architecture  Strength  Gaps  
Residual 
Attention 
Neural 
Network  
 • Generates attention aware featur e-maps  
• Easy to scale up due to residual learning  
• Provides different representations of the focused patches  
• Adds soft weights on features using bottom up top-down feedforward attention  • Complex model  
 
Convolutional 
Block 
Attention 
Module  • CBAM is a generic block designed for feed forward convolutional neural networks.  
• Generate both feature -map and spatial attention in a sequential manner  
• Channel attention ma ps help what to focus.  
• Spatial attention helps where to focus.  
• Increases efficient flow of information.  
• Uses global avera ge pooling and max pool simultaneously.  • Increase in computational load 
may happen  
 
6 CNN c hallenges  
Deep CNNs have achieved good performance on data that either is of the time series nature or 
follows a grid-like topology. However, there are also some other challenges, where dee p CNN 
architectures have been put to tasks. Major challenges associated with different CNN 
architec tures ar e mentioned in Table 5 a-g. The different researchers related to the performance of 
CNN on different ML tasks have  interesting discussions . Some of th e challenges faced during 
the training of deep CNN models are given below:  
• Deep CNNs are generally like a black box and thus may lack in interpretation and 
explanation. Therefore, sometimes it is difficult to verify them.  
• Szegedy et al. (2013) showed that  training of CNN on noisy image data could  cause an 
increase of misclassification error (Szegedy et al. 2014) . The addition of the small 
quantity of random noise in the input image is capable of fooling the network in such a 
way that the mod el will classify the original and its slightly perturbed version differently.   
• Each layer of CNN autom atically tri es to extract better and proble m-specific features 
related to the task. However, for some tasks,  it is imperative  to know the nature of