Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
44 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
                                               
( ) ( ). ( )K K K
am l sm l tm lg g g=F F F                                   (22) 
In one of the previous studies, Transformation network (Jaderberg et al. 2015; Li et al. 
2018)  also exploited  the idea of attention in a simple way by incorporating it with convolution 
block , but the main problem was that attention module s in Transformation network  are fixed and 
cannot adapt to changing circumstances.  RAN  was made efficient towards  recognition of 
cluttered, complex , and noisy images by stacking multiple attention modules. Hierarchical 
organization of RAN endow ed the ability  to adaptivel y assign weight to each feature -map based 
on their relevance in the layers  (Wang et al. 2017a) . Learning of deep hierarchical structure was 
supported through residual units.  Moreover, three different levels of attention: mixed, channel , 
and spatial attenti on were  incorporated , thus leveraging the capability  to capture ob ject-aware 
features  at different levels  (Wang et al. 2017a) .  
4.7.2  Convolutional Block Attention Module  
The significance of attention mechanism and feature -map exploitation is validated through RAN  
and SE-Network  (Wang et al. 2017a; Hu et al. 2018a) . In this regard,  Woo et al.  came up with 
new attention -based CNN , named as Convolutional Block Attention Module (C BAM ) (Woo et 
al. 2018) . CBAM is  simple  in design  and similar to SE-Network . SE-Network only considers the 
contribution  of feature -maps in image classification , but it  ignores the spatial locality  of the 
object  in image s. The s patial locatio n of the object  has a vital role in object detection.  
CBAM infer s attention maps sequentially by first applying  feature -map (channel ) 
attention and then spatial attention , to find the refined feature -maps. In literature, generally, 1x1 
convolution and poo ling operations are used for spatial attention. Woo et al.  showed that the 
pooling of features along the spatial  axis generate s an efficient feature descriptor. CBAM 
concatenates average pooling operation  with max -pooling , which generate s a strong spatial 
attention  map.  Likewise, feature -map statistics  were  modeled  using  a combination  of max -
pooling and global average -pooling operation. Woo et al.  showed that max-pooling could  
provide  the clue about d istinctive object features, where as the use of global ave rage pooling 
returns suboptimal inference of feature -map attention. The e xploitation of both average -pooling 
and max-pooling  improves the representational power of the network. These refined feature -
maps not only focus on the important  part but also increa se the representationa l power of the 
selected feature -maps. Woo et al.  empirically show ed that the formulation  of a 3D attention map