Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
1 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 A Survey of the Recent Architectures of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks  
Asifullah Khan1, 2*, Anabia  Sohail1, 2, Umme Zahoora1, and Aqsa Saeed Qureshi1 
1 Pattern Recognition Lab, DCIS, PIEAS, Nilore, Islamabad 45650, Pakistan  
2 Deep Learning Lab, Center for Mathematical Sciences, PIEAS, Nilore, Islamabad 45650, Pakistan  
asif@pieas.edu.pk  
 
 
Abstract  
Deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a special  type of Neural Networks, which has 
shown exemplary performance on  several competitions related to Computer Vision and Image 
Processing. Some of the exciting application areas of CNN include Image Classification and 
Segmentation, Object Detection, Video Pr ocessing, Natural Language Processing, and Speech 
Recognition. The  powerful learning ability of deep CNN is primarily due to the use of multiple 
feature extraction stages that can automatically learn representations from the data. The 
availability of a lar ge amount of data and improvement in the hardware technology has 
accelerated the research in CNNs, and recently interesting deep CNN architectures have been 
reported. Several inspiring ideas to bring advancements in CNNs have been explored, such as the 
use of different activation and loss functions, parameter optimizatio n, regularization, and 
architectural innovations. However, the significant improvement in the representational capacity 
of the deep CNN is achieved through architectural innovations. Notably , the ideas of exploiting 
spatial and channel information, depth a nd width of architecture, and multi -path information 
processing have gained substantial attention.  Similarly, the idea of using a block of layers as a 
structural unit is also gaining popular ity. This survey thus focuses on the intrinsic taxonomy 
present in  the recently reported deep CNN architectures and, consequently, classifies the recent 
innovations in CNN architectures into seven different categories. These seven categories are 
based on s patial exploitation, depth, multi -path, width, feature -map exploit ation, channel 
boosting, and attention. Additionally, the elementary understanding of CNN components, current 
challenges, and applications of CNN are also provided.  
Keywords:  Deep Learning , Convolutional Neural Network s, Taxonomy , Representational 
Capacity , Residual  Learning, and Channel Boosted CNN .