Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
25 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 For the tuning of the network, max -pooling is placed after the convolutiona l layer, while padding 
was performed to maintain the spatial resolution (Ranzato et al. 2007) . VGG showed good 
results both for image classification and localiz ation problems. VGG was at 2nd place in the 
2014 -ILSVRC competition but, got fame due to it s simplicity, homogenous topology, and 
increased depth. The main limitation associated with VGG was the use of 138 million 
parameters, which make it computationally expensive and difficult to deploy it on low resource 
systems.  
4.1.5  GoogleNet  
GoogleNet was  the winner of the 2014 -ILSVRC competition and is also known as Inception -V1. 
The main objective of the GoogleNet architecture was to achieve high accuracy with a re duced 
computational cost (Szegedy et al. 2015) . It introduced the new concept of inception block in 
CNN, whereby it incorporates mul ti-scale convolutional transformations using split, transform 
and merge idea. The architect ure of the inception block is shown in Fig. 6. In GoogleNet, 
conventional convolutional layers are replaced in small blocks similar to the idea of substituting 
each layer with micro NN as proposed in Network in Network (NIN) architecture (Lin et al. 
2013) . This block encapsulates filters of different sizes (1x1, 3x3, and 5x5) to capture spatial 
information at different scales, including both fine and coarse grain  level. The exploitation of the 
idea of split, transform, and merge by GoogleNet, helped in addressing a problem related to the 
learning of diverse types of variations present in the same category of images having different 
resolutions. GoogleNet regulates  the computations by adding a bottleneck layer of 1x1 
convolutional filter, before employing large size kernels. In addition to it, it used sparse 
connections (not all the output feature -maps are connected to all the input feature -maps), to 
overcome the pr oblem of redundant information and reduced cost by omitting feature -maps that 
were not relevant. Furthermore, connection’s density was reduced by using global average 
pooling at the last layer, instead of using a fully connected layer. These parameter tuni ngs caused 
a significant decrease in the number of parameters from 138 million to 4 million parameters. 
Other regulatory factors applied were batch normalization and the use of RmsProp as an 
optimizer (Dauphin et al. 2015) . GoogleNet also introduced the concept of auxiliary learners to 
speed up the convergence rate. However, the main drawback of the GoogleNet was its 
heterogeneous topology that needs to be customized from module to module. Another l imitation