Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
47 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 5.2 CNN  based natural language processing  
Natural Language Processing (NLP) converts  language into a presentation that can easily be 
exploit ed by any computer. Although  RNNs are  very suitable for NLP applications, however, 
CNN s have also been utilized in NLP based applications such as language modeling, and 
analysis, etc. Especially, lang uage modeling  or sentence molding  has taken a t wist after the 
introduction of CNN as a new representation learning algorithm. Sentence modeling is 
performed to know semantics of the sentences and thus offer new and appealing applications 
according to custo mer requirements. Traditional methods of information retrieval  analyze data, 
based on words or features, but ignore the core of the sentence. Kalchbrenner et al. (2014 ) 
proposed a dynamic CNN and dynamic k-max pooling during training. This approach finds t he 
relations between words without taking into account any ext ernal source like parser or 
vocabulary (Kalchbrenner et al. 2014) . In a similar way, Collobert and Weston (2008)  proposed 
CNN based architecture that can perform various MLP related tasks at the s ame time as 
chunking, language modeling, recognizing name -entity, and role modeling related to semantics 
(Collobert and Weston 2008) . In another work, Hu et al. proposed a generic CNN based 
archit ecture that performs matching between two sentences and thus can be applied to different 
languages (Hu et al. 2011) . 
5.3 CNN based  object d etection  and segmentation  
Object detection focuses on identifying different objects in images.  Recently, R-CNN has been 
widely used f or object detection. Ren et al. (2015) proposed an improvement over R -CNN 
named as fast R -CNN for object detection  (Ren et al. 2015) . In their work , a fully connected 
convolution al neural network  is used to extract feature space that can simultaneously detect the 
boundary and score of object s located at different positions. Similarly, Dai et al. (2016) proposed 
region -based  object detection using fully connected CNN  (Dai et al. 2016) . In Dai’s work , results 
are reported on the PASCAL VOC image dataset. Another object detection technique is reported  
by Gidaris et al. (Gidaris and Komodakis 201 5), which is based on multi -region  based deep CNN 
that helps to learn the semantic aware features. In Gidaris’s approach, objects are detected with 
high accuracy on PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 dataset.  Recently, AE based CNN  architectures  
have shown success  in segmentation task s. In this regard, various interesting  CNN architectures 
have been reported  for both semantic and instance -based segmentation tasks such as FCN,