Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
54 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 featu res extracted by the deep CNNs before classification. The idea of feature 
visualization in CNNs  can help in this direction. Similarly, Hinton reported that lower 
layers should handover their knowledge only to the relevant neuron s of the next layer. In 
this regard, Hinton proposed an interesting Capsule Network approach (de Vries et al. 
2016; Hinton et al. 2018) . 
• Deep CNNs  are based on supervised learnin g mechanism s, and therefore,  the availability 
of large and annotated data is required for its proper learning. In contrast, humans can 
learn and generalize from a few examples.  
• Hyper -parameter selection highly influences the performance of CNN. A little ch ange in 
the hyper -parameter values can affect the overall performance of a CNN. That is why 
careful selection of hyper -parameters is a major design issue that needs to be addressed 
through some suitable optimization strategy.  
• The e fficient training of CNN demands powerful hardware r esources such as GPUs. 
However, it is still needed to employ CNNs in embedded and smart devices efficiently . A 
few applications of deep learning in embedded systems are wound intensity correction, 
law enf orcement in smart cities, etc., (Hinton et a l. 2011, 2012a; Lu et al. 2017a) . 
• In vision -related  tasks, one shortcoming of CNN is that it is generally  unable to show 
good performance  when used to estimate the pose, orientation, and location of an o bject. 
In 2012, AlexNet solved this problem to some extent  by introducing the concept of data 
augmentation. Data augmentation can help CNN in learning diverse internal 
representations, which ultimately may lead to improved performance.  
7 Future d irections  
The exploitation of different innovative ideas  in CN N architectural design has changed the 
direction of research , especially  in image processing and CV . Good  performance of CNN on  a 
grid-like topological data presents  it as a powerful representation al model for image s. 
Architectural  design of CNN is a promi sing research field and in future,  it is likely to  be one of 
the most widely used AI techniques . 
• Ensemble learning  is one of the prospective areas of research in CNNs  (Marmanis et al. 
2016; Ahmed et al. 2019) . The combination of multiple and diverse architectures can aid 
the model in improvin g generalization and robustness on diverse categories of images by