Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
43 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 succession of partial glimpses and pay attention to context -relevant  parts. This process not only 
serves to focus sel ected region s but also deduces different interpretatio ns of objects at that 
location and t hus helps in capturin g visual structure in a better way. A more or less s imilar kind 
of interpretability is added into RNN  and LSTM  (Mikolov et al. 2010; Sundermeyer et al. 2012) . 
RNN and LSTM  networks exploit attention module s for the generation  of sequential data , and 
the new samples are weighted based on the ir occurrence in previous iterations . The c oncept  of 
attention was incorporated into CNN , by various researchers to improve representation and 
overcome the computational  limits. This idea of  attention also helps in making CNN intelligent 
enough to recognize  objects even from cluttered  backgrounds and complex scenes . 
4.7.1  Residual  Attention  Neural Network  
Wang et al . proposed a Residual Attention N etwork (RAN) to improve the feature represent ation 
of the network  (Wang et al. 2017a) . The motivation behind the incorporation  of attention in CNN 
was to make a network capable of learning object aware features. RAN is a feed -forward CNN , 
which was built by stacking re sidual blocks with attention module. The a ttention module is 
branched off into trunk and mask branch es that adopt  bottom -up, top-down learning strategy . 
The assembly of two different learning strategies into the attention  module enable s fast feed -
forward p rocess ing and top -down  attention feedback in a single feed -forward process . The 
bottom -up feed -forward structure produces low-resolution  feature -maps with strong semantic 
information. Whereas, top -down architec ture produces dense features to make an infere nce of 
each pixel.   
In the previously  proposed studies , a top-down , bottom -up learning strategy wa s used by 
Restricted Boltzma nn Machines  (Salakhutdinov and Larochelle 2010) . Similarly, Goh et al . 
exploited the top-down  attention mechanism as a regularizing factor in  Deep Boltzma nn 
Machine during the reconstruction phase of the training . The top-down learning strategy globally 
optimizes the network  in such a way that it gradually output  the maps to input during the 
learning  process  (Hinton et al. 2006; Salakhutdinov and Larochelle 2010; Goh et al. 2013) . The 
attention module in RAN  generates object aware soft mask 
(.)smg  at each layer  for input feature -
map 
K
lF  (Xu et al. 2015b) . Soft mask  
(.)smg assign s attention towards object  using equation ( 22) 
by recalibrating trunk branch 
()K
tm lgF  output and thus, behaves like a control gate  for every 
neuron output.