Published in Artificial Intelligence Review , DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -020-09825 -6 
 
40 
arXiv:1901.06032 [cs.CV]  
 feature -map wise motifs ( statistics ) from both residual and  identity mapping based feature -maps . 
In this regard, g lobal representation of feature -maps is generated using g lobal average pooling 
operatio n (equa tion (17 )), whereas relevance of feature -maps is estimated by establishing  
competition between feature descriptors  of residual and identity mappings . This phenomena is 
termed as inner imaging (Hu et al. 2018b) . CMPE -SE block not only models the relati onship 
between residual feature -maps but also ma ps their relation with identity feature -map. The 
mathematical expression for CMPE -SE block is represented using the following equation:  
                                                        
'
11, ( ), ( )k k k k
l m sq l sq m gg++= S S F F                                     (17) 
                                                          
11 ( ( , ))k k k
m ex k l m gg++= Y S S                                          (18) 
                                                              
'
1 1 1 .k k k
m m m+ + +=F Y F                                                   (19) 
where 
K
lF  and 
'
1K
m+F  are the identity and residual mapping of input  
K
lF respectively . SE 
block is implemented by applying squeeze operation 
(.)sqg  both on residual and the identity 
feature -maps  and their receptive output is used as joint input of excitation  operation  
(.)exg . 
Where as 
(.)kg represents the concatenation operation.  The output masks  of excitation oper ation 
(equation (18))  are multiplied with residual information (equation (19 )) to rebuild each feature -
map importance . The backpropagation algorithm  thus tries to  optimize  the competition betwee n 
identity and residual feature -maps and the r elationship betw een all feature -maps in the residual  
block.  
4.6 Channel (Input ) Exploitation based CNNs  
Image representation plays an important role in determining the performance of the image 
processing  algorithm s, including both conventional and deep learning algorithms . A good 
representation of the image  is one that can define the salient features of an i mage from a compact 
code. In MV tasks , various types of conventional filters are applied to extract different levels o f 
information for a single type of image  (Lowe 2004; Dollár et al. 2009) . These diverse 
representations are then used as an input of the model  to improve performance  (Do and Ve tterli 
2005 ; Oquab et al. 2014) . Now CNN is a compelling feature learner that can automatically 
extract discriminating feature s depending upon the problem  (Yang et al. 2019) . However, the 
learning of CNN relies on input representation. The lack of diversity and the absence of class