Entropy 2021 ,23, 283 9 of 18
Figure 6. A matrix of alignment scores. It represents how much of each input state should be
considered when deciding the next state and generating the output.
3.3. Self-Attention and Memory Networks
A variant of the attention mechanism is self-attention, in which the attention compo-
nent relates different positions of a single sequence in order to compute a representation
of the sequence. In this way, the keys, values and queries come from the same source.
The mechanism can connect distant elements of the sequence more directly than using
RNNs [12].
Similar to the description given in [ 11], for an input sequence X= (x1,x2,. . .,xT),
the self-attention process can be implemented by the following steps:
1. For each of the input vectors, create a query Qt, a key Ktand a value vector Vtby
multiplying the input vector xtby three matrices that are trained during the learning
process, WQ
i2Rddk,WK
i2RddkandWV
i2Rddv.
2. For each query vector Qt, the self-attention value is computed by mapping the query
and all the key-values to an output, Attention (Qt,K,V) =åT
j=1aj(Qt,Kj)Vj, where
aj(Qt,Kj) =so f tmax (QtKjT
pdk) (17)
3. This self-attention process is performed htimes in what is called multi-headed at-
tention. Each time, the input vectors are projected into a different query, key and
value vector using different matrices WQ
i,WK
iand WV
ifori=1,. . .,h. On each
of these projected queries, keys and values, the attention function is performed in
parallel, producing dvdimensional output values, that are concatenated and once
again projected to the ﬁnal values. This multi-headed attention process allows the
model to focus on different positions from different representation subspaces.
When the model is processing a vector of the input sequence, single self-attention
allows the model to focus on other vectors in the sequence to get a better representation of
this vector. With multi-headed self-attention (see Figure 7), each attention head is focusing
on a different set of vectors when processing the vector.
The transformer [ 11], a network architecture based only on self-attention, is composed
of an encoder and a decoder:
1. Encoder: Composed of a stack of six identical layers, each layer with a multi-head
self-attention process and a position-wise fully connected feed-forward network.
Around each of the sub-layers, a residual connections followed by layer normalization
is employed.