Entropy 2021 ,23, 283 14 of 18
If we compare the computational graph of an see Figure 2 (RNN) with the graph of
an attention module (Figure 11), we observe that even adding a memory unit (LSTM),
the attention module relates each of the inputs in a more direct and symmetric way to form
the output vector.
Figure 11. Self-attention graph. The self-attention component calculates how much each input vector
contributes to form each output vector.
The distance, in number of edges in the graph, between an input and an output distant
in time, is shorter and is the same for all input vectors in the self-attention module. However,
this is at the cost of not prioritizing local interactions, which has a high computational cost
for very long sequences.
The transformer, as we have pointed out, is composed of a stack of multi-headed
self-attention components. With multi-headed attention, the input vectors are projected
into a different query, key and value vector, performing the self-attention process htimes.
When processing a vector, each attention head is focusing on a different set of vectors from
different representation subspaces.
These mentioned characteristics make self-attention and the transformer a promising
building block in deep learning models for complex systems.
In [48], the authors propose a dual self-attention network for multivariate time
(dynamic-period or non-periodic) series forecasting. In [ 49], the authors utilize attention
models for clinical time-series modeling. They employ a masked self-attention mechanism
and use positional encoding and dense interpolation for incorporating temporal order.
Further understanding of the transformer architecture is carried out in [ 50], where the
authors show that the transformer architecture can be interpreted as a numerical Ordinary
Differential Equation (ODE) solver for a convection-diffusion equation in a multi-particle
dynamic system. They interpret how words (vectors) in a sentence are abstracted by
passing through the layers of the transformer as approximating the movement of multiple
particles in the space using the Lie–Trotter splitting scheme and the Euler’s method.
5. Discussion
After the success of recent years, one of the most important challenges that deep
learning faces is to improve input-output models, adopting new primitives that provide
reasoning, abstraction, search and memory capabilities.
Similar to what happens in the brain, attention mechanisms allow the reasoning or
cognitive process to be guided in a ﬂexible way. This improvement is important when
modeling complex systems due to their temporal dependence and complex relationships.