Entropy 2021 ,23, 283 5 of 18
and attention for memory encoding and retrieval. In [ 26], the authors modeled the inter-
action between top-down attention and bottom-up stimulus contrast effects and found
that external attention inputs bias neurons to move to different parts of their nonlinear
activation functions. Insects have been a source of inspiration in intelligence and attention
mechanisms. In [ 27], a multiclass support vector machine with inhibition is inspired by
the brain structure of insects. In [ 28], a multi-layer spiking neural network is presented
that models the Mushroom Bodies and their interactions to other key elements of the insect
brain, the Central Complex and the Lateral Horns.
Analogously, a learning problem in machine learning can be decomposed into a
sequence of tasks, where in each task it is necessary to focus on one part of an input (or
transformed input) or a memory. Once again, neural information processing in the brain,
in which several layers interact with each other [ 29], has been a source of inspiration for
machine learning.
Generally formulated, attention in machine learning is a sequential process in which
a learning task is guided by a set of elements of the input source (or memory). This is
achieved by integrating the attention value into the task.
Attention mechanisms have provided and will provide a paradigm shift in machine
learning. Speciﬁcally, this change is from traditional large-scale vector transformations to
more conscious processes (i.e., that focus only on a set of elements), e.g., decomposing a
problem into a sequence of attention based reasoning tasks [13,30–34].
As stated in Section 2, to integrate a component into a deep learning model that learns
using gradient descent, all the functions of the parameters in the component must be
differentiable. One way to make attention mechanisms differentiable is to formulate them
as a convex combination of the input or memory. In this case, all the steps are differentiable
and can be learned, and the combination weights must add up to one (forcing them to
focus on some parts more than others). In this way, the mechanisms learn which parts it
needs to focus on.
As in [ 11], this convex combination, shown in Figure 3, is described as mapping a
query and a set of key-value pairs to an output:
att(q,s) =T
å
i=1ai(q,ki)Vi, (6)
where, as seen in Figure 3, kiandViare the key and the value vectors from the source/memory
s, and qis the query vector (task). ai(q,ki)is the similarity function between the query and
the corresponding key and is calculated by applying the softmax function,
So f tmax (zi) =exp(zi)
åi0exp(zi0), (7)
to the score function score(q,ki):
ai=exp(score(q,ki))
åT
i0=1exp(score(q,ki0)). (8)
The score function can be computed using a feedforward neural network:
score(q,ki) =Zatanh(Wa[q,ki])), (9)
as proposed in [ 35], where ZaandWaare matrices to be jointly learned with the rest of the
model and [q,ki]is a linear function or concatenation of qandki. Furthermore, in [ 36] the
authors use a cosine similarity measure for content-based attention, namely,
score(q,ki) =cos((q,ki)), (10)