Entropy 2021 ,23, 283 6 of 18
where ((q,ki))denotes the angle between qandki.
Figure 3. Attention diagram. Attention as a sequential process of reasoning in which the task (query)
is guided by a set of elements (values) of the source (or memory).
Then, attention can be seen as a sequential process of reasoning in which the task
(query) is guided by a set of elements of the input source (or memory) using attention.
The attention process can focus on:
1. Temporal dimensions, e.g., different time steps of a sequence.
2. Spatial dimensions, e.g., different regions of an image.
3. Different elements of a memory.
4. Different features or dimensions of an input vector, etc.
Depending on where the process is initiated, we have:
1. Top-down attention, initiated by the current task.
2. Bottom-up, initiated spontaneously by the source or memory.
To apply the attention mechanism, it is necessary to break down the learning process
into a sequence of attention-guided tasks.
Then, due to its ﬂexibility, an attention mechanism can be added in multiple ways to
any deep learning architecture that models a complex system. In Section 4, we illustrate
this ﬂexibility as follows:
1. Through a conventional attention (the query is different from the key and the value)
in Section 4.2, with the encoder selecting input features and the decoder selecting
time steps.
2. Through a memory network in which a memory of historical data guides the current
prediction task in Section 4.3.
3. Through self-attention (the keys, values and queries come from the same source) in
Section 4.4. Here, to encode a vector of the input sequence, self-attention allows the
model to focus in a direct way on other vectors in the sequence.
3.2. Attention in seq2seq Models
An encoder–decoder model maps an input sequence to a target one with both se-
quences of arbitrary length [ 3]. They have applications ranging from machine translation
to time series prediction.
More speciﬁcally, this mechanism uses an RNN (or any of its variants such as an
LSTM or a GRU, Gated Recurrent Unit) to map the input sequence to a ﬁxed-length vector,
and another or any of its variants (RNN) to decode the target sequence from that vector
(see Figure 4). Such a seq2seq model typically features an architecture composed of: