Entropy 2021 ,23, 283 15 of 18
As we have seen, attention mechanisms has the following beneﬁts in modeling
such systems:
1. By focusing on a subset of elements, it guides the reasoning or cognitive process.
2. These elements can be tensors (vectors) from the input layer, from the intermediate
layer or be external to the model, e.g., a external memory.
3. It can focus on temporal dimensions (different time steps of a sequence), spatial di-
mensions (different regions of space) or different features of an input vector.
4. It can relate each of the input vectors in a more direct and symmetric way to form the
output vector.
More speciﬁcally, as shown in Table 2, for each of the techniques and applications
described, we discuss its application potential, characteristics and advantages.
1. One stage conventional attention. The attention mechanism allows guiding any complex
system task such as modeling, prediction, identiﬁcation, etc. To do this, it focuses on
a set of elements from the input layer or from an intermediate layer. These elements
can be temporal, spatial or feature dimensions. For example, to model a dynamical
system with an input of dimension n, one can add an attention mechanism to focus
and integrate the different input dimensions. The attention mechanism is combined,
as we have seen, with an RNN or an LSTM and allows modeling long temporal
dependencies. This technique, like the rest, adds complexity to the model. To calculate
the attention weights between a task (query) of Telements and an attended region
(key, value) of Telements, it is necessary to perform T2multiplications.
2. Several stages conventional attention . This case is similar to the previous, one-stage
conventional attention but with several attention phases or stages. The attention
mechanism is also combined with an RNN or an LSTM and allows modeling long
temporal dependencies. As we have seen, the model can focus on a set of feature
elements from the input layer and on a set of temporal steps from an intermediate
layer. This enables multi-step reasoning. The downside is that more computational
cost is added to the model with T2multiplications for each attention stage.
3. Memory networks . In memory networks, any complex system task such as modeling,
prediction or identiﬁcation is guided by an external memory. Then, memory networks
allow long-term or external dependencies in sequential data to be learned thanks to
an external memory component. Instead of taking into account only the most recent
states, these networks consider the states of a memory or external data as well. Such is
the case of time series prediction also based on an external source that can inﬂuence
the series. To calculate the attention weights between a task (query) of Telements and
an attended memory of T0elements, it is necessary to perform TT0multiplications.
4. Self-attention . In self-attention, the component relates different positions of a single
sequence in order to compute a transformation of the sequence. The keys, values
and queries come from the same source. It is a generalization of neural networks,
since they perform a direct transformation of the input but the weights are dynam-
ically calculated. The attention module relates each of the inputs in a more direct
way to form the output vector but at the cost of not prioritizing local interactions.
Their use case is general since they can replace neural networks, RNNs or even CNNs.
To calculate the attention weights for a sequence of Telements it is necessary to
perform T2multiplications.
5. Combination of the above techniques . It is interesting to combine several of the previous
techniques but at the cost of increasing the complexity and adding the computational
cost of each of the components. For example, the transformer, which can be used
in a multitude of tasks such as sequence modeling, generative models, predictions,
machine translation, multi-tasking, etc. The transformer combines self-attention with
conventional attention. In the encoder, the transformer has a stack of self-attention
blocks. The decoder also has self-attention blocks and an additional layer to perform
attention over the output of the encoder.