Entropy 2021 ,23, 283 10 of 18
2. Decoder: Is also composed of a stack of six identical layers (with self-attention and
a feed-forward network) with an additional third sub-layer to perform attention
over the output of the encoder (as in the seq2seq with attention). The self-attention
sub-layer is modiﬁed to prevent a vector from attending to subsequent vectors in
the sequence.
Figure 7. Multi-headed attention. Self-attention process performed in parallel htimes in different subspaces. The output
values are concatenated and projected to a ﬁnal value.
The transformer allows to replace CNNs and RNNs, improving machine translation
tasks while using less training time. The transformer is also the basic component of GPT-3
(Generative Pre-Trained transformer-3), a pre-trained language model which achieves good
performance in few-shot learning on many Natural Language Processing tasks without
ﬁne-tuning [39].
Another variant of attention are end-to-end memory networks [ 40], which are neu-
ral networks with a recurrent attention model over an external memory. The model,
trained end-to-end, is described in more detail in Section 4.3 and outputs an answer based
on a query and a set of inputs x1,x2, . . . , xnstored in a memory.
4. Attention Mechanisms in Complex Systems
4.1. Where and How to Apply Attention
In the previous sections we have described various attention mechanisms. These mech-
anisms allow a task to focus on a set of elements of an input sequence, an intermediate
sequence or a memory source.
Due to its ﬂexibility, an attention mechanism can be added to any deep learning
model in multiple ways. Therefore, when applying it to model complex systems, it will be
necessary to decide the following issues:
1. In which part of the model should be introduced?
2. What elements of the model will the attention mechanism relate?
3. What dimension (temporal, spatial, input dimension, etc.) is the mechanism going to
focus on?
4. Will self-attention or conventional attention be used?
5. What elements will correspond to the query, the key and the value?
In the following sections we describe some illustrative cases of application of attention
mechanisms to model complex systems. As we will see, how the information is processed
in the system and how the different elements are related will be key when deﬁning the
aforementioned issues.