Modular building blocks. Lingvo is designed for collaboration, focusing
on code with a consistent interface and style that is easy to read and understand,
and a ﬂexible modular layering system that promotes code reuse. The same
building blocks, such as LSTM or attention layers, can be used as-is across
diﬀerent models with assurance of good quality and performance. Because the
blocks are general, an algorithmic improvement in one task (such as the use
of multi-head attention in Machine Translation) can be immediately applied
to another task (e.g. Speech Recognition). With many people using the same
codebase, this makes it extremely easy to employ ideas others are trying in your
own models. This also makes it simple to adapt existing models to new datasets.
The building blocks are each individual classes, making it straightforward to
extend and override their implementation. Layers are composed in a hierarchical
manner, separating low-level implementation details from high-level control ﬂow.
Shared, comparable, reproducible, understandable, and correct ex-
periments. A big problem in research is the diﬃculty in reproducing and
comparing results, even between people working in the same team. To better
document experiments and allow the same experiment to be re-run in the future,
Lingvoadopts a system where all the hyperparameters of a model are conﬁgured
in their own dedicated sub-directory separate from the model logic and are meant
to be committed to a shared version control system. As the models are built
from the same common layers, this allows our models to be compared with each
other without worrying about eﬀects from minute diﬀerences in implementation.
All models follow the same overall structure from input processing to loss
computation, and all the layers have the same interface. In addition, all the
hyperparameters are explicitly declared and their values are logged at runtime.
Finally, there are copious amounts of assertions about tensor values and shapes
as well as documentation and unit tests. This makes it very easy to read and
understand new models when familiar with the framework, and to debug and
ensure that the models are correct.
Performance. Lingvo is used to train on production-scale datasets. As a
matter of necessity, its implementation has been optimized, from input processing
to the individual layers. Support for synchronous and asynchronous distributed
training is provided.
Deployment-readiness. Ideally, there should be little porting from research
to product deployment. In Lingvo, inference-speciﬁc graphs are built from the
same shared code used for training, and individual classes can be overwritten
with device-speciﬁc implementations while the high level model architecture
remains the same. In addition, quantization support is built directly into the
framework.
However, these beneﬁts come at the cost of more discipline and boilerplate,
a common trade-oﬀ between scalability and fast prototyping.
3