1 Introduction
This paper presents the open-source Lingvo framework developed by Google
for sequence modeling with deep neural networks. To date, this framework has
produced a number of state-of-the-art results in machine translation [ 2,21,23],
speech recognition [ 3,4,5,10,11,12,13,14,16,15,20,22], speech synthesis [ 6,
8,19], and speech translation [ 7,9]. It is currently being used by dozens of
researchers in their day-to-day work.
We begin by motivating the design of the framework in Section 2, including
the development environment it was built for as well as its guiding principles.
That is followed by an exposition of its core components and the role possessed
by each of them.
Then, in Section 3, we take a deeper dive into how fundamental concepts
are implemented and what that means for users of the framework. This covers
topics such as how trainable variables are managed and how hyperparameters
are conﬁgured, as well as the basic APIs involved in composing layers into a
model. While there will be some code snippets, those seeking complete examples
with code should refer to the codelab [1].
Section 4 provides a consolidated walk-through of the ﬂow of logic during a
training run. It outlines the pieces involved from how the model is constructed
to how its parameters are updated.
Finally, advanced usage such as distributed training, multi-task models, and
inference are described in Section 5.
2 Design
2.1 Motivation
In research, it is critical to be able to quickly prototype and iterate on new ideas.
But, when working in a collaborative environment, it is also critical to be able
to easily reuse code and document past experiments.
Lingvoevolved out ofthe need tosupporta largegroup of appliedresearchers
working on speech and natural language problems in a single shared codebase.
It follows these guiding principles:
•Individual pieces should be small and modular, implement the same con-
sistent interface, and be easily extensible;
•Experiments should be shared, comparable, reproducible, understandable,
and correct;
•Performance should eﬃciently scale to production-scale datasets and dis-
tributed training over hundreds of accelerators;
•Code shouldbesharedasmuch aspossiblewhentransitioningfromresearch
to production.
2