2.2 Components
The following are the core components of the Lingvo framework.
Models: AModelis an abstract collection of one or more Tasks. For single-
task models the Modelis just a transparent wrapper around the Taskand the
two can be considered the same. For multi-task models, the Modelcontrols how
variables are shared between Tasksand how Tasksare sampled for training.
Tasks: ATaskis a speciﬁcation of a complete optimization problem, such
as image classiﬁcation or speech recognition. It contains an input generator,
Layersrepresenting a neural network, a loss value, and an optimizer, and is in
charge of updating the model parameters on each training step.
Layers: ALayerrepresents an arbitrary function possibly with trainable
parameters. A Layercan contain other Layersas children. SoftMax,LSTM,
Attention , and even a Taskare all examples of Layers.
Input Generators: Lingvo input generators are specialized for sequences,
allowing batching input of diﬀerent lengths in multiple buckets and automatically
padding them to the same length. Large datasets that span multiple input ﬁles
are also supported. The ﬂexibility of the generic_input function enables simple
and eﬃcient implementations of custom input processors.
Params: The Paramsobject contains hyperparameters for the model. They
can be viewed as local versions of tf. flags .Layers,Tasks, and Modelsare all
constructed in accordance to the speciﬁcations in their Params.
Paramsare hierarchical, meaning that the Paramsfor an object can contain
Paramsconﬁguring child objects.
Experiment Conﬁgurations: Each experiment is deﬁned in its own class
and fully deﬁnes all aspects of the experiment from hyperparameters like learning
rate and optimizer parameters to options that aﬀect the model graph structure
to input datasets and other miscellaneous options.
These standalone conﬁguration classes make it easy to keep track of the
params used for each experiment and to reproduce past experiments. It also
allows conﬁgurations to inherit from other conﬁgurations.
All experiment params are registered in a central registry, and can be refer-
enced by its name, e.g. image . mnist . LeNet5 .
Job Runners: Lingvo’s training setup is broken into separate jobs. For
example, the Controller job is in charge of writing checkpoints while the
Evalerjob evaluates the model on the latest checkpoint. For a full description
of the diﬀerent job runners see Section 5.1.
4