After the variables are initialized, the Trainer will run training, i.e. calling
session . run with the model’s train_op , in a loop, and the Controller will
produce training summaries for each step. When enough steps have passed,
theController writes a new checkpoint to the log directory. The Evalerand
Decoder detect this new checkpoint and evaluates the model at that checkpoint
to generate summaries. This process then continues until the user terminates all
jobs or p. train . max_steps is reached.
For more details about the various runners such as the diﬀerence between
Evalers and Decoders, as well as information about which devices individual ops
in the graph will be placed on during distributed training, see Section 5.1.
5 Advanced Usage
This section provides some examples of advanced features. This is by no means an
exhaustive list of all the existing features, and many new features are continually
being added.
Section 5.1 describes the distributed training setup. Section 5.2 details how
multi-task models are conﬁgured and registered, and Section 5.3 gives a brief
look into inference and productionization support.
5.1 Distributed Training
Both synchronous as well as asynchronous distributed training are supported.
In asynchronous mode, each individual worker job executes its own training loop
and is completely independent from the other workers. In synchronous mode,
there is a single training loop driven by a trainer client that distributes work
onto the various worker jobs.
Here we summarize the diﬀerent types of job runners under each conﬁguration.
A shared directory on a distributed ﬁle system where checkpoints can be
written and loaded is assumed to exist.
5.1.1 Common Runners
Controller: This job handles initializing variables and saving/loading check-
points as well as writing training summaries.
Evaler: This job loads the latest checkpoint and runs and exports evaluation
summaries. Multiple evalers can be started for diﬀerent datasets.
Decoder: This job loads the latest checkpoint and runs and exports decoding
summaries. Multiple decoders can be started for diﬀerent datasets. Decoders
are diﬀerent from evalers in that the ground-truth is used during evaluation but
not during decoding. A concrete example is that Evalers can use teacher-forcing
while Decoders may need to rely on beam search.
10