4 Life of a Training Run
Figure 2: An overview of the Lingvo framework, outlining how models are
instantiated, trained, and exported for evaluation and serving.
This section gives an overview of what happens behind the scenes from the
start of a training run to the end of the ﬁrst step for a single-task model.
Training is started by launching the trainer with the name of a model and
the path to a log directory. The model name is resolved using the model registry
to obtain the Paramsfor the model, and the various job runners for training are
created.
The Paramsat this point is just the params for the top level Modelwith
the overrides in the experiment conﬁguration corresponding to the model name
speciﬁed. No Layershave been instantiated yet.
Each runner then independently instantiates the model and builds the tensor-
ﬂow graphs and ops that they will execute based on their job. For example, the
Trainer will build a train_op spanning both the FProp () and BProp () graphs
and involves updating model parameters, while the Evalerand Decoder will
build a eval_metrics op involving only the FProp () graph with p. is_eval set.
There can be multiple Evalers andDecoders , one for each evaluation dataset.
Instantiating the model calls its __init__ () method, which constructs the
Params for child layers and instantiates them recursively through calls to
self . CreateChild () . These child layer params could be exposed as part of
the top level model params, perhaps as a “params template”, allowing them
to be conﬁgured in the params ﬁles, or they could be constructed completely
from scratch in the __init__ () method based on the information available at
that time. The __init__ () method is also in charge of creating the variables
managed by the Layerthrough self . CreateVariable () .
Once the graphs are built, the Trainer runner will wait for the Controller
runner to initialize the variables or restore them from a checkpoint, while the
evaluation runners will wait for a new checkpoint to be written to the log
directory.
9