MixMatch: A Holistic Approach to
Semi-Supervised Learning
David Berthelot
Google Research
dberth@google.comNicholas Carlini
Google Research
ncarlini@google.comIan Goodfellow
Work done at Google
ian-academic@mailfence.com
Avital Oliver
Google Research
avitalo@google.comNicolas Papernot
Google Research
papernot@google.comColin Raffel
Google Research
craffel@google.com
Abstract
Semi-supervised learning has proven to be a powerful paradigm for leveraging
unlabeled data to mitigate the reliance on large labeled datasets. In this work, we
unify the current dominant approaches for semi-supervised learning to produce a
new algorithm, MixMatch , that guesses low-entropy labels for data-augmented un-
labeled examples and mixes labeled and unlabeled data using MixUp .MixMatch
obtains state-of-the-art results by a large margin across many datasets and labeled
data amounts. For example, on CIFAR-10 with 250 labels, we reduce error rate by a
factor of 4 (from 38% to11%) and by a factor of 2 on STL-10. We also demonstrate
howMixMatch can help achieve a dramatically better accuracy-privacy trade-off
for differential privacy. Finally, we perform an ablation study to tease apart which
components of MixMatch are most important for its success. We release all code
used in our experiments.1
1 Introduction
Much of the recent success in training large, deep neural networks is thanks in part to the existence
of large labeled datasets. Yet, collecting labeled data is expensive for many learning tasks because
it necessarily involves expert knowledge. This is perhaps best illustrated by medical tasks where
measurements call for expensive machinery and labels are the fruit of a time-consuming analysis that
draws from multiple human experts. Furthermore, data labels may contain private information. In
comparison, in many tasks it is much easier or cheaper to obtain unlabeled data.
Semi-supervised learning [ 6] (SSL) seeks to largely alleviate the need for labeled data by allowing
a model to leverage unlabeled data. Many recent approaches for semi-supervised learning add a
loss term which is computed on unlabeled data and encourages the model to generalize better to
unseen data. In much recent work, this loss term falls into one of three classes (discussed further
in Section 2): entropy minimization [ 18,28]—which encourages the model to output conﬁdent
predictions on unlabeled data; consistency regularization—which encourages the model to produce
the same output distribution when its inputs are perturbed; and generic regularization—which
encourages the model to generalize well and avoid overﬁtting the training data.
In this paper, we introduce MixMatch , an SSL algorithm which introduces a single loss that gracefully
uniﬁes these dominant approaches to semi-supervised learning. Unlike previous methods, MixMatch
targets all the properties at once which we ﬁnd leads to the following beneﬁts:
1https://github.com/google-research/mixmatch
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.