(algorithm 1, lines 10–11). Then, we combine these collections and shufﬂe the result to form W
which will serve as a data source for MixUp (algorithm 1, line 12). For each the ithexample-label
pair inˆX, we compute MixUp(ˆXi,Wi)and add the result to the collection X′(algorithm 1, line
13). We compute U′
i= MixUp( ˆUi,Wi+|ˆX|)fori∈(1,...,|ˆU|), intentionally using the remainder
ofWthat was not used in the construction of X′(algorithm 1, line 14). To summarize, MixMatch
transforms XintoX′, a collection of labeled examples which have had data augmentation and
MixUp (potentially mixed with an unlabeled example) applied. Similarly, Uis transformed into U′,
a collection of multiple augmentations of each unlabeled example with corresponding label guesses.
3.4 Loss Function
Given our processed batches X′andU′, we use the standard semi-supervised loss shown in eqs. (3)
to (5). Equation (5) combines the typical cross-entropy loss between labels and model predictions
fromX′with the squared L2loss on predictions and guessed labels from U′. We use this L2loss
in eq. (4) (the multiclass Brier score [ 5]) because, unlike the cross-entropy, it is bounded and less
sensitive to incorrect predictions. For this reason, it is often used as the unlabeled data loss in SSL
[25,44] as well as a measure of predictive uncertainty [ 26]. We do not propagate gradients through
computing the guessed labels, as is standard [25, 44, 31, 35]
3.5 Hyperparameters
SinceMixMatch combines multiple mechanisms for leveraging unlabeled data, it introduces various
hyperparameters – speciﬁcally, the sharpening temperature T, number of unlabeled augmentations K,
αparameter for Beta inMixUp , and the unsupervised loss weight λU. In practice, semi-supervised
learning methods with many hyperparameters can be problematic because cross-validation is difﬁcult
with small validation sets [ 35,39,35]. However, we ﬁnd in practice that most of MixMatch ’s
hyperparameters can be ﬁxed and do not need to be tuned on a per-experiment or per-dataset basis.
Speciﬁcally, for all experiments we set T= 0.5andK= 2. Further, we only change αandλUon a
per-dataset basis; we found that α= 0.75andλU= 100 are good starting points for tuning. In all
experiments, we linearly ramp up λUto its maximum value over the ﬁrst 16,000steps of training as
is common practice [44].
4 Experiments
We test the effectiveness of MixMatch on standard SSL benchmarks (section 4.2). Our ablation study
teases apart the contribution of each of MixMatch ’s components (section 4.2.3). As an additional
application, we consider privacy-preserving learning in section 4.3.
4.1 Implementation details
Unless otherwise noted, in all experiments we use the “Wide ResNet-28” model from [ 35]. Our
implementation of the model and training procedure closely matches that of [ 35] (including using
5000 examples to select the hyperparameters), except for the following differences: First, instead
of decaying the learning rate, we evaluate models using an exponential moving average of their
parameters with a decay rate of 0.999. Second, we apply a weight decay of 0.0004 at each update for
the Wide ResNet-28 model. Finally, we checkpoint every 216training samples and report the median
error rate of the last 20 checkpoints. This simpliﬁes the analysis at a potential cost to accuracy by, for
example, averaging checkpoints [2] or choosing the checkpoint with the lowest validation error.
4.2 Semi-Supervised Learning
First, we evaluate the effectiveness of MixMatch on four standard benchmark datasets: CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 [ 24], SVHN [ 32], and STL-10 [ 8]. Standard practice for evaluating semi-supervised
learning on the ﬁrst three datasets is to treat most of the dataset as unlabeled and use a small portion
as labeled data. STL-10 is a dataset speciﬁcally designed for SSL, with 5,000 labeled images and
100,000 unlabeled images which are drawn from a slightly different distribution than the labeled data.
5