Sharpen
… K augmentations ...
Classify
Classify
 UnlabeledGuessed Label
AverageFigure 1: Diagram of the label guessing process used in MixMatch . Stochastic data augmentation
is applied to an unlabeled image Ktimes, and each augmented image is fed through the classiﬁer.
Then, the average of these Kpredictions is “sharpened” by adjusting the distribution’s temperature.
See algorithm 1 for a full description.
•Experimentally, we show that MixMatch obtains state-of-the-art results on all standard
image benchmarks (section 4.2), and reducing the error rate on CIFAR-10 by a factor of 4;
•We further show in an ablation study that MixMatch is greater than the sum of its parts;
•We demonstrate in section 4.3 that MixMatch is useful for differentially private learning,
enabling students in the PATE framework [ 36] to obtain new state-of-the-art results that
simultaneously strengthen both privacy guarantees and accuracy.
In short,MixMatch introduces a uniﬁed loss term for unlabeled data that seamlessly reduces entropy
while maintaining consistency and remaining compatible with traditional regularization techniques.
2 Related Work
To set the stage for MixMatch , we ﬁrst introduce existing methods for SSL. We focus mainly on
those which are currently state-of-the-art and that MixMatch builds on; there is a wide literature on
SSL techniques that we do not discuss here (e.g., “transductive” models [ 14,22,21], graph-based
methods [ 49,4,29], generative modeling [ 3,27,41,9,17,23,38,34,42], etc.). More comprehensive
overviews are provided in [ 49,6]. In the following, we will refer to a generic model pmodel(y|x;θ)
which produces a distribution over class labels yfor an input xwith parameters θ.
2.1 Consistency Regularization
A common regularization technique in supervised learning is data augmentation , which applies input
transformations assumed to leave class semantics unaffected. For example, in image classiﬁcation,
it is common to elastically deform or add noise to an input image, which can dramatically change
the pixel content of an image without altering its label [ 7,43,10]. Roughly speaking, this can
artiﬁcially expand the size of a training set by generating a near-inﬁnite stream of new, modiﬁed data.
Consistency regularization applies data augmentation to semi-supervised learning by leveraging the
idea that a classiﬁer should output the same class distribution for an unlabeled example even after it
has been augmented. More formally, consistency regularization enforces that an unlabeled example x
should be classiﬁed the same as Augment( x), an augmentation of itself.
In the simplest case, for unlabeled points x, prior work [25, 40] adds the loss term
/bardblpmodel(y|Augment( x);θ)−pmodel(y|Augment( x);θ)/bardbl2
2. (1)
Note that Augment( x)is a stochastic transformation, so the two terms in eq. (1) are not identical.
“Mean Teacher” [ 44] replaces one of the terms in eq. (1) with the output of the model using an
exponential moving average of model parameter values. This provides a more stable target and was
found empirically to signiﬁcantly improve results. A drawback to these approaches is that they use
domain-speciﬁc data augmentation strategies. “Virtual Adversarial Training” [ 31] (V AT) addresses
this by instead computing an additive perturbation to apply to the input which maximally changes the
output class distribution. MixMatch utilizes a form of consistency regularization through the use of
standard data augmentation for images (random horizontal ﬂips and crops).
2.2 Entropy Minimization
A common underlying assumption in many semi-supervised learning methods is that the classiﬁer’s
decision boundary should not pass through high-density regions of the marginal data distribution.
2