J2019 ,2, 16 233 of 235
J 2019, 2 7 of 9 
 The Canopy algorithm can roughly divide the data into several overlapping subsets [17], 
recorded as Canopy. Each subset acts as a cluster, often using low-cost similarity metrics to accelerate 
clustering [18]. Therefore, Canopy clustering is generally used for the initialization operations of 
other clustering algorithms. The formation of Canopy needs to specify two distance thresholds—T1, 
T2, and T1 > T2 (the settings of T1 and T2 can be obtained according to the needs of the user or using 
cross-validation)—and the original data set X is sorted according to certain rules. 
A data vector A is randomly selected in X, and a distance d between other sample data vectors 
in A and X is calculated using a rough distance calculation method. The sample data vector with d 
less than T1 is mapped to a Canopy, and the sample data vector with d less than T2 is removed from 
the list of candidate center vectors. Repeat the above steps until the list of candidate center vectors is 
empty; that is, X is empty and the algorithm ends [19]. The pseudo code of the algorithm is as follows: 
 
Algorithm 4: Canopy 
  Input: iris = datasets.load_iris (), X = iris.data [:, 2 :] 
  Output: k 
1: def T1, T2, T1 > T2; delete_X = []; Canopy_X = []; 
2: for P ∈ X do 
3:    d =‖𝑃−𝑋௜‖; 
4:    if d < T2 then 
5:      delete_X = [d]; 
6:    else Canopy_X  = [d]; 
7: until X = Φ; 
8: end;  
 
The algorithm mainly traverses the data continuously. T2 < d < T1 can be used as the center list. 
d < T2 is considered too close to Canopy and will not be deleted as a center point in the future. It can 
be seen from Figure 5 that the Canopy algorithm is used to cluster the Iris data set, and after 
convergence, it is two center points; that is, K is 2. 
 
Figure 5.  A generated clustering effect map by the Canopy method: The algorithm mainly traverses 
the data continuously. T2 < d < T1 can be used as the center list. d < T2 is considered too close to 
Canopy and will not be deleted as a center point in the future. As shown, the Canopy algorithm is 
used to cluster the Iris data set, and after convergence, it is two center points; that is, k is 2. 
4. Discussion 
In this paper, four kinds of K-value selection algorithms, such as Elbow Method, Gap Statistic, 
Silhouette Coefficient, and Canopy, are used to cluster the Iris data set to obtain the K value and the 
clustering result of the data set. For the four algorithms implemented in this paper, the verification 
results are shown in Table 1.  
Figure 5. A generated clustering e ect map by the Canopy method: The algorithm mainly traverses
the data continuously. T2 <d<T1 can be used as the center list. d<T2 is considered too close to
Canopy and will not be deleted as a center point in the future. As shown, the Canopy algorithm is
used to cluster the Iris data set, and after convergence, it is two center points; that is, k is 2.
4. Discussion
In this paper, four kinds of K-value selection algorithms, such as Elbow Method, Gap Statistic,
Silhouette Coe cient, and Canopy, are used to cluster the Iris data set to obtain the K value and the
clustering result of the data set. For the four algorithms implemented in this paper, the veriﬁcation
results are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. The following table shows the experimental results of the four algorithms, including the
obtained K value and the algorithm execution time, where the Gap Statistic algorithm execution time is
the result when the reference sample P=100.
No. Name K value Execution Time
1 Elbow Method 2 1.830 s
2 Gap Statistic 2 9.763 s
3 Silhouette Coe cient 2 8.648 s
4 Canopy 2 2.120 s
It can be seen from the above table that each of the four algorithms has its own characteristics.
The Elbow Method algorithm uses SSE as a performance metric, traverses the K value, ﬁnds the
inﬂection point, and has a simple complexity. The inadequacy is that the inﬂection point depends on
the relationship between the K value and the distance value. If the inﬂection point is not obvious, the K
value cannot be determined. The Gap Statistic algorithm compares the expected value of the averaged
reference data set with that of the observed data set so that the fastest k value of decreases. However,
for many practical large-scale data sets, this method is not desirable for both time complexity and
space complexity. Take this article as an example: In the experiment, when P=100, the algorithm
execution time is 9.763 s, and when P=1000, the total time spent is 56.970 s. The Silhouette Coe cient
algorithm uses cluster cohesion and separation to perform a cluster analysis. Minimizing cohesion is
equivalent to maximizing separation, combining it with Si, and traversing the K value. When Si is
maximum, the K value is the optimal number of clusters. Because the distance matrix needs to be
calculated, the defect is that the computational complexity is O(n2); then, the amount of data reaches
one million or even ten million. The computational overhead can be very large, so this method is also
not used for large-scale data sets. The Canopy algorithm divides the data set into several overlapping
subsets by a predetermined distance threshold and repeats aggregation and deletion through distance
comparisons until the original data set is empty. The advantage is that the addition of overlapping