J2019 ,2, 16 228 of 235
which is the focus of the algorithm; it directly a ects the clustering results, such as the local optimality
or global optimality [11].
3. Research on K-Value Selection Algorithm
For the K-means algorithm, the number of clusters depends on the K-value setting [ 12]. In practice,
the K value is generally di cult to deﬁne. The choice of K value directly determines the data cluster
that needs to be clustered into multiple clusters. At the beginning of the algorithm, people use
the “shooting the head” method to determine the K value, which is estimated to later give many
improvements proposed for optimization algorithms. This paper mainly summarizes the methods
of K-value selection with certain representativeness and gives further analysis and experimental
veriﬁcation. The experimental simulation environment is Intel Core i5 dual-core CPU@3.2GHz,
4G memory, 500G hard disk space.
The experiment used the UCI Machine Learning Repository machine to learn the Iris data set in
the data set [ 13]. The Iris data set consists of three classes, each with 50 elements, a total of 150 samples,
and four attributes per sample, with each representing a type of iris.
In order to have a more obvious clustering e ect to test the pros and cons of the K-value algorithm,
the latter two dimensions of the Iris data set sample are selected during the experiment.
3.1. An Elbow Method Algorithm
The basic idea of the elbow rule is to use a square of the distance between the sample points in
each cluster and the centroid of the cluster to give a series of K values. The sum of squared errors
(SSE) is used as a performance indicator. Iterate over the K-value and calculate the SSE. Smaller values
indicate that each cluster is more convergent.
When the number of clusters is set to approach the number of real clusters, SSE shows a rapid
decline. When the number of clusters exceeds the number of real clusters, SSE will continue to decline
but it will quickly become slower. The pseudo code of the algorithm is as follows:
Algorithm 1: Silhouette Coe cient
Input: iris=datasets.load_iris (),X=iris.data [:, 2 :]
Output: d,k
1:d=[];
2:fork=1,k in rang (1, 9) do
3 : d=kP
i=1Pdist(x,ci)2;
4: return d,k;
The K value can be better determined by plotting the K-SSE curve and by ﬁnding the inﬂection
point down. As shown in Figure 1, there is a very obvious inﬂection point when K =2, so when the K
value is 2, the data set clustering e ect is the best, as shown in Figure 2.