2 
 ABSTRACT  
This article seeks to clarify how autonomous vehicles (AV)  could affect  urban planning 
and the built environment, to what extent these  effects  are compatible with municipalities’ 
existing objectives, and  what lessons can be drawn from that. The paper combines a 
systematic review of the literature , a quantitative online survey and qualitative interviews 
with representatives from urban transport planning authorities in Germany . Four concrete 
‘use cases ’ were  applied to structure the survey . 
Results show that r espondents are rather skeptical about the compatibility of AV with 
existing transport and urban planning objectives, above all to strengthen  non-motorized 
transportation and  to promote public transportat ion. Particularly, automating private 
motorized travel appears not to match  municipal planning perspectives. On the contrary, 
transport planners think that shared autonomous vehicles as a complement  to public 
transport systems are more appropriate to support  urban development strategies.  Their 
most prominent concern with respect to AV is  the expectation that car travel will increase 
with AV, propagating problems like congestion and negative environmental effects. 
However, survey respondents  expect th at effects differ quite strongly depending on how 
AV will occur.  
As a lesson, the study suggests that different AV  use cases should receive specific attention 
to explore their potentials and challenges. The study likewise suggests  to, given the 
discrepancy between the objectives of urban transport planning  and federal government‘s  
policy  focus , consider consolidating  the communal  strategic positions  on research and 
develop ment priorities . The results indicate a demand for studies that demonstrate  how AV 
can respond to more fundamental challenges and goals that city planner ’s face.  Given the 
wide range of potential implications , the study suggests to broaden the debate from its 
present primary  focus on the transport planning domain to city planning  and development .  
Keywords: autonomous driving, systemic analysis, transportation planning, transportation 
policy, built environment  
1. INTRODUCTION  
Autonomous driving has started to receive attention not only by the research community 
but also by planning practitioners and policy makers concerned with transport and urban 
planning . There seems to be  great concern and perhaps even greater uncertainty ab out how 
autonomous vehicles in cities may possibly affect a core domain of city planning: the 
interaction of the transport system with land use and the built environment.  
Visions of integrating autonomous vehicles into the urban transport system so far 
essentially refer to the development of the vehicle technology itself, the effects on traffic 
flow and potential benefits with respect to safety, congestion or emissions. Effects on 
parking as a result that autonomous vehicles ( AV) can park themselves or rema in in the 
transportation network while awaiting their next passenger have been modelled and 
showed significant impact on inner city street space usage (e.g. Pavone , 2016, Fagnant and 
Kockelman , 2015 ; Brownell and Kornhauser , 2014). Only a few studies or papers have 
explored the effects on land use (Anderson et al. , 2016, Chapin et al. , 2016 ; Heinrichs , 
2016 ; Heinrichs and Cyganski , 2015 ; Litman , 2015), primarily in a U.S. context. They