13 
 Participation  - Opening and encouraging the societal debate on autonomous vehicles regarding 
possible new uses for urban space  
- Opening and encouraging the societal debate on autonomous vehicles in order to 
increase acceptance in the population  
Other aspects  - Creating a nd setting up test fields for autonomous vehicles (for both private and 
public transportation)  
- Definition of data standards and data requirements  
Table 1 – Potential fields of action regarding an implementation of AV  
The following table how immediate respondents see the need for action. For th is purpose, 
Table 2 summarizes the average of the different fields for actions in a given area.  
Area  Short -term  Mid-term  
(3-10 years)  Long -term  
(10 – 20 years)  No actions 
required  
Transportation planning  13.2% 48.8% 17.8%  20.1% 
Traffic control  7.9% 34.9% 14.3% 42.9% 
Infrastructure planning  16.0% 41.9% 21.2% 20.9% 
Urban planning  12.2% 45.2% 22.0% 20.6% 
Participation  32.6% 39.5% 9.3% 18.6% 
Other aspects  48.8% 25.6% 16.3% 9.3% 
Table 2 – Immediacy of actions regarding an implementation of AV as stated by the 
respondents  
Apart from creating and setting up  test fields or the definition of data protocols, the 
interviewees did not see major  short -term need for action with regard to automation. 
However, promoting the participation of the civil society  in the societal debate around 
autonomous vehi cles is regarded as im portant in the short and medium -term. The majority 
of the respondents  believe d that automation sh ould be addressed in the medium -term at the 
level of transport ation , infrastructure and urban  planning . It is surprising, however, that 
16 % of the planners considered changes in road infrastructure as a short -term necessity, 
especially when lower proportions ide ntify a short -term need for  action in the areas of 
transportation and urban planning). Finally, a  large proportion of th e respond ents stated 
that no actions would be required at all regarding traffic management and control . These 
findings diverge from recommendations found in the transportation literature (e.g. Smith, 
2012; Bahamonde -Birke et al., 201 7) which point out that autonomo us vehicles can cause 
substantial changes in the attractiveness of the alternatives and thus in the modal partition , 
This would make it necessary  to rethink and reevaluate current traffic control and 
management measures.  
4.2. Qualitative interviews  
The quantita tive survey revealed a general skepticism that autonomous vehicles would 
benefit the cities. However, as only about one third of the questionnaire participants stated 
that their cities have been engaged or are planning to engage in activities related to 
autonomous driving , one could assume that the critical views are in part due to a lack of 
knowledge about the potentials of the technology. The interviews with transport planners 
from four large  cities were conducted to gain a more differentiated view on the  topic. City 
governments in all four cities have already started to implement activities with respect to