6 
 affect this trade -off. Relieving the driver from  driving tasks enable s them to engage in 
other activities during the travel, which may be deemed more appealing or  meaningful by 
the passengers  (Silberg et al., 2012 ; Heinrichs, 2015 ; Cyganski et al., 20 15). This would 
lead to a reduction of the subjective value of travel time savings (SVTTS) for users of AV 
(Smith, 2012 ; Zmud et al., 2016; Milakis et al., 2017b ). Thus, a lower SVTTS would result 
in a willingness to drive longer distances with an impact o n the choice of destinations 
(shopping, leisure, training places) and ultimately even on the choice of residence location 
(Bahamonde -Birke et al., 2017). Hence, a reduced SVTTS could lead to substantial 
changes in the settlement structure and to an intensi fied suburbanization  (Childress et al., 
2015; Milakis et al., 2017a) . This, in turn, would further i ncrease motorized transportation, 
as well as fuel consumption, pollutant emissions, and consequently the demand for 
transport related measures (infrastructu re, management).  Nevertheless, Wagner et al . 
(2014) raise doubts about claims that vehicle automation technologies would affect 
commuting patterns. Other technologies developments outside of vehicle automation, like 
maturing telecommuting technologies, could have a greater impact on travel and urban 
development patterns. Along this line , it is to be expected that a potential revaluation of the 
SVTTS would impact on distinct use r groups (i.e. given the potential alternative uses of the 
travel time) and tr ansportation modes differently (e.g. the potential appear to be larger in 
the case of passenger cars than in public transportation).  
Finally, some studies address the impact of autonomous vehicles in the opposite way: that 
is not how AV are likely to affe ct cities, but how cities (and city planning) provide 
conditions for AV. For instance, Heinrichs (2015) consider s different city typologies and 
how different types provide conditions for different forms and applications of AV. 
Nevertheless, Wagner et al . (2014) interview ed several actors and entities in this regard, 
reporting that the majority has not yet begun  the discussion about how manag ing the 
transition to AV operation. Along these lines, Guerra  (2016)  presents a r eview of the 
regional transportation plans ( RTP) of the American ’s twenty -five largest metropolitan 
areas , showing  that none has incorporated self -driving cars and only one mentions the new 
technology  in their current planning documents . As he points out, t his is almost certainly 
not because the planners be unaware or skeptical about self -driving cars . Instead, 
uncertainty abo ut autonomous vehicles’ impacts, their timeline  and the gap between  future  
potential impacts and day -to-day investment decisions are  mentioned  the principal reasons 
for self-driving cars do not being considered  in RTPs . In general terms,  although planners 
follow existing research and develop modeling and other scenarios , it is perceived  that 
existing research does not yet provide sufficient, actionable information to direc t 
investments or planning priorities.  In their literature review paper on policy and society 
related implications of automated driving technology, Milakis et al. (2017b) also revealed 
the manifold open research questions and uncertainties and suggested to differentiate 
between different stages of implications – thus indicating that effects of AV have to be 
considered on a systemic level and not in their singular characteristics. However, we would 
additionally suggest including experts’ perspectives in this process to gain a more 
comprehensive understanding of the system itself (in its particular spatial form, e.g. urban 
environments). Thus, valuable hints on directions of fut ure research could be expected.   
3. Methodology  
It can be assumed  that the impact s of a large scale introduction of AV in urban 
environments will go far beyond the direct implications on vehicle flow and usage