12 
   
Figure 4 - Can autonomous vehicles contribute to achieving  urban transport planning 
objectives ? 
As illustrated , 50 % of the respondents believe d that SAV  could have an overall positive 
impact on the objectives of the cities. In contrast, no ne of the respondents  associate d PAV 
with a positive contribution to  urban and transport  planning objectives . Moreover, 40  % of 
the interviewees did not expect that any of the  use case s could have  an overall positive 
impact on the cities’ goals . The results  reflect that many of the potentials currently  
associated with autonomous vehicles (e.g. reducing costs, improving road capacities, etc.; 
Fagnant und Kockelman, 2016) do not seem to be  in line with the objectives of the city 
planners  but rather conflict them . 
In a third and final block , respondents  were asked to evaluate  the need for action s and 
measures  in several areas in order to enable  autonomous vehicles  to contribute effectively 
to the objections of  the cities . These areas were addressed considering the fields of action  
depicted in Table 1:  
Area  Field of action  
Transportation planning  - Update of traffic and local massive transit development plans  
- Adjustment of strategies to support non -motorized transportation  
- Adjustment of current economic and business concepts  
- Development of prediction tools and integra ted transportation models considering 
autonomous vehicles  
Traffic control  - Revision of rights -of-way (road pricing, exclusive lines, no vehicles areas, etc.)  
- Adjustment of speed limits  
- Adjustment of traffic priorities  
Infrastructure planning  - Securing, adapting and certifying road infrastructure for autonomous vehicles  
- Adjustment of current road infrastructure plans  
- Redesign and transformation of the road place (lane widths, bus stations, drop-off and 
pick-up areas, etc. ) 
Urban planning  - Update of urban development plans  
- Update of land -use plans  
- Revision of parking policies  
- Development of new spatial concepts for parking (decentralized parking facilities, 
drop-off and pick -up areas, etc.)  
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%
APP
SAV
PAV
ADV
None of the former