3 
 identify possible impacts on road and mo vement space itself such as  adjustments in lane 
widths and layouts, removal of signage or the need for drop -off and pick -up areas. The 
studies highlight redevelopment opportunities in urban areas dominated by surface parking 
and wide roadways. And they ske tch that autonomous driving may potentially alter the 
trade -offs that household’s  make between choosing location and daily mobility and thus 
may take an effect on long term land use patterns.  
However, the debate is so far led by the question “about how th e built environment might 
need to adapt over time to accommodate AV“ (Chapin et al. , 2016) rather than to address 
uncertainties about the future in a more proactive sense. While this does not mean that 
uncertainty about the future would be dissolved for good, such a proactive approach could 
be the basis to “develop business models and pol icy paths that are flexible and resilient” to 
uncertainties (Lyons , 2016). With respect to autonomous driving and its relation to the 
built environment, dealing with this uncertainty first of all requires a common and 
transparent understanding about plausi ble use cases and scenarios (including their 
development pathways) of the technology and its implications (Heinrichs , 2016 ; Fraedrich 
et al. , 2015). The specific effects on the built environment and – what might be of even 
greater importance in this regard  – how this could inform and support  urban policy 
interventions and planning have not been sufficiently explored so far.  
This paper  responds to these needs and questions. It seeks to clarify (1)  the state of 
knowledge about the likely effects of autonomous driving on the built environment, (2)  
whether autonomous driving appears to be ‘desirable’ i.e. compatible with existing 
frameworks from a planning perspective, and  (3), how, to what extent and with what 
direction urban transport  and city planni ng will need deal with these effects .  
To address these questions, the paper combines a systematic review of the state -of the art 
literature , a quantitative online survey and  qualitative intervi ews with representatives from  
transport  planning authorities  in Germany . The results will help planning actors and 
institutions to  get a clearer picture on the p otentials and constraints of AV in urban areas, 
and how to  deal with implications of autonomous driving in the context of urban 
environments. The paper  will pinpoint policy areas that may require priority attention . It 
goes beyond current knowledge (1) by differentiating impacts of autonomous driving on 
the built environment depending on use cases, thereby clarifying specific potentials and 
challenges, and ( 2) by providing 'near time' urban planning policy guidance for a yet 
distant uncertain development.  
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a state -of-the-art literature 
review  on the impacts of AV on the built environment. Section 3 outlines the methodology. 
It defines a set of concrete use cases that served as the basis for the online survey , provides 
information on the structure and respondents of the online questionnaire , and explains the 
focus of the qualitative follow -up interviews.  Section 4 presents the empirical data 
gathered in the online survey (4.1) and the qualitative interviews (4.2). Section 5 discusses 
the findings with respect to the questions outlined above , summarizes  the results a nd gives 
a conclusion.