9 
  
 
Figure 1: Field of  activit ies of the survey participants  
To gain a more comprehensive view on how autonomous driving is currently dealt with in 
German municipalities, we specifically approached urban transport planning actors from 
four large cities (more than 500 ,000 inhabitants) where autonomous driving is already a 
topic (e.g. in the form of testbeds, pilot projects or policy papers). The respondents – all of 
them employed in the urban transport and planning departments of their local government  
and in leading po sitions  – were directly involved in the ongoing activities . The following 
were the respective working fields of the interviewees: (1) head of city development plan 
in a department of transport politics, (2) head of the transport department, (3) team leader  
in the section on forecast, commercial transport and environment in the city’s department 
of transport planning, and (4) head of a department of road maintenance, intelligent 
transport systems and automotive. With thes e four experts, w e conducted qualitat ive 
guided interviews .  
4. THE PERSPECTIVE S OF CITY -PLANNERS : RESULTS FROM 
THE EXPERT SURVEY  AND SUBSEQUENT INTERVIEWS  
This section presents the results of the  quantitative  survey (Section 4. 1) and  introduces 
results of the qualitative interviews that were carried out subsequently to the survey  
(Section 4.2) . 
4.1. Quantitative expert survey  
In a first block of questions , the respondents were requested to indicate whether activities 
related to the introduction of autonomous vehicles have already been conducted in their 
cities, are currently being carried out or are planned in the near future. The results indicate 
that such activities have only be en conducted  so far  in about one third of the cities, and that 
no major differences can be observed (for our sample) betw een big (more than 500,000 
inhabitants ) and medium -sized cities (between 100,000 and 500,000 inhabitants) regarding 
the realization of such activities.  
Respondents were requested to state the five most important goals for  urban transport  
planning in  their respective municipalities . The results are pictured in Figure 2.  
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
Transport in general
 Transport development
Planning and design of streets and squares
Public Transport
Planning approval for road and rail
Traffic management
Transport legislation
Transport: Other
Other