18 
 how technology  can indeed respond to more fundamental challenges and goals that city 
planners face.  Related to this, they should p rovide 'near time' urban planning  policy 
guidance for a yet (perhaps) distant uncertain development.   
To conclude , we have gathered and interpreted current perspectives  and expectations of 
planning professionals on the implications of AV and their opinion on how transport and 
city plannin g will need to deal with them. Since the  respondents primarily engage in urban 
transport planning and to a lesser extent in city planning  activities , the results may well 
reflect a transport planning perspective . Given the focus on this  particular group of 
professionals  and the comparatively small size of the sample, findings should not be over -
interpreted  or over -generalized . Nonetheless , the study results provide  valuable hints to 
local governments for their short, medium and long -term plans for urban transport and city 
development. As the technology will continue to evolve and provide  options to solve 
challenges, lo cal authorities and their urban transport and city planning professionals 
should be clear and have an agenda on how these potentials may be of use for realizing 
objectives for urban developm ent. The results of this survey  can be a good starting point 
for developing such an agenda . But it also leaves many questions open, for example what 
specific types of action are needed and  suited to ensure that autonomous driving supports 
sustainable transport planning in cities . Because of the possible far reaching (second and 
third order) effects, AV will likely influence broader local development objectives like 
local economic vitality, social inclusiveness, or attractiveness and livability of public 
spaces, Therefore, this agenda setting should not be a concern from the transport planning 
domain alone but rather a multi -sectoral undertaking. This requires placing  the debate on 
autonomous  driving, the built environment and the policy implications in a wider urban 
development context . 
6. REFERENCES  
Alessandrini, A., Campagna, A.,  Delle Site, P., Filippi, F., and Persia, L. (2015). 
Automated vehicles and the rethinking of mobility and cities. Transportation Research 
Procedia , 5, 145 -160. 
Alonso, W (1964)  Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory of Land Rent, 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge , Mass.  
Apel, D. (2003).  Der Einfluss der Verkehrsmittel auf Städtebau und  Stadtstruktur. In: 
Bracher, T., Haag, M., Holzapfel, H.,  Kiepe, F. , Lehmbrock, M. , and  Reutter, U. (eds. ): 
Handbuch der kommunalen Verkehrsplanung .  
Anderson, J.  M., Kalra N., Stanley, K.  D., Sorensen, P., Samaras, C. , and Oluwatola, O.  A. 
(2016). Autonomous Vehicle Technology:  A Guide for Policymakers . Santa Monica, CA: 
RAND Corporation, http://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR443 -2.html . 
Bahamonde Birke, F. J., Kickhöfer, B., Heinrichs, D., and Kuhnimho f, T. (2017). A 
systemic view on autonomous vehicles: Policy aspects for a sustainable transportation 
planning. Kuhmo -Nectar Conference of the International Transportation Economics 
Association, Barcelona, Spain, 21 -23, June, 2017.  
Begg, D. (2014). A 2050 vision for London: what are the implications of driverless 
transport?