15 
 as a major goal in all four interviews. Transport p lanners share the opinion that 
autonomous on -demand vehicles can be a valuable complement to public transport 
systems, e.g. in areas with lower demand. In their view, this is also a significant  potential 
for technology dissemination. Complementing rather than replacing existing public 
transport was seen particularly important to “prevent  cannibalization ” (by other actors), to 
increase  the attractiveness of public transport modes through flexible “ on-demand ” offers 
and to use  existing infrastructure  efficiently , specifically with respect to mass transport 
modes.  
Fighting potential increase in car use and its negative effects  
Interviewees  were very  concern ed that AV technology would lead to an increase  in 
individual motorized traffic. The reasons behind are that cars could be more  easily 
accessible for everyone, be used more intensively during the day to serve all members of a 
family, or drive around empty for redistri bution purposes. The  respondents  thus expressed 
less interest of their cities to engage in activities and projects that would promote 
individual autonomous vehicles. To counterbalance  this threat , they expressed  the need to 
focus  on the system as a whole rather than engaging in AV for mo torized individual travel. 
A general consensus among  the planners was that automation of vehicles should go along 
with electrifying their powertrains.  
Municipalities’ objectives versus federal policy and industry interests  
The respondents  mentioned that w hile f ederal policy’s focus currently is on safeguarding 
Germany as a production location  through pushing AV technology (“ mostly technology 
funding ”) as well as safety and efficiency gains, the municipalities have different goals . 
These are geared towards  securing the cities’ welfare system and guaranteeing livable 
cities’ for all its inhabi tants. These objectives have not gained sufficient attention in the 
debate on AV so far. Respondents  expressed  a strong n eed to consolidate  and articulate 
strategic city’s positions and to enter into  the debate  on research and development 
priorities for AV . They mentioned the  Association of German Cities as the main actor to 
achieve these consolidated positions. However, they saw the challenge that  currently  not 
enough local governments  are seriously engaged in discussions and activities around AV 
and thus do not see too much pressure. This statement connects to the results of the 
quantitativ e survey where around two third  of the respondents stated to not have been 
involved in activities on AV so far  and a majority only saw a need for action in the mid - or 
long-term. 
5. URBAN PLANING POLICY  FOR AUTONOMOUS 
VEHICLES : DISCUSSION and  RECOMMENDATIONS  
This paper  aims at  clarify ing (1) how autonomous driving could  affect  the built 
environment, (2) to what extent these  effects  are deemed as ‘desirable’ i.e. compatible with 
existing frameworks from a planning perspective, and  (3), how urban transport  and city  
planning will need  to deal with the aforementioned implications . With respect to the first 
question, the literature review  show ed that autonomous driving has the potential to affect  
the built environment  in many ways. Among the key themes are changes in the required 
road space (right -of-ways and travel lanes ) and infrastructures (signage, etc.), effects on