4 
 2. Autonomous driving and its possible implications on 
the built environment : a literature review  
Mobility and the built environment  are closely connected  with each other . Urban form and 
the distribution of different land uses  play an important role on mobility decisions, and , to 
a considerable degree, dictate  what forms of transport shape the transport systems  (Cervero 
and Kockelman, 1997) . Compact city form s with high density and mixed use s provide 
good preconditions for short tri ps and efficien t public transportation, promoting also  
walking and cycling, and often making daily car use unnecessary. Sprawling and  sparsely 
populated urban structures , on the other hand, discourage non -motorized travel . In turn, the 
availability and use  of designated transport modes strongly influences land use patterns, 
their densities  and the necessary infrastructures. The residential suburbanization of the 
latter half of last century was thus , to a great extent , encouraged by car availability and the 
expansion of the transport infrastructure for motorized passenger transport (Apel, 2003).   
Fully automated driving will entail a completely new transport system, which will not only 
bring new possibilities and new ty pes of transport provision, but is also likely to strongly 
interact with the built environment  and, therefore, touch the domain of city planning . This 
connection is so far not well -understood. Visions of autonomous  driving and its integration 
in urban area s primarily concentrate on the development of  the technology and the direct 
effects of alternative tr ansport systems on traffic flow, safety, resulting emissions, among 
many others (Heinrichs , 2015 ; Fagnant and Kockelman 2015; for instance ). Nevertheless, 
only a few existing studies investigate  the link between AV and urban form, land use, 
urban infrastructures and the implications for city planning  (see Milakis et al., 2017a (for 
an explorative literature review) . These studies, primarily conducted in the form of 
consulting experts , indicate several areas where AV are likely to influence  the built 
environment . Among the key themes are (1)  changes in the required road space ( right -of-
ways and travel lanes ) and infrastructures (signage, etc.), (2) effe cts on the location, form, 
and amount of parking, (3) interactions with the mobility  of cyclists and pedestrians, (4) 
opportu nities for redevelopment of land -use, and (5) land -use changes and residential 
relocation.  
Some studies argue that AV will require city and transport planners to rethink the design 
and dimensions of road space and infrastructure. Based on a visioning workshop with 
urban planners, Chapin et al . (2016) identify a number of aspects in this regard. Firstly, AV 
may lead to  changes in the required road space, in particular affecting right -of-ways and 
travel lanes and the design intersections. Secondly , AV are likely to affect access time,  as 
they would make it possible that users  be picked up and dropped off very close to their 
origins and destinations. Thirdly, AV may also lead to a substantial diminution of the 
requirements for signage and signalization, as this information could be provided wireless 
in real -time (Chapin et al., 2016) . Along these lines, some authors postul ate, that 
intersections would no longer require traffic lights or stop signs, relying instead on 
computer programs that communicate directly with the vehicles on the road (Begg, 2016) 
and/or on digital signage, e.g. in the form of high quality digital maps  (Wagner et al., 
2014). On the basis of expert interviews on the policy implication of AV, Wagner et al. 
(2014) confirm the effect on roadway infrastructure, but raise doubts about infrastructure 
adapting rapidly enough to keep pace with  the development of  AV.