7 
 primarily discussed in the current literature. Rather , fundamental impacts on  the 
organization of urban transport systems and the urb an space  can be expected . Against this 
background, competent planning authorities will have to develop suitable responses and 
strategies that deal with the new technology. While t heir perspectives and objectives on the 
topic are of particular relevance , they have so far been addressed only marginally .  
To pick up these  aspects, an empirical study was carried  out amongst  the members of the 
Association of German Cities’  expert commission  on transport. The Association of 
German cities is Germany’s largest national federation of municipalities and understands 
itself as the cities’ voice and advocate for local self -government (Deutscher Städtetag , 
2016). The expert commission on transport  consists of 48 members of different urban 
transport  and city planning authorities . The members of the commission are responsible for 
the strategic transport planning tasks in their cities. Such strategies  need to address how to 
deal with current and future trends including automation of the transport systems.  
The study appli ed a mixed -method design in the form of a n explanatory  sequential design 
(Cres well, 2014) using a quantitative survey and qualitative in -depth interviews. The 
interviews should thus help to deepen and explain the result s from the quantitative part of 
the study  as well as draw upon selected aspects in a more differentiated way (Plano Clark 
and Creswell, 2008) .1 The survey  was design ed as an online survey . A preliminary online 
survey  was sent to  members of the commission fo r comments . A revised version of the 
questionnaire was circulated  in September 2016 and yielded a response from 24 cities  
(50% of the members of the commission2). In adherence with  data protection guidelines, 
the survey was conducted in an anonymous form. This impli es that the name and position 
of the respondents and the name of the city they work for are not known. However, t he 
survey included a question on the  field(s) of professi onal activity of respondents to get an 
indication of their professional focus .  
The r esults were jointly discussed in a dedicated session of the expert commission in fall 
2016 . Following this, four in -depth interviews were conducted with experts from 
municipalities that are already carrying out or considering activities on autonomous 
driving. The interviews were conducted in January and February 2017 – three were 
realized via tel ephone, one was a face -to-face conversation. They were audio -taped and 
subsequently transcribed and evaluated. Special focus was put on similarities between the 
cities’ perspectives (respectively the experts’ perspectives) on autonomous driving in 
relation  to objectives of activities and need for actions.  
In line with previous studies that emphasized the need to specify and differentiate 
autonomous driving in relation to different development paths (see Fraedrich et al., 201 5; 
Heinrichs, 201 6; Wachenfeld  et al., 201 6), four different uses cases of autonomous  driving 
                                                 
1 Though there has been an ongoing discussion for decades whether the often differing methodological, 
epistemological/theoretical paradigms of quantitative and qualitative approaches actually allow it to combine 
them (see Tasha kkori and Teddlie, 2003 ) we decided to use a rather pragmatic but nevertheless also very 
common approach  (see Johnson and Omwuegbuzie, 2004).  
2 As this  is the entire population of transport city planning authorities dedicated to automatization in 
Germany , the respon ses are not treated as a sample but as a census of a small population.