16 
 the location, form, and amount of parking, interactions with the mobility  of cyclists and 
pedestrians, and changes in land-use and residential relocation.  
The survey and the q ualitative interviews add ed some instructive insights on the se effects. 
Firstly, the respondents made clear that the effects on the built environment cannot be 
separated from deliberations on the impacts  on mobility and traffic. The most prominent 
concern is that AV are likely to increase the attractiveness of private motorized 
transportation , increasing existing problems like congestion and negative environmental 
effects. Secondly , and related to the previous point, the survey demonstrate d that planners 
expect the effects to differ quite  strongly depending on how autonomous driving  will 
occur. While all respondents of the survey expect ed the use-case private auto nomous  
vehicle to not positive ly contribut e to urban development, SAV and ADV  got a m ore 
positive response. This underlines the importance of differentiating impacts of autonomous 
driving on transport ation systems  and the built environment depending on how the 
technology is likely to be adopted.  Thirdly , the  survey highlight ed the importance  of 
infrastructures as a concern of planners with respect to AV. It raises questions whether AV 
in the different forms will require additional infrastructure and what planning measures and 
investments the transition from a ‘hardware’ to a ‘softwa re’ driven transport infrastructure 
will require.  
Regarding  the second question, urban transport professionals  were rather skeptical about 
the compatibility of AV with existing transport and urban planning objectives.  Almost 
40% of the respondents  in the questionnaire doubted that AV – in any form described in 
the different  the use -cases  – are suited to support the primary planning objectives of their 
cities. The  main  goals  – as identified by the survey respondents  – are strengthen ing non-
motorized  transportation , strengthen ing and complement ing public transportation  and 
reduc ing energy consumption , CO 2 and air pollutants emissions. Particularly , the 
development of private autonomous vehicles  travel does not seem to be  in line with the  
goals of city  planner regarding  the strength ening of non-motorized and public transport. 
On the contrary, autonomous on -demand vehicles (shared autonomous vehicles) , as part of 
public transport systems , could be a meaningful complement to urban development 
strategies. Across all use -cases, the  survey results exhibited that some respondents show ed 
slightly higher optimism with regards to the potential  of AV to support energy as well as 
safety and env ironment related objectives . Nevertheless, t he overall  assessment of AV 
contribution to these goals is at best mixed.  
In a way, these results suggest that from the perspective  of participants in this survey , AV 
as a technological solution  may fall too short to overcome fundamental challenges  
associated with transport in urban areas. While they could imagine the technology to help 
fix p roblems like traffic congestion, optimizing flow or re -routing vehicles or optimizing 
parking, it is perhaps less capable of address ing more fundamental concern s such as  
congestion and an excessive number  vehicles using the road system , which would  require  a 
shift of people onto public transport or cycling/walking  to be overcome . 
Interestingly , the survey reveals that the respondents on average did not see the im mediate 
need to take action to prepare for the ‘arrival’ of AV and to steer the introduction of the 
technology in the desired direction. Only a few planners state d that urban and transport 
planning should be adjusted, while the majority identifie d that thi s is rather a concern for 
the more distant future. This assessment perhaps comes a bit as a surprise, when taking