17 
 into consideration that industry and the federal government  in Germany is likewise  pushing 
the case of AV quite strongly. Given that planners are rather  skeptical regarding the 
possible contribution of the technology, one would expect a more proactive perspective.  
A possible explanation for this reluctance is that professionals  and city administrators are 
uncertain if and when the technology will be mature enough to be seriously considered and 
what development path it will possibly take . Currently, a lot of the activities around 
autonomous driving are  framed as ‘ test fields ’ or ‘living labs’. Technologies are stil l being 
developed and trialed.  The lack of clarity  whether the technology will definitely work and 
solve problem s and improve city services  may well be a reason why planners tend to be 
reluctant to prioritize AV as a topic on their planning agenda.  
This brings us to the  third question of this article. A first lesson from this survey is that 
from the urban transport planning perspective, the different use cases of autonomous 
vehicles seem to differ in their potential implications and, thus, should receive specific 
attention by planning. Obviously, it occurs that automation may be a promising 
complement to public transport in the form of SAV. As noted in the interviews, 
autonomous on -demand vehicles could increase the attractiveness of the public transport 
supply as feeder modes in areas w ith lower and fluctuating demand. Planning at the 
municipal level could start thinking about actions on how to explore this potential. On the 
other hand, the uptake of AV technology for motorized individual travel raises concerns 
about increasing car trave l and associated negative effects. Local  planning could start 
discussing how this ties into existing strategies to manage car use in cities including 
parking. Looking at freight, there is yet little clarity and understanding about the possible 
implications . Activities therefor e should start with exploring potential applications and 
their impact on cost structures, transport and the environment . 
A second lesson from the study  is the d iscrepancy between the objectives of urban 
planning, the f ederal  government‘s  policy  focus and the priorities of the industry. The 
survey illustrates that objectives at the municipal level are to increase public transport and 
non-motorized travel. To this end, planners see a higher potential of automation with 
respect to the public transport system. F ederal government and industry arguments 
currently appear  to attach  a high visibility to the automation of cars, related to  the 
arguments of improved safety, better traffic flow and increased energy efficiency. In 
addition,  they tend to strongly focus on securing industry’s competitiveness.   
Given this ‘mismatch’, local planners and administrators in Germany should start to 
consider preparing, consolidating and communicating their strategic positions  – as was also 
argued for  in the interviews . This could be done individually as well as collectively , as 
done elsewhere already. Particularly , a joint position by local governments would be 
needed to influence current federal policy on research and development priorities with 
respect to auto nomous  driving. This seems to be particularly important because the survey 
shows that the concerns of local transport and urban planners have been  not well addressed  
so far .  
A third lesson  from the survey addresses the type of knowledge that city planning requires 
from current research and development activities. One of the biggest concerns highlighted 
in the study is that any action with respect to AV needs to go beyond  demonstrating how  to 
solve  specific, practical problems . Rather, studies are required  that show and demonstrate