14 
 AV, which permitted an informed perspective on specific requirements for action and 
whether existing infrastructure needs to be redeveloped.  The respon dents displayed a 
positive attitude towards automated driving in general. However, they also raised concerns 
about potential challenges and risks that might come along with the implementation of the 
technology that we will discuss in this section.  
Activiti es in the four cities include the inclusion of the topic in strateg y documents by the 
city governments and planning for pilot projects or testbeds in the field of smart mobility 
and intelligent transport systems . In some cases, these projects are already o ngoing  for 
several years. Perhaps a unifying aspect across the cities is the objective to connect AV 
activities to public transport enhancement (see below). In contrast to this joint goal, the 
interview participants expressed different views on the needs for infrastructure 
investments. One interviewee stated that his city government currently links considerations 
regar ding the requirements of AV with possibilities to fund them. The other respondents  
were in general more skeptical in terms of adapting the infrastructure to allow  AV to better 
‘fit in’, al though the ir arguments  slightly differed. While a lack of possible f unding fo r 
large scale investments seems  to be a prominent challenge for all of them, one participant 
explicitly stated that “ it is not the infrastructures that have to adapt to autonomous vehicles 
but rather the other way round ”. This perspective reveals the general concern of all the 
interviewed planners . While they see  the potentials that AV offer in terms of safety or  
efficiency, they also perceive potential negative implications like an increase in individual 
motorized traffic  and a decrease of public transport mode use in case local governments 
did not actively promote  a development path for AV in urban areas that is in line with their 
objectives . In general, considerations in relatio n to infrastructure development  seem to be 
more closely linked  to dig italization projects and testbeds than to automated driving  ‘only’.  
The interviews revealed four overarching concerns  across all four municipalities . They are  
briefly presented below.  
Municipalities as driving and steering forces  
All respondents  indicated that the planning authorities in the ir city have played a major 
role in pushing, organizing and implementing  activities related to automated (and 
connected) driving. However, municipalities seem to focus on steering and regulating the 
activities  rather than on “just” b eing part of research projects, testbeds or  pilots . The 
planning actors stated that they are in general more interested in integrated concepts than in 
technology -driven projects. One interviewee summarized this view in this way : “New 
technologies are not ends in themselves but have to adapt to what serves the city. And in 
the end, it is the municipalities that have to implement it .” 
Other important actors in relation to activities on automated driving are – first and 
foremost – the local public transport companies, but also industry and economic actors, 
research organizations  and others with whom they collaborate in different initiati ves. 
Strengthening, supporting and (re)developing public transport as a major 
goal 
Respondents emphasized that a  central task for municipalities is securing livelihoods and 
welfare services. Thus, to strengthen and (re)develop  public transport services was  stated