8 
 were defined to  correctly address the point  that the effects of AV are likely to differ 
substantially depending on the form or type of use case3.  They are defined as follows:  
• Autonomous Park Pilot  (APP): After all passengers get off, the vehicle can travel 
alone to a predetermined parking and from there back to a given pick-up address.  
• Shared Autonomous Vehicle ( SAV ): A Shared Autonomous Vehicle is a vehicle 
that drives its occupants without a driver. Users can no longer drive themselves in such a 
vehicle, as there are no steering wheels or pedals.  
• Private Autonomous Vehicle (PAV ): On request or if necessary, the vehicle can 
take over the driving task. During this time, the driver do es not have to pay attention to the 
traffic and can execute  other activities.  
• Autonomous Delivery Vehicle  (ADV ): A small self -propelled vehicle, which may, 
if required, also drive on footpaths or cycle paths, takes over the last mile for goods 
deliveries  to customers or to parcel boxes.  
From the overall 24 respondents of the questionnaire, s ix are represent ative s from large 
cities with 500,000 inhabitants or more; 18 respondents work in  medium sized 
municipalities with 50,000 to 500, 000 inhabitants . It ha s to be noted though, that, as 
individual persons were consulted, the responses  reflect the opinion of the interviewees 
and do not necessarily depict  a coordinated response from across the administration of the 
municipalities . 
Figure 1 illustrates the field of professional activity given by the survey participants. As 
can be seen, multiple answers were allowed. The majority of the respondents are engaged 
in municipal transport planning and development activities , as well as physical  planning 
and design of streets and squares.  Other prominent fields of activities – alongside transport 
in general – include traffic management and public transport . In addition, quite a num ber 
of respondents are engaged in other activities . This category (referred to as ‘Other’ in 
figure 1) comprises activities like  city planning , landscape planning and environmental 
planning.  In summary , all respondents are working on subjects with relevanc e to the  
planning of future transport systems with presences of AV. The listed fields of professional 
activities suggest that a majority of the survey participants work directly on transport 
topics. This indicates that these respondents  have primarily an  urban transport planning 
perspective . In addition, this may be an indication that the topic of AV is currently 
primarily seen and dealt with as a transport planning concern. However , quite many 
activities reported by the respondents relate to  other urban planning subjects . Therefore, 
while we can expect a strong urban transport planning perspective in the responses to our 
questions  in the subsequent sections, we may not confine it to the transport realm alone . 
                                                 
3 However, the four use cases are not mutually exclusive in two ways: first, they could as well evolve parallel 
to each other and therefore be complementary rather than competitive (see  Fraedrich et al 2015). Second, 
they only present a small selection of possible scenarios of autonomous d riving – there are in fact many  more 
that are conceivable, but the ones that were chosen for this study should present likely developments of AV 
in the  city by having been widely discussed in the current literature on autonomous driving at the same time.