5 
 Nevertheless, and despite the aforementioned possibilities, AV will still have to interact 
with pedestrians and cyclist. Thus, to a greater or lesser extent, signage will still be 
required, reducing the potential impact of the changes in this regard.  Changes in signage 
are not expected to be the main implication of the interaction among automated motorized 
traffic and non-motorized transportation . Alessandrini  et al. (2013) argue that AV will have 
positive effects in terms of road safety, as well as, of confidence of cyclist and pedestrians, 
by reducing intimidation of the latter in the knowledge that vehicles are being driven 
correctly. Thus, this “freedom fro m fear” should certainly improve non -motorized travel. 
On the contrary, the increased number  of pick-up / drop-off areas and free flow 
intersections could hinder pedestrian and bicycle  travel  (Chapin et al., 2016) .  
Other s tudies point out the possible eff ect on location, form, and amount of parking . AV 
technology promises vehicles that can drop riders off and park themselves, making the 
need for nearby parking much less impor tant for a large number of land -uses. In this 
context, while some  studies address  park efficiency gains (via autonomous parking) in 
parking houses  (e.g. Kummerle et a l., 2009; Mitchell et al., 2010;  Heinrichs, 2015 ; 
Heinrichs and Cyga nski, 2015; Li and Shao, 2015), it is unclear whether these efficiency 
gains shall be proved economicall y relevant. Provision of private parking infrastructure 
(e.g. parking houses ) in dense urban areas is expensive. Therefore, it is possible that t he 
provision costs of parking infrastructure  exceed the travel costs to free (or more 
convenient)  parking space s - along the same line, it is also possible than cruising without a 
driver for short periods of time be more convenient than paying an expensive parking fee.  
As a result, it can be expected that the demand for parking lots be relocated to sparsely 
populat ed areas , where parking space is not a scarce good (Chapin et al., 2016 ; 
Zakharenko, 2016 ). Furthermore, the development of autonomous taxi-like vehicles 
("Vehicle on Dem and"; Wachenfeld et al., 2015) would also result in a significant 
reduction of the dem and for parking lots in city centers  (Heinrichs, 2015 ). For example, the  
OECD / ITF study (2015) , addressing the replacement of privately owned by shared 
autonomous vehicles,  estimated a potential reduction in the parking requirements of ca. 
6 %-16 % for Lisbon, Portugal . Similar results are founded in Zhang et al . (2015).  
Given the many changes to the urban environment regarding road use and parking space, 
some studies address  the potential for redevelopment opportunities in urban contexts. 
Alessandrini e t al. (2013) suggest that the new parking requirements should  free urban 
space, which can be used to improve  livability of urban environments.  Examples of more 
sustainable  public space use include  reassigning road and parking space to (segregated) 
public t ransport lanes , broader or better  sidewalks and bike paths , parks and green areas  
(Hass -Klau, 2014 ; Chapin et al ., 2016). Additionally , Chapin et al. (2016)  considered  the 
implementation  of fixed stops for AV, in order to facilitate getting on and off the vehicles  
without affecting the traffic  flow. 
Another possible effect associated with auton omous  driving relates to longer term land-use 
change s, in terms of ( residential ) location choice. Economic literature suggests that 
households make a trade -off between commute -time, wage/income, living costs, etc., when 
selecting housing  and working locations (So et al ., 2001; Bhat and Guo, 2007; among 
many others). Since house -prices and rent are lower with increasing distance from ci ty 
centers, a consumer may get access to superior dwellings outside cities (or in their 
suburbs). But they must then accept lower wages in the rural area or larger commuting 
times in exchange of higher wages  in the cities (Alonso, 1964). Autonomous  driving  may