xlFL
LNxl+1yl
(a) post-norm residual unit
xl LNFLxl+1yl
(b) pre-norm residual unit
Figure 1: Examples of pre-norm residual unit and post-
norm residual unit. F= sub-layer, and LN = layer nor-
malization.
former.
Inspired by the linear multi-step method
in numerical analysis (Ascher and Petzold,
1998), we propose an approach based on dy-
namic linear combination of layers (D LCL)
to memorizing the features extracted from all
preceding layers. This overcomes the prob-
lem with the standard residual network where
a residual connection just relies on the output
of one-layer ahead and may forget the earlier
layers.
We successfully train a 30-layer encoder, far
surpassing the deepest encoder reported so
far (Bapna et al., 2018). To our best knowl-
edge, this is the deepest encoder used in
NMT.
On WMT’16 English-German, NIST
OpenMT’12 Chinese-English, and larger
WMT’18 Chinese-English translation tasks,
we show that our deep system (30/25-layer
encoder) yields a BLEU improvement of 1.3 2.4
points over the base model (Transformer-Base
with 6 layers). It even outperforms Transformer-
Big by 0.40.6 BLEU points, but requires 1.6X
fewer model parameters and 3X less training time.
More interestingly, our deep model is 10% faster
than Transformer-Big in inference speed.
2 Post-Norm and Pre-Norm Transformer
The Transformer system and its variants follow the
standard encoder-decoder paradigm. On the en-
coder side, there are a number of identical stacked
layers. Each of them is composed of a self-
attention sub-layer and a feed-forward sub-layer.
The attention model used in Transformer is multi-
head attention, and its output is fed into a fully
connected feed-forward network. Likewise, thedecoder has another stack of identical layers. It
has an encoder-decoder attention sub-layer in ad-
dition to the two sub-layers used in each encoder
layer. In general, because the encoder and the de-
coder share a similar architecture, we can use the
same method to improve them. In the section, we
discuss a more general case, not limited to the en-
coder or the decoder.
2.1 Model Layout
For Transformer, it is not easy to train stacked lay-
ers on neither the encoder-side nor the decoder-
side. Stacking all these sub-layers prevents the ef-
ﬁcient information ﬂow through the network, and
probably leads to the failure of training. Residual
connections and layer normalization are adopted
for a solution. Let Fbe a sub-layer in encoder or
decoder, and lbe the parameters of the sub-layer.
A residual unit is deﬁned to be (He et al., 2016b):
xl+1=f(yl) (1)
yl=xl+F(xl;l) (2)
wherexlandxl+1are the input and output of the
l-th sub-layer, and ylis the intermediate output fol-
lowed by the post-processing function f(). In this
way,xlis explicitly exposed to yl(see Eq. (2)).
Moreover, layer normalization is adopted to re-
duce the variance of sub-layer output because hid-
den state dynamics occasionally causes a much
longer training time for convergence. There are
two ways to incorporate layer normalization into
the residual network.
Post-Norm . In early versions of Transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017), layer normalization is
placed after the element-wise residual addi-
tion (see Figure 1(a)), like this:
xl+1=LN(xl+F(xl;l)) (3)
where LN ()is the layer normalization func-
tion, whose parameter is dropped for simplic-
ity. It can be seen as a post-processing step of
the output (i.e., f(x) =LN(x)).
Pre-Norm . In recent implementations (Klein
et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2018; Domhan,
2018), layer normalization is applied to the
input of every sub-layer (see Figure 1(b)):
xl+1=xl+F(LN(xl);l) (4)