coder depth is further increased in D LCL. Note that
pre-norm Transformer degenerates earlier and is
less robust than D LCL when the depth is beyond
20. However, a deeper network ( >30 layers) does
not bring more beneﬁts. Worse still, deeper net-
works consume a lot of memory, making it impos-
sible to train efﬁciently.
We also report the inference speed on GPU in
Figure 4. As expected, the speed decreases lin-
early with the number of encoder layers. Never-
theless, our system with a 30-layer encoder is still
faster than Transformer-Big, because the encoding
process is independent of beam size, and runs only
once. In contrast, the decoder suffers from severe
autoregressive problems.
6.2 Effect of Decoder Depth
Enc. Depth Dec. Depth BLEU Speed
6 4 27.12 3088.3
6 6 27.33 2589.2
6 8 27.42 2109.6
Table 5: Tokenized BLEU scores [%] and GPU gen-
eration speed (target tokens per second) in pre-norm
Transformer (Base) on the test set of WMT English-
German (batch size = 32, beam size = 4).
Table 5 shows the effects of decoder depth on
BLEU and inference speed on GPU. Different
from encoder, increasing the depth of decoder only
yields a slight BLEU improvement, but the cost is
high: for every two layers added, the translation
speed drops by approximate 500 tokens evenly.
It indicates that exploring deep encoders may be
more promising than deep decoders for NMT.
6.3 Ablation Study
We report the ablation study results in Table 6. We
ﬁrst observe a modest decrease when removing the
introduced layer normalization in Eq. (8). Then
we try two methods to replace learnable weights
with constant weights: All-One (Wi
j= 1) and Av-
erage (Wi
j= 1=(i+1)). We can see that these two
methods consistently hurt performance, in particu-
lar in the case of All-One. It indicates that making
the weights learnable is important for our model.
Moreover, removing the added layer normaliza-
tion in the Average model makes BLEU score drop
by 0.28, which suggests that adding layer normal-
ization helps more if we use the constant weights.
In addition, we did two interesting experiments on
big models. The ﬁrst one is to replace the base en-Model BLEU
pre-norm DLCL-20L 28.80
- layer norm. 28.67
- learnable weight (ﬁx 1) 28.22
- learnable weight (ﬁx 1/N) 28.51
- layer norm. 28.23
pre-norm Transformer-Base 27.11
+ big encoder 27.59
pre-norm Transformer-Big 28.72
+ 12-layer encoder (DLCL) 29.17
Table 6: Ablation results by tokenized BLEU [%] on
the test set of WMT English-German translation.
coder with a big encoder in pre-norm Transformer-
Base. The other one is to use DLCL to train a
deep-and-wide Transformer (12 layers). Although
both of them beneﬁt from the increased network
capacity, the gain is less than the “thin” counter-
part in terms of BLEU, parameter size, and train-
ing efﬁciency.
6.4 Visualization on Learned Weights
We visually present the learned weights matri-
ces of the 30-layer encoder (Figure 5(a)) and its
6-layer decoder (Figure 5(b)) in our pre-norm
DLCL-30L model on En-De task. For a clearer
contrast, we mask out the points with an absolute
value of less than 0.1 or 5% of the maximum per
row. We can see that the connections in the early
layers are dense, but become sparse as the depth
increases. It indicates that making full use of ear-
lier layers is necessary due to insufﬁcient informa-
tion at the beginning of the network. Also, we ﬁnd
that most of the large weight values concentrate on
the right of the matrix, which indicates that the im-
pact of the incoming layer is usually related to the
distance between the outgoing layer. Moreover,
for a ﬁxed layer’s output yi, it is obvious that its
contribution to successive layers changes dynam-
ically (one column). To be clear, we extract the
weights ofy10in Figure 5(c). In contrast, in most
previous paradigms of dense residual connection,
the output of each layer remains ﬁxed for subse-
quent layers.
7 Related Work
Deep Models. Deep models have been ex-
plored in the context of neural machine transla-
tion since the emergence of RNN-based models.
To ease optimization, researchers tried to reduce
the number of non-linear transitions (Zhou et al.,