Learning Deep Transformer Models for Machine Translation
Qiang Wang1, Bei Li1, Tong Xiao1;2, Jingbo Zhu1;2, Changliang Li3,
Derek F. Wong4, Lidia S. Chao4
1NLP Lab, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
2NiuTrans Co., Ltd., Shenyang, China
3Kingsoft AI Lab, Beijing, China
4NLP2CT Lab, University of Macau, Macau, China
wangqiangneu@gmail.com, libei neu@outlook.com,
fxiaotong,zhujingbo g@mail.neu.edu.com,
lichangliang@kingsoft.com, fderekfw,lidiasc g@um.edu.mo
Abstract
Transformer is the state-of-the-art model in
recent machine translation evaluations. Two
strands of research are promising to im-
prove models of this kind: the ﬁrst uses
wide networks (a.k.a. Transformer-Big) and
has been the de facto standard for the de-
velopment of the Transformer system, and
the other uses deeper language representation
but faces the difﬁculty arising from learn-
ing deep networks. Here, we continue the
line of research on the latter. We claim that
a truly deep Transformer model can surpass
the Transformer-Big counterpart by 1) proper
use of layer normalization and 2) a novel
way of passing the combination of previous
layers to the next. On WMT’16 English-
German, NIST OpenMT’12 Chinese-English
and larger WMT’18 Chinese-English tasks,
our deep system (30/25-layer encoder) out-
performs the shallow Transformer-Big/Base
baseline (6-layer encoder) by 0.4 2.4 BLEU
points. As another bonus, the deep model is
1.6X smaller in size and 3X faster in training
than Transformer-Big1.
1 Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) models have
advanced the previous state-of-the-art by learn-
ing mappings between sequences via neural net-
works and attention mechanisms (Sutskever et al.,
2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015). The earliest of
these read and generate word sequences using a
series of recurrent neural network (RNN) units,
and the improvement continues when 4-8 layers
are stacked for a deeper model (Luong et al.,
2015; Wu et al., 2016). More recently, the system
based on multi-layer self-attention (call it Trans-
former) has shown strong results on several large-
Corresponding author.
1The source code is available at https://github.
com/wangqiangneu/dlclscale tasks (Vaswani et al., 2017). In particu-
lar, approaches of this kind beneﬁt greatly from
a wide network with more hidden states (a.k.a.
Transformer-Big), whereas simply deepening the
network has not been found to outperform the
“shallow” counterpart (Bapna et al., 2018). Do
deep models help Transformer? It is still an open
question for the discipline.
For vanilla Transformer, learning deeper net-
works is not easy because there is already a rel-
atively deep model in use2. It is well known that
such deep networks are difﬁcult to optimize due
to the gradient vanishing/exploding problem (Pas-
canu et al., 2013; Bapna et al., 2018). We note that,
despite the signiﬁcant development effort, simply
stacking more layers cannot beneﬁt the system and
leads to a disaster of training in some of our exper-
iments.
A promising attempt to address this issue is
Bapna et al. (2018)’s work. They trained a 16-
layer Transformer encoder by using an enhanced
attention model. In this work, we continue the line
of research and go towards a much deeper encoder
for Transformer. We choose encoders to study be-
cause they have a greater impact on performance
than decoders and require less computational cost
(Domhan, 2018). Our contributions are threefold:
We show that the proper use of layer normal-
ization is the key to learning deep encoders.
The deep network of the encoder can be
optimized smoothly by relocating the layer
normalization unit. While the location of
layer normalization has been discussed in re-
cent systems (Vaswani et al., 2018; Domhan,
2018; Klein et al., 2017), as far as we know,
its impact has not been studied in deep Trans-
2For example, a standard Transformer encoder has 6 lay-
ers. Each of them consists of two sub-layers. More sub-layers
are involved on the decoder side.arXiv:1906.01787v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jun 2019