5
2.2.4 Branched Multi-Task Learning Networks
The models presented in Sections 2.2.1-2.2.3 softly shared
the features amongst tasks during the encoding stage. Dif-
ferently, branched multi-task networks followed a hard-
parameter sharing scheme. Before presenting these meth-
ods, consider the following observation: deep neural net-
works tend to learn hierarchical image representations [62].
The early layers tend to focus on more general low-level
image features, such as edges, corners, etc., while the deeper
layers tend to extract high-level information that is more
task-speciﬁc. Motivated by this observation, branched MTL
networks opted to learn similar hierarchical encoding struc-
tures [9], [10], [11], [12]. These ramiﬁed networks typically
start with a number of shared layers, after which different
(groups of) tasks branch out into their own sequence of
layers. In doing so, the different branches gradually become
more task-speciﬁc as we move to the deeper layers. This
behaviour aligns well with the hierarchical representations
learned by deep neural nets. However, as the number of
possible network conﬁgurations is combinatorially large,
deciding what layers to share and where to branch out
becomes cumbersome. Several works have tried to automate
the procedure of hierarchically clustering the tasks to form
branched MTL networks given a speciﬁc computational
budget (e.g. number of parameters, FLOPS). We provide a
summary of existing works below.
Fully-Adaptive Feature Sharing (FAFS) [9] starts from
a network where tasks initially share all layers, and dynam-
ically grows the model in a greedy layer-by-layer fashion
during training. The task groupings are optimized to sep-
arate dissimilar tasks from each other, while minimizing
network complexity. The task relatedness is based on the
probability of concurrently ’simple’ or ’difﬁcult’ examples
across tasks. This strategy assumes that it is preferable
to solve two tasks in an isolated manner (i.e. different
branches) when the majority of examples are ’simple’ for
one task, but ’difﬁcult’ for the other.
Similar to FAFS, Vandenhende et al. [10] rely on pre-
computed task relatedness scores to decide the grouping of
tasks. In contrast to FAFS, they measure the task relatedness
based on feature afﬁnity scores, rather than sample difﬁ-
culty. The main assumption is that two tasks are strongly
related, if their single-task models rely on a similar set of
features. An efﬁcient method [63] is used to quantify this
property. An advantage over FAFS is that the task groupings
can be determined ofﬂine for the whole network, and not
online in a greedy layer-by-layer fashion [10]. This strategy
promotes task groupings that are optimal in a global, rather
than local, sense. Yet, a disadvantage is that the calculation
of the task afﬁnity scores requires a set of single-task net-
works to be pretrained ﬁrst.
Different from the previous works, Branched Multi-Task
Architecture Search (BMTAS) [11] and Learning To Branch
(LTB) [12] have directly optimized the network topology
without relying on pre-computed task relatedness scores.
More speciﬁcally, they rely on a tree-structured network
design space where the branching points are casted as a
Gumbel softmax operation. This strategy has the advan-
tage over [9], [10] that the task groupings can be directly
optimized end-to-end for the tasks under consideration.
Backbone
Multi-Modal
Distillation
Initial T ask
PredictionsFig. 6: The architecture in PAD-Net [13]. Features extracted
by a backbone network are passed to task-speciﬁc heads
to make initial task predictions. The task features from the
different heads are then combined through a distillation unit
to make the ﬁnal predictions. Note that, auxiliary tasks can
be used in this framework, i.e. tasks for which only the
initial predictions are generated, but not the ﬁnal ones.
Moreover, both methods can easily be applied to any set
of tasks, including both image classiﬁcation and per-pixel
prediction tasks. Similar to [9], [10], a compact network
topology can be obtained by including a resource-aware
loss term. In this case, the computational budget is jointly
optimized with the multi-task learning objective in an end-
to-end fashion.
2.3 Decoder-Focused Architectures
The encoder-focused architectures in Section 2.2 follow a
common pattern: they directly predict all task outputs from
the same input in one processing cycle (i.e. all predictions
are generated once, in parallel or sequentially, and are not
reﬁned afterwards). By doing so, they fail to capture com-
monalities and differences among tasks, that are likely fruit-
ful for one another (e.g. depth discontinuities are usually
aligned with semantic edges). Arguably, this might be the
reason for the moderate only performance improvements
achieved by the encoder-focused approaches to MTL (see
Section 4.3.1). To alleviate this issue, a few recent works
ﬁrst employed a multi-task network to make initial task
predictions, and then leveraged features from these initial
predictions in order to further improve each task output –
in an one-off or recursive manner. As these MTL approaches
also share or exchange information during the decoding
stage, we refer to them as decoder-focused architectures (see
Figure 3b).
2.3.1 PAD-Net
PAD-Net [13] was one of the ﬁrst decoder-focused architec-
tures. The model itself is visualized in Figure 6. As can be
seen, the input image is ﬁrst processed by an off-the-shelf
backbone network. The backbone features are further pro-
cessed by a set of task-speciﬁc heads that produce an initial
prediction for every task. These initial task predictions add
deep supervision to the network, but they can also be used