12
TABLE 2: MTL benchmarks used in the experiments section. Distilled task labels are marked with *.
Dataset # Train # Test Segmentation Depth Human Parts Normals Saliency Edges
PASCAL [74] 10,581 1,449 X X X * X* X
NYUD-v2 [73] 795 654 X X
TABLE 3: Overview of our experiments on NYUD-v2 and PASCAL. We indicate the used backbones and optimization
strategies for every model.
Model Datasets Backbone Optimization
NYUD-v2 PASCAL NYUD-v2 PASCAL
MTL Baseline X X ResNet-50/HRNet-18 ResNet-18/HRNet-18 Uniform, Fixed (Grid Search), Uncertainty,
GradNorm, DWA, MGDA
Cross-Stitch X X ResNet-50 ResNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
NDDR-CNN X X ResNet-50 ResNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
MTAN X X ResNet-50 ResNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
JTRL X ResNet-50 - Fixed (Grid Search)
PAP-Net X ResNet-50 - Fixed (Grid Search)
PAD-Net X X ResNet-50/HRNet-18 HRNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
MTI-Net X X HRNet-18 HRNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
TABLE 4: Overview of the used hyperparameter settings in
our grid search procedure.
Optimizer Batch size Learning rate
SGD ( momentum = 0:9)f6, 12g f 1e-3, 5e-3, 1e-2, 5e-2 g
Adam f6, 12g f 1e-4, 5e-4g
12 hyperparameter settings in total (see overview in Table 4).
A poly learning rate scheduler is used. The number of total
epochs is set to 60 for PASCAL and 100 for NYUD-v2. We
include weight decay regularization of 1e-4. Any remaining
hyperparameters are set in accordance with the original
works.
4.2 Overview
Table 5 provides an overview of the results on NYUD-v2
and PASCAL. The MTL architectures are shown in Tables 5a
and 5b. A direct comparison can be made between architec-
tures that rely on the same backbone. The task balancing
strategies are analyzed in Tables 5c and 5d. We identify
several trends from the results.
Single-Task vs Multi-Task. We compare the encoder- and
decoder-focused MTL models against their single-task coun-
terparts on NYUD-v2 and PASCAL in Tables 5a- 5b. MTL
can offer several advantages relative to single-task learning,
that is, smaller memory footprint, reduced number of calcu-
lations, and improved performance. However, few models
are able to deliver on this potential to its full extent. For
example, JTRL improves the performance on the segmenta-
tion and depth estimation tasks on NYUD-v2, but requires
more resources. Differently, the processing happens more
efﬁciently when using the MTL baseline on PASCAL, but the
performance declines too. MTI-Net constitutes an exemp-
tion from this rule. In particular, the performance increases
on all tasks, except for normals, while the computational
overhead is limited. Note, in this speciﬁc case, the relative
increase in parameters and FLOPS can be attributed to the
use of a shallow backbone network.Inﬂuence of Task Dictionary. We study the inﬂuence of
the task dictionary (i.e. size and diversity) by comparing
the results on NYUD-v2 against PASCAL (see Table 5a vs
Table 5b). On NYUD-v2, we consider the tasks of semantic
segmentation and depth estimation. This pair of tasks is
strongly related [13], [14], [17], since both semantic segmen-
tation and depth estimation reveal similar characteristics
about a scene, such as the layout and object shapes or
boundaries. Differently, PASCAL includes a larger and more
diverse task dictionary.
On NYUD-v2, MTL proves an effective strategy for
jointly tackling segmentation and depth estimation. In par-
ticular, most MTL models outperform the set of single-task
networks (see Table 5a). Similar results have been reported
for other pairs of well-correlated tasks, e.g. depth and ﬂow
estimation [81], detection and classiﬁcation [82], [83], detec-
tion and segmentation [2], [84].
Differently, most existing models fail to outperform their
single-task equivalents on PASCAL (see Table 5b). For ex-
ample, the improvements reported by the encoder-focused
approaches are usually limited to a few isolated tasks, while
a decline in performance is observed for the other tasks.
Jointly tackling a large and diverse task dictionary proves
challenging, as also noted by [10], [18].
Architecture vs Optimization. The effect of designing a
better MTL architecture is compared against the use of a
better task balancing strategy (see Tables 5a-5b vs 5c-5d).
We ﬁnd that the use of a better MTL architecture is usually
more helpful to improve the performance in MTL. Similar
observations were made by prior works [8], [18].
Encoder- vs Decoder-Focused Models. We compare the
encoder-focused models against the decoder-focused mod-
els on NYUD-v2 and PASCAL in Tables 5a- 5b. First, we ﬁnd
that the decoder-focused architectures generally outperform
the encoder-focused ones in terms of multi-task perfor-
mance. We argue that each architecture paradigm serves dif-
ferent purposes. The encoder-focused architectures aim to
learn richer feature representations of the image by sharing
information during the encoding process. Differently, the