18
overhead compared to the encoder-focused ones. As ex-
plained, this is due to an alignment of common cross-task
patterns that decoder-focused architectures promote, which
naturally ﬁts well with dense prediction tasks. Encoder-
focused architectures still offer certain advantages within
the dense prediction task setting, but their inherent layer
sharing seems better ﬁtted to tackle multiple classiﬁcation
tasks.
Finally, we analyzed multiple task balancing strategies,
and isolated the elements that are most effective for balanc-
ing task learning, e.g. down-weighing noisy tasks, balancing
task gradients, etc. Yet, many optimization aspects still
remain poorly understood. For example, opposed to recent
works, our analysis indicates that avoiding gradient com-
petition between tasks can hurt performance. Furthermore,
our study revealed that some task balancing strategies still
suffer from shortcomings, and highlighted several discrep-
ancies between existing methods. We hope that this work
stimulates further research efforts into this problem.
Acknowledgment. The authors would like to acknowledge
support by Toyota via the TRACE project and MACCHINA
(KU Leuven, C14/18/065). This work is also sponsored by
the Flemish Government under the Flemish AI programme.
Finally, the authors would like to thank Shikun Liu, Wanli
Ouyang and the anonymous reviewers for useful feedback.
Simon Vandenhende received his MSE de-
gree in Electrical Engineering from the KU Leu-
ven, Belgium, in 2018. He is currently study-
ing towards a PhD degree at the Center for
Processing Speech and Images at KU Leuven.
His research focuses on multi-task learning and
self-supervised learning. He won a best paper
award at MVA’19. He co-organized the ﬁrst Com-
mands For Autonomous Vehicles workshop at
ECCV’20.
Stamatios Georgoulis is a post-doctoral re-
searcher at the Computer Vision Lab of ETH
Zurich. His current research interests include
multi-task learning, unsupervised learning, and
image generation. Before coming to Zurich, he
was a doctoral student at the PSI group of KU
Leuven, where he received his PhD under the
supervision of Prof. Van Gool and Prof. Tuyte-
laars, focusing on extracting surface characteris-
tics and lighting from images. Further back, he
received his diploma in Electrical and Computer
Engineering from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and partici-
pated in Microsoft’s Imagine Cup Software Design Competition. He reg-
ularly serves as a reviewer in Computer Vision and Machine Learning
conferences (CVPR, NeurIPS, ICCV, ECCV, etc.) with distinctions.
Wouter Van Gansbeke obtained his MSE de-
gree in Electrical Engineering, with a focus on
Information Technology, from the KU Leuven,
Belgium, in 2018. He is currently pursuing a
PhD degree at the Center for Processing Speech
and Images at KU Leuven. His main research
interests are self-supervised learning and multi-
task learning. His focus is leveraging visual sim-
ilarities, temporal information and multiple tasks
to learn rich representations with limited annota-
tions.
Marc Proesmans is a research associate at
the Center for Processing Speech and Images
at KU Leuven, where he leads the TRACE
team. He has an extensive research experience
on various aspects in image processing e.g.
early vision processes, 3D reconstruction, op-
tical ﬂow, stereo, structure from motion, recog-
nition. He has been involved in several Euro-
pean research projects, such as VANGUARD,
IMPROOFS, MESH, MURALE, EUROPA, ROV-
INA. From 2000-2011, he has been CTO for a
KU Leuven spin-off company specialized in special effects for the movie
and game industry. He won several prizes, Golden Egg, Tech-Art, a
European IST, tech. Oscar nomination, European seal of Excellence.
From 2015 he is leading the research on automotive driving as Research
expert, and co-founded TRACE vzw to drive the technology transfer
from academia to the real R&D environment for autonomous driving in
cooperation with Toyota.
Dengxin Dai is a Senior Scientist working with
the Computer Vision Lab at ETH Zurich. In 2016,
he obtained his PhD in Computer Vision at ETH
Zurich. Since then he is the Team Leader of
TRACE-Zurich, working on Autonomous Driv-
ing within the R&D project ”TRACE: Toyota Re-
search on Automated Cars in Europe”. His re-
search interests lie in autonomous driving, ro-
bust perception in adverse weather and illumi-
nation conditions, automotive sensors and com-
puter vision under limited supervision. He has
organized a CVPR Workshop series (’19, ’20) on Vision for All Seasons:
Bad Weather and Nighttime, and has organized an ICCV’19 workshop
on Autonomous Driving. He has been a program committee member
of several major computer vision conferences and received multiple
outstanding reviewer awards. He is guest editor for the IJCV special
issue Vision for All Seasons, area chair for WACV’20 and CVPR’21.
Luc Van Gool is a full professor for Computer
Vision at ETH Zurich and the KU Leuven. He
leads research and teaches at both places. He
has authored over 300 papers. Luc Van Gool
has been a program committee member of sev-
eral, major computer vision conferences (e.g.
Program Chair ICCV’05, Beijing, General Chair
of ICCV’11, Barcelona, and of ECCV’14, Zurich).
His main interests include 3D reconstruction and
modeling, object recognition, and autonomous
driving. He received several Best Paper awards
(eg. David Marr Prize ’98, Best Paper CVPR’07). He received the
Koenderink Award in 2016 and ‘Distinguished Researcher’ nomination
by the IEEE Computer Society in 2017. In 2015 he also received they
5-yearly Excellence Prize by the Flemish Fund for Scientiﬁc Research.
He was the holder of an ERC Advanced Grant (VarCity). Currently, he
leads computer vision research for autonomous driving in the context of
the Toyota TRACE labs in Leuven and at ETH, and has an extensive col-
laboration with Huawei on the issue of image and video enhancement.