4
Task A
Cross-Stitch Unit / NDDR-LayerTask B
Fig. 4: The architecture of
cross-stitch networks [5] and
NDDR-CNNs [7]. The activa-
tions from all single-task net-
works are fused across several
encoding layers. Different fea-
ture fusion mechanisms were
used in each case.
Shared Encoder
Task B
Attention Module
Attention Module
Attention Module
Task A
Attention Module
Attention Module
Attention ModuleFig. 5: The architecture of
MTAN [8]. Task-speciﬁc at-
tention modules select and
reﬁne features from several
layers of a shared encoder.
was given in Section 2.1.3. Based on the proposed criterion,
we distinguish between two types of models: encoder-focused
and decoder-focused architectures. The encoder-focused ar-
chitectures (see Figure 3a) only share information in the
encoder, using either hard- or soft-parameter sharing, before
decoding each task with an independent task-speciﬁc head.
Differently, the decoder-focused architectures (see Figure 3b)
also exchange information during the decoding stage. Fig-
ure 1 gives an overview of the proposed taxonomy, listing
representative works in each case.
2.2 Encoder-focused Architectures
Encoder-focused architectures (see Figure 3a) share the task
features in the encoding stage, before they process them
with a set of independent task-speciﬁc heads. A number
of works [19], [20], [22], [53], [54] followed an ad hoc
strategy by sharing an off-the-shelf backbone network in
combination with small task-speciﬁc heads (see Figure 2a).
This model relies on the encoder (i.e. backbone network)
to learn a generic representation of the scene. The features
from the encoder are then used by the task-speciﬁc heads to
get the predictions for every task. While this simple model
shares the full encoder amongst all tasks, recent works have
considered where and how the feature sharing should happen
in the encoder. We discuss such sharing strategies in the
following sections.
2.2.1 Cross-Stitch Networks
Cross-stitch networks [5] shared the activations amongst
all single-task networks in the encoder. Assume we are
given two activation maps xA;xBat a particular layer, that
belong to tasks AandBrespectively. A learnable linear
combination of these activation maps is applied, before
feeding the transformed result ~xA;~xBto the next layer in the
single-task networks. The transformation is parameterized
by learnable weights , and can be expressed as
~xA
~xB
=AAAB
BABBxA
xB
: (1)
As illustrated in Figure 4, this procedure is repeated at
multiple locations in the encoder. By learning the weights
, the network can decide the degree to which the featuresare shared between tasks. In practice, we are required to
pre-train the single-task networks, before stitching them
together, in order to maximize the performance. A disadvan-
tage of cross-stitch networks is that the size of the network
increases linearly with the number of tasks. Furthermore, it
is not clear where the cross-stitch units should be inserted
in order to maximize their effectiveness. Sluice networks [6]
extended this work by also supporting the selective sharing
of subspaces and skip connections.
2.2.2 Neural Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction
Neural Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction CNNs
(NDDR-CNNs) [7] used a similar architecture with cross-
stitch networks (see Figure 4). However, instead of utilizing
a linear combination to fuse the activations from all single-
task networks, a dimensionality reduction mechanism is
employed. First, features with the same spatial resolution
in the single-task networks are concatenated channel-wise.
Second, the number of channels is reduced by processing
the features with a 1 by 1 convolutional layer, before feeding
the result to the next layer. The convolutional layer allows
to fuse activations across all channels. Differently, cross-
stitch networks only allow to fuse activations from channels
that share the same index. The NDDR-CNN behaves as a
cross-stitch network when the non-diagonal elements in the
weight matrix of the convolutional layer are zero.
Due to their similarity with cross-stitch networks,
NDDR-CNNs are prone to the same problems. First, there
is a scalability concern when dealing with a large number
of tasks. Second, NDDR-CNNs involve additional design
choices, since we need to decide where to include the NDDR
layers. Finally, both cross-stitch networks and NDDR-CNNs
only allow to use limited local information (i.e. small re-
ceptive ﬁeld) when fusing the activations from the different
single-task networks. We hypothesize that this is subopti-
mal because the use of sufﬁcient context is very important
during encoding – as already shown for the tasks of image
classiﬁcation [58] and semantic segmentation [59], [60], [61].
This is backed up by certain decoder-focused architectures
in Section 2.3 that overcome the limited receptive ﬁeld by
predicting the tasks at multiple scales and by sharing the
features repeatedly at every scale.
2.2.3 Multi-Task Attention Networks
Multi-Task Attention Networks (MTAN) [8] used a shared
backbone network in conjunction with task-speciﬁc atten-
tion modules in the encoder (see Figure 5). The shared back-
bone extracts a general pool of features. Then, each task-
speciﬁc attention module selects features from the general
pool by applying a soft attention mask. The attention mech-
anism is implemented using regular convolutional layers
and a sigmoid non-linearity. Since the attention modules
are small compared to the backbone network, the MTAN
model does not suffer as severely from the scalability issues
that are typically associated with cross-stitch networks and
NDDR-CNNs. However, similar to the fusion mechanism in
the latter works, the MTAN model can only use limited local
information to produce the attention mask.