10
TABLE 1: A qualitative comparison between task balancing techniques. First, we consider whether a method balances the
loss magnitudes ( Balance Magnitudes ) and/or the pace at which tasks are learned ( Balance Learning ). Second, we show
what tasks are prioritized during the training stage ( Prioritize ). Third, we show whether the method requires access to
the task-speciﬁc gradients ( Grads Required ). Fourth, we consider whether the tasks gradients are enforced to be non-
conﬂicting ( Non-Competing Grads ). Finally, we consider whether the proposed method requires additional tuning, e.g.
manually choosing the weights, KPIs, etc. ( No Extra T uning ). For a detailed description of each technique see Section 3.
Method Balance
MagnitudesBalance
LearningPrioritize Grads
RequiredNon-Competing
GradsNo Extra
T uningMotivation
Uncertainty [19] X Low Noise X Homoscedastic uncertainty
GradNorm [20] X X X X Balance learning and magnitudes
DWA [8] X Balance learning
DTP [21] Difﬁcult Prioritize difﬁcult tasks
MGDA [22] X X X X X Pareto Optimum
be decided for each case individually. (2) We also ﬁnd
commonalities between the described methods, e.g. uncer-
tainty weighting, GradNorm and MGDA opted to balance
the loss magnitudes as part of their learning strategy. In
Section 4.4, we provide extensive ablation studies under
more common datasets or task dictionaries to verify what
task balancing strategies are most useful to improve the
multi-tasking performance, and under which circumstances.
(3) A number of works (e.g. DWA, DTP) still require careful
manual tuning of the initial hyperparameters, which can
limit their applicability when dealing with a larger number
of tasks.
3.2 Other Approaches
The task balancing works in Section 3.1 can be plugged
into most existing multi-task architectures to regulate the
task learning. Another group of works also tried to regulate
the training of multi-task networks, albeit for more speciﬁc
setups. We touch upon several of these approaches here.
Note that, some of these concepts can be combined with
task balancing strategies too.
Zhao et al. [26] empirically found that tasks with gra-
dients pointing in the opposite direction can cause the
destructive interference of the gradient. This observation is
related to the update rule in Equation 5. They proposed to
add a modulation unit to the network in order to alleviate
the competing gradients issue during training.
Liu et al. [24] considered a speciﬁc multi-task architec-
ture where the feature space is split into a shared and a task-
speciﬁc part. They argue that the shared features should
contain more common information, and no information that
is speciﬁc to a particular task only. The network weights
are regularized by enforcing this prior. More speciﬁcally, an
adversarial approach is used to avoid task-speciﬁc features
from creeping into the shared representation. Similarly, [18],
[25] added an adversarial loss to the single-task gradients in
order to make them statistically indistinguishable from each
other in the shared parts of the network.
Chen et al. [29] proposed gradient sign dropout, a modu-
lar layer that can be plugged into any network with multiple
gradient signals. Following MGDA, the authors argue that
conﬂicts in the weight update arise when the gradient
values of the different learning signals have opposite signs.
Gradient sign dropout operates by choosing the sign of the
gradient based on the distribution of the gradient values,and masking out the gradient values with opposite sign. It
is shown that the method has several desirable properties,
and increases performance and robustness compared to
competing works.
Finally, some works relied on heuristics to balance the
tasks. Sanh et al. [27] trained the network by randomly
sampling a single task for the weight update during every
iteration. The sampling probabilities were set proportionally
to the available amount of training data for every task. Raffel
et al. [28] used temperature scaling to balance the tasks. So
far, however, both procedures were used in the context of
natural language processing.
4 E XPERIMENTS
This section provides an extensive comparison of the previ-
ously discussed methods. First, we describe the experimen-
tal setup in Section 4.1. We cover the used datasets, methods,
evaluation criteria and training setup, so the reader can
easily give interpretation to the obtained results. Section 4.2
presents a general overview of the results, allowing us to
identify several overall trends. Section 4.3 compares the
MTL architectures in more detail, while the task balancing
strategies are considered in Section 4.4. We refer the reader
to the supplementary materials for qualitative results.
4.1 Experimental Setup
4.1.1 Datasets
Our experiments were conducted on two popular dense-
labeling benchmarks, i.e. NYUD-v2 [73] and PASCAL [74].
We selected the datasets to provide us with a diverse pair
of settings, allowing us to scrutinize the advantages and
disadvantages of the methods under consideration. We ad-
ditionally took into account what datasets were used in the
original works. Both datasets are described in more detail
below.
The PASCAL dataset [74] is a popular benchmark for
dense prediction tasks. We use the split from PASCAL-
Context [75] which has annotations for semantic segmen-
tation, human part segmentation and semantic edge detec-
tion. Additionally, we consider the tasks of surface normals
prediction and saliency detection. The annotations were dis-
tilled by [18] using pre-trained state-of-the-art models [76],
[77]. The optimal dataset F-measure ( odsF ) [78] is used to