1
Multi-Task Learning for Dense Prediction Tasks:
A Survey
Simon Vandenhende, Stamatios Georgoulis, Wouter Van Gansbeke,
Marc Proesmans, Dengxin Dai and Luc Van Gool
Abstract —With the advent of deep learning, many dense prediction tasks, i.e. tasks that produce pixel-level predictions, have seen
signiﬁcant performance improvements. The typical approach is to learn these tasks in isolation, that is, a separate neural network is
trained for each individual task. Y et, recent multi-task learning (MTL) techniques have shown promising results w.r.t. performance,
computations and/or memory footprint, by jointly tackling multiple tasks through a learned shared representation. In this survey, we
provide a well-rounded view on state-of-the-art deep learning approaches for MTL in computer vision, explicitly emphasizing on dense
prediction tasks. Our contributions concern the following. First, we consider MTL from a network architecture point-of-view. We include
an extensive overview and discuss the advantages/disadvantages of recent popular MTL models. Second, we examine various
optimization methods to tackle the joint learning of multiple tasks. We summarize the qualitative elements of these works and explore
their commonalities and differences. Finally, we provide an extensive experimental evaluation across a variety of dense prediction
benchmarks to examine the pros and cons of the different methods, including both architectural and optimization based strategies.
Index Terms —Multi-Task Learning, Dense Prediction Tasks, Pixel-Level Tasks, Optimization, Convolutional Neural Networks.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
OVER the last decade, neural networks have shown
impressive results for a multitude of tasks, such as
semantic segmentation [1], instance segmentation [2] and
monocular depth estimation [3]. Traditionally, these tasks
are tackled in isolation, i.e. a separate neural network is
trained for each task. Yet, many real-world problems are
inherently multi-modal. For example, an autonomous car
should be able to segment the lane markings, detect all
instances in the scene, estimate their distance and trajectory,
etc., in order to safely navigate itself in its surroundings.
Similarly, an intelligent advertisement system should be
able to detect the presence of people in its viewpoint,
understand their gender and age group, analyze their ap-
pearance, track where they are looking at, etc., in order to
provide personalized content. At the same time, humans
are remarkably good at solving many tasks concurrently.
Biological data processing appears to follow a multi-tasking
strategy too: instead of separating tasks and tackling them
in isolation, different processes seem to share the same early
processing layers in the brain (see V1 in macaques [4]). The
aforementioned observations have motivated researchers to
develop generalized deep learning models that given an
Simon Vandenhende, Wouter Van Gansbeke and Marc
Proesmans are with the Center for Processing Speech and
Images, Department Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven. E-mail:
fsimon.vandenhende,wouter.vangansbeke,marc.proesmans g@kuleuven.be
Stamatios Georgoulis and Dengxin Dai are with the Computer
Vision Lab, Department Electrical Engineering, ETH Zurich. E-mail:
fgeorgous,daidg@ee.ethz.ch
Luc Van Gool is with both the Center for Processing Speech and
Images, KU Leuven and the Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich. E-mail:
vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch
Manuscript received September X, 2020input can infer all desired task outputs.
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [30] aims to improve such
generalization by leveraging domain-speciﬁc information
contained in the training signals of related tasks. In the deep
learning era, MTL translates to designing networks capable
of learning shared representations from multi-task supervi-
sory signals. Compared to the single-task case, where each
individual task is solved separately by its own network,
such multi-task networks bring several advantages to the
table. First, due to their inherent layer sharing, the resulting
memory footprint is substantially reduced. Second, as they
explicitly avoid to repeatedly calculate the features in the
shared layers, once for every task, they show increased
inference speeds. Most importantly, they have the potential
for improved performance if the associated tasks share
complementary information, or act as a regularizer for one
another.
Scope. In this survey, we study deep learning approaches
for MTL in computer vision. We refer the interested reader
to [31] for an overview of MTL in other application domains,
such as natural language processing [32], speech recog-
nition [33], bioinformatics [34], etc. Most importantly, we
emphasize on solving multiple pixel-level ordense prediction
tasks , rather than multiple image-level classiﬁcation tasks, a
case that has been mostly under-explored in MTL. Tackling
multiple dense prediction tasks differs in several aspects
from solving multiple classiﬁcation tasks. First, as jointly
learning multiple dense prediction tasks is governed by the
use of different loss functions, unlike classiﬁcation tasks
that mostly use cross-entropy losses, additional consider-
ation is required to avoid a scenario where some tasks
overwhelm the others during training. Second, opposed
to image-level classiﬁcation tasks, dense prediction tasks
can not be directly predicted from a shared global image
representation [35], which renders the network design morearXiv:2004.13379v3  [cs.CV]  24 Jan 2021