16
lower performance compared to GradNorm ( +0:02% vs
+1:45% ). MGDA only updates the weights along directions
that are common among all task-speciﬁc gradients. The
results suggest that it is better to allow some competition
between the task-speciﬁc gradients in the shared layers, as
this could help to avoid local minima.
Finally, we conclude that the use of ﬁxed loss weights op-
timized with a grid search still outperforms several existing
task balancing methods. In particular, the solution obtained
with ﬁxed uniform weights outperforms the models trained
with uncertainty weighting, MGDA and DWA on both the
semantic segmentation and depth estimation tasks.
PASCAL. The task balancing techniques are compared on
PASCAL in Table 5d. We ﬁnd that a grid-search on the
weight space works better than the use of automated task
balancing procedures from Section 3. A similar observation
was made by [18]. We hypothesize that this is due to the
imbalance between the optimal parameters, e.g. the weight
for the edge detection loss is 100 times higher than for the
semantic segmentation loss. Uncertainty weighting reports
the highest performance losses on the distilled tasks, i.e.
normals and saliency. This is because uncertainty weighting
assigns a smaller weight to tasks with higher homoscedastic
uncertainty. Differently, MGDA fails to properly learn the
edge detection task. This is another indication (cf. NYUD-
v2 results) that avoiding competing gradients by only back
propagating along a common direction in the shared layers
does not necessarily improve performance. This is partic-
ularly the case for the edge detection task on PASCAL
because of two reasons. First, the edge detection loss has
a much smaller magnitude compared to the other tasks.
Second, when the edge annotations are converted into seg-
ments they provide an over-segmentation of the image. As
a consequence, the loss gradient of the edge detection task
often conﬂicts with other tasks since they have a smoother
gradient. Because of this, MGDA prefers to mask out the
gradient from the edge detection task by assigning it a
smaller weight. Finally, GradNorm does not report higher
performance when compared against uniform weighting.
We hypothesize that this is due to the re-normalization of
the loss weights during the optimization. The latter does
not work well when the optimal loss magnitudes are very
imbalanced.
Hyperparameters. We use the performance proﬁle from Fig-
ure 10c to analyze the hyperparameter sensitivity of the task
balancing methods on NYUD-v2. The used hyperparame-
ters are the same as deﬁned before (see Table 4). GradNorm
is the only technique that outperforms training a separate
model for each task. However, when less effort is spent to
tune the hyperparameters of the single-task models, all task
balancing techniques result in improved performance. This
observation explains the increased performance relative to
the single-task case reported by prior works [19], [20], [22].
Again, we stress the importance of carefully training the
single-task baselines.
Second, as before, the MTL models seem more robust
to hyperparameter changes compared to the single-task
networks. In particular, the performance drops slower when
using less optimal hyperparameter settings in the MTL case.
Finally, ﬁxed loss weighting and uncertainty weighting
are most robust against hyperparameter changes. Thesetechniques report high performance for a large number of
hyperparameter settings. For example, out of the top-20%
best models, 40% of those were trained with uncertainty
weighting.
Discussion. We evaluated the task balancing strategies from
Section 3.1 under different settings. The methods were
compared to selecting the loss weights by a grid-search
procedure. Surprisingly, in our case, we found that grid-
search is competitive or better compared to existing task
balancing techniques. Also, a number of techniques per-
formed worse than anticipated. Gong et al. [37] obtained
similar results with ours, albeit only for a few loss balancing
strategies. Also, Maninis et al. [18] found that performing a
grid search for the weights could outperform a state-of-the-
art loss balancing scheme. Based on these works and our
own ﬁndings, we argue that the optimization in MTL could
beneﬁt from further investigation (see also Section 3.1.6).
Still existing task balancing techniques can be useful to
train MTL networks. A grid search on the weight space
becomes intractable when tackling large number of tasks.
In this case, we can fallback to existing task balancing tech-
niques to set the task weights. Furthermore, when dealing
with noisy annotations, uncertainty weighting can help to
automatically readjust the weights on the noisy tasks.
4.5 Limitations
We performed an extensive comparison of different MTL
architectures and optimization strategies. This led to a num-
ber of important observations for each group of works.
Undoubtedly, there are several aspects of the problem that
fall outside the scope of our experimental analysis. We
brieﬂy discuss some of these limitations below.
Joint architecture and optimization exploration. The ar-
chitectures and optimization strategies have been studied
orthogonal to each other. However, the interaction between
these two design spaces could be further examined in order
to construct MTL systems at the level of a joint architecture-
optimizer space.
Inﬂuence data. The tasks and training examples themselves
play an important role in the optimization, e.g. uncertainty
weighting works well when there are tasks with higher ho-
moscedastic uncertainty. Thus, it would be useful to analyze
what properties of the data are most important for the MTL
setup. For example, such an analysis could be used to tune
the optimization scheme to the needs of a speciﬁc setting.
Hyperparameter robustness. The performance proﬁles
showed that the results strongly depend on the used hy-
perparameters. Interestingly, we found that some MTL al-
gorithms are more robust against changes in the hyperpa-
rameter settings than others. This behavior could be further
investigated.
5 R ELATED DOMAINS
So far, we focused on the application of MTL to jointly solve
multiple vision tasks under a fully-supervised setting. In
this section, we consider the MTL setup from a more gen-
eral point-of-view, and analyze its connection with several
related domains. The latter could potentially be combined
with the MTL setup and improve it, or vice versa.