Table 3: ROC AUC for multitask and single task NAMs on COMPAS dataset, broken down by gender. Each cell
contains the mean AUC one standard deviation obtained via 5-fold cross validation. Higher AUCs are better.
Model COMPAS Women COMPAS Men COMPAS Combined
Single Task NAM 0.7160.026 0.7350.009 0.7370.010
Multitask NAM 0.7230.019 0.7370.009 0.7390.010
Multitask Recidivism Prediction: In some settings multitask learning can increase accuracy and
intelligibility by learning task-speciﬁc shape plots that expose task-speciﬁc patterns in the data that
would not be learned by single task learning. We reformulate COMPAS as a multitask problem where
recidivism prediction for men and women are treated as separate tasks on a NAM with two outputs.
Indeed, we ﬁnd that a multitask NAM reveals different relationships between race, charge degree,
and recidivism risk for men and women while achieving slightly higher overall accuracy.
The right column of Figure 10 displays a selection of shape plots learned for a multitask NAM trained
on the same data as the single task NAM but with Male and Female as separate output tasks. (The
remaining MTL shape plots are similar for the two genders, reinforcing that these are strongly related
tasks, but we omit them for brevity.) The race shape plot in the multitask NAM shows a different
pattern of racial bias for each gender. The curve for men looks similar to that of the single task NAM
(which is expected because men make up 81% of the data), but the curve for women suggests that
recidivism risk is lower for Black women and higher for Caucasian and Hispanic women than for
their male counterparts. The multitask shape plots also reveal that charge degree is almost twice as
important for women as it is for men. The straightforward extension of NAMs to the multitask setting
offers a useful modelling technique not currently available with tree-based GAMs.
5 Related Work
Generalized Additive Neural Networks (GANNs) [ 29] are somewhat similar to the NAMs we propose
here. Like NAMs, GANNs used a restriction in the neural net architecture to force it to learn additive
functions of individual features. GANNs, however, predate deep learning and use a single hidden
layer with typically only 1-5 hidden units. Furthermore, GANNs did not use backpropagation [ 37],
required human-in-the-loop evaluation and were not successful in training accurate or scalable GAMs
with neural nets. See Section A.7 for a more detailed overview of GANNs.
In contrast, NAMs in this paper beneﬁt from the advances in deep learning. They use a large number
of hidden units and multiple hidden layers per input feature subnet to allow more complex, more
accurate shape functions to be learned. Furthermore, NAMs use novel ExU hidden units to allow
subnets to learn the more non-linear functions often required for accurate additive models, and then
form an ensemble of these nets to provide uncertainty estimates, further improve accuracy and reduce
the high-variance that can result from encouraging the model to learn highly non-linear functions.
Prior to NAMs, the state-of-the-art in high-accuracy, interpretable generalized additive models [ 12,
14] are the GAM [ 23] and G A2M [24] based on regularized boosted decision trees which were
successfully applied to healthcare datasets [ 5]. We compare the accuracy of NAMs to these models
in Section 3. We note that pairwise interactions, similar to G A2Ms, can be easily added to NAMs –
GA2Ms use a heuristic to compute the importance of each pairwise interaction by ﬁtting residual
from ﬁrst-order terms and select the k ( 10) most important interactions. We don’t consider such
interactions to keep the paper focused on additive modeling with neural nets.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
We present Neural Additive Models (NAMs), which combine the inherent interpretability of GAMs
with the expressivity of DNNs, opening the door for other advances in interpretability in deep learning.
NAMs are competitive in accuracy to GAMs and accurate alternatives to prevalent interpretable
models ( e.g., shallow trees) while being more easily extendable than existing GAMs due to their
differentiability and composability.
A promising direction for future work is improving the expressivity of NAMs by incorporating
higher-order feature interactions. While such interactions may result in more expressivity, they might
worsen the intelligibility of the learned NAM. Thus, ﬁnding a small number of crucial interactions
seems important for more expressive yet intelligible NAMs. Another interesting avenue is developing
9