Patient  
Context 
Demographics Lab Tests STL 
NAM 
MTL 
NAM 
Treatments Untreated 
Mortality Risk 
Total 
Treatmen t 
Benefit Mortality 
RiskPersonalized 
Treatment 
Benefits ⅀
⟨·,· ⟩
(a) Architecture
5 10 15 20
Neutrophil / Lymphocyte Ratio0.00.51.01.52.0Expected Benefit (Log-Odds)
20 40 60 80
Age (Years)0.00.51.01.52.0Expected Benefit (Log-Odds)
(b) Anti-Coagulants
5 10 15 20
Neutrophil / Lymphocyte Ratio0.00.51.01.52.0Expected Benefit (Log-Odds)
20 40 60 80
Age (Years)0.00.51.01.52.0Expected Benefit (Log-Odds) (c) NSAIDs
5 10 15 20
Neutrophil / Lymphocyte Ratio0.00.51.01.52.0Expected Benefit (Log-Odds)
20 40 60 80
Age (Years)0.00.51.01.52.0Expected Benefit (Log-Odds) (d) Glucocorticoids
Figure 7: Estimating personalized treatment beneﬁts for Covid-19 patients. NAMs provide a unique
combination of intelligibility and differentiability which make them suitable as a component in contextual
parameter generation (a). By applying NAMs in this way, we are able to estimate and interpret personalized
beneﬁts of medical treatments for Covid-19 patients (b-d).
Training and Evaluation . Feature nets in NAMs are selected amongst (1) DNNs containing 3
hidden layers with 64, 64 and 32 units and ReLU activation, and (2) single hidden layer NNs with
1024 ExU units and ReLU- 1activation. We perform 5-fold cross validation to evaluate the accuracy
of the learned models. To measure performance in Table 1, we use area under the precision-recall
curve (AUC) for binary classiﬁcation and root mean-squared error (RMSE) for regression. More
details about training and evaluation protocols can be found in Section A.5 in the appendix.
NAMs achieve comparable performance to EBMs on both classiﬁcation and regression datasets,
making them a competitive alternative to EBMs. Given this observation, we next look at some
additional capabilities of NAMs that are not available to EBMs or any tree-based learning methods.
4 Unique Capabilities of NAMs
4.1 Intelligible Parameter Generation: Leveraging the Differentiability of NAMs
Medical treatment protocols are designed to deliver treatments to patients who would most beneﬁt
from them. To optimize treatment protocols, we would like a model which provides an intelligible
map from patient information to an estimate of beneﬁt for each potential treatment. To accomplish
this, we use a NAM to generate parameters for personalized models of mortality risk given treatment
(Fig. 7). By training to match predicted mortality risk with observed mortality, the NAM encodes
expected treatment beneﬁts as a function of patient information. NAMs are the only nonlinear GAM
suitable for this application because NAMs are differentiable and can be trained via backpropagation.
Figure 7 shows a NAM trained to predict treatment beneﬁts for Covid-19 patients. We train the
model on deidentiﬁed data from over 3000 Covid-19 patients. The model suggests that the beneﬁts of
anti-coagulants and NSAIDs decrease with increased Neutrophil / Lymphocyte Ratio (NLR), while
the effectiveness of glucocorticoids slightly increases with increasing NLR. NLR is a marker of
inﬂammation and severe Covid-19; it is thus expected that anti-coagulants (which target a distinct
biomedical pathway) and NSAIDs (which are weaker) would not be as effective for patients with
elevated NLR. In contrast, glucocorticoids become more effective for patients with more inﬂammation.
This example shows the utility of a differentiable nonlinear additive model such as NAMs.
4.2 Multitask Learning
One advantage of NAMs is that they are easily extended to multitask learning (MTL) [ 4], whereas
MTL is not available in EBMs or in any major boosted-tree package. In NAMs, the composability
of neural nets makes it easy to train multiple subnets per feature. The model can learn task-speciﬁc
weights over these subnets to allow sharing of subnets (shape functions) across tasks while also
allowing subnets to differentiate between tasks as needed. However, it is unclear how to implement
MTL in EBMs and possibly requires changes to both the backﬁtting procedure and the information
gain rule in decision trees. Figure 8 shows a multitask NAM architecture that can jointly learn
different feature representations for each task while preserving the intelligibility and modularity
of NAMs. As we show, this can beneﬁt both accuracy and interpretability. We ﬁrst demonstrate
multitask NAMs on a synthetic dataset before showing their utility on a multitask formulation of the
COMPAS recidivism prediction dataset.
6