better activation functions or feature representations for easily expressing complex functions using
NAMs. For example, fourier features [ 43] have been shown to be highly effective for learning high
frequency functions via neural networks and might be useful for training expressive NAMs.
Extending and applying NAMs beyond tabular data to more complex tasks with high-dimensional
inputs, such as computer vision and language understanding, is an exciting avenue for future work.
While NAMs only use some of the expressivity of DNNs, one can imagine using NAMs in a real-
world pipeline where intelligibility is required for decision making from representation [ 36] (e.g.,
features learned from images, speech etc). Much of the existing interpretability work in deep learning
focuses on making learned representations interpretable. Also, NAMs can be used for interpretability
across multiple raw features ( e.g., multimodal inputs) where interpretability within a NAM network
can utilize existing interpretability methods in ML – recently CNN-LSTM based extension of NAMs
have already been developed for genomics [ 40] where the input to each NAM network was a one-hot
encoded DNA sequence (passed as an image). Overall, we believe that NAMs are likely to broaden
the use of inherently interpretable models in the deep learning community.
Broader Impact
Interpretability in AI systems might be desirable or necessary for various reasons – see [ 44] for an
overview; we discuss some of them in the context of NAMs below:
•Safeguarding against bias : NAMs can check whether training data is used in ways that result in
bias or discriminatory outcomes and can be easily corrected for bias to yield possibly more fair
models – e.g., Section 4.2.2 demonstrates this utility for recidivism risk prediction.
•Improving AI system design : NAMs allow developers to interrogate why it behaved in a certain
way ( e.g., tracking system malfunctions), and develop improvements – Section A.1 shows that
NAMs can explain seemingly anomalous results in healthcare as well as uncover problems that
might put some kinds of patients at risk and need correction before deploying the system.
•Adhering to regulatory standards or policy requirements : Interpretability of NAMs can be
important in enforcing legal rights surrounding a system – e.g., credit scores in the United States,
have a well-established “right to explanation”. NAMs can also enable individuals to contest model
outputs, e.g., challenging an unsuccessful loan application, based on the interpretations provided
by NAMs for a speciﬁc decision (Figure 5).
•Assessing risk, robustness, and vulnerability : This can be particularly important if an AI
system is deployed in a new environment, where we cannot be sure of its effectiveness – e.g.,
NAMs for fraud detection (Section A.2.2) can be analyzed to understand the risks involved or
how it might fail before deploying it to unseen customers.
•Giving users conﬁdence in the system : Interpretations from NAMs might provide users conﬁ-
dence that it works as intended – e.g., expensive house prices near metropolitan areas such as San
Francisco, as predicted by NAMs (Figure 6), is expected for a trustworthy model.
•Data-driven scientiﬁc discovery : NAMs can be applied in natural sciences – e.g., ecology [ 12],
medicine [ 13], astronomy [ 15]etc. – to obtain novel scientiﬁc insights and discoveries from
observational or simulated data [34, 45] while remaining scalable to the ever-increasing data.
There are also pitfalls associated with interpretability methods – NAMs are no exception. Different
contexts give rise to different interpretability needs – e.g., public have different expectations of
systems used in healthcare vs.recruitment [ 19]. Furthermore, AI system designs often need to
balance competing demands – e.g., to optimize the accuracy of a system or ensure fairness (NAMs
for making bail decisions with race feature “removed” may be less accurate but more fair). In many
critical decision-making areas – e.g., healthcare, justice, and public services – complex processes
have developed over time to provide safeguards, audit functions, or other forms of accountability.
NAMs may therefore be only the ﬁrst step in creating trustworthy systems. Those developing NAMs
must consider how their use ﬁts in the wider socio-technical context of its deployment
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Kevin Swersky for reviewing an early draft of the paper. We also thank Sarah
Tan for providing us with pre-processed versions of some of the datasets used in the paper. RA would
also like to thank Marlos C. Machado and Marc G. Bellemare for helpful discussions.
10