Neural Additive Models:
Interpretable Machine Learning with Neural Nets
Rishabh Agarwal
Google Research, Brain TeamLevi Melnick
Microsoft Research
Nicholas Frosst
CohereXuezhou Zhang
University of Wisconsin-MadisonBen Lengerich
MIT
Rich Caruana
Microsoft ResearchGeoffrey E. Hinton
Google Research, Brain Team
Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are powerful black-box predictors that have achieved
impressive performance on a wide variety of tasks. However, their accuracy comes
at the cost of intelligibility: it is usually unclear how they make their decisions.
This hinders their applicability to high stakes decision-making domains such as
healthcare. We propose Neural Additive Models (NAMs) which combine some of
the expressivity of DNNs with the inherent intelligibility of generalized additive
models. NAMs learn a linear combination of neural networks that each attend to a
single input feature. These networks are trained jointly and can learn arbitrarily
complex relationships between their input feature and the output. Our experiments
on regression and classiﬁcation datasets show that NAMs are more accurate than
widely used intelligible models such as logistic regression and shallow decision
trees. They perform similarly to existing state-of-the-art generalized additive
models in accuracy, but are more ﬂexible because they are based on neural nets
instead of boosted trees. To demonstrate this, we show how NAMs can be used
for multitask learning on synthetic data and on the COMPAS recidivism data due
to their composability, and demonstrate that the differentiability of NAMs allows
them to train more complex interpretable models for COVID-19. Source code is
available at neural-additive-models.github.io .
1 Introduction
While deep neural networks have achieved impressive results on tasks such as computer vision [17]
and language modeling [ 31], it is notoriously difﬁcult to understand how such networks make
predictions, and they are often considered as black-box models. This hinders their applicability to high-
stakes domains such as healthcare, ﬁnance and criminal justice. Various efforts have been made to
demystify the predictions of neural networks (NNs). For example, one family of methods, represented
by LIME [ 33], attempt to explain individual predictions of a neural network by approximating it
locally with interpretable models such as linear models and shallow trees2. However, these approaches
often fail to provide a global view of the model and their explanations often are not faithful to what
the original model computes or do not provide enough detail to understand the model’s behavior [ 35].
Correspondence to: Rishabh Agarwal < rishabhagarwal@google.com >, Levi Melnick
<lemeln@microsoft.com >, and Rich Caruana < rcaruana@microsoft.com >.
2Linear models, shallow decision trees and GAMs are interpretable only if the features they are trained on
are interpretable.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).