In this paper, we make restrictions on the structure of neural networks, which yields a family of
glass-box models called Neural Additive Models (NAMs), that are inherently interpretable while
suffering little loss in prediction accuracy when applied to tabular data. Methodologically, NAMs
belong to a model family called Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) [ 14]. GAMs have the form:
g(E[y]) =+f1(x1) +f2(x2) ++fK(xK) (1)
…..…..…... . .
. . .
Figure 1: NAM architecture for binary classiﬁcation. Each
input variable is handled by a different neural network. This
results in easily interpretable yet highly accurate models.where x= (x1; x2; :::; xK)is the input
withKfeatures,yis the target variable, g(:)
is the link function ( e.g., logistic function)
and eachfiis a univariate shape function
withE[fi] = 0 . Generalized linear models,
such as logistic regression, are a special form
of GAMs where each fiis restricted to be
linear.
NAMs learn a linear combination of net-
works that each attend to a single input fea-
ture: eachfiin(1)is parametrized by a
neural network. These networks are trained
jointly using backpropagation and can learn
arbitrarily complex shape functions. Inter-
preting NAMs is easy as the impact of a fea-
ture on the prediction does not rely on the
other features and can be understood by visu-
alizing its corresponding shape function ( e.g.,
plottingfi(xi)vs.xi). While interpretabil-
ity of NAMs may seem heuristic, the graphs
learned by NAMs are an exact description of
how NAMs compute a prediction.
Traditionally, GAMs were ﬁtted via iterative backﬁtting using smooth low-order splines, which reduce
overﬁtting and can be ﬁt analytically. More recently, GAMs [ 5] were ﬁtted with boosted decision
trees to improve accuracy and to allow GAMs to learn jumps in the feature shaping functions to better
match patterns seen in real data that smooth splines could not easily capture. This paper examines
using DNNs to ﬁt generalized additive models (NAMs) which provides the following advantages:
•NAMs introduce an expressive yet intelligible class of models to the deep learning (DL) commu-
nity, a much larger community than the one using tree-based GAMs.
•NAMs are likely to be combined with other DL methods in ways we don’t foresee. This is
important because a key drawback of deep learning is interpretability. For example, NAMs have
already been employed for survival analysis [46].
•NAMs, due to the ﬂexibility of NNs, can be easily extended to various settings problematic
for boosted decision trees. For example, extending boosted tree GAMs to multitask, multi-
class or multi-label learning requires signiﬁcant changes to how trees are trained, but is easily
accomplished with NAMs without requiring changes to how neural nets are trained due to their
composability (Section 4.2). Futhermore, the differentiability of NAMs allows them to train more
complex interpretable models for COVID-19 (Section 4.1).
•Graphs learned by NAMs are not just an explanation but an exact description of how NAMs
compute a prediction. As such, a decision-maker can easily interpret NAMs and understand
exactly how they make decisions. This would help harness the expressivity of neural nets on
high-stakes domains with intelligibility requirements, e.g., in-hospital mortality prediction [22].
•NAMs are more scalable as inference and training can be done on GPUs/TPUs or other specialized
hardware using the same toolkits developed for deep learning over the past decade – GAMs
currently cannot.
•Accurate GAMs [ 5] currently require millions of decision trees to ﬁt each shape function while
NAMs only use a small ensemble (2 - 100) of neural nets. Thus, NAMs are relatively much easier
to extend compared to GAMs.
2