Explained node
Sampling node
Original feature
Feature as explanation
(
a
)
(
b
)
(
c
)
Learning
Neural
Powerful
Deep
Neural
_
network
Neural
Deep
Prediction from GNNFigure 1: Sample neighbors of the explained red node; (b) Obtain ﬁnite numbers of features as explanations (the green part of the features
of the red node); (c) Present explanations to users.
data is a challenging task since it needs to combine both feature information of nodes as well as graph information together.
Currently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely used because of their powerful modeling capability with regard to
graphs. GNNs use neural networks to incorporate the feature information of nodes in a graph and as well as the structure
information and pass these messages through the edges of the graph in non-Euclidean domains. However, GNNs are noto-
riously difﬁcult to interpret, and their predictions are hard to explain, similar to that in DNNs. It is important to develop an
interpretation method for GNNs because it can improve the transparency of a GNN model and contribute to getting humans
to trust the model. Although there exists a large number of interpretation methods designed for DNNs, these methods are
not suited for GNN-model interpretation because they do not explicitly use the graph information but perform in Euclidean
domains.
Recently, GNNexplainer [9] was proposed. It can ﬁnd the subgraph and select features of the explained node as
explanations, but it mainly focuses on graph structures and not on ﬁnding useful features. An alternative idea is to use
LIME [3], which uses a linear explanation model to ﬁnd features as explanations for GNN. However, the performance of
LIME can be poor, because LIME does not take the graph structure information into account. Moreover, if the underlying
model is highly nonlinear even in the locality of the prediction, such as that in the case of GNN models, a linear explanation
model may not be able to produce faithful explanations.
In this paper, we propose another GNN explanation method based on LIME [3] in a nonlinear manner. More specif-
ically, we propose GraphLIME, a model-agnostic and nonlinear approach for providing locally faithful explanations for
GNN-based models in a subgraph, whose procedure with a toy explanation sample is shown brieﬂy in Figure 1. It samples
N-hop network neighbors of the node being explained and locally captures the nonlinear dependency between features
and predictions based on HSIC Lasso. GraphLIME is a simple yet effective interpretation method, which locally ﬁnds the
most representative features as explanations in a nonlinear manner. Note that GraphLIME can be treated as a nonlinear
graph-variant of the LIME method [3], which considers perturbation near the node being explained and applies a linear
interpretable model. Generally, Nonlinear explanation methods perform better than linear methods as shown in Figure
2. Through experiments on two real-world datasets, it is shown that the explanations of GraphLIME are of extraordinary
degree and more descriptive in comparison to the existing explanation methods.
2 Related Work
In this section, we brieﬂy review related work from two aspects. The ﬁrst one is the recent development of GNNs, the
second one is the review of interpretation methods for neural models.
2.1 Graph Neural Networks
Recently, there have been many studies on extending deep learning approaches for graph data. GNNs [10] recursively
incorporate the node feature information and structure information of a graph from the neighborhood into a neural network
2