and test accuracy were both above 70% and the difference in their test accuracy was more than 5%. Then, we obtained
explanations of the samples being explained by the explanation framework on two competing classiﬁers and recorded the
number of untrustworthy features appearing in the explanations for the two classiﬁers. Note that the better classiﬁer should
have fewer untrustworthy features in its explanations; therefore, we selected the classiﬁer with fewer untrustworthy features
as the better classiﬁer and compared this choice with the real better classiﬁer with higher test accuracy.
The goal of this experiment was to verify whether the explanation framework could guide users to identify better
models based on explanations from the explanation framework. Considering that users may not have time to examine a
large number of samples, let Bdonate the number of samples being explained, which they are willing to look at in order
to identify the better classiﬁer. We use Submodular Pick [3] to select Bsamples and present these samples to the users for
examining, Submodular Pick will be detailed in the Appendix.
We present the accuracy of selecting the real better classiﬁer as Bvaries from 5 to 30, averaged over 200 rounds,
in Figure 4. We compared the performance of GraphLIME, LIME, GNNexplainer, and omitted Greedy and Random
because they could not produce useful explanations as shown in the previous two experiments. Moreover, we also plotted
the accuracy curve for random choice. These results demonstrate that the proposed method GraphLIME can be used to
perform model selection and that it outperforms LIME and GNNexplainer, which are only slightly better than the random
choice. And it is worthy to note that the performance of GraphLIME also improved With the increase in number of
presented instances.
5 Conclusion
Most of the explanation methods for neural models are designed for general neural networks, while only few works exist
for GNNs. In this paper, we presented a model-agnostic local interpretable explanation framework for GNN, which we
call GraphLIME. It is able to leverage the feature information of the N-hop network neighbors of the node being explained
and their predicted labels in a local subgraph, utilize the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion Lasso (HSIC Lasso),
which is a nonlinear interpretable model for capturing the nonlinear dependency between features and predicted outputs,
and produce ﬁnite features as the explanations for a particular prediction. Experiments on two real-world graph datasets
for two kinds of GNN models demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed framework. It could ﬁlter noisy features and
select the real informative features, guide users in ascertaining trust in predictions, and help users to identify the better
classiﬁer.
In the future, we would mainly focus on two aspects of the explanation for GNN models. Firstly, we will investigate
how to extend the proposed GraphLIME so that it is able to explain the structural graph patterns and ﬁnd the most important
subgraph structure that inﬂuences the predictions from the GNN model. Secondly, the current framework can only explain
the prediction for a single target node; therefore, we will investigate how to provide an explanation for a set of nodes,
where all the nodes belong to one class from a given GNN model in a nonlinear manner.
11