GraphLIME:Local Interpretable Model Explanations
for Graph Neural Networks
Qiang Huang1,Makoto Yamada2;3, Yuan Tian1, Dinesh Singh3, Yi Chang1
1Jilin University,2Kyoto University,3RIKEN AIP,
huangqiang18@mails.jlu.edu.cn, myamada@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, yuantian@jlu.edu.cn
dinesh.singh@riken.jp, yichang@jlu.edu.cn
September 29, 2020
Abstract
Graph structured data has wide applicability in various domains such as physics, chemistry, biology, computer vision,
and social networks, to name a few. Recently, graph neural networks (GNN) were shown to be successful in effectively
representing graph structured data because of their good performance and generalization ability. GNN is a deep learning
based method that learns a node representation by combining speciﬁc nodes and the structural/topological information of a
graph. However, like other deep models, explaining the effectiveness of GNN models is a challenging task because of the
complex nonlinear transformations made over the iterations. In this paper, we propose GraphLIME, a local interpretable
model explanation for graphs using the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) Lasso, which is a nonlinear fea-
ture selection method. GraphLIME is a generic GNN-model explanation framework that learns a nonlinear interpretable
model locally in the subgraph of the node being explained. More speciﬁcally, to explain a node, we generate a nonlinear
interpretable model from its N-hop neighborhood and then compute the Kmost representative features as the explanations
of its prediction using HSIC Lasso. Through experiments on two real-world datasets, the explanations of GraphLIME are
found to be of extraordinary degree and more descriptive in comparison to the existing explanation methods.
1 Introduction
Deep Neural Network (DNN) is essentially a new machine learning algorithm based on discriminant model. DNN can
model for complex and nonlinear problems and learn the underlying features of data to obtain more abstract features,
which can improve the model’s capability for prediction or classiﬁcation. It has a large number of applications such as
image recognition, automatic speech recognition, disease diagnosis, etc [1]
Although the high degree of nonlinearity gives DNNs a powerful model representation capability, DNN is a black-box
model, which make the model and its predictions hard to be interpreted. Also, people usually will not use a model or a
prediction if they do not trust it. For example, if there is a medical diagnosis system that has high accuracy but can not
present faithful explanations for its decisions, doctors will not use it. Therefore, it is very important to explore what a DNN
model learns from data and why it takes a particular decision in a way that humans can understand. Recent works aimed
at interpreting general DNNs mainly focus on two research routes. One approach is to locally approximate models with a
simple and interpretable model such as linear regression, which can itself be probed for explanations [2, 3]. The other one
is to examine models for relevant components such as identifying the most representative features in the input data [4, 5, 6]
or inﬂuential input instances [7, 8].
In many real-world cases, there are considerable amounts of data without regular spatial structures, called non-Euclidean
data, and they can be naturally represented as a graph, for example, graph data extracted from social networks, citation
networks, electronic transactions, protein structures, molecular structures, and so on. Thus, modeling and analyzing graph
1arXiv:2001.06216v2  [cs.LG]  27 Sep 2020