and obtain node embeddings for subsequent machine learning tasks. GraphSAGE [11] is a spatial based and general induc-
tive framework that can generate a node’s embeddings by essentially assembling a node’s neighborhood information from
the node’s local neighborhood, and its aggregation function must be invariant to permutations of node orderings. Novel
control variate-based stochastic approximation algorithms for GCN [12] have been proposed, which utilize the historical
activations of nodes as a control variate and allow sampling an arbitrarily small neighbor size. Graph Attention Network
(GAT) [13] is one type of GNNs, which seeks an aggregation function to fuse the neighboring nodes, random walks, and
candidate models in graphs to learn a new representation. The main idea of GATs is to employ attention mechanisms that
assign larger weights to the more important nodes, walks, or models. Gated Attention Network (GaAN) [14] is a new
network architecture that uses a convolutional sub-network to compute a soft gate at each attention head to control its
importance, and the gated attention can modulate the amount of attended content via the introduced gates. Graph Attention
Model (GAM) [15] processes only a portion of the graph by adaptively selecting a sequence of ”informative” nodes and is
equipped with an external memory component, which allows it to integrate the information gathered from different parts
of the graph. Dual Graph Convolutional Network [16] was proposed as a simple and scalable semi-supervised learning
method for graph-structured data in which only a very small portion of the training data are labeled, and it jointly considers
local and global consistency assumptions.
2.2 Interpretability and Explanations for Neural Networks
There are two main families of models to provide interpretability and explanations for neural models. The ﬁrst family
of models focuses on ﬁnding a simple and proxy model to interpret the model being explained in a model-agnostic way.
For example, LIME [3] has been proposed to explain the predictions of any classiﬁer by learning an interpretable linear
model locally around the prediction. Black Box Explanations through Transparent Approximations (BETA) [2] is another
model-agnostic framework to explain the behavior of the model being explained by simultaneously optimizing for ﬁdelity
to the original model and interpretability of the explanation. DeepRED [17] was proposed to extract rules from deep neural
networks and generate explanations for predictions, and ANN-DT [18] was proposed to extract binary decision trees from
neural networks, it is an interpretable model to interpret the main model.
The second family of models focuses on the relevant aspects of computation in the neural model being explained.
Erhan et al. [19] proposed to inspect feature gradients to ﬁnd good qualitative interpretations of high-level features repre-
sented by neural models. DeepLIFT (Deep Learning Important FeaTures) [20] was proposed to enable interpretability of
neural networks by comparing the activation of each neuron to its ’reference activation’ and assigning contribution scores
according to the difference. The method proposed in [6] uses two fundamental axioms and a standard gradient operator to
attribute the prediction of a deep network to its input features. It is worth noting that these methods produce a ”saliency
map” [21], which reveals the important features of input data. However, recent works have shown that saliency map will
give rise to misleading results in some instances [22] and can lead to issues such as gradient saturation in some cases. This
issue is especially grievous for discrete inputs such as graph adjacency matrices. Therefore, these methods are not suitable
for interpreting GNNs, and this is what we do in this paper. Instead of creating surrogate models, which are inherently
interpretable, some methods has been proposed to identify the patterns of input data and ﬁnd inﬂuential samples for rel-
evant information [7, 8]. However, few studies have focused on the structural information of graphs with these kinds of
interpretation methods, although the relations between nodes in the graph are critical to the predictions from deep models.
Recently, Ying et al. [9] proposed to utilize mutual information to ﬁnd a subgraph with associated features for interpreting
GNN models; however, this method depends on discrete optimization, and the optimization is hard and only consider the
predicted label of the node being explained. The proposed GraphLIME method utilizes predicted labels from both the node
being explained and its neighbors, which enables it to capture more local information around the node and present a ﬁnite
number of features as explanations in an intuitional way.
3