Figure 2: A toy sample to present the advantage of nonlinear explanation model comparing to linear explanation model. Assuming that
the purple and virescent background represent the GNN’s complex decision function f, which is a black box to explanation model, the
yellow and green ﬁlledCircle represent samples which belong to two different classes. When we use linear explanation model (the blue
dashed line) to approximate the decision function flocally, the linear model might make some mistakes due to its linearity, especially
for the complex neural models. However, we can approximate the decision function fprecisely if we use a nonlinear explanation model
(the red dashed line) and then identify some informative features as explanations.
3 Proposed Method: GraphLIME
In this paper, we propose Local Interpretable Model Explanation for Graph Neural Networks (GraphLIME), which is a
nonlinear model-agnostic explanation framework for GNNs. The goal of the proposed explanation framework is to identify
a nonlinear interpretable model over the neighbors of the node being explained in a subgraph, which are locally faithful to
the node’s prediction, and interpret the GNN model, which is powerful but hard to explain in an intuitional manner.
3.1 Formulation of GraphLIME Explainer
Formally, letX Rdbe the domain of a vector x. For each node viin a graph, we have an associated feature vector
xi, where each feature is extracted from the real world and can be understood by humans. We deﬁne an explanation as a
modelg2G, whereGis a class of interpretable models such as linear regressions, decision trees etc. In other words, a
modelg2Gcan provide intuitional interpretations in an interpretable manner. The explanation model class Gused in
this paper is Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion Lasso (HSIC Lasso) [23, 24, 25], which is a kernel based nonlinear
interpretable feature selection algorithm. We will discuss more details about this in a later subsection. Let the domain of
the explanation model g2Galso beXRd, which means that gacts over the original features that are understandable.
Let the GNN model being explained be denoted by f:Rd!R. In a classiﬁcation problem, f(xi)denotes the
probability (or binary indicator) that the instance xibelongs to a certain class. Let vdenote the node whose prediction
4