Mask Scoring R-CNN
Zhaojin Huang†∗Lichao Huang‡Yongchao Gong‡Chang Huang‡Xinggang Wang†⋆
†Institute of AI, School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
‡Horizon Robotics Inc.
{zhaojinhuang,xgwang }@hust.edu.cn {lichao.huang,yongchao.gong,chang.huang }@horizon.ai
Abstract
Letting a deep network be aware of the quality of its own
predictions is an interesting yet important problem. In the
task of instance segmentation, the conﬁdence of instance
classiﬁcation is used as mask quality score in most in-
stance segmentation frameworks. However, the mask qual-
ity, quantiﬁed as the IoU between the instance mask and its
ground truth, is usually not well correlated with classiﬁca-
tion score. In this paper, we study this problem and pro-
pose Mask Scoring R-CNN which contains a network block
to learn the quality of the predicted instance masks. The
proposed network block takes the instance feature and the
corresponding predicted mask together to regress the mask
IoU. The mask scoring strategy calibrates the misalignment
between mask quality and mask score, and improves in-
stance segmentation performance by prioritizing more ac-
curate mask predictions during COCO AP evaluation. By
extensive evaluations on the COCO dataset, Mask Scoring
R-CNN brings consistent and noticeable gain with differ-
ent models and outperforms the state-of-the-art Mask R-
CNN. We hope our simple and effective approach will pro-
vide a new direction for improving instance segmentation.
The source code of our method is available at https://
github.com/zjhuang22/maskscoring_rcnn .
1. Introduction
Deep networks are dramatically driving the develop-
ment of computer vision, leading to a series of state-of-
the-art in tasks including classiﬁcation [ 22,16,35], ob-
ject detection [ 12,17,32,27,33,34], semantic segmen-
tation [ 28,4,37,18]etc. From the development of deep
learning in computer vision, we can observe that the ability
of deep networks is gradually growing from making image-
level prediction [ 22] to region/box-level prediction [ 12],
pixel-level prediction [ 28] and instance/mask-level predic-
tion [ 15]. The ability of making ﬁne-grained predictions re-
∗The work was done when Zhaojin Huang was an intern in Horizon
Robotics Inc.⋆Corresponding author.quires not only more detailed labels but also more delicate
network designing.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of instance seg-
mentation, which is a natural next step of object detec-
tion to move from coarse box-level instance recognition
to precise pixel-level classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, this work
presents a novel method to score the instance segmentation
hypotheses, which is quite important for instance segmen-
tation evaluation. The reason lies in that most evaluation
metrics are deﬁned according to the hypothesis scores, and
more precise scores help to better characterize the model
performance. For example, precision-recall curves and av-
erage precision (AP) are often used for the challenging in-
stance segmentation dataset COCO [ 26]. If one instance
segmentation hypothesis is not properly scored, it might be
wrongly regarded as false positive or false negative, result-
ing in a decrease of AP.
However, in most instance segmentation pipelines, such
as Mask R-CNN [ 15] and MaskLab [ 3], the score of the
instance mask is shared with box-level classiﬁcation conﬁ-
dence, which is predicted by a classiﬁer applied on the pro-
posal feature. It is inappropriate to use classiﬁcation conﬁ-
dence to measure the mask quality since it only serves for
distinguishing the semantic categories of proposals, and is
not aware of the actual quality and completeness of the in-
stance mask. The misalignment between classiﬁcation con-
ﬁdence and mask quality is illustrated in Fig. 1, where in-
stance segmentation hypotheses get accurate box-level lo-
calization results and high classiﬁcation score, but the cor-
responding masks are inaccurate. Obviously, scoring the
masks using such classiﬁcation score tends to degrade the
evaluation results.
Unlike the previous methods that aim to obtain more
accurate instance localization or segmentation mask, our
method focuses on scoring the masks. To achieve this goal,
our model learns a score for each mask instead of using its
classiﬁcation score. For clarity, we call the learned score
mask score.
Inspired by the AP metric of instance segmentation that
1
6409