00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
0.5-0.6 0.6-0.7 0.7-0.8 0.8-0.9 0.9-1.0Score
MaskIoUMask R-CNN MS R-CNN
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 2. Comparisons of Mask R-CNN and our proposed MS R-CNN. (a) shows the results of Mask R-CNN, and the mask score has less
relationship with MaskIoU. (b) shows the results of MS R-CNN; we penalize every detection with a high score and a low MaskIoU, and
the mask score can correlate with MaskIoU better. (c) shows the quantitative results, where we average the score between each MaskIoU
interval; we can see that our method can have a better correspondence between score and MaskIoU.
plicit scores to measure the instance mask quality, they have
to use the averaged pixel-level classiﬁcation scores as an al-
ternative.
Both classes of the above methods do not take into con-
sideration the alignment between mask score and mask
quality. Due to the unreliability of mask score, a mask hy-
pothesis with higher IoU against ground truth is vulnerable
to be ranked with low priority if it has a low mask score. In
this case, the ﬁnal AP is consequently degraded.
2.2. Detection Score Correction
There are several methods focusing on correcting the
classiﬁcation score for the detection box, which has a sim-
ilar goal to our method. Tychsen-Smith et al . [36] pro-
pose Fitness NMS that corrects the detection score using the
IoU between the detected bounding boxes and their ground
truth. It formulates box IoU prediction as a classiﬁcation
task. Our method differs from this method in that we for-
mulate mask IoU estimation as a regression task. Jiang et
al. [19] propose IoU-Net that regressed box IoU directly,
and the predicted IoU is used for both NMS and bounding
box reﬁnement. In [ 5], Cheng et al. discuss the false posi-
tive samples and use a separated network for correcting the
score of such samples. SoftNMS [ 2] uses the overlap be-
tween two boxes to correct the low score box. Neumann
et al. [29] propose Relaxed Softmax to predict temperature
scaling factor value in standard softmax for safety-critical
pedestrian detection.
Unlike these methods that focus on bounding box level
detection, our method is designed for instance segmenta-
tion. The instance mask is further processed in our Mask-
IoU head so that the network can be aware of the complete-
ness of instance mask, and the ﬁnal mask score can reﬂect
the actual quality of the instance segmentation hypothesis.
It is a new direction for improving the performance of in-stance segmentation.
3. Method
3.1. Motivation
In the current Mask R-CNN framework, the score of a
detection ( i.e., instance segmentation) hypothesis is deter-
mined by the largest element in its classiﬁcation scores.
Due to the problems of background clutter, occlusion etc.,
it is possible that the classiﬁcation score is high but the
mask quality is low, as the examples shown in Fig. 1. To
quantitatively analyze this problem, we compare the vanilla
mask score from Mask R-CNN with the actual IoU between
the predicted mask and its ground truth mask (MaskIoU).
Speciﬁcally, we conduct experiments using Mask R-CNN
with ResNet-18 FPN on COCO 2017 validation dataset.
Then we select the detection hypotheses after Soft-NMS
with both MaskIoU and classiﬁcation scores larger than
0.5. The distribution of MaskIoU over classiﬁcation score
is shown in Fig. 2(a) and the average classiﬁcation score in
each MaskIoU interval is shown in blue in Fig. 2(c). These
ﬁgures show that classiﬁcation score and MaskIoU is not
well correlated in Mask R-CNN .
In most instance segmentation evaluation protocols, such
as COCO, a detection hypothesis with a low MaskIoU and
a high score is harmful. In many practical applications, it
is important to determine when the detection results can
be trusted and when they cannot [ 29]. These motivate
us to learn a calibrated mask score according to MaskIoU
for every detection hypothesis. Without loss of general-
ity, we work on the Mask R-CNN framework and propose
Mask Scoring R-CNN (MS R-CNN), a Mask R-CNN with
an additional MaskIoU head module that learns the Mask-
IoU aligned mask score. The predicted mask scores of our
framework are shown in Fig. 2(b) and the orange histogram
6411