Figure 1. Demonstrative cases of instance segmentation in which bounding box has a high overlap with ground truth and a high classiﬁcation
score while the mask is not good enough. The scores predicted by both Mask R-CNN and our proposed MS R-CNN are attached above
their corresponding bounding boxes. The left four images show good detection results with high classiﬁcation scores but low mask quality.
Our method aims at solving this problem. The rightmost image shows the case of a good mask with a high classiﬁcation score. Our method
will retrain the high score. As can be seen, scores predicted by our model can better interpret the actual mask quality.
uses pixel-level Intersection-over-Union (IoU) between the
predicted mask and its ground truth mask to describe in-
stance segmentation quality, we propose a network to learn
the IoU directly. In this paper, this IoU is denoted as Mask-
IoU. Once we obtain the predicted MaskIoU in the testing
phase, mask score is reevaluated by multiplying the pre-
dicted MaskIoU and classiﬁcation score. Thus, mask score
is aware of both semantic categories and the instance mask
completeness.
Learning MaskIoU is quite different from proposal clas-
siﬁcation or mask prediction, as it needs to “compare” the
predicted mask with object feature. Within the Mask R-
CNN framework, we implement a MaskIoU prediction net-
work named MaskIoU head. It takes both the output of
the mask head and RoI feature as input and is trained us-
ing a simple regression loss. We name the proposed model,
namely Mask R-CNN with MaskIoU head, as Mask Scoring
R-CNN (MS R-CNN). Extensive experiments with our MS
R-CNN have been conducted, and the results demonstrate
that our method provides consistent and noticeable perfor-
mance improvement attributing to the alignment between
mask quality and score.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are
highlighted as follows:
1. We present Mask Scoring R-CNN, the ﬁrst framework
that addresses the problem of scoring instance seg-
mentation hypothesis. It explores a new direction for
improving the performance of instance segmentation
models. By considering the completeness of instance
mask, the score of instance mask can be penalized if
it has high classiﬁcation score while the mask is not
good enough.
2. Our MaskIoU head is very simple and effective. Ex-
perimental results on the challenging COCO bench-
mark show that when using mask score from our MS
R-CNN rather than only classiﬁcation conﬁdence, the
AP improves consistently by about 1.5% with variousbackbone networks.
2. Related Work
2.1. Instance Segmentation
Current instance segmentation methods can be roughly
categorized into two classes. One is detection based meth-
ods and the other is segmentation based methods. Detection
based methods exploit the state-of-the-art detectors, such as
Faster R-CNN [ 33], R-FCN [ 8], to get the region of each
instance, and then predict the mask for each region. Pin-
heiro et al. [31] propose DeepMask to segment and clas-
sify the center object in a sliding window fashion. Dai
et al. [6] propose instance-sensitive FCNs to generate the
position-sensitive maps and assembled them to obtain the
ﬁnal masks. FCIS [ 23] takes position-sensitive maps with
inside/outside scores to generate the instance segmentation
results. He et al. [15] propose Mask R-CNN that is built on
the top of Faster R-CNN by adding an instance-level seman-
tic segmentation branch. Based on Mask R-CNN, Chen et
al. [3] propose MaskLab that uses position-sensitive scores
to obtain better results. However, an underlying drawback
in these methods is that mask quality is only measured by
the classiﬁcation scores, thus resulting in the issues dis-
cussed above.
Segmentation based methods predict the category labels
of each pixel ﬁrst and then group them together to form
instance segmentation results. Liang et al. [24] use spec-
tral clustering to cluster the pixels. Other works, such as
[20,21], add boundary detection information during the
clustering procedure. Bai et al. [1] predict pixel-level en-
ergy values and used watershed algorithms for grouping.
Recently, there are some works [ 30,11,14,10] use metric
learning to learn pixel embedding. Speciﬁcally, these meth-
ods learn an embedding for each pixel to ensure that pixels
from the same instance have similar embedding. Afterward,
clustering is performed on the learned embedding to obtain
the ﬁnal instance labels. As these methods do not have ex-
6410