In contrast to safety layer methods or policy optimization, a series of
safe RL methods grounded in control theory have been proposed for robot
learning. Notably, Perkins and Barto [ 248] employ Lyapunov functions, which
are developed over a century ago [ 153], traditionally used to ensure the
stability of controllers [ 282]. They specifically utilize a Lyapunov function
to constrain the action space, effectively ensuring the safety of all policies
and maintaining agent performance. Moreover, they formulate a set of
control laws with predefined Lyapunov domain knowledge. Their approach,
applying a Lyapunov-based safe RL method to pendulum tasks using a robot
arm in simulated environments, may be among the initial applications of
Lyapunov functions for safe RL in robotics. Although Lyapunov functions can
enhance system safety and stability, a significant challenge remains: designing
a function that fulfills all policy safety requirements necessitates a deep
understanding of the system dynamics and the specific domain knowledge of
Lyapunov functions.
Similarly, several safe RL methods that require system models are devel-
oped in recent years. In particular, Thomas et al. [311] leverage a model-based
RL to achieve the agents’ safety by incorporating the model knowledge. Specif-
ically, they use the agents’ dynamics to anticipate the trajectories of the next
few steps, and thus prevent agents from entering unsafe states or performing
unsafe actions. Based on their method, they apply the proposed method
for MuJoCo robot control in simulation environments. Their method may
be more suitable for short-horizon trajectories. However, if it encounters a
large-scale horizon, the method may not work well since it needs to plan
the next few steps quickly. Furthermore, in [ 190], Liu et al. provide a safe
exploration method for robot learning on the constrained manifold. More
specifically, the robot models and manifold constraints in tangent space are
utilized to help ensure robot safety during the RL exploration process. Their
method can leverage any model-free RL methods for robot learning on the
constrained manifold, since the constrained problem is converted as an un-
constrained problem in tangent space, and their method can search for policy
on the exploration of safe regions. Nonetheless, an accurate robot model and
tracking controller are required in their method, which may not be suitable
for real-world applications.
5.3. Safe Reinforcement Learning for Other Applications
Apart from autonomous driving and robotics of safe RL applications, safe
RL is also adopted to ensure safety in recommender systems [ 290], video
40