Ω𝐶=n
𝜋𝑖1:ℎ,π−𝒊𝒉:∀1≤𝑗≤𝑚,1≤𝑖≤𝑛,1≤ℎ≤𝑛,𝐽𝑖
𝑗
𝜋𝑖1:ℎ,π−𝒊𝒉
≤𝑐𝑖
𝑗o
,
(18)
(𝜋−𝑖1:ℎ∗,π−𝒊𝒉∗)=argmax
𝜋𝑖1:ℎ,π−𝒊𝒉∈Ω𝐶{𝐽
𝜋𝑖1:ℎ,π−𝒊𝒉
} ∀𝑖. (19)
3.3.2. Methods of Safe Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
The Multi-Agent Constrained Policy Optimisation (MACPO) algorithm [ 118]
is the first safe model-free MARL algorithm which is developed based on
CPO [ 6] and Heterogeneous-Agent Trust Region Policy Optimisation (HA-
TRPO) [ 171]; it can guarantee monotonic improvement in reward, while
theoretically satisfying safety constraints during each iteration. The algo-
rithm was tested on several challenging tasks, e.g. safe multi-agent Ant tasks,
safe multi-agent Lift tasks. However, MACPO is an expensive computation
algorithm since the Fisher Information Matrix is computed to approximate
conjugate gradients. In contrast to MACPO, MAPPO-Lagrangian [ 118] is the
model-free and first-order safe MARL algorithm that requires less time for
computation on most of challenging tasks, and is easily implemented. In ad-
dition, by adaptive updating of Lagrangian multipliers, MAPPO-Lagrangian
can avoid the problem of the sensitivity to the initialization of the Lagrange
multipliers, that other Lagrangian relaxation methods have. Nonetheless,
MAPPO-Lagrangian does not guarantee hard safety constraints. [ 117] presents
a soft-constrained policy optimization approach for real-world robot control,
which addresses sim-to-real challenges. Despite these advancements, further
investigation is required to establish robust theoretical guarantees.
Safe Decentralized Policy Gradient (Dec-PG) [198] using a decentralized
policy descent-ascent method is the most closely-related algorithm to MACPO.
The saddle point considering reward and cost is searched by a primal-dual
framework in a multi-agent system. However, a consensus network used in this
method imposes an extra constraint of parameter sharing among neighboring
agents, which could yield suboptimal solutions [ 171]. In contrast, MACPO
does not require the assumption of parameter sharing. Furthermore, multi-
agent policy gradient methods can suffer from high variance by parameter
sharing [172].
Robust MARL [ 359] is a model-based MARL algorithm, which takes
into account the reward uncertainty and transition uncertainty. In their
24