flying rules of geese, understand how geese form a certain formation,
and ensure the safety of each geese.
•Possible direction four: Learn safe and diverse behaviors from human
feedback, like ChatGPT15. During human-robot interaction, robots need
to pay more effort into learning safe and diverse behaviors from humans
rather than discriminatory and illegal behaviors. We envision that a
robot needs to adapt to different tasks and learn to satisfy different
people’s preferences after a robot can learn safe behaviors from one
person. In such a scenario, a robot needs to learn how to conduct
safe behaviors with multiple persons. For example, feedback from
humans can be used as training data to boost the relationship between
robots and humans, and help to guarantee exploration safety [ 100].
Moreover, behavior diversity is a critical factor to successful multi-agent
systems [ 349], and diverse behaviors can be leveraged to search for safe
policies for safe robot learning.
•Possible direction five: Human-robot interactions. Learning from in-
teractions with non-expert users is essential for long-term SRRL. For
example, an earlier attempt [ 126] considers learning the user’s reward
signal from human-machine cooperation. The prerequisite that robots
work with humans safely and efficiently is mutualism. Robots have to
learn human preferences and comprehend human intentions and actions
for successful collaboration with humans. By understanding what hu-
mans want and anticipate, robots can better adapt to their environment
and receive enhanced support from their human counterparts. This
mutual understanding fosters an effective and harmonious human-robot
collaboration. Human behavior modeling [ 79] and realistic interactive
modeling [ 368] can be the potential solutions for robots safely inheriting
human preferences and learning more about humans.
8. Conclusion
We carefully review safe RL methods from the past 20 years, attempt to
answer the key safe RL question around the investigation of safety research
with“2H3W” problems, and provide a clear clue for further safe RL research.
15https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/
55