evaluation and improvement, this method still cannot guarantee total safety; a
few unsafe corner actions may dramatically damage critical robot applications.
Akin to Borkar’s method [ 41], Tessler et al. [310] also utilize a multi-
timescale approach with regards to cost as a part of the reward in primal-dual
methods. However, the method’s learning rate is hard to tune for real-world
applications because of imposing stringent requirements, and the method may
not guarantee safety when agents are training.
Similar to the above methods, in actor-critic settings, with primal-dual
optimization techniques, Yu et al. [352] convert a non-convex constrained
problem into a locally convex problem and guarantee the stationary point
to the optimal point of non-convex optimization problem; they consider the
state-action safety optimization, and the optimization process is motivated
by [188], in which the Lipschitz condition is necessary to satisfy the results.
Also, they need to estimate the policy gradient for optimization.
Analogously, using optimization theory, the policy gradient and actor-critic
methods are proposed by Chow et al. [60] to optimize risk RL performance,
in which CVaR4-constrained and chance-constrained optimization are used
to guarantee safety. Specifically, the importance sampling [ 24,303] is used to
improve policy estimation and provide convergence proof for the proposed
algorithms. Nevertheless, this method may not guarantee safety during
training [ 361]. Paternain et al. [241] provide a duality theory for CMDP
optimization, and they prove the zero duality gap in primal-dual optimization
even for non-convexity problems. Furthermore, they point out that the primal
problem can be exactly solved by dual optimization. In their study, the
suboptimal bound using neural network parametrization policy is also present
[136].
3.1.2. Control theory-based approaches
Control theory-based approaches mostly ensure more rigorous safety
than policy optimization approaches. Nevertheless, control theory-based
approaches may not be easy to transfer to other domains due to the strict
requirements of dynamics models. For instance, Berkenkamp et al. [30]
develop a safe model-based RL algorithm by leveraging Lyapunov functions
to guarantee stability with the assumptions of Gaussian process prior; their
method can ensure a high-probability safe policy for an agent in a continuous
4CVaR denotes the Conditional Value at Risk.
12