propose several safe RL methods based on Lyapunov functions in discrete and
continuous CMDP settings, respectively, where Lyapunov functions are used
for safe RL to guarantee safe policy and learning stability. The methods can
guarantee safety during training, and the Lyapunov functions can be designed
by a proposed Linear Programming algorithm. However, the training stability
and safety using Lyapunov functions still need to be improved, and more
efficient algorithms in the setting may need to be proposed.
Apart from Lyapunov functions based safe RL, CBFs are also developed
in model-free settings in recent years [ 351,323], [351] develop a model-free
safe RL method based CBFs, in which they learn the policy and CBFs with
data-driven methods, which can help to reduce reliance on the environment
models. Similarly, [ 323] proposes a safe RL method for power system control
with CBFs, in which they integrated CBFs into reward functions to search
for safe policy. model free control barrier function, [ 207], [358]. Moreover,
[57] leverages a model-free RL and CBFs to guarantee learning safety while
improving learning efficiency, in which CBFs are used to constrain the search
space to enhance learning safety and efficiency based on a GP learning model.
Moreover, [ 208] also leverages CBFs to ensure learning safety with learned
dynamics knowledge, where they provide convergence and stability analysis,
and their method outperforms the baselines in their experiments.
Safety layer methods have been proposed in recent years, which are more
directly to ensure RL safety than safe policy optimization methods that based
on cost value optimization such as CPO and IPO. We categorize safety-layer-
based approaches into control theory methods since they can be considered
as a control filter in control theory.
For example, Pham et al. propose an OptLayer [ 250] method, in which
they leverage stochastic control policies to attain the reward performance,
and a layer of the neural network is integrated to pursue safety during
applications. The real-world applications also demonstrate the effectiveness
of the safety layer. Qin et al. [256] propose the DCRL (Density Constrained
Reinforcement Learning) method that is to optimize the reward and cost from
the perspective of an optimization criterion, in which they consider the safety
constraints via the duality property [ 73,228,229,306] with regard to the state
density functions, rather than the cost functions, reward functions and value
functions [ 6,74,82]. This method lies in model-free settings whereas Chen
et al. [56] provide similar methods in model-based settings. A-CRL (state
Augmented Constrained Reinforcement Learning) method [ 52] is proposed to
address a CMDP problem whereby the optimal policy may not be achieved
19