unclear regarding how to handle the mismatch between the nominal
and real system, since there may be the sensor noise [ 155] generated by
fault sensors or disturbing sensor information transferred by adversary
attacks.
•Trade-off Balances. The trade-off balance between exploration and
exploitation is a dilemma in RL or MARL. Safe RL or safe MARL has
the same problem. More particularly, there is another dilemma that
is the trade-off between reward and cost, which is different from the
exploration and exploitation, since each action can result in the change
of reward and cost simultaneously, it is a multi-objective problem. Thus,
in safe MARL settings, addressing the two balances mentioned earlier
is imperative. In competitive game settings, efficiently modeling an
opponent’s decisions with limited information and implementing safe
actions must be ascertained. In cooperative game settings, searching for
a policy to guarantee the whole team’s reward monotonic improvement
while adhering to individual agent constraints is essential. In mixed-
game settings, the optimization of both local and overall rewards while
executing safe actions needs to be determined.
7.4. Possible Directions for Future Safe Reinforcement Learning Research
•Possible direction one: Safe MARL with game theory. How to solve the
above challenges by leveraging game theory is a primary direction, since
we can consider different games for real-world applications in different
game settings, such as cooperative games or competitive games; how
to optimize safety in an extensive form game is also helpful in real-
world applications. For instance, In a fencing competition, we need
to determine how to ensure that two agents complete the task while
ensuring agents’ safety in the game process.
•Possible direction two: Safe RL with information theory. Information
theory may be useful to handle the uncertainty reward signal and cost
estimation, and efficiently address the problem of large-scale MARL
environments. For example, we can use information coding theory to
construct the representation of different agent actions or reward signals.
•Possible direction three: Safe MARL with human-brain theory and
biology inspiration theory. We can draw some inspiration from the laws
of biology to design safe MARL algorithms. For example, we learn the
54