example, the game of the trolley problem [ 314]. In the game, an out-of-
control trolley will eventually kill five people if no action is taken, but you can
redirect the trolley to another track, where only one person will be killed. The
open question is how to balance safety wights when using RL. Moreover, the
application standard and safe Multi-Agent RL (MARL) should be considered
for future research.
The problem (5) ( safety challenges ) appear to be dilemma problems.
They are not more straightforward problems compared to problem (1) ( safety
policy ), problem (2) ( safety complexity ), problem (3) ( safety applica-
tions ), and the problem (4)( safety benchmarks ). We must guarantee agent,
human, and environmental safety when we apply RL for practical applications
by providing sophisticated algorithms. In addition, few studies have focused
on problem (2) ( safety complexity ) and problem (4) ( safety benchmarks ),
especially in industrial use. Answering problem (3) ( safety applications )
and problem (5) ( safety challenges ) may reveal RL application situations
and provide a clue for future RL research. In this review, we will summarise
the progress of safe RL, answer the five problems and analyze safe RL algo-
rithms, theory, and applications. In general, we mainly sort out the safe RL
research of the past two decades (Though we are unfortunately unable to
include some impressive safe RL literature in this review for space reasons).
The main contributions of this paper: first, we investigate safe RL research
and give an indication of the research progress. Second, the main practical
question of RL applications is discussed, and five fundamental problems are
analyzed in detail. Third, algorithms, theory, and applications of safe RL
are reviewed in detail, e.g., safe model-based learning and safe model-free
learning, in which we present a bird’s eye view to summarising the progress
of safe RL. Finally, the challenges we face when using RL for applications are
explained.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: safe RL background,
including safe RL problem formulation and related safe RL surveys, are
introduced in Section 2; an overview of safe RL is provided in Section 3; safe
RL theory and algorithm analysis are presented in Section 4; the application
analysis of safe RL is introduced in Section 5; several safe RL benchmarks
are introduced in detail in Section 6; challenging problems and remaining
questions are described in Section 7; a conclusion for the review is given in
Section 8.
6