For instance, in [ 15], Anderson et al. provide a neurosymbolic RL method
by leveraging formal verification to guarantee RL safety in a mirror descent
framework. In their method, the neurosymbolic and constrained classes
using symbolic policies are leveraged to approximate gradient and conduct
verification in a loop-iteration setting. The experiment results show promising
performance in RL safety, though the fixed worst-case model knowledge is used
in these environments, which may not be suitable for practical applications.
Similarly, in [ 28], Beard and Baheri utilize formal methods to improve agent
safety by incorporating external knowledge and penalizing behaviors for
RL exploration. Nonetheless, the methods may need to be developed for
scalability and continuous systems. Finally, in [ 101], Fulton and Platzer also
use external knowledge to ensure agent safety by leveraging the justified
speculative control sandbox in offline formal verification settings.
3.1.4. Gaussian processes-based approaches
In formal methods, determining how to measure unsafe areas is a challeng-
ing problem. Recently, many approaches have been proposed by leveraging a
Gaussian Process (GP) [ 335] to estimate the uncertainty and unsafe areas.
Further, the information from GP methods is incorporated into the learning
process for agent safety. For instance, Akametalu et al. [8] develop a safe
RL method based on reachability analysis, in which they use GP methods
to measure the disturbances which may lead to unsafe states for agents, the
maximal safe areas are computed iteratively in an unknown dynamics system.
Like Akametalu et al. [8] method, Berkenkamp and Schoellig [ 29] utilize GP
methods to measure the system uncertainty and further guarantee system
stability. Polymenakos et al. [253]develop a safe policy search approach
based on PILCO (Probabilistic Inference for Learning Control) method [ 77]
which is a policy gradient method derived from a GP, in which they improve
agent safety using probability trajectory predictions by incorporating cost
into reward functions. Similar to Polymenakos et al. [253], Cowen et al. [70]
also use PILCO to actively explore environments while considering risk, a
GP is used to quantify the uncertainty during exploration, and agent safety
probability is improved by leveraging a policy multi-gradient solver.
The above safe RL methods present excellent performance in terms of the
balance between reward and safety performance in most challenging tasks.
Nonetheless, training safety or stability may need to be further investigated
rigorously, and a unified framework may need to be proposed to better examine
safe RL performance.
14