people on the current track or one person by diverting the train, what
would you expect the safe agents to choose? Or, more realistically, when
the driving agent is about to bump into a lorry, it can swerve off the
road to the left to save itself. However, there is a bike on the left. How
could the driving agent make decisions? A human driver’s knee-jerk
reaction might be swerving left to save itself. However, the decision of
the driving agent depends on its value systems. How to leverage the
different value systems to enable safe agents to make ethical decisions
is an open question.
7.2. Industrial Deployment Standards for Safe Reinforcement Learning
Although safe RL has been developed with a wealth of well-understood
methods and algorithms in recent years [ 107,159,195], to our knowledge,
there is no RL deployment standard for industrial applications, including
technical standards and morality standards, etc. More attention is required
on deployment standards and the alignment between academia and industries.
Applications include robotics, autonomous driving, recommendation systems,
finance, et al. We should tailor specific deployment standards to specific
applications.
•Technical standards. In a technical standard, we need to think about
how much efficiency RL can generate, how much time and money can
be saved using RL methods, what environments can be handled with
RL, how to design cost and reward functions considering the balance
between RL reward, performance and safety, etc.
•Law standards. Human-machine interaction needs to be considered
in legal judgments, for example, when robots hurt humans due to
programming errors using RL methods. Furthermore, we need to
determine how responsibilities are divided, e.g., do programmers of
robots need to take more responsibility, or do robot users need to take
more responsibility?
7.3. Safety Guarantee Efficiently in Large Number of Agents’ Environments
Since the decision-making space is incredibly large when the number of
agents increases in a safe MARL setting, it is not easy to optimize the multi-
agent policy to finish tasks safely [ 350,360]. Thus, efficiently guaranteeing
safety in an environment with a large number of agents, e.g., 1 million agents,
is still a challenging problem.
52