A Review of Safe Reinforcement Learning: Methods,
Theories and Applications
Shangding Gu𝑎∗, Long Yang𝑏, Yali Du𝑐, Guang Chen𝑑, Florian Walter𝑎, Jun
Wang𝑒, Alois Knoll𝑎
aDepartment of Computer Science, Technical University of Munich, Germany
bInstitute for AI, Peking University & BIGAI, China
cDepartment of Informatics, King’s College London, UK
dCollege of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, China
eDepartment of Computer Science, University College London, UK
Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved tremendous success in many
complex decision-making tasks. However, safety concerns are raised during
deploying RL in real-world applications, leading to a growing demand for
safe RL algorithms, such as in autonomous driving and robotics scenarios.
While safe control has a long history, the study of safe RL algorithms is
still in the early stages. To establish a good foundation for future safe RL
research, in this paper, we provide a review of safe RL from the perspectives
of methods, theories, and applications. Firstly, we review the progress of safe
RL from five dimensions and come up with five crucial problems for safe RL
being deployed in real-world applications, coined as “2H3W” . Secondly, we
analyze the algorithm and theory progress from the perspectives of answering
the“2H3W” problems. Particularly, the sample complexity of safe RL
algorithms is reviewed and discussed, followed by an introduction to the
applications and benchmarks of safe RL algorithms. Finally, we open the
discussion of the challenging problems in safe RL, hoping to inspire future
research on this thread. To advance the study of safe RL algorithms, we
release an open-sourced repository containing the implementations of major
safe RL algorithms at the link1.
∗This manuscript is under actively development. We appreciate any constructive
comments and suggestions corresponding to shangding.gu@tum.de .
1https://github.com/chauncygu/Safe-Reinforcement-Learning-Baselines.git