3.2. Methods of Model-Free Safe Reinforcement Learning
Most studies pay attention to model-free safe RL since it can be deployed
in many domains without requiring model dynamics. In this section, we also
investigate safe RL methods from the perspectives of policy optimization,
control theory, Gaussian processes, and formal methods.
3.2.1. Policy optimization-based approaches
Constrained Policy Optimisation (CPO)[ 6] is the first policy gradient
method to solve the CMDP problem based on model-free deep RL. In partic-
ular, a policy has to be optimized to guarantee the reward of a monotonic
improvement while satisfying safety constraints. As a result, their methods
can almost converge to safety bound and produce more comparable perfor-
mance than the primal-dual method [ 60] on some tasks. However, CPO’s
computation is more expensive than PPO6-Lagrangian, since it needs to
compute the Fisher information matrix and uses the second Taylor expansion
to optimize objectives. Moreover, the approximation and sampling errors
may have detrimental effects on the overall performance, and the convergence
analysis is challenging. Furthermore, the additional recovery policy may
require more samples, which could result in wasted samples [361].
Derived from CPO [ 6], Projection-based Constrained Policy Optimisation
(PCPO) [ 348] based on two-step methods constructs a cost projection to
optimize cost and guarantee safety, which displays better performance than
CPO on some tasks. PCPO leverages policy to maximize the reward via Trust
Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) method [ 279], and then projects the
policy to a feasible region to satisfy safety constraints. However, the second-
order proximal optimization is used in both steps, which may result in a
more expensive computation than the First Order Constrained Optimization
in Policy Space (FOCOPS) method [ 361], which only uses the first-order
optimization. [ 361] is motivated by the optimization-based idea [ 249], where
they use the primal-dual method, address policy search in the nonparametric
space and project the policy into the parameter space, to carry out proximal
maximization optimization in CMDPs. Although this method is easy to
implement and shows better sample efficiency, it still needs to solve the
problems of unstable saddle points and unsafe actions during training.
Similar to CPO [ 6], in Safe Advantage-based Intervention for Learning
6PPO denotes the Policy Proximal Optimization.
16