agents are considered to be “safe” by some research [ 126,144,180] if “they
act, reason, and generalize obeying human desires”. The fifth type of safety
definitions: Moldovan and Abbeel [ 224] consider an agent “safe” if “it meets
an ergodicity requirement: it can reach each state it visits from any other
state it visits, allowing for reversible errors”. In this review, based on the
above various definitions, we investigate safe RL methods, which are about
optimizing cost objectives, avoiding adversary attacks, improving undesirable
situations, reducing risk, and controlling agents to be safe, etc.
RL safety is a significant practical problem that confronts us in RL
applications, and is one of the critical problems in AI safety [ 14] that remains
unsolved, though it has attracted increasing attention in the field of RL.
Moreover, it is deduced that the mean minus variance [ 206] and percentile
optimisation [ 78] of safe RL are, in general, NP-hard problems [ 223]. In some
applications, the agent’s safety is much more important than the agent’s
reward [ 86]. An attempt to answer the question above raises some fundamental
problems that we call “2H3W” problems:
(1)Safety Policy. H ow can we perform policy optimisation to search for
a safe policy?
(2)Safety Complexity. H ow much training data is required to find a
safe policy?
(3)Safety Applications. W hat is the up to date progress of safe RL
applications?
(4)Safety Benchmarks. W hat benchmarks can we use to fairly and
holistically examine safe RL performance?
(5)Safety Challenges. W hat are the challenges faced in future safe RL
research?
Most of the research in this field is aimed at solving the above “2H3W”
problems, and the framework of safe RL about “2H3W” problems is shown
in Figure 1.
As for the problem (1) ( safety policy ), in many practical applications, a
robot must not visit some states, and must not take some actions, which can
be thought of as “unsafe” either for itself or for elements of its environment.
It is essential that a safe policy function or value function is provided so
3