Safe MARobosuite, multiple agents are set up according to the robot joint
settings, and each agent controls every joint or several joints. A Lift task,
for example, can be divided up into 2 agents (2x4 Lift), 4 agents (4x2 Lift),
8 agents (8x1 Lift); for Stack tasks, similarly, tasks can be provided with 2
agents (2x4 Stack), 4 agents (4x2 Stack), 8 agents (8x1 Stack); for a two-robot
TwoArmLift task, it can be divided up into: 2 agents (2x8 TwoArmLift),
4 agents (4x4 TwoArmLift), 8 agents (8x2 TwoArmLift), 16 agents (16x1
TwoArmLift).
Moreover, Safe MARobosuite is also a fully cooperative, continuous, and
decentralized benchmark that considers the constraints of robot safety. Where
Franka robots are used to conduct each task, each agent can observe partial
environmental information (such as the velocity and position). More impor-
tantly, Safe MARobosuite can be easily used for modular robots and make
robots have good robustness and scalability. In many real-world applications,
modular robots can be quickly paired and assembled for different tasks [ 10].
For instance, when communication bandwidth is limited, or some joints of
robotic arms are broken, leading to causes malfunctioning communication,
modular robots can still work well. The reward setting is the same as Robo-
suite [ 367], and the cost design is used to prevent robots from crashing into
unsafe areas.
6.2.3. Safe Multi-Agent Isaac Gym
Safe Multi-Agent Isaac Gym (Safe MAIG)14is a high-performance envi-
ronment that uses GPU for trajectory sampling and logical computation based
on Isaac Gym [ 204], see Figure 11. The computation speed of Safe MAIG
is almost ten times that of Safe MAuJoCo and Safe MARobosuite on the
same server, in the same task, using the same algorithm. The communication
speed is also better than Safe MAMuJoCo and Safe MARobosuite. But the
memory might need to be optimized between CPU and GPU, since GPU
memory is generally too small.
7. Challenges and Outlook of Safe Reinforcement Learning
When deploying RL in real-world applications, numerous challenges emerge
throughout the implementation process. In this section, the “Safety Chal-
lenges” problem is investigated by proposing several significant challenges we
14https://github.com/chauncygu/Safe-Multi-Agent-Isaac-Gym.git
48