via regular rewards. Their method focuses on solving the monitor problem in
CMDP while the dual gradient descent is used to find the feasible trajectories
and guarantee safety. Nonetheless, OptLayer [ 250], A-CRL [ 52] and DCRL
[256] all lack convergence rate analysis.
3.2.3. Gaussian processes-based approaches
Relative to safe policy optimization methods that attend more to cost
values, Lyapunov function-based techniques, which emphasize safe actions,
and Safety layer approaches, GP methodologies primarily concentrate on the
safe exploration via modeling the safe states. In a GP of model-free settings,
Suiet al. [297] use a GP method to present the unknown reward function
from noise samples, the exploration by leveraging a GP method is improved
to reduce uncertainty and ensure agent safety. More particularly, the GP
method is used to predict unknown function, and guide the exploration in
bandit settings which do not need to state transitions. Their real-world
experiments in movie recommendation systems and medical areas indicate
that their method can achieve near-optimal values safely. Like Sui et al.
[297], Turchetta et al. [319] also leverage a GP method to approximate
unknown functions prior for safe exploration. Nevertheless, they focus more
on finite MDP settings considering explicitly reachability. Nonetheless, the
method may not optimize reward objectives while considering safety. Wachi
et al. [326] represent unknown reward and cost functions with GP methods
to ensure safety with probability and optimize reward. Furthermore, the safe,
unsafe, and uncertain states are denoted for agent optimistic and pessimistic
exploration, and their method can adapt the trade-off between exploration
and exploitation. Nevertheless, the convergence guarantee with finite-time
rates, optimization for multiple and heterogeneous objectives may need to be
provided.
Although GP methods have shown impressive performance with regard to
RL safety, most of them ensure safety with probability. How to rigorously
guarantee RL safety during exploration still remains open.
3.2.4. Formal methods-based approaches
Distinct from employing GP methods to model the safe state, Hasanbeig
et al. [ 129] propose a safety-enhanced RL approach that leverages LTL.
In this novel methodology, logical formulas serve as constraints during the
exploration phase of policy synthesis. Although this method demonstrates
notable safety performance, it is imperative to carefully define the logical
20