3.1. Methods of Model-Based Safe Reinforcement Learning
Although accurate models are challenging to build and many applications
lack models, model-based Deep RL (DRL) methods usually have a better
learning efficiency than model-free DRL methods. There are still many
scenarios for which we can apply model-based DRL methods, such as robotics,
transportation planning, logistics, etc. Several works have shown that safe
problems, such as a safe robot control problem [ 309], can be overcome by
using model-based safe RL methods. In this section, we will investigate
model-based safe RL methods from different perspectives: policy optimization-
based approaches, control theory-based approaches, formal methods-based
approaches, and Gaussian process-based approaches.
3.1.1. Policy optimization-based approaches
Policy optimization-based approaches usually search for a safe policy
using cumulative cost values on trajectories. For example, Moldovan and
Abbeel use the Chernoff function (10) in [ 223] to achieve near-optimal bounds
with desirable theoretical properties. The cumulative expectation cost is
represented in the function as 𝐸𝑠,𝜋
𝑒𝐽/𝜃
, especially for 𝛿, which can be used
to adjust the balance of reward performance and safety. For instance, if 𝛿is
set as 1, this method will ignore the safety, and if 𝛿is set as 0, this method
will fully consider the risk and optimize the cost. Moreover, they examine
the method in grid world environments and air travel planning applications.
However, the method needs a significant amount of time to recover policy
from risk areas, which is ten times the value iteration.
𝐶𝛿
𝑠,𝜋[𝐽]=inf
𝜃>0
𝜃log𝐸𝑠,𝜋h
𝑒𝐽/𝜃i
−𝜃log(𝛿)
(10)
Different from the Chernoff function based methods [ 223], Borkar [ 41]
proposes an actor-critic RL method to handle a CMDP problem based on
the envelope theorem in mathematical economics [ 209,216], in which the
primal-dual optimization is analyzed in detail using a three-time scale process.
The critic scheme, actor scheme, and dual ascent are on the fast, middle, and
slow timescale. Bharadhwaj et al. [35] also present an actor-critic method
to address a safe RL problem, where they first develop a conservative safety
critic to estimate the safety. The primal-dual gradient descent is leveraged
to optimize the reward and cost value by constraining the failure probability.
Although this method can bound the probability of failures during policy
11