need to address moving forward. Additionally, we identify potential research
directions for enhancing the safety of RL systems. Except for the following
challenges and research directions, we will investigate meta-safe RL [ 158] and
robust RL [105, 239] in the future.
7.1. Human-Compatible Safe Reinforcement Learning
Modern safe RL algorithms rely on humans to state the objectives of
safety. While humans understand the dangers, the potential risks are less
noticed. Below we discuss two challenges in human preference statements
and concerns on ethics and morality.
•Human preference statement. Many challenges are posed as AI
agents are frequently evaluated in terms of performance measures, such
as human-stated rewards. On the one hand, while it is usually assumed
that humans are acting honestly in specifying their preferences, such as
by rewards or demonstrations, the consequence of humans misstating
their objectives is commonly underestimated. Humans may maliciously
or unintentionally misstate their preferences, leading the safe RL agent
to perform unexpected implementations. One example is the Tay
chatbot from Microsoft; prankster users falsify their demonstrations
and train Tay to mix racist comments into its dialogue [ 97]. On the
other hand, multiple humans might be involved in training one safe
RL agent. Thus, agents have to learn to strike a balance between the
widely different human preferences. Earlier attempt [ 126] considers one
agent vs one human scenario. However, many open questions remain,
such as training robust agents against malicious users, personalizing
assistance toward human preferences, etc.
•Ethics and morality concerns. In modern society, the human interre-
lationship is built based on social or moral norms. While reinforcement
learning agents are deployed to the real world, they start having impacts
on each other, turning into a multi-agent system, in which norms act
similarly in human society on agents. Therefore, the decisions made
by agents always involve ethical issues. For example, social dilemmas
will emerge from the relation between individual goals and overall in-
terests [ 141,179]. The conflicts are produced when each agent aims to
maximize its benefit. For another example, consider a trolley problem
[99]. When the agent is faced with the choice of either harming multiple
51