•Theory of safe MARL. Theory and experiments of safe MARL for
massive swarm robots should be considered in the future, e.g., the con-
vergence problem remains open for massive safe MARL methods without
strong assumptions. Furthermore, optimizing sample complexity and
stability within safe MARL environments is essential. Specifically,
greater emphasis should be placed on the following key points regarding
the theory of safe MARL. (1). Credit assignment both in cost and
reward. In cooperative, competitive, and mixed game settings, it is
crucial to contemplate the trade-off between reward and safety perfor-
mance, e.g., a policy should be searched to minimize each agent’s cost
value while improving reward. Furthermore, it is necessary to optimize
the precise cost value for each agent, and consider each agent’s cost
credit. (2). Nonstability. In a multi-agent system, when an agent takes
actions, which will influence other agents’ actions and may make other
agents get worse reward value or unsafe. (3). Scalability. In safe MARL
settings, when the number of agents becomes large, such as one billion
agents, it will be challenging for computation and hard to ensure agents’
safety, since it is almost impossible to estimate each agent’s Q values or
V value simultaneously.
•Multiple heterogeneous constraints. It still needs to be determined
how multiple heterogeneous constraints should be handled in multi-
agent systems for safe MARL. To our knowledge, almost no study has
investigated multiple heterogeneous constraints for MARL. For example,
when different agents encounter different heterogeneous constraints, we
need to study how to balance different heterogeneous constraints to
optimize different agents’ policies for safety while improving reward
values.
•Carry out complex multi-agent tasks safely. For instance, swarm
robots perform the encirclement task, and then rescue the hostages
from the dangerous scene safely. Currently, most safe MARL algorithms
could have some challenging issues while conducting complex tasks, e.g.,
time-consuming issues or convergence issues.
•Robust MARL. One of the concerns in robust MARL settings: en-
suring zero cost in different tasks without tuning parameters using the
same algorithms is still open [ 133]. Another concern is when we transfer
the safe MARL simulation results to real-world applications, it is still
53