Feature extractor φθ
FC + softmaxNetworkfθ
Phase 1:
Train for Tepochs with
Ls(XL,YL;θ)
(labeled examples only)Train for 1 epoch with
Lw(X,YL,ˆYU;θ)
(all examples)
Extract descriptors V
Compute afﬁnity A(9)
W←A+A⊤
W←D−1/2WD−1/2Useφθ
Solve (
10)Label propagationPhase 2: Iterate T′times
: labels
 : missing labels
 : pseudo-labels (size proportional to certainty ωi)
Figure 2. Overview of the proposed approach. Starting from a randomly initialized network, we ﬁrst train it in a supervised fashion on
the labeled examples. Then we initiate an iterative process where at each iteration we compute a nearest neighbor graph of the entire
training set in the feature space of the current network, we propagate labels by transductive learning, and then we train the network on the
entire training set, with true labels or pseudo-labels on the labeled or unlabeled examples respectively. The pseudo-labels are weighted per
example and per class according to prediction certainty and inverse class population, respectively.
1 labeled example 3 labeled examples 10 labeled examples
Figure 3. Toy example with 300 examples demonstrating label propagation for different number of labeled examples. Triangle markers
correspond the labeled examples and circles to the unlabeled ones which are ﬁnally pseudo-labeled by label propagation. The class is
color-coded and the size of the circles corresponds to weight ωi. The true labels are the same as the example of Figure 1(top).
following iterative process. First, we extract descriptors V
on the entire training set Xand compute nearest neighbors
to construct the adjacency matrix W. Second, we perform
label propagation by solving linear system ( 10) and assign
pseudo-labels to unlabeled examples XUby (7). Finally,
we train the network for one epoch on the entire training
setXusing the weighted loss Lw(12). We repeat this it-
erative process for T′epochs. The above is summarized in
Algorithm 1.
Procedure O PTIMIZE() refers to the mini-batch opti-
mization of the corresponding loss term for one epoch, i.e.
all examples are fed to the network once. More details about
batch construction are given in the implementation details.
Combination with other approaches. Our contribution
falls in the case of pseudo-label loss in the form of ( 3). It is
orthogonal to approaches that use unsupervised loss, for in-stance ( 4), applied to both labeled and unlabeled examples.
Combination of the two comes in a straightforward way by
adding term ( 4) to the total loss optimized in lines 4and16
of Algorithm 1. This is exactly the way we combine the
proposed approach with the state-of-the-art Mean-Teacher
approach [ 38] in our experiments.
Discussion. In an inductive framework, if zi/√diiis re-
placed by the network output fθ(xi)in the smoothness
term of ( 8), then this becomes an unsupervised loss term,
e.g. like ( 4), only now it encourages consistency between
nearby example predictions. And indeed such solution is
adopted e.g. by Weston et al. [41]. This is not very efﬁ-
cient because the adjacency matrix is typically sparse with
non-zero-elements only on nearest neighbors, and then the
gradient of the smoothness term will propagate from each
example to its neighbors only at each iteration.
5074