data with unsupervised objectives on all data, where the
latter act as regularization [ 41,38]. Or, an existing clas-
siﬁer can be used to assign pseudo-labels [ 24,35], which
is another form of algorithmic supervision. Using a pow-
erful classiﬁer trained on carefully annotated data can pro-
vide high-quality pseudo-labels, opening the door to learn-
ing from real unlabeled, large scale data. In such omni-
supervised learning [ 31], the fully supervised performance
on the labeled part is actually the lower bound. This only
refreshes the interest in inductive semi-supervised methods.
In this paper, we use efﬁcient transductive label propa-
gation [ 43] to infer pseudo-labels for unlabeled data, which
are used to train the classiﬁer. Label propagation is a graph-
based method, and in this work the graph is constructed ex-
ploiting the embeddings obtained by the classiﬁcation net-
work itself. Thus, the proposed method alternates between
two steps. First, the network is trained from labeled and
pseudo-labeled data. The second step uses the embeddings
of the network trained in the previous step to construct a
nearest neighbor graph. Label propagation is then used to
infer pseudo-labels for unlabeled images, as well as a cer-
tainty score per image and per class. Training is performed
on all data, using certainty-based weights.
We experimentally show on standard datasets that the
proposed method outperforms other semi-supervised ap-
proaches. The less labeled data is available, the more pro-
nounced the advantage of the proposed approach is.
2. Related work
The literature is rich in the problem of semi-supervised
learning (SSL). The reader is advised to see [ 3] for an ex-
tensive overview. The same holds for SSL in image classi-
ﬁcation [ 10,16,4,37]. In this section, we mostly restrict
the discussion to approaches that use deep learning for SSL
and perform the training on a large image collection with
mini-batch optimization.
Prior work on semi-supervised deep learning for image
classiﬁcation is divided into two main categories. The ﬁrst
consists of methods, e.g. [15,23,34,38], that add an un-
supervised loss term (often called a regularizer) into the
loss function. This term is applied to either all images or
only the unlabeled ones. Methods in the second category,
e.g. [24,36], assign pseudo-labels to the unlabeled exam-
ples. The pseudo-labeled data are then used in training with
a supervised loss, such as cross entropy. Both categories use
a standard loss term that is trained with supervision from
labeled images. A thorough evaluation of SSL deep image
classiﬁcation can be found in Miyato et al. [27].
Our contribution belongs to the second category, and
is conceptually and implementation-wise orthogonal to the
ﬁrst. It is therefore straightforward to combine the proposed
method with any method from the ﬁrst category. We do
combine it with [ 38] as shown in Section 5.Unsupervised loss in deep SSL. Assuming that every train-
ing image, labeled or not, belongs to a single category, a
natural requirement on the classiﬁer is to make a conﬁdent
prediction on the training set. This idea was formalized by
Sajjadi et al. [35], where the regularizer is designed to min-
imize the entropy of the network output. Such a loss term is
easily combined with other terms. A similar combination is
performed for denoising auto-encoders that are applied on
all images in an unsupervised manner [ 32].
A direction attracting a lot of attention is that of consis-
tency loss , where two related cases, e.g. coming from two
similar images, or made by two networks with related pa-
rameters, are encouraged to have similar network outputs.
Sajjadi et al. [34] is the ﬁrst, to our knowledge, to use a
consistency loss between the outputs of a network on ran-
dom perturbations of the same image. Laine and Aila [ 23]
rather apply consistency between the output of the current
network and the temporal average of outputs during train-
ing. The state-of-the-art mean teacher (MT) method [ 38]
replaces output averaging by averaging of network param-
eters. Consistency loss is commonly measured by squared
Euclidean distance. The Jensen-Shannon divergence is used
instead by Qiao et al. [29], while complementarity of the
two networks is enforced via adversarial examples. A simi-
lar idea is proposed by Miyato et al. [26].
Pseudo-labeling in deep SSL. Lee [ 24] uses the current
network to infer pseudo-labels of unlabeled examples, by
choosing the most conﬁdent class. These pseudo-labels are
treated like human-provided labels in the cross entropy loss.
Its impact is similar to that of entropy minimization [ 35]; in
both cases the network is forced to have more conﬁdent pre-
dictions. The same principle is adopted by Shi et al. [36],
where the authors further add contrastive loss to the con-
sistency loss. Our method is different from all such prior
work in that pseudo-labels are inferred by label propagation
rather than network predictions.
Label propagation has been extensively used in a transduc-
tive setup (see chapter 11 [ 3]). Recently, Douze et al. [7]
perform label propagation on a large image dataset with
CNN descriptors for few shot learning. Unseen images are
classiﬁed via online label propagation, which requires stor-
ing the entire dataset, while the network is trained in ad-
vance and descriptors are ﬁxed. Our work is different in
that we perform label propagation on the training set off-
line while training the network, such that inference is pos-
sible without accessing the original training set. Learning
by association [17] can been seen as two steps of propaga-
tion on a constrained bi-partite graph between labeled and
unlabeled examples. Graph transduction game (GTG) [ 9],
a form of label propagation, has been used for pseudo-
labels [ 8] as in our work, but in this case the network is
pre-trained, the graph remains ﬁxed and there is no weight-
ing mechanism. We compare to this approach in Section 5.
5071