Label Propagation for Deep Semi-supervised Learning
Ahmet Iscen1Giorgos Tolias1Yannis Avrithis2Ondˇrej Chum1
1VRG, FEE, CTU in Prague2Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA
Abstract
Semi-supervised learning is becoming increasingly im-
portant because it can combine data carefully labeled by
humans with abundant unlabeled data to train deep neu-
ral networks. Classic methods on semi-supervised learn-
ing that have focused on transductive learning have not
been fully exploited in the inductive framework followed by
modern deep learning. The same holds for the manifold
assumption—that similar examples should get the same pre-
diction. In this work, we employ a transductive label prop-
agation method that is based on the manifold assumption to
make predictions on the entire dataset and use these predic-
tions to generate pseudo-labels for the unlabeled data and
train a deep neural network. At the core of the transductive
method lies a nearest neighbor graph of the dataset that
we create based on the embeddings of the same network.
Therefore our learning process iterates between these two
steps. We improve performance on several datasets espe-
cially in the few labels regime and show that our work is
complementary to current state of the art.
1. Introduction
Modern approaches to many computer vision problems
exploit deep neural networks. These are popular for being
very efﬁcient and providing great performance at test time.
The downside is a requirement of large amounts of training
examples, which are labeled either by humans or automati-
cally on proxy tasks.
Visual data are available in large quantities, however,
data reliably annotated by humans are still very scarce. Ob-
taining large amounts of annotated training data for every
single task is not only impractical, potentially costly, but it
also turns out to be error prone. The low quality of crowd-
sourced annotation is a common motivation to minimize the
need of annotation.
In the domain of metric learning , promising results have
been recently achieved by unsupervised methods for either
learning from scratch or ﬁne-tuning a supervised network
for domain adaptation, which devise proxy tasks for learn-
ing. These tasks exploit the distribution of data in the orig-
inal space, for instance pairwise relations of training ex-
Figure 1. Label propagation on manifolds toy example. Triangles
denote labeled, and circles un-labeled training data, respectively.
Top: color-coded ground truth for labeled points, and gray color
for unlabeled points. Bottom: color-coded pseudo-labels inferred
by diffusion that are used to train the CNN. The size reﬂects the
certainty of the pseudo-label prediction.
amples [ 42], relations between examples and cluster cen-
troids [ 1], or considering the manifold structure of data [ 19].
Alternatively, in self-supervised learning, one can take ad-
vantage of additional information like spatial layout in im-
ages [ 5,12] or temporal relation in videos [ 40,28]; or mine
for such information in unstructured data by algorithmic su-
pervision using conventional methods [ 13,30]. However,
most such proxy tasks are inferior when directly compared
to laboriously annotated data by humans.
In classiﬁcation, semi-supervised methods attempt to re-
duce the number of labeled examples, whereby the fully su-
pervised performance on all data acts as an upper bound.
Intransductive learning [43,45], label inference restricted
to a given set of unlabeled examples is of interest. In in-
ductive learning , the goal is generalization to new unseen
data, while the original training data are discarded. This
is achieved e.g. by combining classiﬁcation loss on labeled
1
5070