Fine-tuned TD3 TCD3
(a) Ant-v2
 (b) BipedalWalker-v3
 (c) HalfCheetah-v2
 (d) Hopper-v2
(e) Humanoid-v2
 (f) HumanoidStandup-v2
 (g) InvertedDoublePendulum-v2
 (h) InvertedPendulum-v2
(i) LunarLanderContinuous-v2
 (j) Reacher-v2
 (k) Swimmer-v2
 (l) Walker2d-v2
Fig. 2. Learning curves for the set of OpenAI Gym continuous control tasks. The shaded region represents half a standard deviation of the
average evaluation over ten trials. Curves are smoothed uniformly with a sliding window of 20 for visual clarity.
C. Discussion
TCD3 obtains more accurate Q-value estimations than
TD3 [8] on all environments. We observe two cases
from our empirical results. First, our approach accurately
estimates the Q-values by a negligible margin. Second,
albeit the TCD3 greatly reduces the estimation bias, there
still exists an underestimation error which is slightly
bigger than half of the underestimation in TD3 [8]. These
ﬁndings support our claim that an increasing variance of
the reward signals encountered by the agent increases the
underestimation, for example, in the Ant environment.
Nonetheless, the expected value of the bias can be further
reduced, as shown in this paper.
The evaluation results on the same set of tasks are
depicted by Fig. 2. Our algorithm either outperforms
or matches the TD3 algorithm [8] in terms of both
learning speed and ﬁnal performance. We observe that
the estimation error prevents the agent from reaching
higher possible reward potentials and stable returns. On
top of the improvement that the minimum of two approx-
imate critics can eliminate the overestimation bias, our
approach obtains higher and smoother evaluation returns
by reducing underestimation to a negligible margin and
keeping the overestimation eliminated.These simulation results also demonstrate that the
underestimation induced by the minimum of two critics
can cause “good” state-action values to be assigned low
values, resulting in slower convergence and suboptimal
action choices to be selected more frequently [10].
For example, from Fig. 1 and 2, we observe that for
BipedalWalker and Humanoid environments, elimination
of estimation bias yields faster convergence to the opti-
mal evaluation returns. Overall, by signiﬁcantly reduc-
ing this underestimation phenomenon for deterministic
continuous control actor-critic methods, we show in this
paper that agents can attain higher evaluation returns in
fewer time steps with no estimation bias.
VI. C ONCLUSION
Accumulated overestimation bias induced by the func-
tion approximation in deep reinforcement learning has
been identiﬁed as a substantial issue. On the contrary,
in deterministic actor-critic settings, techniques to over-
come function approximation error build-up may lead
to underestimation bias which has been a problematic
drawback. In this work, we ﬁrst show that encountering
different reward signals increases the underestimation
bias. Then, we develop a novel variant of deep Q-
learning that signiﬁcantly reduces the underestimation