Simple and Effective VAE Training with Calibrated Decoders
Oleh Rybkin1Kostas Daniilidis1Sergey Levine2
Abstract
Variational autoencoders (V AEs) provide an effec-
tive and simple method for modeling complex dis-
tributions. However, training V AEs often requires
considerable hyperparameter tuning to determine
the optimal amount of information retained by
the latent variable. We study the impact of cali-
brated decoders, which learn the uncertainty of
the decoding distribution and can determine this
amount of information automatically, on the V AE
performance. While many methods for learning
calibrated decoders have been proposed, many
of the recent papers that employ V AEs rely on
heuristic hyperparameters and ad-hoc modiﬁca-
tions instead. We perform the ﬁrst comprehensive
comparative analysis of calibrated decoder and
provide recommendations for simple and effec-
tive V AE training. Our analysis covers a range of
image and video datasets and several single-image
and sequential V AE models. We further propose
a simple but novel modiﬁcation to the commonly
used Gaussian decoder, which computes the pre-
diction variance analytically. We observe empiri-
cally that using heuristic modiﬁcations is not nec-
essary with our method. Project website: https:
//orybkin.github.io/sigma-vae/ .
1. Introduction
Deep density models based on the variational autoencoder
(V AE) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014)
have found ubiquitous use in probabilistic modeling and
representation learning as they are both conceptually simple
and are able to scale to very complex distributions and large
datasets. These V AE techniques are used for tasks such
as future frame prediction (Castrejon et al., 2019), image
segmentation (Kohl et al., 2018), generating speech (Chung
et al., 2015) and music (Dhariwal et al., 2020), as well as
model-based reinforcement learning (Hafner et al., 2019a).
1University of Pennsylvania2UC Berkeley. Correspondence to:
Oleh Rybkin <oleh@seas.upenn.edu >.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).However, in practice, many of these approaches require
careful manual tuning of the balance between two terms that
correspond to distortion and rate from information theory
(Alemi et al., 2017). This balance trades off ﬁdelity of
reconstruction and quality of samples from the model: a
model with low rate would not contain enough information
to reconstruct the data, while allowing the model to have
high rate might lead to unrealistic samples from the prior as
the KL-divergence constraint becomes weaker (Alemi et al.,
2017; Higgins et al., 2017). While a proper variational lower
bound does not expose any free parameters to control this
tradeoff, many prior works heuristically introduce a weight
on the prior KL-divergence term, often denoted . Usually,
needs to be tuned for every dataset and model variant as
a hyperparameter, which slows down development and can
lead to poor performance as ﬁnding the optimal value is
often prohibitively computationally expensive. Moreover,
using6= 1 precludes the appealing interpretation of the
V AE objective as a principled bound on the data likelihood,
and is undesirable for applications like density modeling.
While many architectures for calibrating decoders have
been proposed in the literature (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Kingma et al., 2016; Dai & Wipf, 2019), more applied work
typically employs V AEs with uncalibrated decoding distri-
butions, such as Gaussian distributions without a learned
variance, where the decoder only outputs the mean param-
eter (Castrejon et al., 2019; Denton & Fergus, 2018; Lee
et al., 2019; Babaeizadeh et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018;
Hafner et al., 2019b; Pong et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2017;
Pavlakos et al., 2019), or uses other ad-hoc modiﬁcations
to the objective (Sohn et al., 2015; Henaff et al., 2019). In-
deed, it is well known that naively attempting to learn the
variance in a Gaussian decoder leads to poor results as the
variance may converge to zero (Rezende & Viola, 2018;
Dai & Wipf, 2019), As a result, it remains unclear whether
practical empirical performance of V AEs actually beneﬁts
from calibrated decoders or not.
To rectify this, our ﬁrst contribution is a comparative analy-
sis of various calibrated decoder architectures and practical
recommendations for simple and effective V AE training.
We ﬁnd that, while na ¨ıve calibrated decoders often lead to
worse results, a careful choice of the decoder distribution
can work very well, and removes the need to tune the ad-
ditional parameter . Indeed, we note that the entropy of