Simple and Effective VAE Training with Calibrated Decoders
We note that while the marginal KL only grows up to 4
nats, this means that only 1 generated sample in 50 will be
constrained to the prior (Theis et al., 2016). Given this and
the results in Table 2, we observe that sharing the variance
parameter across the image is a useful inductive bias which
leads to better quality of generated images. We hypothesize
that sharing the variance is effective because it prevents the
model from focusing on particular pixels and forces it to
focus on the whole image equally. In contrast, the per-pixel
sigma-V AE may sacriﬁce image quality for improved results
on just a few particular pixels.
This analysis conﬁrms the result of prior work that focused
on the case of multimodal decoders (Alemi et al., 2017;
Rezende & Viola, 2018), and shows that expressive de-
coders can lead to poor learned representations even when
they are unimodal, like a Gaussian decoder, but with ex-
pressive variance prediction. While with current methods
learning a single shared variance works best, the ability to
produce more ﬁne-grained uncertainty will be desirable on
more complex data with non-uniform dimensions. Our anal-
ysis reveals a shortcoming of current methods for producing
calibrated uncertainties, wherein a more expressive uncer-
tainty prediction may hinder performance, and highlights
the need for more research in this direction.
5.4. Can an analytic solution for optimal variance
further improve learning?
We evaluate the optimal-VAE which uses an analytic so-
lution for the variance (Section 4). Table 2 shows that it
achieves superior results in terms of log-likelihood. We
also note that the optimal -V AE converges to a good vari-
ance estimate instantaneously, which speeds up learning
(highlighted in Figure 9 in the Appendix). In addition, we
evaluate the per-image optimal -V AE, in which a single
variance is computed per image. This model achieves signiﬁ-
cantly higher visual quality. While producing this per-image
variance with a neural network would require additional
architecture tuning, optimal -V AE is very simple to imple-
ment (it can be implemented simply as changing the axes of
summation), not requiring any new tunable parameters.
We further analyse the the quality of the variance estimate
of the optimal -V AE numerically. The optimal -V AE
numerically requires computing the following estimate of
the variance
= arg max
ExDataEq(zjx)
lnp(xj(z);2I)
=ExDataEq(zjx)MSE(x;(z)):(10)
This requires computing two expectations, with respect to
the data in the dataset, and with respect to the encoder
distribution. We use MC sampling to approximate both ex-
pectations. Inspired by common practices in V AEs, we use
Figure 4. An analysis of number of predicted variance parameters
on MNIST. Shared -V AE contains one parameter and is on one
end of the spectrum, while the per-pixel -V AE has the full number
of parameters and is on the other end of the spectrum. We see
that with more expressive uncertainty prediction, visual quality
and the quality of the prior measured by marginal KL quickly
degrade. This observation highlights the good performance of
shared-V AE and a shortcoming of current V AE methods that are
not able to handle expressive uncertainty estimates well.
one sample per data point to approximate the inner expec-
tation. On SVHN, the standard error of this approximation
is0:26% of the value of sigma. We further approximate the
outer expectation with a single batch instead of the entire
dataset. On SVHN, the standard error of this approximation
is2%of the value of sigma. We see that both approxima-
tions are accurate in practice. The second approximation
yields a biased estimate of the evidence lower bound be-
cause the same batch is used to approximate the variance
and compute the lower bound estimate. However, this bias
can be corrected by using a different batch, or with a run-
ning average of the variance with an appropriate decay. This
running average can also be used to reduce the variance of
the estimate and to achieve convergence guarantees, but we
did not ﬁnd it necessary in our experiments.
6. Conclusion
We presented a simple and effective method for learning
calibrated decoders, as well as an evaluation of different de-
coding distributions with several V AE and sequential V AE
models. The proposed method outperforms methods that
use na ¨ıve unit variance Gaussian decoders and tune a heuris-
tic weighton the KL-divergence loss, as commonly done
in prior work. Moreover, it does not use the heuristic weight
, making it easier to train than this prior work. We expect
that the simple techniques for learning calibrated decoders
can allow practitioners to speed up the development cy-
cle, obtain better results, and reduce the need for manual
hyperparameter tuning.