VideoGenerative Adversarial Networks: A Review 30:7
to the MNIST dataset [ 29], in which AC-GANs obtained the top classification accuracy. Saxena
etal.[28]concentrateonmodelsthataddressGANsdisadvantagessuchastraininginstabilityand
modelcollapsebymodifying thearchitecture,thelossfunctionortheoptimization method.
3.2 Image GANs
Since the original GANs frameworks were initially built upon images, there is no doubt that the
number of GANs applications in the image domain surpasses other areas such as text, voice, and
video. Multiple reviews [ 30–34] focus on image synthesis, even though the major proportion of
the general GANs reviews mentioned above, are also in the image domain. Huang et al. [ 31]c a t -
egorizetheimagesynthesisGANsframeworksintothreetypesbasedontheoverallarchitecture.
TheseincludedirectarchitecturesbasedonvanillaGANs,hierarchalmodelsanditerativemodels
consisting of multiple generators and discriminators. While each generator in a hierarchical ar-
chitecture is tasked to deal with a different aspect of the disentangled representations of training
images,thegoalofageneratorintheiterativemodelsistorefinethequalityofthegeneratedim-
a g e s .W ue ta l .[ 32] place image GANs models in two main categories, namely conditional image
synthesis models and unconditional image synthesis models. In the unconditional models, differ-
entnetworkmoduleshandletexture,imagesuperresolution,imageinpainting,facesynthesis,and
humansynthesis.Acomparativestudy[ 33]ofimageGANsframeworkswasconductedusingtwo
datasets:MNIST[ 29]andFashion-MNIST[ 35].ThepaperreviewsdifferentapplicationsofGANs
such as style transfer, image inpainting, super-resolution, and text to image. Similar applications
are also reviewed elsewhere [ 30], with additional applications such as face ageing and 3D image
synthesis. Moreover, Agnese et al. [ 34] direct attention to GANs models that are conditioned on
text and produce images. Some of these models fall under semantic enhancement GANs, where
the main goal is to ensure that text is semantically coherent with the generated image. Another
category focusses on producing high resolution images conditioned on text. An additional cate-
gory is for ensuring the diversity of synthesized images based on input text. The last type is text
tovideo models thatconsiderthetemporaldimension of thetrainingsamples.
3.3 Other GANs
GANshavebeenappliedsuccessfullyinotherareasincludingthemedicalfield,withmedicalGANs
frameworksreviewed[ 36,37].Yietal.[ 36]provideillustrationsofjuxtaposedGANsvariationar-
chitectures.In addition, medical imaging GANs models are categorized based on the aim, such as
quality improvement of the synthesized images, data augmentation, segmentation, classification,
registration, and object detection. Another review [ 37] specializes in radiology imaging based on
33papers.GANsmodelsfacilitatesynthesisofnewradiologyimages,improvingthequalityofex-
istingones,convertingradiologyimagesfromonetypetoanotherandlocalizingaspecificobject.
Anomaly detection, which deals with finding data samples that deviate from the normal, has
also taken advantage of GANs models. A survey paper [ 38] reviews existing GANs models that
contributetoidentifyinganomalies,andre-implementsthereviewedmodelstofurtherverifythe
effectivenessof suchmodels.
ThefieldofsynthesizingandenhancingaudiousingGANsarchitectureshasalsobeenreviewed
[39].Intheaudiogenerationmodels,audiocanbegeneratedfromanoisevectorortext,whilein
audio enhancement GANs models, the model input is a noisy audio signal while the output is a
refined signal. Audio GANs models are usually trained on audio spectrogram representations or
rawaudio waveforms.
Yinka-Banjo et al. [ 40] review studies that utilize GANs frameworks in cybersecurity systems.
Such models are used for protection or attack purposes. In the case of protection, GANs mod-
els synthesize new poisoning samples, and the cybersecurity system learns how to protect itself
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January 2022.