30:10 N.Aldausari et al.
Table 2. TheReviewed Speech toVideo GANsFrameworks inSection 4.2.1
Publication Conditionalinformation Task
Vougioukaset al.
[49]audio,initialimage Generatingtalkingpersonvideosfromspeech
and image of thetarget.
DAVS [60] (audioorvideo),initial
imageGeneratingtalkingpersonvideosfromspeech
by disentanglingvisualandaudio features.
Mittalet al.[ 50] audio-basedcontent
representations,initial
imageGeneratingtalkingpersonvideosfrom
disentangled audiorepresentations.
Chenet al.[ 59] audio,initialimage Generatingonly lipregion fromspeech.
Jalalifaretal.[ 61] audio,liplandmarks Generatingtalkingpersonvideosfromlip
landmarks and speech.
The second columnprovides the typeof condition whilethethird one givesinformationon the maintask.
cause of the increase in computational cost is the end part of the generator. This is because the
spatial resolution / feature map is increasing when moving forward in the generator net. Since
TGANv2 is an unsupervised model, it is essential to supply the model with a larger batch size in
ordertogeneralizeproperly.Asubsamplinglayerisintroducedtoreducethebatchsizebystochas-
ticallysamplingvideoswithinamini-batch,andthensamplingaframewithineachchosenvideo.
Applyingthesubsamplingtechniquemultipletimesinthegeneratornetworkfacilitatesreduction
in thesize ofthemini-batch.
BothMoCoGAN[ 42]andTGAN[ 54]synthesiseNframesbasedonNmotionvectors.However,
Wang et al. [ 58] argue that having N motion vectors adds complexity to model training. Thus,
the model discards the role of these vectors and produces frames with similar motions. G3GAN
overcomes this limitation by having one vector for the motion and another one for the content.
G3GAN consists of three streams; one each for the motion, the content, and for maintaining the
coherencebetweenspatio-temporalfeatures.G3GANappliesself-attentiontoenhancethequality
in thegenerationresults.
Dual video discriminator GAN (DVD-GAN) [48] expands BigGAN [ 16] capabilities in the
video domain to produce 48 high quality images up to 256*256 based on complex datasets such
as Kinetics human action dataset. DVD-GAN is trained on the entire dataset, Kinetics, and this is
not the case in prior works [ 44,55] that use only a subset and pre-processed samples. Similar to
MoCoGAN [ 42], there are two discriminators to deal with the temporal and spatial aspects of a
video.
4.2 Conditional Video Generation
ThereareseveralworksthatemployaconditionalsignalinGANstodirecttheprocessandcontrol
modes of the generated data; The condition may be audio signal, text, semantic map, image, or
video.Thefollowing subsectionsreview conditionalGANs basedon theconditiontype.
4.2.1 Speech to Video Synthesis. ThissubsectiondiscussestheGANsframeworksthatareused
tosynchronizespeechaudiowithfacialmovements,andTable 2providesinformationonthemain
taskof theseframeworks.Also, TableS5summarizes speech-to-videosynthesismodels.
Lipsmovementgenerationframeworksweretheinitialattemptatsynchronizingamovinghead
withaudio.Chenetal.[ 59]proposedamodelthatencodesthestartingimageandaudiofile.Then,
theencodedfeaturesarecombinedandusedasinputtoadecodertogeneratevideos.Thesynthesis
videosare evaluatedusingathree-streamdiscriminator.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January2022.