30:8 N.Aldausari et al.
against such samples that might cause an attack. GANs systems can also be used to spoof other
GANscybersecuritysystemsbycreatingadversarialsamplesthataresimilartotherealauthorized
trainingdatapoints.
BesidesgeneralGANsreviews,therearealsodomain-specificreviewsthatfocusonimage,audio
andmedicalimagingaslistedabove.Inaddition,severalreviewpapersarefocusedonspecifictasks
such as anomaly detection and cybersecurity. However, no systematic review of video GANs has
beenperformed,whichhaveveryspecificcharacteristicsduetotheirtemporaldimensionandthe
necessity to maintain temporal cohesiveness. The next section contributes to filling this gap and
payscloseattentionto GANsmodels thatgeneratevideosand capturetheirtemporalbehavior.
4 VIDEO GANs
Compared to image GANs, video GANs require different treatment because of the data complex-
ity. A video consists of multiple images with the additional time dimension. Therefore, a video
GAN generator follows mostly one of four strategies. While most image GANs generators utilize
2D convolutional networks to synthesize images, video generators combine an RNN architecture
with 2D convolutional networks to address the time-series nature of video data [ 41,42]. Another
approach is to use 3D convolutional networks [ 6] instead of 2D convolutional networks in image
GANstoaccountforthetimedimension.Coarse-to-finestrategyisanothermethodthatwasfirst
introduced in image GANs in an architecture called progressive growing GAN [ 5], then it was
widely adopted in video GANs generators [ 43,44]. The purpose of the progressive architecture
in the video GANs realm is to generate the data first, and the generated data is fed into another
generatortoproduceanenhancedresult.Thefourthmethodisthetwo-streamarchitecturevideo
GANsgenerators[ 6,45].ThismethodisnotexclusivetovideoGANsgeneratorsasitiscommonly
usedinimagegenerationusingGANs[ 46,47].Themotivationforatwo-streamarchitectureisto
specializeeachstreamforadifferentaspectofthevideo[ 6,45].ThediscriminatorinvideoGANs
could be the same as the generator’s strategy or use other strategies. It can use two-stream [ 42,
48–53]ora 3Dconvolutionalnetwork[ 54].
VideoGANsmodelsvarydependingontheconditionsettings.Whileatoneend,therearevideo
GANsframeworksthatarenotsuppliedwithconditionalsignals,asdiscussedinSection 4.1,other
models are conditioned on audios, texts, semantic maps, images and videos, as discussed in Sec-
tions4.2.1,4.2.2,4.2.3,and4.2.4,respectively.ThefollowingsectionsreviewthevideoGANsmodels
basedon thepresenceorabsenceofinputconditionsand thevariationswithineachcategory.
4.1 Unconditional Video Generation
This section is a review of unsupervised GANs frameworks in the video domain, and Table 1
summarizesunconditionalvideoGANsmodelsandtheirmaingoals.Moreover,asummaryofthese
frameworks,thedatasetsandevaluationmetricsusedcanbefoundinTableS4.Producingvideos
withoutpriorinformationismorechallengingasthemodelneedstocapturethedatadistribution
without help from the input signal which can help to narrow the target space. Although training
unconditional video GANs can be difficult, some of the unconditional models have become the
foundation for conditional frameworks. For instance, MoCoGAN [ 42] architecture, which is an
unconditional model, is used in Text-Filter conditioning Generative Adversarial Network
(TFGAN)[55] andstoryGAN[ 41],bothof whichare conditionalmodels.
Video-GAN (VGAN) [6] was the first attempt to generate videos using GANs. The generator
consists of two convolutional networks: the first is a 3D spatio-temporal convolutional network
that captures moving objects in the foreground, while the second is a 2D spatial convolutional
model for the static background. The generated frames from the two-stream generator are com-
bined,and thenfedto thediscriminatorto distinguishrealvideosfrom thefakeones.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January2022.