30:4 N.Aldausari et al.
bylearningtofollow realdatadistribution.Ontheotherhand,thediscriminatoracceptstraining
dataandthedatathatissynthesizedbythegenerator.Thediscriminatorisaclassificationnetwork
thatissupposedtoclassifyrealtrainingdatasamplesas“1”sandthegenerateddatapointsas“0”s.
The objective of the generator is to generate samples that cannot be distinguished from the real
data samples by the discriminator. On the contrary, the discriminator targets the discrimination
of real data samples from fake ones via classification. The two networks compete in a minimax
game to improve each other’s performance. The ultimate goal for both networks is to reach the
Nash equilibrium, which is a state where neither of the networks can improve by changing their
parameters.In practice,however,itis difficulttofind theNashequilibrium[ 12].
The objective function for the generator (G) and the discriminator (D), as previously stated, is
defined asaloss function(L) [ 1]:
min Gmax DL(D,G)=Ex∼pr(x)[loдD (x)]+Ez∼pz(z)[loд (1−D(G(z)))](1)
In Equation ( 1),Epis the expectation with respect to a distribution p, p rrefers to the distri-
bution of the real data, and p zis the distribution of the input noise vector z. The discrimina-
tor is trained to recognize the real samples x, and produce high values close to one. Therefore
Ex∼pr(x)[loдD (x)] shouldbemaximized. Meanwhile, the discriminator is also trained to recog-
nize the fake samples G(z)and produces low values close to zero, which means maximizing
Ez∼pz(z)[loд (1−D(G(z)))]. In contrast, the generator needs to generate samples G(z)that are
similar to therealsamplesin orderto foolthediscriminator Ez∼pz(z)[loд (1−D(G(z))).
2.2 Conditional GAN
In vanilla GANs [ 1], the model is unable to control the type of the generated samples. The gen-
erated data points could be from any category of the training data distribution. When sampling
occurs, the generated samples might not represent all possible variations of the training data. In
contrast, conditionalGAN(CGAN) [13]addsaconditiontoboththegeneratorandthediscrim-
inator,asshowninFigure 2(b).Theconditionmightbeaclass,textoranyothertypeofdata,and
the generated data is expected to match the condition. The loss function for CGAN is a modified
version oftheGANs lossfunctionin Equation( 1):
min Gmax DL(D,G)=Ex∼pr(x)[loдD (x|c)]+Ez∼pz(z)[loд (1−D(G(zc))][13] (2)
wherec istheconditionadded tothemodel.
Information Maximizing GAN, InfoGAN [14] for short, uses a slightly different approach
to control the generation process. As illustrated in Figure 2(c), the input in InfoGAN [ 14]t ot h e
generatorisanoisevectoralongwithanothervariable.UnliketheconditioninCGAN,thevariable
vectorinInfoGANisunknown.Thepurposeofusingthevariableistocontrolspecificproperties
in the generated samples by maximizing the mutual information between this variable and the
generated samples. Through training InfoGAN, the generator learns how to disentangle certain
propertiesinthegeneratedsamplesinanunsupervisedmannerthroughanothermodelcalledthe
auxiliary model. The auxiliary model shares the same parameters as the discriminator. The aim
of the auxiliary model is to predict the properties that are disentangled while the discriminator’s
purpose is to distinguish real samples from fake ones. After training, the generated samples can
becontrolledbyspecifyingsomefeaturesthatarelearnedsuchascolour,shape,rotationinimage
samplesor class[ 14].Thelossfunctionfor InfoGAN isdefinedas follows:
min Gmax DL(D,G)−λI (c;G (z,c))[14] (3)
ThelossfunctionisthesameasCGAN,butwithanadditionalterm λI (c;G(z,c))torepresent
themutualinformation lossbetweenthevariablec and thegeneratedsamples[ 14].
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January2022.