30:18 N.Aldausari et al.
5.2 Dataset
Videogenerationisanapplicationofdeeplearningmodelsthatrequiresamyriadofdatasamples
to produce high quality generations. When surveying the video GANs literature, we noticed that
the datasets in these papers were originally used for other purposes. For example, UCF-101 and
Kinetics dataset are used in action recognition. Some of the papers created their own datasets in
ordertohaveaspecificfeaturethatisnotavailableintheexistingdataset[ 6,64,78,82].However,
most of these papers used at least one of the existing datasets in order to evaluate their model. In
thissectionwe coverthedatasetsmore commonly used,butTableS1 listsalldatasetsusedin the
reviewedpaperscodedwithprefix“D”andanumber(e.g.D1referstoClever-svdatasetandsoon).
Thetablealsopresentsthenumberofvideosinthedataset,duration(ifavailable),resolutionand
purpose. UCF101 [ 95] is the most cited dataset, with its samples collected from YouTube and has
101 action categories such as human interactions, sports, and playing musical instruments. This
dataset is a benchmark for unconditionalapplications and prediction applications.This dataset is
widely used because it is not as simple as Moving MNIST [ 96] that has only 10 classes, and not
as complex as Kinetics human action [ 97] that has 600 classes. Kinetics is the second most used
benchmark dataset that was created by Clark et al. [ 48] to illustrate their generative model’s per-
formanceonacomplexdataset.KineticsisahumanactiondatasetthatiscollectedfromYouTube
as well with some similar categories as UCF101. Some works used Kinetics as a benchmark but
using only a subset of the dataset [ 44,98]. In speech synchronisation applications, there are two
well-known datasets: one is GRID [ 99] while the other one is Lip Reading in the Wild (LRW)
[100]. Both datasets have audio-visual samples. GRID consists of 1,000 sentences that are uttered
by34speakers,whileLRWhas500wordsthatarespokenby1,000speakers.LRWismorecomplex
thanGRIDsinceLRWisextractedfromBritishtelevisionprograms,whileGRIDisrecordedinan
experimental office environment. The grammar in LRW is more diverse than GRID that follows
simple grammar structures. Most common datasets that are used in image to video mapping in-
cludeHuman3.6M[ 101],MovingMNIST[ 96],andWeizmannhumanaction[ 102].Weizmannhu-
manactionhas90videosof9actorsdoing10actions,whileHuman3.6Mconsistsof800sequences
of 3D human skeletons of 11 actors. Moving MNIST is based on MNIST dataset which includes
images of handwritten digits on a solid background. Moving MNIST extends MNIST by moving
thedigits aroundtheframes.Othercategorieslackwell-known datasetsthatare widely used.
5.3 Evaluation Metrics
The GANs evaluation metrics can be categorised into quantitative and qualitative metrics. Hu-
manevaluationisaqualitativemetricthatisusedwidelyinGANs.Observersaregivengenerated
videos to evaluate and compare with synthesised videos from competitive benchmark models.
ThecommoncriteriathatobserversevaluateagainstinthevideoGANsrealmincludenaturalness
of movement, realism of the frames, diversity of the samples, and synchronisation. However, ac-
cording to Alqahtani et al. [ 103], one of the limitations associated with human evaluation is the
generatedsamplesvisually might not necessarilyreflectthemodelcapabilities.
For quantitative measures, Inception Score (IS) [104],Fréchet Inception Distance (FID)
[105],Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) [106], and
MeanSquaredError(MSE) [107]areprevalentforvideoGANs.IS[ 104]isproposedasanalter-
nativemeasuretohumanevaluationsinGANframeworks.IStakesintoconsiderationthequality
and diversity of the generated images by computing the classification score and marginal distri-
bution, respectively. IS score only considers the generated frames and does not account for the
originalframes.FID[ 105]overcamethislimitationbycomparingthesynthesisedvideosandorig-
inal videos. To calculate FID, first, spatio-temporal feature maps need to be extracted. Then, the
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January2022.