VideoGenerative Adversarial Networks: A Review 30:13
and few-shot-vid2vid share an overall architecture for the generator network that is conditioned
onthepreviousframe,aprevioussemanticimage,andthesourcesemanticvideos.Thegenerator
consists of three modules, namely W to extract the optical flow, M to predict the occlusion map,
and H to generate the intermediate frames. The main difference between vid2vid and few-shot-
vid2vid is that the module H in vid2vid has fixed weights, whereas the weights are dynamic in
few-shot-vid2vid.Anadaptivenetworkwithdynamicweights[ 52]facilitatesgenerationofvideos
of unseen objects in the training dataset by providing multiple images of the object at test time.
There are two discriminators in both architectures: a video discriminator and an image discrimi-
nator. The modules are trained in a progressive manner, which means that the number of frames
and thequalityof generatedimages increasegradually.
Whiletheconditionalsignalinvid2vidandfew-shot-vide2vid[ 51,52]isasequenceofsemantic
maps,Panetal.[ 63]onlyuseonesemanticlabelmap.Theyclaimthatprovidingasinglesemantic
maphelpsloosentherestrictionsduringthesynthesizingprocess.Togenerateavideoconditioned
on a single semantic map, there are two phases. The first is an image-to-image phase that is con-
ditioned on the semantic map to generate the initial frame with fine details. The second phase
producesa videogiven thestartingframe usingconditionalVAE.
Thissectionalsocoversthevideotaskofvideoinpainting,wherethemodeltriestofillthemiss-
ingmaskedregionswithsuitableandcoherentcontent.Thistaskhasseveralapplicationssuchas
videoretargetting,objectremovalandvideorestoration.Changetal.[ 64]proposedaninpainting
framework with a 3D gated convolution network as generator to handle unmasked features. The
discriminatorisTemporalPatchGANwhichistrainedtobalancebetweenlocalandglobalfeatures
because the mask could be in any location in the frame. In addition, Temporal PatchGAN consid-
ers temporal features by using 3D convolutional layers. One limitation in their proposed model
is that the generator can capture information from nearby frames but cannot capture content for
distantframes. Spatial-TemporalTransformerNetwork(STTN )[65]retainsTemporalPatch-
GAN[64]andchangesthegeneratortotransformerswithattentionmechanismtoextractcontent
fromdistantframe dependencies.
4.2.4 Image to Video Synthesis. The main purpose of image-to-video GANs frameworks is to
predict future frames based on a given frame, and Table 5provides the main aim of these frame-
works and Table S8 lists the reviewed image to video frameworks and some of their properties.
Early versions of image to video architectures [ 66–69] do not disentangle the representations of
thetrainingvideos,resultinginblurrinessinthesynthesizedvideos.Mathieuetal.[ 66]madethe
first attempt to employ adversarial training in the video prediction domain. The generator is a
multiscalenetworkthatisfocussedonsynthesizingcoherentframesconditionedonfrontframes.
Theadversarialnetworksolvestheissuerelatedtoblurryframesthatresultsfromstandardmean
squarederrorlossfunction.Leeetal.[ 67]incorporateVAEswithGANsforavideopredictionsys-
tem.CombiningVAEswithGANswasfirstperformedintheimagedomain[ 4,70].Thereasonfor
using both GANs and VAEs networks is that a GANs model helps produce more realistic images,
while VAE facilitates diversity in the generated images. Multi-Discriminator GAN (MD-GAN )
[68]employstwoconsecutiveGANs.Whilethefirstgeneratesthecontentoftheframes,theother
GANsmodelrefinestheoutputofthefirststage.SimilartoMD-GAN[ 68],themodelbyCaietal.
[69]adoptsatwo-stageframeworkbasedonposeestimation.Thefirstnetworkgenerateshuman
posesequencesoftheconditionedtypeofpose,whereasthesecondstagenetworkmapsfromthe
posespacetopixelspace,given a referenceimage.
Severalstudies[ 45,53,71–74]onframepredictionhaveshownthatdecomposingtheinforma-
tioninvideosenhancesthequalityofthesynthesizedvideos. MotionContentNetwork(MCnet)
[71]encodesmotionandcontentusingseparateencodersinanunsupervisedmanner.Theoutputs
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January 2022.