VideoGenerative Adversarial Networks: A Review 30:17
frameworks trained on two datasets from the source and target domains. Unlike previous video
retargetting models [ 77,78,81,83], Recycle-GAN is conditioned on videos from one domain, and
notonsemanticmapsordetectedposes.Recycle-GANisanextensionofCycle-GAN[ 88],whichis
anunsupervisedmethodusedintheimagedomaintotranslateunpairedimagesformonedomain
toanotherbyapplyingthecycleconsistencyloss.Additionally,Recycle-GANincorporatesspatial
and temporalconstraintswithinaGANs framework.
5 DISCUSSION
ThemainobjectiveinimagegenerationGANsistoensurethatthegeneratedimagesarerealistic
whilevideoGANsextendthisobjectivetomaintainsmoothmotionbetweenthegeneratedframes.
Therearedifferentmethodstoenforcethesecondobjectiveincludingapplyingflowlossfunction
[58,59,74] or adding temporal discriminator [ 42,52]. Other methods to deal with the generator
architecture include 3D convolution, latent space disentanglement and RNN-based architectures.
This section provides an overview of the evaluation metrics, datasets and loss functions that are
widely usedinvideo GANs.
5.1 Loss function
OnereasonthatGANsgeneratedresultssurpassVAEoutcomesistheuseofadversariallossfunc-
tion in GANs to produce more appealing images than the reconstruction loss in VAE [ 3,4]. Early
videoGANsmodelstendedtouseadversariallossalone[ 6,42].However,oneproblemwiththead-
versariallossisthattheproducedimagesmayhaveblendedunseenartefactssincethemodeltries
to make the generated images close to the real images. Thus, current studies include additional
reconstructionlosssuchasL1andL2lossesthathelpineliminatingthehallucinatoryartefactsby
penalizingatthepixellevelifthereareunseenartefactsthatarenotpresentintherealimages[ 89].
ItisworthmentioningthatL1lossproduceslessblurryimagesthanL2basedlossinexperiments
[90–92],andsoL1iswidelyusedinvideoGANsmodels.VAEincludes Kullback-Leibler(KL) in
itsobjectivefunctioninadditiontothereconstructionloss.Whilethereconstructionlossisusedto
minimisethedistancebetweengeneratedimagesandrealones,KLisusedasaregularisertoavoid
overfitting and generate images as copies of the real ones. The VAE architecture is introduced in
video GANs for multiple reasons. Mittal et al. [ 50] utilise VAE as a pre-processing step to disen-
tanglecontentfromemotioninaudiorepresentation.VAEisalsousedtoencodeasignalinalow
dimensiontensor[ 41,63].Whilethereconstructionlossisusedtocalculatethedistancebetween
two data distributions, triplet loss or ranking loss can measure the distance between three distri-
butions. MD-GAN [ 68] and TransMoMo [ 79] utilise triplet loss to compare the motion of three
motion sequences. The objective is to make the generated video closer to a real body sequence
while maintaining a distance from the unrefined video in terms of motion. While the mentioned
reconstruction losses are pixel-wise losses, perceptual loss compares in terms of the semantics
between images. It is used to compare high level features such as content and style differences.
Perceptuallosswasfirstintroducedinthestyletransferdomain[ 93].Then,itwasadoptedingen-
eralcontextstoproducesharperimages.Usually,highlevelfeaturesareextractedusingpretrained
VGGNet that is trained on ImageNet first. Then, perceptual loss is calculated between generated
images and real ones. Feature Matching Loss is similar to perceptual loss, with the main differ-
ence being that perceptual loss uses pre-trained VGGNet to extract the features while the feature
matching loss used the discriminator model. Both feature matching loss and perceptual loss help
in faster training and convergence. However, because feature matching loss and perceptual loss
tend to have faster training, it results in fewer deep features with less fine details and realistic
textures [ 94]. These loss functions are the ones which are commonly used, but an exhaustive list
of allthedifferentlossfunctionsusedin thereviewedpaperare presentedinTableS3.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January 2022.