VideoGenerative Adversarial Networks: A Review 30:11
Table 3. The Reviewed Text toVideoGANs Frameworks inSection 4.2.2
Publication Conditionalinformation Task
TGANs-C [ 62] onesentence Generatingvideobasedon text usingthree
discriminators:image, video,frame-caption
matching.
Li etal.[44] onesentence,firstframe Generatingvideosgiven encodedgist signalthat
includes initialframe and text description.
TFGAN [ 55] onesentence Generatingvideosbasedon textusingmulti-scale
text-conditioningschemein thediscriminator.
StoryGAN [ 41] multiple sentences Generatinganimatedstoriesbasedona paragraph.
Thesecond columnprovides thetypeof conditionwhilethe third one givesinformationon themaintask.
WhileChenetal.[ 59]consideronlylips,otherworks[ 49,50,60,61]studythesynchronization
betweenaudioandtheentireface.Jalalifaretal.[ 61]proposedaprogressiveframeworkthatcom-
bined LSTM with CGAN. The purpose of LSTM is to extract the landmarks of the mouth region.
Given the landmarks as a conditional setting, CGAN synthesizes a synchronized talking face for
the audio signal. Vougioukas et al. [ 49] converts an audio waveform file to a synchronized spo-
kenperson,withoutanintermediatestepforextractingthelandmarksasinJalalifaretal.[ 61].In
this model, given the initial frame, a temporal GANs model with two discriminators, one for the
frame level and the other for the sequence level, are trained to produce synchronized videos for
theaudios.
Theapproachofdisentangledrepresentationshasbeenconsidered[ 50,60].Theintuitionbehind
theDisentangledAudio-VisualSystem(DAVS )[60]istodecouplethetalkingheadinformation
into person-related information and speech-related information in order to overcome the blurry
andincoherentvideosgeneratedfromaplainspeechfile.DAVSisabletogeneratevideosoftalking
faces based on audio files or other video files, while other studies [ 49][50] are conditioned only
on theaudio file.DAVS isableto retargetfacemovements fromonevideo toanother.
Mittal et al. [ 50] decoupled the audio into three aspects: content, emotion, and noise, contrary
to other works [ 49,59,60] that utilize the audio file without any per-possessing step. Decom-
posingaudiorepresentationsusing VariationalAutoEncoder(VAE) atthefirststagefacilitates
discardingofthebackgroundnoisethatappearsinrealworldrecordeddatasets.Moreover,elimi-
natingemotionfromcontentreducestheeffectofemotiononthegeneratedvideos.Inthesecond
stage, the content component of the disentangled audio with an image from the video is fed into
the generator to produce a frame. There are two discriminators in this framework: a frame level
discriminatorand avideo level discriminator.
4.2.2 Text to Video Synthesis. This subsection considers GANs-based frameworks that aim to
produce videos according to a conditional text. Table 3summarizes the main purpose of the re-
viewed models. These frameworks have two main purposes. The first is to maintain semantic
consistency between the condition and the generated video. The second purpose is to generate
realistic quality videos that preserve the coherence and consistency within the frames. More in-
formationonthemaintexttovideoGANsframeworks,theirdatasets,lossfunctionandevaluation
aresummarized in TableS6.
TemporalGANsconditioningoncaptions(TGANs-C) framework[ 62]firstencodesthetext
using an LSTM based encoder. The output of the sentence encoder is concatenated with a noise
vectorandthengiventothegenerator,whichisa3Ddeconvolutionnetwork.Themodelhasthree
discriminatorsforthevideolevel,framelevel,andthemotionlevel,toensurethatadjacentframes
havecoherentmotion.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January 2022.