30:2 N.Aldausari et al.
Fig.1. LinechartrepresentsthenumberofpaperspublishedineachyearaccordingtoGoogleScholarfrom
2015 toJuly2021 (vertical axes).
The goal of generative models, in general, is to generate new data points that conform to the
distribution of the training dataset. To accomplish this goal, GANs consists of two networks, one
named the generator that gets a random noise vector as input and outputs images. The second
networkisthediscriminatorthatdifferentiatesbetweenrealtrainingimagesandfakeonescreated
bythegenerator.Inotherwords,thediscriminatorDclassifiesrealimagesxasD(x) =1andthefake
onesasD(x) =0.ThenetworksaretrainedinanadversarialmannertoreachtheNashequilibrium,
whichisanoptimalstatewhereD(x) =½foreachimagex,whichmeansthatthediscriminatoris
not ableto differentiatebetweenrealandfake samples[ 1].
OnereasonbehindthesuccessofGANsframeworksisthattheyhaveovercomesomeofthelim-
itationsofothergenerativemodelssuchas VariationalAutoencoders(VAEs) [2].Forexample,
GANs frameworks produce sharper images compared to VAEs. The reconstruction loss function
of VAEs is a pixel-wise similarity metric, while that of GANs is a semantic loss function [ 3,4].
The issue with element-wise measures is that they do not align with the human visual system in
the image domain; in other words, there are images that reflect a high element-wise error, how-
ever humans cannot distinguish between these images, and vice versa. The adversarial training
in GANs facilitates building the reconstruction loss of the generator implicitly through the back-
propagating gradients of the discriminator model that is responsible for differentiating between
realimages and fakeones.
GANs have been applied successfully on images and produce 1024*1024 images [ 5]t h a th u -
mans cannot differentiate from photographed images. Because a video is a sequence of images,
it is also possible to employ GANs in the video domain. However, the main challenge in synthe-
sizing videos is that a video contains multiple images rather than a single image. Besides, a video
constitutesmultimodaldatawithdifferentaspectssuchasspeed,motion,picture,andsoundtrack.
Moreover,thetemporaldimensionandthedependencybetweentheframesaddstothechallenges
of generating videos. Although dealing with video in GANs can be more complicated than han-
dling images, many research works have already applied GANs to video datasets, with the first
attempt by Vondrick et al. in 2016 [ 6]. This was followed by others to leverage the use and value
ofapplyingGANstoavideodataset.Sincethen,severalreviewpapershaveincludedadiscussion
of video GANs models [ 7–10]. As far as is known, this paper is the first attempt to review video
GANs models more extensively.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January2022.