VideoGenerative Adversarial Networks: A Review 30:5
Auxiliary Classifier GAN (AC-GAN) [15] is another framework under conditional GANs-
based architectures. AC-GAN frameworks share characteristic with InfoGAN and another with
CGAN.IntermsofthesimilaritywithCGAN,aconditionisfedintothegenerator,whichcanbea
text, class or any other type of data. However, the condition is not an input for the discriminator.
The common factor between AC-GANs and InfoGAN is that there is an auxiliary classifier that
outputs the class of the input sample. The differences in the overall architecture between CGAN,
InfoGAN,andAC-GANaredemonstratedinFigure 2(b),2(c),and2(d),respectively.Thelossfunc-
tionofAC-GANisdividedintotwoterms:oneforevaluatingthepredictedclassandanotherone
todiscriminatefake fromrealsamples.
Thereviewedpapersunderconditionalvideogeneration(seeSection 4.2)useoneofthecondi-
tionalGANs-basedarchitectures.Thereasonbehindchoosingtheconditionalarchitectureisthat
conditionscanenhancethenetworkstabilityand provide higherquality samples[ 13].
2.3 Convolutional GANs
Vanilla GANs [ 1], considered as the simplest type of GANs, uses the Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP)in both the generator and the discriminator. However, one of the main disadvantages of
vanilla GANs is that the training process is not stable [ 12]. One of the possible solutions to this
problemistousea convolutionalneuralnetwork(CNN) instead.InconvolutionalGANs[ 11],
thegeneratorusesadeconvolutionstructure,whilethediscriminatorappliesconvolutionallayers
to classify generated images from the real images. While the type of networks in the generator
and discriminator are different in vanilla GANs and convolutional GANs, the overall architecture
in vanilla GANs andconvolutional GANs areidentical(seeFigure 2(a)).
A significant number of recent GANs frameworks adopt CNN in their generators, discrimina-
tors,orinboth.ThisisbecausetheCNNinConvolutionalGANsoutperformsMLPinvanillaGANs
in terms of the performance, quality of the resulted samples (usually images), and stability of the
trainingprocess.
2.4 High Resolution GANs
The GANs frameworks discussed so far, when applied in the image domain, produce low reso-
lution images as output, i.e 64 ×64 or 128×128 images. In contrast, BigGAN [ 16], ProGAN [ 5],
StyleGANv1[ 17]andStyleGANv2[ 18]scaleuptheoutputresolutionto256 ×256and512×512
usingdifferentmethods.BigGAN[ 16]produceshigh-resolutionimagesbyincreasingthenumber
of parameters and scaling up the batch size. The architecture of BigGAN is based on the self-
attention GAN (SAGAN )[19]. The main advantage of SAGAN is that it focuses on different
partsoftheimagebyintroducinganattentionmapthatisappliedtothefeaturemapsinthedeep
convolutionalmodelarchitecture.ProGAN[ 5]implementsadifferenttechniquebyprogressively
addinglayerstothenetworktoscaleupthegeneratedimages.Thetrainingprocedurestartswith
4×4 images and shallow convolutional layers until convergence, then builds up more layers to
generate 8×8 images and so on until reaching the desired resolution. StyleGAN v1 [ 17]a d o p t sa
progressive architecture for the generator. The visual features can be controlled by lower layers,
i.e 4×4 while finer styles are managed by 1024 resolution layers. StyleGAN v1 controls the gen-
eratedfeaturesbymappingarandomnoisevectortoanintermediatespaceusingfullyconnected
layersofthemappingnetwork.Then,theintermediatespaceisusedtocontrolthefeaturesinthe
generator by Adaptive Instance Normalization (AdaIN) layers. AdaIN is an instance normal-
ization technique that adds the intermediate style space to the content of the images. StyleGAN
v2 [18] overcomes the artefacts that are generated by styleGAN v1 by removing AdaIN that has
provento bethemain issue.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January 2022.