VideoGenerative Adversarial Networks: A Review 30:19
meanandcovariancematrixesarecomputedforallgeneratedvideosandtrainingvideos.Then,a
combination of these statistics from the training videos and the synthesised videos is used to cal-
culate the FID score. While IS and FID scores require a pre-trained model to extract the features,
PSNR,MSE,andSSIMarecomputedatthepixellevel.MSErepresentsthesumofthesquareofthe
distancebetweentheoriginalframesandgeneratedones.MSEiscloselyrelatedtoPSNRbecause
the latter is the ratio between the maximum signal intensity and MSE. SSIM evaluates based on
three aspects which are luminance, contrast, and structure of the original images and generated
ones. SSIM has a stronger relationship with human judgment than PSNR since SSIM mimics the
humanvisualsystemby consideringthementionedthreefactors[ 108].
6 CONCLUSION
GenerativemodelssuchasGANsprovidepromisingresultsinmultipledomainsincludingimages,
videos, audios and texts. Video synthesis is still in the early stages compared to other domains
suchasimages.ThecurrentstateoftheartforvideoGANssuffersfromlowqualityframesorlow
numberofframesorboth.Onereasoncouldbethehigherrequirementforcomputationalpoweras
videosarehighdimensionaldata,andsonecessitatenetworkswithalargenumberofparameters.
Tohandlesuchdata,thereisaneedforacomplexarchitecturethattakesintoconsiderationspatial
as well as temporal data. For example, DVD-GAN uses one TPU and TGANv2 utilizes 8 GPUs. In
addition, videos are usually multimodal and may include audio stream as well, which makes the
processing even more complex. Collecting domain-specific videos is also more time-consuming
andexpensivecomparingtootherdomainssuchasimages,asautomaticvideoretrievalalgorithms
are not yet very accurate and video data collection involves a lot of manual work to select, clean
andpre-processthedata.Nevertheless,thetrendisupwardandeveryyearmorestudiesarebeing
done in this area. The applications of video GANs are broad and include speech animation, video
prediction,videoretargetting,generatingstoriesfromcaptionand videocompletion.
AlthoughtheprogressonGANsinareasotherthanvideosiswelldocumentedthroughseveral
review papers, video GANs models have received less attention so far, and if at all included, they
were only a section in other review papers despite their broad range. Considering the increasing
numberofstudiesonvideoGANsduringthepastfewyears,itistherighttimetosurveythefield,
categorise different models according to their applications and compare their differences. This
paper is among the initial attempts to review GANs models that produce videos and highlight
theirmain differences.
While 3D CNN GANs as proposed by Vondrick et al. [ 6] appear to be an intuitive choice to
synthesise videos and represent frames along with time dimension, 3D convolutions may cause
overfitting[ 109].Analternativeto3DCNNistoutilizeRNNwith2Dconvolution,asinMoCoGAN
[42].Using2Dconvolutionand1Dconvolutiontodisentanglecontentfromthemotiondimension
isanotherwayto representvideos[ 54].
Videos can be generated using GANs either without conditional settings or by introducing a
conditional signal such as an audio, image, video, text, label or semantic map. This survey paper
initiallygroupsthevideoGANsframeworksaccordingtotheirconditionalsetting:unconditional
video generation vs conditional video generation, and discusses the most important models pro-
posed so far in each category and outlines the differences. Moreover, it goes deeper into the con-
ditional frameworks and categorizes the methods according to their condition and presents and
compare the different models in each of those categories. In addition, a list of all datasets used in
the reviewed frameworks, their characteristics, evaluation metrics and the loss function applied
in each work are presentedin supplementary material. The hope is that this paper will serve as a
good review of the domain so far and provide the reader with a better understanding of different
frameworksand theirpotentialapplications.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.2,Article 30.Publicationdate:January 2022.