arXiv:1911.02685v3  [cs.LG]  23 Jun 20201
A Comprehensive Survey on Transfer Learning
Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhiyuan Qi, Keyu Duan, Dongbo Xi, Y ongchun Zh u, Hengshu Zhu, Senior Member, IEEE,
Hui Xiong, Fellow, IEEE, and Qing He
Abstract —Transfer learning aims at improving the performance of tar get learners on target domains by transferring the knowledg e
contained in different but related source domains. In this w ay, the dependence on a large number of target domain data can be reduced
for constructing target learners. Due to the wide applicati on prospects, transfer learning has become a popular and pro mising area in
machine learning. Although there are already some valuable and impressive surveys on transfer learning, these surveys introduce
approaches in a relatively isolated way and lack the recent a dvances in transfer learning. Due to the rapid expansion of t he transfer
learning area, it is both necessary and challenging to compr ehensively review the relevant studies. This survey attemp ts to connect
and systematize the existing transfer learning researches , as well as to summarize and interpret the mechanisms and the strategies of
transfer learning in a comprehensive way, which may help rea ders have a better understanding of the current research sta tus and
ideas. Unlike previous surveys, this survey paper reviews m ore than forty representative transfer learning approache s, especially
homogeneous transfer learning approaches, from the perspe ctives of data and model. The applications of transfer learn ing are also
brieﬂy introduced. In order to show the performance of diffe rent transfer learning models, over twenty representative transfer learning
models are used for experiments. The models are performed on three different datasets, i.e., Amazon Reviews, Reuters-2 1578, and
Ofﬁce-31. And the experimental results demonstrate the imp ortance of selecting appropriate transfer learning models for different
applications in practice.
Index Terms —Transfer learning, machine learning, domain adaptation, interpretation.
✦
1 I NTRODUCTION
ALTHOUGH traditional machine learning technology has
achieved great success and has been successfully ap-
plied in many practical applications, it still has some limi ta-
tions for certain real-world scenarios. The ideal scenario of
machine learning is that there are abundant labeled trainin g
instances, which have the same distribution as the test data .
However, collecting sufﬁcient training data is often expen -
sive, time-consuming, or even unrealistic in many scenario s.
Semi-supervised learning can partly solve this problem by
relaxing the need of mass labeled data. Typically, a semi-
supervised approach only requires a limited number of
labeled data, and it utilizes a large amount of unlabeled
data to improve the learning accuracy. But in many cases,
unlabeled instances are also difﬁcult to collect, which usu -
ally makes the resultant traditional models unsatisfactor y.
Transfer learning, which focuses on transferring the
knowledge across domains, is a promising machine learning
methodology for solving the above problem. The concept
about transfer learning may initially come from educationa l
psychology. According to the generalization theory of tran s-
fer, as proposed by psychologist C.H. Judd, learning to
transfer is the result of the generalization of experience. It is
possible to realize the transfer from one situation to anoth er,
•Fuzhen Zhuang, Zhiyuan Qi, Keyu Duan, Dongbo Xi, Yongchun Zh u,
and Qing He are with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Inform ation
Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing
Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China and the University o f Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
•Hengshu Zhu is with Baidu Inc., No. 10 Shangdi 10th Street, Ha idian
District, Beijing, China.
•Hui Xiong is with Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey , 1
Washington Park, Newark, New Jersey, USA.
•Zhiyuan Qi is with the equal contribution to the ﬁrst author.
•Fuzhen Zhuang and Zhiyuan Qi are corresponding authors, zhu ang-
fuzhen@ict.ac.cn and qizhyuan@gmail.com.
Fig. 1. Intuitive examples about transfer learning.
as long as a person generalizes his experience. According
to this theory, the prerequisite of transfer is that there
needs to be a connection between two learning activities.
In practice, a person who has learned the violin can learn
the piano faster than others, since both the violin and the
piano are musical instruments and may share some common
knowledge. Fig. 1 shows some intuitive examples about
transfer learning. Inspired by human beings’ capabilities to
transfer knowledge across domains, transfer learning aims
to leverage knowledge from a related domain (called source
domain) to improve the learning performance or minimize
the number of labeled examples required in a target domain.
It is worth mentioning that the transferred knowledge does
not always bring a positive impact on new tasks. If there
is little in common between domains, knowledge transfer
could be unsuccessful. For example, learning to ride a bicy-
cle cannot help us learn to play the piano faster. Besides, th e
similarities between domains do not always facilitate lear n-
ing, because sometimes the similarities may be misleading.
For example, although Spanish and French have a close re-
lationship with each other and both belong to the Romance