21
al.combines the active learning and the domain adaptation
technologies for the classiﬁcation of various medical data
[171]. Zeng et al. utilized transfer learning for automatically
encoding ICD-9 codes that are used to describe a patient’s
diagnosis [172].
6.2 Bioinformatics Application
Biological sequence analysis is an important task in the
bioinformatics area. Since the understanding of some or-
ganisms can be transferred to other organisms, transfer
learning can be applied to facilitate the biological sequen ce
analysis. The distribution difference problem exists sign iﬁ-
cantly in this application. For example, the function of som e
biological substances may remain unchanged but with the
composition changed between two organisms, which may
result in the marginal distribution difference. Besides, i f
two organisms have a common ancestor but with long evo-
lutionary distance, the conditional distribution differe nce
would be signiﬁcant. The work by Schweikert et al. uses
the mRNA splice site prediction problem as the example
to analyze the effectiveness of transfer learning approach es
[173]. In their experiments, the source domain contains the
sequence instances from a well-studied model organism, i.e .,
C. elegans , and the target organisms include two additional
nematodes (i.e., C. remanei and P . paciﬁcus ),D. melanogaster ,
and the plant A. thaliana . A number of transfer learning
approaches, e.g., FAM [64] and the variant of KMM [5], are
compared with each other. The experimental results show
that transfer learning can help improve the classiﬁcation
performance.
Another widely encountered task in the bioinformatics
area is gene expression analysis, e.g., predicting associa tions
between genes and phenotypes. In this application, one
of the main challenges is the data sparsity problem, since
there is usually very little data of the known associations.
Transfer learning can be used to leverage this problem
by providing additional information and knowledge. For
example, Petegrosso et al. [174] proposed a transfer learn-
ing approach to analyze and predict the gene-phenotype
associations based on the Label Propagation Algorithm
(LPA) [175]. LPA utilizes the Protein-Protein Interaction
(PPI) network and the initial labeling to predict the target
associations based on the assumption that the genes that are
connected in the PPI network should have the similar labels.
The authors extended LPA by incorporating multi-task and
transfer-learning technologies. First, Human Phenotype O n-
tology (HPO), which provides a standardized vocabulary
of phenotypic features of human diseases, is utilized to
form the auxiliary task. In this way, the associations can be
predicted by utilizing phenotype paths and both the linkage
knowledge in HPO and in the PPI network; the interacted
genes in PPI are more likely to be associated with the same
phenotype and the connected phenotypes in HPO are more
likely to be associated with the same gene. Second, Gene
Ontology (GO), which contains the association information
between gene functions and genes, is used as the source
domain. Additional regularizers are designed, and the PPI
network and the common genes are used as the bridge
for knowledge transfer. The gene-GO term and gene-HPO
phenotype associations are constructed simultaneously fo rall the genes in the PPI network. By transferring additional
knowledge, the predicted gene-phenotype associations can
be more reliable.
Transfer learning can also be applied to solving the PPI
prediction problems. Xu et al. [176] proposed an approach
to transfer the linkage knowledge from the source PPI
network to the target one. The proposed approach is based
on the collective matrix factorization technique [177], wh ere
a factor matrix is shared across domains.
6.3 Transportation Application
One application of transfer learning in the transportation
area is to understand the trafﬁc scene images. In this applic a-
tion, a challenge problem is that the images taken from a cer-
tain location often suffer from variations because of diffe rent
weather and light conditions. In order to solve this problem ,
Diet al. proposed an approach that attempts to transfer the
information of the images that were taken from the same
location in different conditions [178]. In the ﬁrst step, a p re-
trained network is ﬁnetuned to extract the feature represen -
tations of images. In the second step, the feature transfor-
mation strategy is adopted to construct a new feature rep-
resentation. Speciﬁcally, the dimension reduction algori thm
(i.e., partial least squares regression [179]) is performe d on
the extracted features to generate low-dimension features .
Then, a transformation matrix is learned to minimize the
domain discrepancy of the dimension-reduced data. Next,
the subspace alignment operations are adopted to further
reduce the domain discrepancy. Note that, although images
under different conditions often have different appearanc es,
they often have the similar layout structure. Therefore, in
the ﬁnal step, the cross-domain dense correspondences are
established between the test image and the retrieved best
matching image at ﬁrst, and then the annotations of the best
matching image are transferred to the test image via the
Markov random ﬁeld model [180], [181].
Transfer learning can also be applied to the task of driver
behavior modeling. In this task, sufﬁcient personalized da ta
of each individual driver are usually unavailable. In such
situations, transferring the knowledge contained in the hi s-
torical data for the newly-involved driver is a promising
alternative. For example, Lu et al. proposed an approach to
driver model adaptation in lane-changing scenarios [182].
The source domain contains the sufﬁcient data describing
the behavior of the source drivers, while the target domain
has a few numbers of data about the target driver. In the
ﬁrst step, the data from both domains are pre-processed
by performing PCA to generate low-dimension features.
The authors assume that the source and the target data
are from two manifolds. Therefore, in the second step, a
manifold alignment approach is adopted for domain adap-
tation. Speciﬁcally, the dynamic time warping algorithm
[183] is applied to measuring similarity and ﬁnding the
corresponding source-domain data point of each target-
domain data point. Then, local Procrustes analysis [184] is
adopted to align the two manifolds based on the obtained
correspondences between data points. In this way, the data
from the source domain can be transferred to the target
domain. And in the ﬁnal step, a stochastic modeling method
(e.g., Gaussian mixture regression [185]) is used to model