2
group of languages, people who learn Spanish may experi-
ence difﬁculties in learning French, such as using the wrong
vocabulary or conjugation. This occurs because previous
successful experience in Spanish can interfere with learni ng
the word formation, usage, pronunciation, conjugation, et c.,
in French. In the ﬁeld of psychology, the phenomenon that
previous experience has a negative effect on learning new
tasks is called negative transfer [1]. Similarly, in the tra nsfer
learning area, if the target learner is negatively affected by
the transferred knowledge, the phenomenon is also termed
as negative transfer [2], [3]. Whether negative transfer wi ll
occur may depend on several factors, such as the relevance
between the source and the target domains and the learners
capacity of ﬁnding the transferable and beneﬁcial part of th e
knowledge across domains. In [3], a formal deﬁnition and
some analyses of negative transfer are given.
Roughly speaking, according to the discrepancy between
domains, transfer learning can be further divided into two
categories, i.e., homogeneous and heterogeneous transfer
learning [4]. Homogeneous transfer learning approaches ar e
developed and proposed for handling the situations where
the domains are of the same feature space. In homogeneous
transfer learning, some studies assume that domains differ
only in marginal distributions. Therefore, they adapt the d o-
mains by correcting the sample selection bias [5] or covaria te
shift [6]. However, this assumption does not hold in many
cases. For example, in sentiment classiﬁcation problem, a
word may have different meaning tendencies in different
domains. This phenomenon is also called context feature
bias [7]. To solve this problem, some studies further adapt
the conditional distributions. Heterogeneous transfer le arn-
ing refers to the knowledge transfer process in the situatio ns
where the domains have different feature spaces. In additio n
to distribution adaptation, heterogeneous transfer learn ing
requires feature space adaptation [7], which makes it more
complicated than homogeneous transfer learning.
The survey aims to give readers a comprehensive un-
derstanding about transfer learning from the perspectives
of data and model. The mechanisms and the strategies
of transfer learning approaches are introduced to allow
readers grasp how the approaches work. And a number of
the existing transfer learning researches are connected an d
systematized. Speciﬁcally, over forty representative tra nsfer
learning approaches are introduced. Besides, we conduct
experiments to demonstrate on which dataset a transfer
learning model performs well.
In this survey, we focus more on homogeneous transfer
learning. Some interesting transfer learning topics are no t
covered in this survey, such as reinforcement transfer lear n-
ing [8], lifelong transfer learning [9], and online transfe r
learning [10]. The rest of this survey are organized into
seven sections. Section 2 clariﬁes the difference between
transfer learning and other related machine learning tech-
niques. Section 3 introduces the notations used in this sur-
vey and the deﬁnitions about transfer learning. Sections 4
and 5 interpret transfer learning approaches from the data
and the model perspectives, respectively. Section 6 intro-
duces some applications of transfer learning. Experiments
are conducted and the results are provided in Section 7. The
last section concludes this survey. The main contributions of
this survey are summarized below.•Over forty representative transfer learning approaches
are introduced and summarized, which can give read-
ers a comprehensive overview about transfer learning.
•Experiments are conducted to compare different trans-
fer learning approaches. The performance of over
twenty different approaches is displayed intuitively
and then analyzed, which may be instructive for the
readers to select the appropriate ones in practice.
2 R ELATED WORK
Some areas related to transfer learning are introduced. The
connections and difference between them and transfer learn -
ing are clariﬁed.
Semi-Supervised Learning [11]: Semi-supervised learning
is a machine learning task and method that lies between
supervised learning (with completely labeled instances)
and unsupervised learning (without any labeled instances) .
Typically, a semi-supervised method utilizes abundant un-
labeled instances combined with a limited number of la-
beled instances to train a learner. Semi-supervised learn-
ing relaxes the dependence on labeled instances, and thus
reduces the expensive labeling costs. Note that, in semi-
supervised learning, both the labeled and unlabeled in-
stances are drawn from the same distribution. In contrast, i n
transfer learning, the data distributions of the source and the
target domains are usually different. Many transfer learn-
ing approaches absorb the technology of semi-supervised
learning. The key assumptions in semi-supervised learning ,
i.e., smoothness, cluster, and manifold assumptions, are a lso
made use of in transfer learning. It is worth mentioning
that semi-supervised transfer learning is a controversial
term. The reason is that the concept of whether the label
information is available in transfer learning is ambiguous
because both the source and the target domains can be
involved.
Multi-View Learning [12]: Multi-view learning focuses on
the machine learning problems with multi-view data. A
view represents a distinct feature set. An intuitive exampl e
about multiple views is that a video object can be described
from two different viewpoints, i.e., the image signal and
the audio signal. Brieﬂy, multi-view learning describes an
object from multiple views, which results in abundant in-
formation. By properly considering the information from al l
views, the learner’s performance can be improved. There
are several strategies adopted in multi-view learning such
as subspace learning, multi-kernel learning, and co-train ing
[13], [14]. Multi-view techniques are also adopted in some
transfer learning approaches. For example, Zhang et al. pro-
posed a multi-view transfer learning framework, which im-
poses the consistency among multiple views [15]. Yang and
Gao incorporated multi-view information across different
domains for knowledge transfer [16]. The work by Feuz and
Cook introduces a multi-view transfer learning approach
for activity learning, which transfers activity knowledge
between heterogeneous sensor platforms [17].
Multi-Task Learning [18]: The thought of multi-task learn-
ing is to jointly learn a group of related tasks. To be
more speciﬁc, multi-task learning reinforces each task by
taking advantage of the interconnections between task, i.e .,
considering both the inter-task relevance and the inter-ta sk