4
Transfer Learning Problem Categorization 
Solution Categorization Homogeneous Transfer Learning 
Heterogeneous Transfer Learning Inductive Transfer Learning Transductive Transfer Learning 
Unsupervised Transfer Learning 
Instance-Based Approach 
Feature-Based Approach 
Parameter-Based Approach 
Relational-Based Approach Symmetric Transformation 
Asymmetric Transformation Label-Setting-Based 
Categorization 
Space-Setting-Based 
Categorization 
Fig. 2. Categorizations of transfer learning.
sense, which is often cemented into a labeled/unlabeled
instance set or a pre-learned model. A common scenario is
that we have abundant labeled instances or have a well-
trained model on the source domain, and we only have
limited labeled target-domain instances. In this case, the
resources such as the instances and the model are actually
the observations, and the goal of transfer learning is to lea rn
a more accurate decision function on the target domain.
Another term commonly used in the transfer learning
area is domain adaptation. Domain adaptation refers to the
process that adapting one or more source domains to trans-
fer knowledge and improve the performance of the target
learner [4]. Transfer learning often relies on the domain
adaptation process, which attempts to reduce the differenc e
between domains.
3.3 Categorization of Transfer Learning
There are several categorization criteria of transfer lear ning.
For example, transfer learning problems can be divided
into three categories, i.e., transductive, inductive, and un-
supervised transfer learning [2]. The complete deﬁnitions
of these three categories are presented in [2]. These three
categories can be interpreted from a label-setting aspect.
Roughly speaking, transductive transfer learning refers t o
the situations where the label information only comes from
the source domain. If the label information of the target-
domain instances is available, the scenario can be catego-
rized into inductive transfer learning. If the label inform a-
tion is unknown for both the source and the target domains,
the situation is known as unsupervised transfer learning.
Another categorization is based on the consistency between
the source and the target feature spaces and label spaces.
IfXS=XTandYS=YT, the scenario is termed as
homogeneous transfer learning. Otherwise, if XS/ne}ationslash=XT
or/andYS/ne}ationslash=YT, the scenario is referred to as heteroge-
neous transfer learning.
According to the survey [2], the transfer learning ap-
proaches can be categorized into four groups: instance-
based, feature-based, parameter-based, and relational-b ased
approaches. Instance-based transfer learning approaches are
mainly based on the instance weighting strategy. Feature-
based approaches transform the original features to create a
new feature representation; they can be further divided int otwo subcategories, i.e., asymmetric and symmetric feature -
based transfer learning. Asymmetric approaches transform
the source features to match the target ones. In contrast,
symmetric approaches attempt to ﬁnd a common latent
feature space and then transform both the source and
the target features into a new feature representation. The
parameter-based transfer learning approaches transfer th e
knowledge at the model/parameter level. Relational-based
transfer learning approaches mainly focus on the problems
in relational domains. Such approaches transfer the logica l
relationship or rules learned in the source domain to the
target domain. For better understanding, Fig. 2 shows the
above-mentioned categorizations of transfer learning.
Some surveys are provided for the readers who want
to have a more complete understanding of this ﬁeld. The
survey by Pan and Yang [2], which is a pioneering work, cat-
egorizes transfer learning and reviews the research progre ss
before2010 . The survey by Weiss et al. introduces and
summarizes a number of homogeneous and heterogeneous
transfer learning approaches [4]. Heterogeneous transfer
learning is specially reviewed in the survey by Day and
Khoshgoftaar [7]. Some surveys review the literatures re-
lated to speciﬁc themes such as reinforcement learning [8],
computational intelligence [22], and deep learning [23], [ 24].
Besides, a number of surveys focus on speciﬁc application
scenarios including activity recognition [25], visual cat ego-
rization [26], collaborative recommendation [27], comput er
vision [24], and sentiment analysis [28].
Note that the organization of this survey does not strictly
follow the above-mentioned categorizations. In the next
two sections, transfer learning approaches are interprete d
from the data and the model perspectives. Roughly speak-
ing, data-based interpretation covers the above-mentione d
instance-based and feature-based transfer learning ap-
proaches, but from a broader perspective. Model-based
interpretation covers the above-mentioned parameter-bas ed
approaches. Since there are relatively few studies concern -
ing relational-based transfer learning and the representa tive
approaches are well introduced in [2], [4], this survey does
not focus on relational-based approaches.