9
PCA is applied to it, and then the leading eigenvectors
are selected to help construct a low-dimensional feature
representation.
•(µ= 1 andλ1= 0 ) The work by Pan et al. proposes
an approach termed Transfer Component Analysis (TCA)
[36], [78]. TCA adopts MMD to measure the marginal dis-
tribution difference and enforces the scatter matrix as the
constraint. Different from MMDE that learns the kernel
matrix and then further adopts PCA, TCA is a uniﬁed
method that just needs to learn a linear mapping from an
empirical kernel feature space to a low-dimensional fea-
ture space. In this way, it avoids solving the SDP problem,
which results in relatively low computational burden. The
ﬁnal optimization problem can be easily solved via eigen-
decomposition. TCA can also be extended to utilize the
label information. In the extended version, the scatter
matrix constraint is replaced by a new one that balances
the label dependence (measured by HSIC) and the data
variance. Besides, a graph Laplacian regularizer [30] is
also added to preserve the geometry of the manifold. Sim-
ilarly, the ﬁnal optimization problem can also be solved by
eigen-decomposition.
•(µ= 0.5andλ1= 0 ) Long et al. proposed an ap-
proach termed Joint Distribution Adaptation (JDA) [38].
JDA attempts to ﬁnd a transformation matrix that maps
the instances to a low-dimensional space where both the
marginal and the conditional distribution difference are
minimized. To realize it, the MMD metric and the pseudo-
label strategy are adopted. The desired transformation
matrix can be obtained by solving a trace optimization
problem via eigen-decomposition. Further, it is obvious
that the accuracy of the estimated pseudo labels affects
the performance of JDA. In order to improve the labeling
quality, the authors adopt the iterative reﬁnement oper-
ations. Speciﬁcally, in each iteration, JDA is performed,
and then a classiﬁer is trained on the instances with the
extracted features. Next, the pseudo labels are updated
based on the trained classiﬁer. After that, JDA is per-
formed repeatedly with the updated pseudo labels. The
iteration ends when convergence occurs. Note that JDA
can be extended by utilizing the label and structure infor-
mation [79], clustering information [80], various statist ical
and geometrical information [81], etc.
•(µ∈(0,1)andλ1= 0) The paper by Wang et al. proposes
an approach termed Balanced Distribution Adaptation
(BDA) [70], which is an extension of JDA. Different from
JDA which assumes that the marginal and the conditional
distributions have the same importance in adaptation,
BDA attempts to balance the marginal and the condi-
tional distribution adaptation. The operations of BDA are
similar to JDA. In addition, the authors also proposed
the Weighted BDA (WBDA). In WBDA, the conditional
distribution difference is measured by a weighted version
of MMD to solve the class imbalance problem.
It is worth mentioning that some approaches transform
the features into a new feature space (usually of a high
dimension) and train an adaptive classiﬁer simultaneously .
To realize this, the mapping function of the features and the
decision function of the classiﬁer need to be associated. On e
possible way is to deﬁne the following decision function:f(x) =θ·Φ(x)+b, whereθdenotes the classiﬁer parameter;
bdenotes the bias. In light of the representer theorem [82],
the parameter θcan be deﬁned as θ=/summationtextn
i=1αiΦ(xi),and
thus we have
f(x) =n/summationdisplay
i=1αiΦ(xi)·Φ(x)+b=n/summationdisplay
i=1αiκ(xi,x)+b,
whereκdenotes the kernel function. By using the kernel
matrix as the bridge, the regularizers designed for the map-
ping function can be incorporated into the classiﬁer’s obje c-
tive function. In this way, the ﬁnal optimization problem is
usually about the parameter (e.g., αi) or the kernel function.
For example, the paper by Long et al. proposes a general
framework termed Adaptation Regularization Based Trans-
fer Learning (ARTL) [39]. The goals of ARTL are to learn
the adaptive classiﬁer, to minimize the structural risk, to
jointly reduce the marginal and the conditional distributi on
difference, and to maximize the manifold consistency be-
tween the data structure and the predictive structure. The
authors also proposed two speciﬁc algorithms under this
framework based on different loss functions. In these two
algorithms, the coefﬁcient matrix for computing MMD and
the graph Laplacian matrix for manifold regularization are
constructed at ﬁrst. Then, a kernel function is selected to
construct the kernel matrix. After that, the classiﬁer lear ning
problem is converted into a parameter (i.e., αi) solving
problem, and the solution formula is also given in [39].
In ARTL, the choice of the kernel function affects the
performance of the ﬁnal classiﬁer. In order to construct
a robust classiﬁer, some studies turn to kernel learning.
For example, the paper by Duan et al. proposes a uni-
ﬁed framework termed Domain Transfer Multiple Kernel
Learning (DTMKL) [83]. In DTMKL, the kernel function
is assumed to be a linear combination of a group of base
kernels, i.e., κ(xi,xj) =/summationtextN
k=1βkκk(xi,xj). DTMKL aims
to minimize the distribution difference, the classiﬁcatio n
error, etc., simultaneously. The general objective functi on of
DTMKL can be written as follows:
min
βk,fσ/parenleftbig
MMD(XS,XT;κ)/parenrightbig+λΩL(βk,f),
whereσis any monotonically increasing function, fis the
decision function with the same deﬁnition as the one in
ARTL, and ΩL(βk,f)is a general term representing a group
of regularizers deﬁned on the labeled instances such as the
ones for minimizing the classiﬁcation error and controllin g
the complexity of the resultant model. The authors devel-
oped an algorithm to learn the kernel and the decision
function simultaneously by using the reduced gradient de-
scent method [84]. In each iteration, the weight coefﬁcient s
of base kernels are ﬁxed to update the decision function
at ﬁrst. Then, the decision function is ﬁxed to update the
weight coefﬁcients. Note that DTMKL can incorporate many
existing kernel methods. The authors proposed two speciﬁc
algorithms under this framework. The ﬁrst one implements
the framework by using hinge loss and Support Vector
Machine (SVM). The second one is an extension of the
ﬁrst one with an additional regularizer utilizing pseudo-
label information, and the pseudo labels of the unlabeled
instances are generated by using base classiﬁers.