20
importance for domain adaptation. To be more speciﬁc, the
source-domain and the target-domain instances with the
same label are more likely to be potentially associated. How -
ever, since the target-domain instances are unlabeled, how
to identify and partially transfer the important informati on
from the labeled source-domain instances is a critical issu e.
The paper by Zhang et al. proposes an approach
for partial domain adaptation, which is called Impor-
tance Weighted Adversarial Nets-Based Domain Adaptation
(IWANDA) [162]. The architecture of IWANDA is different
from that of DANN. DANN adopts one common feature
extractor based on the assumption that there exists a com-
mon feature space where QS,LandQT,Uhave the similar
distribution. However, IWANDA uses two domain-speciﬁc
feature extractors for the source and the target domains,
respectively. Speciﬁcally, IWANDA consists of two feature
extractors, two domain classiﬁers, and one label predictor .
The diagram of IWANDA is presented below.
Label−−−−−→
PredictorˆYS,L
ˆYT,U
XS,L Source Feature−−−−−−−−→
Extractor↑
QS,L
XT,UTarget Feature−−−−−−−→
ExtractorQT,U
↓/bracerightbigg
+βS
−−−−→
+ˆYT,U2nd Domain−−−−−−→
ClassiﬁerˆS2
ˆT2
1st Domain−−−−−−→
ClassiﬁerˆS1
ˆT1Weight−−−−−→
FunctionβS
Before training, the source feature extractor and the label
predictor are pre-trained on the labeled source-domain in-
stances. These two components are frozen in the training
process, which means that only the target feature extractor
and the domain classiﬁers should be optimized. In each
iteration, the above network is optimized by taking the
following steps.
1.Instance Weighting : In order to solve the partial transfer
issue, the source-domain instances are assigned with
weights based on the output of the ﬁrst domain clas-
siﬁer. The ﬁrst domain classiﬁer is fed with QS,Land
QT,U, and then outputs the probabilistic predictions of
their domains. If a source domain instance is predicted
with a high probability of belonging to the target do-
main, this instance is highly likely to associate with the
target domain. Thus, this instance is assigned with a
larger weight and vice versa.
2.Prediction Making : The label predictor outputs the label
predictions of the instances. The second classiﬁer pre-
dicts which domain an instance belongs to.
3.Parameter Updating : The ﬁrst classiﬁer is optimized to
minimize the domain classiﬁcation error. The second
classiﬁer plays a minmax game with the target fea-
ture extractor. This classiﬁer aims to detect whether
a instance is the instance from the target domain or
the weighted instance from the source domain, and
to reduce the uncertainty of the label prediction ˆYT,U.
The target feature extractor aims to confuse the second
classiﬁer. These components can be optimized in a
similar way to GAN or by inserting a GRL.
In addition to IWANDA, the work by Cao et al. con-
structs the selective adversarial network for partial tran sfer
learning [163]. There are some other studies related totransfer learning. For example, the work by Wang et al.
proposes a minimax-based approach to select high-quality
source-domain data [164]. Chen et al. investigated the trans-
ferability and the discriminability in the adversarial dom ain
adaptation, and proposed a spectral penalization approach
to boost the existing adversarial transfer learning method s
[165].
6 A PPLICATION
In previous sections, a number of representative trans-
fer learning approaches are introduced, which have been
applied to solving a variety of text-related/image-relate d
problems in their original papers. For example, MTrick [122 ]
and TriTL [123] utilize the matrix factorization technique to
solve cross-domain text classiﬁcation problems; the deep-
learning-based approaches such as DAN [137], DCORAL
[148], and DANN [154], [155] are applied to solving image
classiﬁcation problems. Instead of focusing on the general
text-related or image-related applications, in this secti on, we
mainly focus on the transfer learning applications in speci ﬁc
areas such as medicine, bioinformatics, transportation, a nd
recommender systems.
6.1 Medical Application
Medical imaging plays an important role in the medical
area, which is a powerful tool for diagnosis. With the de-
velopment of computer technology such as machine learn-
ing, computer-aided diagnosis has become a popular and
promising direction. Note that medical images are gener-
ated by special medical equipment, and their labeling often
relies on experienced doctors. Therefore, in many cases, it is
expensive and hard to collect sufﬁcient training data. Tran s-
fer learning technology can be utilized for medical imaging
analysis. A commonly used transfer learning approach is
to pre-train a neural network on the source domain (e.g.,
ImageNet, which is an image database containing more than
fourteen million annotated images with more than twenty
thousand categories [166]) and then ﬁnetune it based on the
instances from the target domain.
For example, Maqsood et al. ﬁnetuned the AlexNet [138]
for the detection of Alzheimer’s disease [167]. Their ap-
proach has the following four steps. First, the MRI images
from the target domain are pre-processed by performing
contrast stretching operations. Second, the AlexNet archi tec-
ture [138] is pre-trained over ImageNet [166] (i.e., the sou rce
domain) as a starting point to learn the new task. Third,
the convolutional layers of AlexNet are ﬁxed, and the last
three fully connected layers are replaced by the new ones
including one softmax layer, one fully connected layer, and
one output layer. Finally, the modiﬁed AlexNet is ﬁnetuned
by training on the Alzheimer’s dataset [168] (i.e., the targ et
domain). The experimental results show that the proposed
approach achieves the highest accuracy for the multi-class
classiﬁcation problem (i.e, Alzheimer’s stage detection) .
Similarly, Shin et al. ﬁnetuned the pre-trained deep
neural network for solving the computer-aided detection
problems [169]. Byra et al. utilized the transfer learning tech-
nology to help assess knee osteoarthritis [170]. In additio n to
imaging analysis, transfer learning has some other applica -
tions in the medical area. For example, the work by Tang et