17
target-domain instances in the test set; if two instances
are classiﬁed into the same class, they are connected
in the graph. Another graph GTis constructed for
the target-domain instances as well by performing a
clustering algorithm.
2.Learner Weighting : The weight of the i-th learner for the
j-th target-domain instance xT
jis proportional to the
similarity between the instance’s local structures in GT
Si
andGT. And the similarity can be measured by the
percentage of the common neighbors of xT
jin these two
graphs.
Note that this weighting scheme is based on the clustering-
manifold assumption, i.e., if two instances are close to eac h
other in a high-density region, they often have similar
labels. In order to check the validity of this assumption
for the task, the target task is tested on the source-domain
training set(s). Speciﬁcally, the clustering quality of th e
training set(s) is quantiﬁed and checked by using a metric
such as purity or entropy. If the clustering quality is not
satisfactory, uniform weights are assigned to the learners
instead. Besides, it is intuitive that if the measured struc ture
similarity is particularly low for every learner, weightin g
and combining these learners seems unwise. Therefore, the
authors introduce a threshold and compare it to the average
similarity. If the similarity is lower than the threshold, t he
label ofxT
jis determined by the voting scheme among its
reliable neighbors, where the reliable neighbors are the on es
whose label predictions are made by the combined classiﬁer.
The above-mentioned TaskTrAdaBoost and LWE ap-
proaches mainly focus on the ensemble process. In con-
trast, some studies focus more on the construction of weak
learners. For example, Ensemble Framework of Anchor
Adapters (ENCHOR) [133] is a weighting ensemble frame-
work proposed by Zhuang et al . An anchor is a speciﬁc
instance. Different from TrAdaBoost which adjusts weights
of instances to train and produce a new learner iteratively,
ENCHOR constructs a group of weak learners via using dif-
ferent representations of the instances produced by anchor s.
The thought is that the higher similarity between a certain
instance and an anchor, the more likely the feature of that in -
stance remains unchanged relative to the anchor, where the
similarity can be measured by using the cosine or Gaussian
distance function. ENCHOR contains the following steps.
1.Anchor Selection : In this step, a group of anchors are
selected. These anchors can be selected based on some
rules or even randomly. In order to improve the ﬁ-
nal performance of ENCHOR, the authors proposed a
method of selecting high-quality anchors [133].
2.Anchor-based Representation Generation : For each anchor
and each instance, the feature vector of an instance is
directly multiplied by a coefﬁcient that measures the
distance from the instance to the anchor. In this way,
each anchor produces a new pair of anchor-adapted
source and target instance sets.
3.Learner Training and Ensemble : The obtained pairs of
instance sets can be respectively used to train learners.
Then, the resultant learners are weighted and combined
to make the ﬁnal predictions.
The framework ENCHOR is easy to be realized in a parallel
manner in that the operations performed on each anchor areindependent.
5.4 Deep Learning Technique
Deep learning methods are particularly popular in the ﬁeld
of machine learning. Many researchers utilize the deep
learning techniques to construct transfer learning models .
For example, the SDA and the mSLDA approaches men-
tioned in Section 4.2.6 utilize the deep learning technique s.
In this subsection, we speciﬁcally discuss the deep-learni ng-
related transfer learning models. The deep learning ap-
proaches introduced are divided into two types, i.e., non-
adversarial (or say, traditional) ones and adversarial one s.
5.4.1 Traditional Deep Learning
As said earlier, autoencoders are often used in deep learnin g
area. In addition to SDA and mSLDA, there are some other
reconstruction-based transfer learning approaches. For e x-
ample, the paper by Zhuang et al. proposes an approach
termed Transfer Learning with Deep Autoencoders (TLDA)
[44], [134]. TLDA adopts two autoencoders for the source
and the target domains, respectively. These two autoen-
coders share the same parameters. The encoder and the
decoder both have two layers with activation functions. The
diagram of the two autoencoders is presented as follows:
XS(W1,b1)−−−−−→QS(W2,b2)−−−−−−−−−−→
Softmax RegressionRS(ˆW2,ˆb2)−−−−−→˜QS(ˆW1,ˆb1)−−−−−→˜XS,
⇑
KL Divergence
⇓
XT(W1,b1)−−−−−→QT(W2,b2)−−−−−−−−−−→
Softmax RegressionRT(ˆW2,ˆb2)−−−−−→˜QT(ˆW1,ˆb1)−−−−−→˜XT.
There are several objectives of TLDA, which are listed as
follows.
1.Reconstruction Error Minimization : The output of the de-
coder should be extremely close to the input of encoder.
In other words, the distance between XSand˜XSas
well as the distance between XTand˜XTshould be
minimized.
2.Distribution Adaptation : The distribution difference be-
tweenQSandQTshould be minimized.
3.Regression Error Minimization : The output of the encoder
on the labeled source-domain instances, i.e., RS, should
be consistent with the corresponding label information
YS.
Therefore, the objective function of TLDA is given by
min
ΘLREC(X,˜X)+λ1KL(QS||QT)+λ2Ω(W,b,ˆW,ˆb)
+λ3LREG(RS,YS),
where the ﬁrst term represents the reconstruction error,
KL(·)represents the KL divergence, the third term controls
the complexity, and the last term represents the regression
error. TLDA is trained by using a gradient descent method.
The ﬁnal predictions can be made in two different ways. The
ﬁrst way is to directly use the output of the encoder to make
predictions. And the second way is to treat the autoencoder
as a feature extractor, and then train the target classiﬁer
on the labeled instances with the feature representation
produced by the encoder’s ﬁrst-layer output.