16
proposed a softly associative approach that integrates two
matrix tri-factorizations into a joint framework [126]. Do
et al. utilized matrix tri-factorization to discover both the
implicit and the explicit similarities for cross-domain re c-
ommendation [127].
5.2.2 Parameter Restriction
Another parameter-control-type strategy is to restrict th e
parameters. Different from the parameter sharing strategy
that enforces the models share some parameters, parame-
ter restriction strategy only requires the parameters of th e
source and the target models to be similar.
Take the approaches to category learning as examples.
The category-learning problem is to learn a new decision
function for predicting a new category (denoted by the
(k+ 1) -th category) with only limited target-domain in-
stances and kpre-obtained binary decision functions. The
function of these pre-obtained decision functions is to pre -
dict which of the kcategories an instance belongs to. In
order to solve the category-learning problem, Tommasi et
al.proposed an approach termed Single-Model Knowledge
Transfer (SMKL) [128]. SMKL is based on Least-Squares
SVM (LS-SVM). The advantage of LS-SVM is that LS-SVM
transforms inequality constraints to equality constraint s and
has high computational efﬁciency; its optimization is equi v-
alent to solving a linear equation system problem instead
of a quadratic programming problem. SMKL selects one of
the pre-obtained binary decision functions, and transfers
the knowledge contained in its parameters. The objective
function is given by
min
f1
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleθ−β˜θ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
+λ
2nT,L/summationdisplay
j=1ηj/parenleftBig
f(xT,L
j)−yT,L
j/parenrightBig2
,
wheref(x) =θ·Φ(x) +b,βis the weighting parameter
controlling the transfer degree, ˜θis the parameter of a
selected pre-obtained model, and ηjis the coefﬁcient for
resolving the label imbalance problem. The kernel param-
eter and the tradeoff parameter are chosen based on cross-
validation. In order to ﬁnd the optimal weighting parameter ,
the authors refer to an earlier work [129]. In [129], Cawley
proposed a model selection mechanism for LS-SVM, which
is based on the leave-one-out cross-validation method. The
superiority of this method is that the leave-one-out error
for each instance can be obtained in a closed form without
performing the real cross-validation experiment. Motivat ed
by Cawley’s work, the generalization error can be easily
estimated to guide the parameter setting in SMKL.
Tommasi et al. further extended SMKL by utilizing all the
pre-obtained decision functions. In [130], an approach tha t
is referred to as Multi-Model Knowledge Transfer (MMKL)
is proposed. Its objective function is presented as follows :
min
f1
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleθ−k/summationdisplay
i=1βiθi/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle2
+λ
2nT,L/summationdisplay
j=1ηj/parenleftBig
f(xT,L
j)−yT,L
j/parenrightBig2
,
whereθiandβiare the model parameter and the weighting
parameter of the i-th pre-obtained decision function, respec-
tively. The leave-one-out error can also be obtained in a
closed form, and the optimal value of βi(i= 1,2,···,k)
is the one that maximizes the generalization performance.5.3 Model Ensemble Strategy
In sentiment analysis applications related to product re-
views, data or models from multiple product domains are
available and can be used as the source domains [131]. Com-
bining data or models directly into a single domain may
not be successful because the distributions of these domain s
are different from each other. Model ensemble is another
commonly used strategy. This strategy aims to combine a
number of weak classiﬁers to make the ﬁnal predictions.
Some previously mentioned transfer learning approaches
already adopted this strategy. For example, TrAdaBoost and
MsTrAdaBoost ensemble the weak classiﬁers via voting and
weighting, respectively. In this subsection, several typi cal
ensemble-based transfer learning approaches are introduc ed
to help readers better understand the function and the
appliance of this strategy.
As mentioned in Section 4.1, TaskTrAdaBoost, which
is an extension of TrAdaBoost for handling multi-source
scenarios, is proposed in the paper [33]. TaskTrAdaBoost
mainly has the following two stages.
1.Candidate Classiﬁer Construction : In the ﬁrst stage, a
group of candidate classiﬁers are constructed by per-
forming AdaBoost on each source domain. Note that,
for each source domain, each iteration of AdaBoost re-
sults in a new weak classiﬁer. In order to avoid the over-
ﬁtting problem, the authors introduced a threshold to
pick the suitable classiﬁers into the candidate group.
2.Classiﬁer Selection and Ensemble : In the second stage, a
revised version of AdaBoost is performed on the target-
domain instances to construct the ﬁnal classiﬁer. In each
iteration, an optimal candidate classiﬁer which has the
lowest classiﬁcation error on the labeled target-domain
instances is picked out and assigned with a weight
based on the classiﬁcation error. Then, the weight of
each target-domain instance is updated based on the
performance of the selected classiﬁer on the target do-
main. After the iteration process, the selected classiﬁers
are ensembled to produce the ﬁnal predictions.
The difference between the original AdaBoost and the sec-
ond stage of TaskTrAdaBoost is that, in each iteration, the
former constructs a new candidate classiﬁer on the weighted
target-domain instances, while the latter selects one pre-
obtained candidate classiﬁer which has the minimal clas-
siﬁcation error on the weighted target-domain instances.
The paper by Gao et al. proposes another ensemble-
based framework that is referred to as Locally Weighted En-
semble (LWE) [132]. LWE focuses on the ensemble process
of various learners; these learners could be constructed on
different source domains, or be built by performing differe nt
learning algorithms on a single source domain. Different
from TaskTrAdaBoost that learns the global weight of each
learner, the authors adopted the local-weight strategy, i. e.,
assigning adaptive weights to the learners based on the loca l
manifold structure of the target-domain test set. In LWE,
a learner is usually assigned with different weights when
classifying different target-domain instances. Speciﬁca lly,
the authors adopt a graph-based approach to estimate the
weights. The steps for weighting are outlined below.
1.Graph Construction : For the i-th source learner, a graph
GT
Siis constructed by using the learner to classify the