19
classiﬁers. The corresponding schematic diagram is shown
below.
XS
1···XS
k···XS
mS
XTCommon−−−−−→
ExtractorQS
1···QS
k···QS
mS
QTDomain-Speciﬁc−−−−−−−−−→
Extractors
RS
1···RS
k···RS
mS
RT
1···RT
k···RT
mSDomain-Speciﬁc−−−−−−−−−→
ClassiﬁersˆYS
1···ˆYS
k···ˆYS
mS
ˆYT
1···ˆYT
k···ˆYT
mS
In each iteration, MFSAN has the following steps.
1.Common Feature Extraction : For each source domain
(denoted byDSkwithk= 1,···,mS), the source-
domain instances (denoted by XS
k) are separately input
to the common-feature extractor to produce instances in
a common latent feature space (denoted by QS
k). Similar
operations are also performed on the target-domain
instances (denoted by XT), which produces QT.
2.Speciﬁc Feature Extraction : For each source domain,
the extracted common features QS
kis fed to the k-
th domain-speciﬁc feature extractor. Meanwhile, QTis
fed to all the domain-speciﬁc feature extractors, which
results in RT
kwithk= 1,···,mS.
3.Data Classiﬁcation : The output of the k-th domain-
speciﬁc feature extractor is input to the k-th classiﬁer.
In this way, mSpairs of the classiﬁcation results are
predicted in the form of probability.
4.Parameter Updating : The parameters of the network are
updated to optimize the objective function.
There are three objectives in MFSAN, i.e., classiﬁcation
error minimization, distribution adaptation, and consens us
regularization. The objective function is given by:
min
ΘmS/summationdisplay
i=1L(ˆYS
i,YS
i)+λ1mS/summationdisplay
i=1MMD(RS
i,RT
i)
+λ2mS/summationdisplay
i/negationslash=j/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleˆYT
i−ˆYT
j/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle,
where the ﬁrst term represents the classiﬁcation error of th e
labeled source-domain instances, the second term measures
the distribution difference, and the third term measures
the discrepancy of the predictions on the target-domain
instances.
5.4.2 Adversarial Deep Learning
The thought of adversarial learning can be integrated into
deep-learning-based transfer learning approaches. As men -
tioned above, in the DAN framework, the network Θand
the kernel κplay a minimax game, which reﬂects the
thought of adversarial learning. However, the DAN frame-
work is a little different from the traditional GAN-based
methods in terms of the adversarial matching. In the DAN
framework, there is only a few parameters to be optimized
in the max game, which makes the optimization easier
to achieve equilibrium. Before introducing the adversaria l
transfer learning approaches, let us brieﬂy review the orig i-
nal GAN framework and the related work.
The original GAN [139], which is inspired by the two-
player game, is composed of two models, a generator Gand
a discriminator D. The generator produces the counterfeits
of the true data for the purpose of confusing the discrimina-
tor and making the discriminator produce wrong detection.The discriminator is fed with the mixture of the true data
and the counterfeits, and it aims to detect whether a data is
the true one or the fake one. These two models actually play
a two-player minimax game, and the objective function is as
follows:
min
Gmax
DEx∼Ptrue[log D(x)]+E˜z∼P˜z[log(1−D(G(˜z)))],
where˜zrepresents the noise instances (sampled from a
certain noise distribution) used as the input of the generat or
for producing the counterfeits. The entire GAN can be
trained by using the back-propagation algorithm. When the
two-player game achieves equilibrium, the generator can
produce almost true-looking instances.
Motivated by GAN, many transfer learning approaches
are established based on the assumption that a good feature
representation contains almost no discriminative informa -
tion about the instances’ original domains. For example, th e
work by Ganin et al. proposes a deep architecture termed
Domain-Adversarial Neural Network (DANN) for domain
adaptation [154], [155]. DANN assumes that there is no
labeled target-domain instance to work with. Its architec-
ture consists of a feature extractor, a label predictor, and a
domain classiﬁer. The corresponding diagram is as follows.
Label−−−−−→
PredictorˆYS,L
ˆYT,U
XS,L
XT,UFeature−−−−−→
Extractor↑
QS,L
QT,U/bracerightbigg
Domain−−−−−→
ClassiﬁerˆS
ˆT(Domain Label )
The feature extractor acts like the generator, which aims to
produce the domain-independent feature representation fo r
confusing the domain classiﬁer. The domain classiﬁer plays
the role like the discriminator, which attempts to detect
whether the extracted features come from the source domain
or the target domain. Besides, the label predictor produces
the label prediction of the instances, which is trained on th e
extracted features of the labeled source-domain instances ,
i.e.,QS,L. DANN can be trained by inserting a special gra-
dient reversal layer (GRL). After the training of the whole
system, the feature extractor learns the deep feature of the
instances, and the output ˆYT,Uis the predicted labels of the
unlabeled target-domain instances.
There are some other related impressive works. The
work by Tzeng et al. proposes a uniﬁed adversarial domain
adaptation framework [156]. The work by Shen et al. adopts
Wasserstein distance for domain adaptation [59]. Hoffman
et al. adopted cycle-consistency loss to ensure the structural
and semantic consistency [157]. Long et al. proposed the
Conditional Domain Adversarial Network (CDAN), which
utilizes a conditional domain discriminator to assist adve r-
sarial adaptation [158]. Zhang et al. adopted a symmetric
design for the source and the target classiﬁers [159]. Zhao et
al.utilized domain adversarial networks to solve the multi-
source transfer learning problem [160]. Yu et al. proposed a
dynamic adversarial adaptation network [161].
Some approaches are designed for some special scenar-
ios. Take the partial transfer learning as an example. The
partial transfer learning approaches are designed for the s ce-
nario that the target-domain classes are less than the sourc e-
domain classes, i.e., YS⊆ YT. In this case, the source-
domain instances with different labels may have different