6
into a quadratic programming problem by expanding and
using the kernel trick. This approach to estimating the rati os
of distributions can be easily incorporated into many exist -
ing algorithms. Once the weight βiis obtained, a learner can
be trained on the weighted source-domain instances.
There are some other studies attempting to estimate
the weights. For example, Sugiyama et al. proposed an
approach termed Kullback-Leibler Importance Estimation
Procedure (KLIEP) [6]. KLIEP depends on the minimization
of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence and incorporates
a built-in model selection procedure. Based on the studies
of weight estimation, some instance-based transfer learni ng
frameworks or algorithms are proposed. For example, Sun
et al. proposed a multi-source framework termed 2-Stage
Weighting Framework for Multi-Source Domain Adaptation
(2SW-MDA) with the following two stages [29].
1.Instance Weighting : The source-domain instances are as-
signed with weights to reduce the marginal distribution
difference, which is similar to KMM.
2.Domain Weighting : Weights are assigned to each source
domain for reducing the conditional distribution differ-
ence based on the smoothness assumption [30].
Then, the source-domain instances are reweighted based
on the instance weights and the domain weights. These
reweighted instances and the labeled target-domain in-
stances are used to train the target classiﬁer.
In addition to directly estimating the weighting param-
eters, adjusting weights iteratively is also effective. Th e
key is to design a mechanism to decrease the weights
of the instances that have negative effects on the target
learner. A representative work is TrAdaBoost [31], which
is a framework proposed by Dai et al. This framework is
an extension of AdaBoost [32]. AdaBoost is an effective
boosting algorithm designed for traditional machine learn -
ing tasks. In each iteration of AdaBoost, a learner is traine d
on the instances with updated weights, which results in
a weak classiﬁer. The weighting mechanism of instances
ensures that the instances with incorrect classiﬁcation ar e
given more attention. Finally, the resultant weak classiﬁe rs
are combined to form a strong classiﬁer. TrAdaBoost ex-
tends the AdaBoost to the transfer learning scenario; a new
weighting mechanism is designed to reduce the impact of
the distribution difference. Speciﬁcally, in TrAdaBoost, the
labeled source-domain and labeled target-domain instance s
are combined as a whole, i.e., a training set, to train the
weak classiﬁer. The weighting operations are different for
the source-domain and the target-domain instances. In each
iteration, a temporary variable ¯δ, which measures the classi-
ﬁcation error rate on the labeled target-domain instances, is
calculated. Then, the weights of the target-domain instanc es
are updated based on ¯δand the individual classiﬁcation
results, while the weights of the source-domain instances a re
updated based on a designed constant and the individual
classiﬁcation results. For better understanding, the form ulas
used in the k-th iteration ( k= 1,···,N) for updating the
weights are presented repeatedly as follows [31]:
βS
k,i=βS
k−1,i(1+/radicalBig
2lnnS/N)−|fk(xS
i)−yS
i|(i= 1,···,nS),
βT
k,j=βT
k−1,j(¯δk/(1−¯δk))−|fk(xT
j)−yT
j|(j= 1,···,nT).Note that each iteration forms a new weak classiﬁer. The
ﬁnal classiﬁer is constructed by combining and ensembling
half the number of the newly resultant weak classiﬁers
through voting scheme.
Some studies further extend TrAdaBoost. The work by
Yao and Doretto [33] proposes a Multi-Source TrAdaBoost
(MsTrAdaBoost) algorithm, which mainly has the following
two steps in each iteration.
1.Candidate Classiﬁer Construction : A group of candi-
date weak classiﬁers are respectively trained on the
weighted instances in the pairs of each source domain
and the target domain, i.e., DSi∪DT(i= 1,···,mS).
2.Instance Weighting : A classiﬁer (denoted by jand
trained onDSj∪DT) which has the minimal classi-
ﬁcation error rate ¯δon the target domain instances is
selected, and then is used for updating the weights of
the instances inDSjandDT.
Finally, the selected classiﬁers from each iteration are co m-
bined to form the ﬁnal classiﬁer. Another parameter-based
algorithm, i.e., TaskTrAdaBoost, is also proposed in the
work [33], which is introduced in Section 5.3.
Some approaches realize instance weighting strategy in
a heuristic way. For example, Jiang and Zhai proposed a
general weighting framework [34]. There are three terms in
the framework’s objective function, which are designed to
minimize the cross-entropy loss of three types of instances .
The following types of instances are used to construct the
target classiﬁer.
•Labeled Target-domain Instance : The classiﬁer should mini-
mize the cross-entropy loss on them, which is actually a
standard supervised learning task.
•Unlabeled Target-domain Instance : These instances’ true con-
ditional distributions P(y|xT,U
i)are unknown and should
be estimated. A possible solution is to train an auxiliary
classiﬁer on the labeled source-domain and target-domain
instances to help estimate the conditional distributions o r
assign pseudo labels to these instances.
•Labeled Source-domain Instance : The authors deﬁne the
weight of xS,L
ias the product of two parts, i.e., αiand
βi. The weight βiis ideally equal to PT(xi)/PS(xi),
which can be estimated by non-parametric methods such
as KMM or can be set uniformly in the worst case. The
weightαiis used to ﬁlter out the source-domain instances
that differ greatly from the target domain.
A heuristic method can be used to produce the value of αi,
which contains the following three steps.
1.Auxiliary Classiﬁer Construction : An auxiliary classiﬁer
trained on the labeled target-domain instances are used
to classify the unlabeled source-domain instances.
2.Instance Ranking : The source-domain instances are
ranked based on the probabilistic prediction results.
3.Heuristic Weighting ( βi): The weights of the top- k
source-domain instances with wrong predictions are set
to zero, and the weights of others are set to one.
4.2 Feature Transformation Strategy
Feature transformation strategy is often adopted in featur e-
based approaches. For example, consider a cross-domain
text classiﬁcation problem. The task is to construct a targe t