13
1.Subspace Generation : GFS ﬁrst generates two subspaces
of the source and the target domains by performing
PCA, respectively.
2.Subspace Interpolation : The two obtained subspaces can
be viewed as two points on the Grassmann manifold
[104]. A ﬁnite number of the interpolated subspaces are
generated between these two subspaces based on the
geometric properties of the manifold.
3.Feature Projection &Stacking : The original features are
transformed by stacking the corresponding projections
from all the obtained subspaces.
Despite the usefulness and superiority of GFS, there is a
problem about how to determine the number of the interpo-
lated subspaces. GFK resolves this problem by integrating
inﬁnite number of the subspaces located on the geodesic
curve from the source subspace to the target one. The key
of GFK is to construct an inﬁnite-dimensional feature space
that incorporating the information of all the subspaces lyi ng
on the geodesic ﬂow. In order to compute the inner product
in the resultant inﬁnite-dimensional space, the geodesic-
ﬂow kernel is deﬁned and derived. In addition, a subspace-
disagreement measure is proposed to select the optimal
dimensionality of the subspaces; a rank-of-domain metric
is also proposed to select the optimal source domain when
multi-source domains are available.
Statistic feature alignment is another kind of feature
alignment. For example, Sun et al. proposed an approach
termed Co-Relation Alignment (CORAL) [105]. CORAL
constructs the transformation matrix of the source feature s
by aligning the second-order statistic features, i.e., the co-
variance matrices. The transformation matrix Wis given by
[105]:
W= argmin
W||WTCSW−CT||2
F,
whereCdenotes the covariance matrix. Note that, com-
pared to the above subspace-based approaches, CORAL
avoids subspace generation as well as projection and is very
easy to implement.
Some transfer learning approaches are established based
on spectral feature alignment. In traditional machine lear n-
ing area, spectral clustering is a clustering technique bas ed
on graph theory. The key of this technique is to utilize
the spectrum, i.e., eigenvalues, of the similarity matrix t o
reduce the dimension of the features before clustering. The
similarity matrix is constructed to quantitatively assess the
relative similarity of each pair of data/vertices. On the
basis of spectral clustering and feature alignment, Spectr al
Feature Alignment (SFA) [106] is proposed by Pan et al. SFA
is an algorithm for sentiment classiﬁcation. This algorith m
tries to identify the domain-speciﬁc words and domain-
independent words in different domains, and then aligns
these domain-speciﬁc word features to construct a low-
dimensional feature representation. SFA generally contai ns
the following ﬁve steps.
1.Feature Selection : In this step, feature selection
operations are performed to select the domain-
independent/pivot features. The paper presents three
strategies to select domain-independent features. These
strategies are based on the occurrence frequency of
words, the mutual information between features andlabels [107], and the mutual information between fea-
tures and domains, respectively.
2.Similarity Matrix Construction : Once the domain-speciﬁc
and the domain-independent features are identiﬁed, a
bipartite graph is constructed. Each edge of this bipar-
tite graph is assigned with a weight that measures the
co-occurrence relationship between a domain-speciﬁc
word and a domain-independent word. Based on the
bipartite graph, a similarity matrix is then constructed.
3.Spectral Feature Alignment : In this step, a spectral clus-
tering algorithm is adapted and performed to align
domain-speciﬁc features [108], [109]. Speciﬁcally, based
on the eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian, a feature
alignment mapping is constructed, and the domain-
speciﬁc features are mapped into a low-dimensional
feature space.
4.Feature Stacking : The original features and the low-
dimensional features are stacked to produce the ﬁnal
feature representation.
5.Learner Training : The target learner is trained on the
labeled instances with the ﬁnal feature representation.
There are some other spectral transfer learning ap-
proaches. For example, the work by Ling et al. proposes an
approach termed Cross-Domain Spectral Classiﬁer (CDSC)
[110]. The general ideas and steps of this approach are
presented as follows.
1.Similarity Matrix Construction : In the ﬁrst step, two
similarity matrices are constructed corresponding to
the whole instances and the target-domain instances,
respectively.
2.Spectral Feature Alignment : An objective function is de-
signed with respect to a graph-partition indicator vec-
tor; a constraint matrix is constructed, which contains
pair-wise must-link information. Instead of seeking the
discrete solution of the indicator vector, the solution is
relaxed to be continuous, and the eigen-system problem
corresponding to the objective function is solved to
construct the aligned spectral features [111].
3.Learner Training : A traditional classiﬁer is trained on the
transformed instances.
To be more speciﬁc, the objective function has a form of
the generalized Rayleigh quotient, which aims to ﬁnd the
optimal graph partition that respects the label informatio n
with small cut-size [112], to maximize the separation of
the target-domain instances, and to ﬁt the constraints of
the pair-wise property. After eigen-decomposition, the la st
eigenvectors are selected and combined as a matrix, and
then the matrix is normalized. Each row of the normalized
matrix represents a transformed instance.
5 M ODEL -BASED INTERPRETATION
Transfer learning approaches can also be interpreted from
the model perspective. Fig. 4 shows the corresponding
strategies and the objectives. The main objective of a trans fer
learning model is to make accurate prediction results on the
target domain, e.g., classiﬁcation or clustering results. Note
that a transfer learning model may consist of a few sub-
modules such as classiﬁers, extractors, or encoders. These
sub-modules may play different roles, e.g., feature adapta -
tion or pseudo label generation. In this section, some relat ed