12
example, an input can be corrupted or partially destroyed
by adding a masking noise or Gaussian noise. The denoising
autoencoder is then trained to minimize the denoising re-
construction error between the original clean input and the
output. The SDA algorithm proposed in the paper mainly
encompasses the following steps.
1.Autoencoder Training : The source-domain and target-
domain instances are used to train a stack of denoising
autoencoders in a greedy layer-by-layer way.
2.Feature Encoding &Stacking : A new feature representa-
tion is constructed by stacking the encoding output of
intermediate layers, and the features of the instances
are transformed into the obtained new representation.
3.Learner Training : The target classiﬁer is trained on the
transformed labeled instances.
Although the SDA algorithm has excellent performance
for feature extraction, it still has some drawbacks such as
high computational and parameter-estimation cost. In orde r
to shorten the training time and to speed up traditional
SDA algorithms, Chen et al. proposed a modiﬁed version
of SDA, i.e., Marginalized Stacked Linear Denoising Au-
toencoder (mSLDA) [98], [99]. This algorithm adopts linear
autoencoders and marginalizes the randomly corrupting
step in a closed form. It may seem that linear autoencoders
are too simple to learn complex features. However, the
authors observe that linear autoencoders are often sufﬁcie nt
to achieve competent performance when encountering high
dimensional data. The basic architecture of mSLDA is a
single-layer linear autoencoder. The corresponding singl e-
layer mapping matrix W(augmented with a bias column
for convenience) should minimize the expected squared
reconstruction loss function, i.e.,
W= argmin
W1
2nn/summationdisplay
i=1EP(˜xi|x)/bracketleftbig||xi−W˜xi||2/bracketrightbig,
where˜xidenotes the corrupted version of the input xi. The
solution of Wis given by [98], [99]:
W=/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1xiE[˜xi]T/parenrightBigg/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1E/bracketleftBig
˜xi˜xT
i/bracketrightBig/parenrightBigg−1
.
When the corruption strategy is determined, the above for-
mulas can be further expanded and simpliﬁed into a speciﬁc
form. Note that, in order to insert nonlinearity, a nonlinea r
function is used to squash the output of each autoencoder
after we obtain the matrix Win a closed form. Then, the
next linear autoencoder is stacked to the current one in a
similar way to SDA. In order to deal with high dimensional
data, the authors also put forward an extension approach to
further reduce the computational complexity.
4.2.7 Feature Alignment
Note that feature augmentation and feature reduction
mainly focus on the explicit features in a feature space.
In contrast, in addition to the explicit features, feature
alignment also focuses on some implicit features such as
the statistic features and the spectral features. Therefor e,
feature alignment can play various roles in the feature
transformation process. For example, the explicit feature s
can be aligned to generate a new feature representation, orthe implicit features can be aligned to construct a satisﬁed
feature transformation.
There are several kinds of features that can be aligned,
which includes subspace features, spectral features, and
statistic features. Take the subspace feature alignment as an
example. A typical approach mainly has the following steps.
1.Subspace Generation : In this step, the instances are used
to generate the respective subspaces for the source and
the target domains. The orthonormal bases of the source
and the target domain subspaces are then obtained,
which are denoted by MSandMT, respectively. These
bases are used to learn the shift between the subspaces.
2.Subspace Alignment : In the second step, a mapping,
which aligns the bases MSandMTof the subspaces,
is learned. And the features of the instances are pro-
jected to the aligned subspaces to generate new feature
representation.
3.Learner Training : Finally, the target learner is trained on
the transformed instances.
For example, the work by Fernando et al. proposes an
approach termed Subspace Alignment (SA) [100]. In SA, the
subspaces are generated by performing PCA; the bases MS
andMTare obtained by selecting the leading eigenvectors.
Then, a transformation matrix Wis learned to align the
subspaces, which is given by [100]:
W= argmin
W||MSW−MT||2
F=MT
SMT,
where||·||Fdenotes the Frobenius norm. Note that the
matrixWalignsMSwithMT, or say, transforms the source
subspace coordinate system into the target subspace coor-
dinate system. The transformed low-dimensional source-
domain and target-domain instances are given by XSMSW
andXTMT, respectively. Finally, a learner can be trained on
the resultant transformed instances.
In light of SA, a number of transfer learning approaches
are established. For example, the paper by Sun and Saenko
proposes an approach that aligns both the subspace bases
and the distributions [101], which is termed as Subspace
Distribution Alignment between Two Subspaces (SDA-TS).
In SDA-TS, the transformation matrix Wis formulated as
W=MT
SMTQ, where Qis a matrix used to align the
distribution difference. The transformation matrix Win SA
is a special case of the one in SDA-TS by setting Qto an
identity matrix. Note that SA is a symmetrical feature-base d
approach, while SDA-TS is an asymmetrical one. In SDA-
TS, the labeled source-domain instances are projected to th e
source subspace, then mapped to the target subspace, and
ﬁnally mapped back to the target domain. The transformed
source-domain instances are formulated as XSMSWMT
T.
Another representative subspace feature alignment ap-
proach is Geodesic Flow Kernel (GFK) [102], which is pro-
posed by Gong et al. GFK is closely related to a previous ap-
proach termed Geodesic Flow Subspaces (GFS) [103]. Before
introducing GFK, let us review the steps of GFS at ﬁrst. GFS
is inspired by incremental learning. Intuitively, utilizi ng the
information conveyed by the potential path between two
domains may be beneﬁcial to the domain adaptation. GFS
generally takes the following steps to align features.