11
[91], [92]. CD-PLSA is an extension of Dual-PLSA. Its dia-
gram is shown below:
P(Dk0)
⇓
D →P(di|zd
k1,Dk0)
⇓
d←zdP(zd
k1,zw
k2)
←−−−−−−→ zw→P(wj|zw
k2,Dk0)
⇓w
ց ր,
where1≤k0≤mS+mTdenotes the domain index.
The domainDconnects both the variables dandw, but
is independent of the variables zdandzw. The label in-
formation of the source-domain instances is utilized by
initializing the value P(di|zd
k1,Dk0)(k0= 1,···,mS). Due
to the lack of the target-domain label information, the
valueP(di|zd
k1,Dk0)(k0=mS+ 1,···,mS+mT) can
be initialized based on any supervised classiﬁer. Similarl y,
the authors adopt the EM algorithm to ﬁnd the param-
eters. Through the iterations, all the parameters in the
Bayesian network are obtained. Thus, the class label of the
i-th document in a target domain (denoted by Dk) can
be predicted by computing the posterior probabilities, i.e .,
argmaxzdP(zd|di,Dk).
Zhuang et al. further proposed a general framework
that is termed as Homogeneous-Identical-Distinct-Concep t
Model (HIDC) [93]. This framework is also an extension of
Dual-PLSA. HIDC is composed of three generative models,
i.e., identical-concept, homogeneous-concept, and disti nct-
concept models. These three graphical models are presented
below:
Identical-Concept Model: D→d←zd
ցր→zw
IC→w,
Homogeneous-Concept Model:ր ց
D→d←zd
ցր→zw
HC→w,
Distinct-Concept Model:րցց
D→d←zd
ցր→zw
DC→w.
The original word concept zwis divided into three types,
i.e.,zw
IC,zw
HC, andzw
DC. In the identical-concept model, the
word distributions only rely on the word concepts, and the
word concepts are independent of the domains. However,
in the homogeneous-concept model, the word distributions
also depend on the domains. The difference between the
identical and the homogeneous concepts is that zw
ICis di-
rectly transferable, while zw
HCis the domain-speciﬁc transfer-
able one that may have different effects on the word distri-
butions for different domains. In the distinct-concept mod el,
zw
DCis actually the nontransferable domain-speciﬁc one,
which may only appear in a speciﬁc domain. The above-
mentioned three models are combined as an integrated one,
i.e., HIDC. Similar to other PLSA-related algorithms, HIDC
also uses EM algorithm to get the parameters.
4.2.5 Feature Selection
Feature selection is another kind of operation for feature
reduction, which is used to extract the pivot features. The
pivot features are the ones that behave in the same way
in different domains. Due to the stability of these features ,
they can be used as the bridge to transfer the knowledge.
For example, Blitzer et al. proposed an approach termedStructural Correspondence Learning (SCL) [94]. Brieﬂy, SC L
consists of the following steps to construct a new feature
representation.
1.Feature Selection : SCL ﬁrst performs feature selection
operations to obtain the pivot features.
2.Mapping Learning : The pivot features are utilized to
ﬁnd a low-dimensional common latent feature space by
using the structural learning technique [95].
3.Feature Stacking : A new feature representation is con-
structed by feature augmentation, i.e., stacking the
original features with the obtained low-dimensional
features.
Take the part-of-speech tagging problem as an example. The
selected pivot features should occur frequently in source
and target domains. Therefore, determiners can be included
in pivot features. Once all the pivot features are deﬁned
and selected, a number of binary linear classiﬁers whose
function is to predict the occurrence of each pivot feature a re
constructed. Without losing generality, the decision func tion
of thei-th classiﬁer, which is used to predict the i-th pivot
feature, can be formulated as fi(x) =sign(θi·x), wherexis
assumed to be a binary feature input. And the i-th classiﬁer
is trained on all the instances excluding the features deriv ed
from the i-th pivot feature. The following formula can be
used to estimate the i-th classiﬁer’s parameters, i.e.,
θi= argmin
θ1
nn/summationdisplay
j=1L(θ·xj,Rowi(xj))+λ||θ||2,
where Row i(xj)denotes the true value of the unlabeled
instancexjin terms of the i-th pivot feature. By stacking the
obtained parameter vectors as column elements, a matrix ˜W
is obtained. Next, based on singular value decomposition
(SVD), the top- kleft singular vectors, which are the prin-
cipal components of the matrix ˜W, are taken to construct
the transformation matrix W. At last, the ﬁnal classiﬁer is
trained on the labeled instances in an augmented feature
space, i.e., ([xL
i;WTxL
i]T,yL
i).
4.2.6 Feature Encoding
In addition to feature extraction and selection, feature en -
coding is also an effective tool. For example, autoencoders ,
which are often adopted in deep learning area, can be used
for feature encoding. An autoencoder consists of an encoder
and a decoder. The encoder tries to produce a more abstract
representation of the input, while the decoder aims to map
back that representation and to minimize the reconstructio n
error. Autoencoders can be stacked to build a deep learning
architecture. Once an autoencoder completes the training
process, another autoencoder can be stacked at the top of
it. The newly added autoencoder is then trained by using
the encoded output of the upper-level autoencoder as its
input. In this way, deep learning architectures can thus be
constructed.
Some transfer learning approaches are developed based
on autoencoders. For example, the paper by Glorot et al.
proposes an approach termed Stacked Denoising Autoen-
coder (SDA) [96]. The denoising autoencoder, which can
enhance the robustness, is an extension of the basic one [97] .
This kind of autoencoder contains a randomly corrupting
mechanism that adds noise to the input before mapping. For