10
4.2.4 Feature Clustering
Feature clustering aims to ﬁnd a more abstract feature
representation of the original features. Although it can be
regarded as a way of feature extraction, it is different from
the above-mentioned mapping-based extraction.
For example, some transfer learning approaches implic-
itly reduce the features by using the co-clustering tech-
nique, i.e., simultaneously clustering both the columns an d
rows of (or say, co-cluster) a contingency table based on
the information theory [85]. The paper by Dai et al. [41]
proposes an algorithm termed Co-Clustering Based Clas-
siﬁcation (CoCC), which is used for document classiﬁca-
tion. In a document classiﬁcation problem, the transfer
learning task is to classify the target-domain documents
(represented by a document-to-word matrix) with the help
of the labeled source document-to-word data. CoCC re-
gards the co-clustering technique as a bridge to transfer
the knowledge. In CoCC algorithm, both the source and
the target document-to-word matrices are co-clustered. Th e
source document-to-word matrix is co-clustered to generat e
the word clusters based on the known label information,
and these word clusters are used as constraints during the
co-clustering process of the target-domain data. The co-
clustering criterion is to minimize the loss in mutual infor -
mation, and the clustering results are obtained by iteratio n.
Each iteration contains the following two steps.
1.Document Clustering : Each row of the target document-
to-word matrix is re-ordered based on the objective
function for updating the document clusters.
2.Word Clustering : The word clusters are adjusted to min-
imize the joint mutual-information loss of the source
and the target document-word matrices.
After several times of iterations, the algorithm converges ,
and the classiﬁcation results are obtained. Note that, in
CoCC, the word clustering process implicitly extracts the
word features to form uniﬁed word clusters.
Dai et al. also proposed an unsupervised clustering ap-
proach, which is termed as Self-Taught Clustering (STC)
[42]. Similar to CoCC, this algorithm is also a co-clusterin g-
based one. However, STC does not need the label infor-
mation. STC aims to simultaneously co-cluster the source-
domain and the target-domain instances with the assump-
tion that these two domains share the same feature clusters
in their common feature space. Therefore, two co-clusterin g
tasks are separately performed at the same time to ﬁnd
the shared feature clusters. Each iteration of STC has the
following steps.
1.Instance Clustering : The clustering results of the source-
domain and the target domain instances are updated to
minimize their respective loss in mutual information.
2.Feature Clustering : The feature clusters are updated to
minimize the joint loss in mutual information.
When the algorithm converges, the clustering results of the
target-domain instances are obtained.
Different from the above-mentioned co-clustering-based
ones, some approaches extract the original features into co n-
cepts (or topics). In the document classiﬁcation problem, t he
concepts represent the high-level abstractness of the word s
(e.g., word clusters). In order to introduce the concept-ba sed
transfer learning approaches easily, let us brieﬂy review t heLatent Semantic Analysis (LSA) [86], the Probabilistic LSA
(PLSA) [87], and the Dual-PLSA [88].
•LSA: LSA is an approach to mapping the document-to-
word matrix to a low-dimensional space (i.e., a latent se-
mantic space) based on the SVD technique. In short, LSA
attempts to ﬁnd the true meanings of the words. To realize
this, SVD technique is used to reduce the dimensionality,
which can remove the irrelevant information and ﬁlter out
the noise information from the raw data.
•PLSA : PLSA is developed based on a statistical view of
LSA. PLSA assumes that there is a latent class variable
z, which reﬂects the concept, associating the document d
and the word w. Besides, dandware independently con-
ditioned on the concept z. The diagram of this graphical
model is presented as follows:
dP(di|zk)←−−−−−P(zk)
⇓zP(wj|zk)−−−−−−→ w,
where the subscripts i,jandkrepresent the indexes of the
document, the word, and the concept, respectively. PLSA
constructs a Bayesian network, and the parameters are
estimated by using the Expectation-Maximization (EM)
algorithm [89].
•Dual-PLSA : The Dual-PLSA is an extension of PLSA. This
approach assumes there are two latent variables zdand
zwassociating the documents and the words. Speciﬁcally,
the variables zdandzwreﬂect the concepts behind the
documents and the words, respectively. The diagram of
the Dual-PLSA is provided below:
dP(di|zd
k1)
←−−−−−− zdP(zd
k1,zw
k2)
←−−−−−−→ zwP(wj|zw
k2)
−−−−−−→ w.
The parameters of the Dual-PLSA can also be obtained
based on the EM algorithm.
Some concept-based transfer learning approaches are
established based on PLSA. For example, the paper by Xue
et al. proposes a cross-domain text classiﬁcation approach
termed Topic-Bridged Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analy -
sis (TPLSA) [90]. TPLSA, which is an extension of PLSA,
assumes that the source-domain and the target-domain
instances share the same mixing concepts of the words.
Instead of performing two PLSAs for the source domain and
the target domain separately, the authors merge those two
PLSAs as an integrated one by using the mixing concept zas
a bridge, i.e., each concept has some probabilities to produ ce
the source-domain and the target-domain documents. The
diagram of TPLSA is provided below:
/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingledS
dTտ
ւP(dS
i|zk)=======
P(dT
i|zk)zP(zk|wj)←−−−−−− w.
Note that PLSA does not require the label information. In
order to exploit the label information, the authors add the
concept constraints, which include must-link and cannot-
link constraints, as the penalty terms in the objective
function of TPLSA. Finally, the objective function is iter-
atively optimized to obtain the classiﬁcation results (i.e .,
argmaxzP(z|dT
i)) by using the EM algorithm.
The work by Zhuang et al. proposes an approach termed
Collaborative Dual-PLSA (CD-PLSA) for multi-domain text
classiﬁcation ( mSsource domains and mTtarget domains)