International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence
Volume 11 • Issue 1 • January-March 2017
65. CoGNITIVE C oNVERGENCE oF INTELLIGENT CL oUd CoMPUTING
The computing platforms for machine learning and cognitive computing are converging from two 
sides: (1) the nanoscale and (2) the exascale. At the nanoscale we observe the ascending power of GPU systems (e.g. Pascal GPU) and multi-core systems (e.g. Intel KNL Xeon Phi). At the exascale level we are experiencing new Exabyte data centers that are pushing and storing more video and imaging content than ever before e.g. Google DeepMind acquisition.
This is indeed the beginning of large scale AI applications that are now being approached from 
both sides, the deep learning architectures supported by new GPU hardware with larger multicore systems and exascale cloud system integration with access to Exabyte data streams. Hence, an obvious question that is getting more attention recently is: Is the network of large cloud platforms linked by gigabit interfaces beginning to exhibit more and more brain-like behavior? A prior question that attributed Internet to a brain-like system, appeared as early as 1995 when Peter Russell suggested that an increasingly active global network of densely interconnected humans would initialize the ecosystem for the next development stage in human history (Russell, 2000).
Recently, there seems to be even more evidence (Sporns, 2005) that the internet of things, 
supported by powerful clusters of cloud systems increasingly running machine learning applications, does indeed seem to converge to a world-wide brain-like system (Graham & Rockmore, 2011).
A crude comparison between the current state of the Internet and brain anatomy shows the 
following: both exhibit areas of specialization; both seem to have a modular architecture; both exhibit the same kind of plasticity, that is, large areas can be damaged without a significant effect on the overall operation; both seem to exhibit similar learning and focusing processes.
In effect, the aggregation of all the information available on the internet at any particular time may 
trigger diffusion (or divergence from any particular point of interest), or convergence to a particular point of interest (i.e. complete focus and attention, e.g. presidential elections). This wave like oscillation at a global scale is similar to the brain beta-band synchronization activity produced independently by the prefrontal cortex and the striatum. This causes the formation of new communication circuits which induces rapid learning. Similarly, enhanced activity in any part of the Internet or clustered cloud platforms results in new nodes and new pathway generation. This suggests the development for larger cloud platforms will be in the direction of automated self-configuration and learning. This brings us to the basic concept of Cloudets (Baciu et al., 2012). The ability to monitor and automatically redeploy resources (Baciu et al., 2015), within a cloud orchestration framework, aided by machine learning for predicting resource utilization and load rebalancing (Tudoran et al., 2016) makes the Cloudet architecture ideal for exploring the cloud vs brain metaphor in the context of the global Internet. (This section is contributed by Prof. George Baciu.)
6. dATA C oRRELATI oN VS. INF oRMATI oN dIVERSIT y
In a variety of disciplines such as natural science, mathematics, engineering, and social science, 
statistical correlation has been used to measure similarity between two data distributions. These include Pearson’s correlation in the parametric case, and Kendall’s tau and Spearman’s rho for ranking correlation. More recently, in the new field of information and computer science such as machine learning (ML), data mining (DM), artificial intelligence, and information fusion, information diversity has to be defined in order to measure similarity (or dissimilarity) between two variables (attributes, features, parameters, indicators, and so on) or two systems (forecasting systems, ML systems, DM systems, models, and so on).
Cognitive diversity, as defined in (Hsu et al., 2006, 2010) using rank-score characteristics (RSC) 
function to measure the dissimilarity between two scoring systems. It has been used in several domain applications including visual cognitive systems (Batallones et al., 2015), information retrieval systems (Hsu & Taksa, 2005), target tracking (Lyons & Hsu, 2009), skeleton pruning, feature selection in