International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence
Volume 11 • Issue 1 • January-March 2017
3NI is a transdisciplinary field that studies the neurological models and neural representations of 
genetic information via DNA and acquired information via cognitive neurology and neurocomputation. 
NI encompasses theories and methodologies for neural information processing and neural knowledge representations. A set of fundamental issues such as neural models of genetic and acquired information, neural signaling theory, the neural circuit theory, and neural representation of memory and knowledge is studied in NI.
• Brain Informatics (BI): BI is the second level of brain studies in the hierarchical framework 
of brain/intelligence science, which is built on NI at the neurological level towards cognitive informatics at the functional level (Wang, 2011b, 2012c). BI is a joint field of brain and information sciences that studies information processing mechanisms of the brain at the physiological level by computing and brain imagination technologies. BI explains how the most complicated physiological organ, the human brain, is formed based on the space/time divided nervous systems according to observations in brain anatomy and neurophysiology (Woolsey et al., 2008; Carter et al., 2009; Marieb 1992; Sternberg, 1998; Dayan and Abbott, 2001; Wilson & Keil, 2001; Wang & Fariello, 2012).
It is recognized that the exploration for the brain is a complicated recursive problem where 
contemporary denotational mathematics is needed in order to efficiently deal with its extreme 
complexity. Cognitive psychology and brain science used to explain the brain based on empirical relations between stimuli/tasks and reactions in the cortices. However, the lack of a precise logical model about the brain at a higher level has prevented a rigorous explanation of the brain by losing the forest for the trees. This methodological weakness has led to the investigation into upper layers of the problem towards cognitive and abstract intelligence theories for the brain.
• Cognitive Informatics (CI): CI, in its narrow sense, is the third level of brain studies in the 
hierarchical framework of brain/intelligence science, which is built on both NI and BI at the Figure 1. The theoretical framework of brain and intelligence sciences