International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence
Volume 11 • Issue 1 • January-March 2017
9The primary objective of such agent systems is to satisfactorily perform tasks in T. Perpetual 
learning is just the means for agents to get progressively better, as measured by P, through E at T 
over time.
There are many types of learning stimuli. For instance, inconsistent phenomena (or uncertainties, 
anomalies, surprises, conflicts, peculiarities or outliers) that manifest themselves at various granularities 
of knowledge content (from data, information, knowledge, meta-knowledge, to expertise) can serve as learning stimuli. Henri Poincaré once said that contradiction is the prime stimulus for scientific research (Gotesky, 1968). This statement succinctly captures the essence of what contradictions or inconsistencies can help reveal, and the role they play in helping advance scientific knowledge. Inconsistencies can serve as effective stimuli to learning because they often signify the inadequacies, gaps, deficiencies, or boundary conditions in an agent’s problem-solving knowledge (Wang et al., 2011; Zhang, 2009, 2010, 2011; Zhang & Gregoire, 2011; Zhang & Orgun, 2012, 2013). What the agent possesses in its knowledge base cannot properly and adequately handle the task at hand; hence a subsequent learning episode is in order.
Once an inconsistency is identified, a learning episode ensues. Some inconsistency-specific 
heuristics can be used to overcome the contradiction. Through the process of overcoming an inconsistency, the agent is able to revise, refine, or augment its existing knowledge to adapt to the emergent patterns and behaviors as exhibited by the inconsistent circumstance. Learning is essentially embodied in the process of finding ways to overcome inconsistent phenomena (Zhang, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015; Zhang & Lu, 2012). The goal is to incrementally improve the agent’s problem-solving performance over many such learning episodes.
The STEP learning agents can be characterized as follows: (a) Learning is triggered by stimuli, 
events or circumstances in which an agent is unable to satisfactorily carry out tasks in T. Learning stimuli serve to signify the inadequacy, gaps, deficiencies, or boundary conditions in an agent’s problem-solving knowledge. The agent could not adequately handle T, and P is at stake. (b) Learning takes place in discrete episodes. When an agent system can satisfactorily handle its tasks in T, the need for learning is not necessarily imminent and can be deferred. The life span of an agent can be considered as an alternating sequence of task-performing episodes and learning episodes. (c) Stimulus-specific learning algorithm(s) must be deployed in each learning episode to address the task-performing deficiencies as exposed by the stimulus, e.g., to overcome the specific inconsistent phenomenon. Different learning episodes may require different stimulus-specific algorithms to handle different stimuli. (d) The outcome of a learning episode is that an agent’s knowledge at T is refined or augmented just enough so that the agent won’t be “startled” by the same/similar event or circumstance that triggered the learning episode. The incremental performance improvement as measured by P is accomplished by the agent’s refined knowledge: it knows how to handle the task under the same circumstance next time. (e) The perpetual learning capability is embodied in the open-ended nature of such alternating sequence of task-performing episodes and learning episodes. (This section is contributed by Prof. Du Zhang.)
12. C oNCLUSI oN
This paper has summarized a set of position statements presented in the plenary panel (Part II) 
of IEEE ICCI*CC’16 on Cognitive Informatics: Perspectives on Cognitive Computing, Big Data 
Cognition, and Machine Learning  contributed by invited panelists who are part of the world’s renowned 
scholars in the field of cognitive informatics and cognitive computing. It has been elaborated that the theoretical foundations underpinning brain/intelligence science and cognitive computing are cognitive informatics, abstract intelligence, denotational mathematics, and mathematical engineering. A wide range of theoretical breakthroughs and engineering applications have been reported such as cognitive informatics theories, cognitive computing methodologies, cognitive robots, computing with words, deep learning machines, cognitive learning engines, cognitive systems, cognitive knowledge bases, cognitive engineering, and cognitive self-driving cars.