International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence
Volume 11 • Issue 1 • January-March 2017
8replace, unchallenged, what needs to be asked, and text analytic and other intelligent applications 
remain woefully inadequate.
Meaning is unattainable without representing the human knowledge of the world, a task for 
which first-order logic is not sufficient. Real semantic interpretation of language entities is in the isomorphism between large property-rich ontology capturing the objects of the world and relations among them. We have developed the prototype of such an ontology and implemented several applications in it. Our rule- and meaning-based approach is where efforts in cognitive science and artificial intelligence should be redirected, and cognitive computing is the way! (This section is contributed by Prof. Victor Raskin.)
10. BIG dATA NEE dS CoGNITIVE C oMPUTING
Big data will be a hot topic in this decade. The development of sensors and computers enables us 
to acquire or store big data anywhere and anytime, which may be used for future problem solving and decision making. One of the major branches in big data analytics is how to deal with big data generated by service information system. With computerization of services, medical and healthcare services have been introduced in order to not only enhance the productivity of service entries, but also generate a large amount of services logs as “big data”. Reuse of such data becomes two-fold: one is to reuse the results of service to gain better quality of decision making; and the other is to use the historic data to optimize the efficiency of services. For example, a hospital information system (HIS) collects up to 6TP big data, which are very difficult to grasp the whole status of a certain patient in a comprehensive way.
Therefore, processing such big data needs human-like interpretation before the visualization 
and analysis results are shown. This is a typical context requires cognitive computing. One of the most important aspects of human-like interpretation is “granulation” proposed by Lotfi Zadeh, who pointed out that human can interpret data or humans with different granular scales. Intuitively, coarse scale gives a global view of data, while fine scale provides the precise view. Zadeh discussed that topology may play a central role in granulation. Thus, granular computing becomes a part of cognitive computing especially in the case of medical big data analytics. (This section is contributed by Prof. Shusaku Tsumoto.)
11. LEARNING THR oUGH oVERC oMING INC oNSISTENCIES
Perpetual learning, also known as life-long, continuous, or never-ending learning, is a research direction 
in the field of machine learning (Mitchell, 2006). It is concerned with how to develop computing systems that can automatically, consistently and continuously improve their performance at tasks over time. Perpetual learning is an essential capability for long-lived intelligent agents (natural or artificial) to adapt to complex, dynamic and changing environments for their survival. This capability is indispensable for the following reasons: (a) the initial knowledge in an agent’s knowledge base cannot anticipate all possible situations that the agent may find itself in; (b) the agent cannot foresee all changes in its environment over time; and (c) there are circumstances where it is difficult for the agent to follow a predefined algorithm for a given problem, so it has to rely on learning approaches.
A perpetual learning agent can be defined through its STEP dimensions as follows:
Given S as a set of learning stimuli, T as a set of tasks, E as type of experience, and P as performance metric, a computing system perpetually learns with regard to (S, T, E, P) if the system automatically, consistently and continuously improves its performance P at T, following S and E over time.