International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence
Volume 11 • Issue 1 • January-March 2017
53. CoMPUTING wITH woRdS (Cww) AN d INVALUENCE
There are many misconception about what Computer with Words (CWW) is and what it has to offer. 
A common misconception is that CWW and Natural Language Processing (NLP) are closely related. This is not the case. In fact, CWW and NLP have very different agendas. The objects of computation in CWW are propositions drawn from natural language. Such propositions are carriers of information, which are typically imprecise, uncertain and incomplete. There is a vast literature on propositions in natural languages, but the concepts and techniques which are described in this literature are not suited for use in CWW because there were formulated at the time when computers had not existed.
Underlying CWW are two postulates and two concomitant rationales.
A.  Words are less precise than numbers
B.  Precision carriers a cost
C.  When numerical information is not available or too costly, CWW becomes necessary
D.  CWW’s advantages can be exploited to reduce cost, simplify design, and enhance robustness when there is a tolerance for imprecision
These rationales are the basis for some important applications where mathematical modules and 
precise information are put aside and simple linguistic models and fuzzy if-then rule are employed. A 
very simple example is stabilization of inverted pendulum which was described by Professor Yamakawa in his 1999 paper. In this paper differential equations are employed to describe a mathematical model of the inverted pendulum with classical stability theory. The traditional approach requires a high-level familiarity for control and stability theories. However, in the CWW-based approach a linguistic model is employed and linguistic fuzzy if-then rules are used to stabilize the pendulum. Low accuracy sensors are employed for measuring the state of the pendulum. The basic ideas which are employed in stabilization of the inverted pendulum can be used in many important practical applications such as ship stabilization and helicopter control.
A question which arises: What can be done when neither numerical information nor linguistic 
information is available? This situation will refer to as an Invaluence, meaning that no value can be assign to a variable. What can be employed in such situations is an approach based on the use of so called Z-numbers. Informally, a Z-number, Z, is an ordered pair (A, B) referring to the value and 
confidence of a variable X, respectively. A is an estimation of the value of X called a focal variable. B is an estimate of the goodness/correctness/reliability of A with respect to X. The same idea can apply to the definition of concept which do not lend themselves to traditional form of definition. Among such concepts are those of causality, fairness, relevance and beauty. Actually, there are many concepts which are of this type and which cannot serve as a basis for construction of theories which are rigorous and precise. It is my believe, that CWW and Invaluence will become a significant object of attention and development in coming years. (This section is contributed by Prof. Lotfi A. Zadeh.)
4. LEARNINGS AN d INN oVATI oNS IN SPEECH REC oGNITI oN IN G ooGLE
In the last ten years, speech recognition has evolved from a science fiction dream to a widespread 
input method for mobile devices. In this section, I describe how speech recognition works, the problems we have solved and the challenges that remain. I will touch upon some of Google’s main efforts in language and pronunciation modeling, and describe how the adoption of neural networks for acoustic modeling marked the beginning of a technology revolution in the field, with approaches such as Long-Short Term Memory models and Connectionist Temporal Classification. I will also share my learnings on how Machine Learning and Human Knowledge can be harmoniously combined to build state-of-the-art technology that helps and delights users across the world. (This section is contributed by Dr. Françoise Beaufays.)