International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence
Volume 11 • Issue 1 • January-March 2017
7protein structure prediction, and virtual screening (Yang, 2005). (This section is contributed by Prof. 
D. Frank Hsu.)
7. PERSPECTIVES oN CoGNITIVE C oMPUTING, BIG 
dATA C oGNITI oN, AN d MACHINE LEARNING
The AlphaGo deep learning system represents a recent breakthrough in AI, which has defeated human 
experts in Go games based on deep learning and big data techniques. This event has demonstrated a bright perspective on cognitive computing based on big data. It also triggered strong interest among researchers on big data based learning. Although the term “big data” is relatively new, the act of gathering and storing large amounts of information for eventual analysis is age old. The concept gained momentum in early 2000s when industry analyst Doug Laney articulated the definition of big data as the three Vs, i.e., Volume, Velocity, and Variety. The 3-Vs perception on big data may be extended to 5-Vs known as Volume, Velocity, Variety, Veracity, and Value. Although the 5-Vs were well expressed, some of them are not innate, independent, and some were still missing. Therefore, I propose that the characterization for big data can be modeled to include the following: Volume, Velocity, Distribution, Randomness, and Regularity. This is inline with a formal definition of big data as provided in big data algebra (Wang, 2016d): “Big data are extremely large-scaled heterogeneous data in terms of quantity, complexity, storage, retrieval, semantics, cognition, distribution, maintenance, and processing costs across computer science, information science, cognitive informatics, web-based computing, cloud computing, social networks, and computational intelligence.” (This section is contributed by Prof. Guiming Luo.)
8. BASIC RESEARCH oN SELF- dRIVING
In this statements, we focus on driver’s behavior based on real-time data collected by driving 
recorders. We treat the cognitive inference function on driving behaviors as meta-cognition. Using the meta-cognition, we can find out the characters of drivers behaving on highways. By comparing the simulation results with driving recorder data, we have identified driver’s cognitive processes on highways such as driving in the same lane, curve negotiation, and lane changing. In order to carry out the driving experiments in real-world conditions, we adopted a simple driving recorder widely available. The driving data were collected in a Toyota on the highway from Meguro to Nagano in Japan. This study can successfully recognize driver behaviors and maneuvers in real-time on the highway, which will lead to the design of next generation of self-driving systems learnt from human drivers. (This section is contributed by Prof. Fumio Mizoguchi.)
9. CoGNITIVE C oMPUTING AS A PATH T o REAL 
CoGNITI oN AN d ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
I strongly believe that cognitive computing with its attempts to add understanding in the computer to 
what it is doing is the only way to understand, formalize, represent and compute human intelligence. I have no particular interest in trying to emulate human intelligent processes unintelligently, and along with other older scholars, including several former leaders and founders of machine learning, I lament the massive turn away from the big issues in cognitive science and artificial intelligence.
I understand that it is easier to try and exploit a method further and further but I wonder whether 
there is any use in doing it without spending as much or more effort on understanding what this method can yield. The crucial question in my world of natural language understanding is what a text means. Can a statistical method even begin to answer this question? No, it can’t, so the answers that can be produced, namely, whether Text A and Text B belong to the same group are allowed to