Fig. 7. Training and Validation Loss for Masked model
the validation curve quickly gets to a minimum and becomes
stable. But the problem is that the validation loss is too high,
which implies that our model is not learning from our data,
and we need to do more work to get it to perform better.
As expected, we have a nice curve for our training and
validation accuracy for the unmasked dataset, as shown in
Figure 6. We can still do better to increase the accuracy
of the validation dataset. We compare this result to that of
the masked dataset in Figure 8 and notice that our train and
validation accuracy keeps increasing without giving that stable
curve at a point. This result corresponds to our expectation
earlier in our report that the reduction in features due to
occlusion may hinder our masked model from learning. Hence
we can try other techniques to improve the performance
of our face recognition on masked faces. We will discuss
such methods in the next section. Finally, looking at our
performance metrics, we observe that our model performs well
on the unmasked than on the masked. The F1-score for the
masked and unmasked is 0.897 and 0.4473. The recall was
also high for the unmasked model while it was low for the
masked model. We also have similar results for precision.
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE METRICS
Type of Data Precision Recall F1-Score
unmasked 0.8933 0.8970 0.897
masked 0.4613 0.4719 0.4473
VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In the course of this work, we have learned that convolu-
tional networks are good at recognizing faces but can perform
badly when faces are occluded. The implication is that the
simple use of these architectures will not give the desired
outcome as we noticed in our project of recognizing masked
faces. Hence, more novel techniques need to be implemented
to improve their performance. We have seen from literature
Fig. 8. Training and Validation Accuracy for Masked model
that cropping out the masked part of the face can give a
better result, or in the case of 3D learning, where the full
faces were recovered from the structural features available
and then features compared to training images. We can use
improve on this method to improve our results. We also
learned we could try increasing the dataset available to us
by simulating masks on our unmasked dataset. We think this
could give us a better result as this will remove the unbalanced
nature of our data. Also, we could try techniques such as
domain adaptation methods to see how this would boost
our performance. Finally, we could also combine other CNN
architectures and also combine these architectures with other
machine learning techniques to also improve our performance.
REFERENCES
[1] Shervin Minaee, Amirali Abdolrashidi, Hang Su, Mohammed Ben-
namoun, and David Zhang. Biometric Recognition Using Deep Learn-
ing: A Survey. arXiv:1912.00271 [cs] , April 2020. arXiv: 1912.00271.
[2] Y . Han, C. Ryu, J. Moon, H. Kim, and H. Choi. A Study on Evaluating
the Uniqueness of Fingerprints Using Statistical Analysis. In Choon-sik
Park and Seongtaek Chee, editors, Information Security and Cryptology
– ICISC 2004 , Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 467–477,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. Springer.
[3] Relly Victoria Petrescu. Face Recognition as a Biometric Application.
SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3417325, Social Science Research Network,
Rochester, NY , April 2019.
[4] Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. FaceNet: A
Uniﬁed Embedding for Face Recognition and Clustering. 2015 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages
815–823, June 2015. arXiv: 1503.03832.
[5] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition, 2015.
[6] Global COVID-19 total tops 51 million as US hospital cases rise,
November 2020.
[7] Derek K. Chu, Elie A. Akl, Stephanie Duda, Karla Solo, Sally Yaacoub,
Holger J. Sch ¨unemann, Derek K. Chu, Elie A. Akl, Amena El-harakeh,
Antonio Bognanni, Tamara Lotﬁ, Mark Loeb, Anisa Hajizadeh, Anna
Bak, Ariel Izcovich, Carlos A. Cuello-Garcia, Chen Chen, David J.
Harris, Ewa Borowiack, Fatimah Chamseddine, Finn Sch ¨unemann,
Gian Paolo Morgano, Giovanna E. U. Muti Sch ¨unemann, Guang Chen,
Hong Zhao, Ignacio Neumann, Jeffrey Chan, Joanne Khabsa, Layal
Hneiny, Leila Harrison, Maureen Smith, Nesrine Rizk, Paolo Giorgi
Rossi, Pierre AbiHanna, Rayane El-khoury, Rosa Stalteri, Tejan Baldeh,
Thomas Piggott, Yuan Zhang, Zahra Saad, Assem Khamis, Marge
Reinap, Stephanie Duda, Karla Solo, Sally Yaacoub, and Holger J.