Fig. 3. Pairs of face images from RMFRD dataset: face without mask (up)
and face with mask (down).
the unmasked faces prediction. Both masked and unmasked
dataset is split into 70% training and 30% validation data.
With the given criterion we end up with 77 classes in the
masked dataset and unmasked dataset. We made this decision
because tried and tested implementations of face recognition
using convolutional networks have shown that we need 10 - 20
images per class if we are using a pre-trained model and 1000-
2000 images per class if the model is trained from scratch[30].
We do not have such an enormous dataset available, therefore
we had to settle for at least eight images per class in the
masked dataset. In Figure 4, we show the statistics of the
dataset used in our project, where the blue bars are for the
masked dataset and the orange bars are for the unmasked
dataset. From the bar chart, we can see that we have an
unbalanced dataset with the unmasked dataset for each class
surpassing the masked dataset with an average ratio of 50:1.
The dimension of the images are not ﬁxed but approximately
between 100-200 pixels by 100-200 pixels. In our training
and validation phases, we convert all the images to a size
of 180 by 180 pixels, and based on the experimentation so
far, using this size turns out to be the wisest of choices. We
applied the random ﬂip horizontally to our training images as a
data augmentation method. We applied this to our dataset such
that at each batch generation, these augmented data will be
produced. With data augmentation, we think that the diversity
of our dataset will increase during training.
B. HyperParameter Tuning
We manually selected and applied different hyperparameter
tuning in a bid to get better results. Since we had two different
experiments on training our model on unmasked faces, then
test on masked faces. During the training and testing the fol-
lowing hyperparameters work best for our model as shown in
Table I. It is important to note that from our table we changed
our optimizer from Stochastic Gradient Descent(SGD) in the
unmasked dataset to Adam in the masked dataset. This was
because we realized that our accuracy improved from 21% to
the current 44.73% when we did so.TABLE I
HYPERPARAMETERS TESTED
HyperParameters unmasked masked
Batch Size 256 32
Optimizer SGD Adam
Dropout 0.5 0.4
Loss Cross Entropy Cross Entropy
Learning Rate 0.002 0.0016
Epoch 20 25
VI. R ESULTS
In this section, we discuss our best results in terms of
accuracy and loss. We will use precision, recall, and F1-score
to observe how well our model worked since these are the
commonly used performance metrics. Finally, we will compare
our results to similar works in this area, however with different
datasets to see how good our model performs.
A. Unmasked Faces
For our unmasked faces, our architecture did better on the
masked than on the masked dataset. This is as a result of
having more dataset for training the unmasked than the masked
dataset. However, its performance is close to though lower
than the performance of the state of the art algorithms in face
recognition. We attribute this that we might need to do more
hyperparameter tuning to get better results. Also, we could try
other CNN models and compare the results to our architecture.
Also, we acknowledge that comparison of CNN models trained
on different dataset results in unfair comparisons hence we do
not use such as a baseline for our results[27].
We explain the different hyperparameters selected for our
unmasked face training. We started with a Batch size of 256,
SGD with momentum of 0.9, and nesterov was enabled. Since
we are using transfer learning, we froze 10 children of the pre-
trained network and trained the rest. We use a Learning Rate
of 0.002 with a decay rate (gamma) of 0.11 and a step size of
14. We run our proposed model for 20 epochs with a cross-
entropy loss. We noticed that our model was overﬁtting, hence
we added dropout layers for regularisation of the model. We
achieved an accuracy of 89.7016% and a loss of 0.4698 (refer
to Fig. 4 and Fig. 5). Additionally we got, a precision score
of 0.8993, a recall score of 0.8970, and F1 score of 0.897 as
shown in Table II.
B. Masked Faces
After we have trained our model on our training sets, we
tested on our masked data, and we realized that we did not do
as well as we did in the unmasked face recognition. This is
because of the lower number of features due to the occlusion
of the face by the mask. The data imbalance of our unmasked
to the masked dataset can also be a problem. We compare
the two results in Table II below. To achieve these results,
we tuned several hyperparameters. We changed our batch size
from 256 to a batch size of 32. We used the optimizer, Adam,
instead of Stochastic Gradient Descent. Then we froze seven
children of the proposed model. We use the learning rate of