Masked Face Recognition using ResNet-50
Bishwas Mandal
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS, USA
Email: bishmdl76@ksu.eduAdaeze Okeukwu
Kansas State University
Manhattan,KS, USA
Email: adaeze@ksu.eduYihong Theis
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS, USA
Email:yihong@ksu.edu
Abstract —Over the last twenty years, there have seen several
outbreaks of different coronavirus diseases across the world.
These outbreaks often led to respiratory tract diseases and have
proved to be fatal sometimes. Currently, we are facing an elusive
health crisis with the emergence of COVID-19 disease of the
coronavirus family. One of the modes of transmission of COVID-
19 is airborne transmission. This transmission occurs as humans
breathe in the droplets released by an infected person through
breathing, speaking, singing, coughing, or sneezing. Hence, public
health ofﬁcials have mandated the use of face masks which
can reduce disease transmission by 65%. For face recognition
programs, commonly used for security veriﬁcation purposes, the
use of face mask presents an arduous challenge since these
programs were typically trained with human faces devoid of
masks but now due to the onset of Covid-19 pandemic, they are
forced to identify faces with masks. Hence, this paper investigates
the same problem by developing a deep learning based model
capable of accurately identifying people with face-masks. In this
paper, the authors train a ResNet-50 based architecture that
performs well at recognizing masked faces. The outcome of this
study could be seamlessly integrated into existing face recognition
programs that are designed to detect faces for security veriﬁcation
purposes.
I. I NTRODUCTION
As humans continue to make technological advances, the
need to secure devices that house both our private and of-
ﬁcial matters is paramount. Some of the traditional methods
achieved this feat by using ID cards, passwords, passphrases,
and puzzles. However, with the rapid advancement in the ﬁeld
of deep learning and high performance computing, the usage
of human biometrics such as the face, voice and ﬁngerprints
are deemed ubiquitous in the modern day security veriﬁcation
programs[1]. The widespread use of these human biometrics
relates to their uniqueness, making it difﬁcult to replicate
them[2]. Similarly, face recognition programs allow a quicker
yet efﬁcient framework for identiﬁcation of an individual[3].
Face recognition software can be seen in everyday devices
like mobile phones and laptops and in physical security devices
deployed in ofﬁces. Their success in accurately identifying
different people is unprecedented. However, to achieve this
step, pre-trained models such as FaceNet[4], ResNets[5], Ses-
Nets, and their variants in use in human face recognition
are trained on human faces without a mask. Generally, this
is not an issue because people verify their identity without
facial coverings. However, in situations where there’s a need to
identify someone with facial covering, it becomes challenging
for deep learning algorithms to identify the unique features
that verify a person’s identity.Currently, we face a critical health challenge with the onset
of COVID-19 disease that has infected about 51 million people
and killed over 1.3 million people worldwide[6]. Public health
ofﬁcials identiﬁed that wearing a facial mask can reduce trans-
mission of COVID-19 by about 65%[7]. Abiding by this public
health directive, individuals are always required to wear a face
mask, especially at times when they interact with one another.
Therefore, individuals in enclosed spaces will need to wear
face masks to authenticate their identity on their mobile phones
or laptop devices. Currently, algorithms that are successful on
unmasked faces have been unable to generalize such successes
on masked faces. One of the problems associated to detecting
an unmasked face is that the deep learning models would
use more features, i.e., the whole face to identify someone.
However, with a masked face, the nose and mouth is occluded.
In that lies the problem of identifying individuals with just the
eyes and sometimes, the forehead.
Hence, we proposed a framework to solve the problem of
identifying individuals with masked faces using ResNet-50
architecture. Furthermore, we apply transfer learning to adapt
a pre-trained ResNet-50 model to our images, comprising
of individuals without face masks. Then we apply different
architectural changes and subject the model to hyperparameter
tuning to identify the identity of individuals with a mask from
images of same individuals without a mask.
Our contribution includes:
1) Finetuning a pre-trained ResNet-50 model on our dataset
and obtaining an accuracy of 89%.
2) Developing and ﬁnetuning the hyperparameters of a
ResNet-50 based architecture that gives around 47%
percent accuracy in identifying faces when used on the
masked face dataset.
3) A detailed description on hyperparameters tuning for the
model is presented.
II. R ELATED WORK
Computer vision is one of the most successful research areas
in the ﬁeld of machine learning. Major progress occurred in
this area within the past two decades. In 2006, Hinton et al
[8] proposed a model to train deeper neural networks to the
desired depth. Then, with the availability of ImageNet [9],
a breakthrough occurred in 2012 [10], with the development
of an 8-layer neural network that outperformed all other
algorithms in the identiﬁcation of images in ImageNet. They
applied convolutional layers, rectiﬁed linear activation, andarXiv:2104.08997v1  [cs.CV]  19 Apr 2021