dropout in their architecture. Their results paved the way
for developing better algorithms in computer vision. Face
recognition can be classiﬁed as a subset of computer vision.
With the application of similar techniques used in computer
vision, face recognition present high accuracies in recognizing
faces. This is important since it enables the identiﬁcation and
authentication of individuals[3]. In this section, we focus our
discussion on the deep learning techniques that evolved the
work on face recognition research. In 2015, FaceNet [4] , using
the GoogleNet-24 framework achieved an accuracy of 99.63%
on the LFW database[11]. Parkhi et al [12] worked on the
VGGFace and achieved an accuracy of 98.95% on the LFW
database. In this case, the architecture used was the VGGNet-
16. Most common techniques have relied on ResNet[5] and
its variants after Microsoft Research performed an image
classiﬁcation with this architecture with a good performance
in 2015. Analogous to our particular case, Cao et al[13] used
ResNet-50 architecture to access face recognition performance
in their work.
Recognizing faces with occlusion is a variant of the fa-
cial recognition problem. Simple face recognition algorithms
become limited[14] when the intention is to recognize faces
when people wear hats, eyeglasses, masks as well as other
objects that can occlude part of the face while leaving others
unaffected in the images. For instance, the existing methods
such as the VGG-16, ResNet, and VGGFace learnt discrimi-
nate features from full-face images. However, learning features
from full-face images of occluded faces does not give us useful
features on the identity of the face. Needless to say, that our
work is related to some of these problems. In the current study,
we focused on solving the problem of facial recognition on
masked faces. We realized that when a person wears a mask
in the training image, it becomes cahllenging to recognize the
corresponding person without a mask, since the eyes and nose
are important features for identiﬁcation.
Several works have been conducted to detect faces with
occlusion. There are two main approaches used in this regard,
which are the restoration approach and discard occlusion based
approach [14]. The restoration approach tries to restore the
occluded parts of the images based on the images in the
training. Bachi et al [15] use a 3D face recognition system
in restoring parts of the face which is occluded. The system
registers a 3D input of a person’s face using the Iterative
Closest Point Algorithm, then the occluded parts of the face
are detected, followed by restoration technique using the
Principal Component Algorithm(PCA). Similarly, Drira et al
[16] use a 3D based statistical approach in recognizing and
estimating the occluded part of the face. THE PCA approach
is used in the recovery of occluded parts of the face.
The discard occlusion based approach rejects the occluded
parts completely to avoid a bad reconstruction process, then
the remaining parts of the face are used in the feature extrac-
tion and classiﬁcation processes. Priya et al [17] divided the
face image into small local patches. Then used the support vec-
tor machine to detect occluded parts of the face and removedthem. After which the mean based weight matrix is used
to identify the remaining partial face. Also, Weng et al[18]
eliminated occluded parts of the face, marked out keypoints,
and extracted features from those keypoints. Furthermore, they
used a matching mechanism to align the extracted information
with those in the gallery by estimating the similarity of the two
faces as the distance between to aligned features.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, lots of researchers have
focused their study on whether or not people wear masks [19],
[20], [21]. However, this is different from our study since the
problem of wearing or not wearing a mask is a mask detection
problem while ours is strictly a face detection problem, with an
added constraint that the face is masked. With regards to this,
we realize there are far less works that are studying how to use
the current state-of-the-art facial recognition models to detect
the identiﬁcation of a person with a face mask. Detecting
the identity of a person wearing a face mask is a much
tougher problem since the number of features to make this
identiﬁcation reduces. Hariri[14] worked on recognizing faces
on a mask by cropping the eyes and the forehead, and then
used a quantization based pooling method on VGG–16 pre-
trained model by considering only the feature maps at the last
convolutional layer using Bag-of-Features (BoF) paradigm.
Geng et. al[22] used two strategies to identify masked faces.
First, the simulated masked faces of the plain faces was used
to generate more training data. Next, they used the Domain
Constrained Ranking (DCR) loss that creates two centers for
the full image and masked images of each identity. Then the
DCR ensures that the feature of masked faces gets close to the
corresponding full face. Masked face recognition can also be
considered as partial face recognition problem. Liao et al[23]
developed an alignment-free face representation method based
on Mult-Keypoint Descriptors (MKD), where the variable size
descriptor of a face is determined by the actual content of the
image. Then used a fast ﬁltering method for facial recognition.
Sato et al[24] proposed a radial basis function (RBF) networks
for 100 persons partial face images. However, He et al.[25]
proposed a dynamic feature match (DFM) method with sliding
loss to address partial face image issues regardless of the size.
Our work is closely related to Hariri[14]. We use ResNet
instead of VGG16 because of the high performance of CNN
based methods that have strong robustness to illumination,
facial expression and facial occlusion changes. In this study,
we demonstrate a method to take on the mask as another
feature besides the full face and deploy deep CNN based
model to address the problem of masked face detection during
the COVID-19 pandemic. The paper is further divided into
different sections. Section III discusses the problem statement,
Section IV examines the technical approach considered and
implemented in this study, Section V explores the experimental
approach, Section VI analyzes our preliminary results and
ﬁnally, the Section VII concludes with the future research
direction.