Deep RNN Framework for Visual Sequential Applications
Bo Pang∗Kaiwen Zha∗Hanwen Cao Chen Shi Cewu Lu†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{pangbo, kevin zha, mbd chw, shichen, lucewu }@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Extracting temporal and representation features efﬁ-
ciently plays a pivotal role in understanding visual se-
quence information. To deal with this, we propose a new
recurrent neural framework that can be stacked deep ef-
fectively. There are mainly two novel designs in our deep
RNN framework: one is a new RNN module called Context
Bridge Module (CBM) which splits the information ﬂowing
along the sequence (temporal direction) and along depth
(spatial representation direction), making it easier to train
when building deep by balancing these two directions; the
other is the Overlap Coherence Training Scheme that re-
duces the training complexity for long visual sequential
tasks on account of the limitation of computing resources.
We provide empirical evidence to show that our deep
RNN framework is easy to optimize and can gain accu-
racy from the increased depth on several visual sequence
problems. On these tasks, we evaluate our deep RNN
framework with 15 layers, 7 ×than conventional RNN net-
works, but it is still easy to train. Our deep framework
achieves more than 11% relative improvements over shal-
low RNN models on Kinetics, UCF-101, and HMDB-51
for video classiﬁcation. For auxiliary annotation, after re-
placing the shallow RNN part of Polygon-RNN with our
15-layer deep CBM, the performance improves by 14.7%.
For video future prediction, our deep RNN improves the
state-of-the-art shallow model’s performance by 2.4% on
PSNR and SSIM. The code and trained models are pub-
lished accompanied by this paper: https://github.
com/BoPang1996/Deep-RNN-Framework .
1. Introduction
With the advent of deep neural networks (DNN) in recent
years, a mass of vision tasks have made great progress [25,
53, 40, 36, 12] due to its superior representation capabil-
ity for high-dimensional data. On top of spatial represen-
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author. Cewu Lu is a member of Department of Com-
puter Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, MoE Key
Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.tation, temporal features are valuable and crucial as well
when dealing with sequential inputs like videos, for which
recurrent neural networks (RNN) are designed. Taking all
above into consideration, we are intended to build a deep
RNN architecture that combines the merits of both RNN
and DNN to extract more powerful temporal and represen-
tation features from visual sequential inputs.
A straightforward way to build RNN deeper is to simply
stack multiple RNN layers. However, this method is en-
countered with two problems. For one thing, in this deep
RNN structure, there exist two information ﬂows — repre-
sentation ﬂow andtemporal ﬂow , along structural (spatial)
depth and temporal depth respectively, however, these two
ﬂows are often entangled with each other, making it hard
for models to be co-adaptive to both of them. Many spe-
ciﬁc RNN structures like LSTM [16] and GRU [6] are de-
signed mainly to capture temporal information among long
sequences, yet there is no adaption that can effectively take
advantage of both the two ﬂows. Therefore, simply stacking
these RNN modules will lead to higher training error and
heavier training consumption. For another, the limitation
of computing resources greatly inﬂuences the feasibility of
this method. Unlike deep CNN [33, 27, 28], deep RNN
needs to unfold as many times as the sequence length, re-
sulting in more signiﬁcant expansion of memory and com-
putational complexity with the depth increasing, especially
for visual sequential inputs.
In this paper, we propose a new deep RNN architecture
including two principle techniques, namely, Context Bridge
Module (CBM) and Overlap Coherence Training Scheme .
In CBM, we design two computing units taking charge of
representation ﬂow and temporal ﬂow respectively, forcing
these two ﬂows relatively independent of each other with
the aim of making them focus on representation and tempo-
ral information separately to ease the training process. After
these two units, a merge unit is utilized to synthesize them.
By adjusting the synthesizing method, we can balance the
dominant degree of each direction to better adapt to the re-
quirements of different tasks. Furthermore, to make repre-
sentation ﬂow less inﬂuenced by temporal ﬂow in the be-
ginning of training, we design the Temporal Dropout (TD)
423