to interdict the back-propagation of temporal information
across layers with a certain probability.
Besides, the proposed Overlap Coherence Training
Scheme aims at reducing the training cost of deep RNN.
Since the enormous training consumptions are largely due
to the long sequence, we introduce this training scheme that
randomly samples the long sequence with length linto sev-
eral overlapping short clips with length nand leverages the
overlaps as the communication bridge between the adjacent
clips to smooth the information propagation among clips. In
this way, we simplify the original Markov process of order
linto several ones of order n(n<l ), which remarkably re-
duces the training complexity, and guarantees the temporal
information coherence among clips at the same time. Based
on overlaps, we design overlap coherence loss that forces
the detached clips to generate coherent results in order to
strengthen the consistency of temporal information, which
makes the model not a strict Markov process of order n, but
the complexity is still reduced.
We conduct comprehensive experiments on several tasks
to show the challenge of training deep RNN and evaluate
our proposed deep RNN framework. Results reveal that:
1) Deep RNN can enjoy accuracy gains from the greatly
increased depth, substantially better than the shallow net-
works. 2) Our CBM is more suitable for stacking deep com-
pared with other RNN structures like LSTM. 3) The overlap
coherence training scheme can effectively make many com-
puter vision problems with high-dimensional sequential in-
puts trainable on commonly-used computing devices.
We evaluate our framework on several visual sequence
tasks: action recognition and anticipation on UCF-101 [43],
HMDB-51 [26] and Kinetics [4], auxiliary annotation
(Polygon-RNN [5]) on Cityscapes [7], and video future pre-
diction on KTH [39]. For action recognition and anticipa-
tion tasks, our deep RNN framework achieves more than
11% relative improvements on all the datasets compared
with the shallow RNN models. For Polygon-RNN task, IoU
value improves by 14.7% on Cityscapes. For video future
prediction task, our deep RNN improves the performance
by 2.4% on PSNR [31] and SSIM [47] metrics.
2. Related Work
Methods for Visual Sequence Tasks Visual sequence
problems require models to extract hierarchical temporal
and representation features simultaneously. A slew of prior
arts have shed light on this tough problem: 1) An inchoate
approach is pooling the spatial representation features of ev-
ery item in the sequence, such as [23, 52] when dealing with
video classiﬁcation and [46, 48] for action detection and lo-
calization. This approach can extract relative high-quality
spatial representation features but is very weak for tempo-
ral ones because it treats the sequence as a set and simply
combines the spatial features of the set as global temporalfeatures without considering order relations. 2) Then 3D
convolutional networks [22, 4] appear, which treat temporal
dimension equal to spatial dimension with its cubic convo-
lution kernel, while 3D convolutional networks need to con-
sume large amount of computing resources. 3) RNN [49, 8]
is designed to handle sequence problems, therefore it is
a natural idea to utilize RNN to encode temporal infor-
mation after obtaining spatial features, which is adopted
in [49, 8, 29, 34] for video classiﬁcation, [8, 44] for video
description, [5, 1] for auxiliary annotation and [45, 50, 32]
for video future prediction. Whereas, currently used RNN
is shallow, which may limit its performance.
Exploration on Deep RNN In this paper, we focus on ex-
ploring appropriate deep structure for RNN model. There
are many previous works trying to address this problem.
In [35, 14], the authors evaluate several ways to extend
RNN deeper, and results show that stacked RNN has rel-
atively better performance and more importantly, stacking
method can synthesize temporal information in each layer
to extract hierarchical temporal-spatial features instead of
plain temporal, deep spatial features.
The learning computational complexity of deep RNN
signiﬁcantly increases with the depth growing, thus in [38],
the authors propose a new RNN structure called LSTMP
to reduce the complexity. In [20, 21, 18, 14], researchers
prove that deep RNNs outperform associated shallow coun-
terparts that employ the same number of parameters. [20]
shows that each layer captures a different aspect of compo-
sitionality which reveals deep RNN’s ability to extract hi-
erarchical features, and a deep bidirectional RNN structure
is proposed in [21]. All these previous works prove the im-
portance of RNN depth in NLP and speech area, while for
high-dimensional inputs like videos in computer vision, it
is more challenging to tackle as we mentioned above. For
them, what we suppose to build is a deep RNN framework
which is easy to optimize even when inputs are large-scale
and can achieve promising improvements on performance
at the same time.
3. Deep RNN Framework
Deep model has exhibited superior performance in pro-
ducing powerful features, and we hope sequence modeling
can enjoy the deep representation as well. To this end, we
introduce our deep RNN framework in this section, which
contains two parts: context bridge module (CBM) designed
to effectively capture temporal and representation infor-
mation simultaneously, and the overlap coherence training
scheme to further simplify the training process.
3.1. Context Bridge Module
To model visual sequential inputs, we need to make sure
it can be trained efﬁciently when building deep. For this,
we design a non-shallow recurrent architecture to respec-
424