Figure 3. Four examples of feature maps from the representation
and temporal unit on the toy experiment. “F1” denotes frame 1,
“R” denotes representation unit and “T” denotes temporal unit.
back-propagation from Tunit through the dashed line in
Fig. 1 with a certain probability. Just like dropout proposed
in [25], it can reduce complex co-adaptations of two ﬂows
and enhance model’s generalization ability. Speciﬁcally, we
begin with a high temporal dropout rate (forbidding with
a high probability) to isolate temporal information of each
layer. In this way, the representation unit can capture effec-
tive representation easily, since it largely shortens the back-
propagation chain in temporal ﬂow as shown in Fig. 2 and
only gradients from Rcan back-propagate to previous lay-
ers. That is, the workload of learning two ﬂows, to some
extent, can be de-coupled in different time by gradually de-
creasing the TD rate to incorporate temporal information
with representation features as training goes. To verify the
effectiveness of this idea, several experiments are conducted
in Section 4 and Section 5.
Comparison with Conventional RNN/LSTM As men-
tioned before, stacked RNN/LSTM is a solution for deep
recurrent architecture. Actually, our proposed approach is
a general version of it. Speciﬁcally, when we set the out-
put ofRunit as constant 1, our model degenerates into
stacked RNN/LSTM model ( Tunit can be LSTM cell).
If we further set the depth of representation branch to 1,
our model becomes a conventional shallow RNN/LSTM.
From another perspective, our model can be considered as
an extension of stacked RNN/LSTM with an extra context
bridge, namely the Runit.
Discussion with a Toy Experiment To further provide an
intuitive perception for the function of context bridge mod-
ule, we design a toy experiment. The experiment is a video
classiﬁcation task that requires the model to learn which
object is in the video from spatial information and how it
moves from the temporal information, such as “a triangle is
moving left” or “a circle is moving right”. We adopt a 3-
layer CBM model with 3 channels and visualize the feature
maps of the ﬁnal layer’s representation unit and temporal
unit in Fig. 3. We can see the two computing units act as
expected that the representation one mainly focuses on the
spatial information while the temporal information is cap-
tured by the temporal unit.
Original Training Scheme
Simple Sampling Method
Overlap Coherence Training SchemeFigure 4. Deep RNN training schemes. First row: original train-
ing scheme for RNN that takes the whole sequence as input and
the information can ﬂow forward and backward without interdict-
ing.Second row: simple sampling method that samples the input
long sequence into several short clips. Third row: our overlap
coherence training scheme. Note that every item in the sequence
can receive backward information (gradients) due to the existence
of overlaps. The red line represents the initialization of each clip
that is randomly chosen from the former clips with overlaps.
3.2. Overlap Coherence Training Scheme
Challenge In practice, utilizing deep RNN to model high-
dimensional visual long sequences can be hard to achieve
because with the depth increasing, the computing resources
needed signiﬁcantly expand. The deeper the model is, the
more dramatically computational complexity grows with
the increase of the sequence length, which can be regarded
as a contradiction between the structural depth and se-
quence length (temporal depth). Recently, a widely-used
method is to sample a few items from the long sequence
(successive or scattered) and learn a truncated version of the
original RNN on them [8, 17, 11, 4] to solve the contradic-
tion. Under this scheme, training on short samples instead
of the long sequence greatly reduces the training complex-
ity, which is very practical for deep RNN. However, this
can be seen as a compromise for the depth, which may lead
to losing some key temporal information. Considering two
short sampled clips that own overlaps, the outputs of the
overlap sections must be different due to the broken tem-
poral information, which will never happen if we train the
whole sequence together, and this provides a clear evidence
for the weakness of this sampling method.
Method In this paper, we also consider shortening the
long sequence to simplify the l-order Markov process into
severaln-order (n < l ) ones, but we smooth the informa-
tion propagation among short clips by introducing the Over-
lap Coherence Training Scheme . In training phase, we ran-
domly sample clips that have random lengths and starting
points, which will naturally generate many overlaps (Third
row in Fig. 4). The overlaps serve as the communication
bridge among the disconnected clips to make information
ﬂow forward and backward smoothly throughout the whole
426