Upper Layer
Ci,tOi,t
Ci,t-1
Oi-1,tTζ
ROi,t+1
Ci,t+1
Oi-1,t+1Tζ
RLater SeqFigure 1. Structure of CBM. The blue lines represent representa-
tion ﬂows, while red ones represent temporal ﬂows. R,T andζde-
note representation unit, temporal unit and merge function respec-
tively. The dashed line (TD) means feeding forward is allowed but
back-propagation is forbidden with a certain probability.
tively capture temporal information from sequential inputs
(e.g. a sequence of frames in a video) and representation
information from each individual one (e.g. one frame of
the sequence). These two information ﬂows are oriented to-
wards temporal depth and structural depth separately, and
we name them as temporal ﬂow and representation ﬂow.
Challenge The straight-forward design for deep RNN can
be a vertically stacked RNN architecture. However, in high-
dimensional visual tasks, parameters in RNN cell are hard
to be co-adaptive to two ﬂows simultaneously, resulting in
ineffective and inefﬁcient training. Extensive experiments
show this design is very hard to train. This is why we hardly
see stacked deep RNN in related literatures. In most cases,
people adopt shallow RNN which takes extracted CNN fea-
tures as inputs, though it is not an end-to-end pipeline.
Our Architecture Therefore, we go down to consider
how to capture these two branches of information ﬂows as
independently as possible, through which the training pro-
cess can be much easier since the two relatively independent
branches can share the burden of learning and ease complex
co-adaptations. Speciﬁcally, for representation ﬂow, we use
a computing unit (e.g. CNN structure) to extract features
of the individual input sample without recurrent operations,
while temporal ﬂow adopts a RNN structure.
As shown in Fig. 1, in each cell, there is a “representa-
tion” unitRand a “temporal” unit Twhich act as a repre-
sentation feature extractor on individual input sample and
a temporal information encoder on the sequential inputs re-
spectively. Here Rcan be seen as a context bridge over the
temporal information. Intuitively, the representation infor-
mation ﬂow would be encouraged to mainly propagate by
this bridge, since it doesn’t need to interwind with tempo-
ral information. Therefore, we call this module as Context
Bridge Module (CBM). By denoting oi−1,tas the input to
the module in ithlayer at time stamp t, we have
1 0
1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1Representation  Flow
Temporal Flow10-2100102104
910 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18TD-rate=0.0  
Seq_len=10    Model_depth=10  TD-rate=0.5 TD-rate=0.2 TD-rate=0.8
 103
 102
 101
 100 
10-1
10-2
5 6 8 9 10 7 
Seq_len=6    Model_depth=6E(Num_Paths)
Path Length Path LengthE(Num_Paths)
Figure 2. Temporal ﬂows adopting TD. Top: When setting the
TD rate to 1.0, all the colorized lines (red & purple) of temporal
ﬂow cannot propagate back, while if only drop the red node out,
the gradients from red node’s temporal unit cannot ﬂow backward
through the red lines. Bottom: Expectation numbers of back-
propagation paths with different lengths (paths from “0” to dif-
ferent “1” in Top) when adopting different TD rates. Note that the
back-propagation remains unchanged when setting TD rate to 0.0.
o′
i,t=R(oi−1,t;ψi), (1)
where the representation unit Ris designed as a conven-
tional CNN layer, namely ReLU(Conv(·)), andψiis the
parameters of Rinithlayer.
On the other hand, temporal ﬂow is captured by Tunit,
which is written as
ci,t=T(ci,t−1,oi−1,t;φi), (2)
whereci,tis the memory state in ithlayer at time stamp t,
andφiis the parameters of Tinithlayer. As a recurrent
architecture, Tcan be aSigmoid (Conv(·))(as simple as
the conventional RNN) or LSTM. In practice, we suggest
Sigmoid (Conv(·))since it only consumes half of comput-
ing resources compared with LSTM cell, which greatly con-
tributes to building model deeper.
Finally, to fuse the information ﬂows from the two units,
we introduce a merge unit,
oi,t=ζ(o′
i,t,ci,t), (3)
whereζis the merge function, and we adopt element-wise
production for ζin our experiments.
Temporal Dropout To make training easier, we hope the
learning in representation ﬂow direction less interwinds
with temporal ﬂow in the beginning. After a desirable
neural representation is shaped, the learning in temporal
ﬂow direction can be more efﬁcient. To this end, we
introduce a Temporal Dropout (TD) scheme: forbidding
425