…
……
Figure 5. “Cat & Dog” experiment. The input sequence is images
of cat and dog, and the label of each image represents the distance
from the cat image (padding with -1).
sequence. Therefore, we introduce a new loss called over-
lap coherence loss to force the outputs of overlaps from dif-
ferent clips to be as closed (coherent) as possible. Then, the
training objective function can be written as
N/summationdisplay
i=1Lr(si)+λ/summationdisplay
(v,u)∈ΩLd(v,u), (4)
wheresiis theithclip andΩis the set of pairs which are the
outputs of overlap sections from different clips. LrandLd
denote the original loss for the speciﬁc task and our over-
lap coherence loss implemented by MSE loss respectively,
whereλis the hyper-parameter to adjust the weight of them.
Additionally, our training scheme exhibits several high-
lights in practice. Firstly, our random sampling mode serves
as a great data argumentation approach to enhance model’s
generalization ability. Secondly, the vanishing/exploding
gradient problem can be solved to some extent since the
scheme will shorten the sequence adequately to train easily.
Thirdly, the initial state of each clip is taken from other ear-
lier trained clips by picking up their hidden states at corre-
sponding time stamp, which further bridges the information
ﬂow among clips to make it smoothly transfer throughout
the whole sequence. Furthermore, initialized clips can be
computed together in parallel, which can effectively reduce
the training time, especially when the overlap rate is high.
Moreover, to verify our training scheme can actually
transfer useful information ﬂow throughout the whole se-
quence, we commit a toy experiment shown in Fig. 5. The
input sequence is a series of images, where there is only one
cat and the others are all dogs. We train a model with over-
lap coherence training scheme to learn how far the current
dog image is from the cat image appeared before. We ﬁnd
that the model can correctly predict even if the cat image ap-
pearing 50 frames ago, where we set the clip length smaller
than 10. This is because temporal information of the image
sequence is successfully captured among clips due to our
overlap coherence training scheme.
4. Experimental Results
In this section, we evaluate our deep RNN framework
and compare it with conventional shallow RNN (we choose
the commonly used one: LSTM) on several sequence tasks
to exhibit the superiority of our deep RNN framework over
the shallow ones on high-dimensional inputs.
Figure 6. Shallow and deep RNN architecture. The shallow ver-
sion is implemented based on [8]. The deep one contains 15 RNN
layers and we add shortcuts along the depth, following [13]. Dif-
ferent from the shallow one, the RNN kernel is convolutional to
maintain the spatial features instead of linear kernel.
4.1. Video Action Recognition and Anticipation
We ﬁrst evaluate our method with action recognition and
anticipation tasks [3, 30] on the UCF-101 dataset [43] and
HMDB-51 dataset [26] to compare our deep RNN with the
common shallow one with CNN backbones. Then we re-
move the backbones, evaluate the standalone deep RNN
model on Kinetics dataset [4] to compare it with several
excellent approaches, not merely the shallow RNN.
Implementation The frames in videos are resized with
its shorter side into 368 and a 224×224crop is randomly
sampled from the frame or its horizontal ﬂip. Color aug-
mentation is used, where all the random augmentation pa-
rameters are shared among the frames of each video. We
adopt BN [19] after each convolutional layer, the same as
[19]. The backbones (if needed) are pre-trained on Ima-
geNet [37] and the RNN part is initialized by “Xavier ini-
tialization” proposed in [10]. We use Adam optimizer [24]
with 64 mini-batch for shallow net and 16 for deep one.
The learning rate starts from 10−4and gradually decays.
427