Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
jellyﬁsh
 goldﬁnch
0.0
0.5
1.0Perceptual Distance
**
sports car
 ﬁre engine
0.0
0.2
0.4Perceptual Distance
**
volcano
 alp
0.0
0.5Perceptual Distance
**- Redness +
- Brightness +
- Blueness +
Perceptual 
Change
Figure 4: Each row shows how a single latent direction waffects two different ImageNet classes.
We observe that changes are consistent with semantic priors (e.g., “V olcanoes” explode, “Alps” do
not). Boxplots show the LPIPS perceptual distance before and after transformation for 200 samples
per class.
However, when we increase the step size of , we observe that the degree to which we can achieve
each transformation is limited. In Fig. 3 we observe two potential failure cases: one in which the the
image becomes unrealistic, and the other in which the image fails to transform any further. When
we try to zoom in on a Persian cat, we observe that the cat no longer increases in size beyond some
point, and in fact consistently undershoots the target zoom. On the other hand, when we try to zoom
out on the cat, we observe that it begins to fall off the image manifold, and does not become any
smaller after some point. Indeed, the perceptual distance (using LPIPS) between images decreases
as we pushtowards the transformation limits. Similar trends hold with other transformations: we
are able to shift a lorikeet up and down to some degree until the transformation yields unrealistic
output, and despite adjusting on the rotation vector, we are unable to rotate a pizza. Are the
limitations to these transformations governed by the training dataset? In other words, are our latent
space walks limited because in ImageNet photos the cats are mostly centered and taken within a
certain size? We seek to investigate and quantify these biases in the next sections.
An intriguing characteristic of the learned trajectory is that the amount it affects the output depends
on the image class. In Fig. 4, we investigate the impact of the walk for different image categories
under color transformations. By moving in the direction of a redness vector, we are able to success-
fully recolor a jellyﬁsh, but we are unable to change the color of a goldﬁnch, which remains yellow
which slight changes in background textures. Likewise, increasing brightness changes an erupting
volcano to a dormant one, but does not have much effect on Alps, which only transitions between
night and day. In the third example, we use our latent walk to turn red sports cars to blue, but it
cannot recolor ﬁretrucks. Again, perceptual distance over image samples conﬁrms these qualita-
tive observations: a 2-sample t-test yieldst= 20:77,p <0:001for jellyﬁsh/goldﬁnch, t= 8:14,
p<0:001for volcano/alp, and t= 6:84,p<0:001for sports car/ﬁre engine. We hypothesize that
the different impact of the shared transformation on separate image classes relates to the variability
in the underlying dataset. The overwhelming majority of ﬁretrucks are red2, but sports cars appear
in a variety of colors. Therefore, our color transformation is constrained by the dataset biases of
individual classes.
With shift, we can move the distribution of the center object by varying . In the underlying model,
the center coordinate of the object is most concentrated at half of the image width and height, but
after applying the shift in X and shift in Y transformation, the mode of the transformed distribution
varies between 0.3 and 0.7 of the image width/height. To quantify the distribution changes, we
compute the area of intersection between the original model distribution and the distribution after
applying each transformation and observe that the intersection decreases as we increase or decrease
the magnitude of . However, our transformations are limited to a certain extent – if we increase 
2but apparently blue ﬁre trucks do exist! (DiGrazia, 2019)
6