Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
- Brightness +
- Rotate2D +
- Rotate3D +
- Zoom +
- Shift Y +
- Shift X +
Figure 1: Learned latent space trajectories in generative adversarial networks correspond to visual
transformations like camera shift and zoom. Take the “steering wheel”, drive in the latent space, and
explore the natural image manifold via generative transformations!
This paper seeks to quantify the degree to which we can achieve basic visual transformations by
navigating in GAN latent space. In other words, are GANs “steerable” in latent space?1We analyze
the relationship between the data distribution on which the model is trained and the success in
achieving these transformations. From our experiments, it is possible to shift the distribution of
generated images to some degree, but we cannot extrapolate entirely out of the dataset’s support.
In particular, attributes can be shifted in proportion to the variability of that attribute in the training
data. We further demonstrate an approach to increase model steerability by jointly optimizing the
generator and latent direction, together with data augmentation on training images. One of the
current criticisms of generative models is that they simply interpolate between datapoints, and fail
to generate anything truly new, but our results add nuance to this story. It ispossible to achieve
distributional shift, but the ability to create realistic images from a modiﬁed distributions relies on
sufﬁcient diversity in the dataset along the dimension that we vary.
Our main ﬁndings are:
A simple walk in the latent space of GANs achieves camera motion and color transforma-
tions in the output image space. These walks are learned in self-supervised manner without
labeled attributes or distinct source and target images.
The linear walk is as effective as more complex non-linear walks, suggesting that the mod-
els learn to roughly linearize these operations without being explicitly trained to do so.
The extent of each transformation is limited, and we quantify a relationship between dataset
variability and how much we can shift the model distribution.
The transformations are a general-purpose framework that work with different model archi-
tectures, e.g. BigGAN, StyleGAN, and DCGAN, and illustrate different disentanglement
properties in their respective latent spaces.
Data augmentation improves steerability, as does jointly training the walk trajectory and
the generator weights, which allows us to achieve larger transformation effects.
2 R ELATED WORK
Latent space manipulations can be seen from several perspectives – how we achieve it, what limits
it, and what it enables us to do. Our work addresses these three aspects together, and we brieﬂy refer
to each one in related work.
Interpolations in latent space Traditional approaches to image editing with GAN latent spaces
ﬁnd linear directions that correspond to changes in labeled attributes, such as smile-vectors and
gender-vectors for faces (Radford et al., 2015; Karras et al., 2018). However these manipulations
are not exclusive to GANs; in ﬂow-based generative models, linearly interpolating between two
encoded images allow one to edit a source image toward attributes of the target (Kingma & Dhari-
wal, 2018). M ¨ollenhoff & Cremers (2019) proposes a modiﬁed GAN formulation by treating data
1We use the term “steerable” in analogy to the classic steerable ﬁlters of Freeman & Adelson (1991).
2