Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
B A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
B.1 M ODEL AND DATA DISTRIBUTIONS
How well does the model distribution of each property match the dataset distribution? If the gener-
ated images do not form a good approximation of the dataset variability, we expect that this would
also impact our ability to transform generated images. In Fig. 10 we show the attribute distributions
of the BigGAN model G(z)compared to samples from the ImageNet dataset. We show corre-
sponding results for StyleGAN and its respective datasets in Appendix B.5. While there is some
bias in how well model-generated images approximate the dataset distribution, we hypothesize that
additional biases in our transformations come from variability in the training data.
B.2 Q UANTIFYING TRANSFORMATION LIMITS
We observe that when we increase the transformation magnitude in latent space, the generated
images become unrealistic and the transformation ceases to have further effect. We show this quali-
tatively in Fig. 3. To quantitatively verify this trends, we can compute the LPIPS perceptual distance
of images generated using consecutive pairs of iandi+1. For shift and zoom transformations,
perceptual distance is larger when (orlog()for zoom) is near zero, and decreases as the the
magnitude of increases, which indicates that large magnitudes have a smaller transformation ef-
fect, and the transformed images appear more similar. On the other hand, color and rotate in 2D/3D
exhibit a steady transformation rate as the magnitude of increases.
Note that this analysis does not tell us how well we achieve the speciﬁc transformation, nor whether
the latent trajectory deviates from natural-looking images. Rather, it tells us how much we manage to
change the image, regardless of the transformation target. To quantify how well each transformation
is achieved, we rely on attribute detectors such as object bounding boxes (see B.3).
B.3 D ETECTED BOUNDING BOXES
To quantify the degree to which we are able to achieve the zoom and shift transformations, we rely
on a pre-trained MobileNet-SSD v13object detection model. In Fig. 12 and 13 we show the results of
applying the object detection model to images from the dataset, and images generated by the model
under the zoom, horizontal shift, and vertical shift transformations for randomly selected values of ,
to qualitatively verify that the object detection boundaries are reasonable. Not all ImageNet images
contain recognizable objects, so we only use ImageNet classes containing objects recognizable by
the detector for this analysis.
B.4 A LTERNATIVE WALKS IN BIGGAN
B.4.1 LPIPS OBJECTIVE
In the main text, we learn the latent space walk wby minimizing the objective function:
J(w;) =Ez[L(G(z+w);edit (G(z);))]: (8)
using a Euclidean loss for L. In Fig. 14 we show qualitative results using the LPIPS perceptual
similarity metric (Zhang et al., 2018) instead of Euclidean loss. Walks were trained using the same
parameters as those in the linear-L2 walk shown in the main text: we use 20k samples for training,
with Adam optimizer and learning rate 0.001 for zoom and color, 0.0001 for the remaining edit
operations (due to scaling of ).
B.4.2 N ON-LINEAR WALKS
Following B.4.2, we modify our objective to use discrete step sizes rather than continuous steps.
We learn a function F(z)to perform this -step transformation on given latent code z, whereF(z)
is parametrized with a neural network. We show qualitative results in Fig. 15. We perform the same
set of experiments shown in the main text using this nonlinear walk in Fig. 16. These experiments
3https://github.com/opencv/opencv/wiki/TensorFlow-Object-Detection-API
14