Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
as directional k-currents, where moving along tangent planes naturally corresponds to interpretable
manipulations. Upchurch et al. (2017) removes the generative model entirely and instead interpo-
lates in the intermediate feature space of a pretrained classiﬁer, again using feature mappings of
source and target sets to determine an edit direction. Unlike these approaches, we learn our latent-
space trajectories in a self-supervised manner without labeled attributes or distinct source and target
images. Instead, we learn to approximate editing operations on individual source images. We ﬁnd
that linear trajectories in latent space can capture simple image manipulations, e.g., zoom-vectors
and shift-vectors, although we also obtain similar results using nonlinear trajectories.
Dataset bias Biases from training data and network architecture both impact the generalization ca-
pacity of learned models (Torralba & Efros, 2011; Geirhos et al., 2018; Amini et al.). Dataset
biases partly comes from human preferences in taking photos: we tend to take pictures in speciﬁc
“canonical” views that are not fully representative of the entire visual world (Mezuman & Weiss,
2012; Jahanian et al., 2015). Consequently, models trained with these datasets inherit their biases.
This may result in models that misrepresent the given task – such as tendencies towards texture
bias rather than shape bias on ImageNet classiﬁers (Geirhos et al., 2018) – and in turn limits their
generalization performance on similar objectives (Azulay & Weiss, 2018). Our latent space trajec-
tories transform the output corresponding to various image editing operations, but ultimately we are
constrained by biases in the data and cannot extrapolate arbitrarily far beyond the data’s support.
Generative models for content creation The recent progress in generative models has opened in-
teresting avenues for content creation (Brock et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2018), including applications
that enable users to ﬁne-tune the generated output (Simon; Zhu et al., 2016; Bau et al., 2018). A
by-product the current work is enable users to modify image properties by turning a single knob –
the magnitude of the learned transformation in latent space. We further demonstrate that these image
manipulations are not just a simple creativity tool; they also provide us with a window into biases
and generalization capacity of these models.
Applications of latent space editing Image manipulations using generative models suggest sev-
eral interesting downstream applications. For example, Denton et al. (2019) learns linear walks
corresponding to various facial characteristics – they use these to measure biases in facial attribute
detectors, whereas we study biases in the generative model that originate from training data. Shen
et al. (2019) also assumes linear latent space trajectories and learns paths for face attribute editing
according to semantic concepts such as age and expression, thus demonstrating disentanglement of
the latent space. White (2016) suggests approaches to improve the learned manipulations, such as
using spherical linear interpolations, resampling images to remove biases in attribute vectors, and
using data augmentation as a synthetic attribute for variational autoencoders. Goetschalckx et al.
(2019) applies a linear walk to achieve transformations corresponding to cognitive properties of an
image such as memorability, aesthetics, and emotional valence. Unlike these works, we do not re-
quire an attribute detector or assessor function to learn the latent space trajectory, and therefore our
loss function is based on image similarity between source and target images. In addition to linear
walks, we explore using non-linear walks parametrized by neural networks for editing operations.
3 M ETHOD
Generative models such as GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) learn a mapping function Gsuch that
G:z!x. Here,zis the latent code drawn from a Gaussian density and xis an output, e.g.,
an image. Our goal is to achieve transformations in the output space by moving in latent space, as
shown in Fig. 2. In general, this goal also captures the idea in equivariance, in which transformations
in the input space result in equivalent transformations in the output space (c.f. Hinton et al. (2011);
Cohen et al. (2019); Lenc & Vedaldi (2015)).
Objective We want to learn an N-dimensional vector representing the optimal path in latent space
for a given transformation. The vector is multiplied with continuous parameter which signiﬁes
the step size: large values correspond to a greater degree of transformation, while small values
correspond to a lesser degree. Formally, we learn the walk wby minimizing the objective function:
w= arg min
wEz;[L(G(z+w);edit (G(z);))]: (1)
3