Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
ON THE “STEERABILITY ”OF
GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS
Ali Jahanian*, Lucy Chai*, & Phillip Isola
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
fjahanian,lrchai,phillipi g@mit.edu
ABSTRACT
An open secret in contemporary machine learning is that many models work beau-
tifully on standard benchmarks but fail to generalize outside the lab. This has been
attributed to biased training data, which provide poor coverage over real world
events. Generative models are no exception, but recent advances in generative
adversarial networks (GANs) suggest otherwise – these models can now synthe-
size strikingly realistic and diverse images. Is generative modeling of photos a
solved problem? We show that although current GANs can ﬁt standard datasets
very well, they still fall short of being comprehensive models of the visual man-
ifold. In particular, we study their ability to ﬁt simple transformations such as
camera movements and color changes. We ﬁnd that the models reﬂect the biases
of the datasets on which they are trained (e.g., centered objects), but that they also
exhibit some capacity for generalization: by “steering” in latent space, we can
shift the distribution while still creating realistic images. We hypothesize that the
degree of distributional shift is related to the breadth of the training data distribu-
tion. Thus, we conduct experiments to quantify the limits of GAN transformations
and introduce techniques to mitigate the problem. Code is released on our project
page: https://ali-design.github.io/gan_steerability/ .
1 I NTRODUCTION
The quality of deep generative models has increased dramatically over the past few years. When
introduced in 2014, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) could only synthesize MNIST digits
and low-resolution grayscale faces (Goodfellow et al., 2014). The most recent models, however,
produce diverse high-resolution images that are often indistinguishable from natural photos (Brock
et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2018).
Science ﬁction has long dreamed of virtual realities ﬁlled of synthetic content as rich as, or richer,
than the real world (e.g., The Matrix ,Ready Player One ). How close are we to this dream? Tra-
ditional computer graphics can render photorealistic 3D scenes, but cannot automatically generate
detailed content. Generative models like GANs, in contrast, can create content from scratch, but we
do not currently have tools for navigating the generated scenes in the same kind of way as you can
walk through and interact with a 3D game engine.
In this paper, we explore the degree to which you can navigate the visual world of a GAN. Figure 1
illustrates the kinds of transformations we explore. Consider the dog at the top-left. By moving
in some direction of GAN latent space, can we hallucinate walking toward this dog? As the ﬁgure
indicates, and as we will show in this paper, the answer is yes. However, as we continue to zoom in,
we quickly reach limits. Once the dog face ﬁlls the full frame, continuing to walk in this direction
fails to increase the zoom. A similar effect occurs in the daisy example (row 2 of Fig. 1), where a
direction in latent space moves the daisy up and down, but cannot move it out of frame.
We hypothesize that these limits are due to biases in the distribution of images on which the GAN
is trained. For example, if the training dataset consists of centered dogs and daises, the same may
be the case in GAN-generated images. Nonetheless, we ﬁnd that some degree of transformation is
possible. When and why can we achieve certain transformations but not others?
1arXiv:1907.07171v4  [cs.CV]  17 Feb 2020