Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
exhibit similar trends as we observed in the main text – we are able to modify the generated distribu-
tion of images using latent space walks, and the amount to which we can transform is related to the
variability in the dataset. However, there are greater increases in FID when we apply the non-linear
transformation, suggesting that these generated images deviate more from natural images and look
less realistic.
B.4.3 A DDITIONAL QUALITATIVE EXAMPLES
We show qualitative examples for randomly generated categories for BigGAN linear-L2, linear
LPIPS, and nonlinear trajectories in Figs. 17, 18, 19 respectively.
B.5 W ALKS IN STYLE GAN
We perform similar experiments for linear latent space walks using StyleGAN models trained on
the LSUN cat, LSUN car, and FFHQ face datasets. As suggested by Karras et al. (2018), we learn
the walk vector in the intermediate Wlatent space due to improved attribute disentanglement in W.
We show qualitative results for color, shift, and zoom transformations in Figs. 20, 22, 24 and corre-
sponding quantitative analyses in Figs. 21, 23, 25. We show qualitative examples for the comparison
of optimizing in the Wandzlatent spaces in Stylegan in 28.
B.6 W ALKS IN PROGRESSIVE GAN
We also experiment with the linear walk objective in the latent space of Progressive GAN Karras
et al. (2017). One interesting property of the Progressive GAN interpolations is that they take much
longer to train to have a visual effect – for example for color, we could obtain drastic color changes in
Stylegan W latent space using as few as 2k samples, but with progressive gan, we used 60k samples
and still did not obtain as strong of an effect. This points to the Stylegan w latent space being more
“ﬂexible” and generalizable for transformation, compared to the latent space of progressive GAN.
Moreover, we qualitatively observe some entanglement in the progressive gan transformations – for
example, changing the level of zoom also changes the lighting. We did not observe big effects in
the horizontal and vertical shift transformations. Qualitative examples and quantitative results are
shown in Figs. 26, 27.
B.7 Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLES FOR ADDITIONAL TRANSFORMATIONS
Since the color transformation operates on individual pixels, we can optimize the walk using a seg-
mented target – for example when learning a walk for cars, we only modify pixels in segmented car
region when generating edit (G(z);). StyleGAN is able to roughly localize the color transforma-
tion to this region, suggesting disentanglement of different objects within the Wlatent space (Fig. 29
left) as also noted in Karras et al. (2018); Shen et al. (2019). We also show qualitative results for
adjust image contrast (Fig. 29 right), and for combining zoom, shift X, and shift Y transformations
(Fig. 30).
B.8 A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR IMPROVING MODEL STEERABILITY
We further test the hypothesis that dataset variability impacts the amount we are able to transform
by comparing DCGAN models trained with and without data augmentation. Namely, with data
augmentation, the discriminator is able to see edited versions of the real images. We also jointly
train the model and the walk trajectory which encourages the model to learn linear walks. For zoom,
horizontal shift, and 2D rotate transformations, additional samples for three training approaches –
without data augmentation, with data augmentation, and joint optimization – appear in Fig. 31-33.
Qualitatively, transformations using the model trained without data augmentation degrade the digit
structure as magnitude increases, and may even change one digit to another. Training with data
augmentation and joint optimization better preserves digit structure and identity.
15