Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
(a) CIFAR-10
 (b) CIFAR-10-Corners
Figure 3: Our learned views are still able to yield useful information even when the inter-patch
mutual information in a dataset is low, as in Figure 3b.
Views Clean Corrupted Diff
Ours 84.5 71.4 -13.1
SimCLR86.2 77.1 -9.1
Combined86.3 79.8 -6.5
(a) Accuracy on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-10-C.
Overlap with CIFAR-10-C corruptions.
(b) Accuracy gain on CIFAR-10-C by from
adding our learned views atop expert views.
Figure 4: Performance of different views on CIFAR-10-C corruptions. Our learned views enable
solid performance in the face of unseen corruptions despite not explicitly including any blurring,
contrast, or brightness transformations during training, unlike the expert views. Adding our learned
views on top of SimCLR yields additional gains in robust accuracy, especially on different kinds of
noise corruptions and glass blurring.
handcrafted augmentations achieves 73.2% linear evaluation accuracy on CIFAR-10. Combining
these views with learned viewmaker perturbations ( = 0:05) achieves 83.1% .1This suggests that
viewmakers can signiﬁcantly improve representation learning even in cases where some domain-
speciﬁc views have already been developed.
4.3 R OBUSTNESS TO COMMON CORRUPTIONS
Image classiﬁcation systems should behave robustly even when the data distribution is slightly dif-
ferent from that seen during training. Does using a viewmaker improve robustness against common
types of corruptions not experienced at train time? To answer this, we evaluate both learned views,
expert views, and their composition on the CIFAR-10-C dataset (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019),
which assesses robustness to corruptions like snow, pixelation, and blurring. In this setting, corrup-
tions are applied only at test time, evaluating whether the classiﬁcation system is robust to some
types of corruptions to which humans are robust.
When considering methods in isolation, SimCLR augmentations result in less of an accuracy drop
from clean to corrupted data compared to our learned views, as shown in Table 4a. This gap is
expected, as the expert views overlap signiﬁcantly with the CIFAR-10-C corruptions: both include
blurring, brightness, and contrast transformations. Interestingly, however, when we train a view-
maker network while also applying expert augmentations (“Combined,” Table 4a), we can further
improve the robust accuracy, with notable gains on noise and glass blur corruptions (Figure 4b).
This is noteworthy, as our learned views have no explicit overlap with the CIFAR-10-C corruptions,
unlike the expert augmentations.2In the Combined setting, we use a distortion budget of = 0:01,
1We did not see additional gains from using viewmakers on top of the full, well-optimized set of SimCLR
augmentations.
2We do notice a smaller decline in contrast corruption accuracy, possibly due to interactions between chang-
ing pixel magnitudes and the `pconstraint.
6