Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
1.Challenging: The perturbations should be complex and strong enough that an encoder
must develop useful representations to perform the self-supervised task. We accomplish
this by generating perturbations with a neural network that is trained adversarially to in-
crease the loss of the encoder network. Speciﬁcally, we use a neural network that ingests
the inputXand outputs a view X+V(X).
2.Faithful: The perturbations must not make the encoder task impossible, being so strong
that they destroy all features of the input. For example, perturbations should not be able
to zero out the input, making learning impossible. We accomplish this by constraining the
perturbations to an `psphere around the original input. `pconstraints are common in the
adversarial robustness literature where perturbations are expected to be indistinguishable.
In our experiments, we ﬁnd the best results are achieved with an `1sphere, which grants
the viewmaker a distortion budget that it can spend on a small perturbation for a large part
of the input or a more extreme perturbation for a smaller portion.
3.Stochastic: The method should be able to generate a variety of perturbations for a single
input, as the encoder objective requires contrasting two different views of an input against
each other. To do this, we inject random noise into the viewmaker, such that the model can
learn a stochastic function that produces a different perturbed input each forward pass.
Figure 2 summarizes our method. The encoder and viewmaker are optimized in alternating steps
to minimize and maximize L, respectively. We use an image-to-image neural network as our view-
maker network, with an architecture adapted from work on style transfer (Johnson et al., 2016). See
the Appendix for more details. This network ingests the input image and outputs a perturbation
that is constrained to an `1sphere. The sphere’s radius is determined by the volume of the input
tensor times a hyperparameter , the distortion budget , which determines the strength of the applied
perturbation. This perturbation is added to the input image and optionally clamped in the case of
images to ensure all pixels are in [0;1]. Algorithm 1 describes this process precisely.
Algorithm 1: Generating viewmaker views
Input: Viewmaker network V,CWHimage X,`1distortion budget , noise
Output: PerturbedCWHimageX
P V(X;)// generate perturbation
P CWH
jPj1P// project to `1sphere
X X+P// apply perturbation
X clamp (X;0;1)// clamp (images only)
4 I MAGES
We begin by applying the viewmaker to contrastive learning for images. In addition to SimCLR
(Chen et al., 2020a), we also consider a memory bank-based instance discrimination framework
(Wu et al., 2018, henceforth InstDisc).
We pretrain ResNet-18 (He et al., 2015) models on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009) for 200 epochs
with a batch size of 256. We train a viewmaker-encoder system with a distortion budget of = 0:05.
We tried distortion budgets 2f0:1;0:05;0:02gand found 0:05to work best; however, we antici-
pate that further tuning would yield additional gains. As we can see in Figure 1, the learned views
are diverse, consisting of qualitatively different kinds of perturbations and affecting different parts
of the input. We compare the resulting encoder representations with a model trained with the expert
views used for SimCLR, comprised of many human-deﬁned transformations targeting different kinds
of invariances useful for image classiﬁcation: cropping-and-resizing, blurring, horizontal ﬂipping,
color dropping, and shifts in brightness, contrast, saturation, and hue (Chen et al., 2020a).
4.1 T RANSFER RESULTS ON IMAGE CLASSIFICATION TASKS
We evaluate our models on CIFAR-10, as well as eleven transfer tasks including MetaDataset (Tri-
antaﬁllou et al., 2019), MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014), MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998), and FashionM-
NIST (Xiao et al., 2017). We use the standard linear evaluation protocol, which trains a logistic
4