Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
For the former, we use code from the NLPAUG library5to take a random contiguous crop of the
waveform with scale (0.08,1.0) and add Gaussian noise with scale 1. We randomly mask contiguous
segments on the horizontal (frequency) and vertical (time) axes for the latter.
To do this, we also use the NLPAUG library and employ the F REQUENCY MASKING AUGand
TIMEMASKING AUGfunctions with MASK FACTOR set to 40. Having done this, we are left with a
1x64x64 tensor for the 100-hour dataset or a 1x112x112 tensor for the 960-hour dataset. For the for-
mer, we use a standard ResNet-18; pretraining and transfer use the same hyperparameters. For the
latter, we use a standard ResNet-50 encoder with an MLP projection head with a hidden dimension
of 2048. We use TORCHVISION implementations (Paszke et al., 2019). We still use the pre-pooling
features for transfer in this setting as we found better performance than using post-pooling features.
Otherwise, hyperparameters are identical to the 100-hour setting (and the CIFAR-10 setting).
For each transfer dataset, we convert waveforms to normalized spectrograms in the same manner
as just described. The AudioMNIST dataset was downloaded from https://github.com/
soerenab/AudioMNIST ; Google Speech Commands was downloaded from https://ai.
googleblog.com/2017/08/launching-speech-commands-dataset.html ; Flu-
ent Speech Commands was downloaded from https://fluent.ai/fluent-speech-
commands-a-dataset-for-spoken-language-understanding-research ; V ox-
Celeb1 was downloaded from http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/ ˜vgg/data/voxceleb/
vox1.html (we use version 1 of the corpus). Each transfer dataset was again normalized using
the training split’s mean and standard deviation.
A.3 W EARABLE SENSOR EXPERIMENTS
The experimental paradigm for wearable sensor data largely follows that for speech. To generate
an example, we randomly sample a subject (from the correct training split) and activity; we next
randomly sample a contiguous 10s frame, linearly interpolating missing data. We generate spectro-
grams for each of the 52 sensors without Mel scaling, using 63 FFT bins, a hop length of 32, and a
power of 2, then take the logarithm after adding 1e-6 for numerical stability. This process yields 52
32x32 spectrograms, which we treat as different channels, giving a tensor of shape [52, 32, 32]. We
then normalize the spectrograms by subtracting and dividing by the mean and standard deviation of
10k samples from the training set. We again use the modiﬁed ResNet-18 encoder for smaller inputs
here.
A.4 T RAINING COSTS
We train all models on single NVIDIA Titan XP GPUs. On our system, training with a viewmaker
network roughly increased training time by 50% and GPU memory utilization by 100%.
A.5 F RAMEWORKS
We make use of PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), PyTorch Lightning (Falcon, 2019), and Weights &
Biases (Biewald, 2020) for our experiments.
B A DDITIONAL GENERATED VIEWS
B.1 CIFAR-10 VIEWS
We visualize more views for CIFAR in Figure 5. We also visualize the difference between examples
and their views (rescaled to [0,1]) in Figure 6. These ﬁgures further demonstrate the complexity,
diversity, and input dependence of the viewmaker views.
B.1.1 A PPLYING PERTURBATIONS IN THE FREQUENCY DOMAIN
Are there other natural ways of generating perturbations with bounded complexity? One other tech-
nique we considered was applying views in the frequency domain. Speciﬁcally, we apply a Discrete
5https://github.com/makcedward/nlpaug
15