Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
VIEWMAKER NETWORKS : LEARNING VIEWS FOR
UNSUPERVISED REPRESENTATION LEARNING
Alex Tamkin, Mike Wu, Noah Goodman
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
fatamkin, wumike, ngoodman g@stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
Many recent methods for unsupervised representation learning train models to be
invariant to different “views,” or distorted versions of an input. However, design-
ing these views requires considerable trial and error by human experts, hindering
widespread adoption of unsupervised representation learning methods across do-
mains and modalities. To address this, we propose viewmaker networks : gen-
erative models that learn to produce useful views from a given input. View-
makers are stochastic bounded adversaries : they produce views by generating
and then adding an `p-bounded perturbation to the input, and are trained ad-
versarially with respect to the main encoder network. Remarkably, when pre-
training on CIFAR-10, our learned views enable comparable transfer accuracy
to the well-tuned SimCLR augmentations—despite not including transformations
like cropping or color jitter. Furthermore, our learned views signiﬁcantly out-
perform baseline augmentations on speech recordings (+9% points, on average)
and wearable sensor data (+17% points). Viewmakers can also be combined with
handcrafted views: they improve robustness to common image corruptions and
can increase transfer performance in cases where handcrafted views are less ex-
plored. These results suggest that viewmakers may provide a path towards more
general representation learning algorithms—reducing the domain expertise and
effort needed to pretrain on a much wider set of domains. Code is available at
https://github.com/alextamkin/viewmaker .
Figure 1: Viewmaker networks generate complex and diverse input-dependent views for unsu-
pervised learning. Examples shown are for CIFAR-10. Original image in center with pink border.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Unsupervised representation learning has made signiﬁcant recent strides, including in computer
vision, where view-based methods have enabled strong performance on benchmark tasks (Wu et al.,
2018; Oord et al., 2018; Bachman et al., 2019; Zhuang et al., 2019; Misra & Maaten, 2020; He et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2020a). Views here refer to human-deﬁned data transformations, which target
capabilities or invariances thought to be useful for transfer tasks. In particular, in contrastive learning
of visual representations, models are trained to maximize the mutual information between different
views of an image, including crops, blurs, noise, and changes to color and contrast (Bachman et al.,
1arXiv:2010.07432v2  [cs.LG]  29 Mar 2021