Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Spectral Ours ( )
Dataset With Noise Without Noise 0:02 0:05 0:2 0:5 2:0
Pamap2 71:0 74 :6 83:0 87:4 88:691:39:1
Table 3: Our learned views signiﬁcantly outperform existing views for activity recognition on
wearable sensor data. Our method learns superior representations across a large range of distortion
budgets, although budgets that are too strong prevent learning. Linear evaluation accuracy for
ResNet18 models trained on Pamap2 with SimCLR. “Spectral” refers to view functions applied
directly to the spectrogram (Park et al., 2019).
ID task artiﬁcially easier. An interesting possibility is that the worse performance of viewmaker
views may result from the model being able to identify and ablate such spurious correlations in the
spectrograms.
6 W EARABLE SENSOR DATA
To further validate that our method for learning views is useful across different modalities, we con-
sider time-series data from wearable sensors. Wearable sensor data has a broad range of applica-
tions, including health care, entertainment, and education (Lara & Labrador, 2012). We speciﬁcally
consider whether viewmaker views improve representation learning for the task of human activity
recognition (HAR), for example identifying whether a user is jumping rope, running, or cycling.
6.1 S ELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING SETUP
We consider the Pamap2 dataset (Reiss & Stricker, 2012), a dataset of 12 different activities per-
formed by 9 participants. Each activity contains 52 different time series, including heart rate, ac-
celerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer data collected from sensors on the ankle, hand, and
chest (all sampled at 100Hz, except heart rate, which is sampled at approximately 9Hz). We linearly
interpolate missing data, then take random 10s windows from subject recordings, using the same
train/validation/test splits as prior work (Moya Rueda et al., 2018). To create inputs for our model,
we generate a multi-channel image composed of one 32x32 log spectrogram for each sensor time-
series window. Unlike speech data, we do not use the mel scale when generating the spectrogram.
We then normalize the training and validation datasets by subtracting the mean and then dividing by
the standard deviation of the training dataset.
We train with both our learned views and the spectral views (Park et al., 2019) that were most
successful in the speech domain (for multi-channel spectral masking, we apply the same randomly
chosen mask to all channels). We also compare against a variant of these views with spectrogram
noise removed, which we ﬁnd improves this baseline’s performance.
6.2 S ENSOR -BASED ACTIVITY RECOGNITION RESULTS
We train a linear classiﬁer on the frozen encoder representations for 50 epochs, reporting accuracy on
the validation set. We sample 10k examples for each training epoch and 50k examples for validation.
Our views signiﬁcantly outperform spectral masking by 12.8 percentage points when using the same
= 0:05as image and speech, and by 16.7 points when using a larger = 0:5(Table 3). We also ﬁnd
that a broad range of distortion budgets produces useful representations, although overly-aggressive
budgets prevent learning (Table 3). These results provide further evidence that our method for
learning views has broad applicability across different domains.
6.3 S EMI-SUPERVISED EXPERIMENTS
An especially important setting for self-supervised learning is domains where labeled data is scarce
or costly to acquire. Here, we show that our method can enable strong performance when labels for
only a single participant (Participant 1) out of seven are available. We compare simple supervised
learning on Participant 1’s labels against linear evaluation of our best pretrained model, which was
8