Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
trained on unlabeled data from all 7 participants. The model architectures and training procedures
are otherwise identical to the previous section. As Figure 4 shows, pretraining with our method on
unlabeled data enables signiﬁcant gains over pure supervised learning when data is scarce, and even
slightly outperforms the hand-crafted views trained on all 7 participants (cf. Table 3).
Supervised Learning Pretrain (Ours) & Transfer
Dataset 1 Participant 7 Participants 1 Participant 7 Participants
Pamap2 58:3 97 :1 75 :1 91 :3
Table 4: Our method enables superior results in a semi-supervised setting where labels for
data from only one participant are available. Validation accuracy for activity recognition on
Pamap2. Supervised Learning refers to training a randomly initialized model on the labeled data
until convergence. Pretrain & Transfer refers to training a linear classiﬁer off of the best pretrained
model above. 1 or 7 Participants refers to the number of participants comprising the training set.
7 C ONCLUSION
We introduce a method for learning views for unsupervised learning, demonstrating its effective-
ness through strong performance on image, speech, and wearable sensor modalities. Our novel
generative model—viewmaker networks—enables us to efﬁciently learn views as part of the repre-
sentation learning process, as opposed to relying on domain-speciﬁc knowledge or costly trial and
error. There are many interesting avenues for future work. For example, while the `1constraint
is simple by design, there may be other kinds of constraints that enable richer spaces of views and
better performance. In addition, viewmaker networks may ﬁnd use in supervised learning, for the
purposes of data augmentation or improving robustness. Finally, it is interesting to consider what
happens as the viewmaker networks increase in size: do we see performance gains or robustness-
accuracy trade-offs (Raghunathan et al., 2019)? Ultimately, our work is a step towards more general
self-supervised algorithms capable of pretraining on arbitrary data and domains.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Dan Yamins, Chengxu Zhuang, Shyamal Buch, Jesse Mu, Jared Davis,
Aditi Raghunathan, Pranav Rajpurkar, Margalit Glasgow, and Jesse Michel for useful discussions
and comments on drafts. AT is supported by an Open Phil AI Fellowship. MW is supported by the
Stanford Interdisciplinary Graduate Fellowship as the Karr Family Fellow.
REFERENCES
Nasir Ahmed, T Natarajan, and Kamisetty R Rao. Discrete cosine transform. IEEE transactions
on Computers , 100(1):90–93, 1974.
Antreas Antoniou, Amos Storkey, and Harrison Edwards. Data augmentation generative adversarial
networks, 2017.
Philip Bachman, R Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning representations by maximizing
mutual information across views. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp.
15535–15545, 2019.
Suzanna Becker and Geoffrey E Hinton. Self-organizing neural network that discovers surfaces in
random-dot stereograms. Nature , 355(6356):161–163, 1992.
S¨oren Becker, Marcel Ackermann, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Klaus-Robert M ¨uller, and Wojciech
Samek. Interpreting and explaining deep neural networks for classiﬁcation of audio signals, 2018.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 35(8):1798–1828,
2013.
9