arXiv:1904.12901v1  [cs.LG]  29 Apr 2019Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold1Daniel Mankowitz2Todd Hester3
Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has proven its
worth in a series of artiﬁcial domains, and is be-
ginning to show some successes in real-world
scenarios. However, much of the research ad-
vances in RL are often hard to leverage in real-
world systems due to a series of assumptions
that are rarely satisﬁed in practice. We present
a set of nine unique challenges that must be ad-
dressed to productionize RL to real world prob-
lems. For each of these challenges, we spec-
ify the exact meaning of the challenge, present
some approaches from the literature, and spec-
ify some metrics for evaluating that challenge.
An approach that addresses all nine challenges
would be applicable to a large number of real
world problems. We also present an example do-
main that has been modiﬁed to present these chal-
lenges as a testbed for practical RL research.
1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) ( Sutton & Barto ,2018 ) is a
powerful algorithmic paradigm encompassing a wide ar-
ray of contemporary algorithmic approaches ( Mnih et al. ,
2015 ;Silver et al. ,2016 ;Hafner et al. ,2018 ). RL methods
have been shown to be effective on a large set of simu-
lated environments ( Mnih et al. ,2015 ;Silver et al. ,2016 ;
Lillicrap et al. ,2015 ;OpenAI ), but uptake in real-world
problems has been much slower. We posit that this is due
in large part to a too-wide divide between the casting of
current experimental RL setups and the generally poorly
deﬁned realities of real-world systems.
In this paper, we present the main challenges that make RL
in the real-world more difﬁcult than RL in research. At a
high-level these challenges are:
1Google Brain, Paris, France2DeepMind, London, United
Kingdom3DeepMind, Seattle, WA, United States. Correspon-
dence to: Gabriel Dulac-Arnold <dulacarnold@google.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).1. Training off-line from the ﬁxed logs of an external be-
havior policy.
2. Learning on the real system from limited samples.
3. High-dimensional continuous state and action spaces.
4. Safety constraints that should never or at least rarely
be violated.
5. Tasks that may be partially observable, alternatively
viewed as non-stationary or stochastic.
6. Reward functions that are unspeciﬁed, multi-objective,
or risk-sensitive.
7. System operators who desire explainable policies and
actions.
8. Inference that must happen in real-time at the control
frequency of the system.
9. Large and/or unknown delays in the system actuators,
sensors, or rewards.
While there has been research focusing on these challenges
individually, there has been little research on algorithms
that address all of these challenges together. We hope that
these challenges can guide researchers towards developing
more applicable RL algorithms. For each challenge above,
we motivate its importance, specify it, present approaches
for addressing the challenge, and provide methods for eval-
uating that particular challenge. Finally, we illustrate t hese
challenges on a toy-problem, a control suite ( Tassa et al. ,
2018 ) task modiﬁed to present all of the challenges de-
scribed above.
We consider control systems grounded in the physical
world, optimization of software systems, and systems that
interact with users such as recommender systems and smart
phones. These systems can range in size from a small drone
to a datacenter, in complexity from a one-dimensional ther-
mostat to a self-driving car, and in cost from a calculator
to a spaceship. In all these scenarios there are recurring
themes: there is rarely a good simulator, the systems are
stochastic & non-stationary, have strong safety constrain ts,
and running them is expensive and/or slow. This is very
different from training on a simulated environment where
data is effectively unlimited, consequences for poor actio ns
are non-existent and system dynamics are clean and often
deterministic.
Although current RL algorithms can learn superhuman poli-
cies for systems we can properly simulate ( Silver et al. ,