Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
trained to optimize one metric, other metrics are discovere d
that also need to be maintained or improved. Thus, a lot of
the work on deploying RL to real systems is in formulating
the reward function, which may be multi-dimensional. Be-
cause the global reward function is generally a balance of
multiple sub-goals ( e.g. reducing both time-to-target and
energy use), a proper evaluation should explicitly separat e
the individual components of the reward function to better
understand the policy’s tradeoffs.
In addition, it may be desired that the policy performs well
for all task instances and not just in expectation. For exam-
ple, an algorithm deployed to a factory needs to work on ev-
ery robot, not just on average, and a recommender system
must work for every user, not just on average. Therefore,
policy quality cannot be summarized by a single scalar de-
scribing cumulative reward, but must consider both multi-
ple dimensions of the policy’s behavior and the full distri-
bution of behaviors both during training and testing.
A typical approach to evaluate the full distribution of
reward across groups is to use a Conditional Value at
Risk (CVaR) objective ( Tamar et al. ,2015b ), which looks
at a given percentile of the reward distribution, rather
than expected reward. Tamar et al. show that by op-
timizing reward percentiles, the agent is able to im-
prove upon its worst-case performance. Distributional
DQN ( Dabney et al. ,2018 ;Bellemare et al. ,2017 ) explic-
itly models the distribution over returns, and it would be
straight-forward to extend it to use a CVaR objective.
There are a number of works devoted to recover-
ing an underlying reward function from demonstrations,
such as inverse reinforcement learning ( Russell ,1998 ;
Ng et al. ,2000 ;Abbeel & Ng ,2004 ;Ross et al. ,2011 ).
Hadﬁeld-Menell et al. examine how to infer the truly in-
tended reward function from the given reward function and
training MDPs, to ensure that the agent performs as in-
tended in new scenarios.
For problems with multi-objective reward functions, there
are approaches to learning the pareto-optimal reward func-
tion ( Roijers et al. ,2013 ), but none of these have been
scaled to the deep reinforcement learning setting yet.
Van Seijen et al. present an approach that takes advantage
of multi-objective reward signals to learn super-human per -
formance in the Atari game Mc-PacMan.
We propose a simple multi-objective analysis of return.
If we consider that the global reward function is de-
ﬁned as a linear combination of sub-rewards, r(s,a) =/summationtextK
j=1αjrj(s,a), then we can consider the vector of per-
component rewards for evaluation:
Jmulti(π) =/parenleftBiggTn/summationdisplay
i=1rj(si,ai)/parenrightBigg
1≤j≤K∈RK.(6)When dealing with multi-objective reward functions, it
is important to track the different objectives individuall y
when evaluating a policy. This way, problem stakeholders
can understand the different tradeoffs the policy is making
and choose which compromises they consider best.
To evaluate the performance of the algorithm across the
full distribution of scenarios (e.g. users, tasks, robots, ob-
jects,etc.), we independently analyze the performance of
the algorithm on each cohort. This is also important for en-
suring fairness of an algorithm when interacting with popu-
lations of users. Another approach is to analyze the CVaR
return rather than expected returns ( Tamar et al. ,2015b ).
One evaluation procedure is to determine whether rare
catastrophic rewards are minimized ( Tamar et al. ,2015b ;a).
Another evaluation procedure is to observe behavioural
changes when an agent needs to be risk-averse or risk-
seeking such as in football ( Mankowitz et al. ,2016 ).
2.7. Explainability
Another essential aspect of real systems is that they are
owned and operated by humans, who need to be reassured
about the controllers’ intentions and require insights re-
garding failure cases. For this reason, policy explainabil -
ity is important for real-world policies. Especially in cas es
where the policy might ﬁnd an alternative and unexpected
approach to controlling a system, understanding the longer -
term intent of the policy is important for obtaining stake-
holder buy-in. In the event of policy errors, being able to
understand the error’s origins a posteriori is essential.
Verma et al. deﬁne their policies using a domain-speciﬁc
programming language, and then use a local search algo-
rithm to distill a learned neural network policy into an ex-
plicit program. Additionally, the domain-speciﬁc languag e
is veriﬁable, which allows the learned policies to be veriﬁ-
ably correct. There are many methods to attempt to elicit
the intent of deep neural networks ( Montavon et al. ,2018 )
which could also be used to understand a learned policy.
Additionally, model-based methods with explicit rollouts
used for planning ( Hafner et al. ,2018 ;Chua et al. ,2018 )
can provide insights on what the policy’s ‘intent’ may have
been.
In the case of ( Verma et al. ,2018 ), evaluation is centered
on looking at the performance of the programatically de-
ﬁned policy, since the policy is inherently deﬁned as a
human-readable program. Evaluating actual explainabil-
ity comes down to evaluating how well a human under-
stands the intent of the policy’s expression, which can be
done through A/B experiments with users on mechanical
turk ( Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. ,2018 ).