Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
2.8. Real-Time Inference
To deploy RL to a production system, policy inference
must be done in real-time at the control frequency of the
system. This may be on the order of milliseconds for a
recommender system ( Covington et al. ,2016 ) responding
to a user request or the control of a physical robot, and
up to the order of minutes for building control systems
(Evans & Gao ). This constraint both limits us from running
the task faster than real-time to generate massive amounts
of data quickly ( Silver et al. ,2016 ;Espeholt et al. ,2018 )
and limits us from running slower than real-time to perform
more computationally expensive approaches (e.g. some
forms of model-based planning).
There has been literature focused on this problem in the
case of robotics. Hester et al. present a real-time archi-
tecture to do model-based RL on a physical robot that
uses Monte Carlo Tree Search and returns actions when
required by the task, but will improve given more time
and more rollouts. Other rollout-based approaches like
AlphaGo ( Silver et al. ,2016 ) will improve with more roll-
outs, but are not engineered to run at a speciﬁc frequency.
Wawrzy´ nski analyzes the potential gains to be had by al-
lowing more computation time than is possible on a true
real-time system.
2.9. System Delays
Finally, most real systems have delays in either the sensa-
tion of the state, the actuators, or the reward feedback. For
example, Hester & Stone focus on controlling a robot ve-
hicle with signiﬁcant delays in the control of the braking
system. They incorporate recent history into the state of
the agent so that the learning algorithm can learn the delay
effects itself. Mann et al. look at delays in recommender
systems, where the true reward is based on the user’s inter-
action with the recommended item, which may take weeks
to determine. They present a factored learning approach
that is able to take advantage of intermediate reward sig-
nals to improve learning in these delayed tasks.
Hung et al. introduce a method to better assign rewards
that arrive signiﬁcantly after a causative event. They use
a memory-based agent, and leverage the memory retrieval
system to properly allocate credit to distant past events th at
are useful in predicting the value function in the current
timestep. They show that this mechanism is able to solve
previously unsolveable delayed reward tasks.
Arjona-Medina et al. introduce the RUDDER algorithm,
which uses a backwards-view of a task to generate a
return-equivalent MDP where the delayed rewards are re-
distributed more evenly throughout time. This return-
equivalent MDP is easier to learn and is guaranteed to have
the same optimal policy as the original MDP. They im-provements using this approach in Atari tasks with long
delays.
Evaluation in this context depends on the source of delay.
Delays in the state & action domain can be patched onto
existing environments, and the correlation between delay
magnitude and the policy’s cumulative reward can be used
to evaluate the policy’s robustness to these perturbations .
3. Example Environment
In this section, we present an example environment from
the DeepMind control suite ( Tassa et al. ,2018 ), and the
modiﬁcations required to make it present all of the chal-
lenges for real world RL that we have presented in this pa-
per2. We also describe how to perform speciﬁc evaluations
for each challenge where it makes sense. Our goal is both
that this environment and its modiﬁcations drive research
in real-world RL as well as help evaluate candidate algo-
rithms’ applicability to real-world problems.
Humanoid Variables: θ,u,F
Type Constraint
StaticLimit joint angles.
Enforce uprightness.
Avoid dynamic obstacles.
Kinematic Limit joint velocities.
DynamicLimit foot contact forces.
Encourage falls on pelvis.
Table 1. Safety constraints for the Humanoid environment.
We start from the control suite’s humanoid task, as it al-
ready has a high-dimensional continuous state and action
space. Next, we present a set of modiﬁcations to the task to
make it present all nine challenges.
First, the training must be done in the batch RL regime
as presented in Sec. 1. To imitate the situation where
we are taking over control from a system with an existing
controller, we recommend ﬁrst training a policy on the task
with a different algorithm than the one being evaluated, and
then generating a dataset from this policy to serve as the ini -
tialD(πb). As the size, quality, and coverage of this dataset
can be critical, we suggest evaluating algorithms with a va-
riety of datasets of different sizes, converged performanc es,
and policy entropies.
Second, we are constrained to act on-line in the domain,
meaning there cannot be separate runs for training and eval-
uation, but instead only training episodes. For the third
challenge, the humanoid domain already presents a high-
dimensional continuous state and action space. Table 1pro-
2A more complete task description, as well as three other pro-
posed tasks are presented in the Appendix.