Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
trol cooling in a Google data center ( Evans & Gao ).
These large state and action spaces can present seri-
ous issues for traditional RL algorithms, as identiﬁed in
(Dulac-Arnold et al. ,2015 ).
There are a number of recent works focused on addressing
this challenge. Dulac-Arnold et al. present an approach
based on generating a vector for a candidate action and
then doing nearest neighbor search to ﬁnd the closest real
action available. Zahavy et al. propose an Action Elimi-
nation Deep Q Network (AE-DQN) that uses a contextual
bandit to eliminate irrelevant actions. He et al. present the
Deep Reinforcement Relevance Network (DRRN) for eval-
uating continuous action spaces in text-based games.
We propose evaluating policy performance according to
two dimensions: number of actions, and relation over the
actions. Millions of related actions are much easier to lear n
than a couple hundred completely unrelated actions, as the
agent needs to sufﬁciently sample each individual action in
the latter case.
2.4. Satisfying Safety Constraints
Almost all physical systems can destroy or degrade them-
selves and their environment. As such, considering these
systems’ safety is fundamentally necessary to controlling
them. Safety is important during system operation, but also
during exploratory learning phases as well. These could
be safety considerations either of the system itself (lim-
iting system temperatures, contact forces or maintaining
minimum battery levels) or of its environment (avoiding
dynamic obstacles, limiting end effector velocities). The re
may exist a fallback watchdog controller, which would take
over if the learned policy violates the safety constraints, but
we consider that it should not be explicitly relied upon.
Recent work in RL safety ( Dalal et al. ,2018 ;Achiam et al. ,
2017 ) has cast safety in the context of Constrained MDPs
(CMDPs) ( Altman ,1999 ), and we will concentrate on pre-
deﬁned constraints on the environment in this context. Con-
strained MDPs deﬁne a constrained optimization problem
and can be expressed as:
max
π∈ΠR(π)subject to Ck(π)≤Vk,k= 1,...,K.
Here,Ris the cumulative reward of a policy πfor a given
MDP, and Ck(π)describes the incurred cumulative cost
of a certain policy πrelative to constraint k. The CMDP
framework describes multiple ways to consider cumulative
cost of a policy π: the total cost until task completion, the
discounted cost, or the average cost. Speciﬁc constraints
are deﬁned as ck(s,a).
The CMDP setup allows for arbitrary constraints on state
and action to be expressed. In the context of a physical sys-
tem these can be as simple as box constraints on a speciﬁcstate variable, or more complex such as dynamic collision
avoidance constraints. One major challenge with address-
ing these safety concerns in real systems is that safety viol a-
tions will likely be very rare in logs of the system. In many
cases, safety constraints are assumed and are not even spec-
iﬁed by the system operator or product manager.
An alternative to CMDPs is budgeted
MDPs ( Boutilier & Lu ,2016 ;Carrara et al. ,2018 ).
While for a CMDP, the constraint level Vkis given, for
budgeted MDPs, it is unknown. Instead, the policy is
learned as a function of constraint level. Then the user
can examine the trade-offs between expected return and
constraint level and choose the constraint level that best
works for the data. This more closely matches the common
real-world scenario where the constraints may not be
absolute, but small violations may be allowed for a large
improvement in expected returns.
Recently, there has a been a lot of work focused on the
problem of safety in reinforcement learning. One focus
has been the addition of a safety layer to the network
(Dalal et al. ,2018 ;Pham et al. ,2017 ). This type of ap-
proach has enabled an agent to learn a task with zero
safety violations as well as transfer some problems to
the real world. These approaches focus on safety during
training. There are other approaches ( Achiam et al. ,2017 ;
Tessler et al. ,2018 ;Bohez et al. ,2019 ) that learn a pol-
icy that violates constraints during training but produce a
trained policy that respects the safety constraints.
Other RL approaches include using Lyapunov functions
to learn safe policies ( Chow et al. ,2018 ) and safe ex-
ploration strategies that predict the safety of neighborin g
states ( Turchetta et al. ,2016 ;Wachi et al. ,2018 ). A Proba-
bilistic Goal MDP ( Mankowitz et al. ,2016 ) is another type
of objective that encourages an agent to consider whether it
should do something risky for large reward or be more con-
servative for smaller rewards within a pre-deﬁned period of
time.
To evaluate the safety of an RL algorithm, we consider
counting the number of safety violations for each individ-
ual constraint. Accumulating all these violations into a
single number has been proposed previously ( Dalal et al. ,
2018 ) and provides a good global summary. We propose
also maintaining each individual constraint’s count of vio -
lations:
Jsafety(π) =/parenleftBiggT/summationdisplay
i=1cj(si,ai)/parenrightBigg
1≤j≤K∈RK,(3)
whereKis the number of safety constraints in the CMDP.
Visualizing this vector’s evolution during both training a nd
once running on the environment is essential to understand-
ing the policy’s behavior relative to the provided safety co n-
straints.