Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
2016 ;Mnih et al. ,2015 ;OpenAI ), for many real-world sys-
tems, not only is there no existing simulator, but building
one can be extremely difﬁcult. Many interesting systems
are either too complex to model properly (datacenter cool-
ing plants or deformable object manipulation tasks), or suf -
ﬁciently varied (arbitrary object assembly with the same
robot arm) that modelling each instance would be impracti-
cal. This lack of available simulators means learning must
be done using data from the real system, and all acting
and exploring must be done on the real system. Thus, we
cannot simply collect massive datasets to solve these chal-
lenges, nor can we ignore safety during training.
To deploy RL to a real production system, robust evalua-
tion is required. Many research papers in RL look at av-
erage episodic return to evaluate the quality of their agent
(although they train with discounted return). This makes
sense when the only optimization criteria is the return it-
self, however in real systems there are other aspects of
agent behavior which are equivalently important. In many
cases, it may be important to evaluate performance for the
worst case user, or the worst case object for manipulation,
rather than the average reward. For many real world ap-
plications, respecting safety can be much more important
than maximizing returns. Additionally, because the global
reward function is generally a balance of multiple sub-goal s
(e.g.reducing both time-to-target and energy use), a proper
evaluation should explicitly separate the individual comp o-
nents of the reward function to better understand the pol-
icy’s tradeoffs.
2. Practical Challenges
In this section we present a series of practical challenges
that appear when using RL on real world systems. Not all
of these challenges will be present in every real system, but
in many cases all of the challenges are present to some de-
gree. To guide practitioners working on applications of RL,
we present current research directions from the literature
for each challenge. To guide researchers who wish to re-
search only a subset of challenges at a time, we present
evaluation criteria for that particular challenge. We beli eve
that an RL algorithm that addresses all of these challenges
would be applicable to a vast number of real world prob-
lems.
For this work, we assume the standard Markov Decision
Process (MDP) formulation. An MDP is represented by a
tuple/a\}bracketle{tS,A,P,r,γ/a\}bracketri}htwhereSis the state space, Athe action
space,Pis the stochastic transition function p(s′|s,a),
andr(s,a)is the reward function which returns a reward
for given state-action. A tuple of experience is of the
form(st,at,rt,st+1). The policy πproduces an action
asat∼π(·|st). Our notation describes a discrete state
and action space but generalizes to continuous ones. Later,we consider modiﬁcations of this formalism for safety con-
straints, robustness, non-stationarity and partial obser vabil-
ity. As there will likely be multiple iterations of the polic y
through time we index them as πito indicate the learning
iteration. An existing system is often controlled by an exis t-
ing policy, either in the form of human operators or black-
box controllers; we call this a behavior policy and denote
itπB.
2.1. Batch Off-line and Off-Policy Training
As mentioned above, many systems cannot be trained on di-
rectly and need to be learned from ﬁxed logs of the system’s
behavior. In many cases, we are deploying an RL approach
to replace a previous control system, and logs from that pol-
icy are available. In future training iterations, batches o f
data will be available from the most recent iteration of the
control algorithm. This setup is an off-line and off-policy
training regime where the policy needs to be trained from
batches of data. We begin by proposing a basic framework
and then discuss possible design choices.
We consider an ordered set of experience tuples produced
by policy πB,DπB= [{s0,a0,r0,...,s T,aT,rT}1≤i≤n].
The initial policy π0is trained from data from the pre-
vious controller of the system, DπB.π0generates data
forDπ0which is used to train π1and so-on1. The de-
tails of policy training are left up to the implementer. The
general framework is that of batched reinforcement learn-
ing ( Scherrer et al. ,2012 ), which we recall in Algorithm
1for clarity. We note that the RL algorithm used to train
the policy after each batch is not restricted; it could be
policy iteration, value function based, policy gradient, e tc.
(Sutton & Barto ,2018 ).
Algorithm 1 Batch RL Training
1:procedure BRT(DπB,Train,N,L )
2:π0←Train(DπB)
3: fori= 0,···,Ndo
4:Dπi←{}
5: fort= 0,···,Ldo
6: at←πi(st)
7:Dπi←Dπi∪(st,at,rt(st,at))
8: st+1∼P(·|st,at)
9: end for
10: πi+1←Train(Dπi)
11: end for
12:end procedure
For a production system where drops in performance could
be very costly, we want to ensure that the new policy im-
proves upon the previous policy. Estimating the policy’s
performance without running it on the real system is termed
1We consider that any mix of previous experience is accept-
able for training the policy, one does not have to limit train ing to
Dπt−1.