Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
2.5. Partial Observability and Non-Stationarity
Almost all real systems where we would want to deploy re-
inforcement learning are partially observable. For exampl e,
on a physical system, we likely do not have observations of
the wear and tear on motors or joints, or the amount of
buildup in pipes or vents. On systems that interact with
users such as recommender systems, we have no observa-
tions of the mental state of the users. Often times, these
partial observabilities appear as non-stationarity (e.g. as a
pump’s efﬁciency degrades) or as stochasticity (e.g. as eac h
robot being operated behaves differently).
Partially observable problems are typically formulated as
a partially observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP).
The key difference from the MDP formulation is that the
agent’s observation x∈Xis now separate from the state,
with an observation function O(x|s)giving the probabil-
ity of observing xgiven the environment state s.
There are two common approaches to handling partial ob-
servability in the literature. First is to incorporate hist ory
into the observation of the agent. DQN ( Mnih et al. ,2015 )
stacks four Atari frames together as the agent’s observatio n
to account for partial observability. An alternate approac h
is to use recurrent networks within the agent, enabling them
to track and recover hidden state. Hausknecht & Stone ap-
ply such an approach to DQN, and show that the recurrent
version can perform equally well in Atari games when only
given a single frame as input. Nagabandi et al. propose
an approach modeling the system as non-stationary with
a time-varying reward function, and use meta-learning to
ﬁnd policies that will adapt to this non-stationarity.
Much of the recent work on transferring learned policies
from simulation to real system also focuses on this area,
as the underlying differences between the systems are not
observable ( Andrychowicz et al. ,2018 ;Peng et al. ,2018 ).
Real world systems are often stochastic and noisy com-
pared to most simulated environments. In addition, sensor
and action noise as well as action delays add to the pertur-
bations an agent may experience in the real-world setting.
There are a number of RL approaches that have been uti-
lized to ensure that an agent is robust to different subsets o f
these factors. We will focus on the Robust MDP formalism,
domain randomization and system identiﬁcation as frame-
works for dealing with noisy, non-stationary systems.
A Robust MDP is deﬁned by a tuple /a\}bracketle{tS,A,P,r,γ/a\}bracketri}htwhere
S,A,r andγare as previously deﬁned; Pis a set of tran-
sition matrices referred to as the uncertainty set ( Iyengar ,
2005 ). The objective that we optimize is the worst case
value function deﬁned as:
J(π) = inf
p∈PEp/bracketleftbigg∞/summationdisplay
t=0γtrt|P,π/bracketrightbigg
. (4)
At each step, nature chooses a transition function that theagent transitions with so as to minimize the long term value.
The agent learns a policy that maximizes this worst case
value function. Recently, a number of works have sur-
faced that have shown this formulation to yield robust poli-
cies that are agnostic to a range of perturbations in the
environment ( Tamar et al. ,2014 ;Mankowitz et al. ,2018 ;
Shashua & Mannor ,2017 ). The solutions do tend to be
overly conservative but some work has been done to yield
less conservative, ‘soft-robust’ solutions ( Derman et al. ,
2018 ).
In addition to the robust MDP formalism, the practitioner
may be interested in both robustness due to domain ran-
domization and system identiﬁcation. Domain randomiza-
tion ( Peng et al. ,2018 ) involves explicitly training an agent
on various perturbations of the environment and averaging
these learning errors together during training. System ide n-
tiﬁcation involves training a policy that can determine on-
line the environment in which it is operating and modify
the policy accordingly ( Finn et al. ,2017 ;Nagabandi et al. ,
2018 ).
We can train a policy to be robust, but the question arises
as to how we can evaluate the performance of such a policy.
Robustness to noisy measurements (possibly both sensor
and action noise), as well as action delays, can be evalu-
ated by executing the policy in Ktest environments that
exhibits these types of perturbations. Comparing the aver-
age test performance of the policy across the Kperturbed
test environments can provide a notion of robustness. That
is,
Jrobust(π) =1
K/summationdisplay
p∈PEp/bracketleftbiggT/summationdisplay
i=1γi−1r(si,ai)/bracketrightbigg
,(5)
wherepis a perturbed test environment within the test set
P. This has previously been applied in a number of differ-
ent works ( Mankowitz et al. ,2018 ;Di Castro et al. ,2012 ;
Derman et al. ,2018 ). Evaluating the performance of a pol-
icy on a stream of constantly changing environment per-
turbations and its ability to adapt online to these pertur-
bations provides another notion of robustness. In each of
these cases, for a given task, experiment designers must
decide which dimensions of the perturbations are pertinent
and look at the effects of variations in these dimensions on
policy performance.
2.6. Unspeciﬁed and Multi-Objective Reward
Functions
Reinforcement learning frames policy learning through the
lens of optimizing a global reward function, yet most sys-
tems have multi-dimensional costs to be minimized. In
many cases, system or product owners do not have a clear
picture of what they want to optimize. When an agent is