Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
off-policy evaluation ( Precup et al. ,2000 ). Off-policy eval-
uation becomes more challenging as the difference between
the policies and the resulting state distributions grows.
The simplest approach to off-policy evaluation is im-
portance sampling ( Precup et al. ,2000 ), which accounts
for the difference between the behavior and target poli-
cies. Alternatively, the direct method learns a tran-
sition model and uses that for evaluation. Doubly-
robust estimators ( Dud´ ık et al. ,2011 ;Jiang & Li ,2015 )
combine both and get the best evaluations from both
worlds. There are many more approaches such as
MAGIC ( Thomas & Brunskill ,2016 ) or more robust dou-
bly robust ( Farajtabar et al. ,2018 ) that can be considered
as well.
The performance of the initial policy π0often dictates
whether access to a system will be granted by system own-
ers as there is usually a minimum performance threshold
the system must respect. Therefore, an important quantity
to evaluate for a new learning algorithm is the warm-start
performance given the behavior policy’s data:
Jstart=R(Train(DπB)), (1)
where R is the cumulative return from the policy
Train(DπB). Evaluating the training algorithm’s perfor-
mance on different sizes of DπB, as well as for differ-
ent quality behavior policies can help understand the algo-
rithm’s ability at ﬁnding a starting policy even in the face
of sub-optimal, over-ﬁt, or insufﬁcient data.
2.2. Learning On the Real System from Limited
Samples
Unlike much of the research performed in deep reinforce-
ment learning ( Mnih et al. ,2015 ;Hester et al. ,2018 ), real
systems do not have separate training and evaluation envi-
ronments. All training data comes from the real system,
and the agent cannot have a separate exploration policy
during training as its exploratory actions do not come for
free. Instead, the agent must perform reasonably well and
act safely throughout learning. For many systems, this
means that exploration must be limited, and the resulting
data is low-variance – very little of the state space may
be covered in the logs. In addition, since there is often
only one instance of the system, approaches that instanti-
ate hundreds or thousands of environments to collect more
data for distributed training are usually not compatible
with this setup ( Horgan et al. ,2018 ;Espeholt et al. ,2018 ;
Adamski et al. ,2018 ).
Almost all of these real-world systems are either slow-
moving, fragile, or expensive enough that the data they pro-
duce is costly, and policy learning must be data-efﬁcient. I n
the case where there are off-line logs of the system, these
might not contain anywhere near the amount of data or datacoverage that current RL algorithms expect. Learning iter-
ations on a real system can take a long time, as slower con-
trol frequencies might range from 1-hour to multi-month
timesteps, and reward horizons could be on the order of
months (e.g. online advertisement, drug therapies). Even
in the case of higher-frequency control tasks, the learning
algorithm needs to learn quickly from potential mistakes
without needing to repeat them multiple times before ﬁxing
them. Thus, learning on a real system requires an algorithm
to be both sample-efﬁcient and performant in its operation
of the system.
There are a number of related works that deal with RL
on real systems and, in particular, focus on sample efﬁ-
ciency. One such work is Model Agnostic Meta-Learning
(MAML) ( Finn et al. ,2017 ) that focuses on learning about
tasks within a distribution and then, with few shot learning ,
quickly adapting to solving a new in-distribution task that
it has not seen previously. Bootstrap DQN ( Osband et al. ,
2016 ) learns an ensemble of Q-networks and uses Thomp-
son Sampling to drive exploration and improve sample efﬁ-
ciency.
Another approach to improving sample efﬁciency is to
use expert demonstrations to bootstrap the agent, rather
than learning from scratch. This approach has been
combined with DQN ( Mnih et al. ,2015 ) and demon-
strated on Atari ( Hester et al. ,2018 ), as well as combined
with DDPG ( Lillicrap et al. ,2015 ) for insertion tasks on
robots ( Vecer´ ık et al. ). Recent Model-based deep RL ap-
proaches ( Hafner et al. ,2018 ;Chua et al. ,2018 ), where the
algorithm plans against a learned transition model of the
environment, show a lot of promise for improving sam-
ple efﬁciency. A common approach is to learn ensem-
bles of transition models and use various sampling strate-
gies from those models to drive exploration and improve
sample efﬁciency ( Hester & Stone ,2013 ;Chua et al. ,2018 ;
Buckman et al. ,2018 ).
To evaluate the data efﬁciency of a particular method, a
simple yet useful measure is to look at the amount of data
necessary to achieve a certain performance threshold:
Jeff.= min|Di|s.t.R(Train(Di))> R min, (2)
whereRminis the desired performance threshold. Similar
approaches have been used in model-based RL literature
to demonstrate efﬁciency ( Hafner et al. ,2018 ;Chua et al. ,
2018 ).
2.3. High-Dimensional Continuous State and Action
Spaces
Many practical real world problems have large and continu-
ous state and action spaces. For example, consider the huge
action spaces in recommender systems ( Covington et al. ,
2016 ), or the number of sensors and actuators to con-