Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement Learning
poses safety constraints for the humanoid task. In the case
of physical systems, we can generally consider that safety
constraints involve one or many of static, kinematic and dy-
namic aspects of the system.
To evaluate algorithm performance in the face of non-
stationarity and partial observability, we recommend sam-
pling a new set of domain parameters (frictions, CoGs,
masses) from a distribution every evaluation episode. For
multi-objective reward, we consider rewards for distance
moved as well as for energy used in movement. We also
consider worse-case reward for each sampled episode; we
want the agent to perform well in every perturbation, not
just on average.
For explainability, there is not a modiﬁcation to the do-
main, but evaluation must be performed qualititatively wit h
humans determining the quality of the explainability (e.g.
perhaps with mechanical turk ( Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al. ,
2018 )). We require that real-time inference be enforced and
that the physics simulation be run in real-time. Finally, we
can introduce artiﬁcial delays on the system actuators, sto r-
ing the requested actions in an n-step queue before passing
them to the simulator.
Metric (Challenges) Deﬁnition
Average Return
Warm-Start (1) Equation ( 1)
Time-to-Rmin(2) Equation ( 2)
Safety Violations (4) Equation ( 3)
Worst-Case Perf. (5, 6) Equation ( 4)
Robust Performance (5) Equation ( 5)
CVaR Return (6) (Tamar et al. ,2015b )
Multi-Objective (6) Equation ( 6)
Explainability (7) User Evals
Table 2. The full set of evaluation metrics to consider to address
all the challenges of real world RL, along with which challen ges
they are relevant for.
In addition to evaluating the average rewards achieved dur-
ing the trials, we can also look at speciﬁc metrics to evalu-
ate individual challenges (Table 2). We look at the warm-
start performance after the training on the behavior policy
data (Eq. 1). For sample efﬁciency, we examine the number
of data samples required to reach a minimum performance
level (Eq. 2). We also track the number of safety violations
for every safety constraint (Eq. 3). We evaluate the worst-
case reward over sampled perturbations (Eq. 4). We inde-
pendently evaluate the reward on both objectives (Eq. 6).
Finally, we want to qualitatively evaluate the explainabil ity
of the agent’s policies. Only by looking at all these evalua-
tors can we truly get an idea of an algorithm’s aptitude for
real-world use. Our goal is for this task to present a testbed
for other researchers who wish to develop new algorithms
that address the challenges of real world RL.4. Related Work
While we covered related work speciﬁc to each chal-
lenge in the sections above, there are a few other
works related to our goal of practical reinforcement learn-
ing. Hester & Stone similarly present a list of challenges
for real world RL, but speciﬁcally for RL on robots.
They present four challenges (sample efﬁciency, high-
dimensional continuous state and action spaces, sensor and
actuator delays, and real-time inference), all of which we
include in our set of challenges as well. They do not include
our other challenges such as robust performance, learn-
ing from ﬁxed logs, non-stationarity, safety constraints,
etc. Their approach is to setup a real-time architecture
for model-based learning where ensembles of models are
learned to improve robustness and sample efﬁciency.
Henderson et al. investigate the effects of existing degrees
of variability between various RL setups and their effects
on algorithm performance. Although restricted to the do-
main of existing environments, Henderson et al. propose
more robust performance estimators for RL learning algo-
rithms which complement those presented here. The paper
ends with the question ”In what setting would [a given algo-
rithm] be useful?” to which we try to contribute by propos-
ing a speciﬁc setting in which well-adapted work should
hopefully stand out. Wagstaff argue similarly to us regard-
ing supervised ML, and its overt distancing from real-world
applications in ML conferences and the subsequent impact
on research directions this can have. Irpan discusses a
complementary series of difﬁculties of getting RL systems
working on real systems. Some of these are more practi-
cal considerations, such as using RL for ﬁne-tuning, and
others are directions for future research such as taking int o
consideration domain-speciﬁc priors, or densifying the re -
ward signal.
5. Conclusion
We argue that real-world problems in RL contain multiple
challenges which are not often considered in the current lit -
erature. We have presented nine such challenges for prac-
tical RL. For each one, we have motivated the challenge,
presented examples, and speciﬁed the challenge more for-
mally. For practitioners wishing to deploy RL to their own
problems, we have pointed the reader to relevant references
for each challenge that may guide them in deploying RL
to a production system. For RL researchers, we have pre-
sented an example environment and evaluation criteria with
which to measure progress on these challenges. There have
been many recent works on each of these challenges indi-
vidually, but little work on approaches that address all nin e
challenges.
There are a few themes that appear across the related works