Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
Since our privacy accounting relies on data distribution
samples, a natural concern is that the data not present in the
dataset are not taken into account, and thus, are not protected.
However, our ﬁnite sample estimator is speciﬁcally designed
to address this issue (see Section 4.3).
Our contributions in this paper are the following:
•we propose a variation of DP, called Bayesian differ-
ential privacy, that allows to provide more practical
privacy guarantees in a wide range of scenarios;
•we derive a clean, principled privacy accounting
method that generalises the moments accountant;
•we experimentally demonstrate advantages of our
method (Section 5), including the state-of-the-art pri-
vacy bounds in deep learning (Section 5.2).
2. Related Work
With machine learning applications becoming more and
more ubiquitous, vulnerabilities and attacks on ML mod-
els get discovered, raising the need for matching defences.
These attacks can be based on both passive adversaries, such
as model inversion (Fredrikson et al., 2015) and member-
ship inference (Shokri et al., 2017), and active adversaries
(for example, (Hitaj et al., 2017)).
One of the strongest privacy standards that can be employed
to protect ML models from these and other attacks is dif-
ferential privacy (Dwork, 2006; Dwork et al., 2006). Pure
"-DP is hard to achieve in many realistic learning settings,
and therefore, a notion of approximate (";)-DP is used
across-the-board in machine learning. It is typically accom-
plished by applying the Gaussian noise mechanism (Dwork
et al., 2014) during the gradient descent update (Abadi et al.,
2016). Privacy accounting, i.e. computing the privacy guar-
antee throughout multiple iterations of the algorithm, is typ-
ically done by the moments accountant (MA) (Abadi et al.,
2016). In Section 4.4.2, we discuss the link between MA and
our accounting method, as well as connection to a closely re-
lated notion of R ´enyi DP (Mironov, 2017). Similarly, a link
can be established to concentrated DP deﬁnitions (Dwork &
Rothblum, 2016; Bun & Steinke, 2016).
A number of previous relaxations considered a similar idea
of limiting the scope of protected data or using the data
generating distribution, either through imposing a set of
data evolution scenarios (Kifer & Machanavajjhala, 2014),
policies (He et al., 2014), distributions (Blum et al., 2013;
Bhaskar et al., 2011), or families of distributions (Bassily
et al., 2013; Bassily & Freund, 2016). Some of these def-
initions (e.g. (Blum et al., 2013)) may require more noise,
because they are stronger than DP in the sense that datasets
can differ in more than one data point. This is not the case
with our deﬁnition: like DP, it considers adjacent datasets
differing in a single data point . The major problem of suchdeﬁnitions, however, is that in real-world scenarios it is not
feasible to exactly deﬁne distributions or families of dis-
tributions that generate data. And even if this problem is
solved by restricting the query functions to enable the us-
age of the central limit theorem (e.g. (Bhaskar et al., 2011;
Duan, 2009)), these guarantees would only hold asymptoti-
cally and may require prohibitively large batch sizes. While
Bayesian DP can be seen as a special case of some of the
above deﬁnitions, the crucial difference with the prior work
is that our additional assumptions allow the Bayesian ac-
counting (Sections 4.2, 4.3) to provide guarantees w.h.p.
with ﬁnite number of samples from data distributions, and
hence, enable a broad range of real-world applications.
Finally, there are other approaches that use the data distribu-
tion information in one way or another, and coincidentally
share the same (Yang et al., 2015) or similar (Leung & Lui,
2012) names. Yet, similarly to the methods discussed above,
their assumptions (e.g. bounds on the minimum probabil-
ity of a data point) and implementation requirements (e.g.
potentially constructing correlation matrices for millions
of data samples) make practical applications very difﬁcult.
Perhaps, the most similar to our approach is random differ-
ential privacy (Hall et al., 2011). The main difference is that
Hall et al. (2011) consider the probability space over all data
points, while we only consider the space over a single differ-
ing example. As a result, our guarantees are more practical
to compute for large, realistic ML datasets. Furthermore,
Hall et al. (2011) only propose a basic composition theo-
rem, which is not tight enough for accounting in iterative
methods, and to the best of our knowledge, there are no
proofs for other crucial properties, such as post-processing
and group privacy.
3. Motivation
Before we proceed, we ﬁnd it important to motivate research
on alternative privacy deﬁnitions, as opposed to fully con-
centrating on new mechanisms for DP. On the one hand,
there is always a combination of data and a desired statistic
that would yield large privacy loss in DP paradigm, regard-
less of the mechanism. In other words, there can always be
data outliers that are difﬁcult to hide without a large drop in
accuracy. On the other hand, we cannot realistically expect
companies to sacriﬁce model quality in favour of privacy.
As a result, we get models with impractical worst-case guar-
antees (as we demonstrate below) without any indication of
what is the privacy guarantee for the majority of users.
Consider the following example. The datasets D;D0consist
of income values for residents of a small town. There is
one individual x0whose income is orders of magnitude
higher than the rest, and whose residency in the town is
what the attacker wishes to infer. The attacker observes
the mean income wsanitised by a differentially private