Bayesian Differential Privacy for Machine Learning
Aleksei Triastcyn1Boi Faltings1
Abstract
Traditional differential privacy is independent of
the data distribution. However, this is not well-
matched with the modern machine learning con-
text, where models are trained on speciﬁc data.
As a result, achieving meaningful privacy guar-
antees in ML often excessively reduces accuracy.
We propose Bayesian differential privacy (BDP) ,
which takes into account the data distribution to
provide more practical privacy guarantees. We
also derive a general privacy accounting method
under BDP, building upon the well-known mo-
ments accountant. Our experiments demonstrate
that in-distribution samples in classic machine
learning datasets, such as MNIST and CIFAR-10,
enjoy signiﬁcantly stronger privacy guarantees
than postulated by DP, while models maintain
high classiﬁcation accuracy.
1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) and data analytics offer vast oppor-
tunities for companies, governments and individuals to take
advantage of the accumulated data. However, their ability
to capture ﬁne levels of detail can compromise privacy of
data providers. Recent research (Fredrikson et al., 2015;
Shokri et al., 2017; Hitaj et al., 2017) suggests that even in
a black-box setting it is possible to infer information about
individual records in the training set.
Numerous solutions have been proposed to address this
problem, varying in the extent of data protection and how
it is achieved. In this work, we consider a notion that is
viewed by many researchers as the gold standard – differen-
tial privacy (DP) (Dwork, 2006). Initially, DP algorithms
focused on sanitising simple statistics, but in recent years,
it made its way to machine learning (Abadi et al., 2016;
Papernot et al., 2016; 2018; McMahan et al., 2018).
1Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab, Ecole Polytechnique F ´ed´erale de
Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Aleksei Triastcyn <aleksei.triastcyn@epﬂ.ch >.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).Despite notable advances, differentially private ML still
suffers from two major problems: (a) utility loss due to
excessive noise added during training and (b) difﬁculty in
interpreting the privacy parameters "and. In many cases
where the ﬁrst problem appears to be solved, it is actually
being hidden by the second. We design a motivational
example in Section 3 that illustrates how a seemingly strong
privacy guarantee allows for the attacker accuracy to be as
high as 99%. Although this guarantee is very pessimistic
and holds against a powerful adversary with any auxiliary
information, it can hardly be viewed as a reassurance to
a user. Moreover, it provides only the worst-case bound,
leaving users to wonder how far is it from a typical case.
In this paper, we focus on practicality of privacy guarantees
and propose a variation of DP that provides more meaning-
ful guarantees for typical scenarios on top of the global DP
guarantee. We name it Bayesian differential privacy (BDP) .
The key to our privacy notion is the deﬁnition of typical
scenarios. We observe that machine learning models are
designed and tuned for a particular data distribution (for
example, an MRI dataset is very unlikely to contain a pic-
ture of a car). Moreover, such prior distribution of data is
often already available to the attacker. Thus, we consider a
scenario typical when all sensitive data is drawn from the
same distribution. While the traditional differential privacy
treats all data as equally likely and hides differences by large
amounts of noise, Bayesian DP calibrates noise to the data
distribution and provides much tighter expected guarantees.
As the data distribution is usually unknown , BDP estimates
the necessary statistics from data as shown in the following
sections. Furthermore, since typical scenarios are deter-
mined by data, the participants of the dataset are covered by
the BDP guarantee with high probability.
To accompany the notion of Bayesian DP (Section 4.1), we
provide its theoretical analysis and the privacy accounting
framework (Section 4.2). The latter considers the privacy
loss random variable and employs principled tools from
probability theory to ﬁnd concentration bounds on it. It
provides a clean derivation of privacy accounting in gen-
eral (Sections 4.2 and 4.3), as well as in the special case
of subsampled Gaussian noise mechanism. Moreover, we
show that it is a generalisation of the well-known moments
accountant (MA) (Abadi et al., 2016) (Section 4.4.2).