3094 T. Lees et al.: Hydrological concept formation inside long short-term memory (LSTM) networks
Figure B3. Histogram showing the distribution of correlations between the ESA CCI Soil Moisture and ERA5-Land Soil Moisture products
(Soil Water V olume 1 – 0–7 cm) for each catchment.
Figure B4. The spatial resolution of the two soil moisture prod-
ucts – ESA CCI Combined (a)and ERA5-Land Soil Water V olume
Level 1 (b). The ERA5-Land data (87 93) contain roughly 6 times
as many pixels as ESA CCI Soil Moisture (35 37).
moisture values. We can see the intercomparison of these fac-
tors in Figs. B4 and B4.
B1 How similar are ESA CCI Soil Moisture and
ERA5-Land Soil Moisture?
We show the correlation between catchment-averaged soil
moisture from the two products in Fig. B3. There is a median
Pearson correlation of 0.50 between the products. The under-
lying spatial resolution of the two products and the median
spatial patterns can be seen in Fig. B4. This demonstrates
that ESA CCI Soil Moisture and ERA5-Land Soil Water V ol-
ume level 1 have similar spatial patterns, with low soil satura-
tion in the Scottish Highlands, saturated soils on the Scottish
western coast, and relatively unsaturated soils in central and
eastern England. However, the spatial resolution for ERA5-
Figure C1. A diagrammatic explanation of the one-hot encoding
vectors, where each station is given a unique encoding by using an
identity matrix of size N(number of stations). Each gauging station
is encoded by a vector of ones and zeros (a vector of length N).
We then append this vector of OHE data ( XOHE
i) to each state vec-
tor (ci) to create an augmented input to the linear probe, X
i.
Land is much higher, with 6 times as many pixels as the ESA
CCI data.
Appendix C: Investigating the catchment-speciﬁc probe
offsets
As discussed in Sect. 4.2, a simple linear model is not able to
predict catchment-speciﬁc offsets because it is constrained
to model a single bias term for each catchment. In order
to minimize the residual sum of squares, the optimum so-
lution is the mean of the target data in the training period.
Given that we normalize the target data, this global mean is
equal to zero. Therefore, the learned bias in the linear probe
will be zero, and we cannot expect the probe to reproduce
catchment-speciﬁc offsets. One simple solution to this prob-
lem is to include one-hot encoded information for each catch-
ment as input features in the regression. We augment our in-
put state dimensions (64) with a binary encoding represent-
ing which catchment that data point is drawn from (Fig. C1).
Then the linear model can learn a catchment-speciﬁc bias,
which will be the mean value for that catchment.
Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 26, 3079–3101, 2022 https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-26-3079-2022