3086 T. Lees et al.: Hydrological concept formation inside long short-term memory (LSTM) networks
Figure 4. (a) The spatial location of the 60 catchments with the largest probe biases (blue) and smallest probe biases (orange). (b)The
distribution of catchment log mean precipitation for the catchments with the largest and smallest probe biases. The largest 60 biases (blue)
occur in catchments that are wetter or drier than average, as demonstrated by the gap in the middle of the distribution of mean catchment
precipitations. By contrast, the smallest 60 biases (orange) are mostly concentrated in the middle of the distribution, as we expect when using
a simple linear model as the probe. These distributions are signiﬁcantly different when using a two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test.
ﬂects our physical understanding. Although we only show
results from one model initialization here, these ﬁndings are
robust to different initializations (different random seeds).
We should not be entirely surprised by the ﬁnding that the
LSTM has identiﬁed a physically realistic mapping from in-
puts to outputs. Neural networks are adept at learning the
simplest solution to a given task. Since we are training the
model to predict discharge in hundreds of basins across GB,
the easiest solution is to learn the underlying physical re-
lationships, since the alternative requires learning of spuri-
ous correlations for all catchments. Nonetheless, by demon-
strating that the LSTM learns physically realistic mappings,
we can imagine interesting opportunities for hydrologists
to (a) provide predictions of intermediate hydrological vari-
ables such as soil moisture and snow depth and to (b) explore
which information remains in the cell states that has not al-
ready been identiﬁed as important for soil moisture or snow
processes.
The former opportunity (a), that the probe analysis offers a
means to predict intermediate variables, is interesting for two
reasons. Firstly, previous studies have demonstrated that the
LSTM produces more accurate discharge simulations when
benchmarked against other hydrological models, and so we
might expect that the intermediate variables and processesare also better represented by the LSTM. Secondly, since the
LSTM generalizes to unseen basins (Kratzert et al., 2019c;
Frame et al., 2021), we might expect that the probe analysis
also generalizes to unseen basins. Exploring probe predic-
tions in ungauged basins reﬂects an exciting area of future
research. This could be done by learning the probe weights
for certain basins and then predicting on basins that have not
been seen by the LSTM or probe before. The latter opportu-
nity (b), that the LSTM allows us to learn something poten-
tially “unknown”, is an exciting aspect of using LSTM-based
models for hydrological modelling. Exploring remaining val-
ues in the LSTM state vector that have not already been as-
signed to a concept offers one promising avenue for iden-
tifying important processes or variables unaccounted for in
the predictors (e.g. water management) and/or explaining the
performance difference between the LSTM and traditional
hydrological models. Once identiﬁed, we have the opportu-
nity to incorporate this information back into traditional hy-
drological models. Alternatively, we can employ feature im-
portance metrics, such as the integrated gradients method, to
identify the signals that are most informative and then reason
about what these signals might represent. Such approaches
may, for example, allow us to detect anthropogenic anoma-
Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 26, 3079–3101, 2022 https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-26-3079-2022