T. Lees et al.: Hydrological concept formation inside long short-term memory (LSTM) networks 3089
Figure 7. (a) We visualize the most informative weights where lighter colours mean larger weights assigned to that cell-state dimension by
the linear probe. (b)The largest two dimensions, in terms of their assigned weight, from the above plot are then overplotted on the snow
depth target time series (grey-dashed line), showing that they really do contain information about the winter snow signal, particularly Cell
State 48, which varies very little in the summer months.
the catchment-speciﬁc offsets that describe the mean catch-
ment soil water volume. Two aspects of the training method
for the probe need to be noted here. Firstly, we are training
one linear probe for all catchments. This means that we have
a single set of weights that linearly map from cell state to
each soil moisture level in all of the basins. We tested train-
ing of one probe on each catchment, which caused the off-
set to be well modelled by the unique bias for each probe
(not shown). Thus the offset problem is not an issue when
we train one probe on each catchment. The reason that we
chose to use a single probe for all catchments was that we
expect the learned concept of the soil and snow processes
to be invariant over space, i.e. that the relationships between
discharge, precipitation, and intermediate hydrological stores
(snow and soil moisture) are encoded in the state vector in a
way that can be easily extracted by our probe.
In order to train the linear probe, we calculate a global
normalization, such that each catchment soil moisture is a
value relative to the GB-wide mean. Since we are training
a linear model, we should expect the observed behaviour of
our probe, which captures the correlation and dynamics of
the signal well but learns a single “intercept” or bias term
for all catchments. This is because the optimization of a lin-
ear model is a convex optimization problem, where there is
one global minimum. The model has a single intercept (bias)
parameter for all catchments (James et al., 2013). The cho-
sen bias term is the one that minimizes the residual sum
of squares, and this is the mean of the training target data
(the probe target, such as soil moisture volume level 1). In
Sect. C we explore how incorporating a catchment-speciﬁc
intercept allows the linear model to accurately model themean catchment-speciﬁc offsets. We do this by augmenting
the state vector with a one-hot encoding of gauge IDs. Fur-
thermore, a non-linear probe is also able to more effectively
model mean catchment soil saturation conditions (Sect. E).
Therefore, the information can be extracted from the LSTM;
however, a linear probe is not sufﬁciently powerful to do so.
That being said, the changes in relative soil saturation levels
are clearly well modelled, as demonstrated by Fig. 3 and the
high correlation scores in Table 1 and Fig. 2.
4.3 Probes offer a means of interpreting the learned
representation of the LSTM
The probe analysis that we have undertaken here provides a
means of interpreting the internal states of the LSTM. We are
interested in extracting the information content of the LSTM
state vector, allowing for the fact that this information may
be stored across multiple cell-state values.
There is no reason why the LSTM should store that in-
formation in a single cell rather than distribute information
across multiple cells. In fact, the LSTM could also model a
process as the difference of two (or more cells) or any other
combination of multiple different cells. Indeed, it is likely
that information is distributed due to the process of dropout.
Using dropout randomly sets certain weights to zero during
training in order to prevent the neural network overﬁtting,
preventing the co-adaptation of weights such that one weight
“corrects” the inﬂuence (Srivastava et al., 2014). However,
this also means that the network can potentially learn the
same process in two different places in the network, since
the network must be robust to those weights being “switched
off” when dropped out.
https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-26-3079-2022 Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 26, 3079–3101, 2022