T. Lees et al.: Hydrological concept formation inside long short-term memory (LSTM) networks 3085
Figure 3. Time series of probe predictions (coloured lines) compared with the target variables (grey dotted lines). We show two catchments
here, (a)54018, Rea Brook at Hookagate, and (b)15021, Burn at Burnham Overy (chosen to reﬂect both a catchment with a small bias and
a catchment with a strong bias; see Appendix D for more information on these two catchments), and four soil moisture levels, swvl1 (blue),
swvl2 (orange), swvl3 (green), and swvl4 (red). The probe captures the temporal dynamics of the soil moisture signals but shows systematic
bias, consistently predicting variability about zero, which deﬁnes the mean GB-wide soil moisture.
4 Discussion
4.1 The LSTM has learned physically realistic
mappings
We ﬁnd evidence that learned representations of catchment
storages, as encoded by the LSTM state vector, are predic-
tive of a broad range of catchment hydrological storages. We
have evidence that the LSTM, trained on a large dataset of
669 catchments, learns to model soil moisture processes and
snow water processes internally. We have tested these ﬁnd-
ings with different initial conditions by initializing the LSTM
with a different random seed, with different probe designs
and with different data products. We ﬁnd that our results are
robust to these different setups. This is despite the LSTM
never having seen these data or being constrained to model
these processes. It is worth emphasizing that the LSTM is
trained to predict only discharge, using information fromthree meteorological drivers, temperature, precipitation, and
potential evapotranspiration, as well as 21 static catchment
attributes describing topographical conditions, climatologi-
cal conditions, land cover types, and soil texture (Lees et al.,
2021, Table 2). Neither direct information about snow ac-
cumulation and ablation nor soil moisture is included in the
training data. The LSTM has to learn these processes itself
from the raw meteorological inputs and the catchment at-
tributes, determining that these concepts are useful in solv-
ing its training task, i.e. predicting discharge. The states of
the LSTM are learned through backpropagation, and there-
fore these learned states are deemed useful by the model in
the training process for minimizing the error in the discharge
signal. This ﬁnding offers evidence that the LSTM is learn-
ing a physically realistic mapping from inputs to outputs that
corresponds to our understanding of the hydrological system.
While there exists a large set of possible mappings from in-
puts to outputs, the LSTM converges on an answer that re-
https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-26-3079-2022 Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 26, 3079–3101, 2022