3088 T. Lees et al.: Hydrological concept formation inside long short-term memory (LSTM) networks
Figure 6. The lumped (catchment-averaged) soil moisture for 0–7 cm at 30 daily timesteps covering most of July 2007.
Soil Moisture product to see whether we get consistent re-
sults (Dorigo et al., 2017; see Appendix B). The results are
similar to the results obtained when using the ERA5-Land
data, with lower absolute correlation scores. Moreover, we
see consistent performance declines when performing our
two control experiments, i.e. shufﬂing the LSTM state vec-
tors in space or shifting them in time (Appendix A), suggest-
ing that soil information stored in the LSTM state vector is
speciﬁc to each given catchment and timestep. We designed
these control experiments to determine whether soil moisture
time series can be reproduced from unrelated inputs. The re-
sults give evidence that the extracted signals are speciﬁc and
therefore that the results are unlikely to be due to chance.
Using alternative products such as ESA CCI Soil Mois-
ture (see Appendix B), a blended product combining multiple
satellite-derived soil moisture estimates, comes with its own
model assumptions and uncertainties. One key issue with re-
motely sensed soil moisture is that the measured soil mois-
ture is restricted to the top layer (5–10 cm), and the depth of
the satellite-derived estimate is itself a function of the water
content and surface roughness (Dorigo et al., 2017). Further-
more, it is difﬁcult to measure and deﬁne catchment-scale
soil moisture in the real world, but we are running our ex-
periments using data lumped at the catchment scale. Neither
reanalysis nor satellite-derived soil moisture reﬂects a true
in situ observation of catchment-scale soil moisture. Our ap-
proach was instead to let the LSTM learn the most effective
mapping from inputs to outputs, and we interpret the inter-
mediate state vector, probing for the concepts that we expect
to ﬁnd given our expectations.With respect to examining the learned representation of
snow processes, one important aspect needs to be discussed.
The snow probe was trained on catchments with a fraction
of precipitation falling as snow greater than 5 %. Training a
linear probe with a penalized squared error loss function (see
Eq. 6) to predict snow depth on all 669 catchments caused the
learned weights of the probe to be zero, and no signal was de-
tected. This is because only 33 of the catchments have signif-
icant snow processes. In contrast, when we trained the probe
on catchments where we knew snow processes were occur-
ring, we found that the snow processes were well captured
by the variability in the cell-state values. Note that the probe
is still trained on the same LSTM. If we look at the cell-state
values that had the largest weights in the linear probe, we can
see that there exist snow-like signals which the probe incor-
porated into its representation of snow depth (Fig. 7).
Our experiments outlined above explore whether known
hydrological concepts (i.e. water stores) are captured by the
LSTM. Our work here is the ﬁrst step towards interpret-
ing the internal dynamics of LSTM-based models. Future
work could consider how we might use feature attribution
approaches (such as the integrated gradients method) to iden-
tify the most informative cell-state values or else examine the
information contained within the states that do not correlate
with snow or soil moisture processes.
4.2 The catchment biases in the linear probe
The probe predictions effectively model the dynamics of
the soil moisture signals; however, they fail to predict ab-
solute soil moisture levels, since they struggle to reproduce
Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 26, 3079–3101, 2022 https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-26-3079-2022