3080 T. Lees et al.: Hydrological concept formation inside long short-term memory (LSTM) networks
logical performance, more research is required to better un-
derstand which conceptual structures the LSTM has learned
and to diagnose potential gaps in our conceptual and process-
based models, ultimately to stimulate innovation in hydro-
logical theory.
The primary objective of this study is to test the hypoth-
esis that the information stored in the LSTM state vector
reﬂects known hydrological concepts that are important for
discharge generation, including soil water storage and snow
processes. What have these models learned about the hydro-
logical system that allows them to make highly accurate pre-
dictions? Can we interrogate the model to determine whether
the LSTM has learned a physically realistic mapping from
inputs to outputs? Being able to reason about the model and
its behaviour is a key component of dependable models. It
allows researchers and practitioners to interrogate the model,
making sure that it is giving the right results for the right
reasons (Kirchner, 2006).
Deriving insights about the hydrological system has
always been a goal of hydrological modelling (Beven,
2011). Peter Young’s work on data-based mechanistic mod-
elling (DBM) emphasized the need to apply ﬂexible data-
driven models before then applying a mechanistic interpre-
tation to the learned representation of these models (Young
and Beven, 1994; Young, 2003, 1998). Philosophically, this
approach is similar to the one we take here, although the
number of parameters in the DBM approach is much smaller.
In an early application of neural networks to rainfall-runoff
modelling, Wilby et al. (2003) sought to challenge precon-
ceptions of neural network approaches as uninterpretable.
They found that nodes in their multi-layer perceptron cor-
responded to quick ﬂow, baseﬂow, and soil saturation and
showed how the learned representation of deep learning
models could be interpreted. They sought to determine
whether neural networks were capable of reproducing both
the outputs and internal functioning of conceptual hydrolog-
ical models.
Recent studies call to more fully explore the potential for
techniques from the ﬁelds of artiﬁcial intelligence and ma-
chine learning (Beven, 2020; Reichstein et al., 2019; Shen,
2018; Karpatne et al., 2017) by demonstrating predictive
performance alongside interpretations of the model itself to
improve our understanding of the modelled system. Sev-
eral studies have suggested that LSTM rainfall-runoff mod-
els learn a generalizable representation of the underlying
physical processes. This allows them to perform well in
out-of-sample conditions, such as prediction in ungauged
basins (PUB) (Kratzert et al., 2019c; Feng et al., 2020; Ma
et al., 2020) and unseen extreme events (Frame et al., 2021).
These results suggest that LSTMs have captured information
that generalizes to these conditions, information that can help
us improve hydrological theory and predictions.
Outside of hydrology, calls for interpreting machine learn-
ing and deep learning systems are getting louder and
even generating legislative changes (European Union Digi-tal Strategy, 2019; UK Statistics Authority, 2019). Spiegel-
halter (2020), for example, argues that as algorithmic deci-
sion support tools become widespread in everyday life, the
ability to describe how predictions are made is essential for
building trust in these systems. A large body of literature has
arisen to deﬁne interpretability (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lipton,
2018; Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017), to measure how inter-
pretable models aid human decision making (Nguyen, 2018;
Chu et al., 2020), and to develop methods for interpreting
models (Olah et al., 2018, 2020; Ghorbani and Zou, 2020;
Lundberg and Lee, 2017). Our contribution draws on work
from neuro-linguistic programming, where learned embed-
dings from models trained for speech-recognition tasks have
been interpreted to better understand how parts of speech are
recognized and used by LSTM models (Hewitt and Liang,
2019).
The exploration of the internal representations of LSTM-
based rainfall-runoff models is still at an early developmen-
tal stage. Kratzert et al. (2018) showed evidence that indi-
vidual LSTM cells correlate with snow water content, al-
though the model was only trained to predict discharge from
meteorological inputs. Kratzert et al. (2019d) explored the
learned embedding of catchment attributes, showing that an
LSTM variant had learned to group the rainfall-runoff be-
haviours of hydrologically similar catchments. Using dimen-
sionality reduction techniques, the static embedding (the out-
put of the input gate) was shown to reﬂect spatial and the-
matic groups of catchments that qualitatively correspond to
catchments with similar hydrological behaviours. For two ex-
emplary basins, Kratzert et al. (2019b) found correlations
between the cell states of the LSTM and three hydrologi-
cal states (upper-zone storage, lower-zone storage, and snow
depth) from the Sacramento CSnow-17 hydrological model
(Burnash, 1995). All three of these studies introduced meth-
ods that can be used for exploring the internal representa-
tion of hydrological models, but there exists no comprehen-
sive evaluation of the information stored in the cell-state di-
mensions across a large sample of basins. Furthermore, these
studies only compared individual memory cells with hydro-
logical processes. The LSTM, however, is not forced to store
information about one process in a single memory cell but
can distribute the information about hydrological processes
across several cells. Therefore, we explore methods for ex-
tracting the information that is stored in the LSTM cell state,
across all cells.
The aim of this research is to examine the internal func-
tioning of the LSTM model. We explore the evolution of
the LSTM state vector and test whether information that re-
ﬂects intermediate stores of water (soil moisture and snow
depth) has been learned by the LSTM. This research is novel
for providing a means of interpreting which information the
LSTM rainfall-runoff model has encoded within its state vec-
tor. To our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to apply techniques
developed in machine learning interpretability and natural
language processing research (Hewitt and Liang, 2019) to
Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 26, 3079–3101, 2022 https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-26-3079-2022