3090 T. Lees et al.: Hydrological concept formation inside long short-term memory (LSTM) networks
The beneﬁts of using the linear probe are twofold. The
ﬁrst is that our probe is relatively inﬂexible, and therefore we
can be conﬁdent that the probe is not overﬁtting to the tar-
gets (Hewitt and Liang, 2019). Indeed, we perform a number
of further experiments to check for spurious correlations, as
described in Sect. A. Our experiments demonstrate that the
ﬁndings show the information from the LSTM state vector is
both catchment- and time-speciﬁc, i.e. that the correlations
are signiﬁcantly better than a sensible benchmark, ensuring
results are robust and unlikely to be due to spurious correla-
tions. This is an important result because it ensures that we
ﬁnd meaningful correlations between the information in the
LSTM state vector and the soil moisture target variable. The
second beneﬁt of using the linear probe is that we can easily
interpret the probe weights. However, there are limitations of
this approach too. The linear probe limits the obtainable in-
formation to certain forms of information storage. In theory,
it is possible for the LSTM to use information linearly for
certain ﬂow regimes and then use it differently for other ﬂow
regimes, even within a single basin. Thus, it is possible that
the linear probe is unable to extract relevant information from
the cell states that are being used by the LSTM. To test this
we could use a fully connected neural network or any other
non-linear regression model (see Sect. E). However, using
a more complex model as a probe also comes with its own
downsides. We lose the interpretability that comes from in-
specting the probe weights and also increase the chance of
getting false-positive results (Hewitt and Liang, 2019).
An open question remains: what other information is cap-
tured by the state-vector values that are not already assigned
to a particular hydrological concept? Exploring these remain-
ing cell states offers the potential to identify the underlying
reason for the increased performance of the LSTM. Given
that soil moisture and snow processes are already included
in most hydrological models, the improvement of the LSTM
over the conceptual and process-based models is unlikely to
be a result of these processes we explore here. It remains
possible that the LSTM is better able to learn the complex
interaction of these processes with catchment-speciﬁc infor-
mation; however, it is also possible that these remaining cell
states contain information that describes other processes such
as anthropogenic impacts on the hydrograph, including with-
drawals, transfers, and reservoir management rules.
5 Conclusions
LSTM-based rainfall-runoff models offer good hydrological
performance; however, interpretation and exploration of the
concepts and structures that these models have learned is still
in its infancy. In this paper we have explored the information
captured by the LSTM state vector using tools from machine
learning interpretability research.
We use a linear probe to map the state vector onto a tar-
get variable and ﬁnd that there is sufﬁcient information inthe state vector to represent the temporal dynamics in both
soil moisture (at different levels) and snow depth from com-
monly applied data products. The state vector of the under-
lying LSTM is trained only on meteorological forcings and
static catchment attributes and is asked to predict discharge.
One obvious limitation of this approach is that we rely on
pre-existing estimates of our concepts of interest. Therefore,
as proposed, this method cannot be used to identify unknown
processes, due to the fact that we need a target variable to ﬁt
the probe.
Ultimately, these results suggest two key conclusions.
First, the LSTM is learning a physically realistic mapping
from meteorological inputs to discharge outputs. The con-
cept of a soil store and snowpack is encoded in most concep-
tual hydrological models (Beven, 2011). We therefore have
evidence that in the UK the LSTM is learning to get the right
results for physically plausible reasons. This ﬁnding offers a
potential explanation for recent research that showed LSTMs
have the potential to generalize to out-of-sample conditions
(Frame et al., 2021), since they have learned physically real-
istic mappings from inputs to outputs.
Finally, the conceptual approach that this paper has taken,
using a linear probe, offers an effective method for extracting
information from LSTM state vectors. Wherever LSTMs are
applied, there is the possibility of exploring ctin a similar
way. This method has been applied in natural language pro-
cessing, but as far as we are aware there are no applications
of this method to LSTMs in Earth systems sciences.
Appendix A: Control experiments
We want to be sure that the signals found by the probe are
speciﬁc to a given catchment and time and control for false
positives (ﬁnding a strong correlation between the LSTM
state variable and the intermediate target variable of interest).
Testing for the probe confounder problem, which describes
“when the probe is able to detect and combine disparate sig-
nals, some of which are unrelated to the property we care
about” (Hewitt and Liang, 2019), requires that we ensure that
our detected signals are speciﬁc to the catchments (spatial
speciﬁcity) and times (temporal speciﬁcity). Our hypothesis
is that the LSTM is learning information that is speciﬁc to
soil moisture and snow processes for a given catchment at
a given time. In order to test this hypothesis, we designed
two control experiments. The ﬁrst involves spatial shufﬂing,
where we take the LSTM state vector from Catchment A
and test whether the information content is sufﬁcient to accu-
rately model soil moisture in Catchment B. Spatial shufﬂing
tests for spatial speciﬁcity and can be seen in Fig. A1.
The second experiment shifted the data in time, testing for
temporal speciﬁcity. We tested the performance of the probe
with inputs shifted by 180 d, breaking the temporal link be-
tween inputs and outputs (Fig. A2).
Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 26, 3079–3101, 2022 https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-26-3079-2022