T. Lees et al.: Hydrological concept formation inside long short-term memory (LSTM) networks 3097
Figure D1. The spatial context of the two demonstration catchments shown in the ﬁgures in the sections above. For both Gauge ID: 54018,
Rea Brook at Hookagate (a), and Gauge ID: 15021, Lunan Burn at Mill Bank (b), we show the log area, the log mean precipitation, the gauge
elevation, and the mean potential evapotranspiration as well as the location of the station on the map on the right.
Appendix E: Non-linear probe results
We initially explored a linear probe for the simplicity of inter-
pretation. However, there is no reason why we could not also
use a non-linear model to extract non-linear patterns from the
cell states. We tested a simple two-layer neural network. We
trained a fully connected network with hidden sizes of 20 and
10 for the ﬁrst and second layers respectively. These layer
sizes were chosen using a grid search algorithm, where we
determined that this was the optimum layer size for mini-
mizing the loss function (RMSE). We used the rectiﬁed lin-
ear unit (ReLU) as our activation function, which was chosen
because it is known to reduce the risk of vanishing gradients
(Nair and Hinton, 2010) and trained our probe using stochas-
tic gradient descent with the Adam optimizer (Kingma and
Ba, 2014).The correlation scores are similar, as shown by the over-
all ﬁt between the predicted time series and the observed
time series in Fig. E1. The non-linear probe, unlike the lin-
ear probe, is able to model catchment-speciﬁc offsets, most
obvious when looking at Catchment 15021 and Soil Water
V olume level 4 (lower ﬁgure, lower-right subplot in Fig. E1).
This pattern is repeated across other catchments, and the
offset problem is much reduced for the non-linear model.
This suggests that, while the information may not be lin-
early extracted, a non-linear combination of the cell states
does contain the information for the catchment-speciﬁc off-
sets. Further research will consider various probe architec-
tures and the other hypotheses outlined above to more fully
explore whether catchment offset information is captured by
the LSTM state vector.
https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-26-3079-2022 Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 26, 3079–3101, 2022