3084 T. Lees et al.: Hydrological concept formation inside long short-term memory (LSTM) networks
Figure 2. Histogram of catchment correlation scores for each soil water volume level: soil water volume level 1 (swvl1) contains soil moisture
from depths of 0–7 cm, soil water volume level 2 (swvl2) contains soil moisture from depths of 7–28 cm, soil water volume level 3 (swvl3)
contains soil moisture from depths of 28–100 cm, and soil water volume level 4 (swvl4) contains soil moisture from depths of 100–289 cm.
3 Results
3.1 Soil moisture probe
We use the linear probe described above to see whether a
learned soil moisture signal for four soil depths (from ERA5-
Land) is present in the LSTM. The correlation between the
inferred soil water volume and the target data from ERA5-
Land is shown by the histograms in Fig. 2. We can see
that, on average, the inferred soil moisture for the upper
three soil layers has a high correlation with the soil moisture
from ERA5-Land (median scores of 0.85, 0.90, and 0.89 for
level 1, level 2, and level 3 respectively). The median catch-
ment correlation coefﬁcient for the fourth soil layer is less
than the three upper layers (0.77). However, we would ar-
gue that, for all four soil layers, the LSTM state seems to
model the dynamics of the soil water content. For reference,
we have run two experiments that act as a baseline (Ap-
pendix A).
The time series plots in Fig. 3 show that the linear probe
is able to capture the dynamics of the soil moisture values.
However, modelling the catchment-speciﬁc offset in catch-
ments with more or less saturated soils than the GB mean is
difﬁcult with the linear probe (e.g. Fig. 3b: a catchment with
less saturated soils than the GB mean has an observed soil
water volume less than the zero point, which describes the
GB mean). By offset, we are referring to the point around
which soil moisture ﬂuctuates, the mean saturation level for
that catchment. Looking at Fig. 4 conﬁrms this hypothesis,
since the catchments with the largest biases in probe outputs
(blue circles) have wetter and drier-than-average conditions
compared with the smallest biases (orange), which are con-
centrated in the middle of the distribution.
As we mentioned in Sect. 2.4, we centered and rescaled
the ERA5-Land soil moisture data using the global mean and
standard deviation. So, a value of zero corresponds to the
mean soil water volume across all catchments in the train-ing period. This can be seen in Catchment 15021, where the
catchment-speciﬁc soil moisture level is below zero (the grey
dashed line is below zero), but the probe continues to predict
values centred on zero. The dynamics remain well modelled
(and therefore correlation scores are high), but the probe
identiﬁes soil moisture anomalies rather than absolute values.
Ultimately, we should expect this behaviour since we are ﬁt-
ting a single linear model with only one bias term. For alter-
native methods that model catchment-speciﬁc offsets, please
see the experiment including a catchment-speciﬁc bias term
(by including the gauge ID as input to the model, Sect. C)
and the experiments with a non-linear model (Sect. E). We
return to this point in the discussion that follows.
3.2 Snow depth probe
Another process that inﬂuences river discharge is snow water
storage. ERA5-Land offers a snow depth variable ( mof wa-
ter equivalent) that serves as a proxy of snow water equiva-
lent. In order to determine whether the LSTM is representing
snow processes in the state vector, we use the probe analysis
with ERA5-Land snow depth as our target variable.
Since snow processes are only signiﬁcant in very few
basins in Great Britain, we trained the probe on a subset
of the basins shown in Fig. 5c. These are deﬁned as those
catchments with a proportion of precipitation falling as snow
greater than 5 %. Figure 5b shows the probe output over
1 year for one station (Station 15025, Ericht at Craighall)
and then Fig. 5a shows the probe output for that station
and two other snowy catchments over the entire test pe-
riod (1998–2008). They show clearly that the probe output
correctly predicts very little variability in the summer pe-
riod, when the snow will have melted. The winter peaks cor-
respond to snow accumulation and snowmelt. The median
(over 33 catchments) Pearson correlation coefﬁcient between
the probe-simulated snow depth and the ERA5-Land snow
depth is 0.84, meaning that 84 % of the snow variance can be
described by the linear probe simulation.
Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 26, 3079–3101, 2022 https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-26-3079-2022