Policy Gradient Method For Robust Reinforcement Learning
(a)R= 0.1.
 (b)R= 0.15.
Figure 6. Robust Actor-Critic v.s. RARL on Taxi Environment.
7.4.2. C OMPARISON WITH ARPL
The idea of the ARPL approach (Mandlekar et al., 2017) can
be summarized as follows. During the training, an adversary
randomly perturb the observation. Specifically, at each time
step, with a small probability pper, the observed state is
perturbed arbitrarily. The algorithm update the policy using
policy gradient method with these perturbed samples .
Consider the G(10,8)problem. We set pper=R. At
each time step, we first generate n= 20 trajectories
Ti, i= 1, ...,20starting at si
0∼ρfollowing πθt, and the
length of Tiis generated according to Geometric (1−γ).
Then, with probability Rthe state observed by the agent
is perturbed to an arbitrary state randomly. We then use
these perturbed trajectories and Monte Carlo method to esti-
mate the action-value functions Qt(s, a). We also use these
perturbed trajectories to estimate the visitation distribution.
Then we perform a sample-based policy gradient step using
Qtand these trajectories. We compare our robust policy gra-
dient algorithm with the ARPL algorithm. At each time step,
we update the policies θtaccording to the two algorithms,
and use 30 trajectories to estimate the robust value function
J(θt), which measures the worst-case performance over the
uncertainty set. We then plot the robust value function J(θt)
for the two approaches v.s. the number of iterations in Fig-
ure 7. The upper and lower envelops correspond the 95 and
5 percentiles of the 30 trajectories. As Figure 7 shows, our
robust PG algorithm finds a policy that achieves a higher
reward under the worst-case transition kernel than the ARPL
approach, and hence is more robust to the model uncertainty.
8. Discussions
In this paper, we develop a direct policy search method
for robust RL. Our robust algorithms can be applied with
arbitrary differentiable value function approximation and
policy parameterization, and thus is scalable to problems
with large state and action spaces. In this paper, the analysis
is for the direct policy parameterization, and our approach
can also be extended to establish the global optimality under
(a)R= 0.2.
 (b)R= 0.3.
Figure 7. Robust PG v.s. ARPL on G(10,8)Environment.
other policy parameterizations and develop robust natural
policy gradient approaches for robust RL. We focus on
theR-contamination model for the uncertainty set in this
paper, which can be closely related to sets defined by total
variation and Kullback-Leibler divergence using Pinsker’s
inequality. It is also of future interest to investigate model-
free approaches for other uncertainty sets defined via e.g.,
total variation, Kullback-Leibler divergence, Wasserstain
distance.
9. Acknowledgment
The work was supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grants CCF-2106560 and CCF-2007783.
References
Abdullah, M. A., Ren, H., Ammar, H. B., Milenkovic, V .,
Luo, R., Zhang, M., and Wang, J. Wasserstein robust
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.13196 ,
2019.
Achiam, J., Held, D., Tamar, A., and Abbeel, P. Constrained
policy optimization. In Proc. International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML) , pp. 22–31. PMLR, 2017.
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S. M., Lee, J. D., and Mahajan, G.
On the theory of policy gradient methods: Optimality,
approximation, and distribution shift. Journal of Machine
Learning Research , 22(98):1–76, 2021.
Archibald, T., McKinnon, K., and Thomas, L. On the
generation of Markov decision processes. Journal of the
Operational Research Society , 46(3):354–361, 1995.
Asadi, K. and Littman, M. L. An alternative softmax oper-
ator for reinforcement learning. In Proc. International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , volume 70, pp.
243–252. JMLR, 2017.
Atkeson, C. G. and Morimoto, J. Nonparametric representa-
tion of policies and value functions: A trajectory-based
approach. In Proc. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NIPS) , pp. 1643–1650, 2003.