Policy Gradient Method For Robust Reinforcement Learning
(a)R= 0.2.
 (b)R= 0.25.
Figure 2. Robust Policy Gradient v.s. Non-robust Policy Gradient
on Garnet Problem G(20,10).
(a)R= 0.1.
 (b)R= 0.15.
Figure 3. Robust Policy Gradient v.s. Non-robust Policy Gradient
on Taxi Problem.
to demonstrate such an approximation.
As shown in Figure 4, when σis small (e.g., σ= 1), the
performance of smoothed robust policy gradient is poor.
Asσincreases, smoothed robust policy gradient behaves
similarly to the robust policy gradient, which corresponds
to the curve with σ=∞. This experiment hence verifies
our theoretical results that we can approximate the robust
policy gradient by choosing a suitably large σ.
(a)R= 0.1.
 (b)R= 0.15.
Figure 4. Smoothed Robust Policy Gradient.
7.3. Robust Actor-Critic
In Figure 5, we consider Garnet problem G(30,20)using
neural network parameterized policy, where we use a two-
layer neural network with 15 neurons in the hidden layer
to parameterize the policy πθ. We then use a two-layer
neural network (with 20 neurons in the hidden layer) in the
critic. At each time step, we run Algorithm 3 for 30 times to
estimate the robust value function. We then use the estimate
to simulate Algorithm 4. We plot J(θt)v.s. the number ofiterations in Figure 5, and the upper and lower envelopes
of the curves correspond to the 95 and 5 percentiles of the
30 trajectories. As the results show, our robust actor-critic
algorithm finds a policy that achieves a higher accumulated
discounted reward on the worst-case transition kernel than
the vanilla actor-critic algorithm (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
(a)R= 0.15.
 (b)R= 0.2.
Figure 5. Robust Actor-Critic (AC) v.s. Non-robust Actor-Critic
on Garnet Problem G(30,20).
7.4. Comparison with Other Robust Algorithms
We compare our robust algorithms with two other robust RL
approahces, including the robust adversarial reinforcement
learning (RARL) approach in (Pinto et al., 2017), and the
adversarially robust policy learning (ARPL) approach in
(Mandlekar et al., 2017).
7.4.1. C OMPARISON WITH RARL
The basic idea of the RARL approach is to introduce an
adversary that perturbs the state transition to minimize the
accumulated discounted reward. Then the agent and the
adversary are trained alternatively using adversarial training.
To apply their algorithm to our problem setting, we set an ad-
versarial player, whose goal is to minimize the accumulated
discounted reward that the agent receives. The action space
Aadof the adversary is the state space Aad≜S. The agent
and the adversary take actions aa, aad, then the environment
will transit to state aadwith probability Ror transit follow-
ing the unperturbed MDP paaswith probability 1−R. We
compare our robust actor-critic algorithm with the RARL
algorithm on the Taxi environment. Similarly, at each time
step, we run Algorithm 3 with neural function approxima-
tion for 30 times to estimate the robust value function. We
then use the results to simulate Algorithm 4 and RARL. We
plot the robust value function J(θt)v.s. the number of itera-
tions in Figure 6. The upper and lower envelops correspond
the 95 and 5 percentiles of the 30 trajectories. As Figure 6
shows, our robust actor-critic algorithm achieves a much
higher accumulative discounted reward than the RARL ap-
proach under the worst-case transition kernel, and thus is
more robust to model mismatch.