1 3Decarbonising the food system is a primary challenge for 
all humanity. The Paris Agreement goal of limiting global 
temperature increases to 2 °C (preferably 1.5 °C) cannot be met without significant reductions in 
 C
O2 equivalent emissions 
from across the food system [4 ]. However, these emission 
reductions cannot impact the availability and cost of healthy foods demanded by an ever-increasing global population [5 ]. 
There is no single panacea to the resolution of this paradox (produce low emission, low cost, and healthy food); it will require a layer of interventions and a complete socio-eco-tech-nical reappraisal of the technology used to produce food. This article considers the opportunities for robotic and artificial intelligence technologies to transform and help decarbonise food production. Our focus is on the production of agricultural crops but recognises that robotics will also play a key role in the decarbonisation of animal production systems.
Agri-robotic technology development is now the focus of 
considerable global research and innovation [6–8]. Applica-tion development is diverse with emerging focus on robotic systems that can selectively harvest crops [9 , 10]; control 
pest, diseases, and weeds [11, 12]; monitor the agricultural 
environment [ 13] and crops [14, 15]; autonomously support 
farm logistic operations [16]; and accelerate the breeding or phenotyping of crops [17
•]. Robotic technologies are pro-
viding viable opportunities for the repurposing of agricul-tural systems, for example by supporting a transition from large high-mass machines (typical tractor mass is
 > 5
 Mg, 
harvesters
 >
 30 
Mg) towards autonomous fleets of medium 
capacity [18] or small machines (mass
 <
 0.5 
Mg) [6 , 19]. 
The key question now is how these robotic technologies can be deployed to decarbonise agricultural production and what are the key challenges to realise their potential. Given the known extent of 
 C
O2 equivalent emissions in agriculture, 
we prioritised our discussion around five key agri-robotic opportunities, whilst recognising multiple approaches will be required:
1.
 R
obotic systems to optimise crop nitrogen use and 
reduce  N2O emission
2.
 A
ccelerated breeding of low carbon crops
3. L
ighweight robotic machines to regenerate soils and 
reduce compaction
4.
 Electr
ified robotic vehicles
5. Ar
tificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning to 
reduce farm waste, including losses from pests and dis-
ease
Nitrogen
Nitrogen (N) is one of the most essential macronutrients required by crops for growth and development. Nitrogen fer -
tiliser represents a significant cost for the grower with global nitrogen price at least doubling in 2021 [20]. Crops in the UK receive N fertiliser in the range of 60–200 kg 
 h
a−1 [21]. 
At a global level, average N use-efficiency (NUE: amount of dry matter produced per unit of N available in the soil) has only increased slowly during the past 20 years [22]. It sits in the range of 40–50% when using input–output budg-eting approaches [23]. The remainder can be released as 
 N2O or might enter the aquatic environment as a pollutant. 
This suggests that there is considerable potential for preci-sion agriculture and robotic technologies to improve NUE by improved spatial and temporal deployment of N. Spatial variable rate application approaches typically use optical and possibly soil sensors to assess N requirement.
Optical approaches are typically based on leaf and canopy 
colour normalised difference vegetation index (NDVI) or greenness. Aula et al. [24 ] showed variable rate applica -
tion using optical sensors can substantially increase NUE by 10.4%, saving as much as 53 kg N 
 ha−1. However, the bene-
fits from spatial applications are not consistent, with N input reductions of 10 to 80% reported depending upon the crop, sensors used, and geographic location [25]. Inconsistency in response is not surprising since use of optical sensors assumes a direct correlation between crop N requirement and canopy colour. This assumption is not likely to hold in all instances since canopy “greenness” can be a function of many factors (crop variety, shade, soil compaction, water availability, etc.), not just N requirement. The existing N status of crop or even the soil does not infer future fertiliser requirements. These will be a function of initial canopy sta-tus, future crop growth, and N demand plus likely forward environmental and soil conditions. Given the complexity of N requirements, next-generation precision agriculture and robotic systems are likely to deploy machine learning tool to optimise NUE [ 26]. These tools need to be developed but 
will use robotic technologies that analyse baseline N status, predict crop needs, and apply precise fertilisation at high spatial resolutions.
Autonomous robotic platforms, agnostic of any specific 
sensor, show considerable potential to provide decision sup-port by optimising the exploration of variable soil and field environments [27]. This could include sensing of soil fer -
tility (e.g. nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium (NPK)), health (microbial activity), moisture, or physical properties (compaction, etc.). In addition to agricultural environments, research focus has been directed and stimulated by extra-terrestrial robotic platforms that explore soils on planets such as Mars [28]. Robotically mapped terrestrial agricul-tural environment parameters that impact net zero include soil nutrition (including N) using advanced laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) sensors [ 29], moisture 
using cosmic neutron detectors [30], compaction using pen-etrometers [27], and more recently spatial carbon dioxide emissions across fields using robot actuated infra-red gas 58 Current Robotics Reports (2022) 3:57–64