1 3powdery mildew by applications of ultraviolet C (UVC) light 
[62, 63] (Fig.  3A). This approach fully exploits the gain from 
autonomous systems as UVC can be applied with minimal hazard to human operators. Robotic systems for crop weed-ing are now well established, using cameras to detect weeds, controlled with a range of tools including hoes [12] and lasers [64]. Direct robotic waste reduction and crop care systems are 
likely to evolve rapidly, but key barriers will be computational speed, access to labelled data sets, and transfer learning [65] for generic application remain.
Indirect robotic waste reduction technologies include the 
use of machine learning and robotic sensors to improve farmer decision support. This might include tools that improve crop forecasting by recognition, counting, and measurement of fruit [15, 66–68] (Fig.  3B) or use of machine learning to fuse data 
from multiple sources (e.g., unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) and unmanned ground vehicles (UGV’s) to inform agronomic decisions [69, 70]. Crop forecasting gains alone are significant 
since they not only enable farmers to increase the proportion of crop sold but also inform price negotiation.
Deployment of Robotic Technologies 
to Decarbonise Agricultural Production
The deployment of these five agri-robotic opportunities 
requires a systemic transformation in agricultural produc-tion. This transformation involves enabling environments in which robotic technologies become innovations that reduce GHG emissions. A social-ecological-technological systems (SETS) approach that also considered the responsible adop-tion of robotic innovation [71] is needed to create environ-ments that promote the interaction amongst technical inno-vation, social systems, and ecosystem functions [72]. Recent literature on net zero recognises that effective mitigation of climate change will require a just transition that involves a societal transformation at different scales to create new rules and institutions that facilitate the adoption and scaling of technological innovations developed around ecological principles [73]. In a growing literature for climate action, SETS appear as an approach to deliver more just, equitable, sustainable, and resilient futures [74]. The emphasis is on enhancing the integration of technical systems with social and ecological systems during the design, manufacture, and use [75] of robotic technology.
Conclusion
Agriculture, one of the planet’s oldest industries, is now at a technological crossroads, fighting climate change while feed-ing the world. Robotics and autonomous systems now emerge as next horizon technologies with considerable potential to transform diverse agricultural activities including minimis-ing on-farm emissions, food and farm waste, and decision support. A context-specific design of RAS innovation and deployment is warranted to reap maximum agricultural ben-efits. Global coordination of multidisciplinary researchers, investors, consumers, farmers, and policy regulators will be vital for driving a paradigm shift in net zero agriculture.
Declarations  
Conflict of Interest  The aut hors declare no competing interests.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent  This ar
ticle does not 
contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any 
of the authors.
Open Access
 This ar
ticle is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
Fig. 3  A mobile r obotic system equipped with an UVC light used 
for treating powdery mildew in strawberry developed by the part-nership between Saga Robotics and University of Lincoln (photo by Kristoffer Skarsgård) (A). Machine learning model used to recognize, count, and measure strawberry fruits developed by Kirk et al. (2021a, 2021b) (B)61 Current Robotics Reports (2022) 3:57–64