1 3analysers (see Fig.  1A). Autonomous robotic soil sampling 
and measurement systems reduce the cost and increase the 
scale of sampling. They have the potential to step change precision and farmer decision support.
Robotic Plant Breeding
Robotic phenotyping can accelerate breeding for new vari-eties in crops through precise phenotyping of traits [31]. On-farm studies have estimated that if yields rise by 1.75%, energy inputs would drop by $7–13 per acre while irrigation could be reduced by 8% [32]. Hence, robotic phenotyping opens a plethora of possibilities that could enable net zero agriculture.
Most breeding programs require thousands of field plots 
but are sampled at great cost by human technicians. Yet diverse robotic phenotyping platforms (both ground- and aerial-based) have been designed and deployed in both con-trolled environments [33, 34] or field conditions [35, 36]. 
The efficacy of such robotic systems varies substantially [37]. However, they have shown considerable potential 
to capture the environmental responses of key traits, par -
ticularly under controlled environments [17
•, 38]. Robotic 
deployment of novel sensors, both 2D and 3D imag -
ing (RGB, hyper/multispectral, thermal or fluorescence; Fig.  1B–E), capturing morphological and structural traits 
[38] and tomography techniques [39] show great promise 
to study internal structures of plant organs, roots, and soils. However, plant deep architectural trait characterisation remains challenging largely due to the complex and deform-able nature of plants [40], where highly specialist robotic systems are required.
Robotic phenotyping for physiological and biochemical 
traits contributing to net zero agriculture deserves further attention. Most physiological and vegetative indices are purely spectral-based derivations while robotic platforms for measuring cellular traits under field conditions are currently unavailable. Such robotic systems need viable designs such as specialised and sensible robotic arms to attach sensors and to hold plant organs [41] and need precise deployment of vision-guided segmentation of specific plant organs [42]. Field-viable mobile robotic platforms for large-scale pheno-typing are scarce and any such existing robotic phenotyping platforms have temporal limitations due to energy demands [6], sensor usage restrictions [43], or unable to cope with 
unstructured and harsh field environments. Novel swarm robotic platforms that could achieve distributed sensing [44] offer the next step change, accurate phenotyping of large number of replicated field-plots at sensible economic costs.
Robotics and Regenerative Agriculture
Robotic technologies offer opportunities as next-generation farm machinery; key intrinsic properties required are of low mass and high geospatial precision. These functional proper -
ties are critical for the adoption of regenerative agriculture systems [45]. These systems are aimed at restoration and sustainable management of soil health through sequestra-tion of soil organic carbon (SOC). They include a diverse range of techniques integrated within a systems approach to farming that include no-till farming (ploughing eliminated), complex rotations, and novel technologies, including con -
trolled traffic farming (CTF). CTF systems in arable crop-ping use real-time kinematics from the global positioning system (RTK-GPS) to precisely guide field vehicles along permanent traffic lanes within a field [46]. This reduces soil compaction to only the traffic lanes and not in the culti -
vated soil. As 
 N2O emissions are a function of the degree 
of water saturation within a soil [47], any farming system that reduces compaction might be beneficial. Review [48] suggested CTF could reduce 
 N2O emissions by 20 to 50% 
compared to non-CTF. In addition, regenerative agricul -
ture, specifically no-till, focusses on building SOC; gains of c.350 kg C 
 ha−1  y ear−1 have been reported [49]. This may 
Fig. 1  Infr ared gas analyser fitted to a mobile robotic platform to col-
lect soil carbon fluxes in the field (A). A mobile robotic phenotyping system (LIPS, Lincoln Phenomic System) developed at the University of Lincoln, UK. The LIPS has been deployed for phenotyping wheat plots in the field (B), which is equipped with a dual set-up of three-dimensional (3D) multispectral laser scanners (PlantEye, Phenospex, C), and fitted to, and operated through, linear actuator inside the plat-form (D) to obtain a high-resolution wheat canopy 3D data (E)59 Current Robotics Reports (2022) 3:57–64