1 3have great significance for net zero agriculture since soil 
is a globally significant carbon sink, holding c.1550Pg of carbon compared to 560Pg in vegetation and 760Pg in the atmosphere [50]. High SOC might also increase yields; Lal [51] estimates that global food production could increase by between 24 and 40 m Mg 
 y
ear−1 if SOC sequesters at a rate 
of 1 Mg   ha−1 each year.
Robotic platforms might enable a new paradigm for agri-
cultural equipment. This could include large fleets of ultra-light weight or medium mass (>
 5 
Mg) machines [16]. Given 
concerns with the availability and cost of labour on farms [52], future robotic systems will require both a high degree 
of autonomy and potential to operate as a fleet [6 ]. Fleet 
operations might require the operation of large numbers of either homogenous or even heterogenous machines [6 ]. An 
example of a heterogenous robotic fleet might be a human-driven combine harvester with logistics support for grain carrying by multiple autonomous tractors. Fleet operations require systems to optimise machine planning [53] and oper -
ational precision with minimal risk to operators, machines, the environment, and the public. The physics of agriculture rather constrains the potential for machinery down scaling, for example typical agricultural machines generally require significant power and torque to traverse soils regardless of additional operational tasks (ploughing, cultivating, crop care, etc.) [54]. In addition, robotic sensors and processing including Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) can create significant fixed costs for small platforms that, without fur -
ther innovation on platform hardware and software design, might create barriers to scaling [55].
Electric Vehicles
Conventional fossil fuel tractors substituted by lighter elec-tric machines offer new possibilities for precision robotic technologies and automation [56]. In the UK, an average cereal farm uses 115.6 l of diesel 
 ha−1  y ear−1 (4,393MJha−1, or 931Gg 
 C
O2 equivalent for UK’s 3.1Mha cereals); mov -
ing to a no-till system might reduce the input energy by 50% [57]. These energy inputs are significant and might limit the application of electric vehicles, scalability, and operational performance. The energy density of lithium-ion batteries (c . 
 200Whk
g−1) [36] is significantly lower 
than diesel (11.6kWhkg−1). However, not all agricultural 
operations require high-energy input machines. In addition to reducing the issues with soil compaction, small robotic platforms with low to medium power ratings will be suit-able for selective harvesting, weeding, logistics support, or crop care only mandate in the order of 1 to 5KW power [58–60]. For instance, 0.8 to 8 KW e-hub powered agri-
robots shown in Fig.  2 (A–B) exemplify how electrification 
of farming vehicles and downsizing could revolutionise the art of farming. These smaller robotic systems can provide critical agricultural functionality with reasonable duty cycles whilst reducing the carbon footprint. Smaller electric farm vehicles can have low costs if batteries can be recharged using renewable energy sources such as solar electricity. Such innovations in farming vehicle technology will ena-ble sustainable development, not least the provision of low cost and durable platforms to support small holder farmers across the globe, for example to transport harvested produce or move water to fields.
Robotics, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Crop 
Care, and Waste
Any robotic system or associated AI analytics that reduces 
food loss and waste, up to one-third of all food produced, con-tributes directly to net zero [61]. Waste specifically represents 13% of all the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Europe food system GHG emissions [2
••]. Robotic systems are being deployed that directly or 
indirectly reduce waste. Direct robotic solutions include the use of autonomous systems that eradicate diseases such as Fig. 2  The ne w generation of 
e-hub-powered agri-robots 
developed by the University of Lincoln, UK, in partnership with OxDrive and Saga Robot-ics (A). 0.8-KW e-hub-powered Thorvald robot from Saga (B)
60 Current Robotics Reports (2022) 3:57–64