Vol.:(0123456789)1 3h
ttps://doi.org/10.1007/s43154-022-00077-6
AGRICULTURE ROBOTICS (EI SKLAR, G DAS AND J GAO, SECTION EDITORS)
Robotics and Autonomous Systems for Net Zero Agriculture
Simon Pearson1  · Tania Carolina Camacho‑Villa1  · Ravi Valluru1  · Oorbessy Gaju1  · Mini C. Rai2  · 
Iain Gould1  · Steve Brewer1  · Elizabeth Sklar1 
Accepted: 2 April 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Purpose of Review  The paper discusses how r
obotics and autonomous systems (RAS) are being deployed to decarbonise 
agricultural production. The climate emergency cannot be ameliorated without dramatic reductions in greenhouse gas emis-sions across the agri-food sector. This review outlines the transformational role for robotics in the agri-food system and considers where research and focus might be prioritised.Recent Findings
 Ag
ri-robotic systems provide multiple emerging opportunities that facilitate the transition towards net 
zero agriculture. Five focus themes were identified where robotics could impact sustainable food production systems to (1) increase nitrogen use efficiency, (2) accelerate plant breeding, (3) deliver regenerative agriculture, (4) electrify robotic vehicles, (5) reduce food waste.Summary
 RAS technologies cr
eate opportunities to (i) optimise the use of inputs such as fertiliser, seeds, and fuel/energy; 
(ii) reduce the environmental impact on soil and other natural resources; (iii) improve the efficiency and precision of agri-cultural processes and equipment; (iv) enhance farmers’ decisions to improve crop care and reduce farm waste. Further and scaled research and technology development are needed to exploit these opportunities.
Keywords
 Ne
t zero agriculture · Nitrogen-use-efficiency · Robotic plant breeding · Electric farm vehicles · Artificial 
intelligence for farm waste · Socio-eco-technical approach
Introduction
There is an urgent need to decarbonise the agri-food sys-
tem which, from farm to fork, accounts for 21 to 37% of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions [1
•, 2••]. 
The total global food system emissions are c.18Gt car -
bon dioxide  (CO2) equivalent with 72% of that derived 
from agricultural production (40%) and land use/change activity (32%). Of the total food system emissions 52%, 35%, 10%, and 2% are derived from Carbon dioxide 
 (CO2), methane  (CH4), nitrous oxide  (N2O), and F gases, 
respectively. Land use change emissions are primarily 
 CO2, brought on by the oxidation of soil carbon follow -
ing conversion of land into agriculture, for example from the intensive cultivation of soil and drainage of peatlands soils. Enteric fermentation within animals, rice cultiva-tion, and manure management contribute to 62% 
 CH4 
emissions, whilst  N2O emissions are primarily derived 
from nitrogen fertilisers. In addition to  N2O soil emis -
sion, energy used in the Haber–Bosch process to produce ammonia accounts for 1.2% of global 
 CO2 emissions [ 3].This article is part of the Topical Collection on Agriculture 
Robotics.
 * Simon Pearson 
 SP
earson@lincoln.ac.uk
 Tania Car
olina Camacho -Villa 
 Ccamac
hovilla@lincoln.ac.uk
 Ra
vi Valluru 
 r
valluru@lincoln.ac.uk
 Oorbessy Gaju 
 OGa
ju@lincoln.ac.uk
 Mini C. Rai 
 mr
ai@lincoln.ac.uk
 Iain Gould 
 IGould@lincoln.ac.uk
 Ste
ve Brewer 
 SBr
ewer@lincoln.ac.uk
 Elizabet
h Sklar 
 Esklar@lincoln.ac.uk
1 Lincoln Institute of Agri -F ood Technology, Riseholme 
Campus, University of Lincoln, Lincoln LN2 2LG, UK
2 School of Engineering, University of Lincoln, 
Lincoln LN6 7T
S, UK/ Published online: 28 April 2022Current Robotics Reports (2022) 3:57–64