using a cell-based search space, namely how to choose the macro-architecture : how many
cells shall be used and how should they be connected to build the actual model? For exam-
ple, Zoph et al. (2018) build a sequential model from cells, in which each cell receives the
outputs of the two preceding cells as input, while Cai et al. (2018b) employ the high-level
structure of well-known manually designed architectures, such as DenseNet (Huang et al.,
2017), and use their cells within these models. In principle, cells can be combined arbi-
trarily, e.g., within the multi-branch space described above, by simply replacing layers with
cells. Ideally, both the macro-architecture and the micro-architecture (i.e., the structure of
the cells) should be optimized jointly instead of solely optimizing the micro-architecture;
otherwise, one may easily end up having to do manual macro-architecture engineering after
nding a well-performing cell. One step in the direction of optimizing macro-architectures
is the hierarchical search space introduced by Liu et al. (2018b), which consists of several
levels of motifs. The rst level consists of the set of primitive operations, the second level
of dierent motifs that connect primitive operations via a directed acyclic graph, the third
level of motifs that encode how to connect second-level motifs, and so on. The cell-based
search space can be seen as a special case of this hierarchical search space where the number
of levels is three, the second level motifs correspond to the cells, and the third level is the
hard-coded macro-architecture.
The choice of the search space largely determines the diculty of the optimization
problem: even for the case of the search space based on a single cell with xed macro-
architecture, the optimization problem remains (i) non-continuous and (ii) relatively high-
dimensional (since more complex models tend to perform better, resulting in more design
choices).
We note that the architectures in many search spaces can be written as xed-length
vectors; e.g., the search space for each of the two cells by Zoph et al. (2018) can be written as
a 40-dimensional1search space with categorical dimensions, each of which chooses between
a small number of dierent building blocks and inputs. Unbounded search spaces can be
constrained to have a (potentially very large, but nite) number of layers, which again gives
rise to xed-size search spaces with (potentially many) conditional dimensions.
In the next section, we discuss Search Strategies that are well-suited for these kinds of
search spaces.
3. Search Strategy
Many dierent search strategies can be used to explore the space of neural architectures, in-
cluding random search, Bayesian optimization, evolutionary methods, reinforcement learn-
ing (RL), and gradient-based methods. Historically, evolutionary algorithms were already
used by many researchers to evolve neural architectures (and often also their weights)
decades ago (see, e.g., Angeline et al., 1994; Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002; Floreano
1. Each of the 2 cells consists of 5 blocks. For each block, 2 inputs are chosen and for each of these inputs
an operation to be applied to the input is chosen, resulting in a 2 522 = 40 dimensional representation.
Note that originally there was another dimension for either summing or concatenating the operations
within a block. However, this choice was discarded in the experiments of the paper and the outputs
within a block were always summed.
5