0
31Conv5x5
MaxPoolConv3x3
2
40
31
2
4Figure 4: Illustration of one-shot architecture search. Simple network with an input node
(denoted as 0), three hidden nodes (denoted as 1,2,3) and one output node (de-
noted as 4). Instead of applying a single operation (such as a 3x3 convolution)
to a node, the one-shot model (left) contains several candidate operations for ev-
ery node, namely 3x3 convolution (red edges), 5x5 convolution (blue edges) and
MaxPooling (green edges) in the above illustration. Once the one-shot model is
trained, its weights are shared across dierent architectures, which are simply
subgraphs of the one-shot model (right). Figure inspired by Liu et al. (2019b).
While the previously mentioned approaches optimize a distribution over architectures
during training, the approach of Bender et al. (2018) can be seen as using a xed dis-
tribution. The high performance obtainable by the latter indicates that the combination
of weight sharing and a xed (carefully chosen) distribution might (perhaps surprisingly)
be the only required ingredients for one-shot NAS. Related to these approaches is meta-
learning of hypernetworks that generate weights for novel architectures and thus requires
only training the hypernetwork but not the architectures themselves (Brock et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2019). The main dierence here is that weights are not strictly shared but
generated by the shared hypernetwork (conditional on the sampled architecture).
A general limitation of one-shot NAS is that the supergraph dened a priori restricts
the search space to its subgraphs. Moreover, approaches which require that the entire
supergraph resides in GPU memory during architecture search will be restricted to relatively
small supergraphs and search spaces accordingly, and are thus typically used in combination
with cell-based search spaces. While approaches based on weight sharing have substantially
reduced the computational resources required for NAS (from thousands to a few GPU
days), it is currently not well understood which biases they introduce into the search if the
sampling distribution of architectures is optimized along with the one-shot model instead of
xing it (Bender et al., 2018). For instance, an initial bias in exploring certain parts of the
search space more than others might lead to the weights of the one-shot model being better
adapted for these architectures, which in turn would reinforce the bias of the search to
these parts of the search space. This might result in premature convergence of NAS or little
correlation between the one-shot and true performance of an architecture (Sciuto et al.,
11