Another approach to speed up performance estimation is to initialize the weights of
novel architectures based on weights of other architectures that have been trained before.
One way of achieving this, dubbed network morphisms (Wei et al., 2016), allows modifying
an architecture while leaving the function represented by the network unchanged, resulting
in methods that only require a few GPU days (Elsken et al., 2017; Cai et al., 2018a,b; Jin
et al., 2018). This allows increasing the capacity of networks successively and retaining
high performance without requiring training from scratch. Continuing training for a few
epochs can also make use of the additional capacity introduced by network morphisms.
An advantage of these approaches is that they allow search spaces without an inherent
upper bound on the architecture's size (Elsken et al., 2017); on the other hand, strict
network morphisms can only make architectures larger and may thus lead to overly complex
architectures. This can be attenuated by employing approximate network morphisms that
allow shrinking architectures (Elsken et al., 2019).
One-Shot Architecture Search (see Figure 4) treats all architectures as dierent sub-
graphs of a supergraph (the one-shot model) and shares weights between architectures that
have edges of this supergraph in common (Saxena and Verbeek, 2016; Brock et al., 2017;
Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b; Bender et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019).
Only the weights of a single one-shot model need to be trained (in one of various ways),
and architectures (which are just subgraphs of the one-shot model) can then be evaluated
without any separate training by inheriting trained weights from the one-shot model. This
greatly speeds up performance estimation of architectures, since no training is required (only
evaluating performance on validation data), again resulting in methods that only require
a few GPU days. The one-shot model typically incurs a large bias as it underestimates
the actual performance of the best architectures severely; nevertheless, it allows ranking
architectures, which would be sucient if the estimated performance correlates strongly
with the actual performance. However, it is currently not clear if this is actually the case
(Bender et al., 2018; Sciuto et al., 2019).
Dierent one-shot NAS methods dier in how the one-shot model is trained: ENAS
(Pham et al., 2018) learns a RNN controller that samples architectures from the search
space and trains the one-shot model based on approximate gradients obtained through RE-
INFORCE. DARTS (Liu et al., 2019b) optimizes all weights of the one-shot model jointly
with a continuous relaxation of the search space, obtained by placing a mixture of candidate
operations on each edge of the one-shot model. Instead of optimizing real-valued weights
on the operations as in DARTS, SNAS (Xie et al., 2019) optimizes a distribution over
the candidate operations. The authors employ the concrete distribution (Maddison et al.,
2017; Jang et al., 2017) and reparametrization (Kingma and Welling, 2014) to relax the
discrete distribution and make it dierentiable, enabling optimization via gradient descent.
To overcome the necessity of keeping the entire one-shot model in the GPU memory, Prox-
ylessNAS (Cai et al., 2019) \binarizes" the architectural weights, masking out all but one
edge per operation. The probabilities for an edge being either masked out or not are then
learned by sampling a few binarized architectures and using BinaryConnect (Courbariaux
et al., 2015) to update the corresponding probabilities. Bender et al. (2018) only train the
one-shot model once and show that this is sucient when deactivating parts of this model
stochastically during training using path dropout.
10