use genetic algorithms to propose architectures and use backpropagation to optimize their
weights. Many neuro-evolutionary approaches since then (Angeline et al., 1994; Stanley and
Miikkulainen, 2002; Stanley et al., 2009) use genetic algorithms to optimize both the neural
architecture and its weights; however, when scaling to contemporary neural architectures
with millions of weights for supervised learning tasks, SGD-based weight optimization meth-
ods currently outperform evolutionary ones.2More recent neuro-evolutionary approaches
(Real et al., 2017; Suganuma et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018b; Real et al., 2019; Miikkulainen
et al., 2017; Xie and Yuille, 2017; Elsken et al., 2019) therefore again use gradient-based
methods for optimizing weights and solely use evolutionary algorithms for optimizing the
neural architecture itself. Evolutionary algorithms evolve a population of models, i.e., a
set of (possibly trained) networks; in every evolution step, at least one model from the
population is sampled and serves as a parent to generate osprings by applying mutations
to it. In the context of NAS, mutations are local operations, such as adding or removing a
layer, altering the hyperparameters of a layer, adding skip connections, as well as altering
training hyperparameters. After training the osprings, their tness (e.g., performance on
a validation set) is evaluated and they are added to the population.
Neuro-evolutionary methods dier in how they sample parents, update populations,
and generate osprings. For example, Real et al. (2017), Real et al. (2019), and Liu et al.
(2018b) use tournament selection (Goldberg and Deb, 1991) to sample parents, whereas
Elsken et al. (2019) sample parents from a multi-objective Pareto front using an inverse
density. Real et al. (2017) remove the worst individual from a population, while Real et al.
(2019) found it benecial to remove the oldest individual (which decreases greediness), and
Liu et al. (2018b) do not remove individuals at all. To generate ospring, most approaches
initialize child networks randomly, while Elsken et al. (2019) employ Lamarckian inheri-
tance, i.e, knowledge (in the form of learned weights) is passed on from a parent network
to its children by using network morphisms. Real et al. (2017) also let an ospring inherit
all parameters of its parent that are not aected by the applied mutation; while this in-
heritance is not strictly function-preserving it might also speed up learning compared to a
random initialization. Moreover, they also allow mutating the learning rate which can be
seen as a way for optimizing the learning rate schedule during NAS. We refer to Stanley
et al. (2019) for a recent in-depth review on neuro-evolutionary methods.
Real et al. (2019) conduct a case study comparing RL, evolution, and random search
(RS), concluding that RL and evolution perform equally well in terms of nal test accuracy,
with evolution having better anytime performance and nding smaller models. Both ap-
proaches consistently perform better than RS in their experiments, but with a rather small
margin: RS achieved test errors of approximately 4% on CIFAR-10, while RL and evolution
reached approximately 3 :5% (after \model augmentation" where depth and number of l-
ters was increased; the dierence on the non-augmented space actually used for the search
was approx. 2%). The dierence was even smaller for Liu et al. (2018b), who reported a
test error of 3 :9% on CIFAR-10 and a top-1 validation error of 21 :0% on ImageNet for RS,
compared to 3 :75% and 20 :3% for their evolution-based method, respectively.
2. Some recent work shows that evolving even millions of weights is competitive to gradient-based opti-
mization when only high-variance estimates of the gradient are available, e.g., for reinforcement learning
tasks (Salimans et al., 2017; Such et al., 2017; Chrabaszcz et al., 2018). Nonetheless, for supervised
learning tasks gradient-based optimization is by far the most common approach.
7