semantic segmentation or object detection). A search space which allows representing and
identifying more general hierarchical structure would thus make NAS more broadly applica-
ble, see Liu et al. (2018b, 2019a) for rst work in this direction. Moreover, common search
spaces are also based on predened building blocks, such as dierent kinds of convolutions
and pooling, but do not allow identifying novel building blocks on this level; going beyond
this limitation might substantially increase the power of NAS.
The comparison of dierent methods for NAS and even the reproducibility of published
results4is complicated by the fact that measurements of an architecture's performance de-
pend on many factors other than the architecture itself. While most authors report results
on the CIFAR-10 data set, experiments often dier with regard to search space, compu-
tational budget, data augmentation, training procedures, regularization, and other factors.
For example, for CIFAR-10, performance substantially improves when using a cosine an-
nealing learning rate schedule (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017), data augmentation by CutOut
(Devries and Taylor, 2017), by MixUp (Zhang et al., 2017) or by a combination of factors
(Cubuk et al., 2018), and regularization by Shake-Shake regularization (Gastaldi, 2017) or
ScheduledDropPath (Zoph et al., 2018). It is therefore conceivable that improvements in
these ingredients have a larger impact on reported performance numbers than the better
architectures found by NAS. We thus consider the denition of common benchmarks to
be crucial for a fair comparison of dierent NAS methods. A rst step in this direction is
the benchmark proposed by Ying et al. (2019), where a search space consisting of approxi-
mately 423,000 unique convolutional architectures is considered. Each element of this space
was pre-trained and evaluated multiple times, resulting in a data set containing training,
validation and test accuracies as well as training times and model sizes for dierent training
budgets for multiple runs. Dierent search strategies can hence be compared with low com-
putational resources on this benchmark by simply querying the pre-computed data set. In
a smaller previous study, Klein et al. (2018) pre-evaluated the joint space of neural archi-
tectures and hyperparameters. It would also be interesting to evaluate NAS methods not
in isolation but as part of a full open-source AutoML system, where also hyperparameters
(Mendoza et al., 2016; Real et al., 2017; Zela et al., 2018), and data augmentation pipeline
(Cubuk et al., 2018) are optimized along with NAS.
While NAS has achieved impressive performance, so far it provides little insights into
why specic architectures work well and how similar the architectures derived in indepen-
dent runs would be. Identifying common motifs, providing an understanding why those
motifs are important for high performance, and investigating if these motifs generalize over
dierent problems would be desirable.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Arber Zela, Esteban Real, Gabriel Bender, Kenneth Stanley, Thomas
Pfeil and the anonymous reviewers for feedback on this survey. This work has partly been
supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under grant no. 716721.
4. We refer to Li and Talwalkar (2019) for a detailed discussion on reproducibility for NAS.
13