et al., 2008; Stanley et al., 2009; Jozefowicz et al., 2015). Yao (1999) provides a literature
review of work earlier than 2000.
Bayesian optimization celebrated several early successes in NAS since 2013, leading to
state-of-the-art vision architectures (Bergstra et al., 2013), state-of-the-art performance for
CIFAR-10 without data augmentation (Domhan et al., 2015), and the rst automatically-
tuned neural networks to win on competition data sets against human experts (Mendoza
et al., 2016). NAS became a mainstream research topic in the machine learning community
after Zoph and Le (2017) obtained competitive performance on the CIFAR-10 and Penn
Treebank benchmarks with a search strategy based on reinforcement learning. While Zoph
and Le (2017) used vast computational resources to achieve this result (800 GPUs for
three to four weeks), after their work, a wide variety of methods have been published in
quick succession to reduce the computational costs and achieve further improvements in
performance.
To frame NAS as a reinforcement learning (RL) problem (Baker et al., 2017a; Zoph and
Le, 2017; Zhong et al., 2018a; Zoph et al., 2018), the generation of a neural architecture can
be considered to be the agent's action, with the action space identical to the search space.
The agent's reward is based on an estimate of the performance of the trained architecture
on unseen data (see Section 4). Dierent RL approaches dier in how they represent
the agent's policy and how they optimize it: Zoph and Le (2017) use a recurrent neural
network (RNN) policy to sequentially sample a string that in turn encodes the neural
architecture. They initially trained this network with the REINFORCE policy gradient
algorithm (Williams, 1992), but in their follow-up work (Zoph et al., 2018) use Proximal
Policy Optimization (Schulman et al., 2017) instead. Baker et al. (2017a) use Q-learning to
train a policy which sequentially chooses a layer's type and corresponding hyperparameters.
An alternative view of these approaches is as sequential decision processes in which the
policy samples actions to generate the architecture sequentially, the environment's \state"
contains a summary of the actions sampled so far, and the (undiscounted) reward is obtained
only after the nal action. However, since no interaction with an environment occurs during
this sequential process (no external state is observed, and there are no intermediate rewards),
we nd it more intuitive to interpret the architecture sampling process as the sequential
generation of a single action; this simplies the RL problem to a stateless multi-armed
bandit problem.
A related approach was proposed by Cai et al. (2018a), who frame NAS as a sequential
decision process: in their approach the state is the current (partially trained) architecture,
the reward is an estimate of the architecture's performance, and the action corresponds to an
application of function-preserving mutations, dubbed network morphisms (Chen et al., 2016;
Wei et al., 2017), see also Section 4, followed by a training phase of the network. In order to
deal with variable-length network architectures, they use a bi-directional LSTM to encode
architectures into a xed-length representation. Based on this encoded representation,
actor networks decide on the sampled action. The combination of these two components
constitute the policy, which is trained end-to-end with the REINFORCE policy gradient
algorithm. We note that this approach will not visit the same state (architecture) twice.
An alternative to using RL are neuro-evolutionary approaches that use evolutionary
algorithms for optimizing the neural architecture. The rst such approach for designing
neural networks we are aware of dates back almost three decades: Miller et al. (1989)
6