Bayesian Optimization (BO, see, e.g., (Shahriari et al., 2016)) is one of the most pop-
ular methods for hyperparameter optimization, but it has not been applied to NAS by
many groups since typical BO toolboxes are based on Gaussian processes and focus on low-
dimensional continuous optimization problems. Swersky et al. (2013) and Kandasamy et al.
(2018) derive kernel functions for architecture search spaces in order to use classic GP-based
BO methods. In contrast, several works use tree-based models (in particular, tree Parzen
estimators (Bergstra et al., 2011), or random forests (Hutter et al., 2011)) to eectively
search high-dimensional conditional spaces and achieve state-of-the-art performance on a
wide range of problems, optimizing both neural architectures and their hyperparameters
jointly (Bergstra et al., 2013; Domhan et al., 2015; Mendoza et al., 2016; Zela et al., 2018).
While a full comparison is lacking, there is preliminary evidence that these approaches can
also outperform evolutionary algorithms (Klein et al., 2018).
Negrinho and Gordon (2017) and Wistuba (2017) exploit the tree-structure of their
search space and use Monte Carlo Tree Search . Elsken et al. (2017) propose a simple
yet well performing hill climbing algorithm that discovers high-quality architectures by
greedily moving in the direction of better performing architectures without requiring more
sophisticated exploration mechanisms.
While the methods above employ a discrete search space, Liu et al. (2019b) propose a
continuous relaxation to enable direct gradient-based optimization: instead of xing a single
operationoi(e.g., convolution or pooling) to be executed at a specic layer, the authors
compute a convex combination from a set of operations fo1;:::;o mg. More specically, given
a layer input x, the layer output yis computed as y=Pm
i=1ioi(x);i0;Pm
i=1i= 1,
where the convex coecients ieectively parametrize the network architecture. Liu et al.
(2019b) then optimize both the network weights and the network architecture by alternating
gradient descent steps on training data for weights and on validation data for architectural
parameters such as . Eventually, a discrete architecture is obtained by choosing the
operationiwithi= arg maxiifor every layer. Instead of optimizing a weighting of
possible operations, Xie et al. (2019); Cai et al. (2019) propose to optimize a parametrized
distribution over the possible operations. Shin et al. (2018) and Ahmed and Torresani
(2018) also employ gradient-based optimization of neural architectures, however focusing
on optimizing layer hyperparameters or connectivity patterns, respectively.
4. Performance Estimation Strategy
The search strategies discussed in Section 3 aim at nding a neural architecture Athat
maximizes some performance measure, such as accuracy on unseen data. To guide their
search process, these strategies need to estimate the performance of a given architecture A
they consider. The simplest way of doing this is to train Aon training data and evaluate its
performance on validation data. However, training each architecture to be evaluated from
scratch frequently yields computational demands in the order of thousands of GPU days
for NAS (Zoph and Le, 2017; Real et al., 2017; Zoph et al., 2018; Real et al., 2019). This
naturally leads to developing methods for speeding up performance estimation, which we
will now discuss. We refer to Table 4 for an overview of existing methods.
Performance can be estimated based on lower delities of the actual performance after
full training (also denoted as proxy metrics). Such lower delities include shorter training
8