Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
training of different language pairs, which have various resource levels, we apply temperature up-
sampling with T= 5 (Arivazhagan et al., 2019). The vocabulary is shared across all languages
and consists of 128K subwords extracted using sentencepiece (Kudo & Richardson, 2018).2All
results use case-sensitive detokenized BLEU, measured using S ACRE BLEU (Post, 2018).We pro-
vide the S ACRE BLEU signatures, along with details on the statistical power of our experiments, in
Appendix C.
kNN-MT In this work, we use a F AISS index to represent the datastore and search for nearest
neighbors. The keys are stored in clusters to speed up search and quantized to 64-bytes for space
efﬁciency (the full-precision keys are discarded). The index is constructed ofﬂine via a single for-
ward pass over every example in the given parallel text collection. We use the 1024-dimensional
representation input to the ﬁnal layer feedforward network as the key. Building the index involves
a training phase to learn the cluster centroids. We use 5M keys for learning 131K cluster centroids
for the multilingual experiments, and 1M keys for 4K clusters for in-domain data in the domain
adaptation experiments. During inference, we query the datastore for 64 neighbors while searching
32 clusters. The interpolation and softmax temperature parameters are tuned on the validation sets.3
Computational Cost WhilekNN-MT does not add trainable model parameters, it does add some
computational overhead. The primary cost of building the datastore is a single forward pass over all
examples in the datastore, which is a fraction of the cost for training on the same examples for one
epoch. During inference, retrieving 64 keys from a datastore containing billions of items results in a
generation speed that is two orders of magnitude slower than the base MT system. Generation speed
can be improved by searching fewer clusters, using smaller beams, or querying smaller datastores,
with relatively minor trade-offs in performance, as we will see in Section 5. Developing faster
nearest neighbor search tools remains an active area of research (Guo et al., 2020).
4 E XPERIMENTS
4.1 S INGLE LANGUAGE -PAIRTRANSLATION
To test whether kNN-MT can improve a model’s ability to generalize from its training data, we ﬁrst
apply it to a state-of-the-art translation model, using a datastore containing only the original training
set. We use a state-of-the-art German-English model as our base MT system, which scores 37.59
BLEU on the newstest2019 test set.4This is a highly competitive baseline – apart from the WMT’19
training data, the base model has also been trained on over 10 billion tokens of extra backtranslation
data as well as ﬁne-tuned on newstest test sets from previous years. Providing this heavily tuned
base model with a datastore containing about 770M tokens of WMT’19 training data improves
performance by 1.5 BLEU to 39.08, without any additional training . This result shows that even
very strong translation models can be improved with test-time access to training sets.
4.2 M ULTILINGUAL MACHINE TRANSLATION
Next, we apply kNN-MT to multilingual machine translation, to measure its ability to add capacity
to a model when using very large training sets. For these experiments, we create datastores using
subsets of the CCMatrix parallel data that the model has been trained on.
Retrieving neighbors from same source language data Here, we build one datastore per
language-pair being tested, using the training examples for that language-pair. Table 1 shows perfor-
mance for the baseline and kNN-MT on 17 language-pairs from newstest2019. Retrieving neighbors
results in up to 3 BLEU improvements for English-German, English-Chinese and Chinese-English,
with an average improvement of 1.4 BLEU across all 17 pairs, without any additional training.
Table 1 also shows the sizes of each of the datastores. Datastore size and the increase in BLEU are
only weakly correlated across languages, though within a language, a larger datastore is decidedly
2Evaluating our model on the recently released OPUS100 (Zhang et al., 2020) corpus improves upon the
result in Zhang et al. (2020) by 0.4 BLEU, suggesting that it is a very strong baseline.
3Code forkNN-MT will be available at https://github.com/urvashik/knnlm .
4The winning system (scoring 40.8 BLEU) extends this model with ensembling and n-best reranking.
4