Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
2 4 8 16 32 64 128
Number of neighbors (k)32333435363738BLEU score
en-zh
Base MT
Temperature=1
Temperature=10
Temperature=100
Temperature=1,000
Figure 2: Effect of the number of neighbors re-
trieved and the softmax temperature on the val-
idation BLEU score for en-zh . Temperatures
greater than 1 are important to prevent the model
from overﬁtting to the most similar neighbor. For
higher temperatures, more neighbors do not al-
ways result in improvements.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Fraction of the Size of the Datastore012345Difference in BLEU score
Datastore size: en-zh=1.13B, ru-en=3.8B
kNN-MT for en-zh
kNN-MT for ru-enFigure 3: Effect of datastore size on the valida-
tion BLEU score for ru-en anden-zh . Perfor-
mance improves monotonically with size but re-
trieval can be slow for datastores containing bil-
lions of tokens. Smaller datastores, which ac-
count for a large fraction of the improvement, can
be used for faster retrieval.
Datastore size Figure 3 shows increasing the size of the datastore improves translation perfor-
mance. However, larger datastores result in slower retrieval, indicating a speed-performance trade-
off. Much of the beneﬁt can be realized with much smaller, and correspondingly faster, datastores.
6 Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS
To better understand kNN-MT, we examine the retrievals for several examples. We use the German-
English model and generate with only the kNN distribution ( = 1) with beam size 1, retrieving
k= 8neighbors from the News Commentary and Common Crawl subsets of WMT’19 data.
Figure 4 shows an example from newstest2018 where all the retrieved neighbors map to the same
target, military . Many of the retrieved examples include phrases similar to tamed the military such
asAutorit ¨at gegen ¨uber dem Milit ¨ar,Kontrolle des Milit ¨arsanddas Milit ¨ar gezwungen on the source
side and authority over the military ,control over the military andforced the military given the local
target side context, but differ sharply in their longer context, often describing different nations and
centuries. We provide additional examples illustrating this point in Appendix B.
Another interesting observation is that kNN, even when not interpolated with the base model, is
able to reconstruct named entities that are split into multiple subword tokens, even if that particular
named entity does not appear in the datastore. One such example is the name Haysom that is split
into subwords Hay andsom. The retrieved neighbors for the ﬁrst subword token include examples
that contain the names Hayes andHaydn , while those for the second include Grissom andFolsom ,
showing subword representations are used effectively in the nearest neighbor search.
7 R ELATED WORK
Retrieval in Translation Recent work has integrated retrieval of words and phrases into neural
translation, to gain some of the advantages of the previous generation of word- and phrase-based
methods (Brown et al., 1993; Koehn et al., 2003). For example, Zhang et al. (2018) proposed
guiding models by retrieving n-grams and up-weighting the probabilities of retrieved tokens. Tu
et al. (2018) use cache-based models (Grave et al., 2017a;b) to save and retrieve translation histories,
so models can adapt to changing contexts. Compared to these, kNN-MT has several advantages —
for instance, the external datastore only needs to be created once, whereas the cache model requires
constant writes. Further, kNN-MT scales retrieval to orders-of-magnitude larger datastores, while
taking advantage of neural context representations.
Other work has retrieved complete example translation sentences at test time. Nagao (1984) pro-
posed example-based MT for translating sequences by analogy. Before deep learning was widely
7