Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
NEAREST NEIGHBOR MACHINE TRANSLATION
Urvashi Khandelwaly, Angela Fanz, Dan Jurafskyy, Luke Zettlemoyerz, Mike Lewisz
yStanford University
zFacebook AI Research
furvashik,jurafsky g@stanford.edu
fangelafan,lsz,mikelewis g@fb.com
ABSTRACT
We introduce k-nearest-neighbor machine translation ( kNN-MT), which predicts
tokens with a nearest neighbor classiﬁer over a large datastore of cached examples,
using representations from a neural translation model for similarity search. This
approach requires no additional training and scales to give the decoder direct ac-
cess to billions of examples at test time, resulting in a highly expressive model that
consistently improves performance across many settings. Simply adding nearest
neighbor search improves a state-of-the-art German-English translation model by
1.5 BLEU.kNN-MT allows a single model to be adapted to diverse domains by
using a domain-speciﬁc datastore, improving results by an average of 9.2 BLEU
over zero-shot transfer, and achieving new state-of-the-art results—without train-
ing on these domains. A massively multilingual model can also be specialized
for particular language pairs, with improvements of 3 BLEU for translating from
English into German and Chinese. Qualitatively, kNN-MT is easily interpretable;
it combines source and target context to retrieve highly relevant examples.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Non-parametric methods have recently been successfully applied to tasks such as language modeling
(Khandelwal et al., 2020) and question answering (Guu et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020). They allow
models that are (1) expressive , because they can use an arbitrary amount of data at test time; (2)
adaptable , because predictions can be controlled by changing the datastore, and (3) interpretable ,
because the data used to make the prediction can be directly inspected. We introduce kNN-MT, a
simple non-parametric method for machine translation (MT) using nearest neighbor retrieval. kNN-
MT can be added to any pre-trained neural translation model without further training, and signiﬁ-
cantly improves performance for in-domain, out-of-domain, and multi-lingual evaluations.
More speciﬁcally, kNN-MT interpolates the target-token softmax distribution from a neural MT
model with a multinomial generated using nearest neighbor search over examples cached in a data
store. The cache is over translation contexts (i.e. the complete source and preﬁx of the target), and
is indexed by hidden states computed from the base MT model. We hypothesize that contexts which
are close in representation space are more likely to be followed by the same target word. We show
this is not only true for the original training data, thereby improving base model performance, but
across a range of different bi-text corpora, allowing for simple and effective model adaptation.
Our work builds upon recent results showing the effectiveness of nearest neighbor methods in uncon-
ditional language models (Khandelwal et al., 2020). We generalize to conditional language models,
by using both source and target context, and show nearest neighbour models can be effective for
generation in addition to density estimation. Compared to prior work on non-parametric methods
for MT, our approach is arguably simpler (in that it requires no training, as compared to Gu et al.
(2018)) and more expressive (in that it provides access to billions of key-value pairs during infer-
ence, as compared to Zhang et al. (2018); Gu et al. (2018)).
Extensive experiments show that kNN-MT scales to datastores containing billions of tokens, im-
proving results across a range of settings. For example, it improves a state-of-the-art German-
English translation model by 1.5 BLEU. kNN-MT can also be used to adapt a single model to
Work done while the ﬁrst author was interning at Facebook AI Research.
1arXiv:2010.00710v2  [cs.CL]  22 Jul 2021