Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Test Input :Dabei schien es, als habe Erdogan das Milit ¨ar gez ¨ahmt.
Generated tokens :In doing so, it seems as if Erdogan has tamed the
Training Set Translation Context (source and target)Training
Set TargetContext
Probability
Dem charismatischen Minis-
terpr ¨asidenten Recep Tayyip
Erdo ˘gan, der drei aufeinanderfol-
gende Wahlen f ¨ur sich entscheiden
konnte, ist es gelungen seine
Autorit ¨at gegen ¨uber dem Milit ¨ar
geltend zu machen.The charismatic prime minister, Re-
cep Tayyip Erdo ˘gan, having won
three consecutive elections, has
been able to exert his authority over
themilitary 0.132
Ein bemerkenswerter Fall war die
Ermordung des gem ¨aßigten Pre-
mierministers Inukai Tsuyoshi
im Jahre 1932, die das
Ende jeder wirklichen zivilen
Kontrolle des Milit ¨arsmarkiert.One notable case was the assas-
sination of moderate Prime Minis-
ter Inukai Tsuyoshi in 1932, which
marked the end of any real civilian
control of themilitary 0.130
Sie sind Teil eines Normal-
isierungsprozesses und der Her-
stellung der absoluten zivilen
Kontrolle ¨uber das Milit ¨ar und
best¨atigen das Prinzip, dass
niemand ¨uber dem Gesetz steht.They are part of a process of nor-
malization, of the establishment of
absolute civilian control of themilitary 0.129
Diese hart formulierte Erkl ¨arung
wurde als verschleierte, jedoch un-
missverst ¨andliche Warnung ange-
sehen, dass das Milit ¨ar bereit w ¨are
einzuschreiten...That toughly worded statement was
seen as a veiled but unmistakable
warning that themilitary 0.123
... ... ... ...
FinalkNN distribution : military = 1:0
Final Translation : In doing so, Erdogan seemed to have tamed the military.
Reference : In doing so, it seems as if Erdogan has tamed the military.
Figure 4: Example retrievals using kNN-MT. Not only do the retrievals all correctly predict the
target word military , but the local contexts tend to be semantically related. Both the source and the
three nearest retrievals express the concept of control over the military.
adopted, this approach was extended to identifying portions of the training data that could be a trans-
lation based on edit distance (Doi et al., 2005), matching training examples based on local trigram
contexts (van den Bosch et al., 2007), using phrase-based memories (van Gompel et al., 2010) and
incorporating syntactic features when retrieving similar examples (Stroppa et al., 2007; Haque et al.,
2009). Recently, Gu et al. (2018) proposed a model that retrieves examples similar to the test source
sequence and then attends over this subset of retrieved source-target pairs at the token level, while
generating translations. Bulte & Tezcan (2019) and Xu et al. (2020) use fuzzy-matching with trans-
lation memories and augment source sequences with retrieved source-target pairs. These techniques
face challenges in identifying relevant retrieval candidates, as they focus on sentence-level retrieval.
In contrast,kNN-MT focuses on token level retrieval from billions of key-value pairs, meaning that
each word can retrieve the most relevant examples for its translation.
Finally, various studies have explored retrieving additional information to improve domain adap-
tation, often using lexicons (Hu et al., 2019), domain-adaptive training (Farajian et al., 2017) or
attending over neighbors similar to n-grams in the source (Bapna & Firat, 2019). These modiﬁca-
tions require additional training, whereas kNN-MT provides the ﬂexibility to use different datastores
when decoding in different domains, keeping the model ﬁxed.
Retrieval in Text Generation Retrieval mechanisms have also been applied to generation tasks
more broadly. Weston et al. (2018) and Fan et al. (2020) improve dialogue response generation sys-
tems by retrieving examples and concatenating them to model inputs. Lewis et al. (2020) improve
8