Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Test Input :Aber in Papua hat sich wenig ver ¨andert, und heute f ¨uhlen sich die Einheimischen betrogen.
Generated tokens :But not much has
Training Set Translation Context Training Set TargetContext
Probability
Nach einem schwer umk ¨ampften
Wahlkampf , der deutlich ¨uber zwei
Milliarden Dollar kostete, sieht es f ¨ur
viele Beobachter aus, als h ¨atte sich in
der amerikanischen Politik nicht viel
ge¨andert...After a hard-fought elec-
tion campaign, costing well
in excess of $2 billion, it
seems to many observers
that not much haschanged 0.143
Ge¨andert freilich hat sich wenig: Schlecht
gehandhabte Kriege...But not much has changed 0.137
Kaum etwas hat sich ver ¨andert , außer
dass es jetzt nicht mehr die Bewohner des
Appartement-Geb ¨audes...Not much has changed 0.130
Es ist zwar richtig, dass sich seit dem
Ausbruch der globalen Finanzkrise
vor ¨uber vier Jahren und der schon
2010 verabschiedeten Dodd-Frank-
Finanzmarkreformen in den Vereinigten
Staaten kaum etwas daran ge ¨andert hat...True, while the global ﬁ-
nancial crisis erupted more
than four years ago, and
the Dodd-Frank ﬁnancial
reforms were adopted in the
United States back in 2010,
not much haschanged 0.121
... ... ...
FinalkNN distribution : changed = 1:0
Final Translation : But not much has changed in Papua, and locals feel betrayed today.
Reference : But precious little has changed in Papua, and today local people feel betrayed.
Figure 5: An example where kNN-MT retrieves the same target token, changed , across all the
neighbors. It matches local contexts on both the source and target sides, but not the global context
regarding Papua .
B A DDITIONAL EXAMPLES
Figure 5 further illustrates the behavior of kNN-MT using local contexts in both the source and
target to retrieve nearest neighbors. Figure 6 shows a case where the model has very little target-side
prior context and mainly relies on the source context to retrieve the best neighbors.
C BLEU SCORES
In this paper, all results use case-sensitive detokenized BLEU, measured using S ACRE BLEU (Post,
2018), with the following signatures:
General: BLEU+case.mixed+numrefs.1+smooth.exp+tok.13a+version.1.4.13
For chinese: BLEU+case.mixed+numrefs.1+smooth.exp+tok.zh+version.1.4.13
For japanese:
BLEU+case.mixed+numrefs.1+smooth.exp+tok.ja-mecab-0.996-IPA+version.1.4.13
For Table 1 and other experiments, we follow advice from Card et al. (2020) regarding the statisti-
cal power of machine translation experiments given the improvements in BLEU scores and the size
of the dataset. The authors present results for a single language pair and we verify that their as-
sumptions hold for a couple of other language pairs. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that for Chinese-English
P0= 0:13andb0= 12 , and for English-Chinese P0= 0:07andb0= 16 . This indicates that
these experiments, with the test sets containing about 2,000 examples, have close to 100% power
which was veriﬁed using the notebooks provided by Card et al. (2020). We refer the reader to the
original paper for more details. More generally, experiments on datasets which contain about 2,000
examples, with improvements of about 1 BLEU or higher, are statistically powered.
13