414 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
points is assessed by considering the entropy of its outputs: for fake data, the discrimina-
tor should be uncertain of the class to assign, whereas it should be certain of its predictionfor real data points. Furthermore, they add a cost term to encourage the generator to assignequal probability of generation to each class. We note that CatGAN can also be used in an
unsupervised setting, by leaving out the cross-entropy cost term.
Salimans et al. ( 2016 ) extended GANs to the semi-supervised setting by using |
Y|+1
outputs, where outputs 1 ,...,|Y|correspond to the individual classes, and output |Y|+1i s
used to indicate fake data points. The loss function is adapted to include the cross-entropy lossof the prediction given the true label for the labelled data points. Otherwise, the loss functiondoes not need to be changed signiﬁcantly: when presented with an unlabelled data point, the
discriminator’s estimate of the data point not being fake can be calculated as/summationtext
|Y|
c=1Dc(x)
for data point x,w h e r e Dc(x)is the value of output cof the discriminator. Odena ( 2016 )
independently proposed the same idea around the same time. Dai et al. ( 2017 ) provided
some theoretical analysis of this framework. They argued that, for the method to improveperformance over the discriminator by itself, the distribution modelled by the generatorshould complement the true data distribution: it should assign high probability density to
regions in the input space that have low density in the true distribution.
Instead of using the discriminator for determining both the class and the authenticity
of data points, one can also use a separate discriminative model for each task. This is theapproach taken in triple adversarial networks , where one discriminator is used for classifying
data points, and another is tasked with distinguishing real from fake data (Li et al. 2017 ).
For an extensive overview of GANs, their applications and their extensions, we refer the
reader to the summary of the 2016 NIPS tutorial on GANs by Goodfellow ( 2017 ).
6.4.3 Variational autoencoders
Aside from GANs, further efforts have been made in recent years towards constructing
semi-supervised deep generative models. One notable example is the proposal of variational
autoencoders (V AE) and their application to semi-supervised learning.
Proposed by Kingma and Welling ( 2013 ), variational autoencoders are a type of latent
variable model that treats each data point xas being generated from a vector of latent variables
z. Traditional latent variable models, such as autoencoders, generally yield a model with a
highly complex distribution p(z), which makes it very difﬁcult to use them for sampling.
Contrastingly, V AEs constrain p(z)to be a simple distribution, such as a standard multivariate
Gaussian distribution, from which sampling is straightforward. The transformation from p(z)
to some more complex distribution p(x|z)is then left to a decoder.
At training time, an encoder is used to determine the parameters of a distribution p(z|x)
based on a data point x. To generate reconstructions of x, latent vectors zcan then be sampled
from this distribution and passed through the decoder. The decoder and encoder are jointlytrained, minimizing a combined cost function consisting of (1) the Kullback-Leibler diver-gence between the posterior distribution p(z|x)and some simple prior distribution p(z),a n d
(2) the reconstruction cost of the output of the autoencoder for input data. The ﬁrst term iscrucial: it allows the decoder to be used as a generative model, taking in latent vectors thatare directly sampled from p(z).
For brevity, we do not go into too much detail regarding the training procedure of V AEs,
which includes a nontrivial backpropagation step due to the sampling procedure; instead, werefer the reader to the V AE tutorial by Doersch ( 2016 ).
123