Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 391
By deﬁnition, base learners in bagging methods are trained independently. Therefore,
the only truly semi-supervised bagging method would apply self-training to individual baselearners. Co-training, however, can be seen to be closely related to bagging methods: the onlyway classiﬁers interact is by the exchange of pseudo-labelled data; other than that, the classi-ﬁers can be trained independently and simultaneously. However, most co-training methods donot use bootstrapping, a deﬁning characteristic of bagging methods. In boosting, on the otherhand, there is an inherent dependency between base learners. Consequently, boosting meth-ods can be readily extended to the semi-supervised setting, by introducing pseudo-labelleddata after each learning step; this idea gives rise to the class of semi-supervised boostingmethods.
Semi-supervised boosting methods have been studied extensively over the past two
decades. The success achieved by supervised boosting methods, such as AdaBoost (Freund
and Schapire 1997 ), gradient boosting, and XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin 2016 ), provides
ample motivation for bringing boosting to the semi-supervised setting. Furthermore, thepseudo-labelling approach of self-training and co-training can be easily extended to boostingmethods.
4.3.1 SSMBoost
The ﬁrst effort towards semi-supervised boosting methods was made by Grandvalet et al.,who extended AdaBoost to the semi-supervised setting. They proposed a semi-supervisedboosting algorithm (Grandvalet et al. 2001 ), which they later extended and motivated from
the perspective of gradient boosting (d’Alché Buc et al. 2002 ). A loss function is deﬁned for
unlabelled data, based on the predictions of the current ensemble and on the predictions of thebase learner under construction. Experiments were conducted with multiple loss functions;the authors reported the strongest results using the expected loss of the new, combinedclassiﬁer. The weighted error /epsilon1
tfor base classiﬁer htis thus adapted to include the unlabelled
data points, causing the weight term αtto depend on the unlabelled data as well.
Crucially, SSMBoost does not assign pseudo-labels to the unlabelled data points. As a
result, it requires semi-supervised base learners to make use of the unlabelled data and istherefore intrinsically semi-supervised, in contrast to most other semi-supervised boostingalgorithms, which are wrapper methods. Nevertheless, SSMBoost is included here, becauseit forms the foundation for all other forms of semi-supervised boosting algorithms, which donot require semi-supervised base learners.
4.3.2 ASSEMBLE
TheASSEMBLE algorithm, short for Adaptive Supervised Ensemble , pseudo-labels the unla-
belled data points after each iteration, and uses these pseudo-labelled data points in theconstruction of the next classiﬁer, thus alleviating the need for semi-supervised base learn-ers (Bennett et al. 2002 ). As shown by its authors, ASSEMBLE effectively maximizes the
classiﬁcation margin in function space.
Since pseudo-labels are used in ASSEMBLE, it is not trivial to decide which unla-
belled data points to pass to the next base learner. Bennett et al. ( 2002 ) proposed to use
bootstrapping—i.e. sampling, uniformly at random, with replacement, ldata points from the
l+ulabelled and unlabelled data points.
123