Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 383
tive methods produce predicted labels ˆyUfor the unlabelled data points in XU. Accordingly,
inductive methods involve optimization over prediction models, whereas transductive meth-ods optimize directly over the predictions ˆy
U.
Inductive methods, which generally extend supervised algorithms to include unlabelled
data, are further differentiated in our taxonomy based on the way they incorporate unlabelleddata: either in a preprocessing step, directly inside the objective function, or via a pseudo-labelling step. The transductive methods are in all cases graph-based; we group these based onthe choices made in different stages of the learning process. In the remainder of this section,we will elaborate on the grouping of semi-supervised learning methods represented in thetaxonomy, which forms the basis for our discussion of semi-supervised learning methods inthe remainder of this survey.
3.1 Inductive methods
Inductive methods aim to construct a classiﬁer that can generate predictions for any object inthe input space. Unlabelled data may be used when training this classiﬁer, but the predictionsfor multiple new, previously unseen examples are independent of each other once training hasbeen completed. This corresponds to the objective in supervised learning methods: a modelis built in the training phase and can then be used for predicting the labels of new data points.
3.1.1 Wrapper methods
A simple approach to extending existing, supervised algorithms to the semi-supervised settingis to ﬁrst train classiﬁers on labelled data, and to then use the predictions of the resultingclassiﬁers to generate additional labelled data. The classiﬁers can then be re-trained on thispseudo-labelled data in addition to the existing labelled data. Such methods are known as
wrapper methods : the unlabelled data is pseudo-labelled by a wrapper procedure, and a
purely supervised learning algorithm, unaware of the distinction between originally labelledand pseudo-labelled data, constructs the ﬁnal inductive classiﬁer. This reveals a key propertyof wrapper methods: most of them can be applied to any given supervised base learner,allowing unlabelled data to be introduced in a straightforward manner. Wrapper methodsform the ﬁrst part of the inductive side of the taxonomy, and are covered in Sect. 4.
3.1.2 Unsupervised preprocessing
Secondly, we consider unsupervised preprocessing methods, which either extract useful fea-
tures from the unlabelled data, pre-cluster the data, or determine the initial parameters of asupervised learning procedure in an unsupervised manner. Like wrapper methods, they canbe used with any supervised classiﬁer. However, unlike wrapper methods, the supervisedclassiﬁer is only provided with originally labelled data points. These methods are covered inSect. 5.
3.1.3 Intrinsically semi-supervised methods
The last class of inductive methods we consider directly incorporate unlabelled data into the
objective function or optimization procedure of the learning method. Many of these methodsare direct extensions of supervised learning methods to the semi-supervised setting: they
123