Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 393
5 Unsupervised preprocessing
We now turn to a second category of inductive methods, known as as unsupervised prepro-
cessing , which, unlike wrapper methods and intrinsically semi-supervised methods, use the
unlabelled data and labelled data in two separate stages. Typically, the unsupervised stagecomprises either the automated extraction or transformation of sample features from the unla-belled data ( feature extraction ), the unsupervised clustering of the data ( cluster-then-label ),
or the initialization of the parameters of the learning procedure ( pre-training ).
5.1 Feature extraction
Since the early days of machine learning, feature extraction has played an important role in
the construction of classiﬁers. Feature extraction methods attempt to ﬁnd a transformation ofthe input data such that the performance of the classiﬁer improves or such that its constructionbecomes computationally more efﬁcient. Feature extraction is an expansive research topic thathas been covered by several books and surveys. We focus on a small number of particularlyprominent techniques and refer the reader to the existing literature on feature extractionmethods for further information (see, e.g. Guyon and Elisseeff 2006 ; Sheikhpour et al. 2017 ).
Many feature extraction methods operate without supervision, i.e. without taking into
account labels. Principal component analysis , for example, transforms the input data to a
different basis, such that they are linearly uncorrelated, and orders the principal componentsbased on their variance (Wold et al. 1987 ). Other traditional feature extraction algorithms
operate on the labelled data and try to extract features with high predictive power (see, e.g.Guyon and Elisseeff 2006 ).
Recent semi-supervised feature extraction methods have mainly been focused on ﬁnding
latent representations of the input data using deep neural networks (in Sect. 6.2.1 ,w ef u r t h e r
discuss neural networks). The most prominent example of this is the autoencoder : a neural
network with one or more hidden layers that has the objective of reconstructing its input. Byincluding a hidden layer with relatively few nodes, usually called the representation layer,
the network is forced to ﬁnd a way to compactly represent its input data. Once the networkis trained, features are provided by the representation layer. A schematic representation of astandard autoencoder is provided in Fig. 4.
The network can be considered to consist of two parts: the encoder h, which maps an
input vector xto its latent representation h(x), and the decoder g, which attempts to map
the latent representation back to the original x. The network is trained by optimizing a loss
function penalizing the reconstruction error : a measure of inconsistency between the input
xand the corresponding reconstruction g(h(x)). Once the network is trained, the latent
representation of any xcan be found by simply propagating it through the encoder part of
the network to obtain h(x). A popular type of autoencoders is the denoising autoencoder ,
which is trained on noisy versions of the input data, penalizing the reconstruction error ofthe reconstructions against the noiseless originals (Vincent et al. 2008 ). Another variant, the
contractive autoencoder, directly penalizes the sensitivity of the autoencoder to perturbationsin the input (Rifai et al. 2011b ).
Autoencoders attempt to ﬁnd a lower-dimensional representation of the input space
without sacriﬁcing substantial amounts of information. Thus, they inherently act on theassumption that the input space contains lower-dimensional substructures on which the datalie. Furthermore, when applied as a preprocessing step to classiﬁcation, they assume thattwo samples on the same lower-dimensional substructure have the same label. These obser-
123