428 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
7.5 From transduction to induction
To obtain a prediction for a previously unseen data point, transductive algorithms need to
be rerun in their entirety. Since transductive methods are often computationally expensive,this is undesirable in many real-world problem scenarios, where on-the-ﬂy classiﬁcation fornew data points is required. The issue of adapting and extending transductive algorithms forinductive classiﬁcation has not been studied extensively in the literature, but some potentialsolutions have been proposed.
The ﬁrst type of approach is to ﬁnd the optimal label prediction for previously unseen
data points based on the objective function of the transductive algorithm. Such approachesﬁx the transductive predictions, and use the resulting graph to predict the label of previouslyunseen data points (Bengio et al. 2006 ;Z h u 2008 ). Considering the general objective function
from Expression 8, the optimal label assignment for the new data point x
ican be calculated
efﬁciently: assuming we can calculate the graph weights Wijforj=1,..., n,w ec a n
optimize the objective function with respect to only the predicted label of the new data point.The label assignment ˆy
iminimizing the cost function is then given by the weighted majority
vote of the neighbours of the data point:
ˆyi∈arg max
c∈Y/summationdisplay
vj∈N(vi)∧ˆyj=cWij
The second type of approach for building an inductive classiﬁer is to treat the pseudo-
labelled predictions as true labels, and to train a supervised classiﬁer based on thesepredictions. This approach was taken by Kveton et al. ( 2010 ), who used the min-cut approach
to obtain the optimal labels, and trained a supervised SVM using the combined labelled andunlabelled data. One can consider using a transductive approach with probability estimates,such that unlabelled samples can be weighted in the supervised learning algorithm. Thisapproach can also be applied to inductive learners that have a computationally expensiveprediction phase: we can train an inductive semi-supervised learning method on all availabledata, and pass its predictions for the unlabelled data along with the labelled data to a com-putationally more efﬁcient classiﬁer (Urner et al. 2011 ). The efﬁcient predictor can then be
used to make predictions on new, previously unseen data points.
7.6 Classification in network data
In some real-world problems, data is inherently represented as a graph. Such data, whichis commonly referred to as network data , arises in the context of social networks, scientiﬁc
collaboration, spreading of infectious diseases, company structures, etc. In such networks,nodes generally represent entities (such as people), and edges represent relations betweenthem (such as friendship). The ﬁeld that studies such data is commonly known as networkscience (Barabási 2016 ).
In such network data, graph-based transductive methods are highly appropriate candidates
for performing inference. Node classiﬁcation in particular can be considered a regular trans-ductive semi-supervised learning task, and is broadly applied to problems in social networkanalysis and natural language processing (Tan et al. 2011 ;Y a n ge ta l . 2016 ). Although there
is a considerable amount of overlap between these ﬁelds, the semi-supervised learning andnetwork science communities have operated rather independently. Of course, signiﬁcant dif-ferences also exist between data that is inherently given in the form of a network and graphsthat are inferred from input vectors based on some similarity measure.
123