376 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Fig. 1 A basic example of binary classiﬁcation in the presence of unlabelled data. The unlabelled data points
are coloured according to their true label. The coloured, unﬁlled circles depict the contour curves of the input
data distribution corresponding to standard deviations of 1, 2 and 3 (Color ﬁgure online)
about particle accelerators that does not contain the word “neutron”, the classiﬁer is unable
to recognize it as a document concerning physics. This is where semi-supervised learningcomes in. If we consider the unlabelled data, there might be documents that connect the word“neutron” to the phrase “particle accelerator”. For instance, the word “neutron” would oftenoccur in a document that also contains the word “quark”. Furthermore, the word “quark”would regularly co-occur with the phrase “particle accelerator”, which guides the classiﬁerstowards classifying these documents as revolving around physics as well, despite havingnever seen the phrase “particle accelerator” in the labelled data.
Figure 1provides some further intuition towards the use of unlabelled data for classiﬁ-
cation. We consider an artiﬁcial classiﬁcation problem with two classes. For both classes,100 samples are drawn from a 2-dimensional Gaussian distribution with identical covariancematrices. The labelled data set is then constructed by taking one sample from each class.Any supervised learning algorithm will most likely obtain as the decision boundary the solidline, which is perpendicular to the line segment connecting the two labelled data points andintersects it in the middle. However, this is quite far from the optimal decision boundary.As is clear from this ﬁgure, the clusters we can infer from the unlabelled data can help usconsiderably in placing the decision boundary: assuming that the data stems from two Gaus-sian distributions, a simple semi-supervised learning algorithm can infer a close-to-optimaldecision boundary.
2.1 Assumptions of semi-supervised learning
A necessary condition of semi-supervised learning is that the underlying marginal data distri-bution p(x)over the input space contains information about the posterior distribution p(y|x).
If this is the case, one might be able to use unlabelled data to gain information about p(x),a n d
thereby about p(y|x). If, on the other hand, this condition is not met, and p(x)contains no
information about p(y|x), it is inherently impossible to improve the accuracy of predictions
based on the additional unlabelled data (Zhu 2008 ).
123