424 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
graph. Two options are commonly considered: one ( symmetric k -nearest neighbours) con-
structs an edge if iis in the k-neighbourhood of jor vice versa, and the other ( mutual k -nearest
neighbours) constructs an edge if iandjare both in each other’s k-neighbourhood (de Sousa
et al. 2013 ). The difference between the /epsilon1-neighbours and k-nearest neighbours methods has
been extensively studied by Maier et al. ( 2009 ) in the context of clustering methods.
b-matching. The postprocessing step used when constructing the graph with k-nearest neigh-
bours generally results in a graph where not all nodes have exactly kneighbours. When
symmetric k-nearest neighbours is used, it often occurs that some nodes have much higher
degrees than others. Jebara et al. ( 2009 ) showed that this can negatively impact the ﬁnal
performance of the classiﬁer. They proposed an edge construction method that enforces theregularity of the constructed graph, i.e. ensures that each node has the same number of neigh-bours, and that the nodes have exactly the requested number of edges. Their approach isinspired by matching , a concept from graph theory where one tries to ﬁnd a subset of edges
in a graph such that the edges do not share any vertices. In their method, referred to as b-
matching, the objective is to ﬁnd the subset of edges in the complete graph such that (1) eachnode has degree band (2) the sum of the edge weights is maximized.
Note that, in the original study by Jebara et al. ( 2009 ), instead of maximizing the sum of
edge weights, the objective is to minimize the sum of the distances between the remainingedges. However, since they deﬁne the distance matrix CasC
ij=/radicalbigWii+Wjj−2Wij,
these notions are equivalent. The corresponding optimization problem is formulated as
minimize
A∈Bn×nn/summationdisplay
i=1n/summationdisplay
j=1Aij·Cij
subject ton/summationdisplay
j=1Aij=bi =1,..., n,
Aii=0 i=1,..., n,
Aij=Aji i,j=1,..., n.
It can be shown that this corresponds to the optimization problem solved by the k-nearest
neighbour algorithm, with the addition of the constraint Aij=Aji, which ensures that
a symmetric graph is constructed without the need for a postprocessing step. However, themost efﬁcient known algorithm for the b-matching optimization problem has time complexity
O(n
2.5)and requires several assumptions that are not always satisﬁed in real-world scenarios
(Huang and Jebara 2011 ).
7.3.2 Graph weighting
The graph weighting phase, which forms the second step of graph construction, determines the
weights for the edges in the graph. In many cases, the weights correspond to the similaritymeasure used for constructing the edges. For instance, a Gaussian kernel is often used todetermine the connectivity of the graph via k-nearest neighbours as well as the edge weights.
In that case, the graph construction process is usually considered as consisting of weightingandsparsiﬁcation .F i r s t ,ac o m p l e t ea d j a n c e n c ym a t r i x Kis constructed using some kernel
function kfor all pairs of nodes such that K
ij=k(xi,xj); then, the weight matrix Wis
obtained by sparsiﬁcation, i.e. by removing edges from K.
Several methods for edge weighting have been suggested in the literature. One of the most
popular weighting schemes is Gaussian edge weighting (de Sousa et al. 2013 ; Jebara et al.
2009 ), where
123