418 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
λ·l/summationdisplay
i=1(ˆyi−yi)2+2·ˆy/intercal·L·ˆy.
Pang and Lee ( 2004 ) used the min-cut approach for classiﬁcation in the context of senti-
ment analysis. They note that, instead of ﬁxing the predicted labels of labelled data to theirtrue labels, one can also assign ﬁnite weight to the edges connecting the source and sink nodesto the labelled data points, indicating conﬁdences in either classiﬁcation from the perspectiveof the individual data point.
The min-cut approach can easily lead to degenerate cuts, yielding a solution where almost
all unlabelled data fall within the same graph component. This behaviour originates from thefact that more balanced cuts generally have more potential edges to cut: when a cut yields asplit into negative nodes V
−and positive nodes V+, the number of edges to cut is potentially
|V+|·|V−|. Joachims ( 2003 ) proposed to normalize the objective function of min-cut based
on this potential number of edges being cut, using spectral methods to solve the resultingoptimization problem.
Since the min-cut algorithm optimizes over a binary vector, it does not permit the extraction
of marginal probabilities. To solve this problem, Blum et al. ( 2004 ) proposed to construct
an ensemble of min-cut classiﬁers, each ﬁnding the minimum cut on a randomly perturbedversion of the constructed graph, obtained by adding noise to the edge weights. The predictionprobabilities are then simply calculated as the fraction of classiﬁers predicting a given label.
7.2.2 Probabilistic label assignments: Markov random ﬁelds
The lack of a principled, efﬁcient way of estimating classiﬁcation probabilities is a fundamen-tal disadvantage of the min-cut approach to graph-based inference. In many cases, we wishto estimate the probability P(y
i=c)that an unlabelled data point xihas label c. Standard
min-cut, however, only provides hard classiﬁcations (i.e. it only outputs class labels and noprobabilities). Approaching graph-based methods from the perspective of Markov randomﬁelds provides a potential solution to this problem. In the following, with a slight abuse ofnotation, we use Xandxto denote random variables and their realizations, respectively,
rather than data points.
The Hammersley-Clifford theorem states that a probability distribution P(X=x)for
random variables X
1,..., Xncorresponds to a Markov random ﬁeld if a graph Gexists such
that the joint probability function P(X=x)can be factorized over the (maximal) cliques
ofG(Hammersley and Clifford 1971 ). In other words, P(X=x)corresponds to a Markov
random ﬁeld formed by Gif
P(X=x)=1
Z·/productdisplay
c∈CGψc(xc),
where Zis a normalization constant, CGis the set of cliques in G,ψcis an arbitrary function,
andxccontains the realizations of random variables in clique c.
Using the Hammersley-Clifford theorem, we can show that the general minimization for
graph-based methods, formulated in Expression 8, can be expressed in the form of a Markov
random ﬁeld. Let Gdenote the graph with weight matrix Wobtained in the graph construction
phase, and let ˆY=(ˆY1,..., ˆYn)be a collection of random variables corresponding to the
predicted labels (i.e. 0 or 1) for data points x1,..., xn.W ee x t e n d Gby connecting each
nodeˆYicorresponding to a labelled data point xito an auxiliary node Y/prime
i, corresponding to
a random variable which can only attain the true label yi. We denote the entire collection of
123