410 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
minimize
f∈HK1
l·l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(f(xi),yi)+γ·| |f||2
K+γU·| |f||2
I, (6)
where γUdetermines the relative inﬂuence of the manifold regularization term.
This general framework leads to semi-supervised extensions of popular supervised learn-
ing algorithms, such as Laplacian support vector machines (LapSVMs), where the loss
function /lscriptis deﬁned as the hinge loss, i.e. /lscript(ˆy,y)=max{1−yˆy,0}. The supervised objective
of LapSVMs maximizes the margin, and the unsupervised objective maximizes consistencyof predictions along the estimated manifolds. In the paper proposing this framework, Belkinet al. ( 2006 ) suggested to solve the resulting loss minimization problem in its dual form,
similar to popular solving techniques for supervised SVMs, in time O(n
3). Melacci and
Belkin ( 2011 ) suggested solving the optimization problem in its primal form. Combining an
early stopping criterion with a preconditioned conjugate gradient, they reduced the time com-plexity to O(c·n
2)for some cthat is empirically shown to be signiﬁcantly smaller than n.
Qi et al. ( 2012 ) suggested to extend twin SVMs , which optimize two SVM-like objective
functions to yield two non-parallel decision boundaries (one for each class) (Jayadeva et al.2007 ), to include the LapSVM regularization term. Sindhwani et al. ( 2005 ); Sindhwani and
Rosenberg ( 2008 ) extend manifold regularization to the co-regularization framework (see
Sect. 4.2). They proposed to construct two classiﬁers using an objective function similar to
that of LapSVMs for two different views. Niyogi ( 2008 ) provided some theoretical analysis
on the manifold regularization framework and analyzed its usefulness in semi-supervisedlearning.
Zhu and Lafferty ( 2005 ) proposed to incorporate a manifold regularization term in a
generative model. They expressed the data-generating distribution as a mixture model, wherethe manifold is locally approximated by a mixture model component. Their loss functionconsists of a regularizer over the graph and a generative component. Weston et al. ( 2008 )
incorporated a manifold regularization term into deep neural networks. They proposed severalmethods to incorporate the manifold structure using an auxiliary embedding task ,w h i c h
encourages the latent representations in the neural network to be similar for similar inputs.Furthermore, they suggested to include a regularization term that explicitly pushes the latentrepresentations of non-similar data points (deﬁned as not being neighbours in the underlyinggraph) further apart. This approach was applied to hyperspectral image classiﬁcation by Ratleet al. ( 2010 ). More recently, Luo et al. ( 2018 ) employed a loss function that encourages data
points with the same label, either predicted (for unlabelled data points) or true (for labelleddata points), to have similar latent representations in the penultimate layer. Additionally,it encourages the latent representations of data points with different predicted labels to bedissimilar.
The graph construction process is non-trivial and involves many hyperparameters. For
instance, one can use a variety of connectivity criteria and edge weighting schemes. Thismakes the performance of manifold regularization methods highly dependent on hyperpa-rameter settings. Geng et al. ( 2012 ) attempted to overcome this problem by ﬁrst selecting a
set of candidate Laplacians using different hyperparameter settings. They then posed the opti-mization problem as ﬁnding the linear combination of Laplacians that minimizes the manifoldregularization objective. Formally, let there be mcandidate Laplacians L
1,..., Lm. Assume
that the optimal manifold L∗lies in the convex hull of L1,..., Lm, i.e. L∗=/summationtextm
j=1μj·Lj
with/summationtextm
j=1μj=1a n dμj≥0f o r j=1,..., m. Since each Ljis a valid graph Laplacian,
their linear combination is a valid graph Laplacian as well. Using exponential weights in theLaplacian, the manifold regularization term ||f||
2
Ithen becomes
123