412 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
propose to approximate it as the difference between the Jacobians corresponding to small
perturbations of the input.
Using singular value decomposition , they estimate the tangent plane at each input point
to approximate the actual manifolds. As a result, the distance between two data points alongthe manifold can be estimated and subsequently used in classiﬁcation, e.g. via a k-nearest
neighbour algorithm. Additionally, they suggested to use a deep neural network pre-trainedwith multiple, stacked contractive autoencoders, where an additional term is added to the lossfunction to explicitly penalize sensitivity of the outputs to perturbations along the tangentplane.
A manifold can be described as a collection of overlapping charts , each having a simple
geometry, that jointly cover the entire manifold. Such a collection of charts is known as anatlas . Pitelis et al. ( 2013 ,2014 ) suggested to approximate these charts explicitly, associating
each with an afﬁne subspace. They alternate between assigning data points to charts, andchoosing the afﬁne subspace best matching the data for each chart. The charts are initializedusing principal component analysis on a set of random subspaces. From this, a set of chartsand a soft assignment of points to charts is obtained (since points can be associated withmore than one chart). Finally, from these charts and soft assignments, kernels are generatedthat are then used in SVM-based supervised learning.
6.4 Generative models
The aforementioned methods are all discriminative : their only goal is to infer a function that
can classify data points. In some cases, they produce probabilistic predictions; in others,they only yield the most likely class to assign. In all cases, they approach the classiﬁcationproblem without explicitly modelling any of the data-generating distributions. In contrast, theprimary goal of methods based on generative models is to model the process that generated
the data. When such a generative model is conditioned on a given label y, it can also be used
for classiﬁcation.
6.4.1 Mixture models
If prior knowledge about p(x,y)is available, generative models can be very powerful. For
instance, consider the case where we know that our data p(x,y)is composed of a mixture of
kGaussian distributions, each of which corresponds to a certain class. Most discriminative
methods would not be able to properly incorporate this prior information. Instead, one wouldbe best served by simply ﬁxing the model as a mixture of kGaussian components. Each
component j=1,..., khas three parameters: a weight π
j(where/summationtextk
j=1πj=1), mean
vector μj, and covariance matrix /Sigma1j. The most likely parameters can then be inferred, for
example via expectation-maximization (Dempster et al. 1977 ). This model is generative: it
models the distribution p(x,y), from which samples (x,y)can be drawn. The model can then
also be used for classiﬁcation: since the inference procedure yields an estimate ˆp(x|y)of the
conditional distribution p(x|y), one can simply assign to an unlabelled data point xi∈XU
the class cthat maximizes ˆp(xi|yi=c)·p(yi=c). In the case of Gaussian mixture models
described earlier, p(yi=c)=πc.
The application of mixture models to generative modelling comes with several caveats
(Cozman et al. 2003 ;Z h u 2008 ). Firstly, the mixture model should be identiﬁable: each
distinct parameter choice for the mixture model should determine a distinct joint distribution,up to a permutation of the mixture components. Secondly, mixture models hinge on the
123