384 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
extend the objective function of the supervised classiﬁer to include unlabelled data. Semi-
supervised support vector machines (S3VMs), for example, extend supervised SVMs bymaximizing the margin not only on labelled, but also on unlabelled data. There are intrinsicallysemi-supervised extensions of many prominent supervised learning approaches, includingSVMs, Gaussian processes and neural networks, and we describe these in Sect. 6.W ef u r t h e r
group the methods inside this category based on the semi-supervised learning assumptionson which they rely.
3.2 Transductive methods
Unlike inductive methods, transductive methods do not construct a classiﬁer for the entireinput space. Instead, their predictive power is limited to exactly those objects that it encoun-ters during the training phase. Therefore, transductive methods have no distinct training andtesting phases. Since supervised learning methods are by deﬁnition not supplied with unla-belled data until the testing phase, no clear analogies of transductive algorithms exist insupervised learning.
Since no model of the input space exists in transductive learners, information has to
be propagated via direct connections between data points. This observation naturally givesrise to a graph-based approach to transductive methods: if a graph can be deﬁned in whichsimilar data points are connected, information can then be propagated along the edges ofthis graph. In practice, all transductive methods we discuss are either explicitly graph-basedor can implicitly be understood as such. We note that inductive graph-based methods alsoexist; we cover them in Sect. 6.3. Inductive as well as transductive graph-based methods are
typically premised on the manifold assumption: the graphs, constructed based on the localsimilarity between data points, provide a lower-dimensional representation of the potentiallyhigh-dimensional input data.
Transductive graph-based methods generally consist of three steps: graph construction,
graph weighting and inference. In the ﬁrst step, the set of objects, X, is used to construct a
graph where each node represents a data point and pairwise similar data points are connectedby an edge. In the second step, these edges are weighted to represent the extent of the pairwisesimilarity between the respective data points. In the third step, the graph is used to assignlabels to the unlabelled data points. Different methods for carrying out these three steps arediscussed in detail in Sect. 7.
4 Wrapper methods
Wrapper methods are among the oldest and most widely known algorithms for semi-
supervised learning (Zhu 2008 ). They utilize one or more supervised base learners and
iteratively train these with the original labelled data as well as previously unlabelled data
that is augmented with predictions from earlier iterations of the learners. The latter is com-monly referred to as pseudo-labelled data . The procedure usually consists of two alternating
steps of training andpseudo-labelling . In the training step, one or more supervised classiﬁers
are trained on the labelled data and, possibly, pseudo-labelled data from previous iterations.In the pseudo-labelling step, the resulting classiﬁers are used to infer labels for the previ-ously unlabelled objects; the data points for which the learners were most conﬁdent of theirpredictions are pseudo-labelled for use in the next iteration.
123