Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 403
can be considered a form of regularization over the unlabelled data, is employed by virtually
all semi-supervised deep learning methods. Furthermore, the hierarchical nature of repre-sentations in deep neural networks make them a viable candidate for other semi-supervisedapproaches. If deeper layers in the network express increasingly abstract representations ofthe input sample, one can argue that unlabelled data could be used to guide the networktowards more informative abstract representations. Approaches based on this argument canbe readily implemented in deep neural networks through the smoothness assumption, givingrise to so-called perturbation-based semi-supervised neural networks.
6.2.3 Ladder networks
The ﬁrst such approach is the ladder network , proposed by Rasmus et al. ( 2015 ). It extends
a feedforward network to incorporate unlabelled data by using the feedforward part of thenetwork as the encoder of a denoising autoencoder, adding a decoder, and including a termin the cost function to penalize the reconstruction cost. The underlying idea is that latentrepresentations that are useful for input reconstruction can also facilitate class prediction.
Consider a feedforward network with Khidden layers and weights W. We denote the
inputs of a layer k(after normalization) as z
k, and the layer’s activations (i.e. after applying
the activation function) as hk. Note that for conciseness, when referring to layer inputs and
activations, we do not explicitly mention the input data xi, nor the parametrization W(e.g.
we write hkfor the activation vector of the k-th layer in a neural network with weights W
for data point xi). In a regular feedforward network, the loss for a given data point xiis
calculated by comparing the activations of the ﬁnal layer f(xi)=hKto the corresponding
label yiwith/lscript(f(xi),yi).A si ss h o w ni nE q . 4, the ﬁnal cost function for the network is then
L(W)=/summationtextl
i=1/lscript(f(xi),yi).
Ladder networks add an additional term to L, in order to penalize the sensitivity of the
network to small perturbations of the input. This is achieved by treating the entire networkas the encoder part of a denoising autoencoder: isotropic Gaussian noise with mean zeroand ﬁxed variance is added to the input samples, and the existing feedforward network istreated as the encoder part. A decoder is then added alongside it, which is supposed to take
the ﬁnal-layer representation h
Kof a noisy data point ˜x, and transform it to reconstruct x.
To achieve this goal, a reconstruction cost is added to the cost function of the network. This
inherently unsupervised cost term penalizes the difference between the input data points andtheir reconstructions generated by the network; it applies to both labelled and unlabelleddata.
Although the autoencoder component of ladder networks is highly similar to regular
denoising autoencoders, it differs from those in two ways. Firstly, a ladder network injectsnoise not only at the ﬁrst layer, but at every layer. We denote the noisy inputs of a layer k
as˜z
k, and the resulting activations as ˜hk. The supervised loss component for each sample
‘omes /lscript(˜hK,y): the loss function is evaluated against the output for the noisy sample. Note
that, in the testing phase, no noise is induced at any point in the network.
Secondly, ladder networks utilize a different reconstruction cost calculation. Where reg-
ular denoising autoencoders only penalize the difference between the clean input xand the
reconstructed version ˆxof the noisy input ˜x, the ladder network also penalizes local recon-
structions of the hidden representations of the data. To do so, they enforce the decoder tohave Klayers, the same number of layers as the original network (the encoder). Each of these
layers is also required to have the same number of nodes as the corresponding layer in theencoder. As a data point passes through the encoder, noise is added to the layer inputs at eachlayer. Then, at each layer in the decoder, the reconstructed representation ˆz
kis compared to
123