392 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
4.3.3 SemiBoost
The semi-supervised boosting algorithm SemiBoost addresses the problem of selecting data
points to be used by the base learners by relying on the manifold assumption, utilizingprinciples from graph-based methods (Mallapragada et al. 2009 ). Each unlabelled data point
is assigned a pseudo-label, and the corresponding prediction conﬁdence is calculated basedon a predeﬁned neighbourhood graph that encodes similarity between data points. Then, asubset of these pseudo-labelled data points is added to the set of labelled data points fortraining the next base learner. The probability of a sample being selected for this subsetis proportional to its prediction conﬁdence. SemiBoost was successfully applied to objecttracking in videos by Grabner et al. ( 2008 ).
SemiBoost uses the standard boosting classiﬁcation model, expressing the ﬁnal label
prediction as a linear combination of the predictions of the individual learners. Its cost func-tion, however, is highly dissimilar from the previously described semi-supervised boostingmethods. Mallapragada et al. ( 2009 ) argue that a successful labelling of the test data should
conform to the following three requirements. Firstly, the predicted labels of the unlabelleddata should be consistent for unlabelled data points that are close to each other. Secondly, thepredicted labels of the unlabelled data should be consistent with the labels of nearby labelleddata points. And, thirdly, the predicted labels for the labelled data points should correspond totheir true labels. These requirements are expressed in the form of a constrained optimizationproblem, where the ﬁrst two are captured by the objective function, and the last is imposed asa constraint. In other words, the SemiBoost algorithm uses boosting to solve the optimizationproblem
minimize
FTLL(ˆy,A,FT)+λ·LU(ˆy,A,FT)
subject to ˆyi=yi, i=1,..., l,(1)
where LUand LLare the cost functions expressing the inconsistency across the unlabelled
and the combined labelled and unlabelled data, respectively, and λ∈Ris a constant governing
the relative weight of the cost terms; Ais an n×nsymmetric matrix denoting the pairwise
similarities between data points. Lastly, FTdenotes the joint prediction function of the
ensemble of classiﬁers at time T. We note that the optimization objective in Eq. 1is very
similar to the cost functions encountered in graph-based methods (see Sects. 6.3and 7)i n
that it favours classiﬁers that consistently label data points on the same manifold. In graph-based methods, however, no distinction is generally made between labelled-unlabelled andunlabelled-unlabelled pairs.
4.3.4 Other semi-supervised boosting methods
The three previously discussed methods form the core of semi-supervised boosting research.Further work in the area includes RegBoost , which, like SemiBoost, includes local label
consistency in its objective function (Chen and Wang 2011 ). In RegBoost, this term is also
dependent on the estimated local density of the marginal distribution p(x). Several attempts
have been made to extend the label consistency regularization to the multiclass setting (Tanhaet al. 2012 ; Valizadegan et al. 2008 ).
123