406 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
of perturbations. Pseudo-ensembles solve this problem by comparing the perturbed network
activations to the activations of the unperturbed network model.
In the same paper in which they propose the /Pi1-model, Laine and Aila ( 2017 ) propose a
different approach to combining multiple perturbations of a network model: they comparethe activations of the neural network at each epoch to the activations of the network atprevious epochs. In particular, after each epoch, they compare the output of the networkto the exponential moving average of the outputs of the network in previous epochs. Sincethe connection weights are changed in each iteration, this cannot be considered a form ofpseudo-ensembling, but it is conceptually related, in that the network output is smoothedover multiple model perturbations.
This approach—dubbed temporal ensembling , because it penalizes the difference in the
network outputs at different points in time during the training process—can be considered anextension of the /Pi1-model. However, instead of comparing f
θ(x;ξ)tofθ(x;ξ/prime)forξ,ξ/prime∼/Xi1,
it uses comparisons to the exponential moving average of ﬁnal-layer activations in previousepochs. Since the loss function for unlabelled data points depends on the network output inprevious iterations, temporal ensembling is closely related to pseudo-labelling methods, suchas the pseudo-label approach (Lee 2013 ) and self-training. The crucial difference, however,
is that the entire set of ﬁnal-layer activations is compared to the activations of the previousnetwork model, whereas self-training approaches and pseudo-label convert these outputs to
a single, hard prediction (the pseudo-label).
6.2.7 Mean teacher
When training a neural network using temporal ensembling, unlabelled data points are incor-porated into the learning process at large intervals. Since the activations for each input areonly generated once per epoch, it takes a long time for the activations of unlabelled datapoints to inﬂuence the inference process. Tarvainen and Valpola ( 2017 ) attempted to over-
come this problem by considering moving averages over connection weights, instead ofmoving averages over network activations.
Speciﬁcally, they suggested calculating the exponential moving average of weights at
each training iteration, and compared the resulting ﬁnal-layer activations to the ﬁnal-layeractivations when using the latest set of weights. Furthermore, they imposed noise on theinput data to increase robustness. Formally, consider a neural network with weights W
tat
iteration t, and a set of averaged weights ˆWt. The loss function /lscriptfor an unlabelled input,
then, is calculated as /lscript(x)=| | f(˜x;ˆWt)−f(˜x/prime;Wt)||2,w h e r e ˜xand˜x/primeare two noise-
augmented versions of x. After calculating Wt+1using backpropagation, ˆWt+1is calculated
byˆWt+1=α·ˆWt+(1−α)·Wt+1,w h e r e αis the decay rate. They name the model with
averaged weights ˆWtheteacher model, and the latest model with weights Wtthestudent
model. This terminology has since been adopted in the literature when constructing semi-supervised neural networks.
6.2.8 Virtual adversarial training
Most of the perturbation-based approaches we have discussed thus far aim to promote robust-ness to small perturbations in the input. In doing so, they do not take into account thedirectionality of the perturbation: the injected noise is generally isotropic. However, it hasbeen suggested in several studies that the sensitivity of neural networks to perturbations inthe input is often highly dependent on the direction of these perturbations (Szegedy et al.2013 ; Goodfellow et al. 2014b ).
123