Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 401
objective function that reﬂects the belief that, in high-density areas, the posterior probability
ofyconditioned on xshould not vary too much. To this end, they cover the entire input
space Xwith multiple, possibly overlapping, small regions; the cost term is then calculated
as the sum of the mutual information between labels and inputs in each of these regions,weighted by the estimated density in the region. Their work is an extension of earlier workby Szummer and Jaakkola ( 2003 ).
Liu et al. ( 2013 ,2015 ) proposed to incorporate the prior density into the node splitting
criterion of decision trees. When selecting the hyperplane for splitting the data at a node ina decision tree, their approach penalizes high-density areas, using Gaussian kernel densityestimators to approximate p(x). They conducted experiments with random forests consisting
of 100 of the resulting semi-supervised decision trees and observed signiﬁcant performanceimprovements over supervised random forests for several data sets. Levati´ ce ta l .( 2017 )
introduced a more generic framework for using unlabelled data in the splitting criterion byconstructing an impurity measure for unlabelled data. In their experiments, they promotedfeature consistency within the data subsets on each side of the splitting boundary, penalizingempirical variance for numerical data and the Gini impurity for nominal data. We note thatthe speciﬁc categorization of these methods within our taxonomy depends on the choice ofsplitting criterion.
6.1.4 Pseudo-labelling as a form of margin maximization
Depending on the base learner used, the self-training approach described in Sect. 4can
also be regarded a margin-maximization method. For instance, when using self-trainingwith supervised SVMs, the decision boundary is iteratively pushed away from the unlabelledsamples. Even though the unlabelled data are not explicitly incorporated into the loss function,this amounts to exploiting the low-density assumption, as done in the case of S3VMs.
6.2 Perturbation-based methods
The smoothness assumption entails that a predictive model should be robust to local pertur-bations in its input. This means that, when we perturb a data point with a small amount ofnoise, the predictions for the noisy and the clean inputs should be similar. Since this expectedsimilarity is not dependent on the true label of the data points, we can make use of unlabelleddata.
Many different methods exist for incorporating the smoothness assumption into a given
learning algorithm. For instance, one could apply noise to the input data points, and incor-porate the difference between the clean and the noisy predictions into the loss function.Alternatively, one could implicitly apply noise to the data points by perturbing the classiﬁeritself. These two approaches give rise to the category of perturbation-based methods .
Perturbation-based methods are often implemented with neural networks. Due to their
straightforward incorporation of additional (unsupervised) loss terms into their objectivefunction, they are extendable to the semi-supervised setting with relative ease. In recentyears, neural networks have received renewed interest, due their successful application invarious application areas (see, e.g. Collobert et al. 2011 ;K r i z h e v s k ye ta l . 2012 ; LeCun et al.
2015 ). As a result, interest in semi-supervised neural networks has risen as well. In particular,
neural networks with many layers, so-called deep neural networks, have given rise to inter-esting extensions to the semi-supervised setting. These intrinsically semi-supervised neuralnetworks differ from the neural networks used for feature extraction, which we discussed in
123