388 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
can never contribute positively to the overall performance of the combined approach. The
second assumption is related to the diversity criterion: if the feature subsets are conditionallyindependent given the class label, the predictions of the individual classiﬁers are unlikely
to be strongly correlated. Formally, for any data point x
i=x(1)
i×x(2)
i, decomposed into
x(1)
iand x(2)
ifor the ﬁrst and second feature subset, respectively, the conditional indepen-
dence assumption amounts to p(x(1)
i|x(2)
i,yi)=p(x(1)
i|yi). Dasgupta et al. ( 2002 )s h o w e d
that, under the previously mentioned assumptions, generalization error can be decreased bypromoting agreement among the individual learners.
In practice, the second assumption is generally not satisﬁed: even if a natural split of
features exists, such as in the experimental setup used by Blum and Mitchell ( 1998 ), it is
unlikely that information contained in one view provides no information about the other viewwhen conditioned on the class label (Du et al. 2011 ). Considering the university web page
classiﬁcation example, the anchor text of a link to a web page can indeed be expected tocontain clues towards the content of the web page, even if it is known that the web pageis classiﬁed as a faculty member’s home page. For example, if the link’s anchor text is“Dean of the Engineering Faculty”, one is more likely to ﬁnd information about the dean ofthe engineering faculty than about any other person in the text of that page. Thus, severalalternatives to this assumption have been considered.
Abney ( 2002 ) showed that a weak independence assumption is sufﬁcient for successful
co-training. Balcan et al. ( 2005 ) further relaxed the conditional independence assumption,
showing that a much weaker assumption, which they dub the expansion assumption ,i ss u f -
ﬁcient and to some extent necessary. The expansion assumption states that the two viewsare not highly correlated, and that individual classiﬁers never conﬁdently make incorrectpredictions.
Du et al. ( 2011 ) studied empirical methods to determine to what degree the sufﬁciency and
independence assumptions hold. They proposed several methods for automatically splittingthe feature set into two views, and showed that the resulting empirical independence and suf-ﬁciency is positively correlated with the performance of the co-trained algorithm, indicatingthat feature splits optimizing sufﬁciency and independence lead to good classiﬁers.
4.2.2 Single-view co-training
A ss h o w nb yD ue ta l .( 2011 ), co-training can be successful even when no natural split in a
given feature set is known a priori. This observation is echoed throughout the literature on co-training, and many different approaches to applying co-training in this so-called single-viewsetting exist.
Chen et al. ( 2011 ) attempted to alleviate the need for pre-deﬁned disjoint feature sets by
automatically splitting the feature set in each co-training iteration. They formulated a singleoptimization problem closely related to co-training, incorporating both the requirement thatthe feature sets should be disjoint and the expansion property of Balcan et al. ( 2005 ). They
showed promising results for this approach on a partially synthetic data set, where multipleviews of each data point are automatically generated. Wang and Zhou ( 2010 ) reasoned about
sufﬁcient and necessary conditions for co-training to succeed, approaching co-training froma graph-based perspective, where label propagation is alternately applied to each learner. Adownside of this approach is that, although inspired by co-training, it cannot be applied toan arbitrary supervised learning algorithm without modiﬁcation: the operations resemblingco-training are embedded in the objective function, which is optimized directly.
123