382 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Fig. 3 Visualization of the semi-supervised classiﬁcation taxonomy. Each leaf in the taxonomy corresponds
to a speciﬁc type of approach to incorporating unlabelled data into classiﬁcation methods. In the leaf corre-sponding to transductive, graph-based methods, the dashed boxes represent distinct phases of the graph-basedclassiﬁcation process, each of which has a multitude of variations
between different groups of methods. Furthermore, the categorizations are often ﬁne-tuned
towards existing work, making them less suited for the inclusion of new approaches.
In this survey, we propose a new way to represent the spectrum of semi-supervised classiﬁ-
cation algorithms. We attempt to group them in a clear, future-proof way, allowing researchersand practitioners alike to gain insight into the way semi-supervised learning methods relateto each other, to existing supervised learning methods, and to the semi-supervised learningassumptions. The taxonomy is visualized in Fig. 3. At the highest level, it distinguishes
between inductive andtransductive methods, which give rise to distinct optimization proce-
dures: the former attempt to ﬁnd a classiﬁcation model, whereas the latter are solely concernedwith obtaining label predictions for the given unlabelled data points. At the second level, itconsiders the way the semi-supervised learning methods incorporate unlabelled data. Thisdistinction gives rise to three distinct classes of inductive methods, each of which is relatedto supervised classiﬁers in a different way.
The ﬁrst distinction we make in our taxonomy, between inductive and transductive meth-
ods, is common in the literature on semi-supervised learning (see, e.g. Chapelle et al. 2006b ;
Zhu 2008 ; Zhu and Goldberg 2009 ). The former, like supervised learning methods, yield a
classiﬁcation model that can be used to predict the label of previously unseen data points.The latter do not yield such a model, but instead directly provide predictions. In other words,given a data set consisting of labelled and unlabelled data, X
L,XU⊆X, with labels yL∈Yl
for the llabelled data points, inductive methods yield a model f:X/mapsto→ Y, whereas transduc-
123