Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 427
method was proposed by He et al. ( 2011 ), who impose a constraint that all coefﬁcients be
non-negative to the objective from Problem 11above.
The coefﬁcient vector acan be seen as an encoding of xi. From this perspective, one
would expect similar data points to have similar encodings. Zhuang et al. ( 2012 ) captured
this assumption by constructing a matrix Afrom all encodings a1,..., anand regularizing
the objective function by the rank of A. Based on a well-known clustering method called low-
rank representation (Liu et al. 2010a ), the regularization term penalizes coefﬁcient matrices
of high rank. The low-rankness of the matrix captures global structures in the data, whilesparsity captures the local structure among data points. The resulting optimization problem,which includes the non-negativity constraint and penalizes the L0 norm of the coefﬁcients, isNP-hard; Zhuang et al. ( 2012 ) proposed a convex relaxation leading to an objective function
identical to the sparse coding objective function from Problem 11, but with the addition of
the non-negativity constraint and a surrogate for the rank-regularization term.
Although this approach achieves good empirical results, the motivation for using the
contribution coefﬁcients aas graph weights remains somewhat unclear. As an alternative, Li
and Fu ( 2013 ,2015 ) use the reconstruction coefﬁcients of pairs of data points to measure
their similarity. In particular, they build a matrix of encoding vectors that is sparse and oflow rank, and base the similarity of data points on the distance between their encodings.Additionally, they impose the constraint that all nodes have equal degree, to promote sparsityand regularity of the graph.
7.4 Scalable transductive learning
Many of the graph construction and inference methods discussed thus far suffer from a lackof scalability (Liu et al. 2012 ). Graph construction methods commonly have time complexity
O(n
2)(for instance, k-nearest neighbours has time complexity O(k·n2)); inference methods
generally have time complexity O(n3)for obtaining exact solutions and O(n)for approximate
solutions. This can make it difﬁcult to apply graph-based methods in real-world applicationswith large quantities of unlabelled data. Liu et al. ( 2012 ) provided an overview of approaches
for making graph-based methods more scalable.
To tackle the scalability problem, several approaches have been proposed for efﬁciently
constructing smaller graphs on which inference can then be performed. These approachesrely on ﬁnding a set of m/lessmuchn prototype oranchor points to express the structure in the
given data more compactly. These anchor points are used in the inference phase, after whichunlabelled data points are classiﬁed based on the inferred labels of nearby anchor points.
A commonly used approach called anchor graph regularization was proposed by Liu et al.
(2010b ). Their method seeks to ﬁnd a set of anchor points u
1,..., ukand corresponding label
assignments so that each data point can be expressed as a linear combination of the labelsof nearby anchor points. They choose the positions of the anchor points using k-means
clustering, and construct a graph connecting each data point to its closest anchors. Thecorresponding weights are deﬁned via locally linear embedding (see Sect. 7.3.2 ); these are
then used to construct a graph over all data points. The inference process indirectly optimizesthe predictions for the data points, by optimizing a graph-based objective function deﬁnedover the predictions for the anchor points. Zhang et al. ( 2009 ) proposed to use a low-rank
approximation of the adjacency matrix in the unsupervised cost term in the inference phase.
123