380 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
supervised classiﬁer performs well in such cases, it is only natural to use the semi-supervised
extension to the algorithm.
As is the case for supervised learning algorithms, no method has yet been discovered to
determine a priori what learning method is best-suited for any particular problem. What ismore, it is impossible to guarantee that the introduction of unlabelled data will not degradeperformance. Such performance degradation has been observed in practice, and its preva-lence is likely under-reported due to publication bias (Zhu 2008 ). The problem of potential
performance degradation has been identiﬁed in multiple studies (Zhu 2008 ; Chapelle et al.
2006b ; Singh et al. 2009 ; Li and Zhou 2015 ; Oliver et al. 2018 ), but remains difﬁcult to
address. It is particularly relevant in scenarios where good performance can be achieved withpurely supervised classiﬁers. In those cases, the potential performance degradation is muchlarger than the potential performance gain.
The main takeaway from these observations is that semi-supervised learning should not be
seen as a guaranteed way of achieving improved prediction performance by the mere intro-duction of unlabelled data. Rather, it should be treated as another direction in the process ofﬁnding and conﬁguring a learning algorithm for the task at hand. Semi-supervised learningprocedures should be part of the suite of algorithms considered for use in a particular appli-cation scenario, and a combination of theoretical analysis (where possible) and empiricalevaluation should be used to choose an approach that is well suited to the given situation.
2.4 Empirical evaluation of semi-supervised learning methods
When evaluating and comparing machine learning algorithms, a multitude of decisions inﬂu-ence the relative performance of different algorithms. In supervised learning, these includethe selection of data sets, the partitioning of those data sets into training, validation and testsets, and the extent to which hyperparameters are tuned. In semi-supervised learning, addi-tional factors come into play. First, in many benchmarking scenarios, a decision has to bemade which data points should be labelled and which should remain unlabelled. Second, onecan choose to evaluate the performance of the learner on the unlabelled data used for training(which is by deﬁnition the case in transductive learning), or on a completely disjoint testset. Additionally, it is important to establish high-quality supervised baselines to allow forproper assessment of the added value of the unlabelled data. In practice, excessively limitingthe scope of the evaluation can lead to unrealistic perspectives on the performance of thelearning algorithms. Recently, Oliver et al. ( 2018 ) established a set of guidelines for the real-
istic evaluation of semi-supervised learning algorithms; several of their recommendationsare included here.
In practical use cases, the partitioning of labelled and unlabelled data is typically ﬁxed.
In research, data sets used for evaluating semi-supervised learning algorithms are usuallyobtained by simply removing the labels of a large amount of data points from an existingsupervised learning data set. In earlier research, the data sets from the UCI Machine LearningRepository were often used (Dua and Graff 2019 ). In more recent research on semi-supervised
image classiﬁcation, the CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky 2009 ) and SVHN (Netzer et al. 2011 )
data sets have been popular choices. Additionally, two-dimensional toy datasets are some-times used to demonstrate the viability of a new approach. Typically, these toy data setsconsist of an input distribution where data points from each class are concentrated alonga one-dimensional manifold. For instance, the popular half-moon data set consists of data
points drawn from two interleaved half circles, each associated with a different class.
123