374 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
1 Introduction
In machine learning, a distinction has traditionally been made between two major tasks:
supervised and unsupervised learning (Bishop 2006 ). Insupervised learning , one is presented
with a set of data points consisting of some input xand a corresponding output value y.T h e
goal is, then, to construct a classiﬁer or regressor that can estimate the output value forpreviously unseen inputs. In unsupervised learning , on the other hand, no speciﬁc output
value is provided. Instead, one tries to infer some underlying structure from the inputs. Forinstance, in unsupervised clustering, the goal is to infer a mapping from the given inputs (e.g.vectors of real numbers) to groups such that similar inputs are mapped to the same group.
Semi-supervised learning is a branch of machine learning that aims to combine these
two tasks (Chapelle et al. 2006b ;Z h u 2008 ). Typically, semi-supervised learning algorithms
attempt to improve performance in one of these two tasks by utilizing information generallyassociated with the other. For instance, when tackling a classiﬁcation problem, additionaldata points for which the label is unknown might be used to aid in the classiﬁcation process.For clustering methods, on the other hand, the learning procedure might beneﬁt from theknowledge that certain data points belong to the same class.
As is the case for machine learning in general, a large majority of the research on semi-
supervised learning is focused on classiﬁcation. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods areparticularly relevant to scenarios where labelled data is scarce. In those cases, it may bedifﬁcult to construct a reliable supervised classiﬁer. This situation occurs in applicationdomains where labelled data is expensive or difﬁcult obtain, like computer-aided diagnosis,drug discovery and part-of-speech tagging. If sufﬁcient unlabelled data is available and undercertain assumptions about the distribution of the data, the unlabelled data can help in theconstruction of a better classiﬁer. In practice, semi-supervised learning methods have alsobeen applied to scenarios where no signiﬁcant lack of labelled data exists: if the unlabelleddata points provide additional information that is relevant for prediction, they can potentiallybe used to achieve improved classiﬁcation performance.
A plethora of learning methods exists, each with their own characteristics, advantages and
disadvantages. The most recent comprehensive survey of the area was published by Zhu in2005 and last updated in 2008 [see Zhu ( 2008 )]. The book by Chapelle et al. ( 2006b )a n d
the introductory book by Zhu and Goldberg ( 2009 ) also provide good bases for studying
earlier work on semi-supervised learning. More recently, Subramanya and Talukdar ( 2014 )
provided an overview of several graph-based techniques, and Triguero et al. ( 2015 ) reviewed
and analyzed pseudo-labelling techniques, a class of semi-supervised learning methods.
Since the survey by Zhu ( 2008 ) was published, some important developments have taken
place in the ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning. Across the ﬁeld, new learning approacheshave been proposed, and existing approaches have been extended, improved, and analyzedin more depth. Additionally, the rise in popularity of (deep) neural networks (Goodfellow2017 ) for supervised learning has prompted new approaches to semi-supervised learning,
driven by the simplicity of incorporating unsupervised loss terms into the cost functions ofneural networks. Lastly, there has been increased attention for the development of robustsemi-supervised learning methods that do not degrade performance, and for the evaluationof semi-supervised learning methods for practical purposes.
In this survey, we aim to provide the reader with a comprehensive overview of the cur-
rent state of the research area of semi-supervised learning, covering early work and recentadvances, and providing explanations of key algorithms and approaches. We present a newtaxonomy for semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods that captures the assumptions under-
123