402 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Sect. 5.1: the unlabelled data is incorporated directly into the optimization objective, rather
than being used in a separate preprocessing step. Before continuing our discussion of suchmethods, we provide a short, general introduction to neural networks targeted at readers whoare not too familiar with them. For a more extensive introduction to (deep) neural networks,we refer the interested reader to the recent book by Goodfellow et al. ( 2016 ).
6.2.1 Neural networks
A neural network is a formal system that computes an output vector by propagating an input
vector through a network of simple processing elements with weighted connections betweenthem. These simple processing elements are called nodes , and each of them contains an
activation function that ultimately determines its output. In the feedforward networks we are
considering here, nodes are usually grouped together into layers , where nodes from each
layer are only connected to nodes from adjacent layers. The output vector is calculated bypropagating the input vector through the weighted connections of the network. The outputof each node, commonly referred to as its activation , is calculated by applying its activation
function to the weighted sum of its inputs.
In supervised neural networks, the network weights are generally optimized to calculate
the desired output vector for a given input vector. Considering the classiﬁcation task, let
f:R
d/mapsto→ R|Y|denote the vector-valued function modelled by a neural network, mapping
an input vector x∈Rdto a|Y|-dimensional output vector, where Ydenotes the set of possible
classes. The function fis modelled by a neural network consisting of one or multiple layers;
nodes in consecutive layers are connected by weighted edges. The weights are stored in aweight matrix W, where the element at position (i,j)denotes the weight of the edge between
nodes iand j.W eu s e f(x;W)to denote the output obtained by propagating the input x
through the network and evaluating the activations of the ﬁnal layer.
A loss function /lscriptis then deﬁned, calculating the cost associated with output layer activa-
tions f(x;W)for a data point xwith true label y. The complete cost function is then deﬁned
as
L(W)=l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(f(xi;W),yi). (4)
The explicit notion of the parametrization of fbyWis often omitted for conciseness.
The weights in Ware iteratively optimized by passing input samples through the network
and propagating the share of one or more samples in the cost Lbackwards through the
network. In this process, known as backpropagation , the weights are updated, using gradient
descent or a similar method to iteratively minimize the cost (Goodfellow et al. 2016 ). To
achieve good performance (in terms of loss), the network generally needs to pass multipletimes over the entire training set, and each such pass is known as an epoch .
In the literature on neural networks, various notation styles are used. In particular, some
of the articles we discuss use θto denote the network weights, and denote the output of
the corresponding network by f
θ(x). In discussing these articles, we use this notation style
when we deem it essential for maintaining relatability between the respective article and thissurvey.
6.2.2 Semi-supervised neural networks
The simplicity and efﬁciency of the backpropagation algorithm for a great variety of loss func-tions make it attractive to simply add an unsupervised component to
L. This approach, which
123