Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 415
Kingma et al. ( 2014 ) propose a two-step model to use V AEs for semi-supervised learning.
In the ﬁrst step, a V AE is trained on both the unlabelled and labelled data to extract mean-ingful latent representations from data points. By itself, this can be seen as an unsupervisedpreprocessing step, allowing the latent representations to be used by any supervised classiﬁer.In the second step, they implement a V AE in which the latent representation is augmentedwith the label vector y
i, which contains the one-hot-encoded true labels for labelled data
points and is treated as an additional latent variable for unlabelled data. In addition to thedecoder, a classiﬁcation network is introduced that infers the label predictions (Kingma et al.2014 ).
7 Transductive methods
The semi-supervised learning methods described in the previous sections were all inductive
algorithms: their primary goal was to use both labelled and unlabelled data to construct aprocedure capable of providing label predictions for data points in the entire input space.In inductive learners, we can therefore clearly distinguish between a training phase and atesting phase: in the training phase, labelled data (X
L,yL)and unlabelled data XUare used
to construct a classiﬁer. In the testing phase, this classiﬁer is used to independently classifythe unlabelled or other, previously unseen data points.
In this section, we discuss transductive algorithms, which constitute the second major class
of semi-supervised learning methods. Unlike inductive algorithms, transductive algorithmsdo not produce a predictor that can operate over the entire input space. Instead, transductivemethods yield a set of predictions for the set of unlabelled data points provided to the learningalgorithm. Contrary to the inductive setting, we thus cannot distinguish between a trainingphase and a testing phase: transductive algorithms are provided with labelled data (X
L,yL)
and unlabelled data XU, and output exclusively predictions ˆyUfor the unlabelled data.
Transductive methods typically deﬁne a graph over all data points, both labelled and
unlabelled, encoding the pairwise similarity of data points with possibly weighted edges (Zhu2005 ). An objective function is then deﬁned and optimized, in order to achieve two goals:
1. For labelled data points, the predicted labels should match the true labels.
2. Similar data points, as deﬁned via the similarity graph, should have the same label
predictions.
In other words, these methods encourage consistent predictions for similar data points while
taking into account the known labels. A close similarity exists between these methods and theinductive manifold-based methods from Sect. 6.3. Both methods construct a graph over the
data points and use pairwise similarity between data points to approximate more complexstructures. The only major difference between them is that the inductive methods seek toobtain a classiﬁer that can operate across the entire input space, whereas transductive methodsonly yield predictions for a given set of unlabelled data points. Collectively, these methodsare often referred to as graph-based methods (Zhu 2008 ).
In Sect. 6.3, we focused on the interpretation and motivation of graph-based techniques
from the theoretical perspective of manifolds. The development of transductive graph-basedmethods, however, has generally been driven directly by the two optimization criteria outlinedabove. This section, in which we discuss transductive semi-supervised learning, follows thatline of reasoning.
123