394 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
... ... ...
Encoder
h(·)Decoder
g(·)x
h(x)g(h(x))
Fig. 4 Simpliﬁed representation of an autoencoder. The rectangles correspond to layers within the network;
the trapeziums represent the encoder and decoder portions of the network, which can consist of multiple layers
vations indicate that the assumptions underlying autoencoders are closely related to the
semi-supervised manifold assumption .
In some domains, data is not inherently represented as a meaningful feature vector. Since
many common classiﬁcation methods require such a representation, feature extraction is anecessity in those cases. The feature extraction step, then, consists of ﬁnding an embedding
of the given object into a vector space by taking into account the relations between differentinput objects. Examples of such approaches can be found in natural language processing(Collobert et al. 2011 ; Mikolov et al. 2013 ) and network science (Grover and Leskovec
2016 ; Perozzi et al. 2014 ;W a n ge ta l . 2016 ).
5.2 Cluster-then-label
Clustering and classiﬁcation have traditionally been regarded as relatively disjoint research
areas. However, many semi-supervised learning algorithms use principles from clustering toguide the classiﬁcation process. Cluster-then-label approaches form a group of methods that
explicitly join the clustering and classiﬁcation processes: they ﬁrst apply an unsupervised orsemi-supervised clustering algorithm to all available data, and use the resulting clusters toguide the classiﬁcation process.
Goldberg et al. ( 2009 ) ﬁrst cluster the labelled data and a subset of the unlabelled data.
A classiﬁer is then trained independently for each cluster on the labelled data contained init. Finally, the unlabelled data points are classiﬁed using the classiﬁers for their respectiveclusters. In the clustering step, a graph is constructed over the data points using the Hellingerdistance; size-constrained spectral clustering is then applied to the resulting graph. Since theclustering is only used to segment the data, after which individual learners are applied toeach cluster, the approach supports any supervised base learner.
Demiriz et al. ( 1999 ) ﬁrst cluster the data in a semi-supervised manner, favouring clusters
with limited label impurity (i.e. a high degree of consistency in the labels of the data points
123