Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 423
Instructured output learning , the labels of data points cannot be captured using sim-
ple binary or real-valued representations. For instance, the output labels might be betterrepresented with histograms or probability distributions in some cases (e.g. when predict-ing the relative trafﬁc density at a location over a 24-hour cycle). Subramanya and Bilmes(2008 ,2011 ) propagate discrete probability distributions through a graph, based on the KL-
divergence between the distributions of different nodes. As an alternative to KL-divergence,Solomon et al. ( 2014 ) proposed to use the Wasserstein distance to measure the similarity
between the discrete distributions of neighbouring nodes.
7.3 Graph construction
Arguably, graph construction is the most important aspect of graph-based methods: in orderfor inference to work, the constructed graph must accurately capture local similarities. Initialresearch on graph-based methods was chieﬂy focused on the inference phase, and graphconstruction was not well-studied (Zhu 2008 ). In recent years, however, this has changed.
Extensive experiments have been conducted on different graph construction algorithms, andnew methods have been introduced (de Sousa et al. 2013 ; Jebara et al. 2009 ; Subramanya
and Talukdar 2014 ).
Since the nodes of the graph correspond to the data points (both labelled and unlabelled),
the graph construction phase amounts to forming edges between nodes (yielding the adja-cency matrix) and attaching weights to them (yielding the weight matrix). In many cases, thesimilarity measure governing the connectivity between nodes is also used to construct theweight matrix.
7.3.1 Adjacency matrix construction
The ﬁrst step in constructing the graph is the creation of an adjacency matrix, whose elementsindicate the presence of edges between pairs of nodes. Three popular methods for determiningedges exist and are outlined below. We note that the ﬁrst two methods, /epsilon1-neighbourhood and
k-nearest neighbours, are local in the sense that a set of neighbours can be determined
independently for each node. In other words, the construction of a neighbourhood for anodev
idoes not inﬂuence neighbourhood construction for another node vj(unless viis
a neighbour of vj). The third method, b-matching, on the other hand, optimizes a global
objective, and nodes that are far apart can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence each other’s connectivity.
/epsilon1-neighbourhood. One of the ﬁrst methods to be used in graph construction was the /epsilon1-
neighbourhood method, which simply connects each node to all nodes to which the distanceis at most /epsilon1(Blum and Chawla 2001 ). In other words, an edge between x
iand xjis created
if, and only if, d(xi,xj)≤/epsilon1,w h e r e d(·,·)is some distance measure (usually Euclidean
distance). The structure of the resulting graph is highly dependent on the choice of /epsilon1and the
distance measure. Furthermore, since /epsilon1is ﬁxed, it does not work well if the scale of patterns
varies across the given input data. Because of these limitations, the /epsilon1-neighbourhood method
is rarely used in practice (de Sousa et al. 2013 ; Jebara et al. 2009 ).
k-nearest neighbours. The most common graph construction method for transductive
methods is the k-nearest neighbours method, where each node is connected to its knearest
neighbours in the input space according to some distance measure (Blum and Chawla 2001 ).
Using vanilla k-nearest neighbours, however, gives rise to a problem: since k-nearest neigh-
bours is not symmetric, some additional processing is often required to obtain an undirected
123