420 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
where the normalization constant Zcan be calculated by summing over all possible conﬁg-
urations of Y. Although this is computationally too expensive for all practical purposes, the
normalization constant is irrelevant in the context of maximum-likelihood estimation. Thenegative logarithm of the unnormalized probability, then, is exactly equal to the general lossfunction for graph-based methods from Expression 8. Maximizing the probability P(Y=y),
we obtain the mode of the Markov random ﬁeld, i.e. its most likely conﬁguration. This solu-
tion is exactly the solution found when minimizing the min-cut objective (Blum and Chawla2001 ).
In the inductive semi-supervised classiﬁcation setting, classiﬁer predictions are indepen-
dent, i.e. P(ˆY=ˆy)=p(Y
1=ˆy1)·p(ˆY2=ˆy2)·...·p(ˆYn=ˆyn). In transductive,
graph-based methods, however, this is generally not the case: predictions are dependent oneach other. Therefore, the most probable label assignment ˆygenerally does not correspond
to the label assignment minimizing the expected error rate. To ﬁnd the latter, each data pointx
iwould have to be assigned the label that maximizes the marginal probability for that data
point. Unfortunately, ﬁnding the marginal probabilities of a random ﬁeld is not trivial.
Zhu and Ghahramani ( 2002b ) attempted the calculation of the marginal probabilities via
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling. They experimented with Metropolis and
Swendsen-Wang sampling and reported low computational efﬁciency. Shental and Domany(2005 ) used a multicanonical MCMC method to compute the marginal probabilities.
7.2.3 Efﬁcient probabilistic label assignments: Gaussian random ﬁelds
There is no closed-form solution for calculating the marginal probabilities in the Markov
random ﬁeld with binary labels described previously. However, when the random variables
ˆYare relaxed to take real values, a closed-form solution exists. This approach was proposed
by Zhu et al. ( 2003 ); it involves ﬁxing the labels of the labelled data points and using quadratic
cost for the pairs of predictions ˆyi,ˆyj∈R. This results in an objective function identical
to that used in the min-cut formulation (see Expression 9), except for the relaxation of the
predictions to real numbers.
Using real-valued predictions with a quadratic loss function, the exponential form for
P(ˆY=ˆy)is a multivariate Gaussian distribution. Thus, a closed-form solution for the mode
of the ﬁeld, which equals its mean, exists. Furthermore, the marginal probability distribution
P(ˆYi=ˆyi)is Gaussian as well, allowing for computation of the label predictions minimizing
the error rate. This is why the random ﬁeld is called a Gaussian random ﬁeld .
Recall from Sect. 6.3that we deﬁned the graph Laplacian as L=D−W,w h e r e D
is the degree matrix (i.e. a diagonal matrix with the vertex degrees on the diagonal). Zhuet al. ( 2003 ) showed that the prediction function is harmonic , i.e. L·ˆy=0 at unlabelled
data points, and is equal to the true label at labelled data points. The predicted label at eachunlabelled data point is equal to the average of the predictions of its neighbours, i.e.
ˆy
i=1
Dii·/summationdisplay
vj∈N(vi)Wij·ˆyj,fori=l+1,..., n,
where N(vi)denotes the neighbourhood of node vi,t h a ti s , N(vi)={vj:Wij/negationslash=0}.F u r -
thermore, the solution is unique and ˆyi∈[0,1]for each i. Thus, label predictions can be
easily obtained from the solution using thresholding.
Computation of the marginals of the Markov random ﬁeld involves an inversion of the
submatrix LUcorresponding to the unlabelled data points in the graph Laplacian. This is com-
putationally expensive for large numbers of unlabelled data points. Several other approaches
123