Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 379
on some concept of similarity between data points in X, according to which we can assign
clusters to similar data points.
The concept of similarity we choose, often implicitly, dictates what constitutes a cluster.
Although the efﬁcacy of any particular clustering method for ﬁnding these clusters dependson many other factors, the concept of similarity uniquely deﬁnes the interaction between p(x)
andp(y|x). Therefore, whether two points belong to the same cluster can be derived from
their similarity to each other and to other points. From our perspective, the smoothness, low-density, and manifold assumptions boil down to different deﬁnitions of the similarity betweenpoints: the smoothness assumption states that points that are close to each other in input spaceare similar; the low-density assumption states that points in the same high-density area aresimilar; and the manifold assumption states that points that lie on the same low-dimensionalmanifold are similar. Consequently, the semi-supervised learning assumptions can be seenas more speciﬁc instances of the cluster assumption: that similar points tend to belong to thesame group.
One could even argue that the cluster assumption corresponds to the necessary condition
for semi-supervised learning: that p(x)carries information on p(y|x). In fact, assuming the
output space
Ycontains the labels of all possible clusters, the necessary condition for semi-
supervised learning to succeed can be seen to be the necessary condition for clustering tosucceed. In other words: if the data points (both unlabelled and labelled) cannot be mean-ingfully clustered, it is impossible for a semi-supervised learning method to improve on asupervised learning method.
2.3 When does semi-supervised learning work?
The primary goal of semi-supervised learning is to harness unlabelled data for the constructionof better learning procedures. As it turns out, this is not always easy or even possible. Asmentioned earlier, unlabelled data is only useful if it carries information useful for labelprediction that is not contained in the labelled data alone or cannot be easily extracted fromit. To apply any semi-supervised learning method in practice, the algorithm then needs to beable to extract this information. For practitioners and researchers alike, this begs the question:when is this the case?
Unfortunately, it has proven difﬁcult to ﬁnd a practical answer to this question. Not only
is it difﬁcult to precisely deﬁne the conditions under which any particular semi-supervisedlearning algorithm may work, it is also rarely straightforward to evaluate to what extent theseconditions are satisﬁed. However, one can reason about the applicability of different learningmethods on various types of problems. Graph-based methods, for example, typically rely ona local similarity measure to construct a graph over all data points. To apply such methodssuccessfully, it is important that a meaningful local similarity measure can be devised. Inhigh-dimensional data, such as images, where Euclidean feature distance is rarely a goodindicator of the similarity between data points, this is often difﬁcult. As can be seen in theliterature, most semi-supervised learning approaches for images rely on a weak variant ofthe smoothness assumption that requires predictions to be invariant to minor perturbationsin the input (Rasmus et al. 2015 ; Laine and Aila 2017 ; Tarvainen and Valpola 2017 ). Semi-
supervised extensions of supervised learning algorithms, on the other hand, generally relyon the same assumption as their supervised counterparts. For instance, both supervised andsemi-supervised support vector machines rely on the low-density assumption, which statesthat the decision boundary should lie in a low-density region of the decision space. If a
123