Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 395
within a given cluster), and use the resulting clusters in classiﬁcation. Dara et al. ( 2002 )
proposed a more elaborate preprocessing step, applying self-organizing maps (Kohonen
1998 ) to the labelled data in an iterative fashion. The unlabelled data points are then mapped,
yielding a cluster assignment for each of them. If the cluster to which an unlabelled datapoint x
iis mapped contains only data points with the same label, that label is also assigned
toxi. This process can be iterated, after which the resulting label assignments can be used
to train an inductive classiﬁer (in the work of Dara et al., a multilayer perceptron). We notethat this approach can be regarded as a wrapper method (see Sect. 4).
5.3 Pre-training
In pre-training methods, unlabelled data is used to guide the decision boundary towards
potentially interesting regions before applying supervised training.
This approach naturally applies to deep learning methods, where each layer of the hierar-
chical model can be considered a latent representation of the input data. The most commonlyknown algorithms corresponding to this paradigm are deep belief networks andstacked
autoencoders . Both methods are based on artiﬁcial neural networks and aim to guide the
parameters (weights) of a network towards interesting regions in model space using theunlabelled data, before ﬁne-tuning the parameters with the labelled data.
Pre-training approaches have deep roots in the ﬁeld of deep learning. Since the early 2000s,
neural networks with multiple hidden layers (deep neural networks) have been gaining anincreasing amount of attention. However, due to their high number of tunable parameters,training these networks has often been challenging: convergence tended to be slow, and trainednetworks were prone to poor generalization (Erhan et al. 2010 ). Early on, these problems
were commonly addressed by employing unsupervised pre-training methods. Since then, thishas been mostly superseded by the application of weight sharing, regularization methods anddifferent activation functions. Consequently, the work we cover in this section mainly stemsfrom the ﬁrst decade of the 2000s. However, the underlying principles still apply, and arestill used in other methods (such as ladder networks, see Sect. 6.2.2 ).
Deep belief networks consist of multiple stacked restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) ,
which are trained layer-by-layer with unlabelled data in a greedy fashion (Hinton et al. 2006 ).
The resulting weights are then used as the initialization for a deep neural network with thesame architecture augmented by an additional output layer, enabling the model to be trainedin a supervised manner on the labelled data.
Stacked autoencoders are very similar to deep belief networks, but they use autoencoders
as their base models instead of RBMs. The autoencoders are trained layer-by-layer, where theencoding h(x)produced by each autoencoder is passed as the input to the next autoencoder,
which is then trained to reconstruct it with minimal error. Finally, these trained autoencodersare combined, an output layer is added (as in deep belief networks), and the resulting networkis trained on the labelled data in a supervised manner. The paradigm works with multipletypes of autoencoders, including denoising and contractive autoencoders (Vincent et al. 2008 ;
Rifai et al. 2011b ).
Based on an empirical analysis of deep belief networks and stacked autoencoders, Erhan
et al. ( 2010 ) suggested that unsupervised pre-training guides the neural network model
towards regions in model space that provide better generalization. Deep neural networksare often motivated from the perspective that they learn a higher-level representation of thedata at each layer. Thus, each layer of the network can be considered to contain a differ-ent representation of the input data. Both deep belief networks and stacked autoencoders
123