422 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
l/summationdisplay
i=1(ˆyi−yi)2+n/summationdisplay
i=l+1ˆy2
i+λU·n/summationdisplay
i=1n/summationdisplay
j=1Wij·/parenleftBigg
ˆyi√Dii−ˆyj/radicalbigDjj/parenrightBigg2
,
where λUgoverns the weight of the penalization of inconsistencies in label predictions
between neighbours in the graph.
Note that, like for the min-cut and MRF objectives, the last term of the objective function
can be expressed using matrix notation. The only difference is that LGC uses the normalized
graph Laplacian ˜L=D−1
2·L·D−1
2instead of the unnormalized Laplacian L=D−W
in that term. Like Gaussian random ﬁelds, this formalization admits a closed-form solutionand a relatively efﬁcient iterative approach to optimization. In this algorithm, the label vector
ˆy
t+1at iteration t+1 is calculated based on that at iteration t, using the update rule
ˆyt+1=α·˜L·ˆyt+(1−α)·y,
where yis 0 for the unlabelled data points, and αgoverns the relative importance of the
calculated label vector versus the base label vector y. This algorithm is often referred to as
label spreading .
7.2.5 Further research on graph-based inference
The previously described approaches, and in particular label propagation, have been the de
facto standard approach to the inference phase in graph-based semi-supervised classiﬁca-
tion. Several variants and extensions to the approach have been proposed, which we brieﬂysummarize here.
Baluja et al. ( 2008 ) applied graph-based methods to recommender systems (in particular,
video suggestions to users). They proposed adsorption , a heuristic algorithm for predicting
the label ˆy
iof node iby performing a random walk starting at node vi. At each step in the
random walk, the process can either continue to the next step ( continue ), accept the label of
a labelled node as the prediction ( injection ), or explicitly predict no label ( abandonment ).
The last option corresponds to a dummy prediction, which speciﬁcally indicates that thelearning algorithm is unable to produce a conﬁdent prediction. The option chosen by thealgorithm is dependent on two hyperparameters governing the relative frequencies of thethree options. Heuristic approaches to hyperparameter optimization have been proposed byBaluja et al. ( 2008 ) and Talukdar et al. ( 2008 ). The algorithm has been successfully applied
to video recommendation, but is difﬁcult to analyze theoretically, due to its many heuristiccomponents. Talukdar and Crammer ( 2009 ) found that there is no objective function that is
minimized by the adsorption algorithm, and proposed a modiﬁcation to the algorithm forwhich such an objective function does exist.
The previously described graph-based methods can be sensitive to class imbalance (Zhu
2008 ). Several approaches have been proposed to mitigate this problem. Zhu et al. ( 2003 )
suggested to adjust the classiﬁcation threshold such that the predicted label proportionscorrespond to predeﬁned label proportions. Wang et al. ( 2008a ) developed an optimization
scheme that is less sensitive to noise in the true labels and that mitigates the problem ofsensitivity to class imbalance by altering the inﬂuence of labelled samples based on the labelproportions. They modiﬁed the objective function to optimize over real-valued predictions aswell as binary label assignments; their approach penalizes the difference between real-valuedand binary predictions. It then proceeds to optimize the objective function by optimizing,in an alternating fashion, the real-valued and binary label assignments. Later, Wang et al.(2013 ) considered the same approach from a graph max-cut perspective.
123