386 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
The self-training paradigm admits a multitude of design decisions, including the selection
of data to pseudo-label, the re-use of pseudo-labelled data in later iterations of the algorithm,and stopping criteria (see, e.g. Rosenberg et al. 2005 ; Triguero et al. 2015 ). The selection
procedure for data to be pseudo-labelled is of particular importance, since it determineswhich data end up in the training set for the classiﬁer. In typical self-training settings, wherethis selection is made based on prediction conﬁdence, the quality of the conﬁdence esti-mates signiﬁcantly inﬂuences algorithm performance. In particular, the ranking of predictionprobabilities for the unlabelled samples should reﬂect the true conﬁdence ranking.
If well-calibrated probabilistic predictions are available, the respective probabilities can
be used directly. In this case, the self-training approach is iterative and not incremental, aslabel probabilities for unlabelled data points are re-estimated in each step. In that case, theapproach becomes similar to expectation-maximization (EM; Dempster et al. 1977 ). It has
been particularly well studied in the context of naïve Bayes classiﬁers, which are inherently
probabilistic (Nigam and Ghani 2000 ; Nigam et al. 2000 ,2006 ). Wu et al. ( 2012b ) recently
applied semi-supervised EM with a naïve Bayes classiﬁer to the problem of detecting fakeproduct reviews on e-commerce websites.
Algorithms that do not natively support robust probabilistic predictions may require adap-
tations to beneﬁt from self-training. Decision trees are a prime example of this: without anymodiﬁcations or pruning, prediction probability estimates, which are generally calculatedfrom the fraction of samples in a leaf with a certain label, are generally of low quality. Thiscan be mainly attributed to the fact that most decision tree learning algorithms explicitlyattempt to minimize the impurity in tree nodes, thereby encouraging small leaves and highlybiased probability estimates (Provost and Domingos 2003 ). Tanha et al. ( 2017 ) attempted to
overcome this problem in two distinct ways. Firstly, they applied several existing methods,such as grafting and Laplace correction, to directly improve prediction probability estimates.Secondly, they used a local distance-based measure to determine the conﬁdence rankingbetween instances: the prediction conﬁdence of an unlabelled data point is based on theabsolute difference in the Mahalanobis distances between that point and the labelled datafrom each class. They showed improvements in performance of both decision trees andrandom forests (ensembles of decision trees) using this method (Tanha et al. 2017 ).
Leistner et al. ( 2009 ) also utilized self-training to improve random forests. Instead of
labelling the unlabelled data x∈X
Uwith the label predicted to be most likely, they pseudo-
label each unlabelled data point independently for each tree according to the estimatedposterior distribution p(y|x). Furthermore, they proposed a stopping criterion based on the
out-of-bag-error: when the out-of-bag-error (which is an unbiased estimate of the general-ization error) increases, training is stopped.
The base learners in self-training are by deﬁnition agnostic to the presence of the wrapper
method. Consequently, they have to be completely re-trained in each self-training iteration.However, when a classiﬁer can be trained incrementally (i.e. optimizing the objective functionover individual data points or subsets of the given data), an iterative pseudo-labelling approachsimilar to self-training can be applied. Instead of re-training the entire algorithm in eachiteration, data points can be pseudo-labelled throughout the training process. This approachw a sa p p l i e dt on e u r a ln e t w o r k sb yL e e( 2013 ), who proposed the pseudo-label approach.
Since the pseudo-labels predicted in the earlier training stages are generally less reliable,the weight of the pseudo-labelled data is increased over time. The pseudo-label approach
exhibits clear similarities to self-training, but differs in the sense that the classiﬁer is notre-trained after each pseudo-labelling step: instead, it is ﬁne-tuned with new pseudo-labelleddata, and therefore technically deviates from the wrapper method paradigm.
123