Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 405
activations of the unperturbed and the perturbed network, respectively. The cost function of
the pseudo-ensemble for neural networks then becomes
E
ξ∼/Xi1/bracketleftBigg
1
l·l/summationdisplay
i=1L(˜fθ(xi;ξ),yi)/bracketrightBigg
+ E
ξ∼/Xi1/bracketleftBigg
1
n·n/summationdisplay
i=1K/summationdisplay
k=2λk·Vk/parenleftBig
fk
θ(xi),˜fk
θ(xi;ξ)/parenrightBig/bracketrightBigg
,
where the consistency loss Vkpenalizes differences between the activations of the unper-
turbed and perturbed networks at the k-th layer for the same input; λkis the relative weight
of that particular cost term.2Bachman et al. propose to gradually increase each ˘kover time,
in effect placing more weight on the supervised objective in early iterations. One particu-larly prominent method of inducing noise is dropout , which randomly sets weights to zero
(i.e. removes connections in the neural network) in each training iteration (Srivastava et al.2014 ). In its originally proposed form, it was only applied to the supervised loss component.
However, Wager et al. ( 2013 ) and Bachman et al. ( 2014 ) showed that dropout can be readily
applied to unlabelled data as well.
The framework proposed by Bachman et al. is not limited to semi-supervised settings:
the supervised term in the loss function can be applied to any supervised learning problem.Furthermore, a similar approach could be applied to other learning algorithms than neuralnetworks, although the per-layer activation comparison would have to be replaced by asuitable alternative. Of course, since neural networks are entirely parametrized by connectionweights, they offer a relatively straightforward implementation of model perturbation.
6.2.5 5-model
Instead of comparing the activations of the unperturbed parent model with those of the
perturbed models in the cost function, one can also compare the perturbed models directly.A simple variant of this approach, where two perturbed neural network models are trained,was suggested by Laine and Aila ( 2017 ). They use dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014 )a st h e
perturbation process, and penalize the differences in the ﬁnal-layer activations of the twonetworks using squared loss. The weight of the unsupervised term in the cost function startsat zero, and is gradually increased. This approach, which they name the /Pi1-model, can be
seen as a simple variant of pseudo-ensembles.
6.2.6 Temporal ensembling
Since the noise process used in the methods described thus far is stochastic, the entire neural
network model can be considered a stochastic model. With the /Pi1-model, the network is
regularized by penalizing the difference in output of two perturbed network models, drawnfrom the same distribution, on the same input. This idea can be extended to more than twoperturbed models. Such an approach was taken by Sajjadi et al. ( 2016 ), who additionally
perturbed the input data with random transformations. Of course, such pairwise compar-isons will increase the running time of each training iteration quadratically in the number
2Bachman et al. ( 2014 ) consider distributions over the input data and consequently use expectations in their
formalism; for consistency within this survey, we replaced these expectations by averages over the given data.
123