Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-019-05855-6
A survey on semi-supervised learning
Jesper E. van Engelen1·Holger H. Hoos1,2
Received: 3 December 2018 / Revised: 20 September 2019 / Accepted: 29 September 2019 /
Published online: 15 November 2019© The Author(s) 2019
Abstract
Semi-supervised learning is the branch of machine learning concerned with using labelledas well as unlabelled data to perform certain learning tasks. Conceptually situated betweensupervised and unsupervised learning, it permits harnessing the large amounts of unlabelleddata available in many use cases in combination with typically smaller sets of labelled data.In recent years, research in this area has followed the general trends observed in machinelearning, with much attention directed at neural network-based models and generative learn-ing. The literature on the topic has also expanded in volume and scope, now encompassing abroad spectrum of theory, algorithms and applications. However, no recent surveys exist tocollect and organize this knowledge, impeding the ability of researchers and engineers aliketo utilize it. Filling this void, we present an up-to-date overview of semi-supervised learn-ing methods, covering earlier work as well as more recent advances. We focus primarily onsemi-supervised classiﬁcation, where the large majority of semi-supervised learning researchtakes place. Our survey aims to provide researchers and practitioners new to the ﬁeld as wellas more advanced readers with a solid understanding of the main approaches and algorithmsdeveloped over the past two decades, with an emphasis on the most prominent and currentlyrelevant work. Furthermore, we propose a new taxonomy of semi-supervised classiﬁcationalgorithms, which sheds light on the different conceptual and methodological approaches forincorporating unlabelled data into the training process. Lastly, we show how the fundamentalassumptions underlying most semi-supervised learning algorithms are closely connected toeach other, and how they relate to the well-known semi-supervised clustering assumption.
Keywords Semi-supervised learning ·Machine learning ·Classiﬁcation
Editor: Tom Fawcett.
B Jesper E. van Engelen
jesper.van.engelen@gmail.com
Holger H. Hoos
hh@liacs.nl
1Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
2Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
123