398 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
Initial efforts showed promising results in applying S3VMs, but only to small data sets.
For instance, Bennett and Demiriz ( 1999 ) proposed to use the L1 norm instead of the L2 norm
in the objective function and posed the problem as a mixed integer programming problem.The earliest widely used optimization approach was introduced by Joachims ( 1999 ), whose
approach for solving the optimization problem starts with a random assignment of ˆy
Uand
al o wv a l u ef o r C/prime. Each iteration of the algorithm then consists of three steps. First, the
supervised SVM optimization problem corresponding to the current label assignment ˆyUis
solved. Next, the algorithm inverts the labels of each pair of data points for which this inversionimproves the objective function, until no more such pairs exist. Finally, C
/primeis increased. The
algorithm terminates when C/primereaches a predeﬁned value speciﬁed by the user.
Other approaches to solving S3VMs have been put forward. For instance, several stud-
ies have proposed convex relaxations of the objective function, which can be solved usingsemideﬁnite programming methods. The earliest such approach was introduced by de Bieand Cristianini ( 2004 ,2006 ) and later extended to the multiclass setting by Xu and Schuur-
mans ( 2005 ). However, due to their time complexity, these approaches do not scale to large
amounts of data.
Chapelle et al. ( 2008 ) provided an overview of optimization procedures for S3VMs up
until 2008 and broadly categorize S3VM optimization methods into two categories: com-
binatorial methods , ﬁnding the label assignment ˆy
Uthat minimizes the objective function,
andcontinuous methods , directly solving the optimization problem using label assignments
ˆyi=sign(w/intercal·xi+b). All the approaches we have thus far described fall into the combinatorial
category. However, the formulation in optimization problem 2corresponds to the continuous
approach; it underlies, for example, the concave-convex procedure , which decomposes the
non-convex objective function into a convex and a concave component, and iteratively solvesthe optimization problem by replacing the concave component with a linear approximationat the current solution (Chapelle et al. 2008 ; Collobert et al. 2006 ).
Other continuous methods make use of the fact that problem 2can be reformulated as an
optimization problem without constraints. This stems from the fact that, if a labelled pointx
i∈XLdoes not violate the margin, then ξi=0 in the optimal solution. If it does violate
the margin, then ξi=1−yi·(w/intercal·xi+b). For an unlabelled data point xi∈XU,ξi=0i f
it does not violate the margin, and otherwise, ξi=1−|w/intercal·xi+b|. Thus, the optimization
problem can be reformulated as
minimize
w,b1
2·| |w||2+C·l/summationdisplay
i=1max(0,1−yi·f(xi))
+C/prime·n/summationdisplay
i=l+1max(0,1−|f(xi)|),(3)
where f(xi)=w/intercal·xi+b.
This approach underlies ∇TSVM by Chapelle and Zien ( 2005 ), which is based on a smooth
approximation of the object function in Eq. 3obtained by squaring the loss for the labelled
data points, and by approximating the loss for the unlabelled data points with an exponentialfunction. This optimization problem is then solved by gradient descent, where C
/primeis gradually
increased from some value close to zero to its intended value. Chapelle et al. ( 2006a )t a k ea
similar approach, where they keep C/primeﬁxed and use a continuous approach to transform the
objective function from using only the labelled data to the ﬁnal objective function.
As is the case for most semi-supervised learning methods, S3VMs are not guaranteed
to perform better than their supervised counterparts (Singh et al. 2009 ). Speciﬁcally, if one
123