416 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
7.1 A general framework for graph-based methods
Graph-based semi-supervised learning methods generally involve three separate steps: graph
creation, graph weighting and inference (Jebara et al. 2009 ; Liu et al. 2012 ). In the ﬁrst step,
nodes (representing data points) in the graph are connected to each other, based on somesimilarity measure. In the second step, the resulting edges are weighted, yielding a weightmatrix. The ﬁrst two steps together are commonly referred to as the graph construction phase .
After graph construction, we have a graph consisting of a set of nodes V={v
1,...,v n},
corresponding to the data points, and an n×nweight matrix Wcontaining the edge weights
for all pairs of nodes, where an edge weight of zero indicates that no edge is present. Inthe remainder of this section, we use the terms node anddata point interchangeably in the
context of graph-based methods.
Once the graph is constructed, it is used to obtain predictions ˆy
Ufor the unlabelled
data points. The general form of objective functions for transductive graph-based methodscontains one component for penalizing predicted labels that do not match the true label,and another component for penalizing differences in the label predictions for connected datapoints. Formally, given a supervised loss function /lscriptfor the labelled data and an unsupervised
loss function /lscript
Ufor pairs of labelled or unlabelled data points, transductive graph-based
methods attempt to ﬁnd a labelling ˆythat minimizes
λ·l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(ˆyi,yi)+n/summationdisplay
i=1n/summationdisplay
j=1Wij·/lscriptU(ˆyi,ˆyj), (8)
where λgoverns the relative importance of the supervised term. Furthermore, some graph-
based methods impose an additional unary regularization term on the unlabelled predictions.This general framework for graph-based methods allows for a multitude of variations in eachof its steps. The formulation is commonplace in graph-based methods, and most graph-basedinference algorithms can be shown to ﬁt into this framework (Bengio et al. 2006 ; Subramanya
and Talukdar 2014 ). It is also present in the manifold regularization framework (Belkin et al.
2005 ) discussed in Sect. 6.3.
For graph construction, most graph-based methods rely on the local similarity between
data points in the input space, connecting data points with similar features. In that case,they implicitly rely on the smoothness assumption in addition to the manifold assumption. Aparallel can be drawn between such graph-based methods and supervised nearest-neighbourmethods. The latter predict the label of an unlabelled data point by looking at the labels ofsimilar (i.e. nearby) labelled data points; graph-based methods also consider the similaritybetween pairs of unlabelled data points. Using that information, labels can be propagatedtransitively from a labelled data point to an unlabelled data point through other data points,both labelled and unlabelled. In that light, some graph-based methods can be seen as semi-supervised extensions to nearest-neighbour methods.
The spectrum of graph-based semi-supervised learning methods can be effectively struc-
tured based on the different approaches in the two main phases, i.e. graph construction and
inference . Early work on graph-based methods focused mainly on the second phase, leaving
graph construction a scarcely studied topic. Zhu ( 2008 ) noted that this imbalance might be
unjust, and that graph construction can have signiﬁcant impact on classiﬁer performance.Later work has addressed this imbalance, and graph construction has since become an areaof substantial research interest (de Sousa et al. 2013 ).
Graph-based transductive methods were introduced in the early 2000s, and graph-based
inference methods were particularly intensively studied during the subsequent decade. A
123