Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 385
A signiﬁcant advantage of wrapper methods is that they can be used with virtually any
supervised base learner. The supervised base learner can be entirely unaware of the wrappermethod, which simply passes pseudo-labelled samples to the base learner as if they wereregular labelled samples. Although some wrapper methods require the base learner to provideprobabilistic predictions, many wrapper methods relying on multiple base learners do not.For any particular wrapper method, the semi-supervised learning assumptions underlying itare dependent on the base learners that are used. In that sense, a wrapper method cannot beconsidered a learning method on its own: it only becomes a complete learning method whenit is combined with a particular set of base learners.
A comprehensive survey of wrapper methods was published recently by Triguero et al.
(2015 ). In addition to providing an overview of such methods, they also proposed a catego-
rization and taxonomy of wrapper methods, which is based on (1) how many classiﬁers areused, (2) whether different types of classiﬁers are used, and (3) whether they use single-viewor multi-view data (i.e. whether the data is split into multiple feature subsets). This taxonomyprovides valuable insight into the space of wrapper methods.
We present a less complex taxonomy, focused on the three relatively independent types of
wrapper methods that have been studied in the literature. Firstly, we consider self-training ,
which uses one supervised classiﬁer that is iteratively re-trained on its own most conﬁdentpredictions. Secondly, we consider co-training , an extension of self-training to multiple
classiﬁers that are iteratively re-trained on each other’s most conﬁdent predictions. Theclassiﬁers are supposed to be sufﬁciently diverse, which is usually achieved by operatingon different subsets of the given objects or features. Lastly, we consider pseudo-labelled
boosting methods . Like traditional boosting methods, they build a classiﬁer ensemble by
constructing individual classiﬁers sequentially, where each individual classiﬁer is trained onboth labelled data and the most conﬁdent predictions of the previous classiﬁers on unlabelleddata.
4.1 Self-training
Self-training methods (sometimes also called “self-learning” methods) are the most basicof pseudo-labelling approaches (Triguero et al. 2015 ). They consist of a single supervised
classiﬁer that is iteratively trained on both labelled data and data that has been pseudo-labelledin previous iterations of the algorithm.
At the beginning of the self-training procedure, a supervised classiﬁer is trained on only
the labelled data. The resulting classiﬁer is used to obtain predictions for the unlabelleddata points. Then, the most conﬁdent of these predictions are added to the labelled data set,and the supervised classiﬁer is re-trained on both the original labelled data and the newlyobtained pseudo-labelled data. This procedure is typically iterated until no more unlabelleddata remain.
Self-training was ﬁrst proposed by Yarowsky ( 1995 ) as an approach to word sense dis-
ambiguation in text documents, predicting the meaning of words based on their context.Since then, several applications and variations of self-training have been put forward. Forinstance, Rosenberg et al. ( 2005 ) applied self-training to object detection problems, and
showed improved performance over a state-of-the-art (at that time) object detection model.Dópido et al. ( 2013 ) developed a self-training approach for hyperspectral image classiﬁ-
cation. They used domain knowledge to select a set of candidate unlabelled samples, andpseudo-labelled the most informative of these samples with the predictions made by thetrained classiﬁer.
123