408 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
ˆx=λ·x+(1−λ)·x/prime,
ˆy=λ·y+(1−λ)·y/prime.
In their experiments, Zhang et al. ( 2018 ) report substantial performance improvements in
several training scenarios. Their best results are achieved when the beta distribution hyper-parameter, α, is relatively low, causing the distribution to be strongly biased towards the
extremes (i.e., λ=0a n dλ=1). Consequently, a large majority of interpolated samples will
lie very close to either of the two selected data points.
The interpolation used in mixup can be applied to unlabelled samples as well, by interpo-
lating the predicted labels rather than the true labels. Verma et al. ( 2019 ) combined mixup with
the mean teacher approach (see Sect. 6.2.7 ), determining the target label for the augmented
data point as the linear interpolation of the predictions of the teacher model. Interestingly,the interpolation was only applied to pairs of unlabelled data points, and not to mixed pairsof labelled and unlabelled data points. Berthelot et al. ( 2019 ) proposed a semi-supervised
neural network composed of several supervised and semi-supervised components, includ-ing a semi-supervised extension of mixup. In selecting data points for interpolation, theydo not distinguish between labelled and unlabelled data points. For labelled data points,the true label is then used in interpolation; for unlabelled data points, the predicted label isused.
Mixup exhibits similarities to graph-based methods (see Sects. 6.3and 7): rather than
employing pointwise perturbations, they apply perturbations based on combinations of dif-ferent data points. Unlike in graph-based methods, however, the pairwise similarity betweendata points is not taken into account. The precise implications of this remain an interestingavenue for future research.
6.3 Manifolds
Perturbation-based methods make direct use of the smoothness assumption, penalizing dif-ferences in the behaviour of a classiﬁer under slight changes in the input or in the classiﬁeritself. However, one can imagine that not all minor changes to the input should yield similaroutputs. In particular, if the data lie on lower-dimensional manifolds, one can expect theclassiﬁer to be insensitive only to minor changes along the manifold. This observation corre-sponds to the manifold assumption, which forms the basis of a signiﬁcant body of intrinsicallysemi-supervised learning algorithms.
Anm-dimensional manifold is a subspace of the original input space that locally resem-
bles Euclidean space R
m. Reiterating the deﬁnition from Sect. 2, the manifold assumption
states that (a) the input space is composed of multiple lower-dimensional manifolds onwhich all data points lie and (b) data points lying on the same lower-dimensional manifoldhave the same label. Formally, the ﬁrst part of the manifold assumption states that eachconditional probability distribution p(x|y)has a structure corresponding to the union of
one or more Riemannian manifolds
M. The second part, then, states that points on the
same Riemannian manifold Mshould have the same label. If these assumptions hold,
information about the manifolds present in the input space can prove useful to classiﬁca-tion.
In this section, we consider two general types of methods that are based on the manifold
assumption. Firstly, we consider manifold regularization techniques , which deﬁne a graph
over the data points and implicitly penalize differences in predictions for data points withsmall geodesic distance. Secondly, we consider manifold approximation techniques ,w h i c h
123