Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 431
see Sect. 6). Graph-based methods (Sects. 6.3and 7) have been extensively researched over
the past two decades. They are perhaps the most intuitive semi-supervised learning method,explicitly incorporating the similarity of different unlabelled data points in a principled way.However, they still pose computational challenges. In recent years, semi-supervised learninghas developed along similar lines as supervised learning: notably, there has been a strong focuson semi-supervised neural networks, in the form of unsupervised preprocessing (Sect. 5.3)
as well as semi-supervised regularization (Sect. 6.2). Additionally, deep generative models
have been extended to the semi-supervised setting (Sect. 6.4).
From our perspective, one of the most important issues to be resolved in semi-supervised
learning is the potential performance degradation caused by the introduction of unlabelleddata. Although this has received relatively little attention in the literature (likely due to pub-lication bias, as noted by Zhu 2008 ), many semi-supervised learning methods only perform
better than their supervised counterparts or base learners in speciﬁc cases (Li and Zhou 2015 ;
Singh et al. 2009 ). In other cases, the supervised baselines used for empirically evaluating
the performance of semi-supervised learning methods are relatively weak, causing a skewedperspective on the beneﬁts of incorporating unlabelled data (Oliver et al. 2018 ). Moreover,
the potential performance degradation is generally much more signiﬁcant than the potentialimprovement, especially in machine learning problems where strong performance is achievedwith purely supervised learning. We believe that this is one of the main reasons for the dearthof applications of semi-supervised learning methods in practice when compared to supervisedlearning.
Notable exceptions are the recent advances in semi-supervised neural networks, which are
generally perturbation-based (see Sect. 6.2). They incorporate the relatively weak smooth-
ness assumption (i.e. minor variations in the input space should only cause minor variations
in the output space). Empirically, these methods have been shown to consistently outper-form their supervised counterparts. A considerable advantage of using neural networks forsemi-supervised learning is that it is relatively straightforward to incorporate unsupervisedloss terms into the cost function, which can then be optimized using backpropagation. Thisﬂexibility also accomodates the incorporation of more complex cost terms, facilitating, forexample, graph-based regularization. For these reasons, we expect that the popularity ofsemi-supervised neural networks will continue to grow for the foreseeable future.
A second potential remedy for the lack of robustness of semi-supervised learning methods
lies in the application of automated machine learning (AutoML) to the semi-supervised
setting. Recently, there has been a steep increase in interest in the automatic selection andconﬁguration of learning algorithms for a given classiﬁcation problem. These approachesinclude meta-learning and neural architecture search as well as automated algorithm selectionand hyperparameter optimization. While AutoML techniques have been prominently andsuccessfully applied to supervised learning (see, e.g. Elsken et al. 2019 ;F e u r e re ta l . 2015 ;
Thornton et al. 2013 ), there has been no application to semi-supervised learning so far.
Another important step towards the adoption of semi-supervised in practice is the develop-
ment of standardized software packages. Several highly popular toolkits exist for supervisedlearning, such as scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011 ), but there is much less standardization
in the ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning. We note that some generic toolkits do exist; theKEEL software package includes a semi-supervised learning module (Triguero et al. 2017 ),
and implementations of some transductive graph-based methods exist in scikit-learn .F o r
neural networks, it is typically relatively straightforward to implement semi-supervised lossterms within popular software packages such as PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2017 )a n d TensorFlow
(Abadi et al. 2016 ).
123