Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 417
substantial portion of the research conducted in this ﬁeld is covered in the semi-supervised
learning survey by Zhu ( 2008 ) and in the doctoral thesis of Zhu ( 2005 ). Furthermore, Sub-
ramanya and Talukdar ( 2014 ) recently published a book on graph-based methods.
Following the general chronological order of research in the ﬁeld of graph-based methods,
we begin by outlining different approaches to solving the inference problem. After that, weprovide an overview of research on graph construction.
7.2 Inference in graphs
The inference process in transductive methods consists of forming predictions ˆyUfor the
unlabelled data points XU. If the predicted labels of the labelled data are not ﬁxed to the
true labels in the inference process, optimization proceeds over the entire set of predictedlabels ˆy.
Many approaches have been suggested for tackling the optimization of Expression 8;
generally, these differ in the speciﬁc choices of the loss functions /lscriptand/lscript
Uand the trade-off
parameter λ. Furthermore, some methods infer only the most likely label assignment ˆy, while
others estimate the marginal probability distributions. Jointly, these variations give rise to aplethora of different graph-based inference methods.
Although the general objective function from Expression 8applies to the multiclass setting
as well, many graph-based methods do not naturally extend beyond binary classiﬁcation. Theinference methods we focus on in the following mostly consider the binary classiﬁcation case.
7.2.1 Hard label assignments: graph min-cut
The ﬁrst graph-based semi-supervised classiﬁcation method was proposed by Blum andChawla ( 2001 ), who experimented with graph construction using a k-nearest neighbours
algorithm and the /epsilon1-neighbourhood (connecting pairs of data points with distance smaller
than/epsilon1). They kept the edge weights ﬁxed and uniform, but experimented with changing the
weight of edges between unlabelled data points relative to other edges.
Once the graph is constructed, the optimization problem is approached from a min-cut
perspective. Speciﬁcally, a single source node v
+is added and connected with inﬁnite weight
to the positive data points, and a single sink node v−, connected with inﬁnite weight to the
negative data points. Determining the minimum cut, then, corresponds to ﬁnding a set ofedges with minimal combined weight that, when removed, result in a graph with no pathsfrom the source node to the sink node. All unlabelled nodes in the resulting graph that arein the component containing v
+are labelled as positive, and all unlabelled nodes that are in
the component containing v−are labelled as negative.
The min-cut approach can be seen to minimize the general objective function of Expres-
sion 8asλapproaches inﬁnity (ﬁxing the predictions on labelled data points to their true
labels) and /lscriptU(ˆyi,ˆyj)= 1{ˆyi/negationslash=ˆyj},w h e r e 1is the indicator function. Note that, assuming
labels 0 and 1 are used, the loss function for unlabelled data corresponds to quadratic cost,i.e.
1{ˆyi/negationslash=ˆyj}=(ˆyi−ˆyj)2. We can write the corresponding objective function as
λ·l/summationdisplay
i=1(ˆyi−yi)2+n/summationdisplay
i=1n/summationdisplay
j=1Wij·(ˆyi−ˆyj)2. (9)
Note that this objective function can be written in an alternate form, using the graph
Laplacian L=D−W(where Dis the diagonal matrix containing the degree for node iat
Dii) as follows:
123