Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 413
critical assumption that the assumed model is correct. If the model is not correct, i.e. the true
distribution p(x,y)does not conform with the assumed model, unlabelled data may hurt
performance rather than improve it.
In real-world applications, the model correctness assumption rarely holds. Therefore,
using mixture models for generative modelling can prove difﬁcult. Some approaches exist tomitigate these problems; for example, Nigam et al. ( 2000 ) vary the inﬂuence of unlabelled
data in EM. However, the rigidity of mixture models has caused attention to shift to moreﬂexible classes of generative models.
6.4.2 Generative adversarial networks
Recently, a new type of learning paradigm known as generative adversarial networks (GAN)
has been proposed, based on the idea of simultaneously constructing generative and discrim-inative learners (Goodfellow et al. 2014a ). Generally implemented using neural networks,
this approach simultaneously trains a generative model, tasked with generating data pointsthat are difﬁcult to distinguish from real data, and a discriminative classiﬁer, tasked withpredicting whether a given data point is ‘real’ or ‘fake’ (i.e. artiﬁcially generated).
The discriminator D, with parameters θ
(D), and generator G, with parameters θ(G),a r e
trained simultaneously to optimize a single objective function. Crucially, the discriminator’sgoal is to minimize the objective function, whereas the generator’s goal is to maximize it. The
discriminative function Dexpresses the probability that a data point xis real; the generative
function Ggenerates a data point xfrom a noise vector zsampled from some distribution
p(z). The cost function then consists of two terms; the ﬁrst of these expresses the ability
of the discriminator to identify true data points as such, and its optimization involves onlythe discriminator. The second term expresses the discriminator’s ability to identify fake datapoints, and its optimization involves both the discriminator and the generator. Formally,treating the real data as samples from some underlying probability distribution p(x),t h e
optimization problem can be formulated as
min
Gmax
DV(D,G)=Ex∼p(x)[logD(x)]+ Ez∼p(z)[log(1−D(G(z))], (7)
where the parametrizations of Dbyθ(D)andGbyθ(G)are omitted for conciseness.
The generator and the discriminator are trained in an alternating fashion. In each training
step, multiple real data points are taken from the training data, and multiple fake data pointsare generated using Gby sampling from p(z). The respective parameters θ
(D)andθ(R)of
the discriminator and the generator are then adjusted independently to optimize the empiricalobjective function over the batches of samples using gradient descent (Goodfellow 2017 ).
GANs are naturally unsupervised: they consist of a generative model, trained on unlabelled
data, in combination with a discriminative classiﬁer used to assess the quality of the generator.However, extensions exist to support classiﬁcation in GANs. Proposed but not implementedin the original GAN paper (Goodfellow et al. 2014a ), these methods also use a generator
and a discriminator, but train the discriminator to identify different classes instead of onlydistinguishing real from fake data points. As such, GANs naturally extend to the semi-supervised case: the purely discriminative component of the loss term (the ﬁrst cost term inEq.7) can easily be extended to incorporate true labels when these are known.
Springenberg ( 2015 ) proposed to extend the GAN discriminator to use |
Y|outputs, cor-
responding to the |Y|possible classes. In their method, named CatGAN , they adapt the GAN
cost function to include a cross-entropy cost term that penalizes misclassiﬁcations of realdata by the discriminator. The ability of the discriminator to distinguish real from fake data
123