378 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
boundary should not pass through high-density regions. The assumption is deﬁned over
p(x), the true distribution of the input data. When considering a limited set of samples from
this distribution, it essentially means that the decision boundary should lie in an area wherefew data points are observed. In that light, the low-density assumption is closely related tothe smoothness assumption; in fact, it can be considered the counterpart of the smoothnessassumption for the underlying data distribution.
Suppose that a low-density area exists, i.e. an area R⊂
Xwhere p(x)is low. Then very
few observations are expected to be contained in R, and it is thus unlikely that any pair of
similar data points in Ris observed. If we place the decision boundary in this low-density
area, the smoothness assumption is not violated, since it only concerns pairs of similar datapoints. For high-density areas, on the other hand, many data points can be expected. Thus,placing the decision boundary in a high-density region violates the smoothness assumption,since the predicted labels would then be dissimilar for similar data points.
The converse is also true: if the smoothness assumption holds, then any two data points
that lie close together have the same label. Therefore, in any densely populated area of theinput space, all data points are expected to have the same label. Consequently, a decisionboundary can be constructed that passes only through low-density areas in the input space,thus satisfying the low-density assumption as well. Due to their close practical relation, wedepict the low-density assumption and the smoothness assumption in a single illustration inFig. 2.
2.1.3 Manifold assumption
In machine learning problems where the data can be represented in Euclidean space, the
observed data points in the high-dimensional input space Rdare usually concentrated along
lower-dimensional substructures. These substructures are known as manifolds : topological
spaces that are locally Euclidean. For instance, when we consider a 3-dimensional input spacewhere all points lie on the surface of a sphere, the data can be said to lie on a 2-dimensionalmanifold. The manifold assumption in semi-supervised learning states that (a) the input spaceis composed of multiple lower-dimensional manifolds on which all data points lie and (b)data points lying on the same manifold have the same label. Consequently, if we are ableto determine which manifolds exist and which data points lie on which manifold, the classassignments of unlabelled data points can be inferred from the labelled data points on thesame manifold.
2.2 Connection to clustering
In semi-supervised learning research, an additional assumption that is often included is thecluster assumption , which states that data points belonging to the same cluster belong to
the same class (Chapelle et al. 2006b ). We argue, however, that the previously mentioned
assumptions and the cluster assumption are not independent of each other but, rather, thatthe cluster assumption is a generalization of the other assumptions.
Consider an input space
Xwith some objects X⊂X, drawn from the distribution p(x).
A cluster, then, is a set of data points C⊆Xthat are more similar to each other than to other
data points in X, according to some concept of similarity (Anderberg 1973 ). Determining
clusters corresponds to ﬁnding some function f:X→ Ythat maps each input in x∈Xto
a cluster with label y=f(x), where each cluster label y∈Yuniquely identiﬁes one cluster.
Since we do not have direct access to p(x)to determine a suitable clustering, we need to rely
123