Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 387
Limited studies regarding the theoretical properties of self-training algorithms exist. Haf-
fari and Sarkar ( 2007 ) performed a theoretical analysis of several variants of self-training and
showed a connection with graph-based methods. Culp and Michailidis ( 2008 ) analyzed the
convergence properties of a variant of self-training with several base learners, and consideredthe connection to graph-based methods as well.
4.2 Co-training
Co-training is an extension of self-training to multiple supervised classiﬁers. In co-training,two or more supervised classiﬁers are iteratively trained on the labelled data, adding theirmost conﬁdent predictions to the labelled data set of the other supervised classiﬁers in eachiteration. For co-training to succeed, it is important that the base learners are not too stronglycorrelated in their predictions. If they are, their potential to provide each other with usefulinformation is limited. In the literature, this condition is usually referred to as the diversity
criterion (Wang and Zhou 2010 ). Zhou and Li ( 2010 ) provided a survey of semi-supervised
learning methods relying on multiple base learners. They jointly refer to these methods asdisagreement-based methods , referring to the observation that co-training approaches exploit
disagreements between multiple learners: they exchange information through unlabelled data,for which different learners predict different labels.
To promote classiﬁer diversity, earlier co-training approaches mainly relied on the exis-
tence of multiple different views of the data, which generally correspond to distinct subsets of
the feature set. For instance, when handling video data, the data can be naturally decomposedinto visual and audio data. Such co-training methods belong to the broader class of multi-view learning approaches, which includes a broad range of supervised learning algorithms aswell. A comprehensive survey of multi-view learning was produced by Xu et al. ( 2013 ). We
cover multi-view co-training methods in Sect. 4.2.1 . In many real-world problem scenarios,
no distinct views of the data are known a priori. Single-view co-training methods addressthis problem either by automatically splitting the data into different views, or by promotingdiversity in the learning algorithms themselves; we cover these methods in Sect. 4.2.2 .W e
also brieﬂy discuss co-regularization methods, in which multiple classiﬁers are combined
into a single objective function, in Sect. 4.2.3 .
4.2.1 Multi-view co-training
The basic form of co-training was proposed by Blum and Mitchell ( 1998 ). In their seminal
paper, they proposed to construct two classiﬁers that are trained on two distinct views, i.e.subsets of features, of the given data. After each training step, the most conﬁdent predictionsfor each view are added to the set of labelled data for the other view. Blum and Mitchellapplied the co-training algorithm to the classiﬁcation for university web pages, using theweb page text and the anchor text in links to the web page from external sources as twodistinct views. This algorithm and variants thereof have been successfully applied in severalﬁelds, most notably natural language processing (Kiritchenko and Matwin 2001 ; Mihalcea
2004 ;W a n 2009 ).
The original co-training algorithm by Blum and Mitchell ( 1998 ) relies on two main
assumptions to succeed: (1) each individual subset of features should be sufﬁcient to obtaingood predictions on the given data set, and (2) the subsets of features should be conditionallyindependent given the class label. The ﬁrst assumption can be understood trivially: if oneof the two feature subsets is insufﬁcient to form good predictions, a classiﬁer using that set
123