396 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
attempt to guide the model in the extraction of these hierarchical representations, pushing
the model towards the extraction of representations that are deemed informative. From thatperspective, pre-training methods are closely related to the unsupervised feature extractionmethods described earlier: they both use unlabelled data in an attempt to extract meaningfulinformation from the input data. Crucially, however, the parameters used for unsupervisedpreprocessing can be changed in the supervised ﬁne-tuning phase of pre-training methods,whereas they remain ﬁxed after the unsupervised phase of feature extraction approaches.
6 Intrinsically semi-supervised methods
We now turn our attention to inductive learning algorithms that directly optimize an objectivefunction with components for labelled and unlabelled samples. These methods, which wecallintrinsically semi-supervised , do not rely on any intermediate steps or supervised base
learners. Usually, they are extensions of existing supervised methods to include unlabelledsamples in the objective function.
Generally, these methods rely either explicitly or implicitly on one of the semi-supervised
learning assumptions (see Sect. 2.1). For instance, maximum-margin methods rely on the
low-density assumption, and most semi-supervised neural networks rely on the smooth-ness assumption. We begin with an overview of the earliest intrinsically semi-supervisedclassiﬁcation methods, namely maximum-margin methods. Next, we discuss perturbation-based methods, which directly incorporate the smoothness assumption. These encompassmost semi-supervised neural networks. Then, we consider manifold-based techniques, whicheither explicitly or implicitly approximate the manifolds on which the data lie. Finally, weconsider generative models.
6.1 Maximum-margin methods
Maximum-margin classiﬁers attempt to maximize the distance between the given data pointsand the decision boundary. This approach corresponds to the semi-supervised low-densityassumption: when the margin between all data points and the decision boundary is large(except for some outliers), the decision boundary must be in a low-density area (Ben-Davidet al. 2009 ). Conceptually, maximum-margin methods thus lend themselves well to extension
to the semi-supervised setting: one can incorporate knowledge from the unlabelled data todetermine where the density is low and thus, where a large margin can be achieved.
6.1.1 Support vector machines
The most prominent example of a supervised maximum-margin classiﬁer is the support
vector machine (SVM) : a classiﬁcation method that attempts to maximize the distance from
the decision boundary to the points closest to it, while encouraging data points to be classiﬁedcorrectly. It was one of the ﬁrst maximum-margin approaches to be proposed in the semi-supervised setting, and it has been studied extensively since. We brieﬂy introduce supervisedSVMs, but the reader to machine learning book by Bishop ( 2006 ) for a more extensive
introduction.
The objective of an SVM is to ﬁnd a decision boundary that maximizes the margin ,w h i c h
is deﬁned as the distance between the decision boundary and the data points closest to it.The term is also commonly used to describe the area extruding from the decision boundary
123