Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 421
have been proposed for ﬁnding the solution to the harmonic function, including loopy belief
propagation and a conjugate gradient method (Zhu et al. 2003 ).
Before proposing the Gaussian random ﬁelds approach to graph-based methods, Zhu and
Ghahramani ( 2002a ) introduced the label propagation algorithm for inference on graphs. It is
an iterative algorithm that computes soft label assignments ˆyi∈Rby pushing ( propagating )
the estimated label at each node to its neighbouring nodes based on the edge weights. In otherwords, the new estimated label at each node is calculated as the weighted sum of the labelsof its neighbours. In matrix notation, let
A
ij=Wij/summationtext
vk∈N(vi)Wik
denote the transition matrix. The label propagation algorithm then consists of two steps, which
are repeated until the label assignment ˆyconverges. Starting with an initial label assignment
ˆy, which is random for the unlabelled data points and equal to the true labels for the labelled
data points:
1. Propagate labels from each node to the neighbouring nodes: ˆy=A/intercal·ˆy.
2. Reset the predictions of the labelled data points to the corresponding true labels.
Zhu ( 2005 ) showed that the algorithm is guaranteed to converge to the harmonic function
solution described earlier. They also showed that the label propagation approach can beinterpreted as a random walk with transition matrix A, which stops when a labelled node
is hit. Wu et al. ( 2012a ) cast this procedure in a framework they call partially absorbing
random walks , where they, instead of deterministically stopping when a labelled node is hit,
stochastically determine whether to stop ( absorb ) or continue the random walk. The label
propagation approach is closely related to the Markov random walks approach by Szummer
and Jaakkola ( 2002 ). Belkin et al. ( 2004 ) considered a similar objective function and provided
some theoretical analysis. Azran ( 2007 ) proposed a random walk approach, where walks
originate in unlabelled nodes and the labelled nodes are absorbing states. The probabilitythat an unlabelled data points attains a certain label is then derived from the probability that awalk starting from the unlabelled node ends up in a labelled node of the corresponding class,as the length of the random walk approaches inﬁnity.
7.2.4 Handling label noise and irregular graphs: local and global consistency
The Gaussian random ﬁelds method has two drawbacks (Subramanya and Talukdar 2014 ).
Firstly, since the true labels are clamped to the labelled data points, it does not handle labelnoise well. Secondly, in irregular graphs, the inﬂuence of nodes with a high degree is relativelylarge. An approach closely related to the Gaussian random ﬁelds method that addresses thesetwo issues was proposed by Zhou et al. ( 2004 ). It is commonly known as the local and global
consistency (LGC) method , referring to the observation that graph-based methods promote
consistency of labels on manifolds (global) and nearby in the input space (local). Note that,in the following, we assume
Y={ − 1,1}.
To address the ﬁrst issue, LCF does not clamp the true labels to the labelled data points, but
rather penalizes the squared error between the true label and the estimated label. The secondissue is addressed by regularizing the penalty term for unlabelled data points by the nodedegrees. Furthermore, predictions for the unlabelled data points are regularized by pullingthem towards zero (Bengio et al. 2006 ). We can write the corresponding objective function
in the general form as
123