Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 381
As has been observed in practice, the choice of data sets and their partitioning can have
signiﬁcant impact on the relative performance of different learning algorithms (see, e.g.Chapelle et al. 2006b ; Triguero et al. 2015 ). Some algorithms may work well when the
amount of labelled data is limited and perform poorly when more labelled data is available;others may excel on particular types of data sets but not on others. To provide a realisticevaluation of semi-supervised learning algorithms, researchers should thus evaluate theiralgorithms on a diverse suite of data sets with different quantities of labelled and unlabelleddata.
In addition to the choice of data sets and their partitioning, it is important that a strong
baseline is chosen when evaluating the performance of a semi-supervised learning method.After all, it is not particularly relevant to practitioners whether the introduction of unlabelleddata improves the performance of any particular learning algorithm. Rather, the central ques-tion is: does the introduction of unlabelled data yield a learner that is better than any otherlearner—be it supervised or semi-supervised. As pointed out by Oliver et al. ( 2018 ), this calls
for the inclusion of state-of-the-art, properly tuned supervised baselines when evaluating theperformance of semi-supervised learning algorithms.
Several studies have independently evaluated the performance of different semi-supervised
learning methods on various data sets. Chapelle et al. ( 2006b ) empirically compared eleven
diverse semi-supervised learning algorithms, using supervised support vector machines and k-
nearest neighbours as their baseline. They included semi-supervised support vector machines,label propagation and manifold regularization techniques, applying hyperparameter opti-mization for each algorithm. Comparing the performance of the algorithms on eight differentdata sets, the authors found that no algorithm uniformly outperformed the others. Substan-tial performance improvements over the baselines were observed on some data sets, whileperformance was found to be degraded on others. Relative performance also varied with theamount of unlabelled data.
Oliver et al. ( 2018 ) compared several semi-supervised neural networks, including the mean
teacher model, virtual adversarial training and a wrapper method called pseudo-label ,o n
two image classiﬁcation problems. They reported substantial performance improvementsfor most of the algorithms, and observed that the error rates typically declined as moreunlabelled data points were added (without removing any labelled data points). Performancedegradations were observed only when there was a mismatch between the classes present inthe labelled data and the classes present in the unlabelled data. These results are promisingindeed: they indicate that, in image classiﬁcation tasks, unlabelled data can be employedby neural networks to consistently improve performance. It is an interesting avenue forfuture research to investigate whether these consistent performance improvements can also beobtained for other types of data. Furthermore, it is an open question whether the assumptionsunderlying these semi-supervised neural networks could be exploited to consistently improvethe performance of other learning methods.
3 Taxonomy of semi-supervised learning methods
Over the past two decades, a broad variety of semi-supervised classiﬁcation algorithms hasbeen proposed. These methods differ in the semi-supervised learning assumptions they arebased on, in how they make use of unlabelled data, and in the way they relate to supervisedalgorithms. Existing categorizations of semi-supervised learning methods generally use asubset of these properties and are typically relatively ﬂat, thereby failing to capture similarities
123