Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 377
(a)Smoothness and low-density assumptions. (b)Manifold assumption.
Fig. 2 Illustrations of the semi-supervised learning assumptions. In each picture, a reasonable supervised
decision boundary is depicted, as well as the optimal decision boundary, which could be closely approximatedby a semi-supervised learning algorithm relying on the respective assumption
Fortunately, the previously mentioned condition appears to be satisﬁed in most learning
problems encountered in the real world, as is suggested by the successful application of semi-supervised learning methods in practice. However, the way in which p(x)andp(y|x)interact
is not always the same. This has given rise to the semi-supervised learning assumptions ,
which formalize the types of expected interaction (Chapelle et al. 2006b ). The most widely
recognized assumptions are the smoothness assumption (if two samples xandx
/primeare close
in the input space, their labels yandy/primeshould be the same), the low-density assumption
(the decision boundary should not pass through high-density areas in the input space), andthemanifold assumption (data points on the same low-dimensional manifold should have the
same label). These assumptions are the foundation of most, if not all, semi-supervised learningalgorithms, which generally depend on one or more of them being satisﬁed, either explicitly orimplicitly. Throughout this survey, we will elaborate on the underlying assumptions utilizedby each speciﬁc learning algorithm. The assumptions are explained in more detail below; a
visual representation is provided in Fig. 2.
2.1.1 Smoothness assumption
The smoothness assumption states that, for two input points x,x/prime∈Xthat are close by in
the input space, the corresponding labels y,y/primeshould be the same. This assumption is also
commonly used in supervised learning, but has an extended beneﬁt in the semi-supervisedcontext: the smoothness assumption can be applied transitively to unlabelled data. For exam-ple, assume that a labelled data point x
1∈XLand two unlabelled data points x2,x3∈XU
exist, such that x1is close to x2andx2is close to x3,b u t x1is not close to x3. Then, because
of the smoothness assumption, we can still expect x3to have the same label as x1,s i n c e
proximity—and thereby the label—is transitively propagated through x2.
2.1.2 Low-density assumption
The low-density assumption implies that the decision boundary of a classiﬁer should prefer-
ably pass through low-density regions in the input space. In other words, the decision
123