404 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
the hidden representation zkof the clean input xat layer kin the encoder. This, of course,
requires each data point to pass through the network twice: once without noise (to obtain z),
and once with noise (to obtain ˜zand the reconstructed ˆz).
The ﬁnal semi-supervised cost function of ladder networks then becomes
L(W)=l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(f(xi),yi)+n/summationdisplay
i=1K/summationdisplay
k=1ReconsCost (zk
i,ˆzk
i),
where ReconsCost (·,·)is deﬁned as the squared L2 norm of the difference between the two
normalized latent vectors and summed over the labelled and unlabelled data. For a detaileddiagram of the information ﬂow in ladder networks, which uses the same notation we do, werefer the reader to Figure 1 in the ladder network study by Pezeshki et al. ( 2016 ,p .4 ) .
Through their penalization of reconstruction errors, ladder networks effectively attempt to
push the network towards extracting interesting latent representations of the data. The methodis premised on the assumption that a latent representation h
Kthat is useful for reconstructing
xcan also facilitate the prediction of the corresponding class label. Rasmus et al. ( 2015 )
showed that ladder networks achieve state-of-the-art results on image data sets with partiallylabelled data, including MNIST. Interestingly, they also reported improvements when usingonly labelled data. Prémont-Schwarz et al. ( 2017 ) extended the ladder network architecture to
the recurrent setting by adding connections between the encoders and decoders of successiveinstances of the network.
Rasmus et al. also proposed a simpler, computationally more efﬁcient variant of ladder
networks. This method, generally referred to as the /Gamma1-model, only includes the reconstruction
cost for the last layer. Therefore, no full decoder needs to be constructed. The /Gamma1-model was
empirically shown to provide substantial performance improvements over the correspondingfully-supervised model.
Pezeshki et al. ( 2016 ) conducted an extensive empirical study of the different components
of ladder networks. Their study revealed that the reconstruction cost at the ﬁrst layer of theneural network, combined with the introduction of noise in that layer, has critical impact onoverall performance. We note that this architecture differs from the /Gamma1-model, which only
considers the last, rather than the ﬁrst, layer of the network when assessing reconstructionerror.
6.2.4 Pseudo-ensembles
Instead of explicitly perturbing the input data, one can also perturb the neural networkmodel itself. Robustness in the model can then be promoted by imposing a penalty onthe difference between the activations of the perturbed network and those of the orig-inal network for the same input. Bachman et al. ( 2014 ) proposed a general framework
for this approach, where an unperturbed parent model with parameters θis perturbed to
obtain one or more child models . In this framework, which they call pseudo-ensembles ,
the perturbation is obtained from a noise distribution /Xi1. The perturbed network ˜f
θ(x;ξ)
is then generated based on the unperturbed parent network fθ(x)and a sample ξfrom
the noise distribution. The semi-supervised cost function then consists of a supervised partand an unsupervised part. The former captures the loss of a perturbed network for labelledinput data, and the latter the consistency across perturbed networks for the unlabelled datapoints.
Based on this framework, Bachman et al. ( 2014 ) proposed a semi-supervised cost function.
Consider a neural network with Klayers, and let f
k
θ(x)and˜fk
θ(x;ξ)denote the k-th layer
123