Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 399
of the underlying assumptions of the semi-supervised learning method is violated, there
is a large risk of degrading performance when introducing the unsupervised objective. Inthe case of S3VMs, many highly diverse decision boundaries may exist that pass througha low-density area and achieve reasonable classiﬁcation performance on the labelled data.Consequently, one can expect the generalization performance of such classiﬁers to exhibitsigniﬁcant variance.
Li and Zhou ( 2015 ) proposed to mitigate this problem by considering a diverse set of
low-density separators and choosing the separator that performs best under the worst pos-sible ground truth. Like all S3VM variants, their method is premised on the assumptionthat the optimal decision boundary lies in a low-density area. Their algorithm, called S4VM(safe S3VM), consists of two stages. Firstly, a diverse set of low-density decision boundariesis constructed. To this end, the authors propose to minimize a cost function that penalizesthe pairwise similarity between the label predictions associated with the decision bound-aries, using deterministic annealing and a heuristic sampling method. Secondly, the decisionboundary with maximal worst-case performance gain over the supervised decision boundaryis chosen as the result of S4VM training. This problem formulation limits the probability thatthe solution found by a S4VM exhibits performance worse than the corresponding supervisedSVM.
The performance gain is formulated as the resulting increase in the number of correctly
labelled data points minus the increase in the number of incorrectly labelled data. The latterterm is multiplied by a factor λ∈R, governing the amount of risk of performance degradation
one wishes to take. Formally, this is captured by a scoring function J(ˆy,y,y
svm)for a set of
predicted labels ˆy, ground truth y, and supervised SVM predictions ysvmdeﬁned as
J(ˆy,y,ysvm)=gain(ˆy,y,ysvm)−λ·lose(ˆy,y,ysvm),
where gain andlose denote the increases in correctly and incorrectly labelled data points,
respectively. The optimal label assignment ¯yin the worst-case true labelling can then be
found as
¯y∈arg max
y∈{± 1}u/bracketleftbigg
min
ˆy∈MJ(y,ˆy,ysvm)/bracketrightbigg
,
where Mis the set of all candidate label assignments such that the corresponding decision
boundary cuts through a low-density area. Due to the optimization over all possible labelassignments, this optimization problem is NP-hard. Li and Zhou ( 2015 ) proposed a con-
vex relaxation of the problem to effectively ﬁnd a good candidate solution. Based on theassumption that the true label assignment is indeed in this set, they proved that, if λ≥1,
the performance of S4VM is never lower than that of the corresponding SVM. They vali-dated this ﬁnding empirically, and showed that their implementation achieves performanceimprovements over standard SVMs similar to other S3VM approaches, but that, contrary tothose, performance never signiﬁcantly degrades relative to supervised SVMs.
The formulation of the second stage of the optimization procedure is not limited to sup-
port vector machines; indeed, it could theoretically be applied to any other semi-supervisedlearning algorithm. Li and Zhou ( 2015 ) additionally propose to perform both stages simul-
taneously in a deterministic annealing approach.
6.1.2 Gaussian processes
The notion of margin maximization is directly incorporated into support vector machines,and it should thus not come as a surprise that they are easily extended to the semi-supervised
123