430 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
A class of methods that can be rather easily extended to the regression setting is that of
graph-based methods (see Sect. 7). Many such methods model a real-valued function in an
intermediate step and incorporate the real-valued predictions in a regularization term in theobjective function. These real-valued predictions can be readily utilized in the regressionscenario (see, e.g. Belkin et al. 2004 ; Cortes and Mohri 2007 ).
The second class of methods that is naturally equipped to deal with regression problems
is the class of wrapper methods (see Sect. 4). Although relatively little research has been
conducted in this direction, wrapper methods such as self-training and co-training to regres-sion methods can be readily applied in a semi-supervised regression setting. In fact, as inthe case of supervised classiﬁcation methods, any supervised regressor can be used within awrapper method. Zhou and Li ( 2005a ) proposed a co-training algorithm for semi-supervised
regression. They construct two k-nearest neighbour regressors on the labelled data, which
then iteratively pass pseudo-labelled data to each other. The labelling conﬁdence, which isused to select data points to pseudo-label, is based on the performance of the regressorsobtained when adding the pseudo-labelled data point to the training set, as measured on thelabelled data.
8.2 Semi-supervised clustering
Semi-supervised classiﬁcation is a relatively well-deﬁned task, where one is presented withfully labelled data as well as completely unlabelled data. In semi-supervised clustering,however, the supervised information can take different forms. For instance, there can bemust-link (two samples are known to be in the same cluster) and cannot-link (two samples
are known to be in different clusters) constraints (Lange et al. 2005 ). It is also possible that
some cluster assignments are known beforehand.
An example for incorporation of the latter type of information is the use of labelled data
forcluster seeding .B a s ue ta l .( 2002 ) proposed to initialize the clusters based on the data
points for which cluster assignments are known. For every cluster, they initialize the clustercentroid for the k-means algorithm to the mean feature values of the data points known to
belong to that cluster. They also proposed an alternative of this approach, where the clusterassignments of the labelled data points are kept ﬁxed in the k-means procedure.
Like semi-supervised regression, semi-supervised clustering is a relatively small research
area when compared to semi-supervised classiﬁcation. For a more extensive overview ofsemi-supervised clustering methods, we refer the reader to the recent survey by Bair ( 2013 )
and the older survey on clustering methods by Grira et al. ( 2004 ).
9 Conclusions and future perspectives
In this survey, we have presented an overview of the ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning.
Covering methods from the early 2000s and more recent advances, our survey constitutes anup-to-date review of this important topic within machine learning. Furthermore, we have pre-sented a new taxonomy for semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods, distinguishing betweenthe primary objective of the approach ( transductive versus inductive learning )a n dt h ew a y
unlabelled data is used (i.e. wrapper methods ,unsupervised preprocessing ,a n d intrinsically
semi-supervised methods ).
Early research in the ﬁeld of semi-supervised learning mainly focused on wrapper methods
(Sect. 4) and semi-supervised extensions of traditional supervised algorithms (such as SVMs,
123