400 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
setting. Less obviously, similar efforts have been made with other supervised methods as
well. Notably, Lawrence and Jordan ( 2005 ) have extended Gaussian processes to handle
unlabelled data.
Gaussian processes are a family of non-parametric models that estimate the posterior
probability over the function fmapping points in the input space to a continuous output
space. When used for binary classiﬁcation purposes, which are the focus of the paper byLawrence and Jordan ( 2005 ), this output is in turn mapped to the label space
Y={ − 1,1}.
In the learning phase, fis established such that the likelihood of observing the data points
((xi,yi))l
i=1is maximized. The resulting model can be considered an l-dimensional Gaussian
distribution over the label vector yof the input data points, where lis the number of labelled
data points. Predictions for previously unseen data points x∗can then be made by the model by
evaluating the posterior probability of the respective class label, conditioned on the observeddata points X, their associated labels y, and the observed data point x
∗. The associated
covariance matrix is the Gram matrix obtained from all l+1 data points using some kernel
function k.
Lawrence and Jordan ( 2005 ) extended Gaussian processes for binary classiﬁcation to
the semi-supervised case by incorporating the unlabelled data points into the likelihoodfunction. Speciﬁcally, the likelihood for an unlabelled data point xis low when it is close to
the decision boundary (i.e. when f(x)is close to 0), and high when it is far away from the
decision boundary. The space of possible labels is expanded to include a null category ;t h e
posterior probability of this null category is high around the decision boundary. By imposingthe constraint that unlabelled data points can never be mapped to the null category, the modelis explicitly discouraged from choosing a decision boundary that passes through a high-density area of unlabelled data points. In other words, unlabelled data points should be faraway from the decision boundary.
This extension of Gaussian processes to the semi-supervised setting has an interesting side
effect: contrary to supervised Gaussian processes, introducing additional (unlabelled) datacan increase the posterior variance. In other words, additional data can increase uncertainty.This effect stems from the observation that the likelihood function for a single unlabelleddata point x
∗can be bimodal if f(x∗)is close to 0.
6.1.3 Density regularization
Another way of encouraging the decision boundary to pass through a low-density area is to
explicitly incorporate the amount of overlap between the estimated posterior class probabil-ities into the cost function. When there is a large amount of overlap, the decision boundarypasses through a high-density area, and when there is a small amount of overlap, it passesthrough a low-density area. Several approaches have been proposed to use this assumptionto regularize the objective function used in the context of classiﬁcation.
Grandvalet and Bengio ( 2005 ) proposed to formalize this in the maximum a posteri-
ori(MAP) framework by imposing a prior on the model parameters, favouring parameters
inducing small class overlap in the predictive model (additionally, see Chapelle et al. 2006b ).
In particular, they used Shannon’s conditional entropy as a measure of class overlap. Theprior is weighted by a constant λ∈R. The resulting objective is generally non-convex. The
authors proposed solving the optimization problem by means of deterministic annealing.This entropy regularization method can be applied to any supervised learning method basedon maximum-likelihood; the authors conducted experiments using logistic regression.
Corduneanu and Jaakkola ( 2003 ) proposed to directly incorporate an estimate of p(x),
the distribution over the input data, into the objective function. They add a cost term to the
123