Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 375
lying each group of methods as well as the way in which they relate to existing supervised
methods. In this, we provide a perspective on semi-supervised learning that allows for amore thorough understanding of different approaches and the connections between them.Furthermore, we shed new light on the fundamental assumptions underlying semi-supervisedlearning, and show how they connect to the so-called cluster assumption.
Although we aim to provide a comprehensive survey on semi-supervised learning, we
cannot possibly cover every method in existence. Due to the sheer size of the literatureon the topic, this would not only be beyond the scope of this article, but also distractfrom the key insights which we wish to provide to the reader. Instead, we focus on themost inﬂuential work and the most important developments in the area over the past twentyyears.
The rest of this article is structured as follows. The basic concepts and assumptions of semi-
supervised learning are covered in Sect. 2, where we also make a connection to clustering.
In Sect. 3, we present our taxonomy of semi-supervised learning methods, which forms
the conceptual basis for the remainder of our survey. Inductive methods are covered inSects. 4through 6. We ﬁrst consider wrapper methods (Sect. 4), followed by unsupervised
preprocessing (Sect. 5), and ﬁnally, we cover intrinsically semi-supervised methods (Sect. 6).
Sect. 7covers transductive methods, which form the second major branch of our taxonomy.
Semi-supervised regression and clustering are discussed in Sect. 8. Finally, in Sect. 9,w e
provide some prospects for the future of semi-supervised learning.
2 Background
In traditional supervised learning problems, we are presented with an ordered collectionofllabelled data points D
L=((xi,yi))l
i=1. Each data point (xi,yi)consists of an object
xi∈Xfrom a given input space X, and has an associated label yi,w h e r e yiis real-valued in
regression problems and categorical in classiﬁcation problems. Based on a collection of thesedata points, usually called the training data , supervised learning methods attempt to infer a
function that can successfully determine the label y
∗of some previously unseen input x∗.
In many real-world classiﬁcation problems, however, we also have access to a collection
ofudata points, DU=(xi)l+u
i=l+1, whose labels are unknown. For instance, the data points for
which we want to make predictions, usually called the test data , are unlabelled by deﬁnition.
Semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods attempt to utilize unlabelled data points to constructa learner whose performance exceeds the performance of learners obtained when using onlythe labelled data. In the remainder of this survey, we denote with X
LandXUthe collection
of input objects for the labelled and unlabelled samples, respectively.1
There are many cases where unlabelled data can help in constructing a classiﬁer. Consider,
for example, the problem of document classiﬁcation, where we wish to assign topics to acollection of text documents (such as news articles). Assuming our documents are representedby the set of words that appear in it, one could train a simple supervised classiﬁer that, forexample, learns to recognize that documents containing the word “neutron” are usually aboutphysics. This classiﬁer might work well on documents containing terms that it has seen inthe training data, but will inherently fail when a document does not contain predictive wordsthat also occurred in the training set. For example, if we encounter a physics document
1We note that the collections of data points referred to here are technically lists. However, following common
usage, in this survey, we refer to them as ‘sets’ and, in a slight abuse of notation, apply standard set-theoreticconcepts to them.
123