Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 407
Miyato et al. ( 2018 ) proposed a regularization procedure that takes the perturbation
direction into account. For each data point, labelled or unlabelled, they approximate theperturbation to the corresponding input data that would yield the largest change in networkoutput (the so-called advesarial noise ). They then incorporate a term into the loss function
that penalizes the difference in the network outputs for the perturbed and unperturbed inputdata. For the unperturbed data point, the weights from the previous optimization iteration areused. Formally, the adversarial loss function for a sample xcan be deﬁned as
/lscript(x)=D(f(x;ˆW),f(x+γ
adv;W)),
where Dis some divergence measure, γadvis the adversarial noise, and ˆWare the previous
network weights. Their approach is called virtual adversarial training ,a f t e rt h es u p e r v i s e d
adversarial training method proposed by Goodfellow et al. ( 2014b ). In the latter approach,
the outputs for the perturbed input are compared to the respective true outputs, rather than tothe outputs of the network for the unperturbed input. As such, regular adversarial training canonly be applied in a supervised setting. Adversarial training and virtual adversarial trainingboth bear close similarity to contractive autoencoders: there, the sensitivity of the network toperturbations in the inputs is penalized by directly assessing the derivatives of the networkoutputs with respect to the inputs (Rifai et al. 2011b ).
Park et al. ( 2018 ) combined concepts from virtual adversarial training with the /Pi1-model
(see Sect. 6.2.5 ). Instead of perturbing the unlabelled data points with adversarial noise, they
apply an adversarial dropout mask to the network weights. First, they sample a random
dropout mask /epsilon1
s. Then, within some maximum distance from /epsilon1s, they ﬁnd the dropout mask
/epsilon1advthat maximizes the difference between the unperturbed network output and the network
output when the dropout mask is applied. Their loss function, then, is deﬁned as
/lscript(x)=D(f(x;W,/epsilon1s),f(x;W,/epsilon1adv)),
where the network is parameterized by the weights Was well as the dropout mask. Park et al.
(2018 ) reported small performance improvements over virtual adversarial training and the
/Pi1-model.
6.2.9 Semi-supervised mixup
The perturbation-based neural networks we have discussed thus far rely on a particularly
strong instantiation of the smoothness assumption: they encourage the predictions of thenetwork to be identical for minor perturbations in the input, regardless of the direction ofthe perturbation. Recently, several researchers have considered the possibility of applyinglarger perturbations to the input. In this scenario, the direction of the perturbation generallydoes matter: when the perturbation points towards the decision boundary, the neural networkoutputs (but not necessarily the resulting class assignment) should typically change morethan when it points away from the decision boundary.
This approach was formalized in the supervised mixup method, which was proposed by
Zhang et al. ( 2018 ). They postulate that, in a robust classiﬁer, the predictions for a linear
combination of feature vectors should be a linear combination of their labels. They incorporatethis by training on augmented data points in addition to the original labelled samples. Tothis end, they randomly select pairs of data points (x,y)and(x
/prime,y/prime)during training, and
sample an interpolation factor λfrom a symmetric beta distribution Beta(α, α) ,w h e r e αis
a predetermined hyperparameter. The network is then trained in a supervised manner on thelinearly interpolated data point (ˆx,ˆy),w h e r e
123