390 Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440
to make these properties explicit in a single objective function (Sindhwani et al. 2005 ; Sind-
hwani and Rosenberg 2008 ). They propose co-regularization , a regularization framework in
which both the ensemble quality and the disagreement between base learners are simultane-ously optimized. The key idea is to use an objective function comprised of two terms: onethat penalizes incorrect predictions made by the ensemble, and another that directly penalizesdifferent predictions of the base classiﬁers. To handle per-view noise within this framework,Yu et al. ( 2011 ) introduced Bayesian co-training , which uses a graphical model for combin-
ing data from multiple views and a kernel-based method for co-regularization. This modelwas extended to handle different noise levels per data point by Christoudias et al. ( 2009 ).
Co-training can be seen as a greedy optimization strategy for the co-regularization objec-
tive. The two components of the objective function are minimized in an alternating fashion:the prediction error of the ensemble is minimized by training the base learners independently,and the disagreement between classiﬁers is minimized by propagating predictions from oneclassiﬁer to the others as if they were ground truth. We note, however, that the general co-regularization objective does not have to be optimized using a wrapper method, and manyco-regularization algorithms use different approaches (see, e.g. Sindhwani and Rosenberg2008 ;Y ue ta l . 2011 ).
4.3 Boosting
Ensemble classiﬁers consist of multiple base classiﬁers, which are trained and then used to
form combined predictions (Zhou 2012 ). The simplest form of ensemble learning trains kbase
classiﬁers independently and aggregates their predictions. Beyond this simplistic approach,two main branches of supervised ensemble learning exist: bagging andboosting (Zhou 2012 ).
In bagging methods, each base learner is provided with a set of ldata points, which are
sampled, uniformly at random with replacement, from the original data set (bootstrapping).The base classiﬁers are trained independently. When training is completed, their outputs areaggregated to form the prediction of the ensemble. In boosting methods, on the other hand,each base learner is dependent on the previous base learners: it is provided with the full dataset, but with weights applied to the data points. The weight of a data point x
iis based on
the performance of the previous base learners on xi, such that larger weights get assigned
to data points that were incorrectly classiﬁed. The ﬁnal prediction is obtained as a linearcombination of the predictions of the base classiﬁers.
Technically, boosting methods construct a weighted ensemble of classiﬁers h
tin a greedy
fashion. Let FT−1(x)=/summationtextT−1
t=1αt·ht(x)denote the ensemble of classiﬁers htwith weight
αtat time T−1. Furthermore, let /lscript(ˆy,y)denote the loss function for predicting label ˆyfor
a data point with true label y. In each iteration of the algorithm, an additional classiﬁer hT
is added to the ensemble with a certain weight αT, such that the cost function
L(FT)=l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(FT(xi),yi)
=l/summationdisplay
i=1/lscript(FT−1(xi)+αT·hT(xi),yi)
is minimized. Note that, at time T,t h ee n s e m b l e FT−1is ﬁxed. With particular choices of
loss functions, such as /lscript(ˆy,y)=exp(−ˆy·y), the optimization problem yields a weighted
classiﬁcation problem for determining hT, and allows us to express the optimal αTin terms
of the loss of hTon the training data.
123