Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 389
Several techniques have been proposed for splitting single-view data sets into multiple
views. For instance, Wang et al. ( 2008b ) suggested to generate krandom projections of
the data, and use these as the views for kdifferent classiﬁers. Zhang and Zheng ( 2009 )
proposed to project the data onto a lower-dimensional subspace using principal componentanalysis and to construct the pseudo-views by greedily selecting the transformed featureswith maximal variance. Yaslan and Cataltepe ( 2010 ) do not transform the data to a different
basis, but select the features for each view iteratively, with preference given to features withhigh mutual information with respect to the given labels.
Further approaches to apply algorithms resembling co-training to data sets where no
explicit views are available focus on other ways of introducing diversity among the clas-siﬁers. For example, one can use different hyperparameters for the supervised algorithms(Wang and Zhou 2007 ; Zhou and Li 2005a ), or use different algorithms altogether (Goldman
and Zhou 2000 ;X ue ta l . 2012 ; Zhou and Goldman 2004 ). Wang and Zhou ( 2007 ) provided
both theoretical and empirical analyses on why co-training can work in single-view settings.They showed that the diversity between the learners is positively correlated with their jointperformance. Zhou and Li ( 2005b ) proposed tri-training , where three classiﬁers are alter-
nately trained. When two of the three classiﬁers agree on their prediction for a given datapoint, that data point is passed to the other classiﬁer along with the respective label. Crucially,tri-training does not rely on probabilistic predictions of individual classiﬁers, and can thusbe applied to a much broader range of supervised learning algorithms.
The authors of the tri-training approach proposed to extend it to more than three learners—
notably, to random forests (Li and Zhou 2007 ). The approach, known as co-forest ,s t a r t sb y
training the decision trees independently on all labelled data. Then, in each iteration, eachclassiﬁer receives pseudo-labelled data based on the joint prediction of all other classiﬁerson the unlabelled data: if the fraction of classiﬁers predicting a class ˆy
ifor an unlabelled
data point xiexceeds a certain threshold, the pseudo-labelled data point (xi,yi)is passed to
the classiﬁer. The decision trees are then all re-trained on their labelled and pseudo-labelleddata. In the next iteration, all previously pseudo-labelled data is treated as unlabelled again.We note that, as the number of trees approaches inﬁnity, this approach becomes a form ofself-training.
Co-forest includes a mechanism for reducing the inﬂuence of possibly mislabelled data
points in the pseudo-labelling step by weighting the newly labelled data based on predic-tion conﬁdence. Deng and Zu Guo ( 2011 ) attempted to further prevent the inﬂuence of
possibly mislabelled data points by removing “suspicious” pseudo-labellings. After eachpseudo-labelling step, the prediction for each pseudo-labelled data point x
iis compared to
the (pseudo-)labels of its knearest neighbours (both labelled and pseudo-labelled); in case
of a mismatch, the pseudo-label is removed from xi.
We note that in existing literature concerning co-forest, the size of the forest has always
been limited to six trees. It has been empirically shown that, in supervised random forests,performance can substantially improve as the number of trees is increased (Oshiro et al. 2012 ).
Therefore, it is likely that increasing the number of trees in co-forest will substantially affectrelative performance compared to random forests.
4.2.3 Co-regularization
Co-training methods reduce disagreement between classiﬁers by passing informationbetween them, in the form of pseudo-labelled data. Furthermore, the implicit objective of co-training is to minimize the error rate of the ensemble of classiﬁers. Sindhwani et al. proposed
123