Machine Learning (2020) 109:373–440 429
Sen et al. ( 2008 ) provided an overview of inference techniques for node classiﬁcation
in network data. They emphasized the difference between local classiﬁcation, where each
node is classiﬁed individually based on its neighbours (possibly iteratively), and global
classiﬁcation, where a global, joint objective function is optimized. They speciﬁcally considertheiterative classiﬁcation algorithm , which constructs a local, supervised classiﬁer for each
node and assigns to the node the most likely label based on its neighbours and their labels (Luand Getoor 2003 ; Neville and Jensen 2000 ). This procedure is iterated until the predictions
in the entire network stabilize. Yang et al. ( 2016 ) proposed a neural network-based approach
that simultaneously predicts the label of a node and its context, i.e. (properties of) nearbynodes in the network, using node embedding.
They extended this approach to the inductive setting, by expressing the embedding as a
function of the features of a given node (and not its context). The context is predicted using arandom walk; similar approaches to that problem have been previously studied (Perozzi et al.2014 ;T a n ge ta l . 2015 ). Several approaches have been suggested to generalize convolutional
neural network architectures to network data (see, e.g. Bruna et al. 2014 ; Duvenaud et al.
2015 ; Kipf and Welling 2016 ).
Network-based methods generally attempt to ﬁnd a way to represent given network data
as vectors, allowing for inductive inference (Yang et al. 2016 ). Interestingly, this can be
considered the inverse task of what most semi-supervised graph-based methods attempt todo, which is to construct a graph based on vector data. These complementary approacheshighlight the difference between ‘standard’, tabular data and data speciﬁed natively in theform of a network.
8 Related areas
Although the vast majority of semi-supervised learning research has been focussed on semi-supervised classiﬁcation, other problems have also been studied. Semi-supervised regression,where the label space
Yis real-valued instead of categorical, is particularly closely related
to semi-supervised classiﬁcation; we cover it in limited detail below. Semi-supervised clus-tering, which can be considered the counterpart of semi-supervised classiﬁcation, is alsocovered in some detail later in this section.
Some other areas related to semi-supervised classiﬁcation are not covered in this survey.
They include the ﬁeld of active learning , where the learning algorithm can query the user
for the labels of previously unlabelled data points. Consequently, new labelled data canbe obtained. Since labelling data is generally costly, the challenge lies in the selection ofunlabelled data points whose labels would be most informative (Settles 2012 ). We also do not
cover learning from positive and unlabelled data , which is a special case of semi-supervised
learning where the algorithm has access to a set of unlabelled data points, but where alllabelled data points belong to a single class (see, e.g. Liu et al. 2002 ; Denis et al. 2005 ;E l k a n
and Noto 2008 ).
8.1 Semi-supervised regression
In classiﬁcation problems, the label space Yis categorical; in regression problems, on the
other hand, the output value space is continuous. Although classiﬁcation and regressionproblems are both concerned with predicting output values for input data points, most semi-supervised classiﬁcation methods cannot be naturally applied to the regression setting.
123