DEVDAN: D EEPEVOLVING DENOISING AUTOENCODER
A P REPRINT
Andri Ashfahaniy
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
andriash001@ntu.edu.sgMahardhika Pratamay
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
mpratama@ntu.edu.sg
Edwin Lughofer
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
edwin.lughofer@jku.atYew Soon Ong
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
asyong@ntu.edu.sg
January 10, 2020
ABSTRACT
The Denoising Autoencoder (DAE) enhances the ﬂexibility of data stream method in exploiting
unlabeled samples. Nonetheless, the feasibility of DAE for data stream analytic deserves in-depth
study because it characterizes a ﬁxed network capacity which cannot adapt to rapidly changing
environments. Deep evolving denoising autoencoder (DEVDAN), is proposed in this paper. It
features an open structure in the generative phase and the discriminative phase where the hidden
units can be automatically added and discarded on the ﬂy. The generative phase reﬁnes the predictive
performance of discriminative model exploiting unlabeled data. Furthermore, DEVDAN is free of
the problem-speciﬁc threshold and works fully in the single-pass learning fashion. We show that
DEVDAN can ﬁnd competitive network architecture compared with state-of-the-art methods on
the classiﬁcation task using ten prominent datasets simulated under the prequential test-then-train
protocol.
Keywords denoising autoencoder, data streams, incremental learning
1 Introduction
The underlying challenge in the design of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is seen in the model selection phase where
no commonly accepted methodology exists to conﬁgure the structure of DNNs [ 1,2]. This issue often forces one to
blindly choose the structure of DNNs. DNN model selection has recently attracted intensive research where the goal
is to determine an appropriate structure for DNNs with the right complexity for given problems. It is evident that a
shallow NN tends to converge much faster than a DNN and handles the small sample size problem better than DNNs.
In other words, the size of DNNs strongly depends on the availability of samples. This encompasses the development
of pruning [ 3], regularization [ 4], parameter prediction [ 4], etc. Most of which start with an over-complex network
followed by a complexity reduction scenario to drop the inactive components of DNNs [ 5]. These approaches, however,
do not fully ﬁt to handle streaming data problems because they rely on an iterative parameter learning scenario where
the tuning phase is iterated across a number of epochs [ 6]. Moreover, a ﬁxed structure is considered to be the underlying
bottleneck of this model because it does not embrace or is too slow to respond to new training patterns as a result of
concept change especially if network parameters have converged to particular points [6].
This paper has been accepted for publication in Neurocomputing 2019. The source code is available in https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/335775518_DEVDAN_Code_mFile .
yEqual contributionarXiv:1910.04062v2  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2020