APREPRINT - JANUARY 10, 2020
In order to further improve the DNNs’ predictive performance with the absence of the true class label, an unsupervised
learning step is carried out in the pre-training phase, also known as the generative training phase. In the realm of
DNNs, the pre-training phase plays a vital role because it addresses the random initialization problem leading to slow
convergence [ 7]. Of the several approaches for the generative phase, DAE, which adopts the partial destruction of the
original input features, is considered the most prominent method because it prevents the learning identity function
problem and opens the manifold of the original input dimension. Furthermore, noise injected mechanism of DAE
functions as some sort of regularization and rejects low variance direction of input features [ 8,9]. From the viewpoint
of the data stream, the generative phase offers a reﬁnement of the predictive model with the absence of true class label.
This case is evident due to the fact that data stream often arrives without labels [6].
1.1 Related Work
The ideas of online DNNs have started to attract research attention [ 10]. In [ 11], online incremental feature learning is
proposed using a denoising autoencoder (DAE) [ 12]. The incremental learning aspect is depicted by its aptitude to
handle the addition of new features and the merging of similar features. The structural learning scenario is mainly
driven by feature similarity and does not fully operate in the one-pass learning mode. [ 13] puts forward the hedge
backpropagation method to answer the research question as to how and when a DNN structure should be adapted. This
work, however, assumes that an initial structure of DNN exists and is built upon a ﬁxed-capacity network. This property
imposes the network’s capacity to be user-deﬁned, thus being problem-dependent. To the best of our knowledge, the
two approaches are not examined with the prequential test-then-train procedure considering the practical scenario
where data streams arrive without labels, thus being impossible to ﬁrst undertake the training process [ 6]. Although the
dynamic-structured DAE has been proposed in [ 11], it has not exploited the full advantage of a coupled generative and
discriminative process - static discriminative part. A further point, it still relies on hyper-parameters thereby making
them an ad-hoc solution.
Several methods have been proposed to increase DNNs’ network capacity whenever there is concept change. Progressive
Neural Networks (PNN) [ 14] learnsKdifferent tasks by introducing new columns while freezing old columns. Its
extension is presented with the idea of Dynamically Expandable Network (DEN) [ 1]. DEN makes use of the selective
retraining approach where relevant components of old network structure is brought across a new task and enhanced
with the splitting-duplicating strategy. Autonomous Deep Learning (ADL) is proposed in [ 15] offering a fully open
structure evolving both network depth and width for data stream learning. It utilizes network signiﬁcance (NS) formula,
which can be computed online, to evolve its network structure. Nonetheless, these three methods still ignore the fact
that data streams are received with the absence of true class labels. As a result, they do not beneﬁt from any generative
phase which is able to reﬁne the DNNs’ predictive performance exploiting unlabeled samples [12].
1.2 Our Approach
A deep evolving denoising autoencoder (DEVDAN) for evolving data streams is proposed in this paper. DEVDAN
presents an incremental learning approach for DAE which features a fully open and single-pass working principle in
both generative and discriminative phase. It is capable of starting its generative learning process from scratch without
an initial structure. Its hidden nodes can be automatically generated, pruned and learned on demand and on the ﬂy. Note
that this paper considers the most challenging case where one has to grow the network from scratch but the concept
is directly applicable in the presence of initial structure. The discriminative model relies on a soft-max layer which
produces the end-output of DNN and shares the same trait of the generative phase: online and evolving.
DEVDAN distinguishes itself from incremental DAE [ 11] which still relies on hyper-parameters thereby making them
an ad-hoc solution. DEVDAN works by means of estimation of NS leading to the approximation of bias and variance
and is free of user-deﬁned thresholds. A new hidden unit is introduced if the current structure is no longer expressive
enough to represent the current data distribution - underﬁtting whereas an inconsequential unit is pruned in the case of
high variance - overﬁtting. In addition, the evolving trait of DEVDAN is not only limited to the generative phase but
also the discriminative phase.
Although the NS formula has been proposed in Autonomous Deep Learning (ADL) [ 15], DEVDAN applies the elastic
learning mechanism in both generative and discriminative phases. The self-adaptive mechanism of generative phase
aims to enhance the stability of the learning process due to poor network initialization and to condition the network
against possible non-stationary environments - virtual drift handling mechanism. This trait also leads to a reformulation
of NS formula to work under encoding-decoding mechanism of DAE. Our numerical study exhibits a clear advantage
of DEVDAN over ADL using only a single hidden layer structure.
The novelty and contribution of our work are primarily four fold: 1) This paper proposes a novel deep evolving DAE
(DEVDAN) for data stream analytic. DEVDAN offers a ﬂexible approach to the automatic construction of extracted
2