Figure 1: The structure of FRCNN and typical updating schemes. The number of stages S= 4. (a) The structure
of the FRCNN. Every node denotes a stage, corresponding to a group of neurons in a functional area in the
sensory pathway (e.g., the inferior colliculus in the auditory pathway). Red, blue and orange arrows denote
bottom-up, top-down and lateral connections, respectively. Both bottom-up and top-down connections can be
made between adjacent stages and non-adjacent stages. (b) Synchronous updating scheme in one block [ 19].
(c) The proposed asynchronous updating scheme in one block. The dashed box in each subﬁgure indicates the
basic building block for constructing a complete RNN (see Figure 4). (d) Multi-scale information fusion for an
example stage receiving three types of inputs.
connections ) and bottom-up/top-down synaptic connections between stages [ 3]. The intra-stage and
inter-stage connections bring different scales of sensory information together and each stage performs
information fusion. These connections fuse different scales of information more completely, and may
lead to better results than existing MSF methods.
However, Figure 1a merely reﬂects a purely static structure in the brain and does not show the
dynamics of the sensory system. In biological systems, given a stimulus, the neurons along a sensory
hierarchy do not ﬁre simultaneously like shown in Figure 1b. For example, it was reported that
the neural response initialized at a retinotopic position in anesthetized rat V1 propagated uniformly
in all directions with a velocity of 50–70 mm/s, slowed down at the V1/V2 area border, after a
short interval, spread in V2, then reﬂected back in V1 [ 38]. In general, “the speed of an action
potential varies among neurons in a range from about 2 to 200 miles per hour”[ 24]. The time at
which a neuron starts to ﬁre depends on a variety of factors including the neuron type, the stage
at the sensory pathway, the number of the dendrites connected to it and the morphology of the
neural ﬁbers. This precludes the possibility of faithfully replicating the sensory system to obtain an
excellent artiﬁcial neural network (ANN). Nevertheless, the history of ANN development indicates
that getting inspiration from the brain is enough to make great progress if task-speciﬁc techniques are
combined. Inspired by the discovery of simple cells and complex cells in cat visual cortex [ 9,10],
a hierarchical model Neocognitron [ 6] was proposed and later developed into convolutional neural
networks [ 15] by applying the backpropagation algorithm. We investigate empirically if there exists
an asynchronous updating scheme for the structure shown in Figure 1a that provides improvement for
speech separation performance.
As the model has bottom-up, top-down and lateral connections as shown in Figure 1a, we call
the model a fully recurrent convolutional neural network (FRCNN) . This name emphasizes the
presence of both lateral and top-down recurrent connections in the model, distinguishing the model
from an existing model [ 17] named recurrent convolutional neural network (RCNN) that has lateral
recurrent connections only. The model with the synchronous updating scheme (Figure 1b) is called
the synchronous FRCNN or S-FRCNN, which was studied for visual recognition [ 19]. We aim to
propose an asynchronous FRCNN or A-FRCNN for speech separation. We notice that SuDoRM-RF
[33] also has the three types of connections and we start from its framework to study different
updating schemes of FRCNN.
The architecture of our proposed A-FRCNN is illustrated in Figure 1c. The information ﬁrst passes
through stages one by one in the bottom-up direction, then fuses between adjacent stages in parallel,
and ﬁnally fuses together with skip connections to the bottom stage. In the S-FRCNN, the information
transmission from the bottom stage to any upper stage then back to the bottom stage is too fast: one
step upward and one step downward (Figure 1b). In contrast, in the A-FRCNN, the information
starting from the bottom stage goes through more processing steps before it goes back to the bottom
stage, which is advantageous for comprehensive MSF. Increasing the depth of a model is one of the
keys for the success of deep learning. We will show the merit of A-FRCNN compared to S-FRCNN
in experiments.
2