Figure 3: Various asynchronous updating schemes in the micro-level.
down-sampling and up-sampling operations for processing the input coming at the highest
resolution. This block is denoted by Control 1.
2.The block Control 1 has too many connections which make the model inefﬁcient in
both parameters and computation. The bottom-up skip-connections and top-down skip-
connections are symmetric, and may be redundant. Therefore, we remove the bottom-up
skip-connections, which results in the block shown in Figure 3b, denoted by Control 2.
3.It is too fast to fuse the information across non-adjacent stages through top-down skip-
connections in the block Control 2. One possible way to represent an increasing ﬁring delay
from widely separated units would be to fuse the information across adjacent stages ﬁrst,
then across non-adjacent stages. This change increases the shortest path from higher stages
to the bottom stage. In addition, to save parameters and computation, we only keep the top-
down skip-connections to the bottom stage and removed other top-down skip-connections.
We also remove the vertical downward connections because the top-down stage-by-stage
fusion has already been performed through the oblique downward connections. This is made
possible by the delayed global fusion; otherwise, the stages would become disconnected
after removing the vertical downward connections. We then obtain the A-FRCNN (Figure
1c).
Note that the sequential fusion method in the third step is more biologically plausible than the
synchronous fusion method since biological connections between non-adjacent stages are longer than
those between adjacent stages, while signal transmission through connections is not instantaneous.
The proposed A-FRCNN block is closely related to the U-Net [ 28] (Figure 3c). To investigate the
potential advantage of delayed global fusion, we add top-down skip-connections to the U-Net block
and obtain a new block, denoted by U-Net-Delay (Figure 3d).
3.2.3 Multi-scale Information Fusion inside Blocks
The blocks depicted in Figures 1 and 3 are RNN blocks, and the nodes in the same horizontal row
represent the same stage (or in biological terms, the same set of neurons in a sensory area) but at
different time. In this study we use Cfeature maps for every stage. Multi-scale information fusion
is performed at the input of every stage. First the Cfeature maps from each of the Kinputs are
concatenated in the channel dimension, resulting in KC feature maps. A 11convolutional layer
is then used to reduce the number of feature maps to C. Figure 1d illustrates this process. This
concatenation method was used by default in our experiments. One can also sum up the Kinputs to
obtainCfeature maps.
3.2.4 Unfolding Methods in the Macro-level
Figures 1 and 3 show single blocks of the entire unfolding schemes. An entire unfolding scheme
usually consists of multiple such blocks with tied weights. If there are Bblocks in total, we say
“FRCNN is unfolded for Btime steps”. At the macro-level, the FRCNN can be unfolded by simply
repeating these blocks along time such that the output of one block is the input of the next block.
To further fuse the multi-scale information, we add a 11convolution between two consecutive
blocks (Figure 4a). This method is formulated as follows:
R(t+ 1) =f('(R(t))); (4)
wheref()denotes a block shown in Figures 1 and 3, R(t)denotes the output of the block at
time steptand'denotes 11convolution. This is called the direct connection (DC) method.
5