Speech Separation Using an Asynchronous Fully
Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network
Xiaolin Hu1, Kai Li1, Weiyi Zhang1, Yi Luo2, Jean-Marie Lemercier3, Timo Gerkmann3
1Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence (THBI),
IDG/McGovern Institute of Brain Research Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, NY , USA
3Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn, {lk21,wy-zhang19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
y.luo@columbia.edu, lemercier@informatik.uni-hamburg.de,
timo.gerkmann@uni-hamburg.de
Abstract
Recent advances in the design of neural network architectures, in particular those
specialized in modeling sequences, have provided signiﬁcant improvements in
speech separation performance. In this work, we propose to use a bio-inspired
architecture called Fully Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network (FRCNN) to
solve the separation task. This model contains bottom-up ,top-down andlateral
connections to fuse information processed at various time-scales represented by
stages . In contrast to the traditional approach updating stages in parallel, we
propose to ﬁrst update the stages one by one in the bottom-up direction, then fuse
information from adjacent stages simultaneously and ﬁnally fuse information from
all stages to the bottom stage together. Experiments showed that this asynchronous
updating scheme achieved signiﬁcantly better results with much fewer parameters
than the traditional synchronous updating scheme. In addition, the proposed model
achieved good balance between speech separation accuracy and computational
efﬁciency as compared to other state-of-the-art models on three benchmark datasets.
1 Introduction
Speech separation aims to extract individual speeches from a mixture of speeches of multiple
speakers. It is an important preprocessing step for speech recognition in noisy environment. Recent
development of speech separation methods at the waveform level has aroused researchers’ interest
[21,22,20], avoiding the traditional representation of STFT amplitude and phase used in so-called
time-frequency (TF) domain methods [ 7,11]. Among these so-called time-domain methods, some
presented mechanisms fuse information processed at various time scales, called multi-scale fusion
(MSF) methods, such as in FurcaNeXt [ 40] or SuDoRM-RF [ 33], and yield impressive results on the
speech separation task. In this work we aim to explore if there exist even better MSF methods.
Evidence from observations of sensory systems of mammals show them to utilize MSF in their
processing. For instance, the visual system includes multiple processing stages (from lower functional
areas such as the lateral geniculate nucleus to higher functional areas such as the inferior temporal
cortex), which process different scales of information [ 1]: the higher the stage, the coarser the
scale. See Figure 1a for illustration. Similar mechanisms and areas have also been identiﬁed
and located in the auditory system [ 1]. More importantly, physiological and anatomical studies
have revealed abundant recurrent synaptic connections within the same stage (also called lateral
Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).