Figure 4: Macro-level unfolding schemes of the FR-
CNN. Every blue box corresponds to a dashed box in
Figures 1 and 3. The pink boxes in a model denote 11
convolutions with shared weights.Another idea is to integrate the input of the
model with the output of every block via fea-
ture map concatenation or summation before
sending to the next block. This rule was used
in constructing the recurrent CNN in a previous
study [ 17]. Again, we add a 11convolution to
further fuse information (Figure 4b). Formally,
R(t+ 1) =f('(R(t)r)) (5)
where rdenotes the input feature maps and 
denotes concatenation or summation of two sets
of feature maps. This is called the concatenation
connection (CC) orsummation connection (SC) depending on which feature map integration method
is used.
For single-input-single-output blocks, i.e., A-FRCNN and the blocks shown in Figure 3, we directly
use the unfolding methods as described above. For the multi-input-multi-output block, i.e., S-FRCNN,
we apply these unfolding methods for each input-output pair corresponding to the same stage. It
should be noted that Figure 1b only illustrate the intermediate blocks of S-FRCNN unfolding scheme.
In the beginning of unfolding we use downsampling to obtain different scales of feature maps, and in
the end of unfolding we use up-sampling to fuse different scales of feature maps.
3.3 Training Method
We use the standard BP algorithm to train the model. The object is to maximize the scale-invariant
signal-to-noise ratio (SI-SNR) [ 14]. See Supplementary Materials for details. SI-SNR is also a metric
to evaluate the performance of speech separation methods.
4 Experimental Settings
4.1 Dataset
Libri2Mix [2]. This dataset was constructed using train-100, train-360, dev, and test set in the
LibriSpeech dataset [ 25]. Random extracts were selected for different speakers and mixed with
uniformly sampled Loudness Units relative to Full Scale (LUFS) [ 29] between -25 and -33 dB.
Random noise samples were added, with loudness uniformly sampled between -38 and -30 LUFS.
We used train-100 as the training set which has 58 hours. We used the same test set to compare
different methods.
WSJ0-2Mix [7]. This dataset contains a 30-hour training set, a 10-hour validation set and a 5-hour
test set. It was generated by combining the speech signals of different speakers in the Wall Street
Journal corpus. The speech signals were randomly selected and mixed with a Signal-to-Noise Ratio
uniformy sampled between -5dB and 5dB.
WHAM! [37]. WHAM! added noise to WSJ0-2Mix, which was recorded in scenes such as cafes,
restaurants and bars. The speeches were mixed with noise with a SNR uniformly sampled between
-6dB and 3dB. Due to the existence of noise, WHAM! is more challenging for speech separation than
WSJ0-2Mix.
4.2 Implementation Details
The encoder and decoder in the speech separation pipeline were respectively a 1-D convolutional
layer and a 1-D transposed convolutional layer. We set their kernel size to 21, stride to 10, and
channel number to 512, i.e., L= 21 andN= 512 . Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the number of stages
Swas set to 5, the number of channels Cin every stage was set to 512 and the SC method was used
for unfolding in the macro-level. Whenever C6=N, a11convolutional layer was added between
the encoder and the separation network.
We designed two methods to realize the connections shown in Figures 1 and 3.
6