Figure 2: The overall pipeline for speech separation.We use the same pipeline as Conv-
TasNet [ 22], as shown in Figure 2.
It consists of an encoder, a separa-
tion network and a decoder. The en-
coder divides xintoKoverlapping
segments xk2R1Land transforms
each segment into a feature vector
rk2R1N:
rk=xkUe (2)
where Ue2RLNis a weight matrix. The two steps can be realized by a trainable 1D convolution
with kernel Ueand an appropriate stride.
The separation network receives rkto estimate a mask Mi2R1Nfor speaker i. We apply a
fully-connected layer with ReLU activation to the output of the separation network to produce Mi.
The detailed structure of the separation network is introduced in Section 3.2.
The decoder reconstructs the waveform segment
si;k= (rkMi)UT
d (3)
where Ud2RLNis a weight matrix and UT
dis the transpose of Ud, andstands for element-wise
multiplication. The estimated waveform bsiis obtained by summing Koverlapping segments si;k.
The two steps can be realized by a 1-D transposed convolution operation.
3.2 Separation Network
3.2.1 Structure of FRCNN
We use the FRCNN as the separation network. It can be represented by a graph with nodes denoting
stages and edges denoting connections. Figure 1a shows an example with S= 4stages. In biological
terms, every node corresponds to a set of neurons in a certain stage in the sensory pathway, e.g., the
inferior colliculus in the auditory pathway. In our model, every node corresponds to a convolutional
layer. Different nodes process different scales of the input information. The higher the node, the
coarser the information. There are three types of connections: bottom-up, top-down and lateral
connections. Note that both bottom-up and top-down connections can be between adjacent stages
and non-adjacent stages. In the latter case, the connections are called skip-connections .
3.2.2 Updating Schemes in the Micro-level
To run a recurrent neural network (RNN) with intricate connections, one needs to ﬁrst determine the
updating order of the neurons. This order determines the RNN unfolding orunrolling scheme. A
commonly used approach is to update all neurons simultaneously. In the case of FRCNN as shown in
Figure 1a, it corresponds to updating all stages synchronously. This scheme is depicted in Figure 1b
[19], and denoted by S-FRCNN. However, if the stages are allowed to be updated asynchronously,
there will be a large number of possible unfolding schemes. For example, without considering the
skip connections, we can update the stages one by one in the upward direction then update them one
by one in the downward direction. In the present work, we propose an efﬁcient updating scheme
A-FRCNN, as shown in Figure 1c.
In the proposed A-FRCNN, we ﬁrst sequentially update the stages in the bottom-up direction, then
update them simultaneously by fusing information from adjacent stages, and ﬁnally, fuse information
from all stages to the bottom stage. This entire process is repeated several times (Sec. 3.2.4). The
two types of fusions can be viewed as local and global fusions, respectively. As a stage represents
a unique set of neurons as its biological counterpart, the connections between two stages (e.g., the
vertical upward connection and the oblique upward connection between stage 3 and stage 4) should
use the same operation and parameters.
The A-FRCNN is adapted from the S-FRCNN in a step-by-step manner.
1.Inspired by the structure of the U-Net [ 28], we design a bottleneck structure at the bottom
stage as shown in Figure 3a. All upper stages exchange information between different
blocks through the bottom stage. This design increases the number of steps including
4