GAP×
: element-wise productAdaptive Selection of 
Kernel Size:
5k=

11C
11C
()kC=
WHC
WHC～
Figure 2. Diagram of our efﬁcient channel attention (ECA) mod-
ule. Given the aggregated features obtained by global average
pooling (GAP), ECA generates channel weights by performing a
fast1Dconvolution of size k, wherekis adaptively determined
via a mapping of channel dimension C.
higher accuracy, they often bring higher model complex-
ity and suffer from heavier computational burden. Different
from the aforementioned methods that achieve better per-
formance at the cost of higher model complexity, this paper
focuses instead on a question: Can one learn effective chan-
nel attention in a more efﬁcient way?
To answer this question, we ﬁrst revisit the channel at-
tention module in SENet. Speciﬁcally, given the input fea-
tures, SE block ﬁrst employs a global average pooling for
each channel independently, then two fully-connected (FC)
layers with non-linearity followed by a Sigmoid function
are used to generate channel weights. The two FC layers
are designed to capture non-linear cross-channel interac-
tion, which involve dimensionality reduction for controlling
model complexity. Although this strategy is widely used in
subsequent channel attention modules [33, 13, 9], our em-
pirical studies show dimensionality reduction brings side ef-
fect on channel attention prediction, and it is inefﬁcient and
unnecessary to capture dependencies across all channels.
Therefore, this paper proposes an Efﬁcient Channel At-
tention (ECA) module for deep CNNs, which avoids dimen-
sionality reduction and captures cross-channel interaction in
an efﬁcient way. As illustrated in Figure 2, after channel-
wise global average pooling without dimensionality reduc-
tion, our ECA captures local cross-channel interaction by
considering every channel and its kneighbors. Such method
is proven to guarantee both efﬁciency and effectiveness.
Note that our ECA can be efﬁciently implemented by fast
1Dconvolution of size k, where kernel size krepresents the
coverage of local cross-channel interaction, i.e., how many
neighbors participate in attention prediction of one channel.
To avoid manual tuning of kvia cross-validation, we de-
velop a method to adaptively determine k, where coverage
of interaction (i.e., kernel size k) is proportional to channel
dimension. As shown in Figure 1 and Table 3, as opposed
to the backbone models [11], deep CNNs with our ECAModel No DR Cross-channel Interaction Lightweight
SENet [14] ×√–
CBAM [33] ×√×
GE-θ−[13]√×√
GE-θ[13]√× ×
GE-θ+[13] ×√×
A2-Net [4] ×√×
GSoP-Net [9] ×√×
ECA-Net (Ours)√ √ √
Table 1. Comparison of existing attention modules in terms of
whether no channel dimensionality reduction (No DR), cross-
channel interaction and less parameters than SE (indicated by
lightweight) or not.
module (called ECA-Net) introduce very few additional pa-
rameters and negligible computations, while bringing no-
table performance gain. For example, for ResNet-50 with
24.37M parameters and 3.86 GFLOPs, the addtional pa-
rameters and computations of ECA-Net50 are 80 and 4.7e-
4 GFLOPs, resecptively; meanwhile, ECA-Net50 outper-
forms ResNet-50 by 2.28% in terms of Top-1 accuracy.
Table 1 summarizes existing attention modules in terms
of whether channel dimensionality reduction (DR), cross-
channel interaction and lightweight model, where we can
see that our ECA module learn effective channel attention
by avoiding channel dimensionality reduction while captur-
ing cross-channel interaction in an extremely lightweight
way. To evaluate our method, we conduct experiments on
ImageNet-1K [6] and MS COCO [23] in a variety of tasks
using different deep CNN architectures.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as fol-
lows. (1) We dissect the SE block and empirically demon-
strate avoiding dimensionality reduction and appropriate
cross-channel interaction are important to learn effective
and efﬁcient channel attention, respectively. (2) Based on
above analysis, we make an attempt to develop an extremely
lightweight channel attention module for deep CNNs by
proposing an Efﬁcient Channel Attention (ECA), which in-
creases little model complexity while bringing clear im-
provement. (3) The experimental results on ImageNet-1K
and MS COCO demonstrate our method has lower model
complexity than state-of-the-arts while achieving very com-
petitive performance.
2. Related Work
Attention mechanism has proven to be a potential means
to enhance deep CNNs. SE-Net [14] presents for the ﬁrst
time an effective mechanism to learn channel attention and
achieves promising performance. Subsequently, develop-
ment of attention modules can be roughly divided into two
directions: (1) enhancement of feature aggregation; (2)
combination of channel and spatial attentions. Speciﬁcally,
CBAM [33] employs both average and max pooling to ag-
11535