Sensors 2019 ,19, 3667 14 of 16
However, when observed for the test case of Nh=30, MLP with three hidden layers is found to produce
better results than the MLP with four hidden layers. Further, this may be due to the increase in
architectural complexity with an increased number of hidden layers. Also. if the Nhis set to as high as
100, there might be a high risk of over-ﬁtting the training data which would lead to poor performance
than those obtained with Nhvalues of 50 and 80. Besides, provided the current experimental setup,
one could likewise accomplish slightly di erent results due to the underlying fact that the biases and
initial weights of the neural networks are determined randomly. If an appropriate weight set is ﬁxed
initially, one could obtain superior results for similar settings. This assertion could be endorsed by the
fact that the gradient descent may not generally ensure a near-ideal weight set towards the end of the
neural network training process.
According to the results obtained inTable 6, the performance of MLP with four hidden layers
is high compared to the performance of the Neural Network and the MLP with three hidden layer
approaches used in some of the existing literature. Therefore, the proposed model assesses the given
agriculture land and provides better results for sustainable agriculture development compared to other
approaches. This model provides a reliable decision on the suitability level of the agriculture land in
four di erent categories, helping agriculturists to assess their land appropriately. Thus, this proposed
model could be used as a recommendation model for land suitability to improve the crop production
for sustainable agriculture development.
7. Conclusions
Since agriculture is the backbone of any country, it is necessary to ensure its sustainable growth
over the years. This work has presented a model that would be as accurate as 99%, which would be the
most desirable. The data collected through various sensors, handled here with MLP with four hidden
layers, has ensured better e ciency. A proper advisory system with precise instructions would always
deliver better results. Thus, the accuracy score to precision score presented depicts the e ciency of this
proposed approach, which will ensure appropriate classiﬁcation. Multiclass classiﬁcation in agriculture
would further ﬁne-tune the recommendation system to guide farmers appropriately. Rather than
binary classiﬁcation, this one would guide the farmers’ precisely. Thus, this approach would provide
real-time data to ensure better crop yield productivity.
Author Contributions: This research speciﬁes below the individual contributions. Conceptualization—D.R.V .
and N.D.; Data curation—K.S.; Formal analysis—N.D.; Funding acquisition—S.H.C.; Investigation—D.R.V .;
Methodology—K.S.; Project administration—K.S.; Resources—S.H.C.; Software—D.E.; Supervision—D.E., K.S.
and C.I.; Validation—D.R.V . and K.S.; Visualization—D.R.V . and C.I.; Writing—review & editing—C.I.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Ahmed, A.N.; de Hussain, I.D. Internet of Things (IoT) for smart precision agriculture and farming in rural
areas. IEEE Internet Things J. 2018 ,5, 4890–4899. [CrossRef]
2. Elijah, O.; Rahman, T.A.; Orikumhi, I.; Leow, C.Y.; Hindia, M.N. An overview of Internet of Things (IoT) and
data analytics in agriculture: beneﬁts and challenges. IEEE Internet Things J. 2018 ,5, 3758–3773. [CrossRef]
3. Somov, A.; Shadrin, D.; Fastovets, I.; Nikitin, A.; Matveev, S.; Hrinchuk, O. Pervasive Agriculture: IoT-Enabled
Greenhouse for Plant Growth Control. IEEE Pervasive Comput. 2018 ,17, 65–75. [CrossRef]
4. Bu, F.; Wang, X. A smart agriculture IoT system based on deep reinforcement learning. Future Gener.
Comput. Syst. 2019 ,99, 500–507. [CrossRef]
5. Alreshidi, E. Smart Sustainable Agriculture (SSA) solution underpinned by Internet of Things (IoT) and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1906.03106. [CrossRef]
6. Kamienski, C.; Soininen, J.-P .; Taumberger, M.; Dantas, R.; Toscano, A.; Cinotti, T.S.; Maia, R.F.; Neto, A.T.
Smart water management platform: Iot-based precision irrigation for agriculture. Sensors 2019 ,19, 276.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]