Sensors 2019 ,19, 3667 3 of 16
Neural network-based models are used widely, as they have the capability to improve the e ciency
of the model over every iteration [ 17]. Classiﬁcation problems are handled by various algorithms,
such as support vector machines, decision tree algorithms, etc. Multiclass classiﬁcations are expertly
handled by neural network algorithms [ 18]. When the model is trained with the appropriate number
of inputs and outputs, it is expected to give better results compared to other machine learning models.
The integration of IoT, along with machine learning models, are providing the farmer recommendation
system with appropriate inputs [19].
In this work, an agriculture dataset has been obtained through various IoT sensor devices such as
a pH sensor, soil moisture sensor, salinity sensor, and electromagnetic sensor. A sensor is a device
which is used to detect and respond to some type of input obtained from the physical environment [ 20].
As it requires less labor and consumes less time, it is used in many real-time applications. As the
Internet plays a mediatory role in various kinds of communication and data exchange, it is advisable to
integrate the agriculture data with the cloud platform. The data acquired from the various IoT devices
could be stored to the cloud platform [21].
The key contribution of this work is as follows
 The selection of the relevant attributes and the collection of data from the appropriate sources for
better agriculture land suitability classiﬁcation, and these data are heterogeneous in nature.
 Integration of di erent data collection and bringing it to a form suitable for future predictions.
 The noble initiation towards helping the farmers build a recommendation model, especially for
the low economic regions, in a country like India.
 Generalization of the proposed model, which could be used for any land, as the current test inputs
are su cient for the classiﬁcation of the land suitability with this developed model.
 The multiclass classiﬁcation is another crucial contribution as the majority of the past work is
based on binary classiﬁcation, which includes two decision classes, namely suitable and unsuitable.
These multiclass results are helpful for the farmers when compared to the binary classiﬁcation, to
take suitable action based on the outcome of the results.
This paper presents a model that will automate the process of analyzing various deciding factors
in the assessment of present and future conditions for the better crop yield. The di erent classiﬁcation
will help decide well in advance how to proceed to start a new session. Besides, this would ensure
minimal loss to the farmers, and the di erent sections presented here elucidate the model further.
2. Related Work
The integration of the Internet of Things into the agricultural system has led to the Internet of
Agriculture of Things along with advanced computing techniques. The researchers apply this to
obtain maximum beneﬁt and to also improve the production of agriculture, artiﬁcial intelligence, and
IoT [ 22]. The agriculture domain is experiencing new evolution and revolution motivated by sensors,
IoT, big data, and cloud technology [ 23]. The IoT based on a smart agriculture system was developed
using deep reinforcement learning integrated with a cloud environment, in which four layers were
included, namely data collection, edge computing, data transmission, and cloud computing [ 24]. IoT
has been integrated with agriculture systems to yield maximum proﬁt, and the applications of IoT in
agriculture have been categorized into restricted environment planning, open farm planting, livestock
farm monitoring, and aquaculture development [25].
A new proposal was presented for agriculture applications by investigating various integrated
platforms, which include cloud computing, IoT, and data mining techniques [ 26]. A scalable
network-based architecture was proposed to monitor and regulate agriculture farms in rural areas
with the help of IoT-based WiFi with long-distance network and fog computing [ 27]. The development
of IoT in agriculture data analytics has transformed from a speciﬁc crop to any kind of crop. Also,
the system is able to support a various number of applications from controlling and supervising the
agriculture crops to promoting the products in the market [ 28]. An irrigation monitoring and control