Sensors 2019 ,19, 3667 2 of 16
for crop cultivation [ 3]. They are not conscious of the fact that agriculture land needs to be assessed
before cultivation [4].
Land suitability analysis is a mandatory prerequisite for crop cultivation, which helps to obtain
maximum production. In order to acquire the properties of the soil, farmers depend on soil testing
labs, which are not su cient enough to help them, and sometimes the data provided by the labs are
inaccurate [ 5]. In order to get enough knowledge about cultivation, data need to be collected manually,
which is very di cult for farmers. The solution is the replacement of traditional methods of data
collection with Internet of Things (IoT)-based sensors [ 6]. Sensors play a signiﬁcant role in collecting
information about various factors such as soil, water, climate, etc., for agriculture development. With
the help of data gathered from di erent sensors, land suitability analysis could be done, which would
help farmers identify the current status of their agriculture land and improve their crop production.
Several decision models have been developed so far to assist the farmers in taking a decision on crop
cultivation to maximize their proﬁt [7].
Ever-changing real-world conditions like monsoons to temperate are the dominant factors in
aecting agriculture productivity. Soil parameters to weather prediction are essential in knowing
the future yield [ 8]. The key factors that are inﬂuencing the crop yield are climatic conditions, soil
productivity, and groundwater characteristics, as well as its availability. An extensive study on
phenotyping is helping researchers to understand these factors [ 9]. One of the signiﬁcant challenges
involved in identifying the di erent land conditions is based on the inﬂuence of various soil parameters.
Over the past few decades, soil testing has been practised, which is widely accepted by agriculture
experts and farmers to determine the properties of soil for agriculture production [ 10]. The Agriculture
Management Information System (AMIS) is mandatory to store the data acquired in various formats
and exchanges the data for digital agriculture technology [ 11]. Currently, AMIS has enhanced its
facilities by accumulating the latest technologies, such as the Internet and the Internet of Things (IoT).
Introduction of the usage of sensors actually reduces the cost and time involved in assessing the
land suitability in the traditional manner [12]. The uses of sensors are plenty, and it is possible to use
as many sensors in the ﬁeld of agriculture. Soil sensors, water sensors, and biosensors are few that
have been shown to have a signiﬁcant role in measuring nature. These sensors contribute to the smart
farming system, especially in the handling of appropriate irrigation systems to help farmers. The Radio
Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) technology is used for the detection of animals entering into the
farmland. The Global Positioning System (GPS) position-based seeding recommendation is emerging
as another beneﬁt in the ﬁeld of agriculture beneﬁting from the latest technological developments [ 13].
Some of the beneﬁts it has achieved in recent days are improved e ciency, sustainable growth, as well
as cost-e ectiveness. It is considered to be the connection between the collection of physical devices
through internet connection such as WiFi, Data cards, etc.
As a revolutionary change, the sensor-driven network has a considerable role in precision
agriculture [ 14]. Timely forecast based on soil parameters will ensure proper irrigation systems. IoT
has a signiﬁcant role in handling the recorded data from sensors. General Purpose Input /Output
facilitates various sensor inputs and the corresponding outputs in Raspberry Pi. Further, this could
really help in hosting di erent sensors. Cloud computing is helping the IoT sensor networks to record
the measured data through its sensors. The wireless medium is transferring the data to the cloud,
which is used later for data analysis [15].
Data Analytics has brought impactful results for future predictions in almost every single
application. Artiﬁcial intelligence-based model building is a challenging task as the model should
replicate the observed parameters in the dataset. Parametric estimations are helpful in solving the
problems in a futuristic way, and agriculture problems are among those [ 16]. Agriculture data analysis
is done with di erent machine learning algorithms. Maximizing the outcome is the agenda for any
machine learning model, and model assessment metrics are helpful in analyzing the results obtained.
Appropriate training of the machine learning model will produce the results with utmost accuracy.