Sensors 2019 ,19, 3667 6 of 16
value. The porousness value is obtained based on the measurement of the soil moisture sensor and
granularity of the soil is obtained using the measurement acquired from the moisture content of the
soil. The values of the structure of the soil and the compact and cementation are obtained from the
agriculture experts.
The type of dataset acquired from the sensors are numerical values. Based on the values obtained
from the sensor, suitability range values (obtained from experts) are assigned to the parameters
considered for the land suitability model. For example, the pH value ranges from 7.2–6.7 for favorable
land conditions, 6.6–5.5 for less favorable land conditions, 5.4–4.5 for unfavorable land conditions,
and less than 4.5 for the very unfavorable land condition. The salinity value for the favorable land
condition is <2, 2–6 for less favorable land conditions, 6–12 for unfavorable land conditions, and
greater than 12 for the very unfavorable condition. The sampling period of data acquisition is one
day. The average of the one-day data obtained from various sensors is stored in the cloud network as
part of the preprocessing of the data. As the data may contain missing and noisy values, the mean of
the data is considered. Since the data contain di erent units of measurement (categorical, numerical),
normalization is done before applying the proposed model.
Figure 1 states the architectural diagram of the proposed model. The steps involved in this process
are shown in this ﬁgure. The data is collected from the farmland using sensors, and is then transferred
and stored with the help of the Raspberry Pi system in the cloud. The stored data is used here to
build the artiﬁcial intelligence recommendation model shown in the ﬁgure. The constructed model is
expected to classify the results into four di erent categories. Amazon Web Service (AWS) is used here
for the storage of the data.
The learning model construction is explained in the algorithm part given below. The built model
will be assessed with inputs received after every cultivation period, and accordingly, assessment results
will be provided. Di erent classes are considered here for land suitability assessment as most suitable
(class 1), suitable (class 2), moderately suitable (class 3), and unsuitable (class 4).
The Algorithm 1 presented here explains the steps involved in the processing the collected data
from the di erent sensors. Since the size of the data is quite high in size, it is necessary to handle the
data with the algorithm that is capable of handling the expected size of the data. That is the reason
why a neural network approach is considered here for processing the data. The algorithm presented
here is further explained below.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Model building is given in the algorithm. Processing of the neural networks
relies upon the network topology, adjustments of weights, and activation functions. The network
topology deﬁnes the network arrangement together with its connecting links and nodes. In neural
networks, learning refers to the process of modifying weights of neural connections among the neurons
of the speciﬁc network. Activation functions are additional e orts applied over the input to achieve
the exact output. In the proposed work, a supervised learning-based neural network is adopted where
the learning process is dependent. The input vector is o ered to the network model and obtains an
output vector, which is then compared to the desired or target vector. An error signal is developed
in case of a variation existing between the actual and the desired output vector. Depending on the
error signal the weights are adapted until the desired and the actual output matches. Neural networks
can be precisely deﬁned as complex adaptive architecture, which can transform its internal structure
depending on the information passing through them. The following section explains the data collection
and further processes.