Sensors 2019 ,19, 3667 5 of 16
sensors are used [ 41]. The data acquisition is made using various sensor devices such as the pH sensor,
soil moisture sensor, salinity sensor, and an electromagnetic sensor.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 16 
  
Figure 1. Architecture diagram of the proposed model. 
The raspberry Pi 3 system is used here to handle inputs from multiple sensors, and the data are 
sent to a cloud for storage, since it has the most powerful CPU comparatively, as well as the IEEE 802.11 wireless standard. A wi-fi facility is also available and is used to transfer the data from the remote agriculture land. For the better handling of data, the data is sent further to the cloud with the help of the internet. The cloud facility used here  is Amazon Web Serive (AWS), and the stored data 
is used for machine learning for the purpose of an alysis. The data is accessed on the local machine 
through a cloud facility. The algorithm is developed in the machine and it is tested on the collected 
data to verify the accuracy of the results obtained. The Raspberry Pi controller is used to collect the 
data from various sensors for a sampling period of  one day. Then the average values of various 
sensors are moved to the AWS Cloud Network with the help of the Internet. From the AWS, the data is accessed by the proposed model, which is developed in the system for normalization and training purposes. Thus, the data obtained from various sensors for six months are considered for the 
development of the sensor-driven AI model. 
The various parameters used to find agriculture land suitability analysis in this work are soil 
texture, granular fragments (percentage of sand part icles in the soil), structure of the soil, compact 
and cementation, cnternal drainage, available wa ter content, porousness, organic matter, cation 
exchange capacity, degree saturation, pH value, salinity, and carbonates. Moreover, this is the collected information which is essential to make proper classification of land suitability. These inputs are collected from sensors, as well as from the anonymous farmers and agriculture experts. Their collective responses and inputs helped to construct the required dataset. 
Electromagnetic sensors have been used to obtain the measurements for soil texture, internal 
drainage, available water content, organic matter, cation exchange capacity, carbonates, and degree 
of saturation. pH sensors are used to obtain the pH value, and salinity sensors are used to get the salinity value. The porousness value is obtained based on the measurement of the soil moisture sensor and granularity of the soil is obtained using the measurement acquired from the moisture 
content of the soil. The values of the structure of the soil and the compact and cementation are 
obtained from the agriculture experts. 
Figure 1. Architecture diagram of the proposed model.
The raspberry Pi 3 system is used here to handle inputs from multiple sensors, and the data are
sent to a cloud for storage, since it has the most powerful CPU comparatively, as well as the IEEE 802.11
wireless standard. A wi-ﬁ facility is also available and is used to transfer the data from the remote
agriculture land. For the better handling of data, the data is sent further to the cloud with the help of
the internet. The cloud facility used here is Amazon Web Serive (AWS), and the stored data is used
for machine learning for the purpose of analysis. The data is accessed on the local machine through
a cloud facility. The algorithm is developed in the machine and it is tested on the collected data to
verify the accuracy of the results obtained. The Raspberry Pi controller is used to collect the data from
various sensors for a sampling period of one day. Then the average values of various sensors are
moved to the AWS Cloud Network with the help of the Internet. From the AWS, the data is accessed
by the proposed model, which is developed in the system for normalization and training purposes.
Thus, the data obtained from various sensors for six months are considered for the development of the
sensor-driven AI model.
The various parameters used to ﬁnd agriculture land suitability analysis in this work are soil
texture, granular fragments (percentage of sand particles in the soil), structure of the soil, compact
and cementation, cnternal drainage, available water content, porousness, organic matter, cation
exchange capacity, degree saturation, pH value, salinity, and carbonates. Moreover, this is the collected
information which is essential to make proper classiﬁcation of land suitability. These inputs are
collected from sensors, as well as from the anonymous farmers and agriculture experts. Their collective
responses and inputs helped to construct the required dataset.
Electromagnetic sensors have been used to obtain the measurements for soil texture, internal
drainage, available water content, organic matter, cation exchange capacity, carbonates, and degree of
saturation. pH sensors are used to obtain the pH value, and salinity sensors are used to get the salinity