Sensors 2019 ,19, 3667 4 of 16
system was developed using a fuzzy approach to generate a moisture content distribution map of soil
by applying an interpolation technique.
The IoT-based Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) was used to generate a distribution map with the
measurements of soil moisture content taken at nine places of the selected farmland [ 29]. An IoT-based
system was developed to water agriculture crops using a wireless sensor network, and a web application
was also designed to control the information about the crop and ﬁeld [ 30]. Several machine learning
algorithms have been used so far for prediction and forecasting. A new forecasting model was designed
by combining the gravitational search algorithm with Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) to forecast the level
of water in Winnipesaukee and Cypress Lakes in the USA [ 31]. A neural network-based model was
proposed using MLP to predict the bid price of the keyword in a particular search engine ranking [ 32].
A hybrid model was proposed by combining the ﬁreﬂy algorithm and MLP to predict the salinity value
of soil with the help of remote sensing data [33]. An algorithm was proposed for the identiﬁcation of
weed diseases using MLP and automatic relevance determination. Three multi-criteria yield models
were proposed using neural networks with MLP for the prediction of winter rapeseed [34].
An IoT-based hydroponic intelligent system was developed using deep neural networks to control
the actions in the hydroponic environment characterized by multiple parameters gathered using IoT
sensors [ 35]. An IoT-based smart decision model was developed to help the farmers to get information
such as fertilizer requirements, crop analysis, and market requirements. IoT-based sensors were used to
obtain the data related to farming, and it is stored in a cloud framework where information is processed
and sent to farmers’ mobile devices by applying some data mining techniques [ 36]. An Intelligent
model was developed for the diagnosis of faults in the aquaculture ponds located in remote places
through IoT sensors. A fuzzy neural network algorithm was applied for fault detection, and the model
detects many types of faults in aquaculture ponds [ 37]. An IoT-based prototype was designed for
monitoring the water level in sources like borewells, water tanks, etc. This prototype could be used to
avoid damage in pump motors when the water level goes beyond the threshold level [38].
A predictive platform for precision agriculture was presented using IoT devices to improve
crop productivity at low-cost. Deep learning algorithms were used to predict the diseases in plants
which were hidden in the images of the leaves, and they were classiﬁed with maximum accuracy [ 39].
An intelligent system was developed to predict the fruit-melon image of skin lesions and alert for new
planting environments using the convolutional neural network and deep learning rule. The image is
obtained by using an infrared video sensor, and the system has obtained a satisfactory accuracy of
97.5%. A modern automatic agriculture monitoring system was developed using the ZigBee Wireless
Sensor Network and deep learning algorithms. Wireless sensor networks are also used to monitor the
temperature of soil and humidity. Also, the system classiﬁes the moisture content in the soil.
A decision tree-based model was proposed for optimizing water and energy consumption [ 40].
Further, this was accomplished with the assistance of the Internet-of-things. Moreover, to help the
farmers in saving the precious water resource, which is declining day by day, several soil parameters
were considered. Besides, for measuring the water requirement, and factors such as soil moisture
content and soil temperature were utilized for making a suitable decisions concerning water release.
The cloud-based IoT sensors are helpful in this work to control the overall setup. This in turn also
saves the energy.
The below section presents the proposed system which is a recommendation model for using
artiﬁcial intelligence and sensors.
3. Proposed System—Sensors Driven Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) - Based Agriculture
Recommendation Model
The sensor network-based proposed model is discussed in this section. The architecture diagram
of the sensor-based data management is shown in Figure 1. Sensor-based data collection requires three
main steps: data acquisition, data communication, and data processing. For collecting the various
parameter values concerning the properties of soil suitable for agriculture development, various