Context-aware Dynamics Model for Generalization in Model-Based Reinforcement Learning 
Vanilla DM + CaDM (one-step forward)
Vanilla DM + CaDM (future-step forward)
Vanilla DM + CaDM (future-step forward & backward)Average Return
0500100015002000
Timesteps0 5×10410×10415×10420×104
Vanilla DM
PE-TS
ReBALStacked DM
Vanilla DM + CaDM
PE-TS + CaDMPrediction Error
80120160200
HalfCheetah Mass0.5 1.0 1.5
(a) Effects of prediction loss (b) Prediction error (c) Context latent vector 
Figure 6. (a) Test performance of dynamics models optimized by variants of the proposed prediction objective in (1) on HalfCheetah 
environments. (b) Prediction errors on the HalfCheetah task with varying mass values. The pink shaded area represents the training range. 
(c) PCA visualization of context latent vectors extracted from trajectories collected in the CartPole environments. Embedded points from 
environments with the same mass parameter have the same color. The full fgures of all environments are in the supplementary material. 
12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
 2 4 6 8 10Vanilla+CaDM Stacked DM Vanilla+CaDM Stacked DM Vanilla DM Vanilla DM
Figure 7. Visualization of future state predictions from Vanilla + CaDM (ours), Stacked DM, and Vanilla DM on CartPole and Pendulum 
environments with unseen environment parameters. Given 10 past states and actions, we predict future states for the next 20 timesteps 
only using ground truth actions. The colored and faded objects represent the ground truth states and the predicted states, respectively. 
methods (i.e., PPO + EP and PPO + PC), implying that the 
proposed CaDM method can extract contextual information 
more effectively. On the other hand, the performance gain 
from our method is marginal in simple environments, such 
as CartPole and Pendulum. 
5.4. Ablation Study 
Effects of prediction loss. In order to verify the individual 
effects of the suggested prediction losses (1), we train three 
different dynamics models that optimize (a) one-step for -
ward prediction loss, (b) future-step forward prediction loss, 
and (c) future-step forward and backward prediction loss, 
respectively. Figure 6(a) shows the test performances for the 
HalfCheetah environment in the extreme regime. One can 
observe that optimizing the future-step forward and back-
ward prediction loss achieves the best performances. This 
shows that every component in the proposed loss function helps the context encoder extract the environment context. 
Prediction errors. To show that our method indeed helps 
with a forward prediction, we compare baseline methods 
with CaDM in terms of prediction error across multiple 
HalfCheetah environments with varying mass values. As 
shown in Figure 6(b), our model demonstrates superior pre-
diction performance in both training and test environments. 
In particular, PE-TS quickly becomes unreliable outside 
the training range (pink shaded area), whereas our model 
maintains a tolerable level of prediction errors throughout. 
Embedding analysis . We analyze whether the learned la-
tent vector encodes meaningful information about the en-
vironment. To this end, we collect trajectories from Cart-
Pole environments with different push force magnitudes, 
then visualize the latent encoding of the collected trajec-tory segments using principal component analysis (PCA) 
(Jolliffe, 1986). As shown in Figure 6(c), latent vectors