Context-aware Dynamics Model 
for Generalization in Model-Based Reinforcement Learning 
Kimin Lee 1* Younggyo Seo 2* Seunghyun Lee 2 Honglak Lee 3 4 Jinwoo Shin 2 
Abstract et al., 2019; Hafner et al., 2019; 2020; Kaiser et al., 2020). 
Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) enjoys 
several benefts, such as data-effciency and plan-
ning, by learning a model of the environments 
dynamics. However, learning a global model that 
can generalize across different dynamics is a chal-
lenging task. To tackle this problem, we decom-
pose the task of learning a global dynamics model 
into two stages: (a) learning a context latent vec-
tor that captures the local dynamics, then (b) pre-
dicting the next state conditioned on it. In order 
to encode dynamics-specifc information into the 
context latent vector, we introduce a novel loss 
function that encourages the context latent vector 
to be useful for predicting both forward and back-
ward dynamics. The proposed method achieves 
superior generalization ability across various sim-
ulated robotics and control tasks, compared to 
existing RL schemes. 
1. Introduction 
Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) with high-
capacity function approximators, such as deep neural net-
works (DNNs), has been used to solve a variety of sequen-
tial decision-making problems, including board games (e.g., 
Go and Chess (Schrittwieser et al., 2019)), video games 
(e.g., Atari games (Kaiser et al., 2020; Schrittwieser et al., 
2019)), and complex robotic control tasks (Zhang et al., 
2019; Nagabandi et al., 2019a; Hafner et al., 2020). By 
learning a model of the environment’s dynamics and uti-
lizing the dynamics model for planning, model-based RL 
achieves superior data-effciency to model-free RL meth-
ods in general (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011; Levine & 
Abbeel, 2014), and sometimes even beats model-free RL 
methods trained on suffcient amount of data (Schrittwieser 
*Equal contribution 1UC Berkeley 2KAIST 3University of 
Michigan Ann Arbor 4Google Brain. Correspondence to: Kimin 
Lee <kiminlee@berkeley.edu>. 
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine 
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s). However, it has been evidenced that model-based RL meth-
ods often struggle to generalize to an unseen environ-ment with different transition dynamics (Nagabandi et al., 
2019a;b). For example, when using a vanilla model-based 
RL method for the simple CartPole task (see Figure 1), even 
a minimal change in the pole mass leads to an inaccurate next-step prediction. This, in turn, leads to poor planning, 
and eventually performance degradation, as demonstrated in 
our experiments (see Table 1). Such failure to take account 
of transition dynamics shift makes them unreliable for real-
life deployment, which requires robustness to a myriad of 
changing environmental factors. 
To improve the generalization capabilities of model-based 
RL methods, several strategies have been proposed, includ-
ing meta-learning (Nagabandi et al., 2019a;b) and graph 
networks (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2018) (see Section 2 for 
further details). A notable such example is the model-based 
meta-RL method suggested by Nagabandi et al. (2019a), 
where a meta-learned prior model adapts to a recent trajec-
tory segment, either by updating hidden state of a recurrent 
model (Duan et al., 2016), or by updating model parameters 
via a small number of gradient steps (Finn et al., 2017). 
However, it is questionable whether a simple gradient or 
hidden state updates would capture the rich contextual infor -
mation that the environment offers. Instead, we argue that 
separating context encoding (i.e., capturing the contextual 
information) and transition inference (i.e., predicting the 
next state conditioned on the captured information) can be 
more effective for learning the environment dynamics. 
Contribution . In this paper, we develop a context-aware 
dynamics model (CaDM) capable of generalizing across 
a distribution of environments with varying transition dy-
namics. First, to capture the contextual information, we 
introduce a context encoder that produces a latent vector from a recent experience. Then, by conditioning our for -
ward dynamics model on this latent vector, we effectively 
perform an online adaptation to the unseen environment. 
We emphasize that the proposed CaDM can incorporate any 
dynamics model, e.g., fully-connected network or recurrent 
neural network, simply by conditioning the dynamics model 
on the encoder output. The novel ingredient of CaDM is its