Context-aware Dynamics Model for Generalization in Model-Based Reinforcement Learning 
loss function that forces the latent vector to be useful for 
predicting not only the next states (forward dynamics), but 
also the previous states (backward dynamics). Moreover, we 
consider an additional regularization that encourages tem-
poral consistency of the context latent vector: we force the 
context latent vector obtained in the current timestep to be 
useful for predictions made in the nearby future timesteps. 
We discover that the proposed context latent vector aptly 
captures the rich contextual information of the environment, 
which enables fast adaptation to the changing dynamics (see 
Figure 6(c)). Finally, we explore the possibility of improv-
ing the generalization abilities of a model-free RL method 
(Schulman et al., 2017) by giving the learned context latent 
vector as an additional input to the policy. 
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on a variety 
of simulated control tasks from OpenAI gym (Brockman 
et al., 2016) and MuJoCo physics engine (Todorov et al., 
2012). For evaluation, we measure the performance of 
model-based RL methods in a range of unseen (yet related) 
environments with different transition dynamics (see Fig-
ure 1). In our experiments, CaDM signifcantly reduces 
the performance gap between training and test environ-
ments when compared to baselines, including ensemble 
methods (Chua et al., 2018) and model-based meta-RL meth-
ods (Nagabandi et al., 2019a). Furthermore, we show that 
CaDM can also improve model-free RL methods: it im-
proves the generalization performance of proximal policy 
optimization (PPO; Schulman et al. 2017), compared to 
other context learning methods (Rakelly et al., 2019; Zhou 
et al., 2019) for model-free RL. We believe that our ap-
proach could be infuential to other relevant topics, such as 
sim-to-real transfer (Peng et al., 2018). 
2. Related Work 
Model-based reinforcement learning . In model-based 
RL, we learn a dynamics model that approximates the true 
environment dynamics. Such a dynamics model can then be 
used for control by planning (Atkeson & Santamaria, 1997; 
Lenz et al., 2015; Finn & Levine, 2017), or for improving the 
data-effciency of model-free RL methods (Sutton, 1990; Gu 
et al., 2016; Janner et al., 2019). Recently, by incorporating 
high-capacity function approximators like DNNs, model-
based RL has shown remarkable progress even in complex 
domains (Oh et al., 2015; Chua et al., 2018; Hafner et al., 
2019; 2020; Schrittwieser et al., 2019). For example, Chua 
et al. (2018) showed that an ensemble of probabilistic DNNs 
could reduce modeling errors and achieve the asymptotic 
performance on-par with model-free RL algorithms. It also 
has been observed that model-based RL methods can be 
applied for solving high-dimensional visual domain tasks 
(Hafner et al., 2019; 2020; Schrittwieser et al., 2019). How-
ever, developing a generalizable model-based RL method (a) CartPole with varying pole lengths 
(b) Pendulum with varying pendulum lengths 
(c) HalfCheetah with varying body masses 
(d) Ant with varying body masses 
Figure 1. Examples from (a) CartPole, (b) Pendulum, (c) HalfChee-
tah, and (d) Ant. We change the transition dynamics of each 
environment by modifying its environment parameters. 
still remains a longstanding challenge. 
Dynamics generalization in deep RL. Generalization of 
model-based RL has recently gained considerable attention 
in the research community. Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2018) 
proposed to model a dynamics model using a graph net-
work, and Nagabandi et al. (2019a;b) studied model-based 
meta-RL methods where the meta-learner learns to update 
the model according to dynamics changes. Notably, Naga-
bandi et al. (2019a) proposed to adapt the dynamics model 
to recent trajectory segments, either by updating hidden rep-
resentations of a recurrent model (Duan et al., 2016) or by 
updating model parameters via a small number of gradient 
steps (Finn et al., 2017). However, it is questionable whether 
such methods capture the environment context properly, for 
they are overburdened with two tasks: adaptation and next-
state inference. We instead propose to disentangle the two 
tasks by introducing a context encoder that specializes in the 
former, and a conditioned dynamics model that specializes 
in the latter. 
Several model-free RL methods, including adversarial pol-
icy training (Morimoto & Doya, 2001; Pinto et al., 2017; 
Rajeswaran et al., 2017), structured policy with graph neural 
network (Wang et al., 2018), online system identifcation 
(Yu et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2019), and meta-learning (Finn 
et al., 2017; Rakelly et al., 2019), have been proposed to 
improve the generalization ability of RL agents across dy-
namics changes. In particular, Rakelly et al. (2019) pro-