Context-aware Dynamics Model for Generalization in Model-Based Reinforcement Learning 
5. Experiments 
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our CaDM 
method to answer the following questions: 
• Is CaDM more robust to dynamics changes compared 
to other model-based RL methods (see Table 1)? 
• Can CaDM be combined with model-free RL methods 
to improve their generalization abilities (see Table 2)? 
• Does the proposed prediction loss (1) improve the test 
performance (see Figure 6(a))? 
• Can CaDM make accurate predictions (see Figure 6(b) 
and Figure 7)? 
• Does our context encoder extract meaningful contex-
tual information (see Figure 6(c))? 
5.1. Setups 
Environments . We demonstrate the effectiveness of our 
proposed method on simulated robots (i.e., HalfCheetah, 
Ant, CrippledHalfCheetah, and SlimHumanoid) using the 
MuJoCo physics engine (Todorov et al., 2012) and classic 
control tasks (i.e., CartPole and Pendulum) from OpenAI 
Gym (Brockman et al., 2016). The goal of CartPole is to 
prevent the pole from falling over by pushing the cart left 
and right, while that of Pendulum is to swing up the pendu-
lum and keep it in the upright position. As for HalfCheetah, 
Ant, and SlimHumanoid, the goal is to move forward as 
fast as possible, while keeping the control cost minimal. 
As in Packer et al. (2018); Zhou et al. (2019), we modify 
the environment parameters (e.g., mass, length, damping) 
that characterize the transition dynamics (see Figure 1). In 
the case of CrippledHalfCheetah, one of the actuators is 
randomly crippled to change the transition dynamics. 
For both training and testing, we sample environment pa-rameters at the beginning of each episode. During train-
ing, we randomly sample environment parameters from a 
predefned training range. At test time, we measure each 
model’s performance in unseen environments characterized 
by parameters outside the training range. In order to utilize 
model-predictive control (MPC), we assume that the reward 
function is known, as in (Chua et al., 2018; Nagabandi et al., 
2019a). 
Note that generalization performance is measured in two 
different regimes: moderate and extreme, where the former 
draw environment parameters from a closer range to the 
training range, compared to the latter (see Figure 3). For all 
our experiments, we select the model with the highest aver -
age return during training and report the test performance. 
We report mean and standard deviation across fve runs. Due 
to space limitations, we provide more experimental details 
in the supplementary material. 
Training Neutral Neutral Extreme Extreme
 Training Moderate Moderate Extreme ExtremeFigure 3. Illustration of training and test parameter ranges. 
Baselines and our method . We consider the following 
model-based RL methods as baselines: 
• Vanilla dynamics model (Vanilla DM): Dynamics model trained to minimize the standard one-step for -
ward prediction loss. The model is fxed during test 
time (i.e., no adaptation). 
• Stacked dynamics model (Stacked DM): Vanilla dy-namics model which takes the past 
K ∈{5, 10, 15}
transitions as an additional input. A comparison with 
this model evaluates the beneft of introducing a con-
text latent vector. 
• Gradient-Based Adaptive Learner (GrBAL; Nagabandi 
et al. 2019a): Model-based meta-RL method which 
trains a dynamics model by optimizing an adaptation 
meta-objective. At test time, the meta-learned prior 
dynamics model adapts to a recent trajectory segment 
by taking gradient steps.1 
• Recurrence-Based Adaptive Learner (ReBAL; Naga-
bandi et al. 2019a): Model-based meta-RL method 
similar to GrBAL. However, instead of taking gradient 
steps, ReBAL uses a recurrent model that learns its 
own update rule, i.e. updating its hidden state.1 
• Probabilistic ensemble dynamics model (PE-TS; Chua 
et al. 2018): An ensemble of probabilistic dynam-
ics models designed to incorporate both environment 
stochasticity and subjective uncertainty into the model. 
We combine CaDM with two baseline model-based RL 
methods, Vanilla DM and PE-TS.: the results of ReBAL 
+ CaDM can also be found in the supplementary mate-
rial, where it underperforms Vanilla + CaDM or PE-TS 
+ CaDM overall. We remark that the proposed method can 
be applied to any model-based RL methods because we 
separate a context encoder from forward dynamics models, 
as shown in Figure 2. Due to space limitation, we pro-
vide details about model architecture and hyperparameters 
in the supplementary material. Our code is available at 
https://github.com/younggyoseo/CaDM. 
1We used a reference implementation publicly avail-
able at https://github.com/iclavera/learning_ 
to_adapt.