across the spatial-channel dimensions. We propose a “global” attention mechanism that reserves
information to magnify the “global” cross-dimension interactions. Therefore, we name the proposed
method Global Attention Mechanism (GAM).
2 Related Works
There have been several studies focusing on performance improvements of attention mechanisms
for image classiﬁcation tasks. Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks (SENet) (Hu et al. [2018]) is the
ﬁrst to use channel attention and channel-wise-feature-fusion to suppress the unimportant channels.
However, it is less efﬁcient in suppressing unimportant pixels. The later-on attention mechanisms
considered both spatial and channel dimensions. The convolutional block attention module (CBAM)
(Woo et al. [2018]) places the channel and spatial attention operation sequentially, while bottleneck
attention module (BAM) (Park et al. [2018]) did it in parallel. However, both of them ignore the
channel-spatial interactions and lose the cross-dimension information consequently. Considering
the signiﬁcance of the cross-dimension interactions, the triplet attention module (TAM) (Misra et al.
[2021]) boosts efﬁciency by utilizing the attention weights between each pair of the three dimensions
– channel, spatial width, and spatial height. However, the attention operations are still applied on two
of the dimensions each time instead of all three. To magnify cross-dimension interactions, we propose
an attention mechanism that is capable of capturing signiﬁcant features across all three dimensions.
3 Global Attention Mechanism (GAM)
Our objective is to design a mechanism that reduces information reduction and magniﬁes global
dimension-interactive features. We adopt the sequential channel-spatial attention mechanism from
CBAM and redesign the submodules. The overall process is illustrated in Fig. 1 and formulated in
Equation 1 and 2 (Woo et al. [2018]). Given the input feature map F12RCHW, the intermediate
stateF2and the output F3are deﬁned as:
F2=Mc(F1)
F1 (1)
F3=Ms(F2)
F2 (2)
whereMcandMsare the channel and spatial attention maps, respectively; 
denotes element-wise
multiplication.
Channel Attention Spatial Attention
Figure 1: The overview of GAM
Thechannel attention submodule uses 3D permutation to retain information across three dimensions.
It then magniﬁes cross-dimension channel-spatial dependencies with a two-layer MLP (multi-layer
perceptron). (The MLP is an encoder-decoder structure with a reduction ratio r, same as BAM.) The
channel attention submodule is illustrated in Fig. 2.
In the spatial attention submodule, to focus on spatial information, we use two convolutional
layers for spatial information fusion. We also use the same reduction ratio rfrom the channel
attention submodule, same as BAM. Meanwhile, max-pooling reduces the information and contributes
negatively. We remove pooling to further retain the feature maps. As a result, the spatial attention
module sometimes increase the number of parameters signiﬁcantly. To prevent a notable increase of
the parameters, we adopt group convolution with channel shufﬂe (Zhang et al. [2018]) in ResNet50.
The spatial attention submodule without group convolution is shown in Fig. 3.
2