Explanations for Decision Trees 5
paper. In addition, there has been work on applying explaina ble AI (XAI) to decision
trees [ 38], but with the focus of improving the quality of local (heuri stic) explanations,
where the goal is to relate a local approximate model against a reference model; hence
there is no immediate relationship with PI-explanations.
3 Decision Trees May Not be Interpretable
This section shows that there exist Boolean functions for wh ich a learned decision tree
will exhibit paths containing all features, and for which a P I-explanation has a con-
stant size. Thus, if we associate explanations with DT paths , there will be explana-
tions that are arbitraly larger (on n) than the actual (constant-size) PI-explanation. As
the experimental results demonstrate, and as discussed lat er in this section, it is fairly
frequent in practice for DT paths to include more literals th at those in the associated
PI-explanations.
Proposition 1. There exist functions for which an irreducible DT contains p aths which
are a proper superset of a PI-explanation. Furthermore, the difference in the number
of literals is n−k, where n is the number of features and k is the (constant) siz e of a
PI-explanation.
Proof. Let us consider the following Boolean function f:{0,1}n→{0,1}(with even
n):
f(x1,x2,..., xn−1,xn)=/logicalordisplayn/2
i=1x2i−1∧x2i (3)
For the case n=4, different off-the-self DT learners will obtain the DT sho wn in Figure 1b .
(To obtain the decision tree, we considered a dataset compos ed of allpossible instances,
and used ITI [ 65]9.) Furthermore, it is immediate to conclude that the decisio n tree
shown is irreducible (i.e. no nodes can be removed while keep ing accuracy). More-
over, let the target instance be (v,π)=(( 1,0,1,1),1). In this case, the explanation (i.e.
the path) extracted from the DT is (x1=1)∧(x2=0)∧(x3=1)∧(x4=1), which
guarantees that the prediction is 1. However, it is immediat e from the function deﬁni-
tion ( 3), that(x3=1)∧(x4=1)entails f(x1,x2,x3,x4)=1,independently of the value
assigned to x1andx2, i.e. in this case the PI-explanation is (x3=1)∧(x4=1). The
same analysis generalizes to an arbitrary number of variabl es. For an instance of the
form((1,0,1,0,..., 1,0,1,1),1), the DT would indicate an explanation with nliterals,
whereas the PI-explanation has size 2, namely (xn−1=1)∧(xn=1).
It should be noted that the issue above does not depend on whet her the DT is
redundant (e.g. in the cases shown, the DTs are notredundant); the reported issues
result solely from a fundamental limitation of DTs for succi nctly representing cer-
tain classes of functions10.Figure 2 exempliﬁes that redundancy may occur even in
9ITI is available from https://www-lrn.cs.umass.edu/iti/ . We considered a number of publicly
available DT learners, and reached the same conclusions (in terms of path length) in all cases.
10Indeed, it is well-known that DTs are not as succinct as decis ion lists (DLs) [ 53] (and so not
as succinct as decision sets (DSs)). This means that there ex ist functions that have succint DLs
or DSs, but not DTs. Although not the focus of the paper, we con jecture that similar results
can be obtained for DLs and for restricted cases of DSs, among those where DSs compute
functions.