Explanations for Decision Trees 13
of redundant literals per path is denoted by %avg (%mand%M, resp.). Observe that
despite the shallowness of the trees produced by IAI and ITI, for the majority of datasets
and with a few exceptions, the paths in trees trained by both t ools exhibit signiﬁcant
explanation-redundancy. In particular, on average, 32.1% (46.9%, resp.) of paths are
explanation-redundantfor the trees obtained by IAI (ITI, r esp.). For some DTs, obtained
with either IAI and ITI, more than 85% of tree paths are redund ant. Also, redundant
paths of the trees of IAI (ITI, resp.) cover on average 20.1% ( 37.7%, resp.) of feature
space. Moreover, in some cases, up to 89% and 98% of the entire feature space is
covered by the redundant paths for IAI and ITI, respectively . This means that DTs
produced by IAI and ITI are unable to provide a user with a succ inct explanation for
thevast majority of data instances. In addition, the average number of redund ant literals
in redundant paths for both IAI and ITI varies from 16% to 65%, but for some DTs it
exceeds 80%.
To summarize, the numbers shown for the selected datasets an d for the state-of-
the-art DT training tools contrast the common belief in the i nherent interpretability of
decision tree classiﬁers. Perhaps as importantly, the perf ormance ﬁgures conﬁrm that
the elimination of explanation-redundancy in the DTs produ ced with available tools has
negligible computational cost.
7 Conclusions
Decision trees are most often associated with interpretabi lity. This paper shows that in
some situations, paths in a decision tree may include many li terals that are irrelevant for
an explanation, and that this holds true even for irreducibl e decision trees. Moreover,
the paper proposes a linear time test to decide whether a deci sion tree path contains ir-
relevant literals, and uses such test to devise a polynomial time algorithm for computing
one PI-explanation of a decision tree. Furthermore, the pap er shows the connection be-
tween enumerating the PI-explanations of DTs and the enumer ation of minimal hitting
sets. Experimental results obtained on publicly available datasets, using state-of-the-
art decision tree learners, show that in practice induced pa ths in decision trees may
contain irrelevant literals, even when the decision tree is irreducible. For the decision
trees considered in the experiments, the run times of the pro posed algorithms are either
negligible or comparable to tree learning times.
References
1. G. Aglin, S. Nijssen, and P. Schaus. Learning optimal deci sion trees using caching branch-
and-bound search. In AAAI , pages 3146–3153, 2020.
2. G. Aglin, S. Nijssen, and P. Schaus. PyDL8.5: a library for learning optimal decision trees.
InIJCAI , pages 5222–5224, 2020.
3. E. Alpaydin. Machine Learning: The New AI . MIT Press, 2016.
4. E. Angelino, N. Larus-Stone, D. Alabi, M. Seltzer, and C. R udin. Learning certiﬁably opti-
mal rule lists. In KDD , pages 35–44, 2017.
5. E. Angelino, N. Larus-Stone, D. Alabi, M. Seltzer, and C. R udin. Learning certiﬁably opti-
mal rule lists for categorical data. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 18:234:1–234:78, 2017.