Explanations for Decision Trees 9
Algorithm 2: Inconsistent sub-path lookup
Function CHKDOWN(T,N,Rk,n,rec)
1 π←Prediction (T,Rk);
2C←ChildNodes (T,n);
3 foreach c∈Cdo
4 ifc∈N andrec=0then continue ;
5 if notHasPaths (T,c,π)then continue ;
6 ifIsTerminal (T,c)then
7 return false ;
8 g←Feature (T,c);
9 if notUniversal (T,g)then continue ;
10 if not CHKDOWN(T,N,Rk,c,rec)then
11 return false ;
12 return true;
correspond to P1,Q1andQ2. Hence, due to Q1andQ2, it might seem that x1might
be irredundant. However, both Q1andQ2are inconsistent with other non-redundant
literals of P2, concretely x3=1 and x4=1. Hence, x1is declared redundant.
Extracting one PI-explanation. One approach to ﬁnd a PI-explanation is to use re-
cent work based on compilation [ 61] or iterative entailment checks with an NP ora-
cle [29]. However, a computationally simpler solution is based on t he ideas described
above.
Features are analyzed as proposed in Algorithms 1and2. However, a feature already
declared as redundant signiﬁes that it can take anyvalue from its domain. This may
allow inconsistent paths with prediction ⊖to become consistent, thus preventing some
other feature from being declared redundant. One consequen ce is that the ﬁltering of
paths exploited in Algorithms 1and2is not longer applicable. Concretely, the analysis
of each feature requires visiting all of the sub-paths start ing in any of the path nodes
testing the feature. Algorithm 2can still be used, in this case by setting rec to 1, i.e.
all sub-paths will be analyzed. The worst-case complexity o f the resulting algorithm is
O(|T|)for each feature, thus yielding O(|T|2)for the complete algorithm. Finally, we
can conclude that an algorithm for ﬁnding one PI-explanatio n for each path inTruns
inO(|T|3).
Example 4. We consider the DT from Figure 1b and analyze path P2(and so anyin-
stance consistent with P2). Literals are analyzed in reverse path order. (In this case , ag-
gregation of nodes by feature is optional, as long as a decisi on with respect to a feature
is delayed until all nodes associated with the feature have b een analyzed, and keeping
track whether non-irredundancy applies to all nodes.) As be fore, the literal (x4=1)
is not redundant; otherwise Q4would be consistent. Similarly, the literal (x3=1)is
not redundant; otherwise Q3would be consistent. In contrast, the feature x2can be
made universal, as this does not change the prediction, i.e. P2is consistent with the
prediction, and the other literals (x3=1)and(x4=1)block the paths inQ. A similar