2 Izza, Ignatiev and Marques-Silva
of features) than a PI-explanation3of constant size. Experimental results demonstrate
that for widely used tools for constructing DT classiﬁers, t he resulting DTs often con-
tain paths that are proper supersets of PI-explanations (wh ich we refer as explanation-
redundant paths, in possibly irredundant DTs). Perhaps mor e importantly, for a signiﬁ-
cant number of datasets, and for the obtained DTs, most of the ir paths are explanation-
redundant. The results also indicate that for some DTs, as mu ch as 98% of feature space
will be explained by some path that is explanation-redundan t. Motivated by these nega-
tive results, we propose a hitting set formulation for compu ting PI-explanations of DTs,
distinguishing explanations restricted to literals in a tr ee path, and explanations unre-
stricted to literals in a tree path. In addition, we propose a polynomial time algorithm
for computing a single PI-explanation for any given instanc e. Finally, the paper reduces
enumeration of PI-explanations of DTs to the problem of enum erating minimal hitting
sets (MHSes), and proposes a solution based on iterative cal ls to an NP oracle (e.g. SAT
or a 0-1 ILP) oracle.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the notation and deﬁnitions
used in the remainder of the paper. Section 3 studies functions that elicit poor DT in-
terpretability. Section 4 proposes a polynomial-time algorithm for computing a singl e
PI-explanation for a DT. Section 5 proposes a solution for enumerating PI-explanations
of DTs, by reducing the problem to the computation of MHSes. Section 6 studies the
DTs obtained with two state-of-the-art tools, on publicly a vailable datasets, and shows
that paths in learned decision trees are often proper supers ets of PI-explanations. More-
over, the experimental results conﬁrm that run times for ext racting PI-explanations are
negligible. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.
2 Preliminaries
Classiﬁcation problems. We consider a classiﬁcation problem deﬁned on a set of
featuresF={1,..., n}, where each feature itakes values from a (categorical) domain
Di4, and ndenotes the number of features. Feature space is deﬁned by F=D1×D2×
...×Dn, each deﬁning the range of (categorical) values of each feat urexi. To refer to
an arbitrary point in feature space we use the notation x=(x1,..., xn), whereas to refer
to a concrete point in feature space we use the notation v=(v1,..., vn), with vi∈Di,
i=1,..., n. We consider a binary classiﬁcation problem, with two class esK={⊖,⊕}5.
(For simplicity, we will often use 0 for ⊖and 1 for⊕.) An instance (or example) denotes
a pair(v,π), where v∈Fandπ∈K. A machine learning model computes a function
µthat maps the feature space into the set of classes: µ:F→K . To train an ML model
(in our case we are interested in DTs), we start from a set of ex amplesE={e1,..., em},
where each ej=(vj,πj), such that vj∈Fandπj∈K, and mis the number of examples.
Decision trees. A decision treeTis a directed acyclic graph having at most one path
between every pair of nodes. Thas a root node, characterized by having no incoming
3A PI-explanation is a subset-minimal set of feature-value p airs that entails the prediction [ 61].
4For simplicity, most of the examples in the paper consider Di/defines{0,1}(i.e. binary features).
5The results in the paper are readily applicable to multiple c lasses; the case|K|=2 is considered
solely for simplicity.