P7
P6
P5
P4
P3
(a) FPN(d) BiFPN (b) PANet (c) NAS-FPNP7
P6
P5
P4
P3P7
P6
P5
P4
P3P7
P6
P5
P4
P3repeated blocks repeated blocks
Figure 2: Feature network design – (a) FPN [ 20] introduces a top-down pathway to fuse multi-scale features from level 3 to
7 (P3-P7); (b) PANet [ 23] adds an additional bottom-up pathway on top of FPN; (c) NAS-FPN [ 8] use neural architecture
search to ﬁnd an irregular feature network topology and then repeatedly apply the same block; (d) is our BiFPN with better
accuracy and efﬁciency trade-offs.
Figure 2(a) shows the conventional top-down FPN [ 20]. It
takes level 3-7 input features /vectorPin= (Pin
3,...Pin
7), where
Pin
irepresents a feature level with resolution of 1/2iof the
input images. For instance, if input resolution is 640x640,
thenPin
3represents feature level 3 ( 640/23= 80 ) with res-
olution 80x80, while Pin
7represents feature level 7 with res-
olution 5x5. The conventional FPN aggregates multi-scale
features in a top-down manner:
Pout
7=Conv(Pin
7)
Pout
6=Conv(Pin
6+Resize(Pout
7))
...
Pout
3=Conv(Pin
3+Resize(Pout
4))
whereResize is usually a upsampling or downsampling
op for resolution matching, and Conv is usually a convo-
lutional op for feature processing.
3.2. Cross­Scale Connections
Conventional top-down FPN is inherently limited by the
one-way information ﬂow. To address this issue, PANet
[23] adds an extra bottom-up path aggregation network, as
shown in Figure 2(b). Cross-scale connections are further
studied in [ 17,15,39]. Recently, NAS-FPN [ 8] employs
neural architecture search to search for better cross-scale
feature network topology, but it requires thousands of GPU
hours during search and the found network is irregular and
difﬁcult to interpret or modify, as shown in Figure 2(c).
By studying the performance and efﬁciency of these
three networks (Table 5), we observe that PANet achieves
better accuracy than FPN and NAS-FPN, but with the cost
of more parameters and computations. To improve modelefﬁciency, this paper proposes several optimizations for
cross-scale connections: First, we remove those nodes that
only have one input edge. Our intuition is simple: if a
node has only one input edge with no feature fusion, then
it will have less contribution to feature network that aims
at fusing different features. This leads to a simpliﬁed bi-
directional network; Second, we add an extra edge from the
original input to output node if they are at the same level,
in order to fuse more features without adding much cost;
Third, unlike PANet [ 23] that only has one top-down and
one bottom-up path, we treat each bidirectional (top-down
& bottom-up) path as one feature network layer, and repeat
the same layer multiple times to enable more high-level fea-
ture fusion. Section 4.2will discuss how to determine the
number of layers for different resource constraints using a
compound scaling method. With these optimizations, we
name the new feature network as bidirectional feature pyra-
mid network (BiFPN), as shown in Figure 2and3.
3.3. Weighted Feature Fusion
When fusing features with different resolutions, a com-
mon way is to ﬁrst resize them to the same resolution and
then sum them up. Pyramid attention network [ 19] intro-
duces global self-attention upsampling to recover pixel lo-
calization, which is further studied in [ 8]. All previous
methods treat all input features equally without distinction.
However, we observe that since different input features are
at different resolutions, they usually contribute to the output
feature unequally . To address this issue, we propose to add
an additional weight for each input, and let the network to
learn the importance of each input feature. Based on this
idea, we consider three weighted fusion approaches:
Unbounded fusion: O=/summationtext
iwi·Ii, where wiis a
10783