Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
IMPLEMENTATION MATTERS IN DEEPPOLICY
GRADIENTS : A C ASE STUDY ON PPO AND TRPO
Logan Engstrom1*, Andrew Ilyas1*, Shibani Santurkar1, Dimitris Tsipras1,
Firdaus Janoos2, Larry Rudolph1,2, and Aleksander M ˛ adry1
1MIT2Two Sigma
{engstrom,ailyas,shibani,tsipras,madry}@mit.edu
rudolph@csail.mit.edu, firdaus.janoos@twosigma.com
ABSTRACT
We study the roots of algorithmic progress in deep policy gradient algorithms
through a case study on two popular algorithms: Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) and Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO). Speciﬁcally, we investigate
the consequences of “code-level optimizations:” algorithm augmentations found
only in implementations or described as auxiliary details to the core algorithm.
Seemingly of secondary importance, such optimizations turn out to have a major
impact on agent behavior. Our results show that they (a) are responsible for most
of PPO’s gain in cumulative reward over TRPO, and (b) fundamentally change
how RL methods function. These insights show the difﬁculty and importance of
attributing performance gains in deep reinforcement learning.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have fueled many of the most publicized achievements
in modern machine learning (Silver et al., 2017; OpenAI, 2018; Abbeel & Schulman, 2016; Mnih
et al., 2013). However, despite these accomplishments, deep RL methods still are not nearly as
reliable as their (deep) supervised learning counterparts. Indeed, recent research found the existing
deep RL methods to be brittle (Henderson et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018), hard to reproduce (Hen-
derson et al., 2017; Tucker et al., 2018), unreliable across runs (Henderson et al., 2017; 2018), and
sometimes outperformed by simple baselines (Mania et al., 2018).
The prevalence of these issues points to a broader problem: we do not understand how the parts
comprising deep RL algorithms impact agent training, either separately or as a whole. This unsat-
isfactory understanding suggests that we should re-evaluate the inner workings of our algorithms.
Indeed, the overall question motivating our work is: how do the multitude of mechanisms used in
deep RL training algorithms impact agent behavior?
Our contributions. We analyze the underpinnings of agent behavior—both through the traditional
metric of cumulative reward, and by measuring more ﬁne-grained algorithmic properties. As a ﬁrst
step, we conduct a case study of two of the most popular deep policy-gradient methods: Trust
Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015a) and Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). These two methods are closely related: PPO was originally devel-
oped as a reﬁnement of TRPO.
We ﬁnd that much of the observed improvement in reward brought by PPO may come from seem-
ingly small modiﬁcations to the core algorithm which we call code-level optimizations . These op-
timizations are either found only in implementations of PPO, or are described as auxiliary details
and are not present in the corresponding TRPO baselines1. We pinpoint these modiﬁcations, and
perform an ablation study demonstrating that they are instrumental to the PPO’s performance.
*Equal contribution. Work done in part while interning at Two Sigma.
1Note that these code-level optimizations are separate from “implementation choices” like the choice of
PyTorch versus TensorFlow in that they intentionally change the training algorithm’s operation.
1arXiv:2005.12729v1  [cs.LG]  25 May 2020