Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
This observation prompts us to study how code-level optimizations change agent training dynamics,
and whether we can truly think of these optimizations as merely auxiliary improvements. Our results
indicate that these optimizations fundamentally change algorithms’ operation, and go even beyond
improvements in agent reward. We ﬁnd that they majorly impact a key algorithmic principle behind
TRPO and PPO’s operations: trust region enforcement.
Ultimately, we discover that the PPO code-optimizations are more important in terms of ﬁnal re-
ward achieved than the choice of general training algorithm (TRPO vs. PPO). This result is in stark
contrast to the previous view that the central PPO clipping method drives the gains seen in Schulman
et al. (2017). In doing so, we demonstrate that the algorithmic changes imposed by such optimiza-
tions make rigorous comparisons of algorithms difﬁcult. Without a rigorous understanding of the
full impact of code-level optimizations, we cannot hope to gain any reliable insight from comparing
algorithms on benchmark tasks.
Our results emphasize the importance of building RL methods in a modular manner. To progress
towards more performant and reliable algorithms, we need to understand each component’s impact
on agents’ behavior and performance—both individually, and as part of a whole.
Code for all the results shown in this work is available at https://github.com/MadryLab/
implementation-matters .
2 R ELATED WORK
The idea of using gradient estimates to update neural network–based RL agents dates back at least
to the work of Williams (1992), who proposed the REINFORCE algorithm. Later, Sutton et al.
(1999) established a unifying framework that casts the previous algorithms as instances of the policy
gradient method.
Our work focuses on proximal policy optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) and trust region
policy optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015a), which are two of the most prominent policy
gradient algorithms used in deep RL. Much of the original inspiration for the usage of the trust
regions stems from the conservative policy update of Kakade (2001). This policy update, similarly
to TRPO, uses a natural gradient descent-based greedy policy update. TRPO also bears similarity
to the relative policy entropy search method of Peters et al. (2010), which constrains the distance
between marginal action distributions (whereas TRPO constrains the conditionals of such action
distributions).
Notably, Henderson et al. (2017) points out a number of brittleness, reproducibility, and experimen-
tal practice issues in deep RL algorithms. Importantly, we build on the observation of Henderson
et al. (2017) that ﬁnal reward for a given algorithm is greatly inﬂuenced depending on the code
base used. Rajeswaran et al. (2017) and Mania et al. (2018) also demonstrate that on many of the
benchmark tasks, the performance of PPO and TRPO can be matched by fairly elementary random-
ized search approaches. Additionally, Tucker et al. (2018) showed that one of the recently proposed
extensions of the policy gradient framework, i.e., the usage of baseline functions that are also action-
dependent (in addition to being state-dependent), might not lead to better policies after all.
3 A TTRIBUTING SUCCESS IN PROXIMAL POLICY OPTIMIZATION
Our overarching goal is to better understand the underpinnings of the behavior of deep policy gra-
dient methods. We thus perform a careful study of two tightly linked algorithms: TRPO and PPO
(recall that PPO is motivated as TRPO with a different trust region enforcement mechanism). To
better understand these methods, we start by thoroughly investigating their implementations in prac-
tice. We ﬁnd that in comparison to TRPO, the PPO implementation contains many non-trivial op-
timizations that are not (or only barely) described in its corresponding paper. Indeed, the standard
implementation of PPO2contains the following additional optimizations:
2From the OpenAI baselines GitHub repository: https://github.com/openai/baselines
2