Universal Graph Convolutional Networks
Di Jin1†, Zhizhi Yu1†, Cuiying Huo1, Rui Wang1, Xiao Wang2*, Dongxiao He1, and Jiawei Han3
1College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2School of Computer Science (National Pilot Software Engineering School),
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
3Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA
{jindi, yuzhizhi, huocuiying, wr1895, hedongxiao}@tju.edu.cn
xiaowang@bupt.edu.cn ,hanj@illinois.edu
Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs), aiming to obtain the representation of a
node by aggregating its neighbors, have demonstrated great power in tackling vari-
ous analytics tasks on graph (network) data. The remarkable performance of GCNs
typically relies on the homophily assumption of networks, while such assumption
cannot always be satisﬁed, since the heterophily or randomness are also widespread
in real-world. This gives rise to one fundamental question: whether networks with
different structural properties should adopt different propagation mechanisms?
In this paper, we ﬁrst conduct an experimental investigation. Surprisingly, we
discover that there are actually segmentation rules for the propagation mechanism,
i.e., 1-hop, 2-hop and k-nearest neighbor ( kNN) neighbors are more suitable as
neighborhoods of network with complete homophily, complete heterophily and
randomness, respectively. However, the real-world networks are complex, and may
present diverse structural properties, e.g., the network dominated by homophily
may contain a small amount of randomness. So can we reasonably utilize these
segmentation rules to design a universal propagation mechanism independent of the
network structural assumption? To tackle this challenge, we develop a new univer-
sal GCN framework, namely U-GCN. It ﬁrst introduces a multi-type convolution to
extract information from 1-hop, 2-hop and kNN networks simultaneously, and then
designs a discriminative aggregation to sufﬁciently fuse them aiming to given learn-
ing objectives. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of U-GCN over
state-of-the-arts. The code and data are available at https://github.com/jindi-tju.
1 Introduction
Real-world complex systems can often be viewed as networks, such as social networks, biological
networks and citation networks. Recently, research of analyzing networks with deep learning has
received widespread attention both in academia and industry. In particular, Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) [ 14], which obtain the meaningful representation of nodes in the network by
integrating the neighborhood information, have achieved great success and been widely applied
in tackling network analytics tasks, such as node classiﬁcation [ 23,28], link prediction [ 33] and
recommendation [30, 17].
While the success of GCNs and their variants [ 1,6], a key weakness is the homophily assumption
of networks, which restricts their performance on general network data. To be speciﬁc, most GCNs
†Equal contributions.
*Corresponding author.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).