Homophily Assumption. Several efforts have been made to relieve the limitation of homophily
assumption, so as to improve GCNs. Geom-GCN [ 22] proposes a novel geometric aggregation
scheme to overcome neighborhood structural information losing and long-range dependencies lacking.
GPR-GNN [ 4] proposes a new architecture that adaptively learns the generalized pageRank (GPR)
weights, to jointly optimize node feature and topological information extraction. CPGNN [ 34]
designs a GNN framework that incorporates an interpretable compatibility matrix Hfor modeling
the homophily level. Moreover, H2GCN [ 35] incorporates three key designs: ego- and neighbor-
embedding separation, higher-order neighborhoods and combination of intermediate, to capture
information under the low level of homophily. More Recently, GGCN [ 32] proposes a robust and
generalized model that addresses the discrepancy in features and degrees between neighbors by
incorporating signed messages and learned degree corrections, so as to alleviate the homophily
assumption of GCNs.
These existing methods have achieved reasonable results on handling the homophily assumption of
GCNs. However, there is still a lack of insightful understanding of the key factors of a universal prop-
agation mechanism independent of the network structural assumption, which is of great signiﬁcant
while often ignored by the existing GCN methods.
7 Discussion
In this section, we discuss what are the universal propagation mechanism in networks. Take the global
spread of epidemics as an example, it is a complex, network-driven dynamic process. The combined
multi-scale nature and intrinsic heterogeneity of the epidemic network make it difﬁcult to develop an
intuitive understanding of this process, to predict its time course and to locate its origin. However,
Brockmann et al. [3] show that if we use a probabilistically motivated effective distance, rather
than conventional geographic distance, to analyse propagation process, the complex spatiotemporal
patterns can be simpliﬁed into simple, homogeneous wave propagation patterns. Motivated by this
idea, it is of great necessary to ﬁnd a universal propagation mechanism for GCNs, where universality
refers to independence on homophily, heterophily or randomness network structural assumptions, so
as to select the valuable nodes as neighborhoods, and meanwhile relieve the limitation of homophily
assumption of GCNs. More importantly, even if there are assumptions (e.g., homophily), a universal
propagation mechanism may still be able to ﬁnd better and more valuable nodes as neighborhoods,
rather than directly using the 1-hop network neighbors the same as the existing methods.
8 Conclusion
We rethink the propagation mechanism of networks with different structural properties, and sur-
prisingly discover the segmentation rules that 1-hop, kNN and 2-hop neighbors are more suitable
as neighborhoods in network with complete homophily, randomness and complete heterophily, re-
spectively. However, real-world networks are complex, and may present diverse properties. We
accordingly design a universal model U-GCN, which is able to select more valuable nodes as neighbor-
hoods automatically for information propagation without relying on network structural assumptions.
Empirical results on networks with different edge homophily ratio demonstrate the superiority of our
new approach over some state-of-the-art methods.
Last but not least, the methods that satisfy the basic idea, that is, consider the information from nodes
of 1-hop, 2-hop and kNN neighbors simultaneously, and at the same time, make reasonable use of
these information, and fuse them effectively for the learning objectives, can be considered as general
models, where our U-GCN is one of the most simple and effective methods.
Broader Impact
In this work, we propose to analyse whether networks with different structural properties should
adopt different propagation mechanisms. One interesting ﬁnding is that there are segmentation rules
for the universal propagation phenomenon. Considering real-world networks are complex and may
present diverse properties, a universal propagation mechanism independent of the network structural
assumption have been presented. Obviously, the results of the work will have an immediate impact
on improving the performance of most GCN models based on homophily assumption. Not only that,
9