show great importance as the increase of training iterations. This partly validates that under the
setting of complete homophily, 1-hop neighbors are more effective for direct information propagation
compared to 2-hop and kNN neighbors.
Observation 2: Network with randomness tends to get better performance utilizing kNN for direct
information propagation. The network in Figure 2B exhibits more randomness than Figure 2A, that
is, complete random network. Obviously, with the increase of training iterations, the attention value
ofkNN is much higher than those of 1-hop and 2-hop neighbors. Since kNN typically constructed
according to the similarity of node attributes, it can still realize the information fusion effectively,
compared with the other two types of neighbors, in case that the network topology contains noise.
Observation 3: Network with complete heterophily tends to obtain better performance utilizing 2-hop
neighbors for direct information propagation. For the network in Figure 2C, the edges exist only in
nodes within different classes, or complete heterophily. While the learned attention values of these
three types of neighbors differ slightly, the importance of 2-hop neighbors is relatively higher. This is
mainly due to the fact that the homophily ratio of 2-hop neighbors becomes higher with the increase
of inter-class edges (which is often the real life in many network analysis tasks).
While networks with different structural properties provide better performance utilize different
propagation mechanisms, the real-world networks are complex, and may show diverse properties,
e.g., the network dominated by homophily may contain a small amount of heterophily. Therefore, it
is imperative to explore a universal propagation mechanism for GCNs independent of the network
structural assumption.
Theorem 1. The real-world networks can be approximately decomposed into a mixture of three
kinds of simple networks, namely complete homophily, complete random and complete heterophily,
in different proportions.
Proof . Given a network G, wherenandmdenote the number of nodes and edges, respectively.
Assuming that redges ( 0rm) are generated randomly, i.e., the probability of nodes connecting
nodes within the same class or different classes is the same, which form a complete random network
(withnnodes andredges). The remaining edges connecting two nodes within the same class can
then be regarded as composing a complete homophily network, or a complete heterophily network.
Summary. Now, we can conclude that a universal GCN model may not only consider the 1-hop
(Observation 1), but also the 2-hop (Observation 2) and kNN neighbors (Observation 3) for direct
information propagation. More importantly, considering different network properties can be more
correlated with one of them or even their combinations, the model itself should adaptively learn their
corresponding importance, so as to achieve feature fusion more effectively. This case study, although
leveraging speciﬁc artiﬁcial networks, is representative because real-world networks can often be
considered as the combination of these three simple network cases.
4 Our Proposed Approach
To address the homophily assumption of GCNs, our basic idea is to design a universal GCN framework
which is suitable for general networks with any structural properties. It can not only make full use
of the information from 1-hop, 2-hop and kNN neighbors, but also fuse them sufﬁciently aiming to
given learning objectives. In this section, we start by proposing a new simple multi-type convolution
mechanism over three kinds of neighbors, and then introduce a discriminative aggregation to learn
the importance of each part: 1-hop, 2-hop and kNN neighbors, automatically.
4.1 Multi-type Convolution Mechanism
To capture the information from 2-hop and kNN neighbors, we construct a 2-hop network GR=
(AR;X)based on original input network GD= (AD;X), and akNN network GF= (AF;X)
based on node feature matrix X.
2-hop Network. For adjacency matrix AR, considering that the number of neighbors at exactly 2
hops away may raise exponentially with the increase of network scale, we introduce a constraint, i.e.,
select node pairs connected by at least two different paths for each node to set edges. Simultaneously,
we adopt the classic two-layers GCN to perform message passing on this 2-hop network (AR;X),
5