seem to be tailor-made to work on homophily networks [ 18], where nodes within the same class tend
to connect with each other. In fact, heterophily [ 20] networks, where nodes of different classes tend
to link together, are also widespread in real-world. For example, different types of amino acids are
more likely to be connected in protein structure [ 35], and fraudsters tend to connect to accomplices
than to other fraudsters in transaction networks [ 21]. Furthermore, the random networks also often
exist in real-world, such as railway networks, where the edges between nodes are more likely to be
randomly generated.
Most popular GCNs typically obtain node embeddings of these networks using 1-hop network
neighbors as neighborhoods for information propagation [ 12,29]. However, considering the different
structural properties of networks (e.g., homophily or heterophily), whether different networks should
adopt a uniﬁed or different propagation mechanisms? This is a very important question for GCNs
since they mainly gain better performance through the propagation of information. A well informed
answer can help us better understand the essence of GCNs, such as how different types of nodes affect
the propagation, and what type of nodes are really required to achieve a certain level of predictive
accuracy aiming to different networks.
Several recent works have studied the networks with different structural properties. For example,
Peiet al. [22] consider the heterophlily property of networks, and propose a geometric aggregation
scheme to overcome neighborhood structural information losing and long-range dependencies lacking.
Zhuet al. [35] design an effective model which improves the representation power of GCNs under
heterophily through theoretical and empirical analysis. Chien et al. [4] introduce a new generalized
pageRank (GPR) architecture to jointly optimize node feature and topological information extraction.
Boet al. [2] assess the roles of low-frequency and high-frequency signals, and propose an efﬁcient
method that can adaptively integrate different signals in the process of message passing. However,
there is still a lack of insightful understanding from the perspective of propagation mechanism.
As the ﬁrst contribution of this study, we conduct experiments analysing the propagation mechanism
of GCNs in networks with different structural properties. Surprisingly, our experiments clearly
illustrate that for networks with complete homophily, complete heterophily and randomness, 1-hop,
2-hop andk-nearest neighbor ( kNN) neighbors are more suitable as neighborhoods for information
propagation, respectively. This means that the depicting ability of the current propagation mechanism
of GCNs is limited, and networks with different structural properties may need to adopt different
propagation mechanisms.
In fact, while these segmentation rules seem to be able to select appropriate nodes as neighborhoods
in an ideal way, the real-world networks are complex, and may present diverse properties, e.g.,
the network dominated by homophily may contain a small amount of randomness or heterophily.
A natural question is, “ Can we reasonably utilize these segmentation rules to design a universal
propagation mechanism independent of the network structural assumption ?"
To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel and universal GCN model, i.e., U-GCN, for general
network data. The central idea is that we learn node embeddings by making full use of the information
from 1-hop, 2-hop and kNN neighbors, and fuse them adaptively to derive deeper correlation infor-
mation for the given learning objectives. To be speciﬁc, we ﬁrst introduce a multi-type convolution
mechanism. It uses 1-hop network (i.e., original input network), 2-hop network and kNN network that
constructed by 1-hop, 2-hop and kNN neighbors for direct information propagation separately, and
utilizes a node-level attention mechanism for each network, to extract three speciﬁc embeddings. We
then make a discriminative aggregation to learn out the importance of these three embeddings, thereby
extracting the most correlated information aiming to the ground truth such as node classiﬁcation.
Extensive experiments on a series of benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of U-GCN over
some state-of-the-arts.
2 Notations and Preliminaries
LetG= (A;X )be an undirected attributed network, where A2Rnnrepresents the symmetric
adjacency matrix with nnodes, andX2Rnpis the attribute (content) matrix of pattributes per
node. Concretely, aij= 1denotes there is an edge between nodes viandvj, or 0 otherwise; and xi
represents the attribute vectors of node vi.
2