Naturally, the proxy dataset could be the training dataset.
However, using all the training images can be messy and
time-consuming. We randomly select 256 images from the
training dataset, and extract the prediction probability (the
output of the softmax layer) on these 256 images.
Letpbe the output probability of the original network,
andqbe the probability after channel removal. A popu-
lar method to compare the similarity of two probability dis-
tributions is KL-divergence. We calculate the ﬁlter impor-
tance score as
s=DKL(p||q) =n/summationdisplay
i=1pilogpi
qi. (2)
If the current ﬁlter is redundant, swill approach 0. Re-
moving this ﬁlter has almost no inﬂuence to the predic-
tion results. Conversely, a larger value of smeans the cur-
rent dimension is more important. Hence, using the KL-
divergence to denote the importance score is reasonable. It
can reﬂect the information loss of removing some ﬁlters.
This step will be repeated 256 times, resulting in 256 im-
portance scores, one for each channel.
As for those channels inside the residual block (red num-
bers of Fig. 2), the process is easier. We only need to erase
one ﬁlter of the current layer at each step. Finally, ﬁlter
scores in all layers will be sorted in the ascending order.
The topkﬁlters will be removed, leading to a pruned small
model. In practice, the value of kdepends on the available
computational or storage budget. To prevent any extreme
issues ( e.g., there are only few ﬁlters left in a layer after
pruning), the smallest compression rate of each layer should
not be smaller than a threshold ( e.g., 0.3).
The beneﬁts of our pruning method are obvious. First, it
is a global criterion which can evaluate the impact of all ﬁl-
ters simultaneously. Such kind of global criterion makes
possible the pruning of residual connections. Secondly,
there is no direct correlation between importance score and
ﬁlter location. In previous magnitude-based methods ( e.g.,
ℓ1-norm of each ﬁlter [ 22]), the magnitude of importance
scores among layers are different. Hence, a ﬁxed compres-
sion ratio should be speciﬁed for each layer. However, we
can achieve an adaptive compression. How many ﬁlters
should be removed entirely depends on the scores.
3.2. Prune with Limited Data
The pruned small model is then ﬁne-tuned on the target
dataset. Fine-tuning with limited small-scale data is chal-
lenging. Data-augmentation ( e.g., mixup [ 40]) plays an im-
portant role in this step. As aforementioned, ImageNet pre-
training is a crucial augmentation method which achieves
much higher accuracy than directly pruning on the small
dataset. The major difference between ImageNet and small
dataset is the number of training examples. In order to com-
pensate for this gap, we use several image transformation
(a) the original image
 (b) rotate
 (c) cutout [ 4]
(d)2×2shufﬂe [ 3]
 (e)3×3shufﬂe [ 3]
 (f)4×4shufﬂe [ 3]
Figure 3. Visualization of the expanded dataset.
techniques to expand the training dataset and ﬁne-tune the
pruned small model with knowledge distillation [ 14]. How-
ever, the logits may be noisy (since the teacher model has
not seen these augmented data). We then propose a label
reﬁnement method to update these noisy logits.
3.2.1 Data Expansion
Since the main difﬁculty of ﬁne-tuning on small dataset is
caused by limited data, a natural idea is to generate or col-
lect more training images. For example, Chen et al. [2] ex-
ploited GAN to generate training samples. However, train-
ing the generator network can be a more challenging issue,
especially for real images with large resolution. Here, we
adopt a simpler method to expand the training dataset.
Fig.3shows examples of data expansion results. We use
three different image transformation techniques:
•Rotate: randomly rotate the original images rdegrees,
wherer∈[0,360) .
•Cutout [ 4]: cut out a rectangle patch from the original
image pixels with random location. The side length of
rectangle is randomly selected from [0.2,0.5]times the
original image size.
•Shufﬂe [ 3]: uniformly partition the image into N×N
sub-regions, and shufﬂe these partitioned local regions.
We use three different partition sizes, namely 2×2,
3×3,4×4.
Our motivation behind these transformation is that the
most discriminative information often lies in local image
patches ( e.g., leg color of a bird) for object recognition
problems. In order to ﬁnd these discriminative regions, the
network should pay more attention to local patches rather
than global information. Hence, we can cut out some re-
gions or even shufﬂe the whole image to remove the inﬂu-
ence of global information ( i.e., background).
1461