Neural Network Pruning with Residual-Connections and Limited-Data
Jian-Hao Luo Jianxin Wu∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
luojh@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn
Abstract
Filter level pruning is an effective method to accelerate
the inference speed of deep CNN models. Although numer-
ous pruning algorithms have been proposed, there are still
two open issues. The ﬁrst problem is how to prune residual
connections. We propose to prune both channels inside and
outside the residual connections via a KL-divergence based
criterion. The second issue is pruning with limited data.
We observe an interesting phenomenon: directly pruning
on a small dataset is usually worse than ﬁne-tuning a small
model which is pruned or trained from scratch on the large
dataset. Knowledge distillation is an effective approach to
compensate for the weakness of limited data. However, the
logits of a teacher model may be noisy. In order to avoid
the inﬂuence of label noise, we propose a label reﬁnement
approach to solve this problem. Experiments have demon-
strated the effectiveness of our method (CURL, Compres-
sion Using Residual-connections and Limited-data). CURL
signiﬁcantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods
on ImageNet. More importantly, when pruning on small
datasets, CURL achieves comparable or much better per-
formance than ﬁne-tuning a pretrained small model.
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have now become the dominat-
ing method in various computer vision ﬁelds, such as im-
age recognition [ 10,20,35] and object detection [ 5], and
we have witnessed a great improvement in model accuracy.
But, deploying a large CNN model on resource constrained
devices like mobile phones is still challenging. Due to over-
parameterization, it is both storage and time consuming to
run a cumbersome large model on small devices.
Network pruning is a useful tool to obtain a satisfac-
tory balance between inference speed and model accuracy.
Among these methods, ﬁlter level pruning aims to remove
∗This research was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61772256, 61921006). J. Wu is the corresponding
author.( a) bott len e ck (b)  h ou r g las s ( c) wall e t
Figure 1. Illustration of residual block pruning with different
strategies. (a) Bottleneck structure of residual blocks. (b) Only
prune channels inside the bottleneck, generating an hourglass
structure. (c) Prune channels both inside and outside the residual
connection, generating a shape similar to an opened wallet.
the whole unimportant ﬁlters according to a certain crite-
rion. This strategy will not damage the original model struc-
ture and is attracting more and more attention recently.
Although numerous ﬁlter level pruning algorithms have
been proposed, there are still several open issues. First,
pruning residual connections is very difﬁcult. As illustrated
in Fig. 1, most previous pruning methods only prune ﬁl-
ters inside the residual connection, leaving the number of
output channels unchanged. With a smaller target model
(i.e., more ﬁlters pruned), the original bottleneck structure
will become an hourglass. Obviously, representation ability
of middle layers inside the hourglass structure is severely
handicapped. Therefore, pruning channels both inside and
outside the residual connection is more preferred for accel-
erating networks. Then, the pruned block is still bottleneck
or in an opened wallet shape.
As illustrated in the experiments section, the wallet
structure has more advantages compared with hourglass: 1)
it is more accurate thanks to a larger pruning space; 2) it is
faster even with the same number of FLOPs; 3) it can save
more storage space because more weights will be pruned.
The second issue is about pruning models with limited
data. Most current pruning methods only report their results
on toy datasets ( e.g., MNIST [ 21], CIFAR [ 19]) or large
scale datasets ( e.g., ImageNet [ 33]), ignoring an important
real application scenario: pruning models on small datasets
which have few images per category. This is a very common
1458