3.2.2 Label Reﬁnement
We use knowledge distillation [ 14] to ﬁne-tune the small
model. The original large model plays the role of a teacher
model and the pruned small model is the student model.
A typical strategy is to train the student model under the
supervision of soft target (the logits of teacher models) and
hard target (the groundtruth label). However, because the
teacher model has not seen the new data, its output (logits)
may be noisy.
Inspired by PENCIL [ 38] and R2-D2 [ 37], we can up-
date the noisy logits during model training via SGD. How-
ever, updating logits is dangerous. The quality of soft tar-
gets can be updated to become worse if the student model is
not accurate enough. To avoid this situation, we divide the
whole training process into two steps: ﬁne-tuning on orig-
inal small dataset with knowledge distillation plus mixup
and ﬁne-tuning on expanded dataset with label reﬁnement.
Note that the expanded new data and our proposed reﬁne-
ment method are only used in step 2.
Step 1: knowledge distillation with mixup. Knowl-
edge distillation [ 14] and mixup [ 40] are two widely used
techniques, which are really helpful for the training with
limited data. We propose to combine these two techniques
together. First, a new input is generated via mixup:
˜x=λxi+(1−λ)xj,˜y=λyi+(1−λ)yj,(3)
where(xi,yi)and(xj,yj)are two random examples, λ∈
[0,1]is drawn from a Beta distribution. The new input ˜x
is then fed into teacher and student models. Let udenote
the output logits of the teacher model, and vdenote the stu-
dent’s output. Our total loss is calculated as:
L=αT2LKL(p,q)+(1−α)LCE(q,˜y), (4)
wherep=softmax(u/T),q=softmax(v/T)are the soft-
max output under temperature T.LKLandLCEdenote
KL-divergence loss and cross-entropy loss, respectively.
α∈[0,1]controls the balance between losses. With these
two techniques, the pruned small model can converge into a
good local minima.
Step 2: knowledge distillation with label reﬁnement.
We then ﬁne-tune the small model on our expanded dataset
and update logits to remove label noises. Fig. 4illustrates
the framework of our label reﬁnement process. The soft
target ( i.e., teacher model’s logits) of each image in our ex-
panded dataset will be extracted ﬁrst, and stored in memory.
Our loss function is designed as:
L=αT2LKL(q,p)+(1−α)LCE(q,y). (5)
The notations are the same as Eq. ( 4). Note that mixup is
not used here. The major difference with knowledge dis-
tillation is that we use a reversed KL-divergence loss to en-
courage the model to pay more attention to label reﬁnement,inputpruned modelso ft m a x sof t m a xK L -l o ss CE -l o ss so ft m a x
s of t -t a r g e tha rd -ta r g e t+
/g1873/g1868 /g1877
/g1869 /g1869
/g1874 /g1874
/g1876
Figure 4. Illustration of label reﬁnement. The soft target (teacher
model’s logits) will also be updated during model ﬁne-tuning.
Solid and dashed arrows denote forward and backward propaga-
tion, respectively.
as in [ 37,38]. During model ﬁne-tuning, the soft-target will
also be updated via SGD:
u←−u−η·∇uL, (6)
whereηis the learning rate for updating u,∇uLdenotes the
gradient of the loss function Lwith respected to uwhich is
calculated via back-propagation.
4. Experiments
In this section, we will evaluate the performance of
CURL. In order to compare CURL with state-of-the-art
methods, we ﬁrst test the effectiveness on ImageNet [ 33].
ResNet50 [ 10] will be pruned on this dataset. Then, more
results on small-scale datasets will be presented. Our
method achieves better or comparable performance on these
datasets than small models with ImageNet pretraining. Fi-
nally, we will end this section with ablation studies. All the
experiments were conducted with PyTorch [ 32].
4.1. Pruning ResNet50 on ImageNet
Implementation details. We follow the previous train-
ing settings. For a fair comparison, all the ﬁne-tuning tech-
niques introduced in Section 3.2arenot used here. In
other words, we do not use mixup, knowledge distillation or
dataset expansion techniques in the ImageNet experiment.
Once the ﬁlter importance has been evaluated by CURL, we
will remove all unimportant ﬁlters of all layers. The pruned
model is then ﬁne-tuned with 100 epochs. Data argumen-
tation strategy and parameter settings are the same as Py-
Torch ofﬁcial examples. We adopt a large mini-batch size
512. The initial learning rate is set to 0.1. Warmup [ 6] and
cosine learning rate decay [ 27] are also used here. Since
the output of the last stage is closely related to prediction,
we will not prune the output dimension of the last residual
stage ( i.e., the output channel number is still 2048).
Table 1shows the pruning results of ResNet50. We test
model accuracy using 1-crop validation: the shorter side is
resized to 256, followed by a 224×224center crop and
1462