requirement, because we will not apply ImageNet in a real
application. Directly pruning on a target dataset (which is
usually small) is necessary.
In order to get a small model on a target small dataset,
there are two different ways: 1) compress the network us-
ing the large dataset (or using a small network trained from
scratch on the large dataset), and then ﬁne-tune on the target
small dataset; 2) directly prune the model without access to
the large dataset. In many real-world scenarios, the only
choice is to compress the network using the small dataset
and ﬁne-tune on the same small dataset.
But, the reality is that directly pruning on a small dataset
usually has a signiﬁcantly lower accuracy than ﬁne-tuning
a small model which is pruned or trained from scratch on
the large scale dataset . This phenomenon widely exists
in various networks and datasets. For example, as shown
in ThiNet [ 29], ﬁne-tuning a pruned model which is com-
pressed on ImageNet is a better choice when transferring
to other domains. They found that the accuracy of directly
pruning on CUB200 [ 36] is only 66.90%, while ﬁne-tuning
a pruned ImageNet model can achieve 69.43%. A dilemma
is that directly pruning on the target dataset is often the case
in real-world applications, where large datasets are either
proprietary or too expensive to be used by ordinary users.
In this paper, we propose CURL, namely Compression
Using Residual-connections and Limited-data, to address
both issues. In order to prune the channels outside of the
residual connection, we show that all the blocks in the same
stage should be pruned simultaneously due to the short-
cut connection. We propose a KL-divergence based crite-
rion to evaluate the importance of these ﬁlters. The chan-
nels inside and outside the residual connections will both
be pruned, leading to a wallet shaped structure. Experi-
ments on ImageNet show that the proposed residual block
pruning method outperforms the previous state-of-the-art.
To address the problem caused by the lack of enough train-
ing data, we propose to combine knowledge distillation [ 14]
and mixup [ 40] together and enlarge the training dataset via
image transformation. We also propose a novel method to
correct the noise in the logits of the teacher model. All the
techniques greatly improve the accuracy of directly pruning
with limited data.
Our contributions are summarized as follows.
•We propose a novel way to compress residual blocks.
We prune not only channels inside the residual branch,
but also channels of its output activation maps (both
the identity branch and the residual branch). The re-
sulting wallet-shaped structure shows more advantages
than previous hourglass-shaped structure.
•Data augmentation is very effective in model ﬁne-
tuning with limited data. We show that combining data
augmentation and knowledge distillation can achievebetter performance. To avoid the inﬂuence of label
noise, we propose a label reﬁnement strategy which
can further improve the accuracy.
2. Related Work
Pruning is an effective method to accelerate model infer-
ence speed and to reduce model size. Recent developments
on network pruning can be roughly divided into two cate-
gories, non-structured and structured pruning.
In the early stage, researchers mainly focused on non-
structured pruning. Han et al. [8,9] proposed a magnitude-
based pruning method to remove redundant weights. Con-
nections with small absolute values are regarded as unim-
portant and are discarded. In order to compensate for the
unexpected loss, Guo et al. [7] incorporated the splicing op-
eration into network pruning. Once the pruned connections
are found to be important, they could be recovered at any
time.
However, the weakness of non-structured pruning is ob-
vious. Due to the cache and memory access issues caused
by irregular connections, its actual inference speed will be
adversely affected. Therefore, structured pruning such as
ﬁlter level pruning is more preferred.
In ﬁlter level pruning, the whole ﬁlter is discarded if it
is considered to be unimportant. Importance evaluation cri-
terion plays a crucial role in the success of pruning. Li et
al. [22] introduced previous magnitude based criterion into
ﬁlter level pruning and calculated importance scores ac-
cording to its ℓ1-norm. He et al. [13] proposed to select ﬁl-
ters by a LASSO regression based method and least square
reconstruction. Luo et al. [29] calculated ﬁlter importance
based on statistics computed from its next layer. He et
al. [12] calculated the geometric median of the ﬁlters within
one layer to prune ﬁlters with redundant information.
There are also some explorations without explicitly cal-
culating the importance of each ﬁlter. Liu et al. [25] im-
posedℓ1regularization on the scaling factors of batch nor-
malization layers to select unimportant channels. Huang
and Wang [ 15] also introduced scaling factors into the
model training process. By forcing some of the factors to
zero, the unimportant ﬁlters will be pruned. Luo et al. [28]
designed an efﬁcient channel selection layer to ﬁnd less im-
portant ﬁlters in an end-to-end manner. He et al. [11] lever-
aged reinforcement learning to efﬁciently sample the de-
sign space and achieved better compression performance.
Yuet al. [39] proposed slimmable neural networks, a gen-
eral method to train a single CNN model executable at dif-
ferent widths. Although this approach is not designed for
pruning, the output dimensions of residual blocks are re-
duced. But, except slimmable networks, the pruned models
of the above ﬁlter pruning methods are all hourglass shaped.
To sum up, these pruning methods achieve pretty good
results on toy datasets or large scale datasets and contribute
1459