Table 5. Pruning MobileNetV2 on CUB200 with different evalua-
tion criterion. We prune 50% ﬁlters of the middle layers of the last
bottleneck. The accuracy is tested without ﬁne-tuning.
Method Random Weight Sum ∆Loss KL-Div. (Ours)
Acc. 6.80% 8.25% 21.83% 66.33%
This phenomenon is reasonable, because training with
limited data is very challenging. Recently, a study [ 26]
suggests that training the same network from scratch could
achieve comparable or better performance than pruning.
They think the real value of pruning is to ﬁnd a better net-
work structure rather than important ﬁlters. This conclusion
may be correct with enough training time and data. How-
ever, when the conditions are not applicable ( e.g., training
with limited data), this conclusion will fail to hold true. In
this situation, ﬁnding important ﬁlters becomes more valu-
able. To sum up, our pruning method provides a feasible
solution for how to obtain a small model with limited data
and how to get rid of the dependence on the large dataset,
which is really important in many real-world applications.
4.3.2 Impact of Pruning Criterion
We then study the impact of different criterion for evalu-
ating ﬁlter importance, i.e., Eq. ( 2). We focus on the last
bottleneck structure of MobileNetV2. There are two layers
(point-wise convolution and depth-wise convolution) in this
block. Due to the structure constraint of depth-wise convo-
lution, we should prune these two layers simultaneously.
The easiest way to ﬁnish this task is to randomly dis-
card channels. We randomly prune 50% ﬁlters of these two
layers and get 6.80% top-1 accuracy on CUB200 without
ﬁne-tuning (as shown in Table 5). Starting from this sim-
plest baseline, we then focus on how to design a better way
to evaluate the importance of multiple ﬁlters.
One possible solution is to extend previous magnitude-
based criterion. Weight sum [ 22] is such kind of a method
which calculates ﬁlter importance based on its ℓ1-norm.
Here, we simply add the scores of two ﬁlters together:
si=/ba∇dblW1
i/ba∇dbl1+/ba∇dblW2
i/ba∇dbl1, whereW1
iandW2
idenote ﬁlter
iof the ﬁrst (point-wise convolution) and second (depth-
wise convolution) hidden layers, respectively. However, the
extended version of weight sum is only a little better than
the random strategy (8.25% vs. 6.80%).
We then consider data-driven criteria and concentrate on
the output of the network. A natural idea is evaluating the
change of accuracy. If removing some ﬁlters has no inﬂu-
ence to the model accuracy, then we can regard them as
unimportant. However, this approach is impractical. We
ﬁnd that model accuracy is not sensitive to one or two ﬁl-
ters. Most channels will get the same score after evaluation.
Since accuracy is closely related to loss, we can replace ac-Table 6. Pruning results on several small datasets with/without the
proposed label reﬁnement method.
Model Reﬁnement? CUB200 Pets Dogs Car
MobileNetV2✗ 77.43% 86.65% 74.02% 87.15%
✓ 78.72% 86.89% 74.72% 87.64%
ResNet50✗ 82.88% 90.32% 78.65% 91.77%
✓ 83.64% 90.30% 79.79% 92.19%
curacy change with loss change and calculate the score as
si=Lpruned−L unpruned . The performance of this criterion
is 21.83%. Although this result is signiﬁcantly better than
random and weight sum, accuracy of the pruned network is
still not satisfying.
Inspired by knowledge distillation, we propose a KL-
divergence based criterion to evaluate the information loss
of the pruned model. With this criterion, the accuracy is
dramatically improved to 66.33%.
4.3.3 Impact of Label Reﬁnement
In order to compensate for the gap of limited data, we pro-
pose a label reﬁnement technique. The original dataset is
enlarged by 6 times via several image transformation meth-
ods. The ﬁne-tuned model is then trained on this enlarged
dataset with knowledge distillation. Due to label noise, soft
target will also be updated during training.
Table 6illustrates the effectiveness of our label reﬁne-
ment strategy. Compared with standard knowledge dis-
tillation equipped with mixup, using our label reﬁnement
method can achieve better performance on most datasets.
Updating soft target can further improve model accu-
racy. For examples, if we set η= 0 (do not update soft
target) and ﬁne-tune the pruned MobileNetV2 on the ex-
panded CUB200 dataset, the accuracy is 78.56%, slightly
lower than the result of updating soft target (78.72%). In
this work, we adopt a simple method to process label noise
of soft target. How to correct the misleading wrong labels is
still worth exploring. If a more advanced algorithm is used,
the model accuracy can be further improved.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a novel ﬁlter level pruning
method to accelerate the inference speed of deep CNN mod-
els. Different from previous pruning strategies, we prune
both channels inside and outside the residual connections
via a KL-divergence based criterion. We also propose a
label reﬁnement approach to avoid the inﬂuence of label
noise. With the proposed CURL method, we can directly
prune models on the small dataset and achieve comparable
or even better results than ﬁne-tuning a small model pruned
or trained on the large scale dataset, which is of great value
in many real-world scenarios.
1465