arXiv:2010.03978v1  [cs.LG]  7 Oct 2020A B RIEF REVIEW OF DOMAIN ADAPTATION
Abolfazl Farahani
Department of Computer Science
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
a.farahani@uga.eduSahar Voghoei
Department of Computer Science
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
Voghoei@uga.eduKhaled Rasheed
Department of Computer Science
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
Khaled@uga.edu
Hamid R. Arabnia
Department of Computer Science
University of Georgia
Athens, GA, USA
hra@uga.edu
ABSTRACT
Classical machine learning assumes that the training and te st sets come from the same distributions.
Therefore, a model learned from the labeled training data is expected to perform well on the test data.
However, This assumption may not always hold in real-world a pplications where the training and
the test data fall from different distributions, due to many factors, e.g., collecting the training and
test sets from different sources, or having an out-dated tra ining set due to the change of data over
time. In this case, there would be a discrepancy across domai n distributions, and naively applying
the trained model on the new dataset may cause degradation in the performance. Domain adaptation
is a sub-ﬁeld within machine learning that aims to cope with t hese types of problems by aligning
the disparity between domains such that the trained model ca n be generalized into the domain of
interest. This paper focuses on unsupervised domain adapta tion, where the labels are only available
in the source domain. It addresses the categorization of dom ain adaptation from different viewpoints.
Besides, It presents some successful shallow and deep domai n adaptation approaches that aim to deal
with domain adaptation problems.
Keywords Machine learning ·Transfer learning ·Domain adaptation ·Classiﬁcation ·Risk
Minimization
1 Introduction
Traditional Machine learning aims to learn a model on a set of training samples to ﬁnd an objective function with
minimum risk on unseen test data. To train such a generalized model, however, it assumes that both training and
test data are drawn from the same distribution and share simi lar joint probability distributions. This constraint can
be easily violated in real-world applications since traini ng, and test sets can originate from different feature space s or
distributions. The difﬁculty of collecting new instances w ith the same property, dimension, and distribution, as we
have in the training data may happen due to various reasons, e .g., the statistical properties of a domain can evolve in
time, or new samples can be collected from different sources , causing domain shift. Besides, if possible, it is preferre d
to utilize a related publicly available annotated data as a t raining dataset instead of creating a new labeled dataset,
which is a laborious and time-consuming task. However, when the training data is not an accurate reﬂection of test
data distribution, the trained model will likely experienc e degradation in performance when applying on the test data.
To tackle the above problem, researchers proposed a new rese arch area in machine learning called domain adaptation.
In this setting, training and test sets termed as the source a nd the target domains, respectively. Domain adaptation
generally seeks to learn a model from a source labeled data th at can be generalized to a target domain by minimizing
the difference between domain distributions.