4.2.1 Subscpace-based.
Subspace-based adaptation aims to discover a common interm ediate representation that is shared between domains.
Many techniques have been proposed to construct this repres entation from the low-dimensional representation of the
source and target data. Most of the adaptation approaches in this category ﬁrst create a low-dimensional representa-
tion of original data in the form of a linear subspace for each domain, and then reduce the discrepancy between the
subspaces to construct the intermediate representation. A dimensionality reduction technique such as principal comp o-
nent analysis (PCA) can be used to construct the subspaces as two points, one for each domain, in a low-dimensional
Grassmann manifold. The distance between the points in Gras smann manifold indicates the domain shift which can
be reduced by applying different methods. Goplan et al. [26], proposed Sampling Geodesic Flow (SGF) that ﬁrst
ﬁnds a geodesic path between the source and target points On a Grassmann manifold and then samples a set of points,
subspaces, including the source and the target points along this path. In the next step, the data from both domains are
projected onto all sampled subspaces along the geodesic pat h and will be concatenated to create a high-dimensional
vector. Finally, A discriminative classiﬁer can learn from the source projected data to classify the unlabeled samples .
Sampling more points from the geodesic path would help to map the source subspace into the target subspace more
precisely. However, sampling more subspaces extends the di mensionality of the feature vector, which makes this
technique computationally expensive. Geodesic Flow Kerne l [45], was proposed to extend and improve SGF. GFK is
a kernel-based domain adaptation method that deals with shi ft across domains. It aims to represent the smoothness
of transition from a source to a target domain by integrating an inﬁnite number of subspaces to ﬁnd a geodesic line
between domains in a low-dimensional manifold space. Ferna ndoet al. [46], proposed a subspace alignment tech-
nique (SA) to directly reduce the discrepancy between domai ns by learning a linear mapping function that projects
the source point directly into the target point in the grassm ann manifold. The projection matrix Mcan be learned by
minimizing the divergence in the Bergman matrix:
M= argmin
M||XSM−XT||2
F=XT
SXT, (8)
whereXS,XTare the low-dimensional representation, basis vectors, of The source and the target data in the Grass-
mann manifold respectively, and ||.||2
Fis the Frobenius norm. SA only aligns the subspace bases and i gnores the differ-
ence between subspace distributions. Subspace distributi on alignment (SDA) [47], extends the work in SA by aligning
both subspace distributions and the bases at the same time. I n SDA the projection matrix Mcan be formulated as
M=XT
SXTQ, whereQis a matrix to align the discrepancy between distributions.
4.2.2 Transformation-based.
Feature transformation transforms the original features i nto a new feature representation to minimize the discrep-
ancy between the marginal and the conditional distribution s while preserving the original data’s underlying structur e
and characteristics. To reduce the domain discrepancy, we n eed some metrics such as Maximum Mean discrepancy
(MMD), Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KL-divergence), or B regman Divergence to measure the dissimilarity across
domains. Transfer component adaptation (TCA) [27], was pro posed to learn a domain-invariant feature transformation
in which the marginal distributions between the source and t arget domains are minimized in RKHS using maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) criterion. After ﬁnding the domain- invariant features, we can utilize any classical machine
learning technique to train the ﬁnal target classiﬁer. Join t domain adaptation (JDA) [48], extends TCA by simultane-
ously matching both marginal and conditional distribution s between domains. JDA utilizes PCA as a dimensionality
reduction technique to extract more robust features. Low-d imensional features can then be embedded into a high-
dimensional feature space where the difference between mar ginal distributions are minimized using MMD. To align
conditional distributions, we need labeled data in both dom ains. When labels are unavailable in the target domain, we
can use pseudo labels, which can be estimated by the classiﬁe r trained on the labeled source data. After obtaining the
pseudo labels, the model minimizes the distance between con ditional distributions by modifying MMD. All the above
steps are jointly and iteratively performed to ﬁnd the best m apping function that aligns both marginal and conditional
distributions across domains. The ﬁnal target classiﬁer ca n be trained on domain-invariant features discovered by the
algorithm.
4.2.3 Reconstruction-based.
The feature reconstruction-based methods aim to reduce the disparity between domain distributions by sample recon-
struction in an intermediate feature representation. Jhuo et al. [28], proposed a Robust visual Domain Adaptation with
Low-rank Reconstruction (RDALR) method to reduce the domai n discrepancy. RDALR learns a linear projection ma-
trixWthat transforms the source samples into an intermediate rep resentation where they can be linearly represented
by the samples in the target domain to align the domain shift. The domain adaptation problem can be addressed by
6