adaptation was proposed to tackle this problem by reducing t he disparity across domains and further training a model
that performs well on the target samples. In other words, dom ain adaptation aims to learn a generalized classiﬁer in
the presence of a shift between source and target domain dist ributions. Classiﬁcation is a machine learning task that
aims to learn a function from labeled training data to map inp ut samples to real numbers h:X − → Y , wherehis a
function or an element of a hypothesis space H, andHrefers to a set of all possible functions. For example, in ima ge
classiﬁcation, a classiﬁer assigns each input image a categ ory such as a dog or a cat. Generally, to obtain the best
predictive function, we learn a model on a given source datas et by minimizing the expected risk of the source labeled
data:
RS(h) =E(x,y)∼PS(x,y)[ℓ(h(x),y)]
=/summationtext
y∈Y/integraltext
Xℓ(h(x),y)pS(x,y)dx, (1)
where the expectation is taken with respect to the source dis tribution PS,ℓ(h(x),y)is a loss function that denotes
the disagreement between the label predicted by the classiﬁ erhand the true label, and RS(h)is the sum of all the
disagreements or misclassiﬁed samples in the source domain . However, in the supervised learning, the goal is to learn
a model with the lowest risk when applying on the target domai n. Thus, we can rewrite the above equation as follows:
RT(h) =E(x,y)∼PT[ℓ(h(x),y)]
=/summationtext
y∈Y/integraltext
Xℓ(h(x),y)pT(x,y)dx
=/summationtext
y∈Y/integraltext
Xℓ(h(x),y)pT(x,y)pS(x,y)
pS(x,y)dx
=/summationtext
y∈Y/integraltext
Xℓ(h(x),y)pT(x,y)
pS(x,y)pS(x,y)dx
=E(x,y)∼PS/bracketleftBig
pT(x,y)
pS(x,y)ℓ(h(x),y)/bracketrightBig
,(2)
wherePS(x,y)andPT(x,y)are joint probability distribution of source and target dom ains. For more information
about the risk minimization and supervised learning, see [1 8][19]. In classical machine learning,PT(x,y)
PS(x,y)= 1 since
the assumption is that both training and test data are drawn f rom the same distribution. However, domain adaptation
relaxes this assumption, which will be discussed in the foll owing sections.
3 Categorization of Domain Adaptation
Conventional domain adaptation assumes that feature and la bel spaces remain unchanged while their probability dis-
tributions may vary between domains. However, ﬁnding a sour ce and target domains with equivalent label space is
usually arduous or even impossible. When the source and targ et label spaces are not identical, matching the whole
source and target distributions will create a representati on space containing the features of the data belonging to the
source classes which do not exist in the target classes. The t arget domain sees these classes as outlier classes, and
extending their knowledge into the target domain will cause negative transfer, which signiﬁcantly harms the model
performance. Thus, in addition to marginal distribution di sparity, we need to consider different scenarios where labe l
spaces differ across domains. Different marginal distribu tions and different label spaces across domains are termed a s
domain gap and category gap, respectively. Based on the cate gory gap, domain adaptation can be divided into four
main categories; closed set, open set, partial, and univers al domain adaptation.
• Closed set domain adaptation refers to the situation where both source and target domains share the same
classes while there still exists a domain gap between domain s. Traditional domain adaptation falls into this
category.
• In open set domain adaptation, related domains share some l abels in the common label set and also they may
have private labels [20]. Saito et al. [21], introduced new open set domain adaptation in which the data in the
source private classes is removed. In the modiﬁed open set, t he source label set is considered to be a subset
of the target label set. Open set domain adaptation is suitab le when there are multiple source domains where
each includes a subset of target classes. Domain adaptation techniques aim to utilize all the source domain
information contained in the shared classes to boost the mod el’s performance in the target domain.
• In contrast to open set, partial domain adaptation refers t o the situation where the target label set is a subset
of the source label set [22], [23]. In this setting, the avail able source domain can be considered as a generic
domain that consists of an abundant number of classes, and th e target is only a subset of the source label set
with fewer classes.
• Universal domain adaptation (UDA) [24], generalizes the a bove scenarios. In contrast to the above settings,
which require prior knowledge about the source and target la bel sets, universal domain adaptation is not
3