of using autoencoder in domain adaptation is to learn the par ameters of the encoder based on the samples in one domain
(source) and adapt the decoder to reconstruct the samples in another domain (target). Glorot et al. [34], proposed a
deep domain adaptation network based on Stacked Auto Encode rs (SDA) [75], to extract high-level representation
to represent both source and target domain data. The propose d model is assumed to have access to various domains
with unlabeled data and only one source labeled data. In the ﬁ rst step, the higher-level feature extraction can be
obtained by learning from all the available domains in an uns upervised manner. In the ﬁrst step, the model obtains
high-level representations from data in all domains by mini mizing the reconstruction error. Next, a linear classiﬁer,
such as linear SVM, is trained on the extracted features of th e source labeled data by minimizing a squared hinge loss.
Finally, this classiﬁer can be used on the target domains. Th e model shows remarkable results; however, using SDAs
make it computationally expensive and unscalable, especia lly when having high-dimensional features. Marginalized
SDA (mSDA) [77], was proposed to extend the work in SDAs and ad dress its limitations. mSDA marginalizes noise
with linear denoisers to induce the model to learn the parame ters in a closed-form solution without using stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) [76]. Ghifary et al. [73], proposed a Deep Reconstruction-Classiﬁcation Netwo rk (DRCN)
that uses an encoder-decoder network for unsupervised doma in adaptation in object recognition. DRCN consists of a
standard convolutional network (encoder) to predict the so urce labels and a deconvolutional networks [74], (decoder)
to reconstruct the target samples. The model jointly utiliz es supervised and unsupervised learning strategies to lear n
the encoder parameters to predict the source labels and the p arameters of the decoder to reconstruct the target data.
The encoder parameters are shared across both label predict ion and reconstruction tasks, while the decoder parameters
are private only for the reconstruction task.
4.3.3 Adversarial-based
The success of adversarial learning as a powerful domain-in variant feature extractor has motivated many researchers t o
embed it into deep networks. Adversarial domain adaptation approaches tend to minimize the distribution discrepancy
between domains to obtain transferable and domain invarian t features. The main idea of adversarial domain adaptation
was inspired by the Generative Adversarial Nets (GAN) [61], which tends to minimize the cross-domain discrepancy
through an adversarial objective. GANs are deep learning-b ased generative models composed of a two-player game, a
generator model G, and a discriminator model D. The generato r aims to produce the samples similar to the domain of
interest from the source data, and confuse the discriminato r to make a wrong decision. The discriminator then tends
to discriminate between the true data in the domain of intere st and the counterfeits generated by model G.
Ganin et al. [35], proposed a deep adversarial-based domain adaptation approach to match the domain gap by adding
an effective Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL) to the model. Dur ing the forward propagation, GRU acts like an identity
function that leaves the input unchanged. However, it multi plies the gradient by a negative scalar to reverse it during
the backpropagation phase. The proposed model can be traine d on a massive amount of source labeled data and a
large amount of unlabeled target data. The model is generall y decomposed into three parts, feature extractor Gf, label
predictor Gy, and domain classiﬁer Gd.Gfproduces the features for both label predictor and domain cl assiﬁer. The
GRL is inserted between GfandGd. The three parts of the model can learn their corresponding p arameters θf,,θy,
andθdbased on the source labeled data and the unlabeled target dat a. During the learning stage, the model learns the
parameters θfandθyby minimizing the label predictor loss. This process enforc es the feature extractor to produce
the discriminative features for a good label prediction on t he source domain. At the same time, the model learns
the parameters θfandθdby maximizing and minimizing the domain classiﬁer loss, res pectively, to obtain domain-
invariant features. Pei et al. [62], argued that using a single domain discriminator can on ly match the marginal
distributions and ignores the discrepancy between class-c onditional distributions causing negative transfer and fa lsely
aligning the classes across domains. Multi-Adversarial Do main Adaptation (MADA)[62] was proposed to reduce the
shift in the joint distribution between domains and enable ﬁ ne-grained alignment of different class distributions by
constructing multiple class-wise domain discriminators. Such that, each discriminator only matches the source and
target data samples belonging to the same class.
The generator G and discriminator D also can be implemented t hrough a minimax optimization of an adversarial
objective for a domain confusion. This approach was inspire d by theory on domain adaptation [64], [65], suggesting
that the transferable representation across domains does n ot include discriminative information, and thus, an algori thm
is not able to learn the origin of an input sample based on this representation. In other words, the minimax optimization
process aims to match the domain disparity by learning deep i nvariant representation across domains. [63], and [36],
constructed the minimax optimization based adversarial do main adaptation in deep neural networks for the ﬁrst time.
Tzeng et al. [63], introduced an adversarial CNN-based architecture th at tends to align both marginal and conditional
distributions across domains by minimizing the classiﬁcat ion loss, soft label loss, domain classiﬁer loss, and domain
confusion loss. The model ﬁrst computes the average probabi lity distribution, soft label, for the source labeled data
in each category. It can be later ﬁne-tuned over the target la beled data to match the class-conditional distributions to
the soft labels across domains. Unlike hard labels, the soft labels provide more transferable and useful information
8