minimizing the following objective function:
min
W,Z,Erank(Z)+α||E||2,1,
s.t. WX S=XTZ+E, WWT=I,(9)
whereXSandXTare sets of samples in the source and target domains respecti vely,WXSdenotes the transformed
source samples, Z is the reconstruction coefﬁcient matrix i ncluding a set of coefﬁcient vectors corresponding to the
projected source samples, Eis a matrix of noise and outlier information of source domain , andαis the regularization
parameter. By minimizing the rank of the coefﬁcient matrix Z, the method tends to reconstruct the different source
samples together, and ﬁnd the underlying structure of sourc e samples. WWT=Iensures to have a basis transforma-
tion matrix by enforcing it to be orthogonal. Besides, the no ises and outliers in the source domain are decomposed
intoE. By Minimizing E, the noises and outliers will be removed from the projected s ource data. However, RDALR
is restricted to the rotation only, and the discriminative s ource domain information may not be transferred to the targe t
domain, causing an unreliable alignment. Shao et al. [49], proposed Low-Rank Transfer Subspace Learning (LTSL)
to resolve the RDALR problem. LTSL intends to discover a comm on low-rank subspace between domains where the
source samples can reconstruct the target samples. Learnin g the common subspace makes LTSL more ﬂexible on data
representation. LTSL performs the adaptation by minimizin g the following objective function:
min
W,Z,EF(W,XS)+λ1rank(Z)+λ2||E||2,1,
s.t. WTXT=WTXSZ+E, WTU2W=I,(10)
where F(.) is a generalized subspace learning function. In c ontrast to RDALR that considers all target samples to
represent the projected source samples, LTSL assumes that e ach sample in the target domain is more related to its
neighborhood. Thus, each datum in the target domain can be re constructed by only a set of source samples. In this
way, the method can transfer both locality and discriminati ve properties of the source domain into the target domain.
4.3 Deep Domain Adaptation
In recent years, deep neural networks have widely employed f or representation learning and achieved remarkable
results in many machine learning tasks such as image classiﬁ cation [50], sentiment analysis [51], speech recognition
[52], [53], object detection [54], [55], and object recogni tion [56], [57]. Deep neural networks are very powerful
techniques to extract the generalized feature representat ion of data. However they require an abundant labeled data
for training while annotating large amount of data is labori ous, costly and sometimes impossible. Besides, neural
networks assume that both source and target domains are samp led from the same distribution, and domain shift can
greatly degrade the performance. Hence, deep domain adapta tion was proposed to address the lack of sufﬁcient
labeled data while boosting the model’s performance by depl oying deep network properties along with adaptation
techniques. Deep network adaptation techniques are mainly categorized into discrepancy-based, reconstruction-bas ed,
and adversarial-based adaptation.
4.3.1 Discrepancy-based.
For the ﬁrst time, Long et al. [33], propose Deep Adaptation Network (DAN) which utilizes the deep neural networks
in the domain adaptation setting to learn transferable feat ures across domains. DAN assumes that there is a shift
between marginal distributions while the conditional dist ributions remain unchanged. Therefore, it tends to match
the marginal distributions across domains by adding multip le adaptation layers for the task-speciﬁc representations .
Adaptation layers utilize multiple kernel variant of MMD (M K-MMD) to embed all the task-speciﬁc representations
into RKHS and align the shift between marginal distribution s. DAN only aligns the marginal distributions and does
not consider the conditional distribution disparity acros s domains. Deep Transfer Network (DTN) [58], was proposed
to match both marginal and conditional distributions simul taneously. DTN is a MMD-based distribution matching
technique and composed of two types of layers. the shared fea ture extraction layer learns a subspace to align the
marginal distributions across domains while discriminati on layer matches the conditional distributions using class iﬁer
transduction. To reduce the difference in the conditional d istributions, the source labels and the target pseudo label s
are used to project the data points into different hyperplan es for different classes. To align the conditional distribu tions,
the data points are ﬁrst projected into different hyperplan es using the source labels and the target pseudo labels and
then the discrepancy between conditional distributions is reduced by measuring and minimizing the conditional MMD
based objective function.
4.3.2 Reconstruction-based
Another category of deep adaptation networks utilizes auto encoder to align the discrepancy between domains by
minimizing the reconstruction error and learning invarian t and transferable representation across domains. The purp ose
7