Domain adaptation is a special case of transfer learning [1] . These two closely related problem settings are sub-
discipline of machine learning which aim to improve the perf ormance of a target model with insufﬁcient or lack of
annotated data by using the knowledge from another related d omain with adequate labeled data. We ﬁrst brieﬂy
review transfer learning and its categories, and then addre ss some existing related works to transfer learning and
domain adaptation. Transfer learning refers to a class of ma chine learning problems where either the tasks and/or
domains may change between source and target while in domain adaptations only domains differ and tasks remain
unchanged. In transfer learning, a domain consists of featu re space and marginal probability distribution, and a task
includes a label space and an objective predictive function . Thus, Various possible scenarios in domains and tasks
create different transfer learning settings. Pan et al. [1], categorizes transfer learning into three main categor ies:
inductive, transductive, and unsupervised transfer learn ing. Inductive transfer learning refers to the situation wh ere
the source and target tasks differ, no matter whether or not d omains are different. In this setting, the source domain
may or may not include annotated data, but a few labeled data i n the target domain are required as training data. In
transductive transfer learning, tasks remain unchanged wh ile domains differ, and labeled data are available only in
the source domain. However, part of the unlabeled data in the target domain is required at training time to obtain
its marginal probability distribution. Finally, unsuperv ised transfer learning refers to the scenario where the task s are
different similar to inductive transfer learning; however , both source and target domains include unlabeled data.
Similar to transfer learning and domain adaptation, Semi-s upervised classiﬁcation addresses the problem of having
insufﬁcient labeled data. This problem setting employs abu ndant unlabeled samples and a small amount of annotated
samples to train a model. In this approach, both labeled and u nlabeled data samples are assumed to be drawn from the
equivalent distributions. In contrast, transfer learning and domain adaptation relax this assumption to allow domain s
to be from distinct distributions [2], [3].
Multi-task learning [4], is another related task that aims t o improve generalization performance in multiple related t asks
by simultaneously training them. Since related tasks are as sumed to utilize common information, Multi-task learning
tends to learn the underlying structure of data and share the common representations across all tasks. There are some
similarities and differences between transfer learning an d multi-task learning. Both of these learning techniques us e
similar procedures, such as parameter sharing and feature t ransformation, to leverage the transferred knowledge to
improve learners’ performance. However, Transfer learnin g aims to boosts the target learner performance by ﬁrst
training a model on a source domain and then transferring the related knowledge to the target learner, while multi-task
learning aims to improve the performance of multiple relate d tasks by jointly training them.
Similarly, multi-view learning aims to learn from multi-vi ew data or multiple sets of distinctive features such as
audio+video, image+text, text+text, etc. E.g., a web page c an be described by the page and hyperlink contents,
which is an example of describing data by two different sourc es of text. The intuition behind this type of learning
is that the multi-view data contains complementary informa tion, and a model can learn more comprehensive and
compact representation to improve the generalization perf ormance. Some real-world application examples of multi-
view learning are video analysis [5], [6], speaker recognit ion [7], [8], natural language processing [9], [10], [11],
and recommender system [12], [13]. Canonical correlation a nalysis (CCA) [14], and co-training [15], are the ﬁrst
representative techniques introduced in the concept of mul ti-view learning which are also used in transfer learning
[16].
Domain generalization [17], also tends to train a model on mu ltiple annotated source domains which can be generalized
into an unseen target domain. In domain generalization, tar get samples are not available at the training time. However,
domain adaptation requires the target data during training to align the shift across domains.
2 Notations and deﬁnitions
In domain adaptation, domains can be considered as three mai n parts: input or feature space X, output or label space
Y, and an associated probability distribution p(x,y), i.e.,D={X,Y,p(x,y)}. Feature space Xis a subset of a
d-dimensional space, X ⊂Rd,Yrefers to either a space of binary {−1,+1}or multi-class {1,...K}, whereKis
the number of classes, and p(x,y)is a joint probability distribution over the feature-label space pair X × Y . We
can decompose the joint probability distribution as p(x,y) =p(x)p(x|y)orp(x,y) =p(y)p(y|x), wherep(.)is a
marginal distribution and p(.|.)is a conditional distribution.
Given a source domain Sand a target domain T, the source dataset samples drawn from the source domain con sist of
feature-label pairs {(xi,yi)}n
i=1, wherenis the number of samples in the source data set. Similarly, th e target data set
can be denoted as {zi,ui}m
i=1, where(zi,ui)refers to the target samples and their associated labels. In unsupervised
domain adaptation where the labels are not available in the t arget domain, uis unknown. When the source and
target domains are related but from different distribution s, naively extending the underlying knowledge contained in
one domain into another might negatively affect the learner ’s performance in the target domain. Therefore, domain
2