pected total reward with respect to the policy as well as its parame ter, the global optimality
of such a stationary point remains unclear. The only exception is the linear-quadratic regu-
lator (LQR) setting ( Fazel et al. ,2018;Malik et al. ,2018;Tu and Recht ,2018;Yang et al. ,
2019a;Bu et al.,2019), which is, however, more restrictive than the general MDP settin g
that possibly involves neural networks.
To bridge the gap between practice and theory, we analyze neural policy gradient meth-
ods equipped with actor-critic schemes, where the actors and crit ics are represented by
overparameterized two-layer neural networks. In detail, we stu dy two settings, where the
policy improvement steps are based on vanilla policy gradient and natu ral policy gradient,
respectively. In both settings, the policy evaluation steps are bas ed on the TD(0) algorithm
(Sutton,1988) with independent sampling. In the ﬁrst setting, we prove that neu ral vanilla
policygradient converges toastationarypointoftheexpected to talrewardata1 /√
T-ratein
the expected squared norm of the policy gradient, where Tis the number of policy improve-
ment steps. Meanwhile, through a geometric characterization tha t relates the suboptimality
of the stationary points to the representation power of the neur al networks parameterizing
the actor and critic, we establish the global optimality of all stationa ry points under mild
regularity conditions. In the second setting, through the lens of K ullback-Leibler (KL) di-
vergence regularization, we prove that neural natural policy gra dient converges to a globally
optimal policy at a 1 /√
T-rate in the expected total reward. In particular, a key to such
global optimality and convergence guarantees is a notion of compat ibility between the actor
and critic, which connects the accuracy of policy evaluation steps w ith the eﬃcacy of policy
improvement steps. We show that such a notion of compatibility is ens ured by using shared
neural architectures and random initializations for both the actor and critic, which is often
used as a practical heuristic ( Mnih et al. ,2016). To our best knowledge, our analysis gives
the ﬁrst global optimality and convergence guarantees for neura l policy gradient methods,
which corroborate their signiﬁcant empirical successes.
Related Work. In contrast to the huge body of empirical literature on policy gradi-
ent methods, theoretical results on their convergence remain re latively scarce. In particu-
lar,Sutton et al. (2000) andKakade(2002) analyze vanilla policy gradient (REINFORCE)
and natural policy gradient with compatible action-value function ap proximators, respec-
tively, which are further extended by Konda and Tsitsiklis (2000);Peters and Schaal (2008);
Castro and Meir (2010) to incorporate actor-critic schemes. Most of this line of work
only establishes the asymptotic convergence based on stochastic approximation techniques
(Kushner and Yin ,2003;Borkar,2009) and requires the actor and critic to be parameterized
3