2373
A comprehensive survey of recent trends in deep learning for…
1 3
4.4  Miscellaneous domains
The image data augmentation techniques not only help in the medical and agriculture 
domain. It contributed greatly to other domains. Those domains vary from human iden-
tification, art, and music to space technology. Table  5 summarizes selected research 
works that used the image data augmentation techniques in the different miscellaneous 
domains.
5  Summary
This survey started with the importance of the image data augmentation for the limited 
dataset and especially the image dataset. A collection of structured data augmentation 
approaches is suggested for dealing with the depth overfitting question in DL models. 
Data-intensive models depend on deep learning Applying approaches in this survey 
yield the same or superior performance in small datasets. Information augmentation is 
very useful for producing improved datasets. The survey was structured into three main 
sections. The first section was the classical image data augmentation, while the sec-
ond section was deep learning data augmentation, and the third section was the image 
data augmentation state art researches. The classical image data augmentation taxon-
omy consisted of geometric transformation which included flipping, rotation, shear -
ing, cropping, and translation. The photometric transformation included color space 
shifting, image filters, and adding noise. The deep learning image data augmentation 
included three types, the first type was the image data augmentation using GAN, while 
the second type was the Neural Style Transfer, and the third type was the meta metric 
learning. The meta metric included Neural Augmentation, Auto Augment, and smart 
Augmentation. Finally, the third main section illustrated the state-of-the-art researches 
in image data augmentation within different domains such as the medical domain, agri-
culture domain, and other miscellaneous domains. The prospect of data augmenta-
tion is extremely promising search algorithms that use data warping and oversampling 
approaches have enormous potential. The deep neural network’s layered design provides 
multiple possibilities for Data Augmentation. Future study would aim to create a tax-
onomy of augmentation techniques, build up new quality standards for GAN samples, 
discover relationships between data augmentation, and further generalize the concepts 
of data augmentation.