2368 N. E. Khalifa et al.
1 3
Figure  20 also shows that the image data augmentation attracted the institutions to sup-
port the researchers in the domain of image data augmentation related to computer science 
within the last 6 years. The figure also shows according to the Scopus database that the 
National Natural Science Foundation of China sponsored more than 430 research papers 
in the domain of image data augmentation which is related to the computer science field. 
The list of the institutions ordered by the number of researches is “ National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China, National Science Foundation, Ministry of Science and Technol-
ogy of the People’s Republic of China, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Uni-
versities, Nvidia, Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, National Key 
Research and Development Program of China, Ministry of Finance, and National Institutes 
of Health.”
4.1  Medical domain
Image data augmentation techniques in the medical domain have accomplished a distin-
guished contribution and a breakthrough. As the existence of a large medical dataset is a 
difficult task as it needs continuous efforts in the long term. Image data augmentation tech-
niques help in generating medical images for diagnoses in an inexpensive way and accom-
plished the highest testing accuracy possible without the need for the existence of large 
medical datasets.
One of the breakthrough research in the medical domain which used image data aug-
mentation techniques is the work presented in Ronneberger et al. (2015), the authors pre-
sented U-net: convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. They claim to 
have built a neural network and training algorithm which relies on the extensive use of 
image data augmentation. The image data augmentation with their proposed neural net-
works achieved 92% testing accuracy (Ronneberger et al. 2015).
In (Pereira et  al. 2016), The paper suggested utilizing convolutional neural net-
works to segment brain tumors. The authors stated that they presented an automatic 
segmentation method based on convolutional neural networks and the use of image data 
Fig. 20  Image data augmentation research number funded by an institution from 2015–2020