2369
A comprehensive survey of recent trends in deep learning for…
1 3
augmentation which is considered to be very effective for brain tumor segmentation in 
MRI images. They used classical image data augmentation (rotations with multiple 90 
degrees). The achieved results relevant dice similarity coefficient metric (Thada and 
Jaglan 2013) were 0.78, 0.65, and 0.75.
According to the World Health Organization, the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic 
is placing healthcare services worldwide under unparalleled and growing strain. The 
scarcity of COVID-19 datasets, especially in chest X-ray and CT photos, is the pri-
mary motivation for some scientific researches such as (Loey et al. Apr. 2020a; Loey 
et al. 2020a). The primary objective is to capture all available x-ray and CT images for 
COVID-19 and to use classical data augmentation techniques in conjunction with GAN 
(Loey et al. Apr. 2020a) and CGAN (Loey et al. 2020a) to produce additional pictures to 
aid in the identification of the COVID-19. The combination of classical data augmenta-
tions and GAN significantly improves classification accuracy in all chosen models.
A lot of work in the medical field has been used for image data augmentation whether 
classical image data augmentation or deep learning augmentation. Table  2 summarizes 
selected research works that used the image data augmentation techniques in the medi-
cal domain.
4.2  Agriculture domain
Agriculture is an important domain which secures the human with the necessary foods 
for their living. Image data augmentation helps many researchers around the globe to 
enhance their models in the agriculture domain. In the presented work in Khalifa et al. 
2020b, the authors presented different deep transfer models to classify 101 class of 
insect pests which are harmful to agriculture crops. They used classical augmentation 
techniques to raise the number of images to be 3 times larger than the original dataset. 
They adopted reflection as an augmentation technique for their dataset. Using the image 
data augmentation technique in their work raised their accuracy from 41.8% in testing 
accuracy to 89.33%.
In (Mehdipour Ghazi et al. 2017), The authors proposes a novel approach for plant 
identification utilizing deep neural networks adjusted using optimization techniques. To 
boost image precision, they have used methods such as rotation, conversion, reflection, 
and scaling. Their algorithm scored an accuracy of 80 percent on the validation collec-
tion and a rank ranking of 75.2% on the official test set. Table  3 summarizes selected 
research works that used the image data augmentation techniques in the agriculture 
domain (Loey et al. Apr. 2020c).
4.3  Remote sensing domain
Remote sensing is a critical field that involves detecting and tracking the physical 
properties of an environment (typically from satellite or aircraft) by the calculation of 
reflected and emitted radiation from a radius. Many researchers around the world use 
image data augmentation to improve their models in the remote sensing domain. Table  4 
summarizes selected research works that used the image data augmentation techniques 
in the different remote sensing domains.