2363
A comprehensive survey of recent trends in deep learning for…
1 3
The Discriminator produces the likelihood that a given sample originated from a collec-
tion of real samples. A real sample has a strong chance of being true. Possibly false sam-
ples are suggested by their low likelihood. The generator may provide an optimum solu-
tion where the discriminator has almost no potential to distinguish true from false samples 
where the discriminator error rate is close to 0.5 (Alqahtani et al. 2019). The GAN struc-
ture is presented in Fig.  14. As data, a random sample is collected and this is used by the 
Generator to produce the output (Alqahtani et al. 2019).
The generator is a neural network that learns from noise in photos to generate pictures. 
The noise generated from the Generator is documented through the G (z). Gaussian noise 
is an input to the device in latent space. During the training phase, each neuron’s G and D 
values are changed iteratively.
The discriminator The Discriminator is a neural network that is capable of identifying 
whether or not the picture it has memorized is indicative of real-world evidence. X is input 
into D and is the output (x) (Goodfellow, et al. 2014). The goal function of a two-person 
minimax game was described in equation form. (16).
The popularity of GANs has generated a new curiosity in how these models could be 
applied to Data Augmentation. These networks enable the generation of novel training data 
which results in improved classifiers. Figure  15 provides examples of outputs of a GAN for 
an original picture.
3.3  Neural style transfer
Neural Style Transfer (NST) (Gatys et al. 2016) is another technique for generating images 
in deep learning data augmentation. It is an artificial model which was developed by using 
a deep neural network particularly a deep convolutional network. The model uses neural 
representations of material and style to isolate and recombine pictures, demonstrating a 
way to construct creative images computationally (Gatys et al. 2016). it is probably best 
known for its artistic domain applications. The NST was a base work for creating artistic 
works in applications such as real-time style transfer for super-resolution images (Johnson 
et al. 2016) (Hayat 2018). A set of equations can be found in Gatys et al. (2016) which is 
considered the mathematical foundation of the neural style transfer.(16) min
Gmax
DV(D,G)=Ex∼Pdata(x)/bracketleft.s1log(d(x))/bracketright.s1+Ez∼pg(z)/bracketleft.s1log(1−D(G(z)))/bracketright.s1
Fig. 14  Graphical representation of the generative adversarial network