2359
A comprehensive survey of recent trends in deep learning for…
1 3
technique for adjusting image intensities to enhance contrast, while the white balancing 
(Lam and Fung 2008) operates by changing the picture such that it is illuminated by a 
neutral light source. Special operations are typically conducted separately in the differ -
ent spectral realms of the signal. Sharpening (Reichenbach et al. 1990) spatial filters are 
used to highlight fine details in an image or to enhance details that have been blurred, 
while blurring is averaging process for pixels by its neighbors as a process of integra-
tion. Using the sharpening and blurring filter (Reichenbach et al. 1990) can result in a 
distorted picture or high contrast horizontal or vertical edges which will aid in recogniz-
ing the details of an image (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar 2019).
The above-mentioned filters are operated using matrix multiplication of the original 
image with the filter matrix. Figure  9 presents the image filter output using different 
filters and they are histogram equalization (Premaladha and Ravichandran 2016), white 
balancing (Lam and Fung 2008), enhancing brightness sharpening (Reichenbach et al. 
1990) accordingly.
2.8  Noise
Adding noise to a picture requires inserting a noise matrix that is created from a regular 
distribution. Four famous types of noise can be used as image data augmentation and 
they are Gaussian, Poisson, salt & pepper, and speckle noise. Many other noises exist, 
but in this research, the mentioned four types of noises were selected and investigated.
The first form of noise to be studied is additive noise since it’s called additive. Gauss-
ian noise continues to shift the color values that makeup pictures. The probability den-
sity function is provided in this article, based on this Eq. (12) (Boyat and Joshi Apr. 
2015).
where gc is the grey color meaning, σ and µ are the standard deviation and mean respec-
tively. The mean value is zero, the spectrum is between zero and one, and the standard 
deviation is 0.1, and 256, as is seen in Fig. 10.
The second form of noise is the Poisson noise which is normally present in the elec-
tromagnetic frequencies encountered by humans. This x-ray and gamma-ray machine 
released a variety of photons continuously. The passion distribution is shown by the 
graph seen below (13) (Boyat and Joshi Apr. 2015).(12) P/parenleft.s1
gc/parenright.s1
=/parenleft.s3/uni221A.s2
e
2/u1D70B/u1D70E2/parenright.s3−(gc−/u1D707)2
2/u1D70E2
Fig. 9  Output images from applying different filters, a original image, b histogram equalization, c white 
balancing, d enhancing brightness, and e sharpening