2365
A comprehensive survey of recent trends in deep learning for…
1 3
3.4  Meta metric learning
The meta metric learning (Zoph and Le 2019) concept is the use of a neural network to 
optimize neural networks. This concept was applied firstly by Barretzoph and et  al. in 
Zoph and Le (2019). They have a novel model for meta-learning architectures which uses a 
recurrent network to achieve the highest possible accuracy (Zoph and Le 2019). There are 
many research trials in this area. Three research trials were selected to be studied in this 
work. The three models are neural augmentation, auto augment, and smart augmentation. 
These models used a mixture of different techniques such as photometric transformation, 
geometric transformations, NST, and GAN.
3.4.1  Neural augmentation
Neural Augmentation (NA) is originally presented by Wang and Perez (Perez and Wang 
2017). They suggest that a neural network should be trained with the best-fit augmentation 
strategy such that it can reach full accuracy. The authors proposed two different approaches 
for data augmentation. The author first manipulated the data to maximize identification 
before training the classifier. The researchers implemented GANs and simple transforma-
tions to construct a broader dataset. The second solution required learning from a neural 
net that was prepended to the input. At training time as presented in Fig.  17, this neural net-
work takes in two random images and produces a single image that is in style or in context 
with a specified image it has been trained on. The gradient for training a convolutional net-
work is then transferred onto the following layers of the network. During training, photos 
from the validation collection would be used to train the classifier (Perez and Wang 2017). 
They achieved remarkable accuracy and their result was very promising.
3.4.2  Auto augment
Auto Augment (AA) is originally presented by Cubuk and et al. (Cubuk et al. 2019). They 
created a software package AA that automatically searches for the right augmentation poli-
cies for a specified picture. In their implementation, they built a search space where a policy 
Fig. 17  Training model for Neural Augmentation