2357
A comprehensive survey of recent trends in deep learning for…
1 3
present the translation equation. The fx and fy is the new coordinates of each pixel after 
translation and the x and y represent the coordinates of the original location on the picture. 
Figure 7 illustrates examples of different translations.
Using classical image data augmentation and especially geometric transformation may 
include some demerits, such as additional memory consumption, additional computing 
processing power, and more training time. Moreover, classical geometric image data aug-
mentation such as cropping, and translation may remove important features from images, 
so it must be operated manually not in an automatic random cropping and translation pro-
cess. In certain applications such as medical image processing, the training data isn’t as 
similar to the test data as classical image data augmentation algorithms make it out to be. 
So, the scope of where and when to use classical image data augmentation can be practical 
is quite inadequate.
2.6  Color space shifting
Color space (Winkler 2013) shifting belongs to the family of classical photometric data 
augmentation. A color plane is a mathematical instrument used to construct and paint 
using colors. Humans distinguish shades by their color properties such as brightness and 
hue. Colors may be represented using the quantities of red, green, and blue light produced 
by the phosphor panel (Winkler 2013). In classical photometric data augmentation, color 
space-shifting is considered one of the important techniques for increasing the number of 
images and may reveal some important features in images that were hidden under a specific 
color space. There most famous color spaces are (Winkler 2013):
• CMY(K) {Cyan—Magenta -Yellow – Black}.
• YIQ, YUV, YCbCr, YCC {Luminance / Chrominance}.
• HSL {Hue—Saturation—Lightness}.
• RGB {Red—Green – Blue}.
The conversion between those color spaces is done by using color space shifting equa-
tions. The most used common color space is RGB, Eq. (9) presents the conversion from 
RGB to CMY, while Eq. (10) presents the conversion from RGB to HSL, finally, Eq. (11) (8)/bracketleft.s3fx
fy/bracketright.s3
=/bracketleft.s3
x
y/bracketright.s3
+/bracketleft.s3Tx
Ty/bracketright.s3
Fig. 7  Translation examples were a original image, b translation on the X-axis direction, c translation on 
the Y-axis direction, and d translation on the X and Y-axis direction