2352 N. E. Khalifa et al.
1 3
1 Introduction
Data augmentation (Dyk and Meng 2001) is greatly important to overcome the limita-
tion of data samples and particularly image data-sets. Data is the raw material for every 
machine learning algorithm, such as the means used to feed the algorithm as illustrated 
in Fig.  1, any shortage in data and it is labeled may reflect on the accuracy of any pro-
posed model in machine learning (Baştanlar and Özuysal 2014). Image augmentation 
is one effective training strategy to grow the collection of images for neural network 
models that also do not include additional images. The image data augmentation is 
extremely needed for the following reasons:
1. It is an inexpensive methodology if it is compared with regular data collection with its 
label annotation.
2. It is extremely accurate, as it is originally generated from ground-truth data by nature.
3. It is controllable, which helps in generating balanced data.
4. It contributes to overcoming the overfitting problem (Subramanian and Simon 2013).
5. It helps in achieving better testing accuracies.
Deep learning (DL) is a sub-category of machine learning (Baştanlar and Özuysal 
2014) which consequently a subset of artificial intelligence (Nilsson 1981). DL instructs 
algorithms to learn by imitation. DL aims to simulate the functioning of the human 
brain, particularly when interacting with data and trends, to help decision-making. DL 
is the secret to computer vision (Ponce and Forsyth 2012), image classifications, object 
recognition (Papageorgiou et  al. 1998), image segmentation (Pal and Pal 1993), and 
more. In deep learning, the data is the main source for learning, without sufficient data 
especially images, the DL model will not learn and produce an accurate model. Models 
that use deeper learning strategies are less likely to exhibit overfitting but often lack 
valid training data. Data augmentation, the subject of this survey, is just one approach 
used to minimize overftting. Other methods are described below to help prevent overfit-
ting in deep learning models. The paragraphs that follow provide alternative methods 
to prevent overfitting in DL models. The outcomes of our survey would demonstrate 
how oversampling of classes in picture data can be performed using Data Augmenta-
tion. The main contributions of the presented survey are (1) highlighting the importance 
of the data augmentation in general, (2) demonstrates the state-of-the-art methods and 
techniques of data augmentations for images which will help researchers to design more 
Fig. 1  Difference between regular programming and machine learning