2367
A comprehensive survey of recent trends in deep learning for…
1 3
to reach comparable or better efficiency standards with smaller networks, it has been effec-
tive on many networks. (Lemley et al. 2017). The SA approach as illustrated is like the NA 
technique presented in the earlier sub-section. Their experiment shows that the augmenta-
tion method can be automated, especially in situations when two or more samples of a cer -
tain type can be mixed non-homogenously outcomes in a stronger generalization of a target 
network. They demonstrated that a deep learning algorithm might learn the enhanced task 
at the same time the task was being taught to the network (Lemley et al. 2017). The SA 
strategy was evaluated on learning tasks in conducting gender identification on a dataset 
(Phillips et al. 1998), the accuracy rose to 88.46%. The audience dataset responded with an 
improvement of 76.06%. By utilizing another face dataset, the findings changed to 95.66% 
(Lemley et al. 2017).
One of the drawbacks of meta metric learning for data augmentation, it is a relatively 
new concept and needs to be tested properly and extensively by researchers to prove its effi-
ciency. Moreover, the implementation of meta metric learning for image data augmentation 
is relatively hard and consumes a lot of time in development.
4  Image data augmentation state of art researches
Image data augmentation with its two branches (classical, and deep learning) has attracted 
the attention of many researchers throughout the previous years. The section conducted its 
results based on the Scopus database in the field of computer science with keyword terms 
“data augmentation, image augmentation, and deep learning” from the year 2015 to 2020. 
Figure  19 presents the number of researches through the last 6 years in the image data aug-
mentation within the computer science field using the Scopus database. It is clearly shown 
throughout the figure that the researches in image data augmentation are exponentially 
increasing. In the year 2020, the number of researches was 1269 which is 24 times larger 
than researches carried out in 2015 which only include 52 research papers, a large number 
of researches due to the effectiveness of data augmentation in producing accurate results. 
Fig. 19  Image data augmentation research number in the computer science field from 2015–2020