ELMo GPT BERT U NILM
Left-to-Right LM /check /check /check
Right-to-Left LM /check /check
Bidirectional LM /check /check
Sequence-to-Sequence LM /check
Table 1: Comparison between language model (LM) pre-training objectives.
Backbone
NetworkLM Objectives of
Uniﬁed Pre-trainingWhat Uniﬁed LM Learns Example Downstream Tasks
Transformer
with shared
parameters
for all LM
objectivesBidirectional LM Bidirectional encodingGLUE benchmark
Extractive question answering
Unidirectional LM Unidirectional decoding Long text generation
Sequence-to-Sequence LMUnidirectional decoding
conditioned on
bidirectional encodingAbstractive summarization
Question generation
Generative question answering
Table 2: The uniﬁed LM is jointly pre-trained by multiple language modeling objectives, sharing the
same parameters. We ﬁne-tune and evaluate the pre-trained uniﬁed LM on various datasets, including
both language understanding and generation tasks.
set of cloze tasks [ 41] where a masked word is predicted based on its context. These cloze tasks differ
in how the context is deﬁned. For a left-to-right unidirectional LM, the context of the masked word
to be predicted consists of all the words on its left. For a right-to-left unidirectional LM, the context
consists of all the words on the right. For a bidirectional LM, the context consists of the words on
both the right and the left [ 9]. For a sequence-to-sequence LM, the context of the to-be-predicted
word in the second (target) sequence consists of all the words in the ﬁrst (source) sequence and the
words on the its left in the target sequence.
Similar to BERT, the pre-trained U NILM can be ﬁne-tuned (with additional task-speciﬁc layers
if necessary) to adapt to various downstream tasks. But unlike BERT which is used mainly for
NLU tasks, U NILM can be conﬁgured, using different self-attention masks (Section 2), to aggregate
context for different types of language models, and thus can be used for both NLU and NLG tasks.
The proposed U NILM has three main advantages. First, the uniﬁed pre-training procedure leads to a
single Transformer LM that uses the shared parameters and architecture for different types of LMs,
alleviating the need of separately training and hosting multiple LMs. Second, the parameter sharing
makes the learned text representations more general because they are jointly optimized for different
language modeling objectives where context is utilized in different ways, mitigating overﬁtting to
any single LM task. Third, in addition to its application to NLU tasks, the use of U NILM as a
sequence-to-sequence LM (Section 2.3), makes it a natural choice for NLG, such as abstractive
summarization and question generation.
Experimental results show that our model, used as a bidirectional encoder, compares favorably with
BERT on the GLUE benchmark and two extractive question answering tasks (i.e., SQuAD 2.0 and
CoQA). In addition, we demonstrate the effectiveness of U NILM on ﬁve NLG datasets, where it
is used as a sequence-to-sequence model, creating new state-of-the-art results on CNN/DailyMail
and Gigaword abstractive summarization, SQuAD question generation, CoQA generative question
answering, and DSTC7 dialog response generation.
2 Uniﬁed Language Model Pre-training
Given an input sequence x=x1···x|x|, UNILM obtains a contextualized vector representation for
each token. As shown in Figure 1, the pre-training optimizes the shared Transformer [ 42] network
with respect to several unsupervised language modeling objectives, namely, unidirectional LM,
bidirectional LM, and sequence-to-sequence LM. In order to control the access to the context of the
word token to be predicted, we employ different masks for self-attention. In other words, we use
masking to control how much context the token should attend to when computing its contextualized
2