EM F1
RMR+ELMo [20] 71.4 73.7
BERT LARGE 78.9 81.8
UNILM 80.5 83.4
Table 5: Extractive QA results on
the SQuAD development set.F1
DrQA+ELMo [34] 67.2
BERT LARGE 82.7
UNILM 84.9
Table 6: Extractive QA results
on the CoQA development set.F1
Seq2Seq [34] 27.5
PGNet [34] 45.4
UNILM 82.5
Table 7: Generative QA results
on the CoQA development set.
bidirectional encoder for the task. We conduct experiments on the Stanford Question Answering
Dataset (SQuAD) 2.0 [33], and Conversational Question Answering (CoQA) [34] datasets.
The results on SQuAD 2.0 are reported in Table 5, where we compare two models in Exact Match
(EM) and F1 score. RMR+ELMo [ 20] is an LSTM-based question answering model augmented with
pre-trained language representation. BERT LARGE is a cased model, ﬁne-tuned on the SQuAD training
data for3epochs, with batch size 24, and maximum length 384. UNILM is ﬁne-tuned in the same
way as BERT LARGE . We see that U NILM outperforms BERT LARGE .
CoQA is a conversational question answering dataset. Compared with SQuAD, CoQA has several
unique characteristics. First, the examples in CoQA are conversational, so we need to answer the
input question based on conversation histories. Second, the answers in CoQA can be free-form texts,
including a large portion is of yes/no answers.
We modify the model used for SQuAD as follows. Firstly, in addition to the asked question,
we concatenate the question-answer histories to the ﬁrst segment, so that the model can capture
conversational information. Secondly, for yes/no questions, we use the ﬁnal hidden vector of the
[SOS] token to predict whether the input is a yes/no question, and whether the answer is yesorno.
For other examples, we select a passage subspan with the highest F1 score for training.
The results on CoQA are reported in Table 6, where we compare two models in F1 scores.
DrQA+ELMo [ 34] is an LSTM-based question answering model augmented with pre-trained ELMo
representation. BERT LARGE is a cased model, ﬁne-tuned on the CoQA training data for 2epochs,
with batch size 16, and maximum length 512. UNILM is ﬁne-tuned with the same hyper-parameters
as BERT LARGE . We see that U NILM outperforms BERT LARGE .
Generative QA Generative question answering generates free-form answers for the input question
and passage, which is a NLG task. In contrast, extractive methods can only predict subspans of the
input passage as answers. On the CoQA dataset (as described above), Reddy et al. [2019] show that
vanilla sequence-to-sequence models still underperforms extractive methods by a wide margin.
We adapt U NILM to generative question answering as a sequence-to-sequence model. The ﬁrst
segment (i.e., the input sequence) is the concatenation of conversational histories, the input question
and the passage. The second segment (i.e., the output sequence) is the answer. We ﬁne-tune the
pre-trained U NILM on the CoQA training set for 10epochs. We set the batch size to 32, the mask
probability to 0.5, and the maximum length to 512. We also use label smoothing with rate of 0.1.
The other hyper-parameters are kept the same as pre-training. During decoding, we use beam search
with beam size of 3. The maximum length of input question and passage is 470. For passages that
are longer than the maximum length, we split the passage into several chunks with a sliding window
approach, and select a chunk with the highest word overlap over the question.
We compare our method with the generative question answering models Seq2Seq and PGNet as
described in [ 34]. The Seq2Seq baseline is a sequence-to-sequence model with an attention mech-
anism. The PGNet model augments Seq2Seq with a copy mechanism. As shown in Table 7, our
generative question answering model outperforms previous generative methods by a wide margin,
which signiﬁcantly closes the gap between generative method and extractive method.
3.3 Question Generation
We conduct experiments for the answer-aware question generation task [ 51]. Given an input passage
and an answer span, our goal is to generate a question that asks for the answer. The SQuAD 1.1
dataset [ 32] is used for evaluation. Following [ 12], we split the original training set into training and
7