the sequence-to-sequence LM, also known as the encoder-decoder model, simultaneously pre-trains
a bidirectional encoder and an unidirectional decoder. The pre-trained model, used as an encoder-
decoder model, can be easily adapted to a wide range of conditional text generation tasks, such as
abstractive summarization.
Next Sentence Prediction For the bidirectional LM, we also include the next sentence prediction
task for pre-training, as in [9].
2.4 Pre-training Setup
The overall training objective is the sum of different types of LM objectives described above.
Speciﬁcally, within one training batch, 1/3of the time we use the bidirectional LM objective, 1/3of
the time we employ the sequence-to-sequence LM objective, and both left-to-right and right-to-left
LM objectives are sampled with rate of 1/6. The model architecture of U NILM follows that of
BERT LARGE [9] for a fair comparison. The gelu activation [ 18] is used as GPT [ 31]. Speciﬁcally, we
use a24-layer Transformer with 1,024hidden size, and 16attention heads, which contains about
340M parameters. The weight matrix of the softmax classiﬁer is tied with token embeddings. U NILM
is initialized by BERT LARGE , and then pre-trained using English Wikipedia2and BookCorpus [ 52],
which have been processed in the same way as [ 9]. The vocabulary size is 28,996. The maximum
length of input sequence is 512. The token masking probability is 15%. Among masked positions,
80% of the time we replace the token with [MASK] ,10% of the time with a random token, and
keeping the original token for the rest. In addition, 80% of the time we randomly mask one token
each time, and 20% of the time we mask a bigram or a trigram.
Adam [ 22] withβ1= 0.9,β2= 0.999is used for optimization. The learning rate is 3e-5, with linear
warmup over the ﬁrst 40,000steps and linear decay. The dropout rate is 0.1. The weight decay is
0.01. The batch size is 330. The pre-training procedure runs for about 770,000steps. It takes about
7hours for 10,000steps using 8Nvidia Telsa V100 32GB GPU cards with mixed precision training.
2.5 Fine-tuning on Downstream NLU and NLG Tasks
For NLU tasks, we ﬁne-tune U NILM as a bidirectional Transformer encoder, like BERT. Take text
classiﬁcation as an example. We use the encoding vector of [SOS] as the representation of input,
denoted as hL
1, and feed it to a randomly initialized softmax classiﬁer (i.e., the task-speciﬁc output
layer), where the class probabilities are computed as softmax( hL
1WC), whereWC∈Rdh×Cis
a parameter matrix, and Cthe number of categories. We maximize the likelihood of the labeled
training data by updating the parameters of the pre-trained LM and the added softmax classiﬁer.
For NLG tasks, we take the sequence-to-sequence task as an example. The ﬁne-tuning procedure is
similar to pre-training using the self-attention masks as in Section 2.3. Let S1andS2denote source
and target sequences, respectively. We pack them together with special tokens, to form the input
“[SOS]S1[EOS]S2[EOS] ”. The model is ﬁne-tuned by masking some percentage of tokens in the
target sequence at random, and learning to recover the masked words. The training objective is to
maximize the likelihood of masked tokens given context. It is worth noting that [EOS] , which marks
the end of the target sequence, can also be masked during ﬁne-tuning, thus when this happens, the
model learns when to emit [EOS] to terminate the generation process of the target sequence.
3 Experiments
We have conducted experiments on both NLU (i.e., the GLUE benchmark, and extractive question
answering) and NLG tasks (i.e., abstractive summarization, question generation, generative question
answering, and dialog response generation).
3.1 Abstractive Summarization
Automatic text summarization produces a concise and ﬂuent summary conveying the key information
in the input (e.g., a news article). We focus on abstractive summarization, a generation task where
2Wikipedia version: enwiki-20181101.
5