of a self-attention head Alis computed via:
Q=Hl−1WQ
l,K=Hl−1WK
l,V=Hl−1WV
l (1)
Mij=/braceleftbigg0, allow to attend
−∞,prevent from attending(2)
Al= softmax(QK⊺
√dk+M)Vl (3)
where the previous layer’s output Hl−1∈R|x|×dhis linearly projected to a triple of queries, keys
and values using parameter matrices WQ
l,WK
l,WV
l∈Rdh×dk, respectively, and the mask matrix
M∈R|x|×|x|determines whether a pair of tokens can be attended to each other.
We use different mask matrices Mto control what context a token can attend to when computing its
contextualized representation, as illustrated in Figure 1. Take bidirectional LM as an example. The
elements of the mask matrix are all 0s, indicating that all the tokens have access to each other.
2.3 Pre-training Objectives
We pretrain U NILM using four cloze tasks designed for different language modeling objectives.
In a cloze task, we randomly choose some WordPiece tokens in the input, and replace them with
special token [MASK] . Then, we feed their corresponding output vectors computed by the Transformer
network into a softmax classiﬁer to predict the masked token. The parameters of U NILM are learned
to minimize the cross-entropy loss computed using the predicted tokens and the original tokens. It is
worth noting that the use of cloze tasks makes it possible to use the same training procedure for all
LMs, unidirectional and bidirectional alike.
Unidirectional LM We use both left-to-right and right-to-left LM objectives. Take the left-to-right
LM as an example. The representation of each token encodes only the leftward context tokens
and itself. For instance, to predict the masked token of “ x1x2[MASK]x4”, only tokens x1,x2and
itself can be used. This is done by using a triangular matrix for the self-attention mask M(as in
Equation (2)), where the upper triangular part of the self-attention mask is set to −∞, and the other
elements to 0, as shown in Figure 1. Similarly, a right-to-left LM predicts a token conditioned on its
future (right) context.
Bidirectional LM Following [ 9], a bidirectional LM allows all tokens to attend to each other in
prediction. It encodes contextual information from both directions, and can generate better contextual
representations of text than its unidirectional counterpart. As indicated in Equation (2), the self-
attention mask Mis a zero matrix, so that every token is allowed to attend across all positions in the
input sequence.
Sequence-to-Sequence LM As shown in Figure 1, for prediction, the tokens in the ﬁrst (source)
segment can attend to each other from both directions within the segment, while the tokens of the
second (target) segment can only attend to the leftward context in the target segment and itself, as
well as all the tokens in the source segment. For example, given source segment t1t2and its target
segmentt3t4t5, we feed input “ [SOS]t1t2[EOS]t3t4t5[EOS] ” into the model. While both t1
andt2have access to the ﬁrst four tokens, including [SOS] and[EOS] ,t4can only attend to the ﬁrst
six tokens.
Figure 1 shows the self-attention mask Mused for the sequence-to-sequence LM objective. The left
part ofMis set to0so that all tokens can attend to the ﬁrst segment. The upper right part is set to
−∞ to block attentions from the source segment to the target segment. Moreover, for the lower right
part, we set its upper triangular part to −∞, and the other elements to 0, which prevents tokens in the
target segment from attending their future (right) positions.
During training, we randomly choose tokens in both segments, and replace them with the special
token[MASK] . The model is learned to recover the masked tokens. Since the pair of source and target
texts are packed as a contiguous input text sequence in training, we implicitly encourage the model
to learn the relationship between the two segments. In order to better predict tokens in the target
segment, U NILM learns to effectively encode the source segment. Thus, the cloze task designed for
4