HAWQ-V3: Dyadic Neural Network Quantization
Zhewei Yao*1Zhen Dong*1Zhangcheng Zheng*1Amir Gholami*1Jiali Yu23Eric Tan1Leyuan Wang2
Qijing Huang1Yida Wang2Michael W. Mahoney1Kurt Keutzer1
Abstract
Current low-precision quantization algorithms of-
ten have the hidden cost of conversion back and
forth from ﬂoating point to quantized integer val-
ues. This hidden cost limits the latency improve-
ment realized by quantizing Neural Networks.
To address this, we present HAWQ-V3 , a novel
mixed-precision integer-only quantization frame-
work. The contributions of HAWQ-V3 are the
following: (i) An integer-only inference where
the entire computational graph is performed only
with integer multiplication, addition, and bit shift-
ing, without any ﬂoating point operations or even
integer division; (ii) A novel hardware-aware
mixed-precision quantization method where the
bit-precision is calculated by solving an integer
linear programming problem that balances the
trade-off between model perturbation and other
constraints, e.g., memory footprint and latency;
(iii) Direct hardware deployment and open source
contribution for 4-bit uniform/mixed-precision
quantization in TVM, achieving an average speed
up of 1.45⇥for uniform 4-bit, as compared to
uniform 8-bit for ResNet50 on T4 GPUs; and (iv)
extensive evaluation of the proposed methods on
ResNet18/50 and InceptionV3, for various model
compression levels with/without mixed precision.
For ResNet50, our INT8 quantization achieves an
accuracy of 77.58%, which is 2.68% higher than
prior integer-only work, and our mixed-precision
INT4/8 quantization can reduce INT8 latency by
23% and still achieve 76.73% accuracy. Our
framework and the TVM implementation have
been open sourced ( HAWQ ,2020 ).
*Equal contribution1University of California, Berkeley
2Amazon3Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Correspondence
to: Zhewei Yao <zheweiy@berkeley.edu>, Amir Gholami
<amirgh@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).1. Introduction
An important step toward realizing pervasive deep learn-
ing is enabling real-time inference, both at the edge and in
the cloud, with low energy consumption and state-of-the-
art model accuracy. This will have a signiﬁcant impact on
applications such as real-time intelligent healthcare mon-
itoring, autonomous driving, audio analytics, and speech
recognition. Over the past decade, we have observed sig-
niﬁcant improvements in the accuracy of Neural Networks
(NNs) for various tasks. However, the state-of-the-art mod-
els are often prohibitively large and too compute-heavy to
be deployed for real-time use. A promising approach to
address this is through quantization ( Gray & Neuhoff ,1998;
Han et al. ,2016 ), where low-precision quantized integer
values are used to express the model parameters and fea-
ture maps. That can help reduce the model footprint, and
improve inference speed and energy consumption.
However, existing quantization algorithms often use sim-
ulated quantization , where the parameters are stored with
quantization, but are cast to ﬂoating point for inference. As
a result, all or part of the inference operations (e.g. con-
volution, matrix operations, batch norm layers, residual
connections) are performed using ﬂoating point precision.
This of course limits the speed up as we cannot utilize low
precision logic. To address this, we build upon existing
integer-only quantization methods ( Jacob et al. ,2018 ), and
propose systematic methods to extend them to low and
mixed-precision quantization. In particular, we make the
following contributions:
•We develop HAWQ-V3 , a mixed-precision integer-
only quantization framework with integer-only multi-
plication, addition, and bit shifting with static quanti-
zation. Importantly, no ﬂoating point and no integer
division calculation is performed in the entire inference.
This includes the batch norm layers and residual con-
nections, which are typically kept at ﬂoating point pre-
cision in prior integer-only quantization work ( Dong
et al.,2019). While keeping these operations in ﬂoating
point helps accuracy, this is not allowed for integer-
only hardware. We show that ignoring this and at-
tempting to deploy a model that uses ﬂoating point
residual on integer-only hardware can lead to more