HAWQ-V3: Dyadic Neural Network Quantization
bit-precision settings could result in a different model per-
turbation. To make the problem tractable, we assume that
the perturbations for each layer are independent of each
other (i.e., ⌦=PL
i=1⌦(bi)
i, where ⌦(bi)
iis the i-th layer’s
perturbation with bibit)4. This allows us to precompute the
sensitivity of each layer separately, and it only requires BL
computations. For the sensitivity metric, we use the Hes-
sian based perturbation proposed in ( Dong et al. ,2020 , Eq.
2.11). The ILP problem tries to ﬁnd the right bit precision
that minimizes this sensitivity, as follows:
Objective: min{bi}L
i=1XL
i=1⌦(bi)
i, (8)
Subject to:XL
i=1M(bi)
iModel Size Limit ,(9)
XL
i=1G(bi)
iBOPS Limit , (10)
XL
i=1Q(bi)
iLatency Limit . (11)
Here, M(bi)
idenotes the size of i-th layer with bibit quan-
tization, Q(bi)
iis the associated latency, and G(bi)
iis the
corresponding BOPS required for computing that layer. The
latter measures the total Bit Operations for calculating a
layer ( van Baalen et al. ,2020 ):
G(bi)
i=bwibaiMAC i,
where MAC iis the total Multiply-Accumulate operations
for computing the i-th layer, and bwi,baiare the bit preci-
sion used for weight and activation.5Note that it is not nec-
essary to set all these constraints at the same time. Typically,
which constraint to use depends on the end-user application.
We solve the ILP using open source PULP library ( Roy &
Mitchell ,2020 ) in Python, where we found that for all the
conﬁgurations tested in the paper, the ILP solver can ﬁnd the
solution in less than 1 second given the sensitivity metric.
For comparison, the RL based method of ( Wang et al. ,2019)
could take tens of hours to ﬁnd the right bit-precision setting.
Meanwhile, as can be seen, our ILP solver can be easily used
for multiple constraints. However, the complexity of Pareto
frontier proposed by ( Dong et al. ,2020 ) is exponentially
increasing for multiple constraints. In Section 4.2, we show
the results with different constraints.
We should also mention that the contemporary work
of (Hubara et al. ,2020 ), also proposed an ILP formula-
tion. However, our approach is hardware-aware and we
directly deploy and measure the latency of each layer in
hardware.
4Similar assumption can be found in ( Dong et al. ,2019;2020).
5bwiandbaiare always the same in HAWQ-V3 . As such,
HAWQ-V3 does not need to cast lower-precision integer numbers,
e.g., INT4, to higher-precision integer numbers, e.g., INT8, which
is more efﬁcient than ( Cai et al. ,2020 ;Dong et al. ,2020 ;Wang
et al.,2019 ).3.5. Hardware Deployment
Model size alone is not a good metric to measure the efﬁ-
ciency (speed and energy consumption) of NNs. In fact, it is
quite possible that a small model would have higher latency
and consume a larger amount of energy for inference. The
same is also true for FLOPs. The reason is that neither
model size nor FLOPs can account for cache misses, data
locality, memory bandwidth, underutilization of hardware,
etc. To address this, we need to deploy and directly measure
the latency.
We target Nvidia Turing Tensor Cores of T4 GPU for de-
ployment, as it supports both INT8 and INT4 precision
and has been enhanced for deep learning network inference.
The only API available is the WMMA kernel call which is
a micro-kernel for performing matrix-matrix operations in
INT4 precision on Tensor Cores. However, there is also no
existing compiler that would map a NN quantized to INT4
to Tensor Cores using WMMA instructions. To address
this challenge, another contribution of our work is extend-
ing TVM ( Chen et al. ,2018 ) to support INT4 inference
with/without mixed precision with INT8. This is important
so we can verify the speed beneﬁts of mixed-precision in-
ference. To accomplish this, we had to add new features in
both graph-level IR and operator schedules to make INT4
inference efﬁcient. For instance, when we perform opti-
mizations such as memory planning, constant folding, and
operator fusion, at the graph-level IR, 4-bit data are involved.
However, on byte-addressable machines, manipulating 4-bit
data individually leads to inefﬁciency in storage and com-
munication. Instead, we pack eight 4-bit elements into an
INT32 data type and perform the memory movement as a
chunk. In the ﬁnal code generation stage, the data type and
all memory access will be adjusted for INT32. By adopting
similar scheduling strategies to Cutlass ( NVIDIA ,2020 ),
we implement a new direct convolution schedule for Tensor
Cores for both 8-bit and 4-bit data in TVM. We set the knobs
for the conﬁgurations such as thread size, block size, and
loop ordering so that the auto-tuner in TVM could search
for the best latency settings.
Another important point is that we have completed the
pipeline to test directly the trained weights and to avoid
using random weights for speed measurements. This is
important, since small discrepancies between the hardware
implementation may go unnoticed from the quantization al-
gorithm in the NN training framework (PyTorch in our case)
which does not use TVM for the forward and backward
propagation. To avoid any such issue, we made sure that the
results between TVM and PyTorch match for every single
layer and stage to machine-precision accuracy, and we veri-
ﬁed the ﬁnal Top-1 accuracy when executed in the hardware
with integer-only arithmetic. In Appendix G, we present the
error accumulation of feature maps for ResNet50 with INT4