Figure 3: For the two plots on the left, we show learning curves on MT10 and MT50 respectively. PCGrad
signiﬁcantly outperforms the other methods in terms of both success rates and data efﬁciency. In the rightmost
plot, we present the ablation study on only using the magnitude and the direction of gradients modiﬁed by
PCGrad and a comparison to GradNorm [ 8]. PCGrad outperforms both ablations and GradNorm, indicating the
importance of modifying both the gradient directions and magnitudes in multi-task learning.
as the most effective scheme for training MTAN. The results comparing Cross-Stitch, MTAN and
MTAN + PCGrad are presented in Table 1 while the full comparison can be found in Table 8 in the
Appendix J.4. MTAN with PCGrad is able to achieve the best scores in 8 out of the 9 categories
where there are 3 categories per task.
Our multi-task supervised learning results indicate that PCGrad can be seamlessly combined with
state-of-art multi-task learning architectures and further improve their results on established super-
vised multi-task learning benchmarks. We include more results of PCGrad combined with more
multi-task learning architectures in Appendix I.
5.2 Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning
To answer question (2) in the RL setting, we ﬁrst consider the multi-task RL problem and evaluate our
algorithm on the recently proposed Meta-World benchmark [ 61]. In particular, we test all methods
on the MT10 and MT50 benchmarks in Meta-World, which contain 10and50manipulation tasks
respectively shown in Figure 10. in Appendix J.2.
The results are shown in left two plots in Figure 3. PCGrad combined with SAC learns all tasks
with the best data efﬁciency and successfully solves all of the 10tasks in MT10 and about 70% of
the50tasks in MT50. Training a single SAC policy and a multi-head policy is unable to acquire
half of the skills in both MT10 and MT50, suggesting that eliminating gradient interference across
tasks can signiﬁcantly boost performance of multi-task RL. Training independent SAC agents is able
to eventually solve all tasks in MT10 and 70% of the tasks in MT50, but requires about 2millions
and15millions more samples than PCGrad with SAC in MT10 and MT50 respectively, implying
that applying PCGrad can result in leveraging shared structure among tasks that expedites multi-task
learning. As noted by Yu et al. [61], these tasks involve distinct behavior motions, which makes
learning all tasks with a single policy challenging as demonstrated by poor baseline performance.
The ability to learn these tasks together opens the door for a number of interesting extensions to
meta-learning and generalization to novel task families.
Since the PCGrad update affects both the gradient direction and the gradient magnitude, we perform
an ablation study that tests two variants of PCGrad: (1) only applying the gradient direction corrected
with PCGrad while keeping the gradient magnitude unchanged and (2) only applying the gradient
magnitude computed by PCGrad while keeping the gradient direction unchanged. We further run a
direction comparison to GradNorm [ 8], which also scales only the magnitudes of the task gradients.
As shown in the rightmost plot in Figure 3, both variants and GradNorm perform worse than PCGrad
and the variant where we only vary the gradient magnitude is much worse than PCGrad. This
emphasizes the importance of the orientation change, which is particularly notable as multiple prior
works only alter gradient magnitudes [ 8,53]. We also notice that the variant of PCGrad where only
the gradient magnitudes change achieves comparable performance to GradNorm, which suggests that
it is important to modify both the gradient directions and magnitudes to eliminate interference and
achieve good multi-task learning results. Finally, to test the importance of keeping positive cosine
similarities between tasks for positive transfer, we compare PCGrad to a recently proposed method
in [55] that regularizes cosine similarities of different task gradients towards 0. PCGrad outperforms
Suteu and Guo [55] by a large margin. We leave details of the comparison to Appendix G.
8