Figure 1: Visualization of PCGrad on a 2D multi-task optimiza-
tion problem. (a) A multi-task objective landscape. (b) & (c)
Contour plots of the individual task objectives that comprise (a).
(d) Trajectory of gradient updates on the multi-task objective using
the Adam optimizer. The gradient vectors of the two tasks at the
end of the trajectory are indicated by blue and red arrows, where
the relative lengths are on a log scale.(e) Trajectory of gradient
updates on the multi-task objective using Adam with PCGrad. For
(d) and (e), the optimization trajectory goes from black to yellow.As an illustrative example, consider the
2D optimization landscapes of two task
objectives in Figure 1a-c. The opti-
mization landscape of each task con-
sists of a deep valley, a property that
has been observed in neural network
optimization landscapes [ 22], and the
bottom of each valley is characterized
by high positive curvature and large
differences in the task gradient mag-
nitudes. Under such circumstances,
the multi-task gradient is dominated
by one task gradient, which comes at
the cost of degrading the performance
of the other task. Further, due to high
curvature, the improvement in the dominating task may be overestimated, while the degradation in
performance of the non-dominating task may be underestimated. As a result, the optimizer struggles
to make progress on the optimization objective. In Figure 1d), the optimizer reaches the deep valley of
task 1, but is unable to traverse the valley in a parameter setting where there are conﬂicting gradients ,
high curvature , and a large difference in gradient magnitudes (see gradients plotted in Fig. 1d). In
Section 5.3, we ﬁnd experimentally that this tragic triad also occurs in a higher-dimensional neural
network multi-task learning problem.
The core contribution of this work is a method for mitigating gradient interference by altering the
gradients directly, i.e. by performing “gradient surgery.” If two gradients are conﬂicting, we alter the
gradients by projecting each onto the normal plane of the other, preventing the interfering components
of the gradient from being applied to the network. We refer to this particular form of gradient
surgery as projecting conﬂicting gradients (PCGrad). PCGrad is model-agnostic, requiring only a
single modiﬁcation to the application of gradients. Hence, it is easy to apply to a range of problem
settings, including multi-task supervised learning and multi-task reinforcement learning, and can
also be readily combined with other multi-task learning approaches, such as those that modify the
architecture. We theoretically prove the local conditions under which PCGrad improves upon standard
multi-task gradient descent, and we empirically evaluate PCGrad on a variety of challenging problems,
including multi-task CIFAR classiﬁcation, multi-objective scene understanding, a challenging multi-
task RL domain, and goal-conditioned RL. Across the board, we ﬁnd PCGrad leads to substantial
improvements in terms of data efﬁciency, optimization speed, and ﬁnal performance compared to
prior approaches, including a more than 30% absolute improvement in multi-task reinforcement
learning problems. Further, on multi-task supervised learning tasks, PCGrad can be successfully
combined with prior state-of-the-art methods for multi-task learning for even greater performance.
2 Multi-Task Learning with PCGrad
While the multi-task problem can in principle be solved by simply applying a standard single-task
algorithm with a suitable task identiﬁer provided to the model, or a simple multi-head or multi-output
model, a number of prior works [ 42,50,53] have found this learning problem to be difﬁcult. In this
section, we introduce notation, identify possible causes for the difﬁculty of multi-task optimization,
propose a simple and general approach to mitigate it, and theoretically analyze the proposed approach.
2.1 Preliminaries: Problem and Notation
The goal of multi-task learning is to ﬁnd parameters of a modelfthat achieve high average
performance across all the training tasks drawn from a distribution of tasks p(T). More formally, we
aim to solve the problem: min
ETip(T)[Li()], whereLiis a loss function for the i-th taskTithat
we want to minimize. For a set of tasks, fTig, we denote the multi-task loss as L() =P
iLi(),
and the gradients of each task as gi=rLi()for a particular . (We drop the reliance on in the
notation for brevity.) To obtain a model that solves a speciﬁc task from the task distribution p(T),
we deﬁne a task-conditioned model f(yjx;zi), with inputx, outputy, and encoding zifor taskTi,
which could be provided as a one-hot vector or in any other form.
2