Broader Impact
Applications and Beneﬁts. Despite recent success, current deep learning and deep RL methods
mostly focus on tackling a single speciﬁc task from scratch. Prior methods have proposed methods
that can perform multiple tasks, but they often yield comparable or even higher data complexity
compared to learning each task individually. Our method enables deep learning systems that mitigate
inferences between differing tasks and thus achieves data-efﬁcient multi-task learning. Since our
method is general and simple to apply to various problems, there are many possible real-world
applications, including but not limited to computer vision systems, autonomous driving, and robotics.
For computer vision systems, our method can be used to develop algorithms that enable efﬁcient
classiﬁcation, instance and semantics segmentation and object detection at the same time, which
could improve performances of computer vision systems by reusing features obtained from each task
and lead to a leap in real-world domains such as autonomous driving. For robotics, there are many
situations where multi-task learning is needed. For example, surgical robots are required to perform a
wide range of tasks such as stitching and removing tumour from the patient’s body. Kitchen robots
should be able to complete multiple chores such as cooking and washing dishes at the same time.
Hence, our work represents a step towards making multi-task reinforcement learning more applicable
to those settings.
Risks. However, there are potential risks that apply to all machine learning and reinforcement
learning systems including ours, including but not limited to safety, reward speciﬁcation in RL
which is often difﬁcult to acquire in the real world, bias in supervised learning systems due to the
composition of training data, and compute/data-intensive training procedures. For example, safety
issues arise when autonomous driving cars fail to generalize to out-of-distribution data, which leads
to crashing or even hurting people. Moreover, reward speciﬁcation in RL is generally inaccessible in
the real world, making RL unable to scale to real robots. In supervised learning domains, learned
models could inherit the bias that exists in the training dataset. Furthermore, training procedures of
ML models are generally compute/data-intensive, which cause inequitable access to these models.
Our method is not immune to these risks. Hence, we encourage future research to design more robust
and safe multi-task RL algorithms that can prevent unsafe behaviors. It is also important to push
research in self-supervised and unsupervised multi-task RL in order to resolve the issue of reward
speciﬁcation. For supervised learning, we recommend researchers to publish their trained multi-task
learning models to make access to those models equitable to everyone in ﬁeld and develop new
datasets that can mitigate biases and also be readily used in multi-task learning.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
The authors would like to thank Annie Xie for reviewing an earlier draft of the paper, Eric Mitchell
for technical guidance, and Aravind Rajeswaran and Deirdre Quillen for helpful discussions. Tianhe
Yu is partially supported by Intel Corporation. Saurabh Kumar is supported by an NSF Graduate
Research Fellowship and the Stanford Knight Hennessy Fellowship. Abhishek Gupta is supported by
an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. Chelsea Finn is a CIFAR Fellow in the Learning in Machines
and Brains program.
References
[1]Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall, and Roberto Cipolla. Segnet: A deep convolutional
encoder-decoder architecture for image segmentation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence , 39(12), 2017.
[2]Bart Bakker and Tom Heskes. Task clustering and gating for bayesian multitask learning. J.
Mach. Learn. Res. , 2003.
[3]Hakan Bilen and Andrea Vedaldi. Integrated perception with recurrent multi-task neural
networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2016.
[4]Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization . Cambridge university press,
2004.
[5]Paul H Calamai and Jorge J Mor ´e. Projected gradient methods for linearly constrained problems.
Mathematical programming , 39(1), 1987.
[6] Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Machine Learning , 1997.
10