task repertoires, in practice it presents a challenging optimization problem, which has been tackled in
several ways in prior work.
A number of architectural solutions have been proposed to the multi-task learning problem based
on multiple modules or paths [19, 14, 40, 51, 46, 57, 46], or using attention-based architectures [33,
37]. Our work is agnostic to the model architecture and can be combined with prior architectural
approaches in a complementary fashion. A different set of multi-task learning approaches aim to
decompose the problem into multiple local problems, often corresponding to each task, that are
signiﬁcantly easier to learn, akin to divide and conquer algorithms [ 32,50,42,56,21,13]. Eventually,
the local models are combined into a single, multi-task policy using different distillation techniques
(outlined in [ 27,13]). In contrast to these methods, we propose a simple and cogent scheme for
multi-task learning that allows us to learn the tasks simultaneously using a single, shared model
without the need for network distillation.
Similarly to our work, a number of prior approaches have observed the difﬁculty of optimization in
multi-task learning [ 26,29,52,55]. Our work suggests that the challenge in multi-task learning may
be attributed to what we describe as the tragic triad of multi-task learning (i.e., conﬂicting gradients,
high curvature, and large gradient differences), which we address directly by introducing a simple and
practical algorithm that deconﬂicts gradients from different tasks. Prior works combat optimization
challenges by rescaling task gradients [ 53,9]. We alter both the magnitude and direction of the
gradient, which we ﬁnd to be critical for good performance (see Fig. 3). Prior work has also used
the cosine similarity between gradients to deﬁne when an auxiliary task might be useful [ 16] or
when two tasks are related [ 55]. We similarly use cosine similarity between gradients to determine
if the gradients between a pair of tasks are in conﬂict. Unlike Du et al. [16], we use this measure
for effective multi-task learning, instead of ignoring auxiliary objectives. Overall, we empirically
compare our approach to a number of these prior approaches [ 53,9,55], and observe superior
performance with PCGrad.
Multiple approaches to continual learning have studied how to prevent gradient updates from adversely
affecting previously-learned tasks through various forms of gradient projection [ 36,7,18,23]. These
methods focus on sequential learning settings, and solve for the gradient projections using quadratic
programming [ 36], only project onto the normal plane of the average gradient of past tasks [ 7], or
project the current task gradients onto the orthonormal set of previous task gradients [ 18]. In contrast,
our work focuses on positive transfer when simultaneously learning multiple tasks, does not require
solving a QP, and iteratively projects the gradients of each task instead of averaging or only projecting
thecurrent task gradient. Finally, our method is distinct from and solves a different problem than
the projected gradient method [ 5], which is an approach for constrained optimization that projects
gradients onto the constraint manifold.
5 Experiments
The goal of our experiments is to study the following questions: (1) Does PCGrad make the optimiza-
tion problems easier for various multi-task learning problems including supervised, reinforcement,
and goal-conditioned reinforcement learning settings across different task families? (2) Can PCGrad
be combined with other multi-task learning approaches to further improve performance? (3) Is the
tragic triad of multi-task learning a major factor in making optimization for multi-task learning
challenging? To broadly evaluate PCGrad, we consider multi-task supervised learning, multi-task RL,
and goal-conditioned RL problems. We include the results on goal-conditioned RL in Appendix F.
During our evaluation, we tune the parameters of the baselines independently, ensuring that all
methods were fairly provided with equal model and training capacity. PCGrad inherits the hyperpa-
rameters of the respective baseline method in all experiments, and has no additional hyperparameters.
For more details on the experimental set-up and model architectures, see Appendix J. The code is
available online1.
5.1 Multi-Task Supervised Learning
To answer question (1) in the supervised learning setting and question (2), we perform experiments on
ﬁve standard multi-task supervised learning datasets: MultiMNIST, CityScapes, CelebA, multi-task
CIFAR-100 and NYUv2. We include the results on MultiMNIST and CityScapes in Appendix E.
1Code is released at https://github.com/tianheyu927/PCGrad
6