Gradient Surgery for Multi-Task Learning
Tianhe Yu1, Saurabh Kumar1, Abhishek Gupta2, Sergey Levine2,
Karol Hausman3,Chelsea Finn1
Stanford University1, UC Berkeley2, Robotics at Google3
tianheyu@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
While deep learning and deep reinforcement learning (RL) systems have demon-
strated impressive results in domains such as image classiﬁcation, game playing,
and robotic control, data efﬁciency remains a major challenge. Multi-task learning
has emerged as a promising approach for sharing structure across multiple tasks to
enable more efﬁcient learning. However, the multi-task setting presents a number
of optimization challenges, making it difﬁcult to realize large efﬁciency gains com-
pared to learning tasks independently. The reasons why multi-task learning is so
challenging compared to single-task learning are not fully understood. In this work,
we identify a set of three conditions of the multi-task optimization landscape that
cause detrimental gradient interference, and develop a simple yet general approach
for avoiding such interference between task gradients. We propose a form of gradi-
ent surgery that projects a task’s gradient onto the normal plane of the gradient of
any other task that has a conﬂicting gradient. On a series of challenging multi-task
supervised and multi-task RL problems, this approach leads to substantial gains
in efﬁciency and performance. Further, it is model-agnostic and can be combined
with previously-proposed multi-task architectures for enhanced performance.
1 Introduction
While deep learning and deep reinforcement learning (RL) have shown considerable promise in
enabling systems to learn complex tasks, the data requirements of current methods make it difﬁcult to
learn a breadth of capabilities, particularly when all tasks are learned individually from scratch. A
natural approach to such multi-task learning problems is to train a network on all tasks jointly, with
the aim of discovering shared structure across the tasks in a way that achieves greater efﬁciency and
performance than solving tasks individually. However, learning multiple tasks all at once results is a
difﬁcult optimization problem, sometimes leading to worse overall performance and data efﬁciency
compared to learning tasks individually [ 42,50]. These optimization challenges are so prevalent that
multiple multi-task RL algorithms have considered using independent training as a subroutine of the
algorithm before distilling the independent models into a multi-tasking model [ 32,42,50,21,56],
producing a multi-task model but losing out on the efﬁciency gains over independent training. If we
could tackle the optimization challenges of multi-task learning effectively, we may be able to actually
realize the hypothesized beneﬁts of multi-task learning without the cost in ﬁnal performance.
While there has been a signiﬁcant amount of research in multi-task learning [ 6,49], the optimization
challenges are not well understood. Prior work has described varying learning speeds of different
tasks [ 8,26] and plateaus in the optimization landscape [ 52] as potential causes, whereas a range of
other works have focused on the model architecture [ 40,33]. In this work, we instead hypothesize
that one of the main optimization issues in multi-task learning arises from gradients from different
tasks conﬂicting with one another in a way that is detrimental to making progress. We deﬁne two
gradients to be conﬂicting if they point away from one another, i.e., have a negative cosine similarity.
We hypothesize that such conﬂict is detrimental when a) conﬂicting gradients coincide with b) high
positive curvature and c) a large difference in gradient magnitudes.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.