Interpreting the Signals
In most cases, signal interpretation is based on classification,
today performed in many cases by using quite complex archi-
tectures belonging to the wide category of deep learning .I n
many cases, models are available to classify objects and peo-ple’s actions: they have been developed spending a large
amount of time and effort, and they are regarded as general
models, good for many purposes. Being all layered models, itis also possible to retain the first, more data intensive levels,
and train models on specific situations, for instance, for the
recognition of activities or objects not included in the originaldata set. Usually, the last layers start from higher level fea-
tures, requiring less time and effort to be learned.
Key points for the application of deep learning in HRI are
the need of extensive data sets covering all the aspects inter-
esting for the specific application and the need of massive
computational power to learn the models. While this secondissue can be addressed by off-line learning activity and with
the support of cloud computing and data centers, the first one
is critical and leads in many situations to the use of tools andmodels that some member of the community kindly made
available, with few possibilities of tuning or obtaining what
would really be needed for the specific application. In other
situations, the collection of proper data sets is simply not pos-
sible, so the need for a different learning approach is emerg-ing, but still not addressed.
Learning and Adaptation of Interactive Behaviors
Behaviors can be learned by following different approaches.
Imitation learning requires that a task be performed by
some other agent (either human or another robot), and descrip-tions of both situation and taken actions are considered to
build the new model. This approach is generalized by super-
vised learning where the proper behaviors for given situations
are directly provided in their representational form.
Another promising approach is reinforcement learning ,
where some evaluation of the performance of the robot is usedto promote correct actions and discard the worst ones.
To implement effective social robots, learning in the actual
situations where they will operate is crucial. In particular, it isimportant to model not only the multimodal features describ-
ing the person the robot is interacting with, but the whole
situation, including other possible persons, objects, surround-
ings, and possibly anticipating what will happen next [ 68].
Replicating the multimodal interactive actions could also belearned, e.g., modeling synchronous speech and gestures for a
humanoid robot [ 69].
The complexity of interaction requires, mostly in long-term
activities [ 70], to understand what are the general attitudes,
personality [ 71], preferences, and possible limitations of the
interlocutor(s) and try to match them [ 72]. The identificationof these aspects, and consequent adaptation of the robot be-
havior to the specific situation, including the selection of the
appropriate multimodal communicative actions, can be doneby learning models of general attitudes, trying to classify the
interlocutor from the interaction, to identify the type of the
most appropriate modality, and to apply the learned modelto generate the proper interaction. It has been observed both
for verbal interaction (e.g., [ 73]) and for non-verbal interaction
(e.g., in robotic games [ 74,75]) that robots matching the char-
acteristics of the interacting people can have better
performance.
Given safety and performance issues in real environments,
and the usually long learning time, needed to identify complex
models general enough to be used in the desired range of
situations, learning is often done in simulation, with possibleissues about how much realistic could be the learning experi-
ence in a simulated world that cannot include real people,
whose behavior is difficult to simulate. The same issues holdforadversarial learning , where two learning systems learn
from each other, again in a simulated environment, the only
one where it is possible to perform the needed, very largenumber of iterations. Also for behaviors, different learning
approaches may be beneficial, at least for some aspects and
for complex applications.
Benchmarking: the “Real ”Performance
“Robot benchmarking can be defined as an objective perfor-
mance evaluation of a robot system/subsystem under con-trolled, reproducible conditions. [...] A benchmark includes a
set of metrics together with a proper interpretation, allowing
the evaluation of the performance of the system/subsystem
under test according to well-specified objective criteria. In
particular, a benchmark can be used to certify properties andfunctionalities, and therefore takes a key role in demonstrating
the worth of specific solutions to prospective adopters, be they
companies contemplating the realization of new products, ortheir clients interested in the purchase of such products ”[76].
Benchmarking is becoming relevant also in HRI when an
objective evaluation of the performance of the robot would berequired to match the market requirements. HRI
benchmarking activities are still in their infancy [ 77–79], but
their importance will increase as certification processes will bedefined for interacting robots, and the real market will require
guarantees for value, performance, and safety.
Conclusion
We have presented a concise list of issues concerning com-munication in HRI. It is evident that communication includes
transmission of signals among the communicating agents as282 Curr Robot Rep (2020) 1:279–285