Inception Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network
Figure 1. Visual information processing pipeline of the human brain, where v1 though v4 represent the visual cortex areas.
Figure 2. The overall operational ﬂow diagram of the proposed Inception Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network (IRCNN), which
consists of an IRCNN block, a transaction block, and a softmax layer.
ing the recognition accuracy of DCNN models. Very lit-
tle research has been conducted on recurrent architectures
within convolutional neural networks. The recurrent strat-
egy is very important for context modeling from input sam-
ples. In 2015, Ming et al (Liang & Hu, 2015) proposed
a RCNN structure for the ﬁrst time that dealt with ob-
ject recognition tasks. The architecture consists of several
blocks of recurrent convolutional layers followed by a max-
pooling layer. In the second to last layer of the structure
global max-pooling is used, which is followed by a soft-
max layer at the end. This architecture showed state-of-
the-art accuracy for object classiﬁcation at the time (Liang
& Hu, 2015; Pinheiro & Collobert, 2014). The Long-term
Recurrent Convolutional Network (LRCN) was proposed
for visual recognition and description by Jeff et al. This
architecture uses a combination of two popular techniques,
CNN and LSTM. The features are extracted through the
CNN, and LSTM is applied to identify how features vary
with respect to time. This model shows outstanding perfor-
mance for visual description (Donahue et al., 2015). From
the above discussion, it can be concluded that DCNNs with
improved architectures are showing enormous achievement
when performing visual recognition tasks.
3. Inception-Recurrent Convolutional Neural
Networks (IRCNN)
The proposed architecture (IRCNN) builds on several re-
cent developments in deep learning architectures, includingInception Nets (Szegedy et al., 2016b) and RCNNs (Liang
& Hu, 2015). It tries to reduce the number of computa-
tional parameters, while providing better recognition accu-
racy. As shown in Figure 2, the IRCNN architecture con-
sists of general convolution layers, IRCNN blocks, trans-
action blocks, and a softmax logistic regression layer. One
of the most novel features of this work is the introduction
of recurrence into the Inception module, as shown in the
IRCNN block in Figure 3. The key feature of Inception-v4
[Szeged al et. 2015] is that it concatenates the outputs of
multiple differently sized convolutional kernels in the in-
ception block (Szegedy et al., 2016a;b). Inception-v4 is
a simpliﬁed version of Inception-v3 model, using lower
rank ﬁlters for convolution. Inception-v4 however com-
bines Residual concepts with Inception networks to im-
prove the overall accuracy over Inception-v3. The out-
puts of the inception layers are added to the inputs of the
Inception-Residual module. In this work, we utilize the in-
ception concepts from Inception-v4.
The IRCNN block, performs recurrent convolution opera-
tions on different sized kernels (see Figure 3). In the re-
current structure, the inputs to the next time step are the
sums of the convolutional outputs of the present time step
and previous time steps. The same operations are repeated
based on the time steps considered. As the input and output
dimensions do not change, this is simply an accumulation
of feature maps with respect to the time step considered.
This helps to strengthen the extraction of the target features.
As shown in Figure 3, an average pooling operation is ap-