Inception Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network
Figure 9. Training and validation accuracy for IRCNN, EIN,
EIRN on CIFAR-100.
Figure 10. Testing accuracy of proposed IRCNN model against
EIN and EIRN on augmented dataset of CIFAR-100.
validation phases are shown in Figures 8 and 9 respectively.
From both ﬁgures, it can be clearly observed that this pro-
posed model shows lower loss and the highest recognition
accuracy compared with EIN and EIRN, proving the effec-
tiveness of the proposed model. It also demonstrates the
advantage of recurrent layers in Inception networks. The
testing accuracy of IRCNN, EIN, and EIRN are shown in
Figure 10. It can be summarized that our proposed model
of IRCNN shows around 3.47% and 2.54% better testing
accuracy compared to EIN and EIRN respectively.
4.4. Evaluation
From the above empirical evaluations, it can be concluded
that this proposed technique provides better recognition ac-
curacy compared to different deep learning models in most
of the cases, demonstrating the precision of the proposed
deep learning model. This model also shows better recog-
nition performance with the same number of computational
parameters (3:12M)against the EIN and EIRN models.
Furthermore, if we observed the ﬁgures for model loss and
accuracy, it can be clearly seen that this proposed modelTable 2. Computation time per Epoch for IRCNN, EIN and EIRN
models
MODEL DATASET TIME(INSEC.)
IRCNN MNIST 112
IRCNN CIFAR-10 418
IRCNN CIFAR-100 422
IRCNN SVHN 610
EIN CIFAR-100 425
EIRN CIFAR-100 426
demonstrates less loss with better recognition accuracy. We
have also empirically evaluated the rate of convergence of
our proposed IRCNN algorithm compared with traditional
EIN and EIRN models. The proposed model converged
earlier with much lower model loss compared to EIN and
EIRN. The computational cost (in seconds) per epoch of
this IRCNN,EIN, and EIRN models for different bench-
mark datasets are shown in Table 2.
4.5. Introspection
In this implementation, we have augmented data apply-
ing only random horizontal ﬂipping techniques whereas
other models published results with more data augmen-
tation with transaction, central crop, and ZCA. This pro-
posed model will provide better recognition accuracy when
using datasets with additional augmentation.Due to hard-
ware constrains, we were not able to experiment on mas-
sive scale implementations of IRCNN. This architecture
will probably provide even better classiﬁcation accuracy
with large networks on the same datasets. The large scale
implementation of proposed IRCNN model with advanced
components such as LSUV , EVE, and Exponential Linear
Unit (ELU) (Clevert et al., 2015) will likely provide fur-
ther improved recognition on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
datasets.
5. Conclusion and Future works
In this paper, we have proposed a new architecture: Incep-
tion Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network (IRCNN) for
object recognition where we have utilized the power of re-
current techniques for context modulation with the archi-
tecture of Inception networks. The experimental results
show the promising recognition accuracy compared with
different state-of-the-art Deep Convolutional Neural Net-
works (DCNN) models on different benchmark datasets
such as MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and SVHN. How-
ever, when the proposed IRCNN architecture is initialized
with LSUV initialization technique, and optimization func-
tion of EVE, it achieved an object recognition accuracy of
71.76% on the CIFAR-100 dataset. This is about a 3.5%