Inception Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network for Object Recognition
Md Zahangir Alom ALOMM 1@ UDAYTON .EDU
University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA
Mahmudul Hasan MAHMUD .UCR@GMAIL .COM
Comcast Labs, Washington, DC, USA
Chris Yakopcic CHRIS @UDAYTON .EDU
University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA
Tarek M. Taha TTAHA 1@ UDAYTON .EDU
University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA
Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs)
are an inﬂuential tool for solving various prob-
lems in the machine learning and computer vi-
sion ﬁelds. In this paper, we introduce a
new deep learning model called an Inception-
Recurrent Convolutional Neural Network (IR-
CNN), which utilizes the power of an incep-
tion network combined with recurrent layers in
DCNN architecture. We have empirically eval-
uated the recognition performance of the pro-
posed IRCNN model using different benchmark
datasets such as MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-
100, and SVHN. Experimental results show sim-
ilar or higher recognition accuracy when com-
pared to most of the popular DCNNs including
the RCNN. Furthermore, we have investigated
IRCNN performance against equivalent Incep-
tion Networks and Inception-Residual Networks
using the CIFAR-100 dataset. We report about
3.5%, 3.47% and 2.54% improvement in classiﬁ-
cation accuracy when compared to the RCNN,
equivalent Inception Networks, and Inception-
Residual Networks on the augmented CIFAR-
100 dataset respectively.
1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning using Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (CNNs) has shown enormous success in the
ﬁeld of machine learning and computer vision. CNNs pro-
vide state-of-the-art accuracy in various image recognition
tasks including object recognition (Schmidhuber, 2015;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014;Szegedy et al., 2015), object detection (Girshick et al.,
2014), tracking (Wang et al., 2015), and image caption-
ing (Xu et al., 2014). In addition, this technique has been
applied massively in computer vision tasks such as video
representation and classiﬁcation of human activity (Bal-
las et al., 2015). Machine translation and natural language
processing are applied deep learning techniques that show
great success in this domain (Collobert & Weston, 2008;
Manning et al., 2014). Furthermore, this technique has
been used extensively in the ﬁeld of speech recognition
(Hinton et al., 2012). Moreover, deep learning is not lim-
ited to signal, natural language, image, and video process-
ing tasks, it has been applying successfully for game devel-
opment (Mnih et al., 2013; Lillicrap et al., 2015). There is
a lot of ongoing research for developing even better perfor-
mance and improving the training process of DCNNs (Lin
et al., 2013; Springenberg et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al.,
2013; Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015; Zeiler & Fergus, 2013).
In some cases, machine intelligence shows better perfor-
mance compared to human intelligence including calcula-
tion, chess, memory, and pattern matching. On the other
hand, human intelligence still provides better performance
in other ﬁelds such as object recognition, scene under-
standing, and more. Deep learning techniques (DCNNs
in particular) perform very well in the domains of detec-
tion, classiﬁcation, and scene understanding. There is a
still a gap that must be closed before human level intelli-
gence is reached when performing visual recognition tasks.
Machine intelligence may open an opportunity to build a
system that can process visual information the way that a
human brain does. According to the study on the visual
processing system within a human brain by James DiCarlo
et al. (Zoccolan & Rust, 2012) the brain consists of sev-
eral visual processing units starting with the visual cortexarXiv:1704.07709v1  [cs.CV]  25 Apr 2017