IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. XX, NO. X, MARCH 2021 1
PredRNN: A Recurrent Neural Network for
Spatiotemporal Predictive Learning
Yunbo Wang, Haixu Wu, Jianjin Zhang, Zhifeng Gao, Jianmin Wang,
Philip S. Yu, Fellow, IEEE , Mingsheng Long, Member, IEEE
Abstract —The predictive learning of spatiotemporal sequences aims to generate future images by learning from the historical context,
where the visual dynamics are believed to have modular structures that can be learned with compositional subsystems. This paper
models these structures by presenting PredRNN, a new recurrent network, in which a pair of memory cells are explicitly decoupled,
operate in nearly independent transition manners, and ﬁnally form uniﬁed representations of the complex environment. Concretely,
besides the original memory cell of LSTM, this network is featured by a zigzag memory ﬂow that propagates in both bottom-up and
top-down directions across all layers, enabling the learned visual dynamics at different levels of RNNs to communicate. It also leverages a
memory decoupling loss to keep the memory cells from learning redundant features. We further propose a new curriculum learning
strategy to force PredRNN to learn long-term dynamics from context frames, which can be generalized to most sequence-to-sequence
models. We provide detailed ablation studies to verify the effectiveness of each component. Our approach is shown to obtain highly
competitive results on ﬁve datasets for both action-free and action-conditioned predictive learning scenarios.
Index Terms —Predictive learning, spatiotemporal modeling, recurrent neural networks
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
As a key application of predictive learning, generating future
frames from historical consecutive frames has received growing
interest in machine learning and computer vision communities.
It beneﬁts many practical applications and downstream tasks,
such as the precipitation forecasting [ 1,2], trafﬁc ﬂow prediction
[3,4], physical scene understanding [ 5,6,7,8], early activity
recognition [ 9], deep reinforcement learning [ 10,11], and the
vision-based model predictive control [ 12,13]. Many of these
existing approaches suggested leveraging RNNs [ 14,15] with
stacked LSTM units [ 16] to capture the temporal dependencies of
spatiotemporal data. This architecture is mainly inspired by similar
ideas from other well-explored tasks of sequential data, such as
neural machine translation [ 17,18], speech recognition [ 19], video
action recognition [20, 21], and video captioning [21].
For stacked LSTMs, a network structure named memory cell
plays an important role in alleviating the vanishing gradient
problem of RNNs. Strong theoretical and empirical evidence has
shown that it can latch the gradients of hidden states inside each
LSTM unit in the training process and thereby preserve valuable
information of underlying temporal dynamics [ 16]. However, the
state transition pathway of LSTM memory cells may not be
optimal for spatiotemporal predictive learning, as this task requires
different focuses on the learned representations in many aspects
from other tasks of sequential data. First, most predictive networks
for language or speech modeling [ 17,18,19] focus on capturing the
long-term, non-Markovian properties of sequential data, rather than
Y. Wang is with MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China.
H. Wu, Z. Gao, J. Wang, P . S. Yu, and M. Long are with the School of
Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China.
J. Zhang is with the Microsoft Corporation, China.
Y. Wang and H. Wu contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long, mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn.spatial deformations of visual appearance. But for future frames
prediction, both data structures in space-time are crucial and need to
be carefully considered. Second, in other supervised tasks of video
data, such as action recognition, high-level semantical features can
be informative enough, and the low-level features are less important
to ﬁnal outputs. Due to the absence of complex structures of
supervision signals, the stacked LSTMs don’t need to preserve ﬁne-
grained representations from the bottom up. Although the existing
recurrent architecture based on inner-layer memory transitions can
be sufﬁcient to capture temporal variations at each level of the
network, it may not be the best choice for predictive learning,
where low-level details and high-level semantics of spatiotemporal
data are both signiﬁcant to generating future frames.
To jointly model the spatial correlations and temporal dy-
namics at different levels of RNNs, we propose a new memory-
prediction framework named Predictive Recurrent Neural Network
(PredRNN), which extends the inner-layer transition function of
memory states in LSTMs to spatiotemporal memory ﬂow . The
spatiotemporal memory ﬂow traverses all nodes of PredRNN in
a zigzag path of bi-directional hierarchies: At each timestep, the
low-level information is delivered vertically from the input to the
output via a newly-designed memory cell, while at the top layer, the
spatiotemporal memory ﬂow brings the high-level memory state to
the bottom layer at the next timestep. By this means, the top-down
expectations interact with the bottom-up signals to both analyze
those inputs and generate predictions of subsequently expected
inputs, which is different from stacked LSTMs, where the memory
state is latched inside each recurrent unit.
Accordingly, we deﬁne the central building block of PredRNN
as the Spatiotemporal LSTM (ST-LSTM), in which the proposed
spatiotemporal memory ﬂow interacts with the original, unidirec-
tional memory state of LSTMs. The intuition is that if we expect
a vivid imagination of multiple future images, we need a uniﬁed
memory mechanism to cope with both short-term deformations
of spatial details and long-term dynamics: On one hand, the newarXiv:2103.09504v4  [cs.LG]  9 Apr 2022