I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with
Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization
Tong Geng†, Chunshu Wu‡, Yongan Zhang§, Cheng Tan†, Chenhao Xie†, Haoran You§, Martin C.
Herbordt‡, Yingyan Lin§, Ang Li†
†Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA
‡Boston University, Boston, MA
§Rice University, Houston, TX
{tong.geng, cheng.tan, chenhao.xie, ang.li }@pnnl.gov,{happycwu, herbordt }@bu.edu,{yz87,hy34,yingyan.lin }@rice.edu
ABSTRACT
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have drawn tremendous
attention in the past three years. Compared with other deep learning
modalities, high-performance hardware acceleration of GCNs is as
critical but even more challenging. The hurdles arise from the poor
data locality and redundant computation due to the large size, high
sparsity, and irregular non-zero distribution of real-world graphs.
In this paper we propose a novel hardware accelerator for GCN
inference, called I-GCN, that significantly improves data locality
and reduces unnecessary computation. The mechanism is a new
online graph restructuring algorithm we refer to as islandization .
The proposed algorithm finds clusters of nodes with strong internal
but weak external connections. The islandization process yields two
major benefits. First, by processing islands rather than individual
nodes, there is better on-chip data reuse and fewer off-chip memory
accesses. Second, there is less redundant computation as aggrega-
tion for common/shared neighbors in an island can be reused. The
parallel search, identification, and leverage of graph islands are all
handled purely in hardware at runtime working in an incremen-
tal pipeline. This is done without any preprocessing of the graph
data or adjustment of the GCN model structure. Experimental re-
sults show that I-GCN can significantly reduce off-chip accesses
and prune 38% of aggregation operations, leading to performance
speedups over CPUs, GPUs, the prior art GCN accelerators of 5549 ×,
403×, and 5.7×on average, respectively.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computer systems organization →Neural networks ;Par-
allel architectures ;•Computing methodologies →Parallel
algorithms .
KEYWORDS
Graph Neural Network, High-Performance Computing, Data Local-
ity, Machine Learning, Hardware Accelerator
ACM acknowledges that this contribution was authored or co-authored by an employee,
contractor, or affiliate of the United States government. As such, the United States
government retains a nonexclusive, royalty-free right to publish or reproduce this
article, or to allow others to do so, for government purposes only.
MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
©2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8557-2/21/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3466752.3480113ACM Reference Format:
Tong Geng, Chunshu Wu, Yongan Zhang, Cheng Tan, Chenhao Xie, Haoran
You, Martin C. Herbordt, Yingyan Lin, Ang Li. 2021. I-GCN: A Graph Convo-
lutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through
Islandization . In MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Microarchitecture (MICRO ’21), October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3466752.3480113
1 INTRODUCTION
Conventional deep learning paradigms such as Convolution Neural
Networks (CNNs) [ 26] and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
[33] have been demonstrated to be quite efficient, but primarily
for applications using Euclidean data [ 15,16,42,44]. Many other
applications, however, require that the relationships between data
points be conserved and must therefore use non-Euclidean data
structures such as graphs [ 10,32,36,46,49,56]. To fill this need,
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) have been proposed [ 6,11,25,50].
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are a type of GNN that
has drawn tremendous attention in the past three years due to their
unique ability to extract latent information from graph data. Practi-
cal applications of GCNs include prediction of cascading power-grid
failure [ 32], E-commerce [ 49], and etc [ 10,36]. The deployment
of GCNs in these applications typically poses strict constraints on
latency and throughput.
To satisfy the increasingly stringent performance requirements,
designing high-performance hardware accelerators for GCNs be-
comes urgent [ 14,48]. Real world graphs tend to have large size,
high sparsity, and extremely unbalanced non-zero distributions;
therefore, the direct application of existing methods, such as Sparse
CNNs [ 19,23,52], has been reported to be insufficient [ 2,17,27,45].
We briefly discuss the performance challenges of the two major
graph aggregation methods used in GCN acceleration:
(1) In PULL-based aggregation nodes are evaluated sequentially,
but for each node: the neighbor features are gathered (i.e., pulled)
simultaneously for aggregation. The advantage of the pullmethod
is that since nodes are processed in order, a small buffer is sufficient
to accommodate the aggregation results. In other words, it shows
good reuse for the result matrix. The major problem, however, is
thepoor data locality for accessing the feature matrix . Given that the
adjacency matrix of real-world graphs is typically very sparse and
imbalanced, parallel fetches of the corresponding neighbor features
can be random and non-coalesced. Since the feature matrix can bearXiv:2203.03606v1  [cs.AR]  7 Mar 2022