I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
1
12
24
46
63
35
5x =Outer Loop
Inner Loop
1
66
22 {X  }2
44
35
1
6 2 4351
12
24
46
63
35
5
A (XW) XCombination AggregationInner Loopb1: Pull-Row-Wisec1: Push-Column-Wise
c2: Push-Outer-Product
b2: Pull-Inner-Product(b) Pull-based Methods (c) Push-based Methods (a) GCN Modelx =
{(AX) } 1
{(AX) } 5
{(AX) } 6{X  }4
{X  }6
O A (XW) XO1 {X  }13 {X  }3
... ... {(AXW)  }m
m{(AX)  } 
1
6 2 435
1
6 2 4351
12
24
46
63
35
5x =Outer LoopInner Loop Outer Loop
Loop1
12
24
46
63
35
5x =1
6 2 435 Loop
Figure 2: PULL-based (Row-wise & Inner-Product) and PUSH-based (Column-wise & Outer-Product) methods.
2.1 Graph Convolutional Networks
GCNs are composed of stacked GraphCONV layers. The compu-
tation flow of each GraphCONV layer includes two phases: Ag-
gregation and Combination , as illustrated in Figure 2-(a). In the
aggregation phase, each node gathers and aggregates features of
its neighbor nodes to update the local feature-vector. In the com-
bination phase, the updated feature-vectors are further merged
to extract high-level abstraction through a local Multi-Layer Per-
ceptron (MLP) network. From the perspective of linear algebra,
the layer-wise forward propagation of GCN can be expressed as
Equation 1:
𝑋(𝑙+1)=𝜎(˜𝐴𝑋(𝑙)𝑊(𝑙)) (1)
where ˜𝐴is the graph adjacency matrix. 𝑋(𝑙)is the matrix of
input features in layer- 𝑙;𝑊𝑙is the weight matrix of layer- 𝑙.𝜎(.)
denotes non-linear activation functions [26].
There are many modalities beneath the umbrella of GCNs, e.g.
GraphSage [ 7,18] and Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) [ 47].
As shown in [ 21], the forward propagation of most GCNs can be
abstracted and expressed as Equation 1.
2.2 Design Space Exploration
We first discuss the design choices related to execution order of the
two phases in GraphCONV. We then present the design choices
within each phase.
2.2.1 Execution Order of a GraphCONV Layer. There are two al-
ternative computation orders for a GraphCONV layer: aggregation
first ((𝐴𝑋)×𝑊) and combination first (𝐴×(𝑋𝑊)). Existing work
[14,30] has shown that the combination first approach can reuse the
same Sparse-dense Matrix Multiplication (SpMM) kernel for both
multiplications 𝑋𝑊 and𝐴(𝑋𝑊)and incorporates less arithmetic
computation. I-GCN follows this combination first approach.
2.2.2 Aggregation Phase. We first discuss the design choices of the
aggregation phase, which is normally the performance bottleneck
of GCN processing. There are two typical methods of aggregation:
PULL and PUSH. For clarity, we compare them from a linear algebra
perspective as illustrated in Figure 2. We discuss the correspondence
between PULL/PUSH-based graph computation methods and four
SpMM approaches as summarized in [ 39]: inner-product, outer-
product, row-wise, and col-wise.PULL-based methods aggregate nodes sequentially. For each
particular node, the feature vectors of all its neighbors are gathered
and aggregated in two ways: (1) PULL-Inner-Product: features from
different channels are calculated sequentially, analogous to the
inner-product approach of SpMM. (2) PULL-Row-Wise: features
from all channels are calculated in parallel, similar to the row-wise-
product approach of SpMM. As shown in Figure 2-(b), PULL-based
methods always process non-zeros of matrix A and produce the
aggregation result matrix 𝑋𝑜by rows ( outer loop ). To calculate each
row of𝑋𝑜(inner loop ), PULL-Row-Wise (Figure 2-(b1)) fetches the
entire feature vectors (i.e. entire rows of 𝑋𝑊) of required nodes
and performs vector accumulation sequentially; in contrast, PULL-
Inner-Product fetches features by channel (i.e. column of 𝑋𝑊) and
computes the output features in 𝑋𝑜sequentially (Figure 2-(b2)).
PULL-based methods have their advantages and disadvantages.
On the plus side, they reuse matrix A and only require relatively
small on-chip buffers to conserve the partial aggregation results
(since they are produced row by row). However, they both suffer
from poor data reuse of matrix 𝑋𝑊. Due to the scattered and irreg-
ular distribution of non-zeros in matrix A, the rows to be accessed
in XW can be random. Given that the height of XW equals the
number of nodes in the graph, which can be very large, XW (which
is dense) can rarely be stored on-chip, leading to frequent data
fetches and inferior performance. Ideally, if the non-zeros from the
same column of A can be clustered, they can reuse the same row of
XW, improving data locality.
PULL-Row-Wise is more popular than PULL-Inner-Product in
prior art mainly due to: (1) accessing the entire rows is more efficient
than randomly fetching elements from different columns in terms of
off-chip access; (2) as 𝑋𝑊 is dense, the processing of a row in a fixed
size can be parallelized without introducing workload imbalance.
PUSH-based aggregation, in contrast, calculates the aggregated
features of all nodes simultaneously by broadcasting features of
each node to all its neighbors one after another. Once a node re-
ceives the features from its neighbors, it updates its local feature
vector. There are two ways of feature broadcasting: PUSH-Column-
Wise and PUSH-Outer-Product. With PUSH-Column-Wise, the in-
put features are broadcast by channel; the output features are calcu-
lated by channel. As shown in Figure 2-(c1), at iteration 𝑘ofouter
loop, each node only pushes its features at channel k (i.e. column
k of XW) to the neighbors. Once all nodes have broadcast their
features at channel k to the neighbors ( inner loop ), every node
has the complete aggregated features at channel k (i.e. column k