I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
Figure 5: Task break conditions of TP-BFS engine.
loop-back FIFOs. The number of FIFOs determines the parallelism
of the hub detection (P1 in Algorithm 1). The Island Node Filters
(IFs) check whether the nodes popped out of the FIFOs are among
the island nodes in the previous round (line 6 in Algorithm 2) by
checking Island Node Table (PR-INT). If yes, these nodes are dis-
carded; if no, the comparators check whether the nodes are hubs
(line 8 in Algorithm 2). The nodes recognized as hubs are sent to a
hub buffer which is also implemented with multi-bank FIFOs; while
the remaining nodes are sent back to the Node Degree Buffers for
the next round detection.
The TP-BFS Task Generator realizes Algorithm 3. Once a hub
node is popped out of the hub buffer, Task Generator will start to
access its adjacency list from global memory. The node IDs of the
neighbors in the list received by Task Generator and the ID of their
hub form task tuples which are cached in TP-BFS Task Queues.
These tasks are further assigned to idle TP-BFS engines.
The simplified architecture of TP-BFS is shown in Figure 6(b).
We implement the orange block of Algorithm 1 as a three-stage
Finite State Machine (FSM). At Stage 0, TP-BFS is ideal and sends
requests of new tasks to Task Generator. When the new task arrives,
TP-BFS engine moves to Stage 2 from Stage 0 with Query Pointer
pointing to row 0 of the Local Visited Table (LVT) and the Island
Node Counter as 1. In general, at Stage 2, the engine first checks
whether the query pointer value and the Island Node Counter are
the same. If yes, the engine finds an island, forwards the data stored
at the output terminal to the Island Consumer, and records island
nodes in CR-INT. Otherwise, the engine accesses the adjacency list
of the node pointed by the Query Pointer from global memory, adds
one to the Query Pointer, and then moves to Stage 1. At Stage 1, the
TP-BFS engine records the newly-arrived adjacency information
in the island bitmap buffer at output terminal and tries to find
unvisited nodes by scanning the nodes included in this information
each per cycle. If the node being scanned is not a hub and also not
visited, the Island Node Counter increases by one. If the counter
value overpasses the maximum number of nodes for an island, the
engine is reset to Stage 0. Otherwise, the engine keeps scanning
the list and at the end moves to state 2.
3.3 Island Consumer
Island Consumer follows Island Locator and conducts combination
and aggregation of islands and hubs. Before introducing the algo-
rithm and architecture adopted in Island Locator, we first discuss
where the redundant calculation of aggregation comes from.
As islands contain nodes with strong internal connections, it is
highly likely that multiple nodes have more than one shared neigh-
bors in which case the aggregation result of these shared neighbors
can be reused multiple times with one-time calculation. Figure 7
uses the graph structure and adjacency matrix of a typical island as
a motivational example. As mentioned in Section 3.1, the adjacency
Figure 6: Simplified architecture of Island Locator.
matrix of an island includes all connections between island nodes
and the connections with hubs. During island processing, all these
connections are evaluated. The example graph has seven island
nodes from ‘a’ to ‘g’ and one hub ‘H’.
As shown in Figure 7(A1), nodes d,e,f, and g are the shared neigh-
bors of nodes b and c; as an undirected graph, nodes b and c are
also the shared neighbors of nodes d, e, f, and g. For the aggre-
gation of nodes b and c, the feature vectors of nodes d, e, f, and
g need to be accumulated twice; to process nodes d, e, g, and f,
the feature vectors of nodes b and c need to be accumulated four
times. If the feature vector length is L, these accumulations take
16×𝐿operations. However, if we can pre-calculate the accumula-
tion results and reuse them, then only 10×𝐿operations are needed.
Figure 7(A2) shows how the pre-calculated results are reused during
aggregation. We add two virtual nodes whose feature vectors are
the accumulation results d,e,f,g and c,b in the graph. We connect
them to the real nodes according to the accumulation requirements.
During the aggregation phase, the pre-aggregated feature vectors
are forwarded directly to the target nodes, so that the accumulation
from shared neighbors is only done once. Note that in the original
graph without island-based locality enhancement, these nodes are
highly scattered, as is the processing of their aggregation opera-
tions. It is therefore prohibitive to find and prune these repeated
operations from shared neighbors at runtime. Through I-GCN, the
nodes with strong interconnects are largely clustered, which makes
redundancy removal feasible.
3.3.1 Algorithm. We first introduce the calculation methodology of
the Island Consumer. Once the information of an island is forwarded
to the Island Consumer, it assigns that information to a PE which is
waiting for new calculation tasks. The information includes island
node IDs, hub node ID, the local adjacency bitmap, the round IDs,
and etc. The PE performs first combination and then aggregation
reusing the same MAC units.
The PE starts the combination of all hub and island nodes by first
accessing their input feature vectors from global memory and then
conducting PULL-based combination. Different from conventional