MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
Figure 1: Workflow of I-GCN.
too large to fit into on-chip memory, repeated irregular off-chip data
accesses for the feature matrix are required; this process is bounded
by off-chip bandwidth. HyGCN [ 48] uses PULL approach. Although
data-aware sparsity-elimination hardware is used to reduce off-chip
data accesses, feature matrices still need to be accessed many times.
An HBM is required to avoid hardware starvation.
(2) In PUSH-based aggregation nodes are evaluated in parallel,
but the feature data of the nodes are distributed sequentially (i.e.
pushed) to their neighbors for aggregation. This avoids the irreg-
ularity in accessing the feature matrix, but essentially shifts the
burden to the result matrix. Given that aggregation for a node is
processed sequentially, a large buffer is required to hold the partial
results. If there are too many nodes, the partial result buffer cannot
fit into on-chip memory, leading to frequent off-chip access and
bandwidth saturation. Furthermore, the power-law distribution of
non-zeros in the adjacency matrix can cause serious workload im-
balance. AWB-GCN [ 14] practices the PUSH approach and uses a
run-time workload autotuning architecture to effectively tackle the
workload imbalance problem. However, it does not address the data
locality problem for the irregular and random accesses of the result
matrix, which can be the most critical problem in GNN processing
especially for large graphs.
Clearly, the key problem is the irregularity (i.e., distribution of
non-zeros) of the adjacency matrix, which leads to poor data reuse
in accessing either the feature matrix or the result matrix. A recent
trend therefore is to rely on offline preprocessing to restructure
the adjacency matrix to improve data locality, e.g. in Rubik [ 8]
and GraphACT [ 51]. The implicit assumption is that the graph
structure (i.e., the adjacency matrix) is fixed upon inference so that
the large overhead of graph restructuring can be omitted in the
critical path. However, this is not always the case, as real-world
graphs are frequently updated (e.g., evolving graphs) or generated
dynamically (e.g., inductive graphs). The high restructuring over-
head, e.g., seconds in Rubik and GraphACT, is not tolerable when
processed online. Besides, although both Rubik and GraphACT al-
low for the possibility of computation reuse for shared neighbors
during aggregation, their complex software-based reordering al-
gorithms introduce significant delay and are only feasible when
processed offline.
In this paper, we propose a novel hardware accelerator, called
I-GCN, which implements a new online graph restructuring algo-
rithm – islandization – that can significantly improve data localityand reduce redundant computation for GCN inference acceleration.
Specifically, I-GCN’s Island Locator module, at runtime, is able to de-
tect the hubnodes (i.e. nodes with high degree), find their neighbors,
and then use these neighbor nodes as starting points to explore and
locate islands iteratively. Islands are groups of nodes with strong
internal, but no external, connections other than with hubs. Note
that islands often (but not always) have practical semantics: in a
social network they might correspond to people working in the
same institute; in a citation network they might correspond to pa-
pers published in the same conference series. Determining islands
is non-obvious, especially in typical (huge and sparse) adjacency
matrices.
Figure 1 gives an overview of I-GCN. (i) Island Locator: after
identifying the islands, the non-zeros of the adjacency matrix be-
come highly clustered – the none-zeros of hubs and islands form
the L-shapes and the anti-diagonal respectively. (ii) Island Con-
sumer: using the hub and island information, the Island Consumer
performs aggregation and combination in a fine-grained pipelined
manner. Redundant aggregation is skipped. This process contin-
ues until all nodes are determined to be either hubs or islands.
The benefits of islandization are two-fold: (1) Improving on-chip
data locality. Through clustering, accesses to the feature and result
matrices can be constrained within a much smaller working-set
(i.e., each L-shape and island in Figure 1). This greatly improves
on-chip data reuse and avoids a tremendous number of off-chip ac-
cesses. (2) Reducing redundant computation. After clustering, nodes
within a cluster tend to share a large portion of common neighbors.
During GCN aggregation, rather than repeatedly counting each
neighbor, aggregated information about the common neighbors as
a whole can be distributed and reused, avoiding repeated aggre-
gation calculation for common neighbors. This neighbor-sharing
information is mostly ambiguous in the raw adjacency matrix, but
becomes obvious after islandization (see node 1 ∼4 in Figure 1). In
summary, islandization resolves the locality issues in both Pull and
Push approaches.
This is the first work, to the best of our knowledge, that tackles
the fundamental data locality problem of GCN acceleration and effi-
ciently skips redundant aggregation through online hardware-based
graph restructuring. This paper makes the following contributions:
•We propose a novel islandization algorithm for efficient runtime
parallel graph restructuring, which can significantly improve
on-chip data locality.
•We design a new hardware accelerator architecture called I-GCN
that effectively implements the islandization algorithm, harvest-
ing the data locality exposed through islandization and avoiding
redundant aggregation among shared neighbors.
•Experimental results show that I-GCN can significantly reduce
off-chip accesses and prune 38% of aggregation operations, lead-
ing to performance speedups over PyG- & DGL-based CPUs, PyG-
& DGL-based GPUs, and prior art GCN accelerators of 9568 ×&
1243×, 368×& 453×, and 5.7×, respectively.
2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
We first introduce GCN algorithms and then elaborate the existing
GCN processing methodologies and their challenges.