MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
On-chip
StorageOff-chip
AccessReuse
𝑋𝑊Reuse
𝐴Reuse
𝑋𝑜Load
ImbalanceRedundancy
Removal
PULL Low High Low High High No Hard
PUSH High High High Low Low Yes Hard
Islandization Low Low High High High No Easy
Table 1: Comparison of PULL, PUSH, Island methods.
of𝑋𝑜). In contrast, PUSH-Outer-Product (Figure 2-(c2)) method
processes all channels at the same time. The entire input feature
vector of each node is broadcast to all its neighbors in parallel. Once
done, the feature aggregation of the entire graph finishes. In the
matrix perspective, PUSH-Outer-Product processes the non-zeros
of matrix A by column, accesses the features of XW by row, and
updates the corresponding partial results of 𝑋𝑜with respect to the
row IDs of non-zeros in matrix A.
The advantage of PUSH-based methods over PULL is that the
data of XW can be fully reused via feature broadcasting. However,
the accesses to 𝑋𝑜then become scattered and random. Given the
height of𝑋𝑜is equal to the number of nodes in the graph, which can
be large, even a single column of 𝑋𝑜may not be able to be buffered
on-chip. Frequent accesses to 𝑋𝑜thus render repeated data fetches
from off-chip DRAM. Ideally, if the non-zeros from the same row of
A can be clustered, they can reuse the same row of 𝑋𝑜, improving
data locality and performance.
PUSH-Column-Wise method is more popular than PUSH-Outer-
Product in prior art because for graphs that a single column of
𝑋𝑜can be put on-chip, PUSH-Column-Wise method can avoid the
repeated off-chip data accesses over 𝑋𝑜. However, this does not
work for large graphs. Consequently, PUSH-Column-Wise does not
fundamentally handle the data locality issue. Additionally, it needs
to repeatedly access matrix A which also incurs additional off-chip
access.
Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of both
approaches. The proposed islandization method is capable of over-
coming all the drawbacks by clustering the non-zeros at runtime
and provides nearly optimal data reuse in GCN inference. Further-
more, with islandization, the unnecessary aggregation for com-
monly shared neighbors can be identified much more easily for
effective pruning.
2.2.3 Combination Phase. As both combination and aggregation
are based on SpMM kernels, the combination phase shares similar
issues with aggregation phase. The only difference is that the weight
matrix W in combination is normally much smaller than the feature
matrix XW in aggregation, and can be more likely stored on-chip.
Therefore, the data locality issue of the PULL-based method is less
prominent than in aggregation. Consequently, I-GCN adopts the
PULL-based method for combination.
3 ALGORITHMS AND ARCHITECTURES
This section first presents the overall workflow and hardware ar-
chitecture of I-GCN. It then introduces the algorithms and the
corresponding architectures of two major components of I-GCN:
theIsland Locator and the Island Consumer .
3.1 I-GCN Overview
3.1.1 I-GCN Workflow. Figure 3 illustrates how I-GCN improves
data locality through islandization: the clustering of graph nodes
Figure 3: Detailed I-GCN workflow and overview of I-GCN
architecture
into islands. Elements of an island tend to have strong internal con-
nections, and are connected to other islands through hubs – nodes
with high fan-in/out degrees, which act as the points of contact
for islands. Islandization is the process of finding these structures
hidden in the original graph. At high level, I-GCN processing begins
by locating these islands, after which it processes the graph at the
granularity of hubs and islands rather than nodes, thus being able
to improve locality and reduce redundant computation.
I-GCN creates the islands gradually by round. Figure 3 shows the
process using the CORA dataset. The scattered non-zeros belonging
to the same island are clustered around the diagonal. The islands (in-
cluding the hubs and nodes) are discovered in parallel by a hardware
module called Island Locator . In each round, the Island Locator
uses different thresholds to recognize hubs and then shapes the
island by scanning the hubs’ neighbor nodes. As shown in Figure 3,
the processing moves from the bottom-left corner of the adjacency
matrix to the upper-right corner, along the anti-diagonal. In each
round a portion of the non-zeros are gathered into an L-shape clus-
ter (except the non-zeros around the anti-diagonal), leaving the
remaining non-zeros untouched. With new hubs located at each
round, new L-shape clusters are formed. This process continues un-
til all non-zeros are clustered either into L-shapes (hubs) or around
the anti-diagonal (islands) (see Round N in Figure 3).
In parallel, whenever an island is formed its adjacency informa-
tion is forwarded to the second module called Island Consumer .
Island Consumer then processes the island as a small but dense
sub-graph, fetches its node features, and performs the required com-
bination and aggregation. Note that although the Island Locator
forms the islands gradually by round, and requires per round syn-
chronization, the Processing Elements in the Island Consumer can
process an island as soon as it is formed without synchronization at
the completion of each round: it does not need to wait until all the
islands in an islandization round are formulated. I-GCN overlaps
graph restructuring and graph processing.
As shown in Figure 3, each node in an island, labeled as an
island node, only connects to the nodes of the same island and
the hub nodes connected to the island. This ensures that the space
between the L-shapes is purely blank. Therefore, when processing
a GraphCONV layer, the associated data of island nodes are only
needed when the island is being processed. Consequently, they
only need to be fetched from off-chip once. The hubs do have
the chance of being used multiple times during the processing of
different islands and inter-hub connections. However, since hubs