MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
Figure 7: Redundancy removal of a typical island.
combination, the Island Consumer conducts pre-aggregation at
the completion of the combination of every k node. Specifically,
after the combination results of k nodes have been calculated, we
sum them up and use the results in aggregation and so skip the
redundant operations. k can be customized.
When the combination results of all nodes in an island and
their pre-aggregated results are ready, the PE starts aggregation by
scanning the local adjacency bitmap. Figure 7(B) shows how the
Island Consumer uses these results in aggregation with redundancy
removal. The scan starts from the top-left corner of the bitmap and
slides towards the bottom-right following the green trace. The size
of the scan window is 1×𝑘where k is the number of nodes whose
feature vectors are pre-aggregated during the combination phase.
If the number of non-zeros covered by the sliding window is less
than𝑘/2, it is more efficient to accumulate the feature vectors of
nodes that are connected (column id of non-zeros under the sliding
window) to the node being scanned (row id of the sliding window);
otherwise, it is more efficient to subtract the feature vectors of
nodes that are not connected (column id of zeros under the sliding
window) from the pre-aggregation results. The Island Consumer
can automatically pick the one that demands the fewest operations.
Figure 7(B) gives an example. For clarity, k is set to 2. The scan
starts once the combination of all nodes and all pre-aggregations
of adjacent k nodes finish. For each scan, if both bits are non-zeros,
i.e. the nodes under-scan are the common neighbors of node-H and
node-a, instead of redoing the accumulation, Island Consumer will
directly use the pre-aggregation result, saving one vector addition
operation. After the first two columns are scanned, Island Con-
sumer proceeds to columns b and c with the combination and pre-
aggregation results of node-b and node-c. After the entire bitmap
is scanned, both GraphCONV’s aggregation and combination of
the island have been completed.
3.3.2 Architecture. The architecture of Island Consumer is illus-
trated in Figure 8. The island-related information sent from Island
Locator is received by Island Collector and then stored in the dis-
tributed memory of the Island Evaluation Task if the incoming
island is not redundant. The major information of each island task
includes: numbers of hubs and island nodes, hub node IDs, island
node IDs, adjacency bitmap, and the round ID. The arbiters in island
collector prefetch evaluation tasks every clock cycle and forward
them to the idle PEs. Once a PE receives an evaluation task, it
performs the aggregation and combination. At the end of evalua-
tion of each island, the PE produces complete output features of
all island nodes and partial results of the output features of hubs.
The complete final outputs of island nodes are stored back to the
global memory, while the incomplete results of hubs are sent to
the corresponding bank of a HUB Partial Result Cache through
Figure 8: Simplified architecture of Island Consumer.
the ring-based reduction network to update the corresponding par-
tial sums calculated previously. To obtain complete aggregation
results of hub nodes, it is necessary to evaluate not only the is-
lands but also the inter-hub connections, which are not included
in islands. To perform the aggregation of inter-hub connections,
Island Collector maintains an inter-hub edge map based on the
information provided by TP-BFS engines during island locating,
generates inter-hub aggregation tasks based on the edge map fol-
lowing Push-Outer-Product execution order, and inserts the tasks
into the evaluation task queues. More details about the creation
of inter-hub edge map and the generation of inter-hub tasks are
omitted due to the space limit. Once all islands and inter-hub tasks
are evaluated, the complete hubs’ results are obtained.
As shown in Figure 8, all PEs are connected in a ring network.
The partial results of hub nodes are distributively stored in the
multi-bank HUB Partial Result Cache (DHUB-PRC). Each bank of
DHUB-PRC is attached to one PE. Note that at the first appearance
of each hub, the Island Collector will map it to an unused row in a
certain bank. The bank ID and row address are attached to the hub
before its island evaluation task is assigned to a PE. This bank ID
and row address will be fixed and reused when this hub appears
again in the future tasks. At the end of each island or inter-hub
task processing, the PE will check the hubs’ bank IDs. If the bank
ID matches its PE ID, the partial results will be used to update the
partial sum stored locally, otherwise it will be forwarded to the
corresponding banks through the ring network.
To accelerate the partial sum update of hubs and reduce com-
munication, the ring network is equipped with the support of in-
network reduction. Particularly, the switch at each entry of the
ring network will check the hub IDs of the partial results sent from
local PE and from its left neighbor. If both are valid and the same,
they are reduced at the entry and the new result will be sent to the