MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece Tong Geng, et al.
nodes, the number of island and hub nodes, and etc. Note that this
abstract container is used just for clarity.
Island location starts with parallel hub detection. This is shown in
Algorithm 2, which uses a threshold-based method to find hubs by
rounds. If the degree of a node is above the current threshold 𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝,
the node is identified as a hub and inserted into a container(buffer)
ℎ𝑢𝑏_𝑏𝑢𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 .𝑇𝐻𝑡𝑚𝑝is reduced each round (line 10 of Algorithm 1)
until all nodes are classified as island or hub nodes. To accelerate
parallel hub detection, in each round we remove the nodes already
classified as hub and island nodes in the previous round. At the end
of island location, the node list 𝑁should be empty.
Hub detection is followed by BFS task generation (Algorithm 3).
Once a hub node is detected, the Island Locator finds its neighbors
by accessing its adjacency list and caches these neighbor nodes in
a task queue, 𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘. The Island Locator sends neighbor nodes to the
task queue,𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘, and then to parallel BFS engines where the nodes
are used by TP-BFS as the starting points for forming islands. Here
we use neighbor nodes as the starting nodes (instead of hubs) in
order to extract higher parallelism from TP-BFS. This significantly
improves the scalability of the Island Locator.
Once the first task is generated and stored in the task queue,
TP-BFS starts (see Algorithm 4). The algorithm keeps track of the
number of nodes whose neighbors have been explored exhaustively
(𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 ) and the total number of visited nodes ( 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 ). Once𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦
catches up with 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 , an island is found with all the nodes and
their neighbors within the island completely explored and the island
information is returned. Multiple TP-BFS engines are able to work
in parallel on different neighbors of different hubs. Multiple 𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 s
are used to keep track of the nodes visited locally by each TP-BFS
engine while 𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 is used to keep track of the nodes visited by
any of the TP-BFS engines.
Each engine begins island searching by (a) recording the initial
node,𝑎𝑜, as the first visited node in a locally visited list, 𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ; (b)
setting the𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 pointer to zero indicating no node’s neighbors
have been fully explored; and (c) accessing the node’s neighbors.
Note that if an engine finds 𝑎𝑜also a hub, it will drop the task and
forward this inter-hub connection information to Island Collector.
As the Island Locator overlaps hub detection and TP-BFS, the TP-
BFS engine does not know which nodes are the hubs and should not
be considered as island nodes. Therefore, when the neighbors of the
first node arrive, the engine checks whether it is a hub node (line 11
of Algorithm 4). In addition, the engine must also check whether it
has itself visited this node during the execution of the current task
(line 12 of Algorithm 4). When either happens, the engine needs
to skip the node and work on the next neighbor. Otherwise, the
engine would have appended the node to the local visited list and
increment the 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟 (line 16 of Algorithm 4).
To accelerate BFS and reduce off-chip accesses to adjacency
data, redundant search must be avoided. To achieve this, the Island
Locator keeps a record of the IDs of nodes visited by all TP-BFS
engines during a certain round in a global visit list, 𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 . When a
BFS engine reaches a node labeled as visited in the global, but not
in the local visited list, it knows that this region has been searched
previously by other engines. The BFS engine then drops this task
and waits for the next (line 20 of Algorithm 4 and Figure 5(A)).
As shown in the Algorithm 4 (line 14), the TP-BFS engine checks
that a node is not on the global visit list before adding it to the localAlgorithm 4 Simplified TP-BFS : fetch nodes from the task
queue and use them as starting points in island detection
1:Inputs:𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 : container of nodes to be chosen as potential starting
points for BFS; 𝑇𝐻: threshold for hub nodes’ degree; 𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥: the max
number of node in an island; 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠 : list of islands’ nodes and hubs
info;𝑃2: parallel factor
2:Outputs: None (modify 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠 in place)
3:𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 ={}
4:while|𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘|>0do
5: for𝑝=0to𝑃2in parallel do {# distributed across 𝑃2engines }
6: Pop{ℎ𝑢𝑏 𝑜,𝑎𝑜}from𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑘 {# Pop the hub and one of its neighbors }
7:𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ={𝑎𝑜},ℎ𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ={ℎ𝑢𝑏 𝑜},𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 =0, and𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 =1, if𝑎𝑜is
not a hub
8: while𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦 ≠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 do{# if there exist unexplored nodes }
9:𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑜=𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙[𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦]
10: for𝑛∈𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑜.𝑛𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑠 do
11: if𝑛.𝑑𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒 <𝑇𝐻then {# hub node or not }
12: if𝑛∈𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 then {#𝑛locally explored by engine p }
13: Skip neighbor 𝑛
14: else if𝑛∉𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 then {# not explored by other engines }
15: 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡+=1
16: Append𝑛to𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 and𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
# if exceeding the max number of nodes in an island
17: if|𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙|>𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥 break while(line 8)
18: else {# already explored by other engines }
19: remove𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 from𝑣𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙
20: break while(line 8)
21: else {# else it’s a hub node }
22: Add𝑛toℎ𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙
23:𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑟𝑦+=1
24: Append (𝑣𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ,ℎ𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙 ) to𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑠
...
......Hub Detection
Nodes with 
high degrees: hubsPopped ...
... ...Task Generation
Generated tasks:
(hub, neighbor)
pairs
...
......TP-BFS
Search
directions
TP-BFS 
starting pointsDiscovered
islands
from graph
Figure 4: Toy example of Island Locator algorithm.
visited list and incrementing the visited node counter. If the counter
is over the threshold (expected maximum island size), the engine
drops the task and waits for a new one ((line 17) and Figure 5 (B)).
When all neighbors of the initial node have been scanned, the
engine checks whether the query pointer value equals the counter
value. This indicates that all nodes have been searched, that TP-
BFS is done without reaching the island size threshold, and that an
island is found. If this happens, the engine sends the connection
information of this island to the Island Consumer and requests a
new task from the Task Generator (see Figure 5 (C)). Otherwise,
it accesses the adjacency list of the node pointed to by the query
pointer and explores all its neighbors. This process continues until
one of the three task-break conditions is triggered.
3.2.2 Architecture. Figure 6 shows the architecture support of Is-
land Locator. The blue part in Algorithm 1 is realized as the Hub
Detector. The degree information of the nodes are distributively
stored in the Node Degree Buffers which are implemented with