I-GCN: A Graph Convolutional Network Accelerator with Runtime Locality Enhancement through Islandization MICRO ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Virtual Event, Greece
Figure 9: Islandization effect on Cora, Citeseer, PubMed, and NELL. Space be-
tween L-shapes is totally blank.
0%20%40%
Actual Operation % Pruned Operation % 60%80%100%
CoraCiteseerPubMedNellReddit CoraCiteseerPubMedNellRedditPruning Rate(Aggregation) Pruning Rate(Overall)
39% 40%35%
46%29%9%5% 4% 5%
17%Figure 10: Pruning rates with redundancy re-
moval.
right neighbor at the next cycle. This in-network reduction design
is widely used in smart-NIC architectures, so we do not elaborate
it due to page limit.
The simplified architecture of each PE is illustrated at the bottom
of Figure 8. The right part is the module for PULL-based combina-
tion. As mentioned in Section 3.3.1, this module accesses feature
data of island nodes based on their IDs from off-chip. These data
are accessed only once as all connections of these island nodes
will be processed during the execution of this island task. Weight
matrix is distributively stored on-chip in Weight Matrix Buffers
of PEs if possible. During calculation, non-zeros of the same node
will be sequentially broadcast to the same row of MAC units and
are multiplied with the corresponding row of weight matrix. The
partial combination results of the same row are locally accumulated.
Once a certain node is completely calculated, the row of MAC units
starts to work on the next node if applicable. If the node is a hub,
the resulting combined features will be stored in HUB Matrix XW
Cache for the reuse in future island and inter-hub tasks. Once the
combination and pre-aggregation of all nodes are done, the right
module will be deactivated and the left one will be activated to start
aggregation. The left module is designed based on the calculation
method introduced in Section 3.3.1. The purple blocks in the figure
are the scan windows. To avoid pipeline bubbles in the aggregation
module, the scans with all zeros need to be skipped. To achieve
this, we scan multiple rows in parallel at each cycle and only for-
ward the scans with non-zeros to FSMs, i.e. CASE and Scheduler
modules in the figure, which access the required pre-aggregation
and/or combination output results from the combination module
and assign the aggregation task to idle MAC units.
4 EVALUATION
4.1 Experiment Setup
We evaluate I-GCN’s latency, energy efficiency, off-chip data move-
ment, and hardware resource utilization with a Stratix 10 SX FPGA.
We evaluate I-GCN on three different models – GCN, GraphSage,
and GIN – using five datasets commonly used in GCN accelera-
tion research [ 14,30,48]. These include Cora (CR), Citeseer (CS),
Pubmed (PM), Nell (NE), and Reddit (RD). With respect to network
structures, existing systems use various configurations: GCNs and
GraphSage have two layers, while GIN has three layers. For GCNs
and GraphSage, EnGN and AWB-GCN use the configurations re-
ported in the original algorithm papers [ 25], while HyGCN uses its
own configuration of 128 hidden channels for all datasets. Here we
label GCN and GraphSage with original configurations, “GCN-algo”
and “GS-algo” and label the ones used in HyGCN, “GCN-Hy” and
Figure 11: Hardware consumption breakdown of I-GCN.
“GS-Hy”. For GIN, HyGCN is the only work that uses it in evaluation.
We evaluate all these models and compare with the corresponding
existing work.
To better demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed on-the-
fly algorithm-architecture co-design for islandization, we compare
I-GCN with 6 existing lightweight graph reordering algorithms
(Section 4.5). These algorithms are realized on an Intel Xeon Gold
6226R CPU with 64 threads. For cross-platform comparison, we
compare I-GCN with prior art GCN accelerators (HyGCN [ 48],
AWB-GCN [ 14]), prior art SpMM accelerator (SIGMA [ 38]), NVIDIA
V100 GPU, RTX8000 GPU, Intel E5-2683-V3 CPU, and Intel E5-2680-
V3 CPU. The CPU and GPU results are based on PyTorch Geometric
(PyG) [13] and Deep Graph Library (DGL) [41].
4.2 Islandization Effect
We first evaluate the efficiency of the islandization algorithm. Fig-
ure 9 shows the effects of the proposed islandization method on
the adjacency matrices of four real-world graphs with various sta-
tistics including size, sparsity and non-zero distribution. Among
them, NELL is believed to be the most difficult to process due to its
extremely high sparsity and imbalanced distribution[ 14]. As shown
in Figure 9, for all these four datasets, our islandization method
is able to optimally cluster all non-zeros to the anti-diagonals and
L-shaped clusters within several rounds. The islandization effect on
NELL looks even more significant than the other datasets, since its
adjacency matrix is the sparsest and its graph has more significant
component structures.
4.3 Island-based Redundancy Removal
Here we evaluate the effects of shared-neighbor-aware redundancy
removal in the Island Consumer. Figure 10 shows the operation
pruning rates during aggregation phase. The Island-based Aggrega-
tor is able to skip, on average, 38% of aggregation operations. These
operations are all redundant and are for the aggregation among
shared neighbors. The removal of these operations is lossless. Note
that in combination-first calculation, aggregation phase takes 23%
operations on average. Therefore, 9% of operations of the entire