5 Discussion and Conclusions
This study set out to investigate whether preva-
lent crowdsourcing practices for building NLU
datasets introduce an annotator bias in the data that
leads to an over-estimation of model performance.
We established that perfect annotator information
can improve model performance, and that the lan-
guage generated by annotators often reveals their
identity. Moreover, we tested the ability of mod-
els to generalize to unseen annotators in three re-
cent NLU datasets, and found that in two of these
datasets annotator bias is evident. These ﬁndings
may be explained by the annotator distributions
and the size of these datasets. Skewed annotator
distributions with only a few annotators creating
the vast majority of examples are more prone to
biases.
Our results suggest that annotator bias should be
monitored in crowdsourcing tasks involving free
text generation by annotators. This can be done
by testing model performance on new annotators
during data collection. Moreover, to tackle anno-
tator bias, we propose that training set annotators
should be separated from test-set annotators.
Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by The Is-
rael Science Foundation grant 942/16, The Blavat-
nik Computer Science Research Fund and The
Yandex Initiative for Machine Learning. We thank
Sam Bowman from NYU University and Alon
Talmor from Tel Aviv University for providing
us the annotation information of the MNLI and
COMMONSENSE QA datasets. This work was
completed in partial fulﬁllment for the Ph.D de-
gree of the ﬁrst author.
References
Roee Aharoni and Yoav Goldberg. 2018. Split and
rephrase: Better evaluation and stronger baselines.
InProceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
2: Short Papers) , pages 719–724. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, David Burkett, and Dan
Klein. 2012. An empirical investigation of statistical
signiﬁcance in nlp. In Proceedings of the 2012 Joint
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning , pages 995–1005. Association for
Computational Linguistics.S. Bowman, G. Angeli, C. Potts, and C. D. Manning.
2015. A large annotated corpus for learning natural
language inference. In Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP) .
Chris Callison-Burch, Lyle Ungar, and Ellie Pavlick.
2015. Crowdsourcing for NLP. In Proceedings of
the 2015 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Tutorial Abstracts , pages 2–3.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .
Rotem Dror, Gili Baumer, Segev Shlomov, and Roi Re-
ichart. 2018. The hitchhikers guide to testing statis-
tical signiﬁcance in natural language processing. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 1383–1392.
Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel
Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. 2019.
DROP: A reading comprehension benchmark re-
quiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. In Proc.
of NAACL .
Max Glockner, Vered Shwartz, and Yoav Goldberg.
2018. Breaking NLI systems with sentences that re-
quire simple lexical inferences. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,
pages 650–655, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
S. Gururangan, S. Swayamdipta, O. Levy, R. Schwartz,
S. R. Bowman, and N. A. Smith. 2018. Annotation
artifacts in natural language inference data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.02324 .
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin John-
son, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen,
Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma,
et al. 2017. Visual Genome: Connecting language
and vision using crowdsourced dense image anno-
tations. International Journal of Computer Vision ,
123(1):32–73.
Omer Levy, Steffen Remus, Chris Biemann, and Ido
Dagan. 2015. Do supervised distributional meth-
ods really learn lexical inference relations? In Pro-
ceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages
970–976.
Quinn McNemar. 1947. Note on the sampling error
of the difference between correlated proportions or
percentages. Psychometrika , 12(2):153–157.
Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish
Sabharwal. 2018. Can a suit of armor conduct elec-
tricity? A new dataset for open book question an-
swering. In In proceedings of the 2018 Conference