Are We Modeling the Task or the Annotator? An Investigation of
Annotator Bias in Natural Language Understanding Datasets
Mor Geva
Tel Aviv University,
Allen Institute for AI
morgeva@mail.tau.ac.ilYoav Goldberg
Bar-Ilan University,
Allen Institute for AI
yoav.goldberg@gmail.com
Jonathan Berant
Tel Aviv University,
Allen Institute for AI
joberant@cs.tau.ac.il
Abstract
Crowdsourcing has been the prevalent
paradigm for creating natural language under-
standing datasets in recent years. A common
crowdsourcing practice is to recruit a small
number of high-quality workers, and have
them massively generate examples. Having
only a few workers generate the majority of
examples raises concerns about data diversity,
especially when workers freely generate
sentences. In this paper, we perform a series
of experiments showing these concerns are
evident in three recent NLP datasets. We
show that model performance improves when
training with annotator identiﬁers as features,
and that models are able to recognize the most
productive annotators. Moreover, we show
that often models do not generalize well to ex-
amples from annotators that did not contribute
to the training set. Our ﬁndings suggest that
annotator bias should be monitored during
dataset creation, and that test set annotators
should be disjoint from training set annotators.
1 Introduction
Generating large datasets has become one of the
main drivers of progress in natural language un-
derstanding (NLU). The prevalent method for
creating new datasets is through crowdsourcing,
where examples are generated by workers (Zaidan
and Callison-Burch, 2011; Richardson et al., 2013;
Bowman et al., 2015; Rajpurkar et al., 2016;
Trischler et al., 2017). A common recent practice
is to choose a small group of workers who produce
high-quality annotations, and massively generate
examples using these workers.
Having only a few workers annotate the major-
ity of dataset examples raises concerns about data
diversity and the ability of models to generalize,
especially when the crowdsourcing task is to gen-
erate free text. If an annotator consistently uses
language patterns that correlate with the labels, aneural model can pick up on those, which can lead
to an over-estimation of model performance.
In this paper, we continue recent efforts to un-
derstand biases that are introduced during the pro-
cess of data creation (Levy et al., 2015; Schwartz
et al., 2017; Gururangan et al., 2018; Glockner
et al., 2018; Poliak et al., 2018; Tsuchiya, 2018;
Aharoni and Goldberg, 2018; Paun et al., 2018).
We investigate this form of bias, termed annotator
bias, and perform multiple experiments over three
recent NLU datasets: MNLI (Williams et al.,
2018), O PENBOOK QA. (Mihaylov et al., 2018),
and C OMMONSENSE QA (Talmor et al., 2019).
First, we establish that annotator information
improves model performance by supplying anno-
tator IDs as part of the input features. Second,
we show that models are able to recognize an-
notators that generated many examples, illustrat-
ing that annotator information is captured by the
model. Last, we test whether models generalize to
annotators that were not seen at training time. We
observe that often generalization to new annota-
tors fails, and that augmenting the training set with
a small number of examples from these annotators
substantially increases performance.
Taken together, our experiments show that an-
notator bias exists in current NLU datasets, which
can lead to problems in model generalization to
new users. Hence, we propose that annotator bias
should be monitored at data collection time and to
tackle it by having the test set include examples
from a disjoint set of annotators.
2 Crowdsourcing Practice
Crowdsourcing has become the prominent
paradigm for creating NLP datasets (Callison-
Burch et al., 2015; Sabou et al., 2014). It has been
used for various NLU tasks, including Question
Answering (Rajpurkar et al., 2018; MihaylovarXiv:1908.07898v2  [cs.CL]  28 Aug 2019