IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, NOVEMBER 2023 12
search space is drastically decreased. The overall framework
uses an iterative prune-and-fine-tune strategy. In each itera-
tion, multiple individual candidates (parents) are generated
by randomly pruning filters. Offsprings are generated by
conducting bit-wise mutations on parents, where each bit
represents the presence of a filter. Individuals are then
evaluated with accuracy and FLOPs, and only top- kare
retained for the next iteration.
2.7 Extensions
Structured pruning can be extended with the Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis, with orthogonal network compression tech-
niques and with different granularity of structured sparsity.
2.7.1 Lottery Ticket Hypothesis
The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) [265] claims that
“dense, randomly-initialized, feed-forward networks con-
tain subnetworks (winning tickets) that — when trained in
isolation — reach test accuracy comparable to the original
network in a similar number of iterations.” Weight rewinding
is often used in LTH-based papers. In the study by Frankle
& Carbin [265], the weights and the learning rate schedule
are rewound to the values at epoch k= 0, in order to find
the sparse subnetworks at initialization. Frankle et al. [266]
propose to rewind the weights and learning rate schedule to
k >0epoch to deal with SGD randomness (noise). Different
means of achieving unstructured LTH have been proposed:
SNIP [267] preserves the training loss; GraSP [268] preserves
thegradient flow ; Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) [269] cap-
tures the training dynamics ; GF [270] prunes weights that
cause the least change to the gradient flow .
Renda et al. [271] propose to rewind the learning rate
schedule but not the weight value ( learning rate rewinding ).
Experiments show that rewinding techniques consistently
outperform fine-tuning, in which learning rate rewinding
outperforms or matches weight rewinding in all scenarios.
Rethinking the Value of Network Pruning (RVNP) [152]
re-evaluates the value of network pruning. The argument
is that traditional fine-tuning techniques work no better
than pruning from scratch. Extending LTH in a structured
pruning setting for large-scale datasets fails to yield the
lottery ticket.
Early Bird (EB) [153] proposes to find the winning ticket
in the early stages of training, rather than fully training the
dense network. To find the EB ticket, the mask for the filters
is computed based on the Hamming distance between two
subnetworks pruned from the same model.
Prospect Pruning (ProsPr) [154] argues that the trainabil-
ityof the pruned networks should be considered. Trainability
exists as the model is going to be trained after pruning.
Thus, meta-gradients (gradient-of-gradients) have been pro-
posed as a measure of trainability . Instead of estimating the
changes in the loss at initialization, the effect of pruning
on the loss over several steps of gradient descent at the
beginning of training is estimated in ProsPr.
Early Compression via Gradient Flow Preservation (Ear-
lyCroP) [155] achieves early pruning by solving three key
problems. The problem 1) why to prune is solved by
extending a GF-based pruning criterion [270] to structuredpruning. 2) How to prune is solved by preserving the
training dynamics using a connection between the gradient
flow and NTK [269]. Lastly, 3) when to prune is solved
by finding the lazy kernel regime , which is the phase where
pruning has little effect on the training dynamics .
Pruning-aware Training (PaT) [156] tries to resolve the
problem of when early pruning should begin ? PaT is based on
the premise that sub-networks having the same number of
remaining neurons can have very different architectures. To
determine when the architectures are stable, a novel metric
called the early pruning indicator (EPI) that computes the
structure similarity of two subnetworks has been proposed.
2.7.2 Joint Compression
Some prevailing techniques, i.e., architecture search, de-
composition and quantization, are orthogonal to pruning
methods for neural network compression. Applying these
techniques in sequence may seem like a natural extension
but can lead to sub-optimal solutions due to different
optimization objectives [165]. Therefore, researchers have
proposed to apply these techniques jointly.
Pruning and NAS : NPAS [161] develops a framework of
joint network pruning and architecture search. This method
is compiler-aware and replaces computational activation
functions (such as the sigmoid function) with compiler-
friendly ones.
Pruning and Quantization: DJPQ [162] jointly performs
structured pruning and mixed-bit precision quantization in
a gradient-based manner. This structured pruning is based
on the variational information bottleneck [104], and mixed-
bit precision quantization is extended to power-of-two bit-
restricted quantization. Bayesian Bits (BB) [163] unifies the
view of mixed precision quantization and pruning, and
introduces mixed precision gates on filters for structured
pruning. IODF [164] utilizes integer-only arithmetic based
on 8-bit quantization and has learnable binary gates to
eliminate redundant filters during inference.
Pruning, NAS, and Quantization: APQ [165] performs
these tasks jointly. A once-for-all network [272] supporting
a large search space for channel number is trained. Next, a
quantization-aware accuracy predictor is designed to eval-
uate the accuracy of the selected structure with mixed-
precision quantization [273]. This is followed by the use of
an evolutionary-based architecture search [274] to find the
best-accuracy model under latency or energy constraints.
Pruning and Decomposition: Some studies have ex-
ploited structured pruning and low-rank decomposition
within a unified framework. The authors of Hinge [166]
contend that pruning techniques cannot deal with the last
CONV layer in a residual block that low-rank decompo-
sition is able to. The two techniques are hinged by in-
troducing sparsity-inducing matrices after filters. Imposing
group sparsity on the columns and rows of sparsity-inducing
matrices achieves filter pruning and decomposition, respec-
tively. Collaborative Compression (CC) [167] simultane-
ously learns the model sparsity and low-rankness to achieve
channel pruning and tensor decomposition jointly.
2.7.3 Special Granularity
Apart from unstructured pruning at the weight level and
structured pruning at the filter level, there are also pruning