IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, NOVEMBER 2023 10
that uses the same selection mask before and after BN
layers [119].
Other methods, such as SCP [78] and DMC [82], also
maintain the mask dynamically. These are discussed in
Section 2.3.
2.5.2 Dynamic during Inference
Runtime Neural Pruning (RNP) [123] is based on the
premise that the static model fails to exploit the different
properties of input images by using the same weights for
both easily recognized and complex pattern images. It uses
a framework with CNN as the backbone and RNN as a deci-
sion network. The network pruning is modeled as a Markov
decision process, and models are trained by reinforcement
learning (RL). The RL agent evaluates filter importance and
performs channel-wise pruning according to the relative
difficulty of samples for a task. Thus, when the image is
easier for the task, a sparser network is generated.
Feature Boosting and Suppression (FBS) [124] predicts
output channel importance based on inputs by introducing
a tiny and differentiable auxiliary network. In the auxiliary
network, a 2D global average pooling is used to subsample
the activation channels in the previous layer to scalars. The
advantage of this is that it reduces the computational over-
head in the auxiliary network. A salient predictor then uses
the subsampled scalars to generate the predicted saliency
scores through a fully connected layer followed by an activa-
tion function. The top- ksalient channels are finally involved
in the inference-time calculation.
Deep Reinforcement Learning pruning (DRLP) [126]
learns both the runtime (dynamic) and the static importance
of channels. The runtime importance measures the impor-
tance of channels specific to an input. In contrast, the static
importance measures the channel importance for the whole
dataset. Like RNP [123], DRLP uses reinforcement learning
(RL). The RL framework contains two parts: one static and
one runtime. Each part contains an importance predictor
and an agent, providing static/runtime importance and
layer-wise pruning ratio, respectively. In addition, a trade-
off pruner generates a unified pruning decision based on the
outputs from the two parts.
Dynamic Dual Gating (DDG) [127] uses two separate
gating modules (spatial and channel gating) to determine
inference-time importance according to inputs. The spatial
module consists of an adaptive average pooling followed by
a 3x3 CONV layer to extract informative spatial features. By
having a spatial mask, only informative features are allowed
to pass to the next layer. The channel gating module works
in a manner similar to existing methods such as FBS [124]
by using global average pooling followed by the application
of FC layers. To enable gradient flow, the Gumbel-Softmax
reparameterization [254] is used for both spatial and channel
gating modules.
Fire Together Wire Together (FTWT) [128] models the
dynamic pruning task as a self-supervised binary classifica-
tion problem. The proposed framework uses 1) a prediction
head to generate learnable binary masks and 2) a ground
truth mask to guide the learning after each convolutional
layer. The prediction head consists of a global max pooling
layer, a 1x1 CONV layer, and a softmax layer. Then, the
outputs from the prediction head are rounded to generate abinary mask. To achieve self-supervised learning, ground
truth binary masks are needed; by ranking the norm of
input activations, ground truth pruning decisions are made
to guide the learning.
At the same time, Contrastive Dual Gating (CDG) [129]
implements another self-supervised dynamic pruning
framework by using contrastive learning [255]. Contrastive
learning trains a model from the latent contrastiveness of
high-level features of two contrastive branches. Therefore, a
similarity-based contrastive loss [256] is used for gradient-
based learning without the labeled data. Empirical studies
show that pruning decisions cannot be transferred between
contrastive branches. Thus, dual gating is introduced, and
the two branches have distinct pruning masks. CDG [129]
uses a framework similar to that of CGNet [257] for each
contrastive branch. Like DDG [127], a 3x3 CONV layer is
used to extract spatial features for unpruned features.
2.6 NAS-Based Pruning
Given that it is cumbersome to manually determine
pruning-related hyperparameters such as the layer-wise
pruning ratio, NAS-based Pruning has been proposed to
automatically find pruned structures. Based on the survey of
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [26], we categorize NAS
for pruning into three methods. NAS can be modeled as:
1)reinforcement learning (RL) problems , in which RL
agents find sparse subnetworks by searching over the
action space such as pruning ratios.
2)gradient-based methods that modify the gradient up-
date rule to make optimization problems with sparsity
constraints differentiable to weights.
3)evolutionary methods that adopt evolutionary algo-
rithms to explore and search the sparse subnetworks.
2.6.1 Reinforcement Learning-Based
AutoML for Model Compression (AMC) [130] uses RL
to automatically select the appropriate layer-wise pruning
ratio without manual sensitivity analysis. To search over a
continuous action space, the deep deterministic policy gra-
dient (DDPG) algorithm [258] is adopted. The actor receives
11 layer-dependent states such as FLOPS and outputs a
continuous action about the pruning ratio. For accuracy-
guaranteed pruning, the reward for the DDPG agent is
modified from Eq. 20 to Eq. 21:
Rerr=−Error (20)
RFLOPs =−Error ·log(FLOPs)
RParam =−Error ·log(#Param)(21)
Automatic Graph encoder-decoder Model Compression
(AGMC) [131] adopts the premise that AMC [130] still
requires manual selection of the fixed 11 states fed into
the RL agent. In addition, the fixed environment states ig-
nore the rich information within the computational graphs.
Hence, the DNNs are modeled as computational graphs
and fed into a GCN-based graph encoder-decoder [259] to
automatically learn the RL agent’s input states. In contrast
to AMC [130], AGMC rescales the pruning ratios to compen-
sate for any unmet sparsity constraint rather than applying
the FLOPs into the reward function (Eq. 21).