IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, NOVEMBER 2023 6
whether smaller-norm parameters are less informative; Ye
et al. propose to train with ISTA [230] to enforce sparsity on
γ. The channel with a γequal to zero is pruned. Then the
γ-Wrescaling trick is used on γand weights to quickly start
the sparsification process.
Operation-aware Soft Channel Pruning (SCP) [78] con-
siders both BN and ReLU operations. In contrast to NS [74]
making decision merely on the channel scaling γ, Kang et al.
also consider shifting parameters β. Specifically, channels
with large negative βand large γare considered unimpor-
tant since these channels will become zero after ReLU. To
consider BN’s large negative mean values, the cumulative
distribution function (CDF) of a Gaussian distribution pa-
rameterized by βandγis used as the indicator function. To
optimize βandγ, a sparsity-loss-inducing large CDF value
is designed to encourage the network to be more sparse.
EagleEye [79] proposes a three-stage pipeline. First ,
pruning strategies (i.e., layer-wise pruning ratio) are gener-
ated by simple random sampling. Second , sub-networks are
generated according to the pruning strategies and ℓ1-norm
of filters. Third , an adaptive-BN-based candidate evaluation
module is used to evaluate the performance of the sub-
networks. Li et al. contend that outdated BN statistics are
unfair to sub-network evaluations, and that BN statistics
for each candidate should be re-calculated on a small part
of the training dataset [79]. After evaluating sub-networks
with the adaptive BN statistics , the best-performing one is
selected as the final pruned model.
2.3.2 Regularization on Extra Parameter
Although some studies [75], [77] make special adjustments
for networks without BN layers, introducing extra parame-
ters is a more general solution. The extra parameters θare
trainable and parameterize the gates g(θ)in determining the
pruning results.
To find a sparse structure, Sparse Structure Selection
(SSS) [80] attempts to force the output of structures to zero.
A scaling factor θis introduced after each structure, i.e.,
neuron, group or residual block. When θis lower than a
threshold, the corresponding structure is removed. The gate
g(θ)function is:
g(θ) =(
0, θ < Threshold
1,otherwise. (7)
It adopts a convex relaxation ℓ1-norm as the sparsity regu-
larization on the extra parameter θ. To update θ, a modified
Accelerated Proximal Gradient [231] is used.
Generative Adversarial Learning (GAL) [81] jointly
prunes structures and adopts a Generative Adversarial Net-
work (GAN) to achieve label-free learning. Extra scaling
factors are introduced after each structure in the generator,
forming soft masks. During training, a special regularization
term that contains three regularizers is proposed: 1) a ℓ2
weight decay regularizer on generators, 2) a ℓ1sparsity
regularizer on the mask, and 3) an adversarial regularization
on discriminator. Furthermore, FISTA [230] is used to itera-
tively update the generator and discriminator, and the mask
is updated together with the generator.
Discrete Model Compression (DMC) [82] explicitly in-
troduces discrete (binary) gates after the feature map toprecisely reflect the pruned channels’ impact on the loss
function. First, it samples subnetworks with stochastic dis-
crete gates:
g(θ) =(
1,w.p.θ
0,w.p.1−θ(8)
where w.p. stands for “with probability”. The stochastic
nature of the gate ensures that every channel has the chance
to be sampled if θ̸= 0 , so different subnetworks can be
produced. To update the non-differentiable binary gates, a
Straight-Through Estimator [232] is adopted.
Similar to PR [76], Gates with Differentiable Polarization
(GDP-Guo) [83] aims to polarize gates. Designing a gate
with a polarization effect wields the property of smoothed
ℓ0formulation [233]:
g(θ) =θ2
θ2+ϵhas property− − − − − − − → g(θ) =(
≈1, θ̸= 0
= 0, θ= 0(9)
where ϵis a small positive value to prevent zero division.
This property polarizes θto either exactly 0or values close
to1. The gate itself is differentiable. However, the sparsity
regularization on θinvolves ℓ0-norm and renders the objec-
tive function non-differentiable. Thus, proximal-SGD [234]
is used to update θ.
Convolutional Re-p arameterization and Gradient
Resetting (ResRep) [84] re-parameterizes a CNN into two
parts. The first “remembering part” learns to maintain
the model’s performance and will not be pruned. The
second “forgetting part” inserts 1×1CONV layers, or the
compactors , after the BN layers. During training, a modified
SGD update rule updates the compactors only. Thus, only
compactors are allowed to forget (forgetting) while other
CONV layers are kept untouched (remembering).
Scientific Control Pruning (SCOP) [85] believes that the
importance of a filter may be disturbed by potential fac-
tors such as input data. For example, the filter importance
ranking may vary if input data is slightly changed for
data-dependent methods. To minimize the effect of potential
factors , it prunes under scientific control by creating knockoff
counterparts [235]. Knockoff features are identical to the
real features except for not knowing the true label. Two
scaling factors θand˜θare then introduced to control the
participation of real and knockoff features, respectively. The
two parameters are complementary that θ+˜θ=1. Ifθ
cannot suppress ˜θ, the real features are deemed to have
little or no association with the true output. Thus, the filter
importance score is defined as I=θ−˜θ, and filters with
small importance scores are deemed redundant.
To directly control the model budget, Budget-Aware
Regularization (BAR) [86] uses a prior loss and introduces
a learnable dropout parameter θ[236]. The prior loss is the
product of two functions. The first function is an approxi-
mation of budgets that is differentiable w.r.t. θ. The second
function is a variant log-barrier function [237] that employs
a sigmoidal schedule. The novel objective function consists
of the prior loss, enabling simultaneous training and prun-
ing according to the budget. Knowledge distillation is then
used to improve accuracy.