IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, NOVEMBER 2023 11
DECORE [132] adopts multi-agent learning. The pres-
ence of multiple agents comes from assigning dedicated
agents to all channels in a layer, with each agent only
learning one parameter representing a binary decision. In
contrast to AMC [130] and AGMC [131], DECORE models
the state of the channel itself. To learn the action parameters,
a higher reward is given when the accuracy retention task
and compression task are both well-completed:
Rl
comp .=Nl+1X
j=11−al
j, R acc=1 ifˆy=y
−λ else
Rl=Rl
comp .∗Racc(22)
where Nl+1represents the output channel size of layer l,al
is the action vector of layer l,yandˆyare the true label and
predicted label, and −λis a large penalty for a wrong pre-
diction. The reward function does not consider the FLOPs;
instead, the reward for the compression task simply takes
into account the number of channels remaining.
GNN-RL [133] first models the DNN into a multi-stage
graph neural network (GNN) to learn the global topology.
The generated hierarchical computational graph is then
used as the environmental state of the agent. In contrast
to AMC [130] and AGMC [131] that both use DDPG, this
method uses the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) al-
gorithm [260] as the policy since PPO gives a much better
experiment result. In addition, due to the specially designed
graph environment, the reward for the RL system does not
need to contain sparsity constraints. Accuracy is the only
metric for the reward described by Eq. 20.
2.6.2 Gradient-Based
To search for the layer-wise sparsity, Differentiable Markov
Channel Pruning (DMCP) [136] models channel pruning
as a Markov process. Here, the state means retaining the
channel during pruning, and transitions between states rep-
resent the pruning process. DMCP parameterizes both the
transition and budget loss by learnable architecture param-
eters. The final loss is thus differentiable w.r.t. architecture
parameters. Two stages are used to finish pruning in a
gradient-based manner. The first stage updates weights of
unpruned networks with a variant sandwich rule [261]. The
second stage updates the architecture parameters.
Differentiable Sparsity Allocation (DSA) [137] optimizes
the sparsity allocation in continuous space using a gradient-
based method that is more effective than a discrete search.
The validation loss is adopted as a differentiable surrogate
to render the evaluation of validation accuracy differen-
tiable. Next, a probabilistic differentiable pruning process
is used as a replacement for the non-differentiable hard
pruning process. Finally, sparsity allocation is obtained un-
der a budget constraint. An ADMM-inspired optimization
method [247] is used to solve the constrained non-convex
optimization problem.
Differentiable Hyper Pruning (DHP) [138] uses hyper-
networks that generate weights for backbone networks.
The designed hypernetwork consists of three layers. 1)
The latent layer first takes two learnable latent vectors
{zlandzl−1,zl∈RNl+1}and forms the latent matrix.
Then 2) the embedding layer projects the latent matrixto embedding space, forming embedding vectors. Finally,
3) the explicit layer takes embedding vectors and outputs
weights that can be explicitly used as weights for CONV
layers. Pruning is done by regularizing the latent vectors
with ℓ1sparsity regularization, and proximal gradient al-
gorithms [237] are used to update the latent vectors. This
method is approximately differentiable since the proximal
operation step has a closed-form solution.
Learning Filter Pruning Criteria (LFPC) [140] searches
for layer-wise pruning criteria instead of pruning ratios. The
basis for its use is that filters have differing distributions for
extracting coarse and fine-level features. This makes using
the same pruning criterion for all layers inappropriate. To
explore the criteria space, criteria parameters are introduced
to guide the choice of criteria. To enable gradient flow, this
method uses the Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization [254]
to make the loss differentiable to criteria parameters.
Transformable Architecture Search (TAS) [141] searches
the width and depth of a network. Two learnable param-
eters, αandβ, are introduced to indicate the distribution
of the possible number of channels and layers, respectively.
Subnetworks can be sampled based on αandβ. Applying
the Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization [254] makes the
sampling process differentiable. The search objectives are
minimizing the validation loss while encouraging smaller
computational costs and penalizing the unmet resources
budget. Knowledge Distillation is further used to boost the
performance of the pruned networks.
Exploration and Estimation (EE) [142] achieves channel
pruning in a two-step gradient-based manner. The first step
isexploration of subnetworks to allow larger search space
with a fast sampling technique ( Stochastic Gradient Hamil-
tonian Monte Carlo [262]). To bring sparsity, this method
applies a FLOPs-aware prior distribution to the exploration
process. The second step, estimation , is used to guide the
generation of high-quality subnetworks.
2.6.3 Evolutionary-Based
MetaPruning [148] aims to find the optimal layer-wise chan-
nel number with a two-stage framework. The first stage
trains a meta network named PruningNet to generate var-
ious structures. PruningNet takes randomly sampled encod-
ing vectors representing structures and learns in an end-
to-end manner. In the second stage, an evolutionary search
algorithm is deployed to search for the optimal structures
under constraints. No fine-tuning is needed at search time
since PruningNet predicts the weights for all the pruned
nets.
In contrast to MetaPruning [148], ABCPruner [149] looks
for the optimal layer-wise channel number with a one-stage
approach and requires no extra supporting network. In
addition, it drastically reduces the combinations of pruned
structures by limiting the preserved channels to a given
space. To search for the optimal pruned structures, an evolu-
tionary algorithm based on the Artificial Bee Colony algorithm
(ABC) [263] is applied.
Instead of using evolutionary algorithms (EA) on the
entire network, Cooperative CoEvolution algorithm for
Pruning (CCEP) [150] uses cooperative coevolution [264] that
groups the network by layer and applies EA on each layer.
By decomposing the networks into multiple groups, the