IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, NOVEMBER 2023 5
that most methods did not consider the reconstruction error
propagation. NISP proposes to use the Final Response Layer
(FRL) to determine the neuron importance because recon-
struction errors from all previous layers will eventually be
propagated to the FRL. Initially, the importance score of
FRL can be determined by any feature ranking technique,
i.e., Inf-FS [227]. The neuron importance is then propagated
backward from FRL to the previous layers. Lastly, neurons
with low importance scores in the layer are pruned. Pruned
neurons will no longer back-propagate scores to the previ-
ous layers.
Discrimination-aware Channel Pruning (DCP) [71] aims
to keep discriminative channels that substantially change
the final loss in their absence. However, pruning shallow
layers often triggers a smaller decrease in final loss due to
the long propagation path. To resolve the problem, Zhuang
et al. introduce discrimination-aware losses to every last
layer of the intermediate layers. A greedy algorithm is
then used to select channels based on the discrimination-
aware loss and reconstruction loss between the baseline and
pruned networks.
2.3 Regularization
Regularization can be used for learning structured sparse
networks by adding different sparsity regularizers Rs(·).
The sparsity regularizer can be applied to BN parameters if
the networks contain batch normalization layers. To achieve
structured sparsity, BN parameters are used to indicate the
pruning decision of structures such as channels or filters.
Extra parameters working as learnable gates have been
introduced to guide pruning. With these extra parameters,
networks no longer require batch normalization layers.
Sparsity regularizers can also be directly applied to filters .
Group Lasso regularization is commonly used to sparsify
filters in a structured manner.
The general Group Lasso is defined as the solution to the
following convex optimization problem [32],
min
β∈Rp






y−GX
g=1Xgβg





2
2+λGX
g=1√ng∥βg∥2
 (4)
where the feature matrix is divided into Ggroups, forming
the matrix Xgthat contains only examples of group gas
well as the corresponding coefficient vector βg.ngindicates
the size of group g, and λ≥0is a tuning parameter. In the
context of filter pruning, the first term can be viewed as the
reconstruction error of the feature map, and the second term
can be rewritten as:
λ


Fl


2,1=λNl+1X
i=1


Fl
i


2(5)
where groups Gare replaced by output channels Nl+1, and
coefficients vectors βgare replaced by filters. In addition,
differences exist among the use of ℓ1-norm, ℓ2-norm and
ℓ2,1-norm as the penalty function (Fig. 2).
2.3.1 Regularization on BN Parameters
Batch Normalization (BN) layers have been widely used in
many modern CNNs to improve model generalization. By
Fig. 2: The left image shows the ℓ1penalty used in Lasso.
The middle image shows the ℓ2,1penalty function used in
Group Lasso, and the right image shows the ℓ2penalty
function used in Ridge. β11andβ12are grouped together
for Group Lasso. (The image is taken from [228].)
normalizing each training mini-batch, the internal covariate
shift is addressed. The following equation describes the
operations of a BN layer (NS [74]),
ˆz=zin−µBq
σ2
B+ϵ;zout=γˆz+β (6)
where Nl+1-dimension zinandzoutare the inputs and
outputs of a BN layer, µBandσBare the mean and standard
deviation over the current mini-batch B.ϵis a small number
to prevent division by zero. γ∈RNl+1andβ∈RNl+1are
the learnable parameters, indicating scale and shift, respec-
tively. BN parameters are used as gates for filter pruning
because the number of learnable parameters is equal to the
number of feature maps and filters.
Network Slimming (NS) [74] directly uses the scaling
parameter γin BN to control output channels. The channel-
level sparsity-induced ℓ1regularization is then introduced
to jointly train the weights together with the γ. After train-
ing, the corresponding channels that have close-to-zero γ
are pruned. To optimize the non-smooth ℓ1penalty term, a
subgradient descent method [229] is used.
Similar to the situation in NS [74], Gated Batch Nor-
malization (GBN) [75] uses γas the channel-wise gate and
ℓ1-norm of γas the regularization term. A Tick-Tock prun-
ing framework is proposed to boost accuracy by iterative
pruning. The Tick phase trains the network with little data,
and only the gates and final linear layer are allowed to be
updated during training for one epoch. Meanwhile, channel
importance is computed by the first-order Taylor Expansion
for a global filter ranking. The Tock phase then fine-tunes the
sparse network with sparsity constraints.
Polarization Regularization (PR) [76] provides a variant
ℓ1-based regularizer to polarize the scaling factors γ. It con-
tends that in most sparsity regularization methods, such as
NS [74], a naive ℓ1regularizer converges all scaling factors
to zero indiscriminately. A more reasonable approach is to
push the scaling factors of unimportant neurons to zero and
those of important neurons to a large value. To achieve the
polarization effect, another penalty term is added to the
naive ℓ1term, separating γfrom their mean as far as possi-
ble. Similar to NS [74], subgradients [229] are used on non-
differentiable points to solve the non-smooth regularizer.
Rethinking Smaller-Norm-Less-Informative (RSNLI) [77]
is developed from the basis of previous methods tending
to suffer from the Model Reparameterization problem and
the Transform Invariance problem. As there are doubts