IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, NOVEMBER 2023 4
number. The two properties with large values indicate a
complex, and thus a less redundant, graph. Within the most
redundant layer, a filter norm can be applied to prune the
least important filters. Finally, the graph of the layer is re-
established, and the layers’ redundancy is re-evaluated.
2.2 Activation-Based
Instead of determining filter importance through their
weights, activation-based pruning methods harness the ac-
tivation maps for pruning decisions. Activation maps, de-
tailed in Eq. 1, are produced from the convolutional process
between input data and filters. Channel pruning is another
name for filter pruning since removing the channels of
activation maps is equivalent to removing the filters. In
addition to the effect of the current layer, filter pruning also
influences the next layer’s filter through feature maps.
To evaluate filters in layer l, we can exploit the
information on activation maps of:
1)the current layer - the channel importance can be evalu-
ated by using the reconstruction error [59], the decompo-
sition of the activation map [60], utilization of channel-
independence [62], and post-activations [63], [64];
2)the adjacent layers - redundant channels can be effec-
tively identified by exploiting the dependency between
the current layer and the next layer [67], [68]. In addition,
activation maps of the previous layer can also be utilized
to guide the pruning decision [123], [124];
3)all layers - the holistic effect of removing a filter can be
evaluated by minimizing the reconstruction error of the
Final Response Layer [70] and considering the discrimi-
native power of all layers [71].
2.2.1 Current Layer
Channel Pruning (CP) [59] uses layer l’s (current) activation
maps to guide the pruning of layer l’s filters. It models layer-
wise channel pruning as an optimization problem that min-
imizes the reconstruction error of sparse activation maps.
Solving the optimization problems involves two alternating
steps. (1) To find which channels to prune, CP explicitly
solves the LASSO regression by fixing the weights rather
than imposing a sparsity regularization to training loss. (2)
To minimize the reconstruction error of layer l’s feature
map, weights are fine-tuned with the fixed pruning decision.
HRank [60] uses the average rank of the current layer’s
activation maps from a small set of input data as the
filter importance. An important finding is that regardless of
the data received, a single filter generates activation maps
with the same average rank. To find the average rank,
the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) is adopted. The
decomposition conducted here is to find the rank rather than
to reduce computational cost. After determining the average
rank, a layer-wise pruning algorithm is then proposed to
retain top- kfilters.
Coreset-Based Compression (CBC) [61] adopts filter
pruning to pre-process filters for coreset-based compres-
sion [226]. The scoring of the filters is based on the mean
of activation norms over the entire training set. A binary
search is then used to find the smallest number of filters
that satisfy the accuracy constraint. After pruning, threecoreset-based compression techniques are discussed, includ-
ingk-Means, Structured Sparse PCA, and Activation-Weighted
coresets . Utilizing Deep Compression [1], Activation-Weighted
coresets outperforms the rest.
CHannel Independence (CHIP) is used by Sui et al. to
evaluate channel importance [62]. Channel independence
is determined by the cross-channel correlation, indicating
whether a channel is linearly dependent on other channels.
The greater the independence of the channel, the higher its
importance. Channel importance is determined by measur-
ing the activation maps’ nuclear norm change.
Average Percentage of Zero (APoZ) [63] utilizes the cur-
rent layer’s post-activation maps, which are the activation
maps after activation functions such as ReLU. The average
percentage of zeros (APoZ) in the post-activation maps are
used to measure the importance of channels. A small APoZ
value means that most parts of the activation maps are being
activated, so these activation maps contribute more to the
final results and are more important.
DropNet [64] utilizes the post-activation maps’ average
magnitude as the metric. Under this metric, a small non-
zero activation value, which is considered important by
APoZ [63], is no longer important in DropNet [64]. There are
two reasons for the use of this metric. First, a small average
magnitude indicates the presence of many inactive nodes.
Second, the small magnitude also means these nodes are
less adaptive to learning.
2.2.2 Adjacent Layer
ThiNet [67] uses layer l+1’s (the next layer) activation maps
to guide the pruning of the layer l(the current layer). The
main idea is to approximate layer l+ 1’s activation maps
with subsets of layer l’s activation maps. Channels outside
these subsets are pruned. To find these subsets, a greedy
algorithm is proposed. Specifically, the algorithm greedily
adds channels to an initially empty set and measures the re-
construction error. Subsets that have the least reconstruction
error and meet the sparsity constraint will be selected.
Approximated Oracle Filter Pruning (AOFP) [68] uses
layer l+1’s activation maps, and targets at pruning without
heuristic knowledge which is often required by Oracle Prun-
ingmethods [14], [63], [95]. Firstly , the concept of damage
isolation is introduced to avoid using heuristic importance
metrics. Damage isolation means the damage caused by prun-
ing layer lis isolated by layer l+ 1, making the damage
invisible to l+ 2.Secondly , a multi-path framework is used
to benefit from parallel scoring and fine-tuning. Thirdly , the
binary filter search method is used to solve problems of the
multi-path framework.
In addition to using the next layer’s activation maps,
Runtime Neural Pruning (RNP) [123] and Feature Boosting
and Suppression (FBS) [124] utilize the layer l−1’s (previous
layer) activation maps to guide the pruning of the current
layer. Both methods use the global average pooling result
of the previous layer as the filter importance. This is fur-
ther discussed in Section 2.5.2, since both methods conduct
dynamic pruning during inference.
2.2.3 All Layer
Despite the success of existing methods, proponents of
Neuron Importance Score Propagation (NISP) [70] argue