Vaccines 2024 ,12, 267 17 of 22
modified HBc/G protein with the CTL epitope string, the HBc/G161-CTL protein with
deleted polyarginine (PA) domain, was less soluble, and it did not sustain precipitation
with ammonium sulfate; the precipitate was insoluble and, thus, was only partially purified
through one-step direct GF chromatography of disintegrated by US cells. It is of interest
to note that the VLPs of the HBc/G161-CTL protein in the GF fractions following the
aggregate fraction contained nucleic acids at a very low level confirming the absence of
PA domain.
In the immunization of BALB/c mice, we used a squalene-based oil-in-water Addavax
adjuvant, which was shown to be advantageous in the immunization of mice with RBD-
conjugated nanoparticles [ 60]. At present, more than 10 different adjuvants, such as MF59,
CpG, AS01, AS03, AS04, liposomes, etc have been used in human vac-cines [ 61]. AddaVax,
which is similar to MF59, has been approved as a seasonal influenza vaccine component in
Europe for people aged 65 and older [ 62]. AddaVax has been widely used in experimental
vaccines to enhance antibody titers [63,64].
Although no exact VLPs were obtained in our study for fusion proteins carrying
MIR insertions, the B-cell responses—anti-hRBD for the HBc/G-RBM protein and anti-N
(aa 2-220) for the HBc/G-Bep protein in BALB/c mice—were found to be remarkably high.
Flow cytometry is the only platform that can provide multi-parametric analysis of the
immune responses necessary for the most sensitive quantification of immunogenicity, the
identification of functional correlates, and adequate comparison of different regimens [ 65].
Polyfunctional cells are characterized by their ability to secrete multiple cytokines simul-
taneously. This feature is believed to be crucial in shaping specific and targeted immune
responses, allowing for a more diverse and adaptive defense against pathogens and dis-
eases [ 66,67]. T-cell polyfunctionality has been identified in both the CD4+ and CD8+
subsets, with the cells being capable of secreting combinations of cytokines. The pres-
ence of polyfunctional T-cells of both the CD4+ and CD8+ subsets was linked with the
protective effect of anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccines on humans [ 68,69], through the produc-
tion of interferon-gamma (IFN- γ), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF- α), and interleukin-2
(IL-2) [ 70]. Since the analysis of single cytokines produced by the T-cells of mice immu-
nized with our HBc/G161-CTL and HBc/G175-CTL proteins did not reveal a statistically
significant response after stimulation with the mixed SARS-CoV-2 CTL peptides, we per-
formed a combined test for the population of cells expressing three cytokines—IFN- γ,
IL-2, and TNF- α—when stimulated by a pooled sample of the five CTL peptides used in
this study. We found that for the CD4+ and CD8+ cells that expressed all three cytokines
(IFN- γ/IL-2/TNF- α), there was a significant difference between the animals immunized
with the HBc/G161-CTL fusion protein and the control group. Although it was not pos-
sible to determine the contribution of each individual peptide to the immune response
in this analysis, we propose that the specific activation of polyfunctional T-cells found
for the HBc/G161-CTL protein is indicative of the protective potential of this particular
recombinant construct.
An important goal of any vaccine is the induction of neutralizing antibodies that can in-
hibit infection [ 33]. In our study, we tested the neutralization of SARS-CoV-2-pseudotyped
MLV particles with the sera from mice immunized with the HBc/G-RBM protein. Despite
the relatively high total anti-hRBD titer, the viral neutralization capacity did not reach a
level that could be considered protective, since the threshold of 50% neutralization was not
achieved (Figure 8). Furthermore, the analysis of individual mouse sera did not reveal a
positive correlation between neutralization effects and anti-hRBM titers (Figure S9B). It is
important to note that in the infection model used by Hassebroek et al. [ 59], the inhibition
of SARS-CoV-2 infection was not achieved, despite the finding that their VLP vaccine
elicited epitope-specific humoral and cell-mediated immune responses. The results of our
study clearly demonstrate that highly specific antibody titers alone do not predict sufficient
protection. Furthermore, the insertion of the RBM sequence into the MIR of HBc/G can
lead to conformational changes in the RBM sequence, thereby potentially influencing its
ability to induce effective neutralizing antibodies. However, the high immunogenicity of