Vaccines 2024 ,12, 267 16 of 22
from other HBV genotypes, since it appeared to be a technologically promising VLP
candidate in terms of HBc protein production level and VLP stability in E. coli [25].
Two sites of HBc/G were used for the insertion—the MIR of full-length HBc/G for
the insertion of the RBM of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein or the B-epitope containing peptide
from the N protein and the C-end of truncated HBc/G—of the combined sequence of five
CTL epitopes of the N protein. The RBM was inserted along with the most commonly used
GS linkers on both sides of the RBM sequence. The flexible GS linker has been shown to
improve folding and stability in several fusion protein cases [ 52]. String of CTL epitopes
was inserted along with an AAY linker between five individual CTL epitopes. It was
predicted that the AAY linkers could significantly improve the expression of certain target
proteins and enhance the immunogenicity of a multi-epitope influenza vaccine designed in
silico for the production in E. coli [53]. However, the sequence to be inserted may affect the
solubility and VLP-forming ability of chimeric HBc VLPs [ 54]. Previously, we successfully
obtained chimeric HBc VLPs using HBc/D proteins of different lengths as carriers of
the HBV preS1 domain, which was inserted into the MIR of HBc [ 47]. When the HBc
protein was used as a VLP carrier for the insertion of other viral antigens, the shortened
version of HBc—the HBc149 designed with the His-tag at the N-terminus—was usually
used [ 55–57]; in all described cases using the HBc149, chimeric proteins were expressed as
inclusion bodies that were recovered through the use of denaturant urea with subsequent
dialysis. Similarly to these reports, we faced the same problem for both of our HBc/G
fusion proteins that carried the RBM or the B-cell epitope containing peptide of SARS-CoV-2
in the MIR of the full-length HBc/G protein—our proteins were also insoluble. Hence,
additional steps, including denaturation with an increasing concentration of urea and
refolding processes through step-wise dialysis, were necessary to obtain purified materials
suitable for immunization. As for the preparation of HBc/G-Bep, a fusion protein was
obtained in the form of homogenous non-VLP particles, as revealed by DLS. Soluble VLPs
were found only for our HBc/G fusion proteins that carried a CTL epitope string at the
C-terminus of the truncated HBc/G proteins HBc/G 161 and HBc/G175.
Until now, only two studies have been published on genetically engineered HBc-
protein-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccines produced in E. coli [58,59]. Sazegary et al. [ 58] used the
short RLNEVAKNL epitope of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein with G4SG4 linkers on both sides of
the epitope for insertion into the MIR of a truncated, HBc149 protein. This chimeric protein
was again found to make an inclusion body in the host cells and was extracted with urea in
a way similar to that used in our study. However, to be used in affinity chromatography, this
recombinant fusion protein was appropriately designed with a His-tag at the N-terminus
of HBc149. Hassebroek et al. [ 59] made a more complex construct on the basis of the
His-HBc149 protein: they inserted three epitopes of SARS-CoV-2: a B-cell epitope (562-
FQQFGRDIADTTDAVRDPQT-581) between the N-terminal 6-His-tag and the first aa of the
HBc sequence; the dual B- and T-cell epitope (371-SASFSTFKCYGVSPTKLNDL-390) in the
MIR between aa 79 and aa 80; and the T-cell epitope (440-NLDSKVGGNYNYLYRLFRKSN-
460) at the C-terminus of HBc149. Insoluble protein was solubilized with urea, which was
followed by anion exchange chromatography and affinity chromatography. A different VLP
construct based on the RNA-phage AP205 coat protein (CP) was used by Liu et al. [ 30], and
the SARS-CoV-2 RBM domain was added C-terminally to a dimer of covalently closed AP205
CP monomers (AP205-RBM); however, this fusion protein was also found to be insoluble.
As mentioned above, the fusion proteins with the CTL epitope string at the C-terminus
of the shortened HBc/G were found to be partly soluble in our study, and the use of gel
filtration (GF) allowed the separation of the VLPs of the fusion protein from the protein
aggregates. At the same time, the presence of nucleic acids in the VLPs of HBc/G175-
CTL allowed us to use ion exchange chromatography as the next step of purification of
HBc/G175-CTL protein. DLS analysis of the preparation of the HBc/G175-CTL protein
revealed the presence of a homogenous material formed by VLPs of an enlarged size
(61–62 nm) , while the unmodified HBc/G VLPs were around 38 nm in size [ 25]. EM con-
firmed the VLP status of the purified HBc/G175-CTL fusion protein. Another C-terminally