The Autoencoding Variational Autoencoder
A. Taylan Cemgil
DeepMindSumedh Ghaisas
DeepMindKrishnamurthy Dvijotham
DeepMindSven Gowal
DeepMind
Pushmeet Kohli
DeepMind
Abstract
Does a Variational AutoEncoder (V AE) consistently encode typical samples gener-
ated from its decoder? This paper shows that the perhaps surprising answer to this
question is ‘No’; a (nominally trained) V AE does not necessarily amortize inference
for typical samples that it is capable of generating. We study the implications of
this behaviour on the learned representations and also the consequences of ﬁxing it
by introducing a notion of self consistency. Our approach hinges on an alternative
construction of the variational approximation distribution to the true posterior of
an extended V AE model with a Markov chain alternating between the encoder
and the decoder. The method can be used to train a V AE model from scratch or
given an already trained V AE, it can be run as a post processing step in an entirely
self supervised way without access to the original training data. Our experimental
analysis reveals that encoders trained with our self-consistency approach lead to
representations that are robust (insensitive) to perturbations in the input introduced
by adversarial attacks. We provide experimental results on the ColorMnist and
CelebA benchmark datasets that quantify the properties of the learned representa-
tions and compare the approach with a baseline that is speciﬁcally trained for the
desired property.
1 Introduction
The variational AutoEncoder (V AE) is a deep generative model [ 10,15] where one can simultaneously
learn a decoder and an encoder from data. An attractive feature of the V AE is that while it estimates
an implicit density model for a given dataset via the decoder, it also provides an amortized inference
procedure for computing a latent representation via the encoder. While learning a generative model
for data, the decoder is the key object of interest. However, when the goal is extracting useful features
from data and learning a good representation, the encoder plays a more central role [ 20]. In this paper,
we will focus primarily on the encoder and its representation capabilities.
Learning good representations is one of the fundamental problems in machine learning to facilitate
data-efﬁcient learning and to boost the ability to transfer to new tasks. The surprising effectiveness of
representation learning in various domains such as natural language processing [ 7] or computer vision
[11] has motivated several research directions, in particular learning representations with desirable
properties like adversarial robustness, disentanglement or compactness [1, 3, 4, 5, 12].
In this paper, our starting point is based on the assumption that if the learned decoder can provide
a good approximation to the true data distribution, the exact posterior distribution (implied by the
decoder) tends to possess many of the mentioned desired properties of a good representation, such as
robustness. On a high level, we want to approximate properties of the exact posterior, in a way that
supports representation learning.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.