5 Conclusions
We show that V AE models derived from the canonical formulation in (1)are not unique. We used an
alternative model (5)to show that the standard model is unable to capture some desired properties of
the exact posterior that are important for representation learning. We proposed a principled alternative,
the A V AE, and observed that it gives rise to robust representations without requiring adversarial
training. In addition, we present a self supervised variant (A V AE-SS) that also exhibits robustness.
The paper justiﬁes, theoretically and experimentally, the modelling choices of A V AE. Using two
benchmark datasets, we demonstrate that the approach can achieve surprisingly high adversarial
accuracy without adversarial training. An important feature of the A V AE is that the likelihood
function is still equal to the standard V AE likelihood. In doing so, we also provide a principled
justiﬁcation for data augmentation in a density estimation context, where naive data augmentation
is not valid as it alters the data distribution. In our framework, the generated data points act like
nuisance parameters of the approximating distribution and do not have an effect on the estimated
decoder.
Although we are not modifying the original likelihood function, currently, we observe a tradeoff:
while the learnt encoder becomes more robust, the corresponding decoder seems to slightly suffer in
quality, as measured by FID and MSE. It remains to be seen if there is actually a fundamental reason
behind this and we believe that with more carefully designed training methods, both the decoder and
the encoder could be in principle improved.
The autoencoding speciﬁcation is related loosely to the concept of cycle consistency , that is often
enforced between two data modalities [ 22]. In [ 8], authors propose a supervised V AE model for pairs
of data points with the same labels to enforce disentanglement by using extra relational information
(similar relational models include [ 18,13]). In contrast, our approach does only change the encoder.
Our method is a V AE based representation learning approach, and there is a large literature on
the subject, see, e.g. [ 20], however models are often not evaluated on their robustness properties.
Another fruitful approach in representation learning, especially for the image modality, is contrastive
learning [ 14,6]. These approaches can challenge and surpass supervised approaches in terms of
label efﬁciency and accuracy, and it remains a future work to investigate the links with our work and
whether or not these models can also be used for learning robust representations.
6 Societal Impact
General Research Direction. In recent years, researchers have trained deep generative models that
can generate synthetic examples, often indistinguishable from natural data. The high quality of
these samples suggest that these models may be able to learn latent representations useful for other
downstream tasks. Learning such representations without task speciﬁc supervision facilitates transfer
to yet unseen, future tasks. This also fosters label efﬁciency, and interpretability. Unsupervised
representation learning would have a high societal impact as it could enable learning representations
from data that can be shared with a wider community of researchers who do not have the computational
resources for training such a representations, or do not have direct access to training data due to
privacy/security/commercial considerations. However, the properties of these representations in
terms of test accuracy, robustness, privacy preservation must be carefully studied before their release,
especially if systems will be deployed in the real world. In the current work, we have taken
a step towards learning representations in an unsupervised way, that exhibit robustness against
transformations of the input.
Ethical Considerations. The current work studies representations learned by a speciﬁc generative
model, the V AE and shares a ﬁnding that training a V AE by enforcing an additional natural autoen-
coding speciﬁcation is able to provide signiﬁcant robustness on the learned representation without
adversarial training. The study is not proposing a particular system for a speciﬁc application. The
human face dataset CelebA is choosen as a standard benchmark dataset with several attributes to
illustrate the viability of the approach. Still, we have decided to exclude potentially sensitive and
subjective attributes from the original dataset, such as ’big-nose’ or ’Asian’, and use only 17 neutral
attributes that we have selected using our own judgment.
9