We see in Figure 3 that the joint distribution Q(Z|Z0;✓,⌘)p(Z0)is far from an identity mapping,
and it is also not symmetrical. In contrast, the distributions learned by A V AE are enforced to be
symmetrical, and the joint distribution is concentrated on the diagonal.
Intermediate summary: Learning a V AE from data is an highly ill-posed problem and regularization
is necessary. Here, instead of modifying the decoder model, we have proposed to constrain the encoder
in such a way that it approaches the desired properties of the exact posterior. Our argument started
with the extended model in proposition 2.1 that admits the V AE as a marginal. In 2.2, we show that
the exact decoder model is by construction independent of the choice of the coupling strength ⇢.
In plain language this means that, if we had access to the exact decoder and if we were able to do
exact inference, any ⇢will be acceptable. In this ideal case, the extended model would be actually
redundant, and in 2.3, we highlight the properties of an exact encoder.
In practice however, we will be learning the decoder from data while doing only approximate
amortized inference. Naturally, we want to still retain the properties of the exact posterior. We
argue that the extended model is relevant for representation learning (see also example 2.2) and
incorporate this explicitly to the encoder by A V AE, and in 3.1 we provide the justiﬁcation that our
choice coincides with the exact target conditional for ⇢=1, the representation learning case, when
we encode and decode consistently.
We argue that encoder/decoder consistency is related to robustness. The existence of certain ’sur-
prising’ adversarial examples [ 17], where an input image is classiﬁed as a very different class after
slightly changing input pixels, can be attributed non-smoothness of the representation such as having
a large Lipschitz constant, see [ 5]. The smooth encoder (SE) method proposed in [ 5] attempted to
ﬁx this by data augmentation while training the encoder. In this paper, we introduce a more general
framework, (where SE is also a special case) and investigate methods that circumvent the need for
computationally costly adversarial attacks during training. The data augmentation is achieved by
using the learned generative model itself, as a factor of the approximating QA V AE distribution. The
A V AE objective ensures that samples that can be generated by the decoder in the vicinity of the
representations corresponding to the training inputs are consistently encoded. In the next experi-
mental section, we will show that the consistency translates to a nontrivial adversarial robustness
performance. While our approach does not provide formal guarantees, learning an encoder that
retains properties of an exact posterior seems to be central in achieving adversarial robustness.
4 Experimental Results
In this section, we will experimentally explore consequences of training with the A V AE objective
in(10), implemented as Algorithm 1 in Appendix C. Optimizing the A V AE objective will change
the learned encoder and decoder, and we expect that the additional terms will enforce a smooth
representation leading to input perturbation robustness in downstream tasks. To test this claim, we
will evaluate the encoder in terms of adversarial robustness, using an approach that will be described
in the evaluation protocol. To see the effect of the new objective on the decoder and reconstruction
quality, we will report Frechet Inception Distance (FID) [ 9], as well as the test mean square error
(MSE).
Models: A V AE will be compared to two models, i) V AE trained using the standard ELBO (2), and,
ii) Smooth Encoder (SE), a method recently proposed by [ 5] that uses the same target model as in (6),
but uses a different variational approximation. This approximation is computed using adversarial
attacks to generate the auxiliary observations ˜X. We provide a self contained derivation of this
algorithm in Appendix C.2. We also include two hybrid models in our simulations. iii) A V AE-SS
(Self Supervised) a post-training method, where a V AE is ﬁrst trained normally and then post-trained
only by samples generated from the decoder (without training data, see Figure 4 for the graphical
model – for details see appendix C.4). Finally, we also provide results for a model iv) SE-A V AE, a
model that combines both the SE and the A V AE objectives and is concurrently trained using both
adversarial attacks and self generated auxiliary observations (for details see appendix C.5). In all
models, we use a latent space dimension of 64.
Data and Tasks: Experiments are conducted on datasets colorMNIST and CelebA, using both MLP
and Convnet architectures in the former, and only Convnet in the latter (for details see Appendix F).
The colorMNIST dataset has 2 separate downstream classiﬁcation tasks (color, digit). For CelebA,
we have 17 different binary classiﬁcation tasks, such as (’has mustache?’ or ’wearing hat?’).
6