4.8 Ethical Obligations of Internationally Active Companies
The orientation for internationally active companies in the decision-making process
should be to assume social and ecological responsibility. This means that the socialand ecological consequences of economic actions must be taken into account. This
promotes decisions that have both good economic and good social consequences.
The companies can position themselves as “good citizens, ”so to speak. In particular
the idea of “noblesse oblige ”comes into play here. Even if, in the ﬁgurative sense,
the privileged are generally concerned (power, money, education), the promotion ofthe community and stabilization of the society in which the companies generate theirvalue creation through social commitment is also a relevant component of entrepre-neurial decisions that can pay off in the medium term. Proponents argue thatcompanies need to give something back to the societies that have made their success
possible. One example is the promotion of society in developing countries, where
not only (short-term) production takes place, but also new sales markets can beopened up in the medium term. This strategy can be found, for example, with carmanufacturers such as Volkswagen in China.
4.9 Ethical Dilemma
There are many situations in business life, but especially in an international context,in which none of the available alternatives seem ethically acceptable. This is because
decisions in the real world are complex, the problem is often dif ﬁcult to formulate,
and the consequences are very dif ﬁcult—if at all —to quantify. Here again, the
example of over ﬁshing and ﬁshing quotas should be recalled (see Sect. 4.5).
Example: An international construction group with headquarters in Europe,
which regularly carries out projects for FIFA, is also active for the 2022 FIFA
World Cup in Qatar. During an on-site visit by a group manager, he discoversthat the working conditions of the temporary workers from Bangladesh hiredby the local subcontractor contracted by the group are in violation of both the
group ’s speci ﬁcations and of ﬁcial FIFA guidelines. He instructs the local
manager to demand the working conditions to the required level with thesubcontractor or otherwise to terminate the contractual relationshipimmediately ...
However, this decision, which may be desirable from an ethical point of view, is
completely unrealistic: the employer support system “Kafala System ”in Qatar,
which gives employers extensive rights over workers and prevents them, for exam-ple, from changing jobs or leaving the country without the consent of their previousemployer, is far from being a non-discriminatory form of employment, despitemassive international protests and some reform efforts (Amnesty International4 Ethics in an International Context 65