General principles for the development of robotics and arti ﬁcial intelligence for
civil use include (Delvaux 2017 ) a call for a EU-wide de ﬁnition of cyberphysical
systems, autonomous systems, intelligent autonomous robots, and their
subcategories, and will take into account the following characteristics of intelligent
robots:
1. Autonomy is gained through sensors and/or through data exchange with their
environment (interconnectivity) and the provision and analysis of their data.
2. The ability to learn by experience and through interaction (optional criterion)
shall be given.
3. there is at least a minimum of physical support.
4. there is an ability to adapt their behavior and actions to their environment.
5. no living beings in the biological sense.
Ethical basics for RoboLaw include the assessment regarding the integrity,
health, and safety of persons, freedom, integrity and dignity, self-determinationand non-discrimination, and protection of personal data. Existing EU legalframeworks should be modernized and, where appropriate, supplemented by ethicalrequirements that consider the complexity of robotics and its numerous social,
medical, and bioethical implications.
A clear, strong, and effective ethical framework for the development, design,
manufacture, use, and modi ﬁcation of robots is needed in the form of a charter
consisting of a code of conduct for robotic engineers, a code for research ethicscommittees reviewing robotic protocols, and model licenses for designers and users.
The principle of transparency, according to which it must at all times be possible
to state the reasons for any decision taken with the aid of AI that may have asigniﬁcant impact on the life of one or more persons, considers that it must at all
times be possible to convert the calculations of AI systems back into a form that can
be understood by humans and that advanced robots should be equipped with a “black
box”in which data on each action performed by the machine, including the logical
sequences that led to any decisions, are stored.
Ethical frameworks should be based on the principles of bene ﬁt, harm prevention,
autonomy, and justice, as well as on the principles and values enshrined in Article2 of the Treaty on THE European Union (EU 2016b ) and in the Charter of
Fundamental Rights, such as human dignity, equality, justice and fairness,
non-discrimination, informed consent, private and family life, and data protection,
and on other principles and values underlying Union law, such asnon-stigmatization, transparency, autonomy, and individual responsibility and socialaccountability, and on existing ethical practices and regulatory frameworks. Atten-tion should be paid to robots, which pose a signi ﬁcant threat to con ﬁdentiality
because they are used in areas that are normally protected and privacy sensitiveand because they can generate and transmit personal and sensitive data.230 S. H. Vieweg