such as deep learning is based on thriving for an unlimited access to and usage of
data, in order to optimize the target function (however, this is de ﬁned). That is
whereas according to the veil of ignorance, speci ﬁc criteria shall be disregarded,
exactly the opposite idea can be found in today ’s AI implementations. In Chap. 7,
this issue will be picked up and discussed in a broader context.
1.6 Finish Line Quiz
1.01 Are social cultures unique and can they be differentiated by their own preferences on
morals?
1 Yes, as there is a static characteristic of each society that does not change over time.2 No, as there are a multitude of characteristics that change over time.
3 Yes, though there are multiple dimensions and the interpretation is complex.
4 No, because the interpretation of the characteristics is impossible, and it changes
over time.
1.02 Morals deteriorate in the age of digitization. This is a unique phenomenon.
1 No, morality has always changed. Morality is a common denominator of a society
and its members ’preferences and values change over time.
2 Yes, societies used to have comparatively stable moralities that are unique. With
digitization, the common denominator diminishes.
3 No, for individuals to be an accepted member of the society they strive to comply
with all rules. Hence, there is no clear tendency of deterioration due to digitization.
4 Yes, with the digitization and the so-called digital natives, they are basically ignoring
social rules entirely.
1.03 A team member resists to join the WhatsApp group, as she is seriously concerned about
data protection issues. She does not want to support business models exploitingconsumers ’personal data. In this case, ...
1 ...the internalized individual ’s ethos is in line with social consensus.
2 ...the social consensus is not (yet?) consistent with individual ’s ethos.
3 ...the individual mistakenly ignores the social consensus.
4 ...the individual must convince the group to follow her conviction.
1.04 A standards technique to provide evidence of societies ’preferences includes surveys.
With AI, better evidence is available because ...
1 ... In traditional surveys, only individuals ’preferences could be asked without seeing
the true link to individuals ’behavior.
2 ... AI measures individuals ’preferences without the need to see the actual behavior.
3 ...traditional surveys provide evidence of personal positions and actual behavior.
4 ...traditional surveys provide evidence of actual behavior, though fail to identify
personal preferences.
1.05 Ethics act as a guardrail for a society, because ...
1 ...constitute the end of a personal re ﬂection of actions.
2 ...applied ethics give general advise for “good ”behavior.
3 ...it is more important than personal ethos.
4 ...ethics comprises a model for concrete decisions.
1.06 According to the (preferential) utilitarian approach, a morally good action is given exactly
when ...
(continued)1 Ethics for Non-philosophers: Basis of Ethics and Ethical Perspectives 19