Despite this, the following section ’s focus will be on the competition between the
USA and China, as they are primarily driving AI on a worldwide basis. Though, it isstrongly recommended not to forget that there are more than just two superpowers in
that race.
The key competition between the USA and China basically kicked off with an
experiment in 2016 with Alpha GO (the Google AI). Go is a highly complex boardgame, originated in China and with an extremely long history. Unlike other boardgames such as Chess, Go is extremely dif ﬁcult to transform into an automated
machine, as there are “endless ”combinations possible and the rules are very
complex. That is having a computer outpacing the (human) grand master (at thatpoint in time it was the South Korean Lee Sedol, a 9 out of 9 dan professional player
and one of the best players overall) is a provocation to one of the Chinese heritages.
Apparently, the Chinese government has changed its approach toward AI when theGoogle AI team managed to score victory over one of the world ’s best human GO
players. Although Alpha GO is just a game, its success is a turning point as AIbecame ready for the market —as Chinese government recognized that AI is serious.
From there on, the Chinese dictator and government have put AI as a cornerstone ofthe“New Silk Route ”, China ’s political program to gain supremacy over the West in
general, and the USA in particular.
6.5.1 China and the “Market Leninism ”
The progress in China is unparalleled. This can be easily illustrated with the ranking
of top-valued companies that are not yet on the stock market —the famous unicorn9
list: not only that increasingly Chinese companies are on the top 10 list, the largest
pre-IPO valuation ever with some USD 140 BN, Bytedance, is a Chinese company(Bocksch 2020 ).
As of 2020, China has surpassed the USA in particular areas of AI, such as facial
detection solutions. For example one leading company, Megvii (Megvii 2020 ), was
founded in 2011 by three students. Its core competency is in deep learning.
Leveraging its proprietary AI productivity platform Brain++, Megvii focuses on
three key verticals: personal IoT, city IoT, and supply chain IoT. Their solution isable to identify persons within 100 msec, even on a mobile device and better than ahuman could do. Megvii partners with Storefriendly to deploy AI-poweredunmanned warehouse storage solution in Singapore (Wallstreet online 2020 ).
China has some advantages on AI development, compared to the USA:
1. As AI success is heavily dependent on data, China ’s population with three to four
times more users than the USA is an immediate advantage.
2. In their emergence as economic power, China has skipped some developments
such as credit card payments (that are very famous in the USA) and went straight
9A company with a valuation above USD 1 Bn is deemed to be a unicorn.6 Digitization: Learnings from Ancient Disruptions, AI and the Digital ... 119