business practice ( “Machine ”) can lead to a pragmatically sustainable and decision-
useful supply of information to stakeholders, taking into account the individualsituation of what is feasible in a meaningful way ( “Human ”).
2.6.2 Stewardship as an Approach to Sustainable
and Ethically-Morally “Good ”Corporate Governance
Theﬁeld of tension between the motivation of corporate decision-makers and their
monitoring is suf ﬁciently described in theoretical considerations ranging from
principal-agent theorem to stewardship (Davis et al. 1997 ) theory and illustrates
the agents ’framework for action.
The starting point for each of these theories is a different conception of man,
assumed motivation, and thus congruently derived focus of action of the principal(owner and his representative, e.g., supervisory board) and the agent acting on behalfof the principal (manager, e.g., board of directors). The stewardship theorycomplements the principal –agent theory in a context-dependent manner and thus
offers further explanations for the respective behavior of the actors.
The principal –agent theory assumes a fundamental con ﬂict of goals between the
two actors, which results from the human image of sel ﬁsh opportunism. The
motivation assumed for the agent is extrinsic; i.e., the manager is not primarilyinterested in the well-being of the company. Accordingly, the principal distrusts theagent, and the principal ’s primary framework for action will lie in monitoring the
agent.
In contrast to this, the stewardship theory sees a fundamental congruence of goals
between the two actors, which is based on the idea of a manager who is primarily
concerned with the well-being of society and the company, i.e., who is intrinsically
motivated and puts personal interests second. Accordingly, the principal trusts theagent and the principal ’s primary scope of action will be to advise the agent.
For the company, there are considerable differences in ef ﬁciency, provided that
the assumed basic assumptions correspond to reality in each case: thus, with theprincipal –agent approach, costs (damage) can be minimized (see Fig. 2.4: Agent/
Agent), whereas with the stewardship approach, corporate performance ismaximized accordingly (see Fig. 2.4: Steward/Steward).
If the ethical and moral dimension is now added to the stewardship approach, it
becomes clear that the social contribution is also maximized beyond the corporateframework.
In order to remain within the picture of the extended stewardship theory, the
challenge of sustainable and ethically-morally “good ”corporate governance is
therefore to minimize the risk of constellations that do not lie on the main diagonalof Fig. 2.3(“redﬁelds”), which should be evidence-based.2 Human Rationality and Morals 35