thisﬁgure had already risen to 7.3 billion US dollars by 2018. In 2020, sales of
around 17.3 billion US dollars are expected, and for 2025, the forecast for the marketpotential of AI is as high as 90 billion US dollars (Tractica 2018 ). Despite this
dynamic market development and the knowledge of AI potential, HR managers are
still very cautious even today (see the empirical results in 10.3.2).
While software providers advertise the superhuman AI potential in all HRM areas
and HR managers dream of far-reaching AI solutions at future conferences, theoryand practice often diverge widely. In everyday corporate life, most HR managers —
especially those of German companies —already regard the creation of an AI-af ﬁne
environment as a major challenge and are rather skeptical about the implementationof AI applications. A lack of technological competence and numerous legal hurdles
then cause this future perspective to disappear completely, although there is wide-
spread agreement that AI can take over repetitive HRM tasks, and thus give HRmanagers more freedom to deal with strategic issues. For example, digital languageassistants (chatbots) can “work through ”frequently asked questions about vacation
entitlements and speech processing algorithms (text mining) can carry out thepreselection of cover letters. With its recruiting software “IBM Watson Recruiting, ”
the software provider IBM offers, among other things, the possibility to comparedata from incoming applicant documents with the analysis of historical company
data. Furthermore, AI tools in the context of recruitment should be able to help to
make better decisions in candidate selection by objectifying cognitive biases (e.g.,primacy or recency bias) or personal sympathies. In this context, the softwarecompany Precire offers an AI solution that uses voice data within a telephoneinterview to draw conclusions about a candidate ’s personality, which in turn is
intended to increase the candidate ’s job requirement ﬁt (Dahm and Dregger 2019 );
further examples were shown in Sect. 7.5.
But beauty is only skin deep. In concrete terms, from a practical business point of
view, it can be said, following Thorsten Dirks (currently a member of the Deutsche
Lufthansa Board of Management): “If you digitize a shitty process, then you have a
shitty digital process. ”The use of AI is therefore only recommended if the existing
analog HR processes are ef ﬁcient, value creating, in line with the strategy, legal, and
non-discriminatory. A much-cited example of the dangers of the digitalization maniaof analog HRM tasks is the AI-based application robot developed by the US onlinemail order company Amazon in 2014 (see Sect. 6.6). This discriminates against
women and people with non-white skin color, which is why it has already been
retired. But why did the software discriminate against these groups of people, when
the software is supposed to be much more objective than human judgment? Verysimple: The application robot examined the received applications with a view to anadvertised job according to prede ﬁned criteria. The underlying training data from the
company ’s history preferred white male candidates —and so did the application
robot. This example of discrimination shows that AI applications are not good orbad per se, but always an image of the people (including their settings) who programthe applications. From an ethical and data protection perspective, the question for
HR managers is therefore how AI applications can be used legally and legitimately.
In order to support HR managers in creating an AI-af ﬁne environment, this chapter192 M. Groß