example, an applicant for a loan should know that, e.g., the loan was refused because
of an income of €35,000, and with an income of €40,000 the loan would have been
offered. Therefore, an explanation of the algorithm is not necessary, and an expla-nation is given to what was needed for the desired result (Wachter et al. 2018 ).
For applications in business decision situations, neural network algorithms are
easily generated on a graphical user interface using the Neural Designer ( What is
Neural Designer? ) software tool. Moreover, the Deep Learning Studio (Deep
Learning Studio Desktop —DeepCognition.ai 2020 ) software tool shows an intui-
tive, simple model creation for neural networks with a drag and drop interface. Inaddition, neural networks can even be created with arti ﬁcial intelligence, thus
accelerating modeling and discovery by an effective neural network.
5.4.2 Decisions with the Analytical Network (Hierarchy) Process
Decisions at the strategic level are complex. They contain “soft”non-cardinally
scaled information and ambiguity and are characterized by uncertainty. They aremulti-criteria decision situations.
The analytical hierarchy process ( “AHP”) is suitable for solving these decision
problems. This procedure was developed by Saaty (Saaty Thomas and Vargas Luis
2006 ) and enables decision-makers to select an alternative course of action by
determining a standardized utility value.
This method ’s unique feature is that the correct preference judgments about the
objects to be compared are not holistic but are the result of pair comparisons,enabling an intuitive evaluation. As a result, intersubjective veri ﬁability is achieved
and veri ﬁable with a mathematically determined inconsistency measure (Ossadnik
2009 , pp. 367 –369).
Furthermore, scenarios with linguistic probability estimates can be created. This
is particularly important if probability functions cannot be empirically determinedfrom empirical values.
The AHP procedure can be generalized by the analytic network process and thus
takes into account mutual dependencies of the criteria and so-called feedback loopsbased on the alternatives.Diagnostic 
Analytics
Descriptive 
AnalyticsPredictive 
AnalyticsPrescriptive 
Analytics
What is to 
be done?What will 
happen?
What 
happened?Why did it 
happen?Fig. 5.5 Advanced analytics
(own presentation based
Gartner ’s Gartner analytic
ascendancy model 2012)5 Value-Based Corporate Management and Integral Intelligence 85