clustering, classi ﬁcation, estimation, and prediction tasks (Strohmeier and Piazza
2015 ), which is why these neural networks are predestined for the prediction of gross
or net demand, absenteeism, and termination intentions (see Fig. 10.4). While the
programming logic is identical for the three applications mentioned above, the
required input factors as well as the analysis objects to be considered differ.
1. For the forecast of medium-term personnel requirements , the recruitment
ﬁgures, incoming orders, ﬂuctuation rates, and staff turnover rates of recent
years can be used as an internal data basis. These can be supplemented byexternal data (e.g., unemployment rate, industry indicators) to increase thepredictive power. The same parameters are used as output data, but only those
of the current period are under review. If the neural network is trained with these
data, the personnel requirements for different time intervals or scenarios can bederived (Roedenbeck 2020 ). So that the forecasts do not get lost in detail on
individual functions, a grouping in job families is useful. By considering jobfamilies that are critical to success, transfer and synergy potential can also beidenti ﬁed (Libuda and Fleischmann 2018 ).
2. In addition to medium-term gross and net personnel requirements planning,
operational resource planning plays an important role. The forecast of absentee-
ismcan signi ﬁcantly facilitate short-term planning work, which is why numer-
ous studies on predictor variables have been conducted in the scienti ﬁc
community. In summary, social, individual, and organizational factors show ahigh predictive power. These include leadership behavior, company support,stress at work, personal work attitude, team cohesion, and corporate culture(Kangas et al. 2017 ). Furthermore, it is postulated that demographic
characteristics provide information about health-related absences. Leao et al.(2017 ), for example, use a data sample of 18,450 employees to show that
gender, age, educational background, industry, and type of employment (full-
time vs. part-time) are reliable predictors of absenteeism. Furthermore, it hasbeen empirically proven that the absenteeism behavior of employees in the pastcan be used to predict future absenteeism (Ivancevich 1985 ). For example, sick
leave around weekends and holidays can be used to predict future absenteeismin relation to comparable calendar events. In addition, weather data and specialevents (e.g., carnival) can be used as relevant prognosis indicators for absentee-ism. All these outlined predictor variables can be used as input variables for the
absenteeism prognosis when programming an ANN. The output variables can
be modeled as a classi ﬁcation task: “yes”or“no”forms the classes with respect
to absenteeism at a certain point in time. For ethical or data protection reasons,the forecasts made at the individual level should be condensed to the departmen-tal or divisional level. In this context, it is conceivable to extend the predictiveAI by prescriptive skills. For example, forecasted absenteeism could be reporteddirectly to temporary employment agencies in the form of demand noti ﬁcations,
or newly incoming vacation requests could be put to the test (Groß and
Dorozalla 2020 ).10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 201