problems and concerns of the employees is of particular relevance in order to
consider the needs of the employees as well as the company ’s guidelines and to
act as a mediator if necessary. In addition to communicative skills, these tasks
primarily require profound knowledge of psychology and sociology.
10.6 Scientific Implications and Outlook
The use of AI applications in HRM will increase in the future. In the context of this
chapter, eleven AI applications along HRM systems were outlined on the basis of thetask technology ﬁt theory (see Sect. 10.3.1 ). With regard to the research question on
the added value of AI in HRM, the potential ﬁelds of application go far beyond
personnel recruitment. Due to the large number of HRM activities and AIfunctionalities, however, far more than the task technology combinations discussedin this chapter are conceivable. For example, AI can serve as a personal learningassistant in personnel development, in which the technology takes into account therespective learning needs (e.g., learning speed) when designing individually tailoredlearning content. However, despite the promising technical possibilities, the com-parison of theory and practice with the status quo of AI in HRM shows that German
HR managers are very reluctant to act (see Sect. 10.3.2 ). Scienti ﬁc studies will be
required in the future to identify further conducive conditions for AI applications inHRM (see Sect. 10.4). For example, a representative quantitative study would not
only allow the status quo in companies of various sectors and sizes to be determined,but also weighting of factors that are conducive to AI deployment (e.g., by multipleregression). Likewise, the success effects of AI applications in relation to the targetvariables of HRM should be examined by means of causal analyses (e.g., structuralequation model; see Fig. 10.3). Speci ﬁcally, it should be analyzed to what extent AI
applications are more powerful than existing HRM solutions (e.g., support by HRM
information systems). In addition, qualitative studies (e.g., expert interviews withHR managers) could reveal restrictions of German companies that have not beenconsidered so far and provide further clues for the design of AI transformation.Focus group analyses in interdisciplinary settings offer the opportunity to identifyinterfaces of AI applications and already existing IT solutions (e.g., ERP system). Inaddition, ﬁeld-experimental methods open up the possibility to investigate the effect
of AI applications on the end users in real life. The all-decisive factor in determining
whether AI applications are accepted in HRM is the human being. An important
element in this context is the competence pro ﬁle of the HR manager in the AI age
developed in this article (see Sect. 10.5), which needs to be validated in future
studies. The development of the outlined competences (see Fig. 10.7) closes the
circle, because here AI can act as an assistant (see point 7 in Sect. 10.3.1 ). In
addition, HR managers can use both internal (e.g., marketing) and external (e.g.,AI startups) job sharing. In conclusion, the future of HRM lies in the intelligentcombination of human and arti ﬁcial intelligence. In order to gain the desired freedom
for strategic tasks, HR managers should successively delegate tasks to AI,10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 219