Example US Truckers
As a consequence of deregulation of work, increased automation, and dimin-
ished unionization, they earn only some 40% (price-adjusted) of what theproceeds were some 40 years ago (Viscelli 2016 ). Given the fact that many
workers in the USA live from paycheck to paycheck with a “free cash ﬂow”of
just very few hundreds of dollars per month, this indicates ﬁnancial instability
that even adds vulnerability in disruptive times and job insecurities.
The disparity between the upper 10% (typically de ﬁned with annual income of
min. USD250,000) or upper 1% ( >USD one million) and the middle class
constitutes a massive risk for societal problems.
1. Although the past has shown a sound increase in prosperity, as the spread
between the very few very rich on the one side and the numerous societal
backbones of a stable middle class widens.
2. The latter destabilizes and suffers in not being able to cope with living standards.3. The generations ’dream of being able to achieve a better living standard than the
parents will diminish.
From that perspective, the theory of value-adding economies, which was devel-
oped by Karl Marx (Kurz 2013 ) some 150 years ago, seems to re ﬂect the potential
disruptive power of the concentration of capital and resources versus human work.
Spoiled by competition and a Darwin-like selection brutality, companies are forced
to introduce new production processes and new products in order to reduce costs asonly the ﬁttest will survive. Markets (i.e., the match of demand and supply) coordi-
nate companies ’output (products and services). “Because of the anarchic nature of
the system, crises occur periodically; development is cyclical ”(Kurz 2013 ). The
value added in the form of pro ﬁt is disproportionately allocated merely in capital
growth (of very few) and expanding even higher production means for even moreproductivity through automation. This has a countereffect: the mass of workers —
and with them their purchasing power —diminishes in consequence of replacement
of human work by machines. But it is the consumption that is the ultimate source ofproﬁt, and that has gradually dried up. Hence, shrinking consumption means
shrinking pro ﬁt rate and in the long run it even conjures up the end of capitalism.
From this perspective, while AI is not the only source of this disruption in the
labor market, it accelerates the transformation massively. This will tear society apart.The rich will become richer, and the poor will not be able to free themselves frommisery (Lee 2018 ).146 S. H. Vieweg