producers and extended to other food products such as eggs as well. In
consequence, trust in food safety deteriorated within China as well as interna-tional trade, as it caused an import ban from various countries worldwide andeffected product recalls from international brands such as Unilever (Sinn
2008 ) or Heinz (AFP 2008 ) and ﬁnally a general alert from the US FDA
(Food and Drug Administration) against food products from China, as “the
problem of melamine contamination is not limited to infant formula products ”
and “the problem of melamine contamination in Chinese food products is a
recurring one ”(FDA 2009 ). In addition, people ’s faith in the political leaders
deteriorates (Elegant 2008 ).
Example Vaccine Scandal 2018
In 2018 —a decade later-, the Changseng Biotechnology vaccine scandal, in
which more than 200,000 Chinese children were administered with rabiesvaccines from production runs that were not effectively quality controlled (TheLancet 2018 ). The mistrust in the Chinese system continues.
What can be seen from these examples is that corruption is a pervasive problem in
China that roots from:
1. The one-party political system that prohibits opposition and hence has no effec-
tive corrective measures (e.g., that are provided by separation of powers, judicial
independence, free elections, and free journalism). Although in such a centralizeddirectorship, decisions can be forced and pushed through much quicker than in amulti-party political system, there is no incentive for the ruling party to improvestructures in the best interest of the public. The incentive is purely in manifesta-tion of the ruling party ’s own privileges. A common assumption within China and
abroad that with economic liberalization a politic mind shift and reforms towardrespect of human rights will eventually occur was falsi ﬁed since the aggressive
program shift put forward as of 2013 by China ’s new autocratic leader (see Sect.
6.5.1 ).
2. The aftermath of the Culture Revolutions ’system of mistrust, observation, and
control that incentivized denunciation and forced cooperation with politicalofﬁcials to avoid sanctions —the basis for corruption.
3. The rapid (forced see #1 above) industrialization that did not allow for the
development of adequate social and economic standards and ef ﬁcient structures
such as independent controls. This spoiled the misconduct, as infringements kept
often without punishment (Wang 2019 ).
4. The countrywide migration streams to urban mega-cities with up to 27 million
population (Shanghai, #3 on worldwide basis, 33 cities above three million)(Comparitech 2020 ) that has distorted the rural family bonding: e.g., caretaking148 S. H. Vieweg