5.2.2 Theorem of Surplus Sense
Luhmann has proposed to observe societies with the theorem of surplus sense
(Luhmann 1997 p. 409) under the aspect of the dominant distribution media of
communication. Surplus sense is therefore a driver of social development. From the
beginning, societies were characterized by their mediality, beginning with language(being able to talk about things that are not there now) and tribal society, then camewriting, which goes beyond the constraints of the time horizon and the society ofantiquity, later came printing with a surplus of criticism (everything can be criticizedby anyone (Baecker 2016b , pp. 4 –5)) and modern society, and now digitalization
with the electronic media and the “Next Society “(Next Society after Peter Drucker
(2002 )) with an excess of control (Baecker 2018 , pp. 54, 75), because electronic
media and algorithms operate quasi instantaneously and have a quasi-in ﬁnite mem-
ory and depth of analytical focus (with big data analytics), which cannot be directlyprocessed by humans in this granularity, but which become accessible throughinteraction. In addition, there are connectivity spaces with a multitude of connectionpossibilities. This leads to the social structural form of the network, and the evolu-tionary concept of spiral dynamics can build on this.
5.2.3 Spiral Dynamics
The starting point is the Graves value system, which Beck and Cowan further
developed into spiral dynamics (Beck and Cowan 2014 ) (Fig. 5.1). Spiral dynamics
is a model of successive evolutionary stages of human consciousness withcorresponding value concepts and thought patterns (so-called Value Memes) of thehistory of mankind, which are also re ﬂected in the individual maturity of the human
being and can therefore be determined in relation to age. “Value Memes ”deﬁne, as it
were, a cultural genetic code that determines the values of a certain society and ispassed on through social interaction. This evolution also shows a change of individ-ual and collective emphasis in value and thought patterns. From the integral evolu-
tionary stage onward, the second-order level is reached, transcending and integrating
the underlying developmental stages.
Spiral dynamics also determines the understanding of leadership and the evolu-
tion of human forms of organization in companies. Effective leadership in a networksociety can therefore be achieved with an integral and collective perspective thatembraces the human being and the possibilities of digital algorithms and arti ﬁcial
intelligence in a holistic way, hence basing leadership on an integral and holisticvalue system.
From the perspective of the second-order level, the positive aspects of the
previous levels can be integrally considered. From an archaic perspective, forexample, it is about securing the existence of a company; from a magical perspec-tive, it is about a “family ”identity; from a mythical perspective, it is about the power
to think or do value-creating things that would otherwise not be realized; from anabsolutist perspective, it is about security and compliance; from a rational78 M. Müller-Wiegand