5.“Culture eats strategy for breakfast ”; this quotation from management thinker
Peter Drucker ( 2007 ) impressively emphasizes the great importance of corporate
culture in transformation processes. Based on existing research on the effects of
an innovation culture on success (Ramella 2017 ; Stock et al. 2013 ), it is obvious
that it also plays a key role in increasing acceptance of AI applications. Accordingto Schein ( 1990 ), corporate culture can be divided into three levels: values,
norms, and artifacts. Values describe in an ideological way which characteristics,qualities, behaviors, or actions are considered desirable. In addition to ethicalvalues such as fairness, transparency, and trust, the values of openness to newexperiences and the willingness to experiment are of great importance in thecontext of AI. Companies need employees who continuously question the status
quo, develop innovative ideas, test them, and implement them step by step. To
convey these expectations to managers and employees, standards are established.Standards are explicit formulations of values with a concrete reference to appro-priate behavior. As formal expressions of the underlying values they are per-ceived more consciously and are less abstract than cultural values. For example,the value of the willingness to experiment with new technologies can be speci ﬁed
as a norm in personnel selection or employee assessment. In contrast to these twoabstract cultural levels, artifacts are phenotypic characteristics of the underlying
values and norms (e.g., stories, rituals, events, physical constructions, and graphic
representations). Innovation-oriented artifacts represent the most concrete levelfor employees, as they facilitate the interpretation of the company ’s innovation
efforts. At the artifact level, companies can, for example, use hackathons (i.e.,collaborative software development events) to send an important innovationsignal for AI application development.
10.5 Competence Profile of a HR Manager in the AI Age
Based on the previous remarks, this chapter will outline a competence pro ﬁle for HR
managers in the AI age. In addition, initial considerations are made on how these
future competencies can be developed. The literature research in this context makes
it clear that no generally valid model exists. Rather, numerous (rather unscienti ﬁc)
collections of different competencies can be identi ﬁed. However, an arbitrary list is
not very promising for the development of a competence pro ﬁle (i.e., a structured
picture of different competence areas; Groß et al. 2019 ). In order to derive a
competence pro ﬁle, the future role of HR management in companies will ﬁrst be
examined in order to identify key competence areas. The conceptual basis for this isthe HR role model according to Ulrich ( 1996 ; see Fig. 10.6).
Based on the two dimensions (1) strategic versus operational focus and (2) process
versus people orientation, the HR role model distinguishes four roles that HRM cantake on in a company. Since the future topic of AI has a strategic focus and has both aprocess-related and a people-related dimension, HRM in the AI age should primarilytake on the roles of strategic partner and change agent. Strategic partner means thatHRM is not about HRM, but about business. In other words, HR managers should216 M. Groß