comparatively harmless sickness rate: as an example, during the ﬁrst wave of
COVID-19 spread in the spring of 2020, in Germany more than 700,000companies with short-time work and massively increased insolvencies to anextent unknown in Germany. When has the limit been crossed in which
deviation from the principle of equal treatment of the members of society is
to be made in order not to further increase the collateral damage of thispolitical decision? According to the ifo Institute, more than 50% of allcompanies from Germany surveyed cannot survive for more than 6 monthsif the sanctions continue for longer (ifo 2020 ).
1.4.2 Utilitarianism or Consequentialism
Utilitarianism (lat. Utilitas for bene ﬁt, advantage) points out that an action is good if
it has the best social consequences or if there is no better action at the present timeunder the present conditions. In this ethical approach it is distinguished between
1.Hedonistic utilitarianism (from Greek hedone for joy, pleasure, lust): here, right
action is everything that maximizes happiness in the world. One of the mostfamous representatives is John Stuart Mill (1806 –1873).
2.Preferential utilitarianism :
Satisfaction of rational preferences serves as a yardstick to judge an action and itseffects. The ful ﬁllment of preferences must be maximized . Preference in this
context means all rational and emotional interests. The problem with thisapproach, however, is that there is uncertainty about an action at the time of the
decision. To mean well is typically not enough: “Well meant does not equal well
done! ”
A typical ethical problem (model) in this context is the so-called trolley problem ,
which leads to an ethical dilemma in such a way that an uncomfortable decision isforced if there are no compatible options. This problem, formulated as early as 1967by philosopher Philippa Foot, allows only two negative options: either to move astreetcar switch so that ﬁve workers are saved but another worker is run over on the
siding, or not to move the switch and risk ﬁve lives. As various studies show, a clear
majority of respondents are in favor of changing the switch —making ﬁve lives more
valuable than one. In some variations, this ethical problem shows the psychologicalcomponent: In the modi ﬁed scenario, there is only one track, a disconnected streetcar
car rolls unbraked toward the ﬁve workers. However, there is a bridge on which a
large man stands. If this man is pushed off the bridge (and dies), he would stop thecar and be the ﬁve workers —at the price of one human life. Here, it can be seen that
the vast majority of the test persons do not actively want to cause the death of a
human being. The ﬁfth commandment of Christians ( “You shall not kill ”[Exodus
20:13]) seems to be internalized. It also turned out in neuro-psychological researchesthat when the death of a person is directly induced, a signi ﬁcantly higher level of12 S. H. Vieweg