the courage of each individual to take action for improvement and, if necessary, to
forego any amenities of their own “for the sake of the cause. ”This intrinsic
motivation means to address any uncomfortable issues, to initiate and pursue
extra activities (which do not occur when looking away), and, if necessary, to take
a stand against one ’s own managers or even top management.
Despite a suitable, organizational environment, it takes a certain amount of
courage to actually address this inconvenience.
For a concrete situation, it is advisable to have a checklist of guidelines at hand, so
to speak, in order to be able to evaluate the ethical implications of a decision foryourself. Figure 4.6shows three different checklists, each of which provides an
orientation and a re ﬂected evaluation of your own actions.
4.12 Finish Line Quiz
4.01 Applying the home country ’s ethical standard abroad when working conditions in the host
country are worse leads to ...
1 ...minimization of the reputational damage and a cost advantage.
2 ...reputation as “good citizen ”and a competitive (cost) disadvantage.
3 ...short-term maintaining of competitiveness
4 ...sanctions as such unethical approach is inacceptable.
4.02 Which information can be derived from the FSI?
1 The level of corruption in a speci ﬁc country.
2 A country ’s progress toward ﬁve different categories (cohesion, economic, political,
social, environmental)
3 A country ’s progress toward various categories including cohesion, economic,
political, social.
4 Only the level of economic performance in a country.
4.03 An emerging country exploits its limited natural resources (burn down rainforest for
generating farmland) with the help of AI technology from developed countries. What is
the ethical position for such company?
1 The company does not have to bother about the use of its technology as long as it
stays within the customers ’own country legal rules.
2 The company does exactly right, as its advanced technology will help the destination
country to prosper bene ﬁting from newest technology and therewith most likely
minimum resources.
3 The company shall not sell any products or any other support to such a country.4 The position is very dif ﬁcult and shall not be answered in general. A detailed
assessment from ethical perspective is required.
4.04 Why is the ﬁght against corruption —despite of all anti-corruption codes and standards —
so dif ﬁcult?
1 Disregarding individuals ’fraudulent motivations, for a business there may be the
consideration of “doing a little evil to achieve a greater (quicker) outcome (e.g., by
bribing local of ﬁcials to accelerate the process) ”.
2 Corruption is a problem of the past. There is hardly any corruption anymore, as with
AI, full transparency is given.
(continued)4 Ethics in an International Context 73