development was 2.3 times of the bottom quartile (period 2015 –2017) (Vieweg
2019 ).
Candorship re ﬂects a management approach that is based on values of transpar-
ency, authenticity, accountability, honesty, and error culture. This is in harsh con-
trast to window dressing, green washing, self-delusion, and fogging.4
Candorship requires an organizational culture re ﬂecting said values. Proven
management methodologies foster decentralization and delegation and at the sametime orchestrating the strategy setting and execution. This gives both the ﬂexibility
to cope with changing requirements and presenting the ef ﬁciency and stability to
drive the strategic themes. The leading holistic and open framework is theScaledAgileFramework (SAFe
®) (SAFe 2020 ) (based on core values of built-in
quality and transparency): The “lean-agile ”orientation allows rapid learning and
adaptation through decentralized decision-making competence within agile teams,and in parallel servant leadership on management level.
11.4.3 The Pillar of Individuals ’Enlightenment
Technology has always acted as enabler or facilitator (e.g., see the John Deer
examples in Sect. 9.4) which pushed the frontier of possibilities further. Though
with AI, there is a new dimension of support, as it is not limited to mechanical ormotoric capabilities, but extends to cognitive human capabilities (see Fig. 9.2in
Sect. 9.4): There is a pending risk of addiction to individual using AI support. As
illustrated in Sects. 7.4and7.5, there is high risk to self-chosen immaturity. Under
the false pretenses of “customer centricity, ”this will lead to consumers ’passivity, as
this“services ”come as an alluring convenience.
Though, ethical AI would respect users as individuals with their own decision
competencies and would support them accordingly. This can be illustrated by usingthe example of pharmaceutical products or prepacked nutritional products: based onregulation requirements, health warnings inform consumers on product ingredients(e.g., on energy, fat, saturates, sugar, salt) and how to use the product rightly and onany collateral effects, e.g., of overconsumption. In the AI context, this requires muchmore than the disclaimers on data privacy. In particular, this should include decision-relevant information about ...
1. ...a particular algorithm ’s characteristics, the quality to be expected realistically,
and its shortcomings
2. ...the data basis to train the algorithm
4FOG refers to “fact-de ﬁcient obfuscating generalities ”; this Ritthouse-in ﬂuenced abbreviation
(fog) from the context of investor relations communication illustrates the problem: disinformationand unclear statements serve to manipulate stakeholders (especially shareholders).11 Ethical AI Implementation 239