(20 million air tickets denied, in addition high-speed train tickets) (Matsakis
2019 ).
2. Municipal local systems that aim for reinforcement of social governance with
potential effects on credit scores. Everyone is tracked, and some local systems are
designed so that for each individual up to the age of 80 years (Lippold 2019 )
speciﬁc“voluntary ”work and speci ﬁc behavior is required in order not to lose
scores. As local of ﬁcials are likewise affected with the scoring systems, they are
incentivized to put pressure on the local community members. Hence, a system offear is established (Lippold 2019 ).
3. People ’s Bank of China ﬁnancial credit system in particular to foster the market
infrastructure by credit reports (individual and businesses) as well as scores for
individuals (Chuncheng 2019 ).
4. Commercial corporations ’credit rating system, which initially started on a
voluntary basis (mobile users could opt out), offering in particular privileges tohigh scorers such as waiver of deposits on rents. For example as of October 2019,Alipay had 520 million customer records on their “Sesame ”credit system
(Lippold 2019 ).
To implement the social credit system, AI extends the depths of tracking
individual ’s behavior based on geotagging, facial recognition, and payments (see
above). Beyond the question of appropriateness there are cases reported where thedatabase is incorrect (either not updated and people are kept on the blacklist evenwhen the originating issue was resolved, or —as the case may be —driven by other
motives): e.g., the case of the Chinese lawyer Li Xiaolin, who was rejected topurchase a ﬂight ticket in 2016, as his name continued to be listed on the blacklist
for failure of having carried out a court order in 2015, although he has resolved it
already (Wang 2017 ).
On the public side, with the program “Sharp Eyes ”a large-scape surveillance
program is being rolled out in major Chinese cities (see Sect. 6.5.1 ).
Example CCTV Surveillance and Crime Rate in China
The line of argument that more surveillance means more security cannot be
derived from the data (see Fig. 7.3). Obviously, there is no direct correlation
between CCTV per capita and crime index. The correlation is r¼0.1; regres-
sion analysis with a slight positive slope (0.06) shows an adjusted R
2of
/C01.6%, so there is no signi ﬁcant evidence in regard to “the more CCTVs
the smaller the crime rate. ”
Another example of AI-based surveillance activities in China is linked to the
police-led mass DNA collection campaign across mainland China, where DNAsamples of male citizens are basically forcedly collected outside a forensic investi-gation. Via the police ’s database, these samples can be linked to multigenerational150 S. H. Vieweg