universal norms such as human rights, for example, are not ethically represented by
such an approach.
4.11.3 Naive Immoralist
Similar to local customs (see Sect. 4.11.2 ), the “naive immoralist ”is: here the
question arises whether it is opportune, for example, to tolerate illegal behavior inthe host country with low legal standards, which is intolerable in the home country(with an effective legal system). As a classic example, protection money fromwarlords is used to protect the host country ’s employees and production facilities
from attacks. Retreating into the belief that this is the lesser evil than exposing one ’s
own local workers to the risk of attack is just as unsatisfactory as the prospect of not
investing in the country and thus depriving the local society of bene ﬁts such as jobs,
income, economic development, and prospects (Hill 2014 ).
4.11.4 Friedman Doctrine
For example, the doctrine of shareholder theory formulated by the in ﬂuential Nobel
Prize winner Milton Friedman ( 1970 ) states that shareholders must be given priority
over all other stakeholders of a company, since they alone make economic activities
possible in the ﬁrst place. This means that a company (or its management, which was
implemented by the shareholders) is only (socially) responsible to the shareholders.The shareholders as principals should then decide for themselves (and not themanagement appointed by the shareholders as their agents) which (social) corporateorientation is to be pursued within the framework of normative corporate gover-nance. Ultimately, this leads to the conclusion that it is enough for a company tocomply with the minimum legal requirements. This view, which is in ﬂuenced by
Adam Smith ’s“invisible hand ”—the eighteenth-century understanding of capital-
ism (Bassiry and Jones 1993 )—has received much criticism, particularly because the
one-sided approach of shareholder value does not in reality help society, but rather,through massive concentration of economic resources in the hands of a minority,leads to alienation between rich and poor, which in turn threatens society itself in themedium term. We will re ﬂect this further in Sect. 7.5when re ﬂecting on the effects
of“Big Tech ”and AI on the societies.
4.11.5 Determinants of Ethical Decisions (in an International
Context)
The ethical compass is intended to provide orientation in dif ﬁcult decision-making
situations —even in the situation of an ethical dilemma. Figure 4.6shows such an
orientation aid, which considers both the organization (vertically), within whichindividuals make decisions, and the individuals themselves (horizontally).4 Ethics in an International Context 69