are, nor can anyone be certain of how it will interact with other algorithms, the
physical world, or us .”(Smith 2018 ).
For example, according to the science historian George Dyson, some high
frequency trading, or HFT ﬁrms have been allowing their algorithms to learn “just
letting the black box try different things, with small amounts of money, and if itworks, reinforce those rules. We know that ’s been done. Then you actually have
rules where nobody knows what the rules are: the algorithms create their own rules —
you let them evolve the same way nature evolves organisms. ”(Dyson 2019 ).
In his 2011 novel The Fear Index , Robert Harris (Harris 2011 ) imagines the
emergence of the singularity or human-level machine intelligence —from exactly
this type of random organic digital evolution.
While this type of mass machine procreation is still largely ﬁctional and more of a
future concern, the widespread problems of big data are already evident now.
A series of data slip-ups have been mostly visible from large tech corporations,
who have been intent for years on claiming their digital turf, by amassing hugeamounts of proprietary data.
What is becoming very apparent is that if machines are provided biased or ﬂawed
data, they are going to produce biased or ﬂawed results.
In one example, three different AI systems by IBM, Microsoft, and Megvii have
been found to correctly identify a person ’s gender from a photo at a rate of 99% —
which sounds impressive, but only if that person is a white male (Cossins 2018 ). In
other cases, e.g., for women of color, the accuracy of facial recognition dropssigniﬁcantly.
In fact, there have been a series of such embarrassing episodes. It seems hard to
believe that sophisticated programmers could allow this to happen routinely, untilone considers the source; literally —that 95% of algorithms are programmed by
men
4, many of whom are weird (WEIRD: White, Educated, Industrialized, Rich,
Democratic).
Furthermore, there is a signi ﬁcant bias on developers ’age toward below the age
of 45 where almost 91% are covered (see Footnote 62).
Should it be at all surprising, with these kinds of statistics, that there are so many
issues with bias? Even if it is highly likely unconscious?
The concerns that there are not enough female and minority voices in ﬂuencing
machine learning seem to be understandable.
As one algorithmic program reviewed more than 100,000 labeled images from
around the Internet, its biased association became stronger than that shown by the
dataset —amplifying rather than simply replicating bias .
As Sara Wachter-Boettcher, the author of Technically Wrong , asks: “Does it
matter that the things that are profoundly changing and shaping our society are being
4According to the 2020 Developers Survey, nearly 92% are men (42 k responses), 71% are white or
European descent (38 k responses), second largest group South Asian with 10%. See https://
insights.stackover ﬂow.com/survey/2020#developer-pro ﬁle-gender-professional-developers2 .
(access 02.09.2020).8 AI in the Financial Industries: Between Apathy and Hysteria 167