of the training data, which is used by the spam ﬁlter to learn how spam
looks, certain spam type will not be detected (as intended by the bad actor).
2. In the “backdoor attack, ”the attacker uses purposefully set entry points by
malicious programmers, so that in later use, manipulation can be conducted
by bad actors related to a speci ﬁc con ﬁguration. Reference is made to
researchers at NYU. They showed that backdoor attacks on commonlyused AI road sign detectors for autonomous vehicles, where a spillovereffect on misclassifying US stop signs was seen, were detected on themodel that was retrained for Swedish stop signs. Given the rapid trend onmodel training in the cloud ( “Function as a Service ”—FaaS), this
represents a major vulnerability of the integrity of AI. (Crawford et al.2019 ).
3. OpenAI:
According to its own statements, OpenAI has been set up for non-pro ﬁt reasons
with primary ﬁduciary duty to humanity (OpenAI 2018 ), so it has ethical standards
for AI in their mission statement:
“OpenAI ’s mission is to ensure that arti ﬁcial general intelligence (AGI) —by
which we mean highly autonomous systems that outperform humans at most
economically valuable work —beneﬁts all of humanity. We will attempt to
directly build safe and bene ﬁcial AGI, but will also consider our mission
fulﬁlled if our work aids others to achieve this outcome. ”
This organization is supported by PayPal-Tesla-SpaceX founder Elon
Musk, and formed an exclusive multiyear partnership with Microsoft in2019 to build Azure AI supercomputing technologies (Microsoft 2019 ).
It is left to the reader to assess the non-commercial aspect of this endeavor
(Fig. 11.3).
11.3 AI Framing to Safeguard the Good
As shown in the previous section, there are quite some initiatives set up to re ﬂect
ethical concerns in digitization in general and AI speci ﬁcally. Although these
initiatives are likely to be helpful, the question arises as to whether these are already
sufﬁcient to adequately re ﬂect the effects of AI.
More than ever, the human welfare depends on an interconnection that ensures
dignity and prospect of advancement for individuals. Technology like AI can enableexactly that, but only, if the advantaged do not sel ﬁshly misuse it for shortsighted
purposes at the cost of the vulnerable. The advantaged, having access to capital andknowledge, have a ﬁduciary duty toward the vulnerable and should act accord-
ingly —as well to foster their own long-term core interests.11 Ethical AI Implementation 235