abilities to achieve an overall goal. However, the question of whether strong AI can
attain a consciousness of its own and what role empathy, self-knowledge, memory,and wisdom play in connection with the abovementioned qualities remains open.With regard to the strength of AI, the focus of this chapter is accordingly on weak AI.
(2) The progress in the learning ability of computers requires a deeper examina-
tion of the decision-making powers between man and machine. In the literature, adistinction is often made between three degrees of AI (Grotenhermen et al. 2020 ):
assisted intelligence, augmented intelligence, and autonomous intelligence (see
Fig. 10.2). Assisted intelligence describes the automation of simple tasks to save
costs and time. Augmented intelligence describes the hand-in-hand work of humanand arti ﬁcial intelligence, where AI learns from human inputs and the human being
beneﬁts from a better decision basis. Autonomous intelligence represents the most
advanced level of AI. Here, the machine makes decisions autonomously; the humanbeing has —if at all —a monitoring function. Due to numerous legal restrictions (e.g.,
Article 22 DSGVO, the German realization of the GDPR), which demand the ﬁnal
decision of the human being, as well as ethical reservations, completely autonomous
systems in the sense of autonomous intelligence are currently only conditionally
conceivable in Germany. The use of AI in Germany is therefore primarily about theteamwork of man and machine. Assisted and augmented types of intelligence aretherefore of particular interest. Assisted intelligence applications can relieve HRmanagers of routine tasks, freeing them up for strategic tasks, while augmentedintelligence solutions are an important building block on the path to evidence-basedHRM. Figure 10.2 summarizes the different decision-making powers of man and
machine.
Which functionalities make AI a vicarious agent or intelligent assistant of HR
managers? In order to specify the functionalities, I will refer in the following to thestatements of Strohmeier and Piazza ( 2015 ), who have already conceptually dealt
with the use of AI in personnel management. Based on a broad understanding of the
Fig. 10.2 Decision-making powers of man and machine in assisted intelligence, augmented
intelligence, and autonomous intelligence [own representation based on (Grotenhermen et al.
2020 )]10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 197