in the world, but suffers massively due to the drop in oil prices and the
mismanagement at home: according to the IMF, the GDP has been predictedfrom its peak in 2011 to drop to 19% (i.e., a reduction of 89%!) for 2020.
4
From an ethical point of view, it is problematic that in principle any action could
be justi ﬁed by the reference to the attitude ( “attitude offender ”). Consequently,
generally accepted rules are necessary, which stand above the individual attitude.Without these, each individual could refer to his or her conviction and thus evade
moral evaluation by others.
1.5.2 Ethics of Duties
Duty is in Kant ’s sense an action, which is done out of attachment to the valid morals
and norms. Ethics of duty thus de ﬁnes actions that are required or prohibited (see
Sect. 1.4.1 ). According to Kant, however, the observance of duties is only an
expression of morality if the inner driving force for good is given, i.e., if an ethos
is the basis. On the other hand, the observance of rules and the ful ﬁllment of duties
out of the motivation of avoiding punishment (fear of punishment) would bereprehensible.
The ethics of duties has a decisive advantage of ef ﬁciency for the individual: The
individual receives clear instructions and orientation points for his or her ownactions. The decision what is good and what is bad is not up to the individual.This means that the individual is freed and relieved from the individual decision.
1.5.3 Ethics of the Consequences
Here the consequences of the action are placed in the foreground. Thus, it is morallycorrect to behave in such a way that the good is achieved or to act in such a way thatthe consequences become maximally good. In other words: the action is evaluatedfrom the point of view of the consequences. This means that moral perception iscongruent, where behavior ultimately does not lead to negative consequences.
The problem with this approach is that the inherent prerequisite is a very good
understanding of the possible consequences. However, this is rarely given inadvance (ex ante), especially in the case of new types of questions such as technol-ogy issues. One might think here, for example, of the dilettantish way in whichnuclear energy has been handled since the 1950s, when the great dangers and issues
4Own evaluation based on data from the IMF (October 11, 2019). Venezuela: Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) in current prices from 1980 to 2018 and forecasts to 2021 (in billions of US dollars)
[Graph]. In Statista. Accessed on 05 May 2020, from https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/
321115/umfrage/bruttoinlandsprodukt-bip-von-venezuela/1 Ethics for Non-philosophers: Basis of Ethics and Ethical Perspectives 15