Ivan Illich expounds upon convivialism as individual freedom, which is realized
in personal interdependence and as such represents an ethical value (Illich 1973 ).
Convivialism thus manifests itself in an integral understanding of individualism
and is a society in which individuals, groups, and communities are connected in new
forms, respecting each other in their differences and cooperating for the bene ﬁt of all
(Adloff and Heins 2015 , p. 11).
The contrast to individualism which develops in the logic of exclusion is that this
is an individualism which, in the logic of inclusion, understands the other as acondition of its own development and which does not “altruistically ”include others
but consciously recognizes that its own development is possible only if it does notinhibit others ’development and instead supports it through positive mutualistic
relationships. Development is possible only socially —with others, not against
them ( Meretz ).
In this sense, the prisoner ’s dilemma paradigmatically shows the consequences of
selﬁsh, non-cooperative behavior. It leads to a lower value creation overall and in
detail. Value creation should instead be achieved in an entrepreneurial mannerthrough convivial cooperation.
With Wisdom 2.0, the contours and signi ﬁcance of the interrelationship of body,
soul, and spirit are also becoming apparent for companies (with reference to the
Wisdom 2.0 Conference 2015 with the central theme “Mindfulness and Compassion
in the Digital Age ”).“Mindfulness ”is considered the beginning of an inner spiritual
growth. It means complete attention to both the conscious and the unconscious ”
(Heinrichs 2018b ) in the “here and now ”without a dominating one-sided evaluation,
i.e., without egotistically distorted desire, and enables integral and holistic thinking.More and more companies are recognizing that both the attitude of employers andemployees can be changed for the better in the long term through a mindfulnessapproach. There is a growing awareness of the intense desire to work in companies
that take people ’s values seriously. This makes companies more successful in
attracting the best, most creative, and enthusiastic employees (Meyer-Galow 2018 ,
p. 60).
This results in an integral business ethic based on mindfulness, which is the
gateway to inner growth and entrepreneurial value creation. This stems from anintegral consciousness that aims to enable value-oriented management with psycho-logical and spiritual maturity (Meyer-Galow 2018 , p. 142). “How can I live happily,
and perhaps ultimately blissfully, in harmony with everything? ”goes far beyond the
ethical question “What should I or may I do? ”and enables us to answer the latter
question correctly (Heinrichs 2018a ).5 Value-Based Corporate Management and Integral Intelligence 81