Based on Sect. 10.2, especially the described functionalities of AI, this chapter
explores application areas of AI in HRM. The theoretical framework for the follow-ing explanations is the task technology ﬁt theory. The theory developed by Goodhue
and Thompson ( 1995 ) states that a better ﬁt between task characteristics and system
properties leads to higher performance. Based on this assumption, it is necessary toexamine areas of application regarding the best possible ﬁt of HRM features and AI
functionalities. While the AI functionalities as well as potential targets have alreadybeen speci ﬁed in Sect. 10.2, the next step is to operationalize the task characteristics
of human resource management systems. In this context, the categorization of Stock-Homburg and Groß ( 2019 ), which differentiates HRM systems into employee ﬂow
and reward systems, will be used. The employee ﬂow systems map the life cycle of
employees in a company and accordingly include personnel requirements planning,
recruitment, development, and release. For ethical reasons, we refrain fromilluminating the AI deployment options in the context of personnel release. Thereward systems include the structured assessment of employees and the creation ofperformance-related incentives for managers and employees. With reference to Großand Dorozalla ( 2020 ), employee self-service is considered as a characteristic of
personnel administration in addition to the employee ﬂow and reward systems.
The 11 selected task characteristics from the HRM systems shown above are
described in detail in Sect. 10.3.1 and are linked to the AI functionalities (see Sect.
10.2) in an overview in Fig. 10.2. Based on this, Sect. 10.3.2 compares theory and
practice for German companies.
Due to the multitude of HRM activities and AI functionalities, there is an almost
inﬁnite number of conceivable task technology combinations. The associated explo-
ration task goes far beyond the scope of this chapter, which is why a consciousselection is made in the following. Following Strohmeier and Piazza ( 2015 ), two
selection criteria will be applied: First, both the broad spectrum of AI functionalities
and the broad spectrum of task characteristics of HRM will be covered as far as
possible. Secondly, “mature ”ﬁelds of application (i.e., those AI applications that are
already used in practice at least occasionally) should be preferred to “futuristic ”
scenarios with uncertain practical feasibility. As shown in Fig. 10.3, it is assumed
that a higher feature-AI functionality ﬁt leads to an increase in ﬂexibility, speed,
scalability, decision optimization, and customization of HRM activities.
10.3.1 Application Areas of AI Along the HRM Systems
In the area of personnel requirements planning, the focus is on the development ofpredictive systems. Relevant forecasts mainly relate to (1) gross or net requirements,
(2) absences from work, and (3) intentions to terminate employment. Predictive
systems can be programmed on the basis of arti ﬁcial neural networks (ANN)
(Roedenbeck 2020 ). ANN are information-processing systems consisting of a cer-
tain number of information-processing units (neurons) containing mathematicalfunctions and connected by directed and weighted links (Pérez-Campdesuñer et al.2018 ). ANN represent a category of knowledge generation that is capable of solving200 M. Groß