in 2017; Github, started in 2008, with its c. 40 million user base, was acquired by
Microsoft in 2018).
This means that ﬁnance ﬁrms continue to play catch-up. One hope which seems to
be persuasive is that ﬁnance latecomers will bene ﬁt from the trial and error of the
early tech entrants and be able to leapfrog forward with a new successful technology.But this requires large and sustainable budgets and also talent to stay in the game,something that will eventually weed out many ﬁrms. It is forecast that only about
15 asset management ﬁrms will ultimately remain globally. This sobering statistic is
balanced by an encouraging broad demand for asset management currently, withsigniﬁcant increases in assets over the last few years
3.
An ongoing strategy for FinTech platforms is component replacement , aimed at
introducing functionality that is cheaper, faster, or safer, relative to legacy platform
components. Blockchain-based/distributed ledger technology systems could signi ﬁ-
cantly reduce the need for specialized custodial institutions since, in principle,market participants would be able to exchange and record transactions securely inthe cloud (see Sect. 6.4.2 as well). Blockchain is currently too slow and expensive to
replace existing practices on a large scale. In the future however, blockchain couldserve as the core technology for platforms that require veri ﬁcation and trust. Trust is
the air that capital markets need to breathe , so this technology could prove to be a
game-changer.
That is, unless quantum computing lives up to its claims, that has it potentially
hacking the blockchain within 5 years. But that is a subject for another story [seedetails on e.g. 51% attack in Sect. 6.4.2 and (Cambridge Quantum Computing
2020 )].
In the current regulatory landscape, platform completion and component replace-
ment in FinTech seem likely to occur mostly through platform partnerships. Notlong ago so-called robo-advisors were touted as a major threat to established
investment ﬁrms. Instead, they have proven to be more complementary, rather
than disruptive, with large ﬁrms simply buying up the most promising FinTech
startups and adding the new technology to their own services.
Finally —and perhaps most signi ﬁcantly —even though they are not natural
participants today, once market participants begin to trust the data handling and AIcapabilities of the large Internet platforms, they could become core components ofFinTech platforms for the same reasons they are trusted in the social, retail, anddevice domains. Why would ﬁnancial players choose to build Google ’s or Amazon ’s
artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning capabilities from scratch, especially
when they struggle to match the talent already.
But this has not stopped banks from thinking about or starting to use arti ﬁcial
intelligence technology throughout their organizations: in lending, in detecting
3On a global level a year-on-year increase of 15% in 2019 according to BCG 2020 Global Asset
Management —Protect, Adapt, and Innovate. https://image-src.bcg.com/Images/BCG-Global-
Asset-Management-2020-May-2020-r_tcm9-247209.pdf , (access 02.09.2020), though with clear
requirements of innovation and customer-centric practices required.8 AI in the Financial Industries: Between Apathy and Hysteria 165