Likewise, the environmental footprint associated with AI technology needs to be
minimized. So far, this is very often neglected, as there are no effective incentives toavoid the negative consequences of resource wastefulness, and digitization com-
monly has an environmental-friendly public image. In Sect. 6.7, the exponential
increase in computational resources and therewith environmental and economiccosts has been demonstrated. While optimization in particular narrow AIapplications is emerging and initiatives to track the “state-of-the-art ”(“SOTA ”)
3
are taken this will not solve the problem, so a fair incentivization is required, which
ultimately will have bene ﬁcial effects in the pillars “trust”and “enlightenment ”
as well.
11.4.2 The Pillar of Trust
In order to achieve that humans need to gain con ﬁdence in the technology. The good
news is that this is absolutely nothing new! It is just a question of how to handlequality. Well-established quality standards provide orientation for decision-makingacross decision-making as consumers, B2B customers, or public authorities. In
particular in critical products and services that can potentially harm individuals
like in the food or healthcare industries, these quality standards are enforced byauditing systems with veri ﬁcation and validation that is the basis for consumers ’
trust.
Such systems can be taken as a starting point to develop an AI framework for
trust. It should encounter the two core elements of any AI application: algorithm anddata (see Sect. 6.6). Furthermore, the context of its usage needs to be encountered as
well: i.e., applying best AI solutions in an repressive or exploitational setting such as
pushing users to immaturity in total surveillance (e.g., see Sects. 7.4and7.5)
contradicts the foundation and the enlightenment pillar of the House of Ethical AI.
While quality proof is visible at the end, it is important to set up a structure in the
AI product development and operations that fosters exactly this quality and trustbuilding. The latter is highly mobile: it takes very long to build up and may bedestroyed in a single glitch. Hence, the question of leadership prevails. Based onempirical evidence, a clear correlation can be shown between the concept ofcandorship and better economic performance (Vieweg 2019 ): For example US
companies applying candorship outperformed S&P500 market average by a factor
of 1.8, and top quartile ’s share price development was three times of the bottom
quartile (period 2010 –2015) (Rittenhouse 2018 ). Similar results were con ﬁrmed for
the German market, where DAX30 top quartile ’s candorship companies
outperformed market average by a factor of 1.6, and top quartile ’s share price
3For example see the neural network training effort of a well-known ImageNet classi ﬁcation, which
could be improved by a factor of 44 compared to the 2012 benchmark (in contrast: the often-cited
Moore ’s Law from the 70th –the trend that computer capabilities double every 18 months –would
yield to a factor of 11) (Hernandez and Brown 2020 ).238 S. H. Vieweg