Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold
Rush Between Optimistic HR Software
Providers, Skeptical HR Managers,
and Corporate Ethical Virtues10
Matthias Groß
Learning Objectives
1. Identify the general potential and shortcomings for AI technologies in the context
of HRM.
2. Utilizing the task technology ﬁt theory, learn about eleven HRM-related
functions that can be supported and automated by use of AI technology.
3. Analyze the status of utilization of AI technology —depending on the degree of
digitization.
4. Analyze the legal boundaries in utilizing AI technologies for HRM-related
functions in jurisdictions under tight data protection regulations such as Germany
with the GDPR (DSGVO).
5. Elaborate on the skill set required for HR managers working in an AI-supported
environment.
6. Re ﬂect the ethical aspects of AI usage in HRM based on the corporate ethic
virtues model.
10.1 Practical and Scientific Relevance of AI in HRM
The gold rush of arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) has begun and has captured the imagina-
tion of many HR managers. What would happen if application robots were to
identify the true high potentials from thousands of candidates in milliseconds (see
the examples in Sect. 7.5)? Or if algorithms were able to recognize the intention of
the most important high performers to resign at an early stage? And that 24/7 without
signs of fatigue, sick leave, or careless mistakes. These and similar dreams (and
partially realities) really cost companies something, as the results of the market
research institute Tractica impressively demonstrate. While in 2016, worldwide sales
of 3.2 billion US dollars were recorded with enterprise applications in the ﬁeld of AI,
M. Groß (*)
Technische Hochschule Mittelhessen, Campus Giessen, Gießen, Germany
e-mail: matthias.gross@w.thm.de
#The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
S. H. Vieweg (ed.), AI for the Good , Management for Professionals,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66913-3_10191