decisions at the latest possible point in time,3individual decisions are made in an
early phase, which cannot be revised without loss. This loss can manifest itself bothmaterially in the form of additional costs and emotionally in the form of admitting a
wrong decision. Especially the latter is often more dif ﬁcult to cope with.
Finally, another cognitive problem —group-think —needs to be addressed: In an
effort to reach a consensus, groups may make decisions that ignore individual criticalvoices. In addition, groups are more willing to take a higher risk than any individualof that group. This can be explained by the collective responsibility, which does nothold the individual accountable in case the decision turns out to be wrong. Attemptsto explain this can be found in the egocentric distortion (see above) or in the prospecttheory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979 ), which describes risk-seeking behavior in the
loss range but risk-averse behavior in the pro ﬁt range.
The unfavorable combination of group-think, excessive optimism, and overcon-
ﬁdence bias led, for example, in the ﬁnancial crisis of 2008 to the crash of major US
ﬁnancial institutions Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, AIG (Shefrin 2016 ).
2.5 Moral Distance to Irrational Behavior
A signi ﬁcant effect in the context of behavioral economics, especially in the ethical
context of relevance, is the so-called Fudge factor (Ariely 2012 ): Small, everyday
inaccuracies are often dealt with without a guilty conscience or accompanied byjustiﬁcations such as “others do it too ”or“nobody notices. ”The decision to cheat is
not rational, but nevertheless very common —with fatal consequences (see below).
Behavioral economist and psychologist Dan Ariely demonstrates this clearly in hisexperiments (Ariely 2012 ).
Example of identifying the “fudge factor ”:Ariely in ﬂuenced groups of
subjects who were to take a simple written arithmetic test by giving the
participants designer sunglasses in advance: one group was told that thesesunglasses were authentic, the second group was told that they were fake, andthe third control group was not told anything at all. Each group had theopportunity to deceive during the test. In the control group, 42% had cheated.In the authentic group, the deception rate decreased to 30%. In the interpreta-tion, the participants ’self-image was strengthened by the advantageous deal.
But in the group with the allegedly fake glasses the fraud rate was 74%! This
leads to the conclusion that deliberate dishonesty —no matter how small —
increases the probability for others to do the same.
3As this practice is used successfully by agile methods such as the scaledagileframework.com
(SAFe®) (SAFe 2020 ), that assumes variability and preserve options (Vieweg 2020a ).30 S. H. Vieweg