Example UN: Human Rights Council ’s Resolution on “Digital Technology,
Social Protection and Human Rights ”Reﬂecting the report of the UN Special
Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, a report submitted in accordance
with Human Rights Council resolution 35/19 (Alston 2019 ), the need for action
beyond becomes obvious. In this report, “the grave risk of stumbling, zombie-like,
into a digital welfare dystopia is highlighted. ”In particular, it is argued that Big Tech
companies “operate in an almost human rights-free zone, and that this is especially
problematic when the private sector is taking a leading role in designing,
constructing and even operating signi ﬁcant parts of the digital welfare state. ”
Hence, it is highlighted that it is paramount to urgently de ﬁne how AI technologies
can be utilized to serve the societies to ensure a higher standard of living for the
vulnerable and disadvantaged. The current appreciation of ef ﬁciency advantages and
the addressing of the security and abuse scenarios are however subordinate.
This mandate from the UN Human Rights Council is a clear wake-up call to think
more broadly than done so far.
In the following section, the required building blocks for such a holistic approach
will be showcased by the metaphor of the House of Ethical AI.
11.4 House of Ethical AI: Shaping the Future with AI
From the previous explanations, signi ﬁcant ethical challenges arise for the age of AI;
they directly link back to the fundamentals of business ethics (see Chaps. 3,4, and
Sect. 7.5as well) and practical considerations addressed in Sect. 9.4. Figure 11.4
summarized the dimension of the issues to be addressed in the form of the House of
Ethical AI. Overarching aim in an ethical and comprehensive sense shall be the
OpenAI.Inc
(Nonprofit)
OpenAI Board 
of Directors
OpenAI L.P . 
(For profit)
Capabilities Safety Policies<50%
Proceeds Elon Musk formally left 
OpenAI Nonprofit Board 02/2018 to avoid 
future conflicts “as Tesla continues to 
become more focused on AI”, “but will 
continue to donate and advise the 
organization.” [OpenAI 2018]ControlFig. 11.3 OpenAI corporate
structure. (Own presentation
based on information from the
organzation ’s website
(OpenAI 2018 ,2019 ))236 S. H. Vieweg