straight away that he has not asked for that meeting; it was initiated on his
nephew ’s request. Although this situation is probably suboptimal for a young
startup, the question was posed to the CEO where he sees problems and areasto improve. He denied and claimed not having any problems. Such behavior
triggered an alarm immediately: If a manager claims not having any issues,
then that person may have one indeed. He disclosed —not without pride —
some KPIs of his ﬁrm. As it happened to be, boot. AI had insights into another
biochemical group that has digitized their supply chain from customer order-ing process straight to the delivery of ﬁnished products at the customer site.
That company can predict the most adequate raw materials supplier and trackindividual delivery units.
Reﬂecting these two realities shows that it requires more than technology to
implement AI solutions: empathy! It starts off with talking to the affected andinvolved people and to understand their objectives (based on their values), theirindividual ways to achieve those, and their particular needs along. It is to show
possible approaches from other (best) practices. This approach also opens new
business opportunities as in that particular case, an IT (consultancy) giant whoprovides IT technology services to SMEs as well abstained for offering in thatparticular case, as the case was “too small ”for them ...
So, as boot.AI asked if at all some data are available throughout the supply
chain, it turned out that on a very small level, though, there was an IT
administrator, a server, and one machine with three sensors measuring ﬁlling
levels, an odometer measuring velocity, and a temperature sensor.
Although this is not very comprehensive and conclusive, boot.AI offered to
build within a few hours a very simple model using those sensor data in orderto demonstrate what would be possible utilizing that in-process informationfor optimizing the ﬂow toward the quality goals of the company. (Quality does
not start at the end of a ﬁnished product! Well implemented, it is an intrinsic
capability of an organization providing as much transparency as possible tospot problems early on and ﬁxing them before an odd product reaches the
ﬁnishing line.) In this particular case, it turned out that the raw material
components had different temperatures when entering speci ﬁc sections of
the production process. Their temperature has an in ﬂuence on the process
quality downstream as they have temperature-dependent consistency(viscosities). So, within a few hours the possibilities of advancing the produc-tion quality just by measuring early on were demonstrated. The CEO wasimmediately impressed, and he asked what could be done if he would havemore sensors, as he has heard that more modern machines have varioussensors and provide such information. So far, he had a market overview on
(continued)9 Ethical Best Practice Applying AI in a Socially Sensible Manner 181