4. General characteristics, which must be given, so that AI works well, are ﬁrstly
suitable algorithms and secondly suitable data. Only in the combination ofalgorithm and data new insights can be gained. If one of the components is
questionable, unsuitable, or even insuf ﬁcient, the result can be disastrous, as real
application examples have repeatedly shown (e.g., unintentional discriminationof applicants in an AI-based recruitment process (Amazon 2018) or AI-basedphoto categorization identifying a black person as a gorilla (Google 2015)).
5. AI —even if in a weak form —is already a fact today and it requires a re ﬂective
handling of this technology, since this technology has enormous innovative butalso enormous destructive power. A sweeping demonization and rejection ofthis technology is just as out of place as a naive good faith that nothing negative
will happen ( “I have nothing to hide ”).
6. The social challenge that increasingly determines the way we live together in a
globalized, fast-moving world that is also threatened by its own over-consumption of resources is that increasing complexity must remain manage-able in a highly dynamic manner. Ethical understanding as a societal point ofreference for “good”(“desirable ”) and “bad”(“intolerable ”) will certainly
continue to adapt to digitization, as has always been the case. However, due tothe acceleration in the digitized world, previous social-ethical correctives no
longer work or work too late. What is needed is a new basic understanding of
how to deal with the technical possibilities in society, and where the “no go
areas”lie. A disinhibited exploitation of all technical possibilities will sooner or
later lead to social and ecological collapse with hardly assessable and certainlymostly irreversible consequences. This new basic understanding should takeinto account the element of phenomenological evidence in order to supportcredibility and con ﬁdence in an AI-based decision that cannot be fully analyzed.
7. A competence is needed that enables the responsible use of the technology in
order to make it usable in a socially positive sense.
8. Strengths and weaknesses of us humans and AI are complementary: where AI
has very strong strengths (fast pattern recognition, detection of facts, andprovision of evidence) humans tend to be limited. Here, AI can support humansin their inadequacies in order to help them make decisions that are sustainablefor society. Used in a targeted manner, AI can be more of a blessing than a curse:in addition to technical optimizations, which ultimately all lead to ef ﬁcient value
creation and thus resource conservation. AI plays a special role in social and
economic decision-making processes in order to keep the aforementioned com-
plexity under control. In contrast to this, only humans in their great diversity areby far the only ones capable of making ﬁnal decisions with their cognitive
abilities, their socialization and permanent development and enormous adapt-ability (e.g., through the neuroplasticity of the brain), their curiosity, their senseof responsibility, and last but not least their soul.
9. AI can and should provide exactly the evidence necessary to strengthen con ﬁ-
dence in human decisions.
10. It is up to us to shape the world in which we want to live.viii Preface