rational but also characterized by emotion. In this respect, a purely economic view is
not enough. Therefore, ﬁndings of psychology are increasingly taken into account.
Examples of this are behavioral ﬁnance (i.e., the “psychology of investors ”and the
study of shareholder behavior) or behavioral risk management (Shefrin 2016 ) (i.e.,
the“pathology ”of organizations in dealing with risks).
The cognitive limitations of individuals and also of groups can lead to
misjudgments and thus often to worse results than a rational decision would promise.
Ultimately, another problem area is that the motivation of individuals is not
necessarily congruent with the company ’s goals (see as well Sect. 1.3where the
discrepancy between individual ’s and society ’s perception was dealt with).
In the following, the different problem areas are brie ﬂy discussed.
2.3 Rationality as an Explanatory Pattern
Most management approaches are still based on the assumption of rational behavior.
Economic models, which are still in ﬂuential today, are based on the assumption of a
“homo oeconomicus, ”although this is known to be an inadequate description of
actual actions. An example from the ﬁnancial market should illustrate this: The basis
of many of the models used today, such as the still predominant capital markettheories, is Markowitz ’s portfolio theory from the 1960s (Brealey et al. 2016 ), as
well as the Nobel Prize-winning “Capital Asset Pricing Models ”(“CAPM ”) based
on it, after W.F. Sharpe and others. Without going into detail, the factual positive
correlation between expected return and risk ( “no risk —no fun ”) is certainly ratio-
nally obvious. But that the markets act highly irrationally can always be seen,especially when the company ’s share price falls despite good real results or vice
versa. It is therefore not surprising if a model that is not designed for prediction (butis nevertheless used for it) only provides limited coverage with reality.
Example of market irrationality in the context of COVID-19: Take the
example of the share price development in Germany under the spell of the
COVID-19 crisis: The business newspaper Handelsblatt of 11.05.2020
headlines in its morning brie ﬁng“Economy paradox: The worse the economic
data and the pro ﬁt expectations of the companies, the stronger the share prices
currently rise ”(Jakobs 2020 ).
The reason why such one-dimensional rational attempts of explanation are
common despite the well-known limitation may be the logical and thus
understandable derivation of the relations. This creates con ﬁdence and orientation.
Irrational —thus not deducible behavior —would not be understandable in
explanations and thus hardly acceptable.
In addition, a purely rational approach offers a convenient “escape pattern ”:
instead of critically weighing up the most diverse qualitative and quantitative aspectsand making this process of knowledge transparent, traditional statistics are used —24 S. H. Vieweg