Example the German Ministry of Health cooperating with Google: Initially
this sounds really great: “‘Who googles health topics is uncertain and needs
urgently advice, therefore it is important that one can rely on the information,which one ﬁnds there, ’explained Federal Minister of Health Jens Spahn
(CDU) ”(Aerzteblatt 2020a ) to promote the cooperation with Google. The
Internet giant inserts colored boxes —so-called knowledge panels —“that
appear next to the search results when searching for 160 diseases and health-related topics. These are ﬁlled with information ”from the Ministry ’s own
website gesund.bund.de and a weblink to it. The information re ﬂects
symptoms and possible treatment.
While this sounds great —initially, the conditions of how Google is entitled
to use the consumers ’data for this speci ﬁc service remain opaque (not only on
the costs for this service to the ministry). For example, individuals ’search
requests will not sel ﬂessly be rooted by Google to the ministry ’s website, but
Google will most likely use them for pro ﬁling. Hence, it should not come as a
surprise if one enters the term “dust allergy, ”one might ﬁnd quite soon —
probably immediately —offers for dust ﬁlters, mite-free mattresses, and per-
haps even for prescription-free medicines against it on the side ...As this may
be a minor issue, the criticality was addressed in the Amwell example above.
6.Social Correctives: Public Awareness to Foster Responsive Governments.
In order to re ﬂect the downside of capitalism that focuses on the economic
progress of the ﬁrm, an independent view on the social and environmental aspects
is more than ever required. Such independent forces can be provided by publicawareness and responsive government (see 5. above): As soon as a public
awareness about a harmful development, e.g., on pollution or the tragedy of
species loss is built, political decision-makers will take corrective actions.McAffee sees the combination of the four elements (1). Capitalism, (2). techprogress, (3). public awareness, and (4). responsive government as the basis foroptimism in societal and environmental progress (McAffee 2019 ).
11.5 Implementation Roadmap for Ethical AI
From the previous chapters, a conclusive roadmap can be generated as cornerstone
for embarking on an ethical acceptable application of AI technologies in the form ofa“fact sheet. ”
Forbusinesses considering introduction or further rollout of AI technologies, the
following considerations should be thought to enable AI for the good (see Fig. 11.5):
1. Ethics: Positioning on the ethical minimal standards such as respecting human
rights, thrive for self-determination !Intent.
2. Governance: establish a leadership approach such as candorship , which conveys
the ethical intent.246 S. H. Vieweg