term, which focuses on functional or skill-oriented analogies to human intelligence,
(1) knowledge, (2) thinking, and (3) language represent elementary cognitiveabilities that can be represented by different AI technologies. (1) Knowledge is
distinguished into three facets: knowledge generation, knowledge representation,
and knowledge processing. Knowledge generation refers to the process ofidentifying new, potentially useful, and valid information in data (e.g., patternrecognition). A wide range of applications is available for this purpose [e.g.,classi ﬁcation, association, segmentation, and prediction techniques (Wu et al.
2008 )]. Knowledge representation serves the formal representation of knowledge
in a computer. Technical methods of knowledge representation (e.g., semanticnetworks and ontologies) are used, for example, in machine translation programs,
in the construction of expert systems, and in database query programs (Tanwar et al.
2010 ). Knowledge processing makes use of knowledge represented in a computer to
produce new knowledge. In this context, the scienti ﬁc methods of abduction,
deduction, and induction are applied (Reichertz 2003 ). (2) Thinking is de ﬁned as
the search for solutions (of optimization problems). For the reproduction of thinkingprocesses the A* search algorithm, the mountaineering algorithms, the particleswarm optimization, as well as genetic algorithms are proposed [e.g., (Kahramanet al. 2011 ; Strohmeier and Piazza 2015 )]. (3) Language is divided into text and
speech processing. Text processing techniques aim at supporting tasks (e.g., topic
extraction) related to written language in an automated way. For this purpose, anumber of word processing techniques are available (e.g., named-entity recognition;Popovski et al. 2020 ). Speech processing techniques focus on tasks related to spoken
language. Special attention is given to automatic speech recognition and speechsynthesis (e.g., hidden Markov model; Mustafa et al. 2019 ). The functionalities
outlined in this paragraph form the technological framework for the speci ﬁcation
of the application ﬁelds of AI in HRM in Sect. 10.3.
What goals are usually associated with the use of AI? According to Wilson and
Daughtery ( 2018 ),ﬁve different objectives are pursued in the context of business
process optimization: (1) ﬂexibility, (2) speed, (3) scalability, (4) decision optimiza-
tion, and (5) customization. In the course of digital transformation, HR processesmust be aligned with these ﬁve objectives. In Sect. 10.3, these are incorporated into
the conceptual framework as dependent variables (see Fig. 10.3).
10.3 AI in HRM
AI will fundamentally change the way people work. This transformation is taking
place on two levels: ﬁrst- and second-order change (Roedenbeck 2020 ). First-order
change refers to the use of AI by the target group of HRM —the workforce. Thus,
HRM has to equip executives or employees with the technological competenciesrequired for the use of AI along the value chain —this applies to both recruitment and
personnel development. In addition, when planning medium- and long-term person-nel requirements, HR managers must keep in mind the rationalization potential ofAI, which essentially arises in routine tasks. In this respect, ﬁrst-order change can198 M. Groß