1. An Asian “yes”is not an agreement: Saving face, you will not hear a direct “no”
in various Asian countries, but you need to interpret what is actually meant bycomplex, multilayered (non-verbal) signals.
2. Relying on your own (family) network for decisions (as is typical in India) instead
of (supposedly) independent expertise.
3. Prudery in North America: e.g., sauna visits only in swim suits, whereas this is
unthinkable in (Northern) Europe.
Morals also changes over time and across generations. Generational con ﬂicts are
therefore precisely due to evolution. What today ’s generations in many societies
regard as opportune was often unacceptable in previous generations. Children are
socialized (and thus learn what is good or bad, what is right or wrong), especially
through their parents, in the family and at school. By means of explicit rules andprohibitions as well as implicitly through behavior, children are provoked to behavein a way that is considered desirable. Nevertheless, children in their developmentalphases (e.g., from Rubicon (9th –10th year of life) via puberty to solidary growing
up) challenge the previous value system. The con ﬂicts at generation transitions lead
in the long run to adjustments of the moral conceptions. This is to be understood as aclear indication of the social evolution and saves chances of the advancement as well
as risks (of the “moral decline ”). This is true both on a small scale within families
and in societies as a whole. One example of this in the political arena is climateprotection efforts.
Although the initiatives have been running for decades, it was not before
1. The World Climate Conference in Paris in 2015,
2. The ever more noticeable consequences of real climate change, and3. The subsequent initiatives such as the “Fridays for Future ”demonstrations, which
were extended as a mass phenomenon in 2019 in particular, that the topic has
been very much present in the public.
Consequently, companies are also gearing up for the issue of climate change and
environmental protection: from “green investment ”to corporate environmental
protection measures, this issue has now found its way into various sectors of theeconomy.
It should be noted that moral values and actions in society are by no means
congruent.
Example: At least in various high(er)-developed Western countries there is a
noticeable “veggie ”trend to do completely without meat products and to
change over vegetarian/vegan nutrition, clothing, etc. The motivation: Be agood citizen, stay healthy, and act consciously for the environment —so
basically: to save the planet. But to bring nevertheless their children bygasoline guzzling SUV daily to school before one feeds oneself in theeco-supermarket with (allegedly) ecologically cultivated soya and palm oil
products from far-off countries.1 Ethics for Non-philosophers: Basis of Ethics and Ethical Perspectives 5