children in multi-generations households is impossible, as the younger migrate to
urban areas leaving their original families behind. So, strangers as nannies wouldlook after children purely for their own economic bene ﬁt without social links to
the children ’s parents.
The fast-pace digitization has created even more online-fraud attacks without
effective penalization, with particularly elderly people targeted as victims.
Reference is commonly made to the Western countries ’credit systems that allows
access to capital resource through high credit scores of creditworthiness, and whichis seen as a role model for China to cope with fraud and corruption (Wang 2019 ).
From that perspective, high expectations and acceptance rate from the Chinese
public for the social credit system can be better understood; some studies scorepublic acceptance as high as 80% (Kostka 2018 ).
Chinas ’social credit system that is being rolled out bene ﬁts expected and
sanctions unwanted behavior.
There are different types of social credit system (Chuncheng 2019 ) (see Fig. 7.2):
1. The judicial system, led by the Supreme People ’s Court that designed and
implemented the discrediting blacklist (and a red list for high scores) that publiclylists individuals and corporations and that leads to massive restriction andrepressions in wrongdoers (e.g., no access to credits, air and high-speed trains,private schools and universities, etc.) and businesses (in a self-regulated manner
as the publicly provided display shall motivate businesses to score high for
competitive reasons). By March 2019, 13 million publicly blacklisted peopleare penalized by denial of access to loans, attractive jobs, or transport servicesMunicipal social credit systemsMunicipal social credit systemsMunicipal social credit systemsMunicipal social credit systemsNational Governm ental Agencies
Discrediting Blacklist
1. Municipal Governments 2. Commercial CorporationsMunicipal social credit systems Commercial credit rating systemsPeople’s Bank of China 
financial credit systemPeople’s Bank of China
Design and Implementation Design and ImplementationDesign and Implementation Design and Implementation
Fig. 7.2 Social credit systems for natural persons in China [own simpli ﬁed presentation based on
(Chuncheng 2019 )]7 AI and the Ethical Challenge 149