And parallel to this alteration of world order, are two meta-driving forces of
change which are creating upheaval in all parts of our lives: climate change andartiﬁcial intelligence.
8.3 Climate Change and Artificial Intelligence: Reasons
for Hysteria?
Two existential questions can be observed:
1. How can humans continue to thrive in a sustainable way on this planet, in a way
that also preserves the health of the planet?
2. How can we safeguard and cherish our humanity in an ever-more digitally driven
world?
Since both forces could, at least in theory, wipe out humanity entirely, it is not
surprising that there may be feelings of hysteria.
This can be witnessed in the panicked discourse surrounding climate change, and
while this drama is perhaps even necessary to affect positive change more quickly,cooler heads must prevail (no pun intended).
There is a second mega-trend confronting individuals, businesses, and societies
likewise: arti ﬁcial intelligence and the ethical implications that are involved in its
application, here through a ﬁnance lens.
While during 2019, movements such as “Fridays for Future ”put the spotlight on
the ecological risk factor (that affects the ﬁnancial industries as well as everyone
else), attention during 2020 was clearly lured away by the COVID-19 pandemic,
which added social risks to our worries. But the problem is not gone. Not at all. “The
Pandemic Is a Dress Rehearsal. The world is entering a transformative era. Preparefor more chaos and instability ”(Mead 2020 ). And just as with the comparatively
“small ”problem of the COVID-19 situation, there are no functioning means to
manage such a situation con ﬁdently, on a global scale. So, what about global
warming: if the global community fails to deliver on the Paris 2015 intent to limitglobal warming below 2
/C14C, (ﬁnancial) risks will turn into reality and key ( ﬁnancial)
assets will literally be diluted (e.g., see the dramatic simulations from MIT Sloan
Management School and the Climate Change Initiative1). Although the problem is a
truly global one, thus far local advantage-thinking and action has been moreprevalent.
As with the potential disaster of global warming, the potential widespread dangers
of arti ﬁcial intelligence are not always visible, nor are the potentially negative effects
easily forecasted or quanti ﬁed.
1The climate interactive world simulations, e.g., demonstrate the effects in the City of London
where the House of Parliament and Westminster Abbey would be ﬂooded in a 4/C14C warming
scenario. See https://climatechangeinitiative.org/ . (access 02.09.2020).162 S. Spinner