be seen very clearly in the example of the Volkswagen diesel scandal surrounding
exhaust gas manipulation, which became public in 2015.
4.11 Ethical Compass: A Guide to Ethical Conduct
Clear positions as blanket solutions are usually not conducive to an ethically baseddecision-making process. They are extreme positions that push the limits to imprac-ticability. Some approaches to illustrate these extreme positions are discussed belowusing so-called strawmen models:
4.11.1 Righteous Moralist
The approach of applying the higher standards of the home country as well in thehost country, with its low ethical standards, must be critically questioned with regardto its practicability: Ultimately, higher standards mean higher economic resourceconsumption (and thus higher costs), so that there is a very high risk that the entireundertaking cannot be presented in a commercially viable manner and may not beundertaken at all. The consequence is then, however, possibly even worse than if asmall economic contribution is made in the host country while tolerating lowerethical standards.
One example is production in the textile, clothing, and shoe industry in
Southeast Asian emerging or developing countries with lower occupational
safety standards than in the (Western developed) home country: The demandfor the same working conditions (working hours, vacations, wages, etc.) as inthe home country will quickly lead to a migration of the workforce to othercountries with wage advantages due to the high price and competitive pres-sure. Digitization in this sector is more likely to optimize customer orientationthan to strive for further cost reductions, but by no means to improve working
conditions.
4.11.2 Cultural Relativism
In contrast to universalism, which assumes a general and universally valid ethics,
cultural relativism assumes that ethics is culturally determined. Accordingly, behav-ior is to be understood in the respective cultural context and is not to be evaluatedfrom the perspective of another culture. Correspondingly, entrepreneurial decisionsmade in a social context of a host country with low social or ecological standardswould then have to be evaluated on the basis of these norms established there and noton the basis of the stricter norms of the home country. Here as well, obviously68 S. H. Vieweg