2.05 How are personal commitment and psychological distance related to each other?
1 Importance of ethos is highest if functional supervision is given.
2 Psychological distance is higher in functional responsibility than in personal
accountability.
3 Psychological distance is lower in functional responsibility than in functional
supervision.
4 Importance of ethos is low if personally informed.
2.06 Adam Smith ’s theory of the “invisible hand ”is...
1 ...ﬂawed, because compensation rise of executives is not directly mirrored in
payment stagnation to staff.
2 ...ﬂawed, because compensation rise of executives is directly mirrored in payment
stagnation to staff.
3 ...ﬂawed, because compensation rise of executives is not directly mirrored in
payment rise to staff.
4 ...ﬁts, because compensation rise of executives is directly mirrored in payment rise
to staff.
2.07 Extending the valuation of a business beyond traditional ( ﬁnancial) reporting such as the
balance sheet (aka statement of ﬁnancial position) is ...
1 ...adequate, as the minority of the company ’s value is recorded on the balance sheet.
2 ...likely to produce additional complexity that is motivated by auditing ﬁrms,
ﬁnancial advisory, rating ﬁrms, and ﬁnancial information brokers to extend their
business opportunities. Comprehensive technology assessment is not envisaged.
3 ...likely to reduce additional complexity although a comprehensive technology
assessment is envisaged.
4 ...inadequate, as the minority of the company ’s value is not recorded on the balance
sheet.
2.08 Humans and machines are complementary in such regard that ...
1 ...humans are better in context mismatch prevention.
2 ...machines have a higher degree of misperception.
3 ...humans are better in avoiding misperception.
4 ...machines are better in context mismatch prevention.
2.09 Stewardship theory sees the following critical constellations between the actors:
1 When the principal correctly expects the manager to apply stewardship.2 When the principal falsely expects the manager to act as agent.3 When the principal acts economically, as the manager does.4 When the principal acts short term economically and the manager pursues high
ethical standards.
Correct answers can be found in www.vieweg-beratung.de/downloads
References
an der Heiden, M., & Hamouda, O. (2020). Schätzung der aktuellen Entwicklung der SARS-CoV-
2-Epidemie in Deutschland –Nowcasting. Epidemiologisches Bulletin, 17 ,1 0–16.https://doi.
org/10.25646/6692.4 .2 Human Rationality and Morals 37