The starting point of integral re ﬂection is the ego as both a sensory element in
conscious activity and an element in the structure of several other elements
(Heinrichs 2016 , p. 25). The ego [as second sense element] stands opposite the
world of the physical, of nature, and of objects. Dialogical thinking does not stop at
subject –object dualism. Rather, the [subjective] ego is confronted by another “objec-
tive”ego, a you (third sense element). Thereby, the other (the you) is not understood
as negatively limiting, but as liberating (Heinrichs 2016 ) (Fig. 5.2).
The fourth sense element, “spirit, ”the medium of meaning, represents the
transpersonal dimension. Participating in this dimension turns the human being
into the living being capable of the Logos. This Logos represents the epitome and
the“condition of possibility ”of all human communication media, primarily for the
language that mediates between I and you (Heinrichs 2003 , p. 3). The more, and the
more powerfully, the true I or self can live this structure of self-reference-through-
alterity and be individualized as a result, the more capable of participating in the
supra-individual or in ﬁnite it will be (Heinrichs 2016 , p. 34). Man is not only
individually capable of the unconditional or the in ﬁnite, but also, in this individual
capacity, participates in the shared in ﬁnite. It is precisely this participation
(as opposed to being a part) that is the key to an integral understanding (Heinrichs
2016 , p. 264).
The four sense elements correspond to the four types of action: (1) factual action,
(2) interest-oriented action, (3) understanding-oriented action, and (4) norm-oriented
action (Heinrichs 2005b , p. 29).
In view of the changes in society and in relation to spiral dynamics in connection
with digitalization —and here especially with arti ﬁcial intelligence —an integral
frame of reference is fundamental for value-oriented corporate management.
It is important to have this holistic view not only in itself and theoretically, but to
live it in a developed form (Heinrichs 2005a , pp. 107 –108). This is the meaning of
the mindfulness and meditative practices that also transform and support entrepre-
neurial actions.
The secular and real nature of the holistic reference is shown in increased intuition
in the midst of everyday business as well as in a lived attitude of love toward all
living things (Heinrichs 2005a ,b, p. 108) (also in the sense of Hans-Peter Dürr: “Let
the living become more alive ”) and in this respect in an understanding of economics
that does not eliminate the inherent laws but forms an integral part of them.Sense Medium
ObjectsI You
Se
n
se
M
ed
i
u
m
Objects
I
 Y
o
uFig. 5.2 Four sense elements
(Heinrichs 2016 , S. 26)80 M. Müller-Wiegand