For practical applications, decision situations can be modeled and solved by
utilizing software such as Expert Choice or Super-Decision. For the time being,humans model and implement the applications as well as conduct the evaluations.
Consequently, these software solutions support people in decision-making, where
humans still play an active and dominant role. By involving several knowledge andexperience carriers, complex decisions can be made with collective knowledge andcollective intuition.
5.4.3 Syntegration
Syntegration (after Stafford Beer ( 1994 ) and Fredmund Malik) is a workshop
method that enables the processing of complex topics in larger groups and achievesits added value through the collective intelligence of the participants. Theperspectives of up to 40 or more knowledge carriers/key persons are networkedacross the boundaries of the different areas so that maximum information transfer isachieved, resulting in many brains functioning as a single, highly ef ﬁcient brain.
The symbol of a Syntegration is an icosahedron, where each corner represents a
topic, each edge represents a participant, and the icosahedron shows the interaction
of topics and participants (Fig. 5.6).
A Syntegration consists of two phases. In the ﬁrst phase, a multi-stage ﬁltering
process allows participants to determine the 12 topics for subsequent discussion by anetwork of individual groups in the second phase. In the second phase, usuallybeginning the following day, these topics are dealt with in group sessions ( Malik ,
p. 2).
According to the icosahedron, ideally, there are 30 participants, each serving as a
team member in two groups, a critic in two further groups, and an observer in four
additional groups (Syntegration ®Effective Communication —Solidia Management
Consulting 2005 ).
When a Syntegration ends, everyone is aware of approximately 90% of the
participants ’total available knowledge ( Malik , p. 2) (Fig. 5.7).
Fig. 5.6 Icosahedron (own
presentation based following
(Malik 2013 ), based on (Beer
1994 ))86 M. Müller-Wiegand