point, AI can make an important contribution in the form of neural networks for
pattern recognition. The algorithmic analysis of large amounts of data makes itpossible not only to detect performance ﬂuctuations in real time, but also to
identify individual performance patterns. In concrete terms, ANN can determine
weighted indicators from various data sources (e.g., the number and duration ofcustomer appointments or number of work from home days), which in ﬂuence
the individual performance of employees. This information can then be used todevelop personal recommendations for the employees. It is important to notethat AI should not be used at this point as a monitoring tool for individualemployee performance, but rather as a personal “performance coach ”to sensi-
tize employees to their behavioral and performance patterns. In addition, the
systematic evaluation of metadata from various sources at the company level
opens up new possibilities for personnel assessment. For example, aggregatedsensor data from wearables, communication data from the social intranet, ormovement data from mobile devices offer new insights into the social structure(see in detail (Bernstein and Waber 2019 )]. Pattern recognition algorithms
enable companies to analyze in real time how closely departments arenetworked with each other, which employee groups are most effective orinnovative, and where the informal opinion leaders in the company can be
found (Groß and Dorozalla 2020 ). These insights into the social structure
provide important information on corporate performance.
10. The remuneration can be divided into three types: ﬁxed remuneration, variable
remuneration, and (non-monetary) additional bene ﬁts. In times of the so-called
war for talents, HR managers are faced with the challenge of putting together themost attractive remuneration packages possible in order to attract and retainqualiﬁed employees. The development of individually optimized compensation
proposals is a combinatorial optimization problem that can be solved, for
example, by means of an evolutionary algorithm (cf. comments on point 6).
The relevant search space for solutions is formed by combinations of the threementioned compensation variants that are legally and ﬁscally permissible,
whereby the non-monetary compensation components enjoy special relevance.By analyzing various employee data (e.g., tax class, previous selection ofnon-monetary compensation components, or focus on reducing statutorycharges), an individually optimized compensation proposal can be created.Speci ﬁcally, genetic algorithms automatically suggest a compensation based
on employees ’preferences, which can also reduce taxes for employers and
employees (Dorozalla and Jeddeloh 2019 ; Groß and Dorozalla 2020 ).
11. In addition to the AI-based management of executives and employees, the
digitalization of the administration of employees plays an important role in
HR transformation. In recent years, digital personnel ﬁles have found their
way into companies in this context. The digital personnel ﬁle is an electronic
document management system that simpli ﬁes the administration of
HRM-related documents and digitizes standardized HRM processes. Changes
to personnel master data (e.g., change of address) or uploads of documents (e.g.,
vacation requests) can be made not only by the HR managers but also by the10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 207