2. Sloping toward auditing ﬁrms:
Drivers of the initiative are obviously biased toward accounting auditors (pre-sumably primarily on generating new business) and not consensus-oriented, sothat neither the companies that generate primary value added (e.g., manufacturingcompanies) were suf ﬁciently involved, nor were the competitors of these drivers
visible in the initiative, which could have ensured broader acceptance. Anexample is the initiative “Coalition for Inclusive Capitalism ”(EY 2018 ), which
of its 31 members only involved nine(!) companies worldwide with primary value
creation and all others only from the ﬁeld of asset management (asset owners
8). In
addition, this project was dominated by an auditing and consulting ﬁrm.9
Despite this sobering summary, it should be pointed out that a “keep it up ”with
single-sided pure short-term economic focus seems as unsuccessful as some currentinitiatives that are characterized by exuberating complexity (Vieweg 2020b ).
Finding a practicable, purposeful, and pragmatic middle way that includes thoseactually affected is a concrete challenge. Here it quickly becomes apparent that the
use of arti ﬁcial intelligence can help in the sense of information processing for
evidence-based decisions and to avoid cognitive (human) bias. On the other hand,skills, beliefs, and values of individuals are crucial to ﬁnd the “right ”decision in a
changed context (see Fig. 2.3). In this respect, a complementary approach seems to
be promising. This can be seen in the case of extended reporting outlined above: Keyupstream and downstream key performance indicators —uniformly de ﬁned, recorded
in a standardized way, and automatically processed in compliance with goodEvidence-based decisions
Strengths in…
Standards
Rou/g415ne problems
Replica/g415on tasks
Transac/g415on ac/g415vi/g415es
Avoids …
Cogni/g415ve biases
Opportunis/g415c (selﬁsh) decisions
mispercep/g415onIntellect-based decisions
Strengths in …
Skills
Experience
Desire
Convic/g415on
Value
Avoids … 
Context mismatch
Missing the good inten/g415onMachine
Human
Fig. 2.3 Human –machine interaction (own illustration)
8This term is misleadingly used in the “Embarkment Project for Inclusive Capitalism, ”since
insurance companies and pension funds also manage assets.
916 of the 19 members come from the consultancy and auditing ﬁrm EY ( 2018 ).34 S. H. Vieweg