5.3 Intelligence: Human –Collective –Artificial Integral
5.3.1 Artificial Intelligence
A system is intelligent if it can solve problems independently and ef ﬁciently. The
degree of intelligence depends on the degree of autonomy, the degree of complexity
of the problem, and the degree of ef ﬁciency of the problem-solving process (Mainzer
2019 , p. 3).
“Weak arti ﬁcial intelligence ”refers to systems that focus on the solution of
concrete application problems, e.g., character or text recognition (Moeser 2018 ).
In contrast, the goal of strong arti ﬁcial intelligence is to achieve or exceed the
intellectual abilities of humans. “Strong arti ﬁcial intelligence ”no longer acts only
reactively, but also on its own initiative, intelligently and ﬂexibly (Moeser 2018 ).
5.3.2 Collective and Integral Intelligence
Collective intelligence is the result of groups of individuals working together
intelligently (Malone 2018 , p. 20), and Malone explicitly speaks of “Supermind —
The Surprising Power of People and Computers Thinking Together ”(Malone 2018 ,
p. 20).
Based on his empirical research, he identi ﬁes three factors that show a clear
positive correlation to collective intelligence, i.e., the problem-solving ability of a
group:
1. The average social perceptivity of the group members.
2. The degree of uniformity in the participation of the members.3. The percentage of women in the group (correlates with average social
perceptivity).
A high level of intelligence among group members therefore only has a limited
inﬂuence on the problem-solving ability of a group (Malone 2018 , p. 20). Rather, the
ability to solve problems is crucially dependent on social intelligence. The right teamcomposition leads to the addition of value through collective intelligence thatexceeds the collective intelligence of the people involved.
According to Ashby ’s Law, complex and dynamic problems can only be under-
stood and solved by a correspondingly complex and dynamic system. Consequently,the intelligence and competencies of individuals no longer suf ﬁce to develop
solutions and innovations. Rather, methods are needed for the organization of
supra-individual discourses. Faced with a highly networked, dif ﬁcult-to-predict
world with incalculable changes, recourse to explicit knowledge alone is no longerenough. Consequently, intuitive knowledge will generally gain in importance as amethod of complexity reduction. Intuitive knowledge expresses the brain ’s ability to
reduce complex relationships to the essential via unconscious pattern formation.Implicit knowledge is valuable but seldom directly accessible, i.e., intuitive82 M. Müller-Wiegand