identi ﬁed. That parallel information processing will exponentially reduce the time it
would take even for the fastest classical computing systems to solve a computationalproblem.
Example Google AI Quantum and Sycamore: Theﬁrst narrow setting of such
supremacy of quantum computing was demonstrated in 2019 by a US-centric
international team around the Google AI Quantum and nine US and threeGerman scienti ﬁc institutions (Arute et al. 2019 ). Based on a narrow compu-
tational task (that is speci ﬁcally hard for classical computers, and advanta-
geous for quantum computing), the “Sycamore ”quantum processor —an array
of up to 53 qubits —took about 200 seconds for the task that the then faster
state-of-the-art classical supercomputer (Summit, USA, which is number 2 in
Fig.6.17, which is “just”2.7 times slower than the ruling #1 Fugaku) would
take approximately 10,000 years (#1 Fugaku would require still some 3,700years, accordingly). This dramatic increase in speed —although applicable
only for a dedicated experimental setting —isﬁrst public evidence of the
widely perceived computing paradigm of quantum computing supremacy.Critics from competitors such as IBM claimed that this experiment couldhave been solved within 2.5 days (Savage 2020 ). While there is an intense
race for ever-increasing computing performance, there are assessments of
10–15 years (from 2020) still to go when quantum computing will be available
on a broadened basis. Though, a variety of initiatives and networks arepreparing for it already now (Solomon 2020 ) and paving the way of using
this emerging technology: as quantum computers have an entirely differentarchitecture, and going along with that an entirely different way of utilizing thefull performance spectrum, development environments need to be set up andreadily in place once the technology will be available on a large(r) scale.
An often-cited problem that might occur once quantum computing is the new
state of technology is hacking existing cryptographical applications that are basicallyused everywhere today for hashing, digital signatures, and encryption. The differentcryptographical approaches are very often based on an asymmetric public keycryptography ( “PKC ”) that allows us easily to share information in an authentical
and secure environment .... until said approach can be compromised (easily).
Public key infrastructure ( “PKI”) is based on a set of a private key and a public
key. As the name indicates, private keys are kept as a secret by the user and is notshared with the outside world, whereas the public key can be shared with otherseasily. The beauty of the approach is that it does not require a symmetric exchange ofkeys (e.g., only one key used for encryption and decryption) that leads to massivelogistical and procedural issues to ensure that only the correct identity has used thecryptographical key for the intended purpose. PKC is an irreversible approach, i.e., a
cryptographical transaction such as encryption of a message of creation of a digital
signature cannot be reversed with the key used; it needs the counterpart key.116 S. H. Vieweg