In the AI era —even in pure civil use cases —there are highly critical situations
that urgently need self-restriction: the example is in health care and telemedicine,where no effective controls are in place to avoid misuse and exploitation of
individuals.
Example Google Invests in Leading US Telemedicine Services Amwell
Amwell is the one of the largest brokers of telemedicine or telematics services
in the USA. Amwell has more than 40,000 service providers (e.g., physicians)including 2000 hospitals that enable c. 80 million US citizens to bene ﬁt from
virtual medical consultations. In order to “leverage the global presence of
Google Cloud, ”there is a link between the customer accounts of Amwell and
Google. (Aerzteblatt 2020 ) In other words: Google has direct access to VERY
sensitive health data of millions of patients. It is claimed that within this
partnership, “security and data protection as core principles ”are to apply
and all services offered would adhere to “strict guidelines on data access and
use, including industry regulations on patient health information ”(Aerzteblatt
2020 ).
To re ﬂect this, such statement ful ﬁlls the ﬁrst condition “intent, ”but it lacks
any measure on the second condition “independent controls ”(see above).
From the past we learnt that despite cheap proclamations data breaches and
misuse are common, e.g., “Google ’s‘Project Nightingale ’Gathers Personal
Health Data on Millions of Americans ”asThe Wall Street Journal titled
(Copeland 2019 ) when reporting that Google has collected and processed
the health data of millions of patients provided by the healthcare organizationAscension, and neither the patients concerned nor the attending physiciansgave their consent to the disclosure.
Self-restriction is a nil return, e.g., in the context of Google ’s acquisition of
smart wearables producer Fitbit; in 2019, the opposite may actually be true,
following the dpa-report. “At the same time, there was no promise to store data
separately, as was once the case when Google took over smarthome specialistNest”(Welt 2020 ).
Although careless individuals may initially think that they do not have
anything to hide or they are “not interesting ”for commercial use, the situa-
tion may quickly turn into a massive disadvantage for them next time theyapply for a job, a loan etc. when the resulting AI-based pro ﬁling will disqual-
ify them due to inadequate living performance parameter ...
Disregarding whether the companies apply strict compliance or not, without
independent controls prevention of breach of human rights is not effectively possi-
ble. Just referring to the law and its procedures ex post is insuf ﬁcient and unsatisfac-
tory, since the AI impact typically affects large groups of a society.244 S. H. Vieweg