be automated within very short setup times (see Fig. 6.9). Incumbent suppliers of
RPA solutions offer simple-to-use con ﬁguration tolls and/or “RPA academy ”sup-
port that enables (non-IT) customers to easily set up their bot without the prerequisite
of programming skills (the resource that is typically within the IT department or withthe external supplier and not easily accessible). Though it is highly advisable toapply a structured approach for the RPA introduction, in an initial evaluation,potential processes that can easily be automated should be identi ﬁed and validated
by both the internal view of the organization and an external re ﬂection to utilize best
(implementation) practices and avoid common problems. Once the right processcandidates have been identi ﬁed, in the second step processes need to be captured
(including data structures) and the technical feasibility be checked.
Typically, the cost for an RPA is in the order of an annual salary of one (human)
resource performing the repetitive task. From thereon, the economic business caserationale with sub-annual paybacks can easily be drawn: As the RPA can run 24/7, itwill give an immediate tripled capacity advantage compared to human workers. Theproductivity itself may add an ef ﬁciency advantage as well as error avoidance.
Obviously, this expectation is only valid for such processes that have thecharacteristics of repetitive ﬂow and a minimum of exception handling. Therefore,
the structured approach and implementation is crucial to the RPA success. Other-
wise, the implementation may entirely fail and deliver broken processes withadditional (over)load for remaining staff to ﬁx what the RPA cannot handle. In
such a situation, it is not technology that failed, but the selection of adequate processparts to be automated and their implementation.
There are different stages of RPA re ﬂecting the sophistication. More advanced
technologies (IRPA, APA) use AI already (see Fig. 6.10). The higher the sophisti-
cation of the RPA (in a wider sense), the higher the potential automation can
generate. The spectrum ranges from static rule-based processes within one applica-
tion (e.g., spreadsheet calculation macros) onward to cross-application prede ﬁned
process ﬂows that replicate (human) user activities over to pattern recognitionAutomation
(orchestrated)Robotics
(RPA)Cognitive Robotics
(CRPA)Intelligent Robotics
(IRPA,  APA)
5-20% 40+% 60+% 80+%
Application dependent 
Workflow Automation
Rule-based
Scripting
Macros
Business Process Modelling
Orchestrated Automation
System interface and API 
dependentRPA replicating actual user 
activities
Cross-application and System 
Workflow Automation
Complex rules
Process Automation of Legacy 
Systems
User Activity ReplicationRPA + integrated cognitive 
services (e.g. from Google, 
Microsoft, ABBYY, etc.)
OCR and image integration (incl. 
Complex screen scrapping)
Natural Language Processing
Cognitive Virtual Assistance, 
Voice Assistants (Alexa, Siri, 
Cortana, etc.), Chatbots
Dynamic Case Management 
integrationRPA with integrated cognitive and 
Deep Learning services 
Self-learning for process discovery 
consolidated RPA generation
„Training“ not „programming“ 
robots
Natural language generation and 
automated process documentation 
generation
Computer Vision (AI-Screen 
recognition)Automation 
PotentialExamples
Fig. 6.10 Different characteristics of RPA (own presentation based on UIPATH ( 2018 ))106 S. H. Vieweg