of the ﬁnal storage of nuclear waste were effectively ignored. Likewise, the side
effects of the “miracle ﬁber”asbestos (weight, strength, insulation, ﬁre protection,
etc.), which was massively used as a building material and basic material in various
products (up to baby powder (ORF 2018 )), were for a long time ignored.
Another example is the dependency (addiction) on smartphones/mobile apps
(with the disclosure of considerable personal information) or the currently stilldifﬁcult to assess impact (suspected macular degeneration) by pulsed radiation
from LED light sources (NDR 2018 ) as a replacement for incandescent bulbs or
energy-saving lamps. From an environmental point of view certainly praiseworthyand well comprehensible, the political directive of the European Union, however,does not consider the harmful side effects of a conversion of the lighting to LED.
Another well-known phenomenon is the so-called free-rider problem: Here, the
effect of the non-compliant actions of one individual is negligible if all others followexactly these rules. In contrast, the effect of good, rule-compliant action by oneindividual is virtually ineffective if all others break exactly these rules. Thus, thefactual consequence cannot be directly attributed to a single person. The problemknown as Hardin ’s“Tragedy of the Commons ”(Hardin 1968 ), that a common good
is overexploited because of the supposed free availability for everyone, has also hadits meaning for 50 years. This can be seen, for example, in the short-term economic
optimization of processes and products without considering the long-term environ-
mental consequences.
A further problem from the ethics of consequences is that an intrinsically
motivated person, who initially does the right thing out of conviction, becomesquasi demotivated if all others do not follow the rules. This process, known as“carving out, ”must of course be prevented, as otherwise the role model function is
completely abandoned and ultimately the right action is not considered desirable.
A further challenge in technology assessment is that in many areas the state of
technology is now so high that these technologies are easily capable of destroying
individual people and the whole of humanity. This double-bind dilemma describedby David Collingridge (Collingridge 1982 ; Genus and Stirling 2018 ) requires great
discipline and rational action: the problem lies in the fact that at the beginning of theimplementation of a new technology, only little is known about the potentialconsequences thereof; later, once the technology has established itself, it is basicallytoo late to stop or revert it due to an overwhelming control problem.
1.5.4 Monological Ethics
In monological ethics, it is left to the individual to ﬁnd out by his own re ﬂection
which actions are moral. Thus, this approach is in some ways contrary to mandatoryethics (see Sect. 1.5.2 ). On the other hand, widespread rules provide orientation. The
“golden rule ”is found in many religions and says that one should treat others as one
would like to be treated by them. This is also articulated in the proverb “Do not do to
others what you do not want them to do to you. ”16 S. H. Vieweg