To follow up with the company example from above, in order to be able to
generate data, sensors are required to detect relevant items and transfer this
detection into measurements that are captured with data. So, the biochemicalcompany requires a supply chain with sensor-equipped machines and infra-structure to generate relevant data along the value chain. Generated data will
be used in algorithms, which at the end is de ﬁned sequence of data manipula-
tion based on mathematical models. Even if one famous technique —neural
networks —is used, that does not ex ante de ﬁne the interaction and manipula-
tion points as such, but which provides a de ﬁned framing (such as the number
of layers of the neural network). Based on the algorithm ’s output, the supply
chain can be automated such as based on predicted consumption of certain rawmaterials (based on speci ﬁc environmental conditions such as temperature, air
pressure, humidity, and actual machine conditions indicators such as ﬁlling
levels of tanks and speeds), an automated ordering process with the supplier
could be triggered.
Within the example company, the CEO has rejected this type of automa-
tion, as he does not like that. His nephew approached the startup boot.AI viasome contacts.
Approaching the company site can be illustrated as such: the company is
located in a rural area in the backyards of Bavaria. The company has telecom-munication networks based on DSL technologies; the CEO still uses only
ISDN. Re ﬂecting brie ﬂy on the topic of digitization, this company is in a
typical setting that can be found at least in Germany in many areas: wired(copper-cable based) infrastructure is rarely available or not capable ofhandling massive data volumes as expected in full-blown IoTimplementations. So, 5G, the new mobile telecommunication standards, isvery promising with high data transfer rates
1allowing real-time applications
such as autonomous driving. From this point of view, it is very interesting, butas higher frequencies and smaller cells are used with 5G, this requires a proper
backbone infrastructure —based on ﬁber
2, which is not available either in those
rural areas (and may not for a very long time going forward)! So, all in all,there is an infrastructure problem!
Passing nice green meadows and approaching this small city, the large
company building where 140 employees work comes in sight. The CEO opensthe door and guides us to his of ﬁce—nicely furnished with posh but oldish,
green leather upholstered armchairs of dark brown wood. The CEO opens
(continued)
1Although reality may vary: compared to UMTS (3G) with some 42 Mbit/sec, 4G (LTE) with max.
500 Mbit/sec and 5G with up to 20 Gbit/sec (though, current implementation may be more around1-2Gbit/sec), see https://www.5g-anbieter.info/speed/wie-schnell-ist-5g.html . (access 04.09.2020).
2https://blog.qsc.de/2019/05/ohne-glasfaser-infrastruktur-kein-5g-mobilfunk/ . (access 04.09.2020).180 S. H. Vieweg