Thus, morality is changeable and culture-dependent and expresses socially desir-
able behavior. But even if morality is changeable, it is by no means arbitrary,especially since the change process itself takes a relatively long time (measured in
years rather than weeks). This is also because a social value framework —and thus
morality —provides an important orientation function: Since time immemorial, peo-
ple have been thinking about moral issues and dealing with them. This makes it clearthat consistent values, norms, and moral concepts always play a major role whenpeople organize themselves in social communities. Ultimately, this also results inanswers to questions of justice, solidarity, and care as well as the distribution ofgoods and resources.
Morality acts here as the common lowest denominator for a given society. The
advantage is based on the fact that the values underlying morality convey a socially
accepted basic understanding and provide orientation in concrete decision-makingsituations. This makes morality functional and ef ﬁcient for social groups: In order to
be accepted in a community, the individual will strive not to act against thiscommunity. Conversely, this means that the behavior of the individual and the socialgroup is ultimately predictable. As a result, uncertainty about behavior is reducedand trust is built up.
However, morality is changing because both the individual and her or his
preferences are changing, as is the context in which she or he lives.
However, there is, so to speak, a minimal consensus of basic values that have
proven themselves for the coexistence of people and which therefore remainuntouched. This basis of human rights can be found worldwide, for example in theUniversal Declaration of Human Rights (UN 1948 ) or in the ﬁrst articles of the Basic
Law of the Federal Republic of Germany (BMJ 1949 ).
1.3 Ethos
While morality describes the value system of a certain social group at a certain point
in time, there is still little said about the individual values and convictions of the
individual members of this society. Here, the terminus ethos plays an important role,
since it describes the attitude of the individual. However, this does not automaticallyensure that individual attitudes and social consensus are compatible. A concreteexample was shown in the Corona crisis in 2020: despite the politically prescribedseparation and compulsory masking in many countries, not everyone was convincedof the measures required to prevent the spread of the virus. As a result, individualsdid not take seriously the requirement to maintain minimum distances and curfews,etc., and even deliberately —almost to the point of sabotage —took countermeasures
such as “corona parties. ”This results in constellations in which social ideas (moral-
ity) and individual convictions (ethos) are antinomic. Table 1.1shows this
discrepancy:
Social norms provide a society with orientation and trust for what is right and
what is wrong. Social norms are accepted in a society, are universally valid, andconcern both cognitive and emotional abilities on the one hand, and concretebehavior on the other.6 S. H. Vieweg