In place of the classical Aristotelian logic of identity, a difference-theoretical
logic of identity is applied, since identity can only be had within the framework of anegation, which is to be understood as an implication. A human being is only ahuman being (identity) if he/she distinguishes himself/herself from the outside,
which he is not (negation), but whose existence he presupposes as outside of the
distinction (implication) (Baecker 2016a , p. 242).
If one looks at the difference between humans and machines, one sees that a
human is alive; a machine is inanimate matter. A human being consists of organicmaterial, a machine of plastic and metal. A human being can think and has feelingsand a consciousness as well as dignity and morality, things that a machine does nothave (Vowinkel 2017 ). If one looks at reentry, one can see that humans also have
their routines or use algorithms and weightings in decision-making, which they
transfer to the programming of algorithms whose application subsequently improves
human decision-making. When our computers and their programs become increas-ingly intelligent, when they develop consciousness, then the “nontrivial machine ”
according to Heinz von Foerster ( 2003 ) is literally completed. Nevertheless, human
intelligence as a biological system will differ from arti ﬁcial intelligence in its
inherent laws.
5.4 Applications
5.4.1 Neuronal Network-Based Decisions
Relationships of effects between variables in real situations are usually complex.Therefore, it is dif ﬁcult to formulate well-founded hypotheses about the nature of
these relationships.
With arti ﬁcial neural networks ( “ANN ”), the user need not necessarily make an
assumption about the relationship between variables. By way of ANN, theconnections between variables are determined independently by a learning processand can thereby consider a multiplicity of variables (Backhaus et al. 2015 , p. 296).
Artiﬁcial neural networks can use the logic of descriptive, predictive, and pre-
scriptive business analytics methods to provide analyses, forecasts, andrecommendations for action, thus enabling better decisions with advanced analytics
(Fig. 5.5).
For example, bank loan granted by an arti ﬁcial neural network can be decided on
the basis of a dataset of creditworthy and non-creditworthy customers and theirsociodemographic and economic data with an assignable classi ﬁcation. For such
classi ﬁcation decisions, the possibility of so-called counterfactual explanations as
explanations of decision recommendations with arti ﬁcial intelligence is useful. ForIntegral Intelligence = Human Machine
Fig. 5.4 Concept of integral intelligence (own presentation)84 M. Müller-Wiegand