2. Social pact (ICESCR)
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR)originating from 1966 (together with ICCPR) states that economic, social, and
cultural rights form an indivisible unit together with civil and political rights.
3. Anti-racial convention (ICERD)
The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrim-ination (ICERD) intends to ensure that people are protected in law and in factfrom racial discrimination.
4. Women ’s rights convention (CEDAW)
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination againstWomen is the most important international human rights treaty for women. The
signatory states commit to the legal and factual equality of women in all areas of
life, including the private sphere.
5. Children ’s rights convention (CRC)
The center of this convention is the recognition of children as human rightsholders. Its principles include the right to non-discrimination, the right to lifeand development of the child, the right to have the best interests of the child aprimary consideration, and the right to be heard and to have the views of the childtaken into account. Extensions include prevention of participation of children in
armed con ﬂicts, sale of children, child prostitution, and child pornography.
6. All migrant workers convention (ICRMW)
The International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All MigrantWorkers and Members of their Families protects migrant workers and their familymembers regardless of their residence status. The protection extends to the entiremigration process, from leaving the country of origin to their stay and return.
7. Disability Rights Convention (ICRPD)
The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
The Disability Rights Convention concretizes the universal human rights for
people with disabilities such as autonomy and self-determination as well asinclusion, i.e., the equal coexistence of people with and without disabilities.
8. Anti-torture convention (CAT)
The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treat-ment or Punishment is one of the few human rights norms that claim legal validitywithout exception and also apply in emergency situations. Each state party to theConvention undertakes to take effective legislative, administrative, judicial, or
other measures to prevent torture and inhuman treatment. Extradition or deporta-
tion of persons to States where they are at risk of torture is prohibited.
9. Convention against disappearances (CPED)
The International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from EnforcedDisappearance requires state parties to undertake to de ﬁne and punish enforced
disappearances as a criminal offense.
Disappearances are often accompanied by other human rights violations such
as torture or extrajudicial executions.58 S. H. Vieweg