of the large GAFA4Internet groups, which have been systematically shifting their
proﬁts (legally) through licenses for years in such a way that they did not pay any taxes
in the important sales market of Europe (where in fact no development took place).
The participation of the European national economies has failed to materialize. On the
contrary, their market power leads (even if not originally intended) to the fact thatthese companies exert considerable in ﬂuence on the respective national
politics (Beutelsbacher et al. 2016 ), as the examples of Amazon and Luxembourg or
Apple and Ireland have shown: in 2017, of ﬁcial politics opposed the political initiative
of the European Commission to eliminate the tax loopholes through a digital tax. Thetrend over the last decade shows that these four mega-corporations together havealready reached a market capitalization equivalent to 1/3 of the entire EU 27 (excluding
the UK, which left the EU on January 31, 2020)
5and Apple ’s market capitalization
exceeded the magic $2 trillion mark on August 19, 2020, almost reaching the GDP ofthe third largest EU economy, Italy. Such monopolistic structures effectively cancelout the laws of a free and fair market with a socially legitimized political force. Even instakeholder economies, in which a socially more acceptable variant of the liberalmarket economy is represented, there are considerable distortions due to marketasymmetries, for example in the labor market.
Interestingly, some change is now emerging from the entrepreneurial perspective
and a —certainly pro ﬁt-driven interest —in taking into account the trend toward
sustainability in social and ecological terms. Inclusive capitalism will be explainedbelow as an example.
2.6.1 Inclusive Capitalism: Example of an Initiative to Consider
the Sustainability Aspect —Not Only for Ethical Reasons
Today ’s standard ﬁnancial reporting —certiﬁed by auditors —no longer does justice
to the increasing complexity of sustainable corporate management and reporting toits stakeholders: funds from the last century are still being used, which do not at allcapture the essential components that characterize the value of a company. This isdue in particular to the backward-looking focus on ﬁnancial indicators (ex post) and
thus the neglect of long-term —leading —indicators that characterize the internal
value of a company and its impact on the corporate environment. Some studies
show that in 2018 only 20% of the company ’s value will be recorded in the balance
sheet, compared to over 80% in the mid-1970s (Brand Finance 2018 ).
More or less suitable indicators and modern management methods are available
in abundance —nevertheless, the comprehensive implementation of such methods in
4GAFA —referred to Google, Apple, Facebook, and Amazon. Sometimes quoted as GAFAM
including Microsoft: in August 2020 the ﬁve US-tech giants had a market cap of >$ 7.4 TN,
which is c. 45% of the entire EU 27 BIP ( 2019 ).
5Own analysis based on ec.europa.eu/eurostat “European Union: Gross domestic product (GDP) in
the member states in current prices in 2019. ”and (Janson 2020 ).32 S. H. Vieweg