those of the churches. Finally, after various attempts, a new version of §218
was only published in 1976.
Consequently, inconsistent regulations on this topic in Europe led to
“abortion tourism, ”in which affected pregnant women had the abortion
performed in countries with a more liberal interpretation. An example of this
was Great Britain with a social-medicine-induced indication regulation, theAbortion Act from 1967 (UKGov 1967 ), where a liberal practice developed
that complied with the corresponding time limit regulation. Only with furtherliberalized legislation in the countries of origin did this “abortion tourism ”
decline.
In the fall of 2020, this topic is high on the agenda in Poland, where the
conservative government in ﬂuenced the Constitutional Tribunal to tighten the
already strictest rules in Europe on abortion. Tens of thousands of people
protested (Ptak and McDonald 2020 ).
A completely different example, in which the legal basis is only subsequently
adapted to the changing social norms, can be seen in the Internet economy. Here
often the problem of a “law-free area ”arises, since e.g. minimal requirements of
social interaction are not re ﬂected in laws. One example is that until 2018, the topic
of data protection was only rudimentarily anchored in Europe and only then, with theintroduction of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (EU 2016 ), were
more restrictive practices regulated, even if these do not directly meet with socialconsensus. In the USA likewise initiatives emerged since 2018 to protect consumersfrom exploitation of Internet companies, in particular the “Big Tech ”GAFAM
1: the
California Consumer Privacy Act ’s(“CCPA ”) (Mactaggert 2019 ) intent is to counter
the ever-increasing exploitation of consumers ’behavior and preferences using AI
technologies by providing indiscriminating possibilities of consumers ’self-
determination.
Similarly, there are discrepancies between the binding nature of email and
electronic media and typical practice. On the basis of the eIDAS (EU 2014 ) regula-
tion issued by the European Union as early as 2014, the German Trust Services Act(VDG) (BMJ 2017 ) did not come into force in Germany until 2018 to guarantee a
qualiﬁed signature (by so-called trust service providers, who in turn act under the
supervision of the federal network agency “Bundesnetzagentur ”) for electronic
business transactions.
In addition to the phenomenon that societal norms (Section A in Fig. 1.2) are
reﬂected in legislation to a limited extent only afterward (Section B in Fig. 1.2), there
is also the case that there is a general consensus in society, but ultimately nocongruent behavior among the individual members of society. This corresponds tothe situation shown in Table 1.1 “Society Approval/Individual Rejection ”in the
1GAFAM: acronym for Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, and Microsoft.1 Ethics for Non-philosophers: Basis of Ethics and Ethical Perspectives 9