activity in the emotional brain center was observed. So, the perception of “right ”and
“wrong ”is not just a purely logical weighing up of the two. Such models have been
repeatedly criticized for being too simplistic. However, the reference to reality
becomes quickly clear when, for example, following the discussion after 9/11
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, in the USA the subject of induced aircraftshooting when there is a terrorist threat is taken into consideration: In the aftermathof the terrorist attacks, a political discussion ﬂared up about the precautionary
shooting down (as a “quasi-defense case ”) of a passenger plane to save a large
number of lives in various countries. In Germany, audience surveys on a ﬁctional TV
court drama (Welt 2016 ) from 2016 show that the vast majority ( >80%) of viewers
interviewed in the DACH
3region pleaded for the acquittal of an air force major who
shot down a passenger plane hijacked by terrorists with 164 people on board to
prevent an attack on a soccer stadium with 70,000 people. The dimension of theethical dilemma becomes obvious when the alternative outcome (i.e., a guiltyverdict) is considered on the basis of the judicial grounds: The judge argues thatthe defendant disregarded the basic values of the constitution. The airplanepassengers were defenselessly handed over not only to the terrorists, but also tothe air force major, and “their dignity, their inalienable rights, their entire humanity
was disregarded. People are not objects. Their lives cannot be measured in numbers.
They are not subject to the laws of a market. ”(Welt 2016 ).
The dilemmas can also be seen in the concrete, real world, for example in the
form of the refugee crises in the Mediterranean since 2016 and the blockade of theEuropean Union members to grant a humane reception to the refugees who landed inGreece/Italy.
Another real example are the alleged decisions in France (Alsace) in March/April
2020 in the context of the Corona pandemic on the non-treatment of patients over80 years of age (Zeit 2020a ), which are tantamount to triage.
In the transition to arti ﬁcial intelligence, the following problem is already appar-
ent from an ethical point of view: since machines and automats have no needs likehumans, the further development of AI to “strong AI “poses very big problems
(Hüther 2018 ). Accordingly, the ethical interpretation becomes dif ﬁcult. Take, for
example, autonomous driving: the ethically correct decision as to who is affected bya collision and who is to be protected —the playing child or the pensioner —is by no
means easier.
Individual behavior reveals the ethical dilemma of how to motivate individuals to
behave morally correct. For this purpose, the continuation of the classic prisoner
problem according to Robert Axelrod ( 2006 ) is often used, which also contains a
basic consideration of game theory: depending on the behavior (cooperate or deny)of the individual players, this leads to different penalties, depending on the behaviorof the other player (see Fig. 1.3). With the help of these models, decision behavior
can be described that provokes optimal decisions under de ﬁned (¼simpli ﬁed)
conditions. It has been shown that the best strategy
3DACH —Germany (Deutschland), Austria, Switzerland.1 Ethics for Non-philosophers: Basis of Ethics and Ethical Perspectives 13