has emerged as platform for millions of (business) servers and desktop computers,
and provided the nucleus ( “kernel ”) for the open source mobile operation system
Android, launched in 2007, which replaced and outpaced the up-to-then dominating
Nokia ’s proprietary operating system “Symbian ”and Microsoft ’s Windows Mobile.
While these achievements are impressive in the open software development, that ischaracterized by many of intrinsically motivated developers who are driving forbetter solutions and their own mastery. The ultimate access to the heart (the “kernel ”)
of these technologies lies with some individuals —with the so-called benevolent
dictators for life ( “BDFL ”) (who deemed to be intrinsically motivated) —such as the
initiator of Linux, Linus Thorvald, taking a coordinating role in the further develop-ment of the kernel. Astonishingly enough, this loose structure seems to work out
quite well so far). Otherwise, fragmentations on a large scale would be the conse-
quence. For AI algorithms and approaches, a commonly accepted framework couldbe built up —similar to the data protection framework in the GDPR —to provide fair
access to resources and to offer security of investment (i.e., a sound foundation forthe individual investments based on fair and stable access to basic intellectualproperty). So, to extend the approach of benevolent dictator for life (BDFL), atruly independent NPO is required with prevention of any acquisitions by companies(as happened to many open platforms like Kaggle or Github, or OpenAI), nor been
governed by a single state, and that safeguards the consistency of AI approaches.
Hence, Europe may play a leading role here.
Politicians are asked to take their ﬁduciary duty seriously driving the agenda in
the AI age, as the impact of societies will be enormous. According to technologyphilosopher Precht ( 2020 ), the moral intuition of humans is not a prede ﬁned and
controlled process, but rather a situational and context-dependent one that is closelyconnected to self-esteem and self-concept. Hence, corrective guardrails are requiredto cope with the societal and environmental challenges: Precht ’s view resonates with
scientists (see Sect. 7.3) if he sees a massive deterioration of ordinary employment
practices. For example in Germany in 2018, there were only 53% of employees whohad paid work according to collective agreements. This trend of deterioration ofachievements on employment participation will have two negative effects: lesspeople will be able to live on their pensions in the future, and —fueled by automation
due to digitization and AI —the rate of unemployment, temporary work, mini-jobs
unpaid internships, etc., will increase leading to impoverishment of the middle class.In a“humane society of the future, ”the unconditional basic income would overcome
the current concept of employment-based (and solely economic performance-based)
remuneration.
This leads to the necessity for politicians to change the system, otherwise —as
technology will dictate (cf. Collingridge dilemma, Sect. 1.5.3 )—there may be
irreversible social mismatches —at least accelerated by AI, which may even lead to
breakup of societies and archaic problem-solving approaches of ancient decadessuch as unrest, riots, and civil war.
An important ﬁrst step of taking accountability toward the society includes the
avoidance of dependencies from “Big Tech. ”Despite the alluring offers and lobby-
ing, politicians need to ensure that effective coordinating structures such as fair242 S. H. Vieweg