Theﬁrst seven conventions comprise a set of potential ethical issues if AI
technologies are applied in a way that would lead to discrimination. Deliberatelyor not, as will be shown in Chaps. 6and8, there is a realistic chance that due to the
approach taken to set up algorithms and to train them, a discrimination potential
toward various groups is given.
Basic human rights are a matter of course in developed countries, but by no
means in developing countries. This raises the question of the responsibility ofcompanies that have activities in or with countries where basic human rights arenot respected: Is it ethically permissible for companies to do business with countrieswith repressive regimes? It would be naive to retreat to the position of not doing anybusiness there. Arguments against this are that, on the one hand, the company might
close signi ﬁcant markets to itself (if such a renunciation can be identi ﬁed at all),
because its place in globalized competition will certainly be taken quickly by one ofits competitors and, on the other hand, that economic exchange between countrieswith high standards and countries with lower standards will lead to an increase inlow standards in the medium term.
4.4 Countries ’Perception Regarding Their Ethical Orientation
Do multinational business activities really help to bring about change in these
countries and ultimately improve citizens ’rights?
This is a non-trivial question. Re ﬂecting analysis ﬁndings such as the Fragile
State Index (FSI) of the Fund for Peace (FFP 2020 ), which indicates the stability of a
state, it becomes clear that 105 out of 178 countries are considered by a warning oralert, the minority considered stable or even sustainable. The Fund for Peace is anon-pro ﬁt organization based in the USA and has a history of over 60 years.
According to its own information, the Fragile State Index has been measuring thesocial, economic, and political pressure that 178 countries around the world havebeen exposed to since 2005. The index is composed of 12 primary indicators(normalized to maximum of 10, re ﬂecting worst situation) in the four dimensions
of cohesion, economic, political, and social, and uses a triangulated methodology
that combines content analysis of millions of documents from more than 10,000sources around the world with quantitative datasets and qualitative review. Theindex and its indicators are based on a social science framework that has beenused by practitioners in the ﬁeld of con ﬂict early warning for over two decades
(Fig. 4.1).
China is a case in point: according to the FSI, the overall situation in China has
substantially improved (in 2020 69.9 on a scale with highest alert at 120, which
corresponds to the 86th rank; see Fig. 4.2).
For example, the expectation that major international events such as the Olympic
Games (2008) would bring about further opening and improve the situation in thelong term was certainly given. However, in 2008 massive food scandal (see Sect.7.4, where this event will be analyzed in the context of AI-based total surveillance)
led to a massive drawback, followed by a steep improvement thereafter. Another4 Ethics in an International Context 59