5.03 What is the sequence in the spiral dynamics model in interaction between individuals and
the society?
1 Integral, followed by rational, followed by absolutistic2 Integral, followed by pluralistic, followed by absolutistic
3 Rational, followed by pluralistic, followed by integral
4 Absolutistic, followed by rational, followed by integral
5.04 What are the consequences of wisdom 2.0 for companies?
1 Holistic approach to include factual skills of the employees. There is an increasing
importance for companies to purely focus on their staff ’s technical skills.
2 Partial approach that is covered in mindfulness. There is no need for companies to
care about this seriously, however.
3 This has nothing to do with real business life.4 Holistic approach to include body, soul, and spirit, all embedded in mindfulness.
There is an increasing importance for companies to care for their staff ’s values
seriously.
5.05 What is collective intelligence?
1 Final collection of all working results from different individuals or smaller teams.2 Result of groups of individuals working together in an intelligent way.3 Nothing that can be orchestrated.4 All information gathered by use of ANN.
5.06 What is the importance of implicit knowledge going forward?
1 No change compared to the era prior to digitalization.
2 Signi ﬁcant decline, because everything will become transparent and explicit.
3 Increase, as this is the way like human brains work in order to cope with information
overﬂow.
4 Slight decline, as AI will cope with some of the knowledge.
5.07 What is AHP and what problems can be solved with it?
1 AHP is a generalization of the analytical network process. It cannot handle multiple
dependencies.
2 AHP enables decision-making on full set of “hard”information.
3 AHP is the ambiguous hypothesis process that provides one ﬁxed solution to
decision-makers.
4 Correct preference judgments about the objects to be compared, as the result of pair
comparisons. Hence, an intersubjective veri ﬁability is achieved.
5.08 What is the common value pattern from the “good leadership ”study?
1 Solidary integration, dynamic networking, iterative testing agility.2 Cooperative team spirit, strong personality.3 Solidary integration, dynamic networking, iterative testing agility, cooperative team
spirit, strong personality, and ef ﬁcient goal achievement.
4 Shareholder Value Management and Management by Objectives
References
Adloff, F., & Heins, V. (Eds.). (2015). Konvivialismus. Eine Debatte. Transcript GbR . Bielefeld:
transcript (X-Texte).5 Value-Based Corporate Management and Integral Intelligence 89