This is pure science ﬁction and also ignores Asimov ’s famous “Three Laws of
Robotics, ”but combined with quotes like Elon Musk ’s, that “AI poses the greatest
threat to humanity ”, it is not surprising that one might feel panic, or simply not want
to think about it at all.
Yet neither of these extremes is conducive to productive solutions.How instead can we get to what can be called the sweet spot between hysteria and
apathy , a place where transparency thrives and a framework of trust in systems is
still possible? A place where human intelligence guides artiﬁcial intelligence and not
the other way around —a question that, for example, CFA Institute is actively
looking at, by updating the required skills and tools for investment professionals.
With this in mind, it is helpful to ﬁrst broadly discuss what is currently happening
in arti ﬁcial intelligence within the context of ﬁnance and what implications that
may have.
Many ﬁnancial AI applications thus far are related to fraud detection, credit
scoring, and robo-advising and have been more focused on retail rather than institu-tional applications. But this is changing rapidly as banks and investment ﬁrms seek
to deploy the technology across research, sales, trading, and compliance (GreenwichAssociates 2020 ).
In 2018, CFA Institute conducted a global survey of investment professionals,
which showed that 73% of the respondents stated that their ﬁrm was looking to apply
technology to client engagement or to use machine learning in portfolio construc-tion. A more recent study from early 2019 showed ﬁnancial industry leaders
identifying the growth in AI and machine learning as the greatest source of disrup-tion for investment professionals in the next 5 –10 years.
This development has the potential to bring signi ﬁcant advances and
improvements to the world of ﬁnance. Routine tasks that can be automated will
free up humans to work on more complex and hopefully rewarding tasks.
So, what is not to like? The pace, for a start. It is apparent that AI is evolving
much faster than our legal frameworks, regulatory oversight, and popular under-standing of these technologies can.
This is true in ﬁnance too. Many ﬁnancial ﬁrms have legacy technology which is
difﬁcult to align with new methods and their progress has been primarily reactive.
And unlike 20 years ago, when the best and brightest headed to ﬁnance because it
was so lucrative, many ﬁnancial ﬁrms currently struggle to attract the IT talent
needed to realize the full power of AI and big data in their business models. In
fact, those working at the top technology companies globally, like Google and
Microsoft, continue to enjoy a real advantage, as those employees specialized inAI at these companies have access to knowledge and skills not yet taught even in thetop universities around the world (CFA 2019 )(CFA Institute AI Pioneers in
Investment Management ). And most of these elite employees are not looking to
move into ﬁnance. Moreover, Google and Microsoft have managed to lure in
developers ’skills on a worldwide basis by acquiring the open software development
platforms for data scientists (see Sect.
6.6.1 : Kaggle, started in 2010, with more than
a million users worldwide, was acquired by Google ’s parent company Alphabet Inc.164 S. Spinner