Certainly here Kant ’s imperative can offer orientation: “Act in such a way that
you need humanity, both in your own person and in the person of every other one, atany time at the same time as an end, never merely as a means ”(Kant, I.).
In the case of great uncertainty in decision-making, it can be helpful to ask oneself
whether one would publicly acknowledge the rules of one ’s actions (this idea is also
taken up again in Chap. 4in the international context in the discussion of the moral
compass).
Ultimately, these ethical approaches require competence or knowledge to assess
the negative consequences of one ’s own actions.
1.5.5 Ethics of Discourse
In contrast to monological ethics, discourse ethics is based on the search for a social
consensus. Thus, it is a common search for “right ”and “wrong ”and a weighing up
of the different points of view of the persons involved in the discourse. In Sect. 11.3,
we will come back to this topic when considering different initiatives for the ethicalevaluation of arti ﬁcial intelligence. For example, ethical guidebooks are one way for
politicians to conduct precisely this discourse.
The disadvantage of this approach is that consensus and thus compromise can
quickly be used as an excuse for not reaching an acceptable (ideal) state, i.e., in theend a “lazy”compromise or a “well meant is not equally well done ”.
The “Harvard approach “from the Harvard Program on Negotiations by Roger
Fisher et al. ( 2009 ) shows a proven path to “win-win situations ”that avoids an
unfavorable compromise: This approach separates the personal and the factual levelby implementing four essential rules of negotiation:
1. Treat people and problems separately.
2. Focus on interests, not on positions.3. Develop decision possibilities (options) to your mutual advantage.4. Insist on the application of neutral assessment criteria.
1.5.6 Justice as a Moral Theme
Justice is one of the central principles by which a community can orient itself andshape the community (see also UN Human Rights (UN 1948 )). In the ﬁnal analysis,
justice is a matter of comparison. Fundamentally in ﬂuencing work in a business
ethics sense is John Rawls ’Theory of Justice (Rawls 1971 ): his concept is based on
two fundamental positions:
1.“Original position ”: this is deemed to be a theoretical (not re ﬂecting reality)1 Ethics for Non-philosophers: Basis of Ethics and Ethical Perspectives 17