The phenomenon of new technologies is by no means new. If we consider the
Collingridge dilemma (which is discussed in more detail in Sect. 1.5.3 ), AI with its
enormous (positive and negative) possibilities also represents a potential that we will
only fully develop over time. However, in the case of an ethically and socially
unreﬂective and “carefree ”approach, the undesirable characteristics may already
have manifested themselves as a reality in such a way that they cannot be revised oronly at socially unwanted expense. Accordingly, now that AI “merely ”refers to
comparatively harmless applications around pattern recognition, it is high time tocritically deal with the fundamental questions.
Therefore, this book addresses “big”topics across the board and wants to offer
the readers an orientation in the sense of an introduction: Ethics —a fundamental
topic that has always preoccupied people —been placed in the context necessary for
AI. Pragmatic issues are especially considered. Digitization —already a very broad
ﬁeld in itself —is also presented in an overview, and approaches of AI with ethical
questions are shown. Furthermore, concrete approaches to consider appropriateethical principles in AI-based solutions are described and pragmatic though compre-hensive roadmap for implementation is proposed.
This book brings together the complex question of how technology can be
perceived as “good”in a cross-functional way, alternating between theory and
practice. To re ﬂect the concepts with “real life, ”concrete effects are illustrated
with the overarching topic of 2020 —the COVID-19 pandemic crisis. As disruption
is anything but new, famous and relevant historical examples are used likewise. Inthis respect, academics, e.g., from humanities, business, or technical disciplines, willﬁnd this to be of added value in their respective ﬁelds, as well as practitioners who
are looking for an introduction to the topic and orientation for concrete questions andassistance. The contributions in this book originate from authors covering a wideﬁeld of experiences from ethics to technology and business from different industries.
Part I gives a focused understanding of ethics and the relevant perspectives that
allows decent assessment for business managers utilizing AI technologies in asustainable manner. In particular, the shortcomings of each side, human and AI, isbeing addressed and an outlook of complementary approaches such as an “integral
intelligence ”is given.
Part II focuses on AI as enabler for sustainable management in a more than ever
complex world. Speci ﬁcally, immanent shortcomings of AI technology approaches
are discussed and linked back to the ethical challenges and requirements of self-
discipline in algorithm design and data analysis.
PART III showcases practical examples from different industries and functions
such as ﬁnancial industries, production, or human talent management and illustrates
stimulating approaches of sustainable AI utilization. Finally, a concrete way forwardon the required journey of ethical orientation, standards, and rule setting will beprovided, based on legitimacy in business and candorship.
This book project took almost a year for full realization. At the end of 2019, my
Institute for Compliance and Corporate Governance ( “ICC”) initiated and hosted a
symposium on “Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Ethics ”in Cologne, Germany, with major
contributions from experts in the ﬁeld. The fruitful discussions and challengingPreface ix