1. More than half of the organic meat consumed in the leading European
economic nation Germany is imported: Here the question arises immedi-ately, how is this to succeed, if a highly developed country like Germany,which is a net exporter of meat (with a 16% meat export surplus), is not able
to cover its own organic meat demand? - OR -
2. Not everything that is sold as “organic ”is actually “organic. ”
The interpretation is left to the reader. This example shows that evidence-
based (machine-based) analysis can quickly expose such discrepancies. Fur-ther AI technology can help to identify mismatches early and to preventmisrepresentation, as the challenge is not in actually doing the calculation,but rather pulling together various data and analyzing it toward the proof point.
In general, consumer behavior is of central —also ethical —importance, since
purchasing behavior has a considerable in ﬂuence on the business strategy of
producers and production conditions. Thus, the demand for cheap(est) products
has a direct impact on the business strategy of companies that want to be successful
in this market: They will strive for price and thus cost leadership and hence optimizetheir value-added chain in one go, without taking other goals into account. Thiscustomer behavior is then also often used to explain their own corporate (non-)responsibility. One example is the textile discounter KiK of the Tengelmann Group:
Example Customers ’Responsible on the Supply Chain
It is argued that the customer is primarily interested in the price (Böcking et al.
2015 ) and thus not for the conditions under which the products are
manufactured. Auditing in accordance with demanding occupational safety
standards is also often used as a relieving argument (here: Social Accountabil-ity International SAI SA8000 ®(SAI 2020 )), but these certi ﬁcates are not
meaningful if they are bought on the de facto black market (Böcking et al.2015 ). The German textile discounter KiK was recently involved in two
disasters involving its suppliers in Asia: In September 2012, a devastatingﬁre at the Ali Enterprises textile factory in Karachi (Pakistan) claimed
258 lives and injured 32 people. Two months before the disaster, Ali
Enterprises was certi ﬁed as SA8000 compliant, but this did not correspond
to the reality at the time of the catastrophe, as there were no emergency exits,sprinkler systems, or usable escape routes and the employees were effectivelytrapped in a deadly trap by barred windows (Haufe 2019 ). KiK had purchased
about 75% of the production and was therefore the dominant customer forwhom it would have been easy to demand humane working conditions andminimum safety standards (ECCHR 2019 ). Relatives and survivors sued KiK
(continued)42 S. H. Vieweg