avoidable “Chinese ”problem, political decision-makers have taken radical
measures, some of which were not very well coordinated, such as entry bans,exit bans, closure of stores, and setting up of frontiers between very close alliesin the European Union under the Schengen concept. With devastating
consequences —at least for the economy: for example, Germany got off
relatively lightly during the ﬁrst infection wave in the spring of 2020, but
only if the number of cases of infection and associated mortality rate areconsidered. If instead of applying only a short-term view (immediate avoid-ance of infections), the collateral effects and societal damages are taken intoconsideration as well, the ﬁndings may be different: As the lockdown affected
public life entirely and massively restricted private lives likewise, the effectson the society and economy are unparalleled. The economical livelihood of
many companies of any size was endangered despite some governmental aid
programs (that current and future taxpayers have to pay for) when work wassuspended, and the entire public and private life came to a halt. This led to atleast one lost term on social contacts, learning, and developing for children.For those just ﬁnished school, chances for apprenticeship jobs shrank, and left
university students losing their sideline jobs for ﬁnancing their studies, as
demand collapsed.
Hence, the moral problem is to decide: Is it better to force entire populations
into self-quarantine with massive economic and social collateral (long lasting)
damage, or is it morally and socially better to isolate only a small group ofvulnerable people to the detriment of a split society with different rights? Not atrivial question ...
1.2 Morality
What is morality? Morality is by no means rigid, but it is rather ﬂuid. Morality is
what is considered good, desirable, relationally bad, and to be avoided in a society,in a certain culture, at a certain point in time by the vast majority of society members(Bak 2014 , p. 2). Thus, these different dimensions have an effect and determine what
is regarded and accepted as moral. Different social cultures have been studiedextensively over the last few decades; certainly the most outstanding works are
Hofstede ( 1991 ), Trompenaars ( 1993 ), and the GLOBE study (House et al. 2004 ).
Here, societies are differentiated from one another on the basis of severaldimensions, whereby a society does not necessarily have to be linked to a state ornation. What is decisive is that one and the same fact can be interpreted incompletely different ways, which can lead to considerable problems betweensocieties. In the economic context, this also leads to considerable challenges, notleast regarding compliance issues. To illustrate this, here are a few examples:4 S. H. Vieweg