and 18 out of the 20 most surveilled cities worldwide are Chinese (Bischoff 2020 ).
According to the human activist and University of California, Berkeley, researcherXiao Quiang, China ’s ruling dictatorship has set up the project “Sharp Eyes ”with
cameras everywhere, so that with the help of AI facial recognition in real time, a total
surveillance is possible (surveillance state). The test laboratory is in the province ofXingjiang in the Northwest of China, where some 25 million people live, half ofthem being a speci ﬁc group of Muslims. In 2009, a turmoil in the provincial capital
Urumqi kicked off a long time of suppression. AI systems are used to surveil andpredict citizens ’tendency to what Chinese government calls terrorism. Based on the
ﬁndings of the AI systems, detected people are pulled into so-called re-educational
camps, without any legal basis, e.g., for wrongdoing. Even outside of the camps the
citizens are affected by highest levels of surveillance and basically risk collective
penalties.
6.5.2 USA and the “Surveillance Capitalism ”
The history of AI and robotics originates from great minds such as scientists like
Norbert Wiener to visionary science ﬁction authors like Isaac Asimov (Seiler and
Jenkins 2014 ). They have paved the way throughout decades, as have lessons learnt
at Cold War times and the race to the moon in the 1960s. The entrepreneurial spirit of
the“American Dream, ”excellent education at top-ranked universities, and funding
through military budget led to an innovative environment that formed Silicon Valleyand that has created the world ’s largest and most successful IT businesses
11—for
now —and many startups driving innovation.
AI technological approaches on the one hand try to mirror human cognitive
behavior in terms of learning strategies. On the other hand, the intent is to exceedhuman cognitive performance in speci ﬁc tasks.
Some learning strategies apply similar approaches like most children do by trial
and error in a joyful interaction with their surroundings. AI learns on its own
(unsupervised learning) from data, which is commonly known as deep learningapproach.
Example Atari Breakout: As an example, in 2013 scientists applied AI on the
formerly famous Atari-video computer game “Breakout ”with one target: to
win. The task is to hit a ball with a racket and smash it against a multilayer wallof bricks that is to be destroyed. The ball would bounce back so that the playerneeds to defend effectively in not losing a ball. For a human player, it is really
hard to gain excellence and almost impossible to win. The AI took 100 games
to learn how to hit the ball with the racket and not to lose the ball. After
(continued)
11Very often seen as “GAFAM ”(Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon, and Microsoft).6 Digitization: Learnings from Ancient Disruptions, AI and the Digital ... 121