4.Societal impact assessment: Political and economic decision-makers resist
exploiting technology potential for their own bene ﬁt without re ﬂecting the
knock-on effects on societies.
At a minimum, ethical guardrails are required to ensure that the technology is
used to the bene ﬁt of societies and businesses in a frame of generally accepted
human rights (see the UN Declaration of Human Rights and following humanrights conventions, cf. Sect. 4.3) and environmental standards as laid down, e.g.,
in ISO 14001 ff. or the European EMAS (Eco-Management and Audit Scheme).
5.Independence and special ﬁduciary duty: Public services have a massive disad-
vantage in many countries, related to AI: AI comprises technologies that requireexpert knowledge in all key areas: algorithm, data, and its implementation.
Typically, AI companies such as Big Tech are in the lead, as they can attract
highly skilled people with ease by offering entrepreneurial spirit, interestingworking, progression, and remuneration conditions, and —most importantly —a
share in a success story. In contrast: if public IT services convey the image of aboring statistical bureau at crummy pay, guess what their recruiting success willbe ...So, political decision-maker should take an active role in shaping the
framing, instead of surrendering and handing over public affairs to Big Techand Co.
It is advisable to re ﬂect best practices where efforts led to a leading organization
that drives progress in the name of their ﬁduciaries. Such examples are indepen-
dent of individual ’s capital dominance.
Antipattern example of lacking ﬁduciary duty -Finnish patients blackmailed
after tens of thousands private psychotherapy notes were hacked: The private
psychotherapy services Vastaamo failed to establish decent measures andcontrols to protect sensitive data of their patients for two years. Back inNovember 2018, hackers ﬁrst accessed the patient database, the then CEO
concealed the breach from the company ’s board, and in late October 2020,
hackers blackmailed patients threatening the disclosure of their private data.As the company has some 40,000 patients ’data on record, this scandal led to a
massive crisis forcing Finland ’s president and prime minister for public
statements. (Sipilä 2020 )
As can be seen from this example
9it needs effective and independent measures to
implement security in the digital age.
Relying on the cooperation of IT companies is not at all an adequate approach.
This can be seen in another potential antipattern:
9There are many other examples across the world, e.g., it is referred to the investigative platform
propublica.org and their 2019 report on “Millions of Americans ’Medical Images and Data Are
Available on the Internet. Anyone Can Take a Peek. ”(Gillum et al. 2019 )11 Ethical AI Implementation 245