3.7 Ethical Frameworks for Businesses
Normative corporate governance is the permanent foundation of a company and thus
sets the framework for the basic orientation of the company and the actions of itsstakeholders (see Fig. 3.1). Thus, normative management determines the self-image
of a company, creates identity and meaning, and ultimately gives the company
legitimacy and the right to exist.
A distinction is made between ﬁve elements (see Fig. 3.3), of which the corporate
values, as a meaningful basis, determine the ethical orientation of a company. Thecorporate philosophy forms the starting point and determines standards as a bench-mark for the actions of the management, describes values, and de ﬁnes the ethical
standards of the company.
Ultimately, the company values are based on the ethical convictions, education,
and experience of the people who shape the company and its society. In Schein ’s
organizational culture model (Schein 1985 ), this corresponds to the deepest level
below the surface —the“basic assumptions. ”These are formative for the company
and by far outlast the period of effect of the persons who initially form it. Thisbecomes visible, for example, in corporate succession when the core of the company(the ultimate reason for existence or the “raison d ’être”) is preserved and the
established behavior patterns are continued as tradition.
The ethics of a company are the result of the ethical, moral, and social attitudes
and values of the actors in a company. These are often documented as a code of
ethics and communicated internally and externally.
Meaningful and ethical corporate values, which offer stakeholders a strong
opportunity to identify with the company and are authentically communicated bytop management, not only promote corporate culture but also economic added value.This has been comprehensively proven in a study conducted by the Great Place ToWork®Institute, for example, in an employee survey of 1000 US companies (Guiso
et al. 2013 ): Particularly when employees perceive their top management to be
Corporate Culture Corporate Constitution
Company mission (company purpose)Company 
objectivesCompany valuesEthics and 
philosophy reason for sense 
Vision and politics
Organizational 
normsBehavioral
norms
Claim and self-image
Fig. 3.3 Normative corporate governance —terms (own presentation)50 S. H. Vieweg