300 games, the computer surpasses human performance, and after 500 games,
AI has found a creative way to victory: a tunnel through the different layers ofbricks is drilled and many bricks are destroyed with just one hit of the ball(Mnih et al. 2015 ).
12While one decade ago, hardly anyone would have
thought that AI could work, today it is used in almost every part of the
society.According to the Future Today Institute, the great promise of AI isthat computers are able to see problems in an entirely different perspectivethan humans do. Probably it will be possible to ﬁnd another and initially
seemingly impossible solution for big tasks such as climate change or aradically different approach in the treatment of incurable cancers. In purelypractical terms, AI promises to enable humans to come up with more creativesolutions, which in turn leads us to ingenious solutions (Webb 2019 ).
Some of those practical applications on more creative solutions are in healthcare
cancer treatment (Dobbins Lehman 2020 ): In order to predict the development of
cancer over time and with that prevent unnecessary surgery, at MIT and the
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, a deep learning algorithm analyzed all
medical records with hundreds of thousands of images of patients who had beenoperated because of a highly dangerous focus on breast cancer in a certain time. Itwas found that 90% did not need to be operated; only 10% had cancer.
Another example is autonomous driving: here, the challenge for AI is to under-
stand the surroundings. While in other parts of the world such as China and Europe,this application is maximum in prototype stage, in the USA ﬁrst commercial offers
on self-driving freight dispatch such as Embark Trucks (Ohnsman 2019 ) exist
already. Although the US traf ﬁc and road situation cannot be compared with other
parts of the world, hence solutions working in the USA on hundreds of miles straighthighways may not work in Germany ’s narrow and curvy villages, the pace on
execution shows clear ﬁrst-mover mentality.
In the USA, a surveillance movement started during the last decade. Although the
motivation is entirely different from the one in China (to keep society at check andavoid any opposition to the ruling party).
The largest US Internet companies like GAFAM —Google, Apple, Facebook,
Amazon, and Microsoft —hold massive data about their users; with each and every
even tiny interaction, the company can increasingly better see who their users areand what they do (Domingo 2015 ). So, the users ’behavior is being recorded, what
they enter in the application ’s interface (even if they discard entries before sending),
which content they look at, and various environmental parameters such assmartphone and operating system version (Chen 2020 ), etc. Using AI, various data
are being customized and individualized for the user. On the one hand, that is aconvenience and better experience for the user, as the user does not have to perform
12A video and original source code can be found here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v¼V1eYniJ0Rnk (accessed 08.10.2020).122 S. H. Vieweg