market conditions on a global level are established. These include (but are not
limited to):
1.Fair taxes: AI companies to bear a fair share of societal costs (that is commonly
called “tax”and typically avoided by them). Currently, in the majority of societies
an anachronistic taxation model is in place: assuming that production factors suchas (human) work are prevalent, companies only pay taxes if they generate a pro ﬁt.
Though, an international business can easily (and legally, but not ethically)navigate from where pro ﬁts are generated to where taxes are low: hence, they
“optimize ”their pro ﬁts in low-tax jurisdictions, whereas in high-tax countries
losses are cumulating (and taxes are avoided). The underlying societal logic
(unfortunately outdated in the AI era) is that companies provide opportunities
for the citizens to work and based on a fair share of success (say “proﬁt”), the
companies shall contribute to the societal infrastructure they are bene ﬁting from.
Examples are education (for the employees), public services, roads real estate,and telecommunication infrastructure.A fair share of AI contribution to the societal systems needs to include anunavoidable taxation mechanics, e.g., based on similar levels as payroll taxesfor human work to be implied for equivalent automation entities (like the e-person
as being discussed in the EU).
2.Fair competition: Fostering competition and avoiding monopoly or oligopoly
market structures that are de facto emerging or existing to a certain extent. Thisincludes the breakup of dominant monopolist as well, similar as breakup of theBell System in the USA in 1982.
3.Self-restriction and misuse prevention: Legal and regulatory settings on an
international level are required to minimize the misuse of products and servicesthat ultimately will lead to compromised human rights. There are effective
mechanisms and knowledge how to handle it available from the pre-digital age:
such structures were set up to ban ABC weapons (atomic/nuclear,biological, chemical) that could be characterized as military and their applicationcould have erased large parts of humanity. The success of such mechanisms isbased on two fundamental elements:
(a) The clear intent as laid down in the contracts: For example the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ( “NPT ”) (UN NPT 1995 ).
8
(b)Independent controls that could trigger off enforcement actions: Example:
the International Atomic Energy Agency ( “IAEA ”):“The International
Atomic Energy Agency is the world ’s central intergovernmental forum for
scienti ﬁc and technical co-operation in the nuclear ﬁeld. It works for the safe,
secure and peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology, contributing tointernational peace and security and the United Nations ’Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals ”(IAEA 2020 ): This UN organization has a clear and indepen-
dent mandate.
8The treaty provided the non-proliferation, disarmament, and peaceful use of nuclear energy.11 Ethical AI Implementation 243