learning paths on the basis of competence and training catalogs (Upadhyay and
Khandelwal 2019 ). In order to train this self-learning recommendation system,
relevant competencies and existing/planned further education offers are trans-
ferred into word clouds and plotted against each other in a vector space, so that
similarity rates are generated (Zhao et al. 2019 ). As a result, matrices with all
possible combinations of competences and training opportunities withcorresponding similarity rates are obtained, which are the input for thematching. Based on the best matching and individual topic preferencesidenti ﬁed through the interaction of employees with the recommendation system
(Pinkwart and Rüdian 2020 ), personal learning paths can now be suggested.
Such a self-learning recommendation system not only increases the accuracy of
theﬁt of competence requirements to training offers, but also minimizes the use
of resources compared to manual assignment.
8. Naturally, HR managers are interested in knowing how certain HRM activities
(e.g., training measures) affect the mood within the workforce . However, it is
almost impossible to gain a comprehensive and profound picture of the mood bypersonal means. The use of employee surveys is also limited (keywords: effortand wear and tear effects). Text mining, which describes a bundle of algorithmsfor the discovery of meaning structures from weakly structured text data (Besimi
et al. 2019 ), can help in this context. Particularly relevant for HRM is the
so-called sentiment analysis, which can be used to automatically extract “posi-
tive, ”“neutral, ”and “negative ”feelings from text documents (e.g., posts on a
social intranet or comments on an employer rating portal). From a technicalpoint of view, sentiment analysis is divided into two components: textpreprocessing and text classi ﬁcation. Text preprocessing refers to the decompo-
sition of the text into individual terms (tokenization), the linguistic categoriza-tion of these terms (tagging), their reduction to the root form (lemmatization),
and their transformation into a vector that re ﬂects the relative frequency of all
identi ﬁed terms (vector space model) (Strohmeier and Piazza 2015 ). The text
classi ﬁcation takes up the vector models by algorithms that evaluate their
content (see Villarroel Ordenes et al. 2017 ). A signi ﬁcant added value of text-
based mood analysis is the ability to analyze large amounts of text in real timeand to react quickly to negative trends. Employee fears could also be identi ﬁed
and addressed at an early stage (e.g., fear of contagion during the COVID-19crisis).
Reward systems include (9) employee assessment and (10) remuneration
(Stock-Homburg and Groß 2019 ).
9. When evaluating employees, there is usually the problem that HR managers
must rely on the judgment of the respective direct superiors of the employees.However, numerous studies suggest that manager evaluations are subject tovarious evaluation errors (e.g., primacy and recency effects) if the judges are notsufﬁciently psychologically trained (Stock-Homburg and Groß 2019 ). Although
so-called 360-degree feedbacks help to objectify the subjective judgment of
superiors, this multiperspective procedure is very time-consuming and can
therefore only be implemented at longer intervals (e.g., annually). At this206 M. Groß