I have been teaching an “Ethics for Finance ”class at the Goethe Business School
for several years and lecture on how modern portfolio theory could in many ways becalled legacy portfolio theory, as many of its premises have been shown to be
outdated; we know that rationality and the rational “homo oeconomicus ”are no
longer looking so smart. The unemotional utilitarianism self-interest which formedthe backbone of business school educations for decades became something of a self-fulﬁlling prophesy, as generations of companies supported the idea of business being
amoral, not immoral. Amoral meaning that there is no moral premise whatsoever.
This sort of thinking allowed for the Wall Street ﬁlm character Gordon Gekko to
actually serve as a role model.
But people are not rational, as Daniel Kahneman (Kahneman and Tversky 1979 )
made famous, and business is not void of morality.
Yet humans have been fascinated with objective rationality for centuries and the
aspiration to achieve it has inspired many great thinkers. With the advent of digitaltechnology and machine learning, we seem to have exchanged our worship of therational analog homo oeconomicus for the worship of the supposedly neutral andrational digital AI. But AI programs are made by humans and data is input byhumans. Most AI can only detect patterns, based on these human factors. At leastthus far.
8.7 Required Change of Mindset
So, a change of mindset is needed and, with this, an end to math washing.
We need to keep ourselves informed and hold humans accountable for the AI that
is being produced and we must be able to solve the problem of many hands , meaning
that responsibility for an error must be able to be traced through multiple parties.
More fundamentally, we need to more generously appreciate the essential role of
human beings and human intelligence in our civilization.
We need to look again to our core human virtues , the four classic cardinal virtues
being: temperance, prudence, courage, and justice.
Coming back to the sweet spot between apathy and hysteria; in order to move
solidly into this better space, we need however one human virtue most: courage(Fig. 8.5).
“Courage is the most important of all the virtues because without courage, you
can’t practice any other virtue consistently. ”(Maya Angelou).
Everybody caring about the future needs the courage to contribute and thrive in
this new world, and it has never been more important to value and cherish ourcollective human intelligence.
The machines are not going to take over unless we let them.We may need to establish the collective courage to mandate that just because we
cando something, it does not mean we should .172 S. Spinner