The purpose is to stimulate intelligent processes, which incorporate the explicit
and implicit knowledge of organizations and markets for better orientation and thebest possible solutions (next-practice GmbH). The aim therefore is to utilize not only
individuals ’experiential knowledge but also the distributed knowledge of
collectives.
For example, the nextexpertizer tool was used to conduct 400 in-depth interviews
with managers as part of the “Good Leadership ”study in 2014 in an effort to draw a
detailed picture of management culture in Germany. The goal was to discover whichunconscious values and collective mental patterns determine the actions ofmanagers, how the actual development of management practice is evaluated againstthis background, and what challenges managers expect for the future (Initiative New
Quality of Work ( INQA )).
The analysis procedure is primarily based on qualitative pair comparisons whose
comparative elements form the search space and the associative framework of theindividual surveys (Kruse 2010 , p. 204). The interviews are designed to bring forth
all construct dimensions that visualize the unconscious value pattern of the inter-viewee. Based on the large number of intuitive individual decisions and explanationsand their relationships, the intuitive view of a respondent can be determined using aself-structural analysis. All respondent ’s individual results are subsequently com-
bined to form a complete picture, making the common pattern of culture and value
preferences visible (Initiative New Quality of Work ( INQA )).
Approximately 4000 –5000 terms were mathematically arranged over all test
persons and in the next step consolidated into topics, resulting in six clear leadershipconcepts: integration in a setting characterized by solidarity, dynamic networking,iterative testing agility, cooperative team spirit, strong personality, and ef ﬁcient goal
achievement.
A comparison of reality with the expressed ideal of good leadership led to a
paradigm shift by management, away from a purely ﬁnance-oriented value orienta-
tion and toward an integral “values ”orientation of a value creation network
characterized by maximum agility and willingness to learn.
5.5 Finish Line Quiz
5.01 What are key elements of integral management?
1 Risk taking, shareholder view, boldness2 Accountability, promise, and determination3 Integrity, reliability, trust4 Authority, micro- to nano-management
5.02 The theorem of surplus sense follows the evolution of mankind:
1 Excess of time horizon, criticism, control
2 Excess of control, time horizon, criticism3 Excess of criticism, control, time horizon4 Excess of control, criticism, time horizon
(continued)88 M. Müller-Wiegand