skills as required. The provider of such services, the worker leasing com-
pany or professional employer organization ( “PEO ”), though, will recruit
individuals and assign those persons to work at and for the client. Incontrast to temporary staf ﬁng, worker leasing constitutes a permanent
employment between the PEO and the worker, but it is the client that
assigns speci ﬁc tasks to the worker.
Fictitious self-employment arose when employers wanted to avoid
social security contributions for their employees (and thus maximize theirproﬁts) by dismissing them and then re-integrating them as self-employed.
A self-employed is responsible for her/his own social security, receives nosick pay, and must take care of the acquisition of orders her/himself.
Some jurisdictions handle ﬁctitious self-employment in such a manner
that it is not “just”linked to the person but to the speci ﬁcs of a contract.
That is in Germany it can happen that the self-employed person can be bothself-employed and pseudo-independent in different job situations at thesame time! The status may be audited by the pension insurance agencyand lead to consequences for all involved parties, the PEO on obligation tocontribute to the social insurance, the self-employed on social pensioncontributions, and the client on permanent employment contract. (Weidner2018 ).
Employees are thus required to behave loyally and morally without objection, but
at the same time they should refuse to obey if immoral behavior is demanded of them
and if necessary even report this (publicly) (see also Sect. 3.3).
3.6 Investors ’Ethics
Investor ethics focuses on the responsibility and duties of investors for companies.
By deciding in which type of companies they invest their own capital ( “asset
owners “) or that of their clients ( “asset managers “), they also bear corporate respon-
sibility. Equity capital providers belong to the stakeholder groups; lenders at least
still belong to the in ﬂuence groups of companies (see Fig. 3.1). As already shown in
Sect. 2.6.1 , there is a certain awareness for the topic and different approaches. These
initiatives try to capture value regarding environmental, social, and governance(“ESG ”) impact of business activities. So far, the initiatives have rather restrained
success —are represented in the investment market. This is mainly due to the con ﬂict
of goals between (short-term) pro ﬁtability and (medium to long-term) sustainability
(Caseau and Grolleau 2020 ). A comparison of (still dominant) traditional investment
strategy and sustainable investment (so-called impact investment) shows the tension
and the increase in the complexity of impact investment (Table 3.2).48 S. H. Vieweg