all interactions between users and AI. The human –machine interface is of high
importance for the user experience and therefore also for the perceived usability.Since HR managers are in most cases not technology experts, the interaction with
the AI should be as intuitive as possible to create a positive overall experience
(Tolino and Mariani 2018 ). For example, user-friendly menu windows are pref-
erable to a purely syntax-based display. Likewise, the AI outputs should bevisualized to a high degree.
3. Maintaining compliance with data protection regulations and at the same time
developing useful AI applications for HRM is probably the greatest challengeGerman companies face in order to increase acceptance. A binding legal frame-work for the use of personal data has been in place since the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) came into force in Germany in May 2018
(Datenschutz-Grundverordnung “DSGVO ”). Personal data includes all informa-
tion relating to an identi ﬁed or identi ﬁable natural person. A person becomes
identi ﬁable not only by name, identi ﬁcation number, or location data, but already
by one or more characteristics that express his or her physical, psychological,genetic, psychological, economic, cultural, or social identity. At this point, itbecomes clear that in this country a large number of the input variables for AIsystems are to be classi ﬁed as personal data (cf. Sect. 10.3.1 ), which is why the
DSGVO plays an important role in programming. According to the DSGVO,
companies must take three major restrictions into account when developingpersonalized AI applications [see (Huff and Götz 2020 ) for details]. The ﬁrst
hurdle is the “prohibition principle with reservation of permission, ”according to
which a legally standardized reason for permission must be presented for thelegality of data collection, data processing, and data use. Classically, the consentof the employees is used as an effective means (workaround) for the legal rulecited. However, the granting of consent is only voluntary in the legal sense if the
person concerned is not disadvantaged even in the event of refusal. The special
relationship of dependence between employee and employer has to be especiallyappreciated, which is why in the end only “irrelevant ”data analyses are possible.
The situation is different if a company can demonstrate a legitimate interest inprocessing data without endangering employees ’interests worthy of protection.
At this point, it is recommended that company with works council conclude acompany agreement in the sense of a basis for permission, although it should bementioned that the scope of permission must not exceed the legal requirements.
Nevertheless, it can be assumed that a company agreement could lead to an
increase in acceptance of AI applications in the company through its signal effect.The second hurdle results from Article 22 DSGVO. This states that a person hasthe right not to be subjected to a decision based solely on automated processing —
including pro ﬁling—which has legal effect vis-à-vis him or her or which signi ﬁ-
cantly affects him or her in a similar way. Thus, autonomous intelligenceapplications (see Fig. 10.2) are not DSGVO compliant. HR managers must
therefore ensure that AI applications are only ever used as a decision-making
aid (augmented intelligence; e.g., there must be no purely mechanical preselec-
tion of applicants). The third hurdle for HRM-related AI applications lies in the10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 213