such ﬁltering and research by herself. On the other side, there is a tremendous risk
that the real companies ’intent —which is typically the maximization of pro ﬁt and
hence cash —conﬂicts with the users ’intent. Instead of society using so-called social
media, it is exactly the other way round: social media (and the companies behind
them) is exploiting society; hence the term “surveillance capitalism, ”which was
created by the former Harvard professor Shoshana Zuboff, re ﬂects this situation
(Zuboff 2019 ). Table 6.3gives an overview of so-called social media offerings and
the companies behind them. As the surveillance capitalism is based on data, thelarger the data access, the better. That ultimately leads to a monopolization of themarket: larger companies such as GAFAM with their ubiquitous reach into the users ’
life are best positioned to succeed in a market, either by surpassing smaller
competitors or by large-scale takeovers of innovative, smaller companies.
A massive ethical problem emerges here, as it is not only the surveillance and
offering customized content to users, it is basically the in ﬂuence such ﬁltering of data
has on the users ’behavior as such. That is the so-called social media have
transformed from an individualized content provision to manipulate user behaviorand decision-making. Although that was initially merely intended to maximize the(GAFAM) company ’s proﬁt through advertisements, meanwhile there is a political
dimension to it, since political parties use such services for the purpose of citizen
manipulation. At least since the aftermath of the 2016 US presidential election
scandal around Facebook and Cambridge Analytica, the problem emerges, andcritical minds raise the discomfort of the subversive way GAFAM in ﬂuence on
politics and the deterioration of the democracy.
Google has set up an AI environment that allows us to identify as much as
possible about the user. Google wants to track as much as possible about theirusers, even non-facts such as wishes, thoughts, and dreams (Fung 2019 ). Hence, the
company tracks data relating to every aspect of their users ’entire life. Google were
initially against advertising, as it would destroy the decency of the Internet and thus
their search engine —hence the original claim “Don ’t be evil. ”
13But when the
dotcom bubble burst in early 2000, Google —already the world ’s most popular
search engine at the time —also came under pressure from investors who wanted
to see more pro ﬁt. So, they thought about the side effects of digital tracking, which is
a technical basic fact. From these traces, the activities of the users can bepredetermined. This was developed secretly; the drastically increasing pro ﬁt was
only announced in 2004 (1510% increase since 2001
14) with the IPO. Google ’s
business model is also used by others, e.g., Facebook: These companies then bought
data from other high data volume businesses, e.g., from credit card issuers. Behav-ioral prediction applications can help reduce uncertainty. In advertising and
13Google was founded in 1998 by the students Larry Page and Sergei Brin, initially without a clear
business model. The founders ’guiding mantra at that time was “Don ’t be evil. ”See Vise ( 2005 ).
14February 16, 2016. Google ’s net income from 2001 to 2015 (in million US dollars) [Graph]. In
Statista. from https://www.statista.com/statistics/266472/googles-net-income/ (accessed
19.10.2020).6 Digitization: Learnings from Ancient Disruptions, AI and the Digital ... 123