The new approach can be scaled immediately: if he uses the sensor-
equipped machines and feeds the algorithm, he would be able to roll thisresource optimization across the entire group worldwide.
Currently, he has an advantage compared to his peer competitors, which he
can utilize wisely. Given that the company is in a world-leading market
position without immediate cost pressure, there are more options to utilizethis advantage.
And that was when the CEO loosened the tie a little bit: He sat and swayed
a little bit back and forth in his chair and he got a little grumpy when he said“but that also means that I can ﬁre 38 people. Yeah, but what could I do, I
could educate. ”But when asked whether he wants to turn trained biologists
and chemists into computer scientists, he said that this was unlikely.
What else could they do? A list of approaches was compiled. The CEO saw
one possibility in making concrete contributions to some of the 17 SustainableDevelopment Goals [ “SDG ”(UN 2020 )] of the United Nations. Among them
are the ﬁght against poverty and hunger, gender equality, health promotion,
education, responsible consumption, and production ...Two of these goals
were selected to work on these issues with the competitive advantage that thecompany currently has as a world leader. The CEO wants to use this advantageto build a new concept now with sustainability: In the meantime, his machines
are at a standstill 1 day a week. The employees in the quality laboratory now
only work 4 days a week (except for those who operate the machines) on thesame salary —very courageous. He knows that he has no ﬁnancial disadvan-
tage; it just works more ef ﬁciently. And he is thinking about how this new
mindset can also be transferred to society.
9.4 Consequences and Looking Forward
In general, society has to deal with the fact that work will be eliminated in the futurethrough further automation, of which AI is a part. This is a very uncomfortable truththat many people do not want to hear. But if we look into the past, we will veryquickly come across similar developments. So of course, the industrial revolutions(Perez 2002 ) are often cited in this context. What does it really mean, speci ﬁcally for
the human work. To illustrate the impact of technology, the changes in agriculture
over the last 100 years shall be taken as an example (see Fig. 9.1): Apparently, many
individual manual activities in arable farming, which was conducted in the earlytwentieth century, i.e., just 100 years ago by people and/or horses, have been entirelyreplaced by a continuous stream of increasing powerful machines such as 5%9 Ethical Best Practice Applying AI in a Socially Sensible Manner 183