University of Cambridge ’s Center for Alternative Finance (CBECI 2020 ). This
amount compares to 108% of the energy consumption of Switzerland, 12% of
Germany, and 0.3% worldwide consumption (Erxleben 2019 ).Encountering that
the Bitcoin is just one application, a multitude of computational resources andtechnical performance challenges (in computing capacity, network latency, andstorage) need to be solved.
Another weakness is the fact that the majority of nodes in a blockchain ﬁnally
deﬁne what is the ultimate “truth. ”So, the basic “51% rule ”of nodes that de ﬁnes
which root is successful and which blocks are to be abandoned per se is prone tofraudulent actions in case of attractive gain from such actions. First 51% attacks were
successful on blockchains such as bitcoin gold in 2018 (Dölle 2018 ) and Ethereum
in 2019 (Jenkinson 2019 ). Despite the technological enhancement of prevention in
that area, there remains a fundamental challenge to avoid successful fraudulentactions as they may have disastrous consequences in value and trust ruination.This can be illustrated by an example of a private real estate contract: Typically,the underlying value (of the property) is in the order of a person ’s largest lifetime
spending. In today ’s standard procedures such a transaction requires speci ﬁcﬁdu-
ciary duty of the intermediate, the attesting notary. This highly skilled and educated
lawyer —not every lawyer will be eligible to act as a notary —has responsibilities of
public administration and guarantees that property transactions are correctlyexecuted, i.e., the transfer of ownership is based on correct identi ﬁcation of buyer
and seller, and the money due is being paid by the bona ﬁde buyer as the proprietor-
ship is transferred from the bona ﬁde seller to the buyer. In case of faulty execution
(e.g., proprietorship has changed without payment or vice versa), it is the notary whohas to face the legal consequences; the notary can be taken to court. In case of using ablockchain technology, no such intermediary exists anymore. It is the blockchain
with all transactional history that provides evidence. If this evidence is manipulated
as a consequence of a fraudulent attack, there is no way to prove this fraudulent050100150200250300350Size (GB) Bitcoin Blockchain-Size
The total size of the block chain minus  the database indices in gigabytes (GB)
Fig. 6.16 Bitcoin blockchain size (own presentation based on cleansed data from blockchain.com
(2020 ))112 S. H. Vieweg