from which only marginal parts succeeded. Another example, with some links
to the above, is in the printing press manufacturer industry. Here, similarcharacteristics as explained in Table 6.1can be applied (except shelf life, as
this is toward consumer products, while mechanical and plant engineering is
an area of business to business). High entry barriers into the complex business
have created an oligopoly of few manufacturers.
In particular in Germany, three printing press manufacturers were worldwide
leaders of their industry, controlling some two-thirds of the market (Schnitzler
2012 )—in the pre-digitized world. These gigantic offset and web printing machines
of some 30 meters (100 ft) length, often more than one hundred tons of weight, thatled paper pass through at a speed of 70 km/h (44 mph), were for large-scale printssuch as physical newspapers, magazines, catalogues, and telephone books. With theadvent of the Internet in the early millennium years, a fatal development for theircustomers —the print shops —started: Print shop customers were increasingly plac-
ing their orders via “reverse auctions ”(Bertram 2018 ), in which print shops were
able to bid online for a job (typically of smaller volume) and competitors were able
to further undercut the lowest price (similar to the eBay approach, but reverse).Hence, a print shop in need of a job would go to or even beyond its limit. Theresulting distribution battle shifted the boundaries of different printing processes aswell. The knock-on effect for the machine manufacturers followed the decrease ofhigh-volume print runs, as physical newspaper volumes decreased: the high-volumeprinting processes were not competitive for short-run brochures and ﬂyers that
migrated completely to digital prints. As market for high-volume prints shrank,
more and more used printing press were on the market, which prevented even further
the manufacturers to sell their new ones. As the machines are built to last “forever ”
or at least for many years, there was no real need for print shops to buy the latestmodel. Figure 6.2shows the disruptive effects of the printing press industry.
Over decades in the pre-digitized world, the printing press machine
manufacturers have basically optimized their productivity by ever-increasing ef ﬁ-
ciency —leading to reduced variable unit costs at the price of high ﬁxed costs. Ideal
for a growing but fatal for a declining market (see Fig. 6.3): as long as the market size
demands high output beyond the parity point, ef ﬁciency gains from ever-more
integrated (automated) machines pay off with lower variable unit costs. This isbitterly reversed when the entire market shrinks, and ef ﬁciency gains are wiped
away by underutilization and ﬁxed costs that must be covered by fewer and fewer
production units.6 Digitization: Learnings from Ancient Disruptions, AI and the Digital ... 99