Preface
There is already a comprehensive amount of speci ﬁc literature available on ethical
issues of the world, as is on digitization and modern technologies such as arti ﬁcial
intelligence ( “AI”). While this is true, we are at the crossroads of how factually
uncontrollable technology can be used in a useful and societal comparable way. Thisleads directly to the fact that a society must ﬁnd a re ﬂective way of dealing with this
technology and thus also has to relocate ethical standards, because AI has enormouspotential —both in a socially good and destructive sense.
The following basic considerations can serve as orientation:
1. The human being is a social being and needs exchange; therefore, ethics are
needed that summarize the social conventions, even if they differ in time andplace, and provide orientation and support.
2. Digitization is currently changing our world massively, and with it the way we
interact with each other. AI is one integral part and probably not obvious toeveryone. Some applications such as service robots for people in need of helpmay quickly raise ethical issues —despite major technical AI insuf ﬁciencies (see
3. below) —such as the relationship of dependencies.
3. AI is a technology that has become enormously more powerful in technical
terms (information processing speed and capacity) over the last few decades,thus opening new application possibilities. However, this progress is by nomeans at the cognitive level! Today ’s AI applications stagnate in fact in pattern
recognition, i.e., all applications —even if they come along in different forms —
can ultimately be traced back to pattern recognition, which either orientates itselfon previous templates (e.g., speech recognition, facial recognition, text recogni-tion, tracking of individuals, and chatbots) or tries to recognize new connections
“unsupervised ”(e.g., by speci ﬁc deep learning ( “DL”) approaches). In this
respect, AI can now recognize patterns and process information in repetitiveprocesses much better than ever before and with impressive success: muchbetter than humans could ever do (so-called weak AI). But AI has no soul, nodesire, no emotions, and no values (for which it is worthwhile to use —out of —
quite changeable —conviction) as we humans have. In this respect, a human-like
so-called strong AI still seems to be a long way off from today ’s perspective.
vii