signiﬁcant competitive advantage in the changing labor market (from an
employer ’s to an employee ’s market). In addition, the chatbot with the
corresponding training data is also able to support foreign-language
applicants during the application process.
6. As indicated in the previous paragraph, AI can be used to preselect applicants .
For the evaluation of text-based applications, the use of genetic algorithms,whose nomenclature is borrowed from evolutionary biology (Strohmeier andPiazza 2015 ), among other things, lends itself. Genetic algorithms, which can be
assigned to statistical optimization methods, generate sample solutionsaccording to certain objective functions and problem-speci ﬁc constraints in
order to optimize the “survival of the ﬁt test ”(Chehouri et al. 2017 ). The target
deﬁnitions or restrictions can vary depending on the intended use. In the
following, the semantic and typological matching procedures are described asexamples. In the semantic matching process, semantic networks are used inanalogy to the digital personnel search in order to realize an automated compar-ison between the input of the applicants (e.g., information in the CV) and thestored wishes of the HR managers (e.g., competence pro ﬁles of the job
advertisements). Depending on the match, each applicant receives a cumulative“ﬁtness value ”that serves as a basis for selection (Lee et al. 2018 ). It is important
to note that traditional preselection systems can be subject to a programmed bias
due to a (too) strong focus on demographic variables (see Amazon example inSect. 10.1). However, this “recruitment bias ”can be relativized or neutralized by
the additional use of typological matching procedures. The typologicalmatching procedure involves the assignment of applicants to personalitytypes. All quali ﬁcations, abilities, and characteristics desirable for the respective
job are summarized in a personality type, which is the basis for matching.Established interest and personality tests are often used to collect the necessary
information from applicants (e.g., Myers-Briggs type indicator; Randall et al.
2017 ). The question of which matching method to use depends largely on the
type of competence to be used for selection. Thus, semantic matchingprocedures seem to be superior in the assessment of hard skills, whereastypological matching procedures are predestined to assess soft skills. For bothprocedures, they can enable a faster selection of applicants. In addition, AIshould help the selection process to become more transparent and provide anon-discriminatory selection of personnel (Cohen 2019 ). However, it must be
clear that AI can only be used in a supporting way. The ﬁnal decision must be
made by the HR manager.There is also potential for AI applications in the area of personnel development .
For example, the focus is on (7) identi ﬁcation of individual learning paths and
(8) sentiment analysis within the company.
7. To ensure competitiveness in a volatile environment, HR managers must con-
tinuously develop their managers and employees while taking personal and
corporate objectives into account. However, the manual assignment of suitable
further training to required competencies is extremely time-consuming. Here
again, matching algorithms can help by generating suggestions for personal10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 205