1. Descriptive ethics —“What is considered good? ”This question shows the
descriptive (lat. Describere —to write down) approach, which does not evaluate
the connections. Accordingly, this scienti ﬁc approach only involves observation
and explanation but no positioning of the content.
2. Normative ethics —“What should be good? ”This question shows the target state
(lat.Norma —rule, regulation) and is in this respect directly evaluative and thus
contrary to descriptive ethics. The aim is to formulate binding, generally validrules, on the basis of which individual actions can be morally evaluated and thusmake it easier to make a decision.
Two —contrary —approaches are of practical relevance in the ﬁeld of normative
ethics.
1.4.1 Deontological Approach
A morally good action is given exactly when the actor decides for this action due to
his normative obligation. An essential representative of this line of thought is
Immanuel Kant (1724 –1804), who decisively in ﬂuenced deontology (greek
deon¼duty): Categorical imperative “Act only according to that maxim by which
you can simultaneously want it to become a general law ”(Weischedel 1977 )
(or“What you do not want to be done to you, do not do to others. ”) But then,
under certain circumstances, this leads to the acceptance of negative consequences inorder to do justice to his maxims. The direct consequence of this is that negativeconsequences may be accepted in order to remain true to one ’s own —normative —
principles ( “whatever the cost ”). The dilemma arises in the determination of when
the consequences count more than the fundamental adherence to certain
commandments. This is a dif ﬁcult task, is quite controversial, and must be decided
anew from case to case.
Example COVID-19 : The Corona crisis of 2020 (CoV19) is a good example: If
the comprehensible social norm prohibits the evaluation of individual persons
as“valuable/less valuable, ”i.e., no multi-class society is considered norma-
tively correct, this ultimately means that the same rules should apply to allmembers of society. Accordingly, the (forced) quarantine of risk groups such
as elderly people is prohibited. Finally, the consequence is that the entire
population is massively restricted from contact with the delayed spread ofthe SARS-CoV19 (WHO 2020 ) virus. Consequently, all quasi-public
institutions, stores, restaurants, etc. were closed, passenger traf ﬁc was
stopped/restricted, and massive impairment in the manufacturing industryand massive restriction of the freedom of movement in many places resulted.At least the economic collateral damage is extraordinary, despite a
(continued)1 Ethics for Non-philosophers: Basis of Ethics and Ethical Perspectives 11