conﬁdence in political processes, political opposition, transparency, and fairness in
the political process; P3 Human Rights and Rule of Law re ﬂects whether fundamen-
tal human rights and freedoms are protected and respected and if there is a wide-spread abuse of legal, political, and social rights (FFP 2020 ). Hence, ethical relevant
aspects lag behind. The widespread use of AI technologies, in particularly regardingpopulation surveillance, control, and sanctions (see “social credit system ”in Sect.
7.4), shows the pervasive nature of the ethical question.
4.5 Tragedy of the Commons
In addition to the social issues, which are articulated as a minimum in the protection
of human rights, the ecological dimension represents a further, very great challenge
with far-reaching effects. This is especially the case in those areas where the
environment is a public good, i.e., where there is no (private) owner. Here thequestion is to what extent exploitation is justi ﬁed if it degrades the environment.
This problem is aggravated if the environmental regulations in the host country areworse than in the home country. Is a multinational company allowed to pollute theenvironment in developing countries just because there are no local regulationsagainst it?
Here the local legal standard is clearly lower than the ethical standards in the
home country.
The model of the “tragedy of the common language ”(Hardin 1968 ) describes the
dilemma in which a freely available but limited resource is not used in a sociallyefﬁcient manner, thus threatening overuse that ultimately leads to social damage. As
soon as a resource is unrestrictedly available, everyone will try to use this resource tomaximize their own pro ﬁt. As soon as too many users exploit this resource and it
cannot regenerate, this not inexhaustible resource will inevitably degenerate andsociety will have to bear the costs of this degeneration, ultimately damaging the
resource and, in the medium term, society. While adequate returns are still possible
for the individual in the short term, the increased costs for the individual onlybecome visible in the medium term.Table 4.2 FSI Indicators (own presentation based on FFP ( 2020 ))
Cohesion Economic Political Social Comprehensive
C1: Security
ApparatusE1: Economic
DeclineP1: State
LegitimacyS1:
DemographicPressuresX1: External
Intervention
C2:
FactionalizedElitesE2: Uneven
EconomicDevelopmentP2: Public
ServicesS2: Refugees
and IDPs
C3: Group
GrievanceE3: Human Flight
and Brain DrainP3: Human
Rights and Rule
of Law4 Ethics in an International Context 61