3. The forecast of termination intentions has always been one of the favorite
fantasies of HR managers. Although legally and ethically controversial, suchan early warning system could make HR work much easier and realize visible or
invisible cost savings. Speci ﬁcally, HR managers could develop targeted
interventions to counteract the dismissal of top performers. Accordingly, numer-ous studies have dealt with the identi ﬁcation of predictor variables for employee
turnover. The most important categories include —as with absenteeism predic-
tion—variables at the organizational and individual level. At the organizational
level, it is especially the satisfaction with the management, the opportunity forindividual development, the informative communication of the management, thefairness in personnel assessment, the sense of justice in payment, and an
appreciative corporate culture that counteracts the intention to dismiss (Chang
et al. 2013 ). On an individual job level, the so-called job characteristics
according to Hackman and Oldman (autonomy, feedback, variety ofrequirements, importance of tasks, holistic approach) are of particular impor-tance. It is assumed that these job characteristics result in signi ﬁcant psycholog-
ical states (e.g., self-ef ﬁcacy, sense of meaning, commitment), which in turn
affect the intention to quit (Slattery et al. 2010 ). In addition, socio-demographic
factors are also relevant in this context. For example, the study by Pérez-
Campdesuñer and colleagues (Pérez-Campdesuñer et al. 2018 ) shows that
average income, educational level, and age have a signi ﬁcant in ﬂuence on the
intention to terminate a contract. The organizational, individual, and demo-graphic factors shown serve as input variables for the ANN to be programmed.In analogy to the forecast of absenteeism, the output is shown in binary.Naturally, the analysis of the intention to quit only makes sense on an individuallevel. While the application maturity seems to be already proven from a techni-cal point of view (Ekawati 2019 ), ethical and data protection issues currently
prevent the use of this predictive AI solution in Germany. Therefore, it seems
worthwhile to consider an aggregated termination forecast for the relevantbusiness areas in order to be able to react ﬂexibly to the upcoming waves of
terminations.In the area of recruitment, further ﬁelds of application for AI are opening up. For
example, the (4) active sourcing, (5) application, and (6) selection process canbe supported.
4. In the (digital) active sourcing process , companies are often faced with the
challenge that the terminology used by the company and the applicants is
different. On web-based job portals, for example, different terms are oftenused to describe quali ﬁcations, skills, or positions. Classic full-text search
engines that search a speci ﬁc area or the entire Internet for documents or
resources based on speci ﬁc words or phrases and output them in a listing
often reach their limits when matching providers and applicants due to hetero-geneous terminology. A semantic knowledge network can provide a remedy inthis context. Semantic knowledge networks represent content as a network of
terms, logical term relationships, and diverse term designations and are to be
assigned to knowledge representation as a sub ﬁeld of AI Arena et al. ( 2018 );10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 203