(b) Political and economic decision-makers to resist exploiting technology
potential for their own bene ﬁt without re ﬂecting the spillover effects on
societies.
(c) Consumer to restrain from carelessness and apply prudent judgment on
(purchasing) decisions similar to what an increasing number of consumerspractice in organic food consumption.
7. Key assets in the “open ”digital world such as open access software is a corner-
stone of the digital evolution. As proven by many occasions throughout the lastfew decades, proprietary approaches deem to block innovation. As an example,since its introduction in 1991, the operating system LINUX (Netmarketshare2020 ) has emerged as platform for millions of (business) servers and desktop
computers, and provided the nucleus ( “kernel ”) for the open source mobile
operation system Android, which was launched in 2007 that has replaced andoutpaced the up-to-then dominating Nokia ’s proprietary Symbian OS and
Microsoft ’s Mobile Windows). While these achievements are impressive in the
open software development, that is characterized by many of intrinsicallymotivated developers who are driving for better solutions and their own mastery.The ultimate access to the heart (the “kernel ”) of these technologies lies with
some individuals —with the so-called Benevolent Dictators for Life (who deemed
to be intrinsically motivated) —such as the initiator of Linux, Linus Thorvald,
taking a coordinating role in the further development of the kernel. Astonishinglyenough, this loose structure seems to work out quite well). Otherwise,fragmentations on a large scale would be the consequence. For AI algorithmsand approaches, a commonly accepted framework could be built up —similar to
the data protection framework in the GDPR —to provide fair access to resources
and to offer security of investment (i.e., a sound foundation for the individualinvestments based on fair and stable access to basic intellectual property). Europe
may play a leading role here.
9.5 Finish Line Quiz
9.01 What are the key factors to make AI ﬁt?
1 Algorithms, data.2 Algorithms, processes.3 Algorithms, data, processes.4 Data, processes.
9.02 What AI approach can be taken in case of missing (data)infrastructure?
1 Data-driven vs. process-driven.
2 Process-driven approach.3 Big data-driven approach.4 Deep learning approaches.
(continued)188 S. H. Vieweg