companies that do not support their HR processes digitally at all is surprising. The
percentage of companies that can be assigned to level 0 ranges from 3% (applicationprocess) to 69% (sentiment analysis). This result is relevant in that it can be assumed
that level 0 has no or very little data that could serve as input data for AI applications.
A further ﬁnding of the study is that the companies surveyed are predominantly
assigned to levels 2 and 3, i.e., that HR processes are primarily supported by classicMicrosoft Of ﬁce applications (e.g., spreadsheet programs) and/or HR information
systems. This ﬁnding is signi ﬁcant, since the HRM information systems in particular
represent an important database for AI applications. The results presented here makecurrent studies on AI applications in personnel practice seem plausible. In thealready quoted study of the Fraunhofer IAO, the participants of the study were
asked to assess the importance of AI applications for selected business areas. Not
surprisingly, it was found that the HRM sector occupied the tenth of eleven ranks —
i.e., compared to marketing, sales, or logistics, it hardly receives any attention in theAI debate in companies (Bauer et al. 2020 ). A similar picture is emerging for
Switzerland. A qualitative study of 26 HR practitioners (mainly from largecompanies) showed that HR processes are currently primarily supported by “old
technology ”(e.g., online employee surveys). AI-based solutions, on the other hand,
are hardly ever used, despite the potential attested to by the study participants
(Weibel et al. 2019 ). These ﬁndings form the basis for the design of conducive
framework conditions for AI applications in HRM in Sect. 10.4. Figure 10.5
provides an overview of the results on the status quo of AI in concrete applicationareas.
10.4 Promotional Framework for AI Applications in HRM
Considering the empirical ﬁndings from Sect. 10.3.2 , the following outlines the
framework conditions that are conducive to increasing the acceptance of AIapplications in HRM. The theoretical basis for this is the technology acceptancemodel (TAM). TAM, developed by Davis and colleagues (Davis et al. 1989 ), is a
widely used instrument for the analysis of technology use in the ﬁeld of information
systems. In its original form, the model postulates that the intention to use atechnology depends on two variables: (1) perceived usefulness and (2) perceivedease of use. Perceived usefulness measures the extent to which a person feels that an
application improves his or her own performance. Perceived ease of use, in turn,
measures a person ’s perception of the effort required to learn how to use the new
technology. The described effect structure is considered robust in research and hasbeen con ﬁrmed in numerous studies (Wu and Lederer 2009 ). Over time, TAM has
been further developed and various input variables have been added. For the presentchapter, the following additional variables are considered: (3) data protection con-formity, (4) ethical virtues, and (5) innovation culture. In the following, it is assumedthat these ﬁve factors increase the acceptance of AI applications in general and
within the HRM sector in particular (see also Fig. 10.3).10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 211