assumed —lead to higher ef ﬁciency and a stronger overall proposition (see Table 6.2,
left side). Hence, a certain convergence of both drivers of the digitization can beexpected (Corea 2017 ).
6.4.3 Quantum Computer, Supercomputer, and the Implication
of Computing Performance
Digital technologies such as AI and blockchain require a high amount of computing
power, as well as complex models in scienti ﬁc (e.g., astrophysics, quantum mechan-
ics, and meteorology) or industrial applications (geological exploration, aircraftdevelopment, and weapon systems). The exponential development in that ﬁeld
over decades has reached a level that is headed by the Japanese RIKEN Fugaku
Supercomputer (Morgan 2020 ) since June 2020: scratching at the exa ﬂops de ﬁni-
tion
6and a cost of close to USD 2 BN, up to 80 MW of electrical power consumption
is leading an accelerated race for computational dominance (see Fig. 6.17), so that in
consequence, the leading position is shorter ( <1 year) than in former years. In
public, this is a tripartite race between Japan, the USA, and China. Power consump-tion is a key issue: the fastest computer (by FLOPS —ﬂoating point operations per
second) in 2020 (Fuguka, JP, 415 PFLOPS) is 762 times more energy hungry thanthe most ef ﬁcient supercomputer (MN-3, JP 1.6PFLOPS).
7Compared to the human
brain —which is an often-used analogy, though with many ﬂaws which to discuss are
beyond the topic here —it would still show up to 4.700 higher ef ﬁciency.8Table 6.2 Complementary characteristics of blockchain and AI (own presentation, based on Corea
(2017 ))
Blockchain to support AI with TRUST Al to support Blockchain with EFFICIENCY
Providing trust from an immutable
audit trailEnergy consumption for the resource-intensive mining
process by AI-based optimizing techniques
Better data quality (trusted data)
improves AI effectivenessScalability based on AI “federated ”learning on new
data sharing approaches keeping blockchain length atcheck, rather than keeping non-value legacy blocks
Ease of AI acceptance in providing
(personal) dataSecurity to avoid fraudulent attacks on the application
layer on top of the blockchain
Provide bots arti ﬁcial trust in machine-
to-machine interactionsMinimizing mining (and cost) efforts by predicting
likely successful nodes
Limit AI action space by applying
smart contracts to speci ﬁc actionsData exchange controls (data gates) for blockchain
protected personal data sharing
6“exa”(10E18) is a thousand “peta ”(10E15), which is a thousand “tera”(10E12), which is a
thousand “giga ”ﬂoating point operations per second (FLOPS).
7Own calculation based on https://www.top500.org/lists/green500/2020/06/ (accessed 06.10.2020).
8Own calculation assuming 1.500 PFLOPS at 15 W, a typical setting found across the literature.114 S. H. Vieweg