considering ethical, data protection, and value-adding issues —until a balance has
been found between the human being and the thinking machine.
10.7 Finish Line Quiz
10.01 In which key HRM functions can AI support?
1 Forecast, recruiting, development, remuneration, employee self-services.2 Reward system, administration, recruitment, requirements planning, development.3 Speech and text processing, knowledge generation, knowledge representation,
knowledge processing, problem solving.
4 Learning pathway identi ﬁcation, sentiment analysis in the workforce, active
sourcing, performance evaluation, absenteeism prediction.
10.02 Which combination is correct for AI-based preselection of candidates?
1 Semantic matching procedures seem to be superior for both hard skills and soft
skills.
2 Typological matching procedures seem to be superior in hard skills, semantic
matching procedures in soft skills.
3 Semantic matching procedures seem to be superior in hard skills, typological
matching procedures in soft skills.
4 Typological matching procedures seem to be superior for both hard skills and soft
skills.
10.03 What is another advantage of chatbots in HRM functions beyond cost ef ﬁciencies?
1 To optimize second- and third-level support by providing better data to the HR
experts.
2 Chatbots are not usable in HR functions.
3 Reduced risk to lose an interesting candidate.4 Chatbots do not pay off; they are on the long run more expensive than human HR
staff.
10.04 Recent (non-representative) research unveils that at least in small/medium-sized
enterprises (SME) in Germany, ...
1 AI support is already used today on basically all different HR functions.
2 The management is aware of AI advantages, though there is hardly any practical
implementation.
3 Utilization of AI technologies is primarily expected in HR management.
4 There is no competitive advantage that could be generated with AI-based HRM.
10.05 What are speci ﬁc ethical and legal aspects to be considered in utilizing AI-based
automated processes in HRM?
1 Assisted intelligence may not be allowed in jurisdictions under the European GDPR
rules.
2 Assisted intelligence may be allowed in jurisdictions under the European GDPR
rules like in the Germany the DSGVO.
3 As long as the AI part is just autonomous intelligence, it may be allowed in
jurisdictions under the European GDPR rules like in Germany with the DSGVO.
4 Fully automated HRM processes such as recruiting using AI technologies may not
be allowed in jurisdictions under the European GDPR rules.
(continued)220 M. Groß