Then have a look at the data; as we know “data is the new oil ”and without
relevant data that is of high quality, meaning that it is representative, accurate,
unbiased, and timely, even the best intentioned algorithm can go wrong.
In addition, some vendors are using data that was bought from someone else, who
bought it from someone else. They cannot trace the data. That brings a new ethicalissue that will need to be addressed.
And to put this challenge in perspective, according to IBM, over 90% of all data
in existence has been collected in the past 2 years (Beatty 2016 ).
And even if a high level of data quality and integrity is attained, that data will still
be a re ﬂection of the past or of the status quo and cannot necessarily be extrapolated
into the future.
Then the model itself must be understood; what are the assumptions being used in
the model and why? What is the margin of error and how are errors corrected?
Finally, governance structures must be created within companies to assure not
only that all the above is considered, but that it is appropriately applied, documented,and consistent with the strategies, goals, and culture of the ﬁrm.
These ﬁndings must then be communicated routinely to the developers of the AI
so that appropriate alterations can be made.
And while individuals must be held clearly accountable within ﬁrms, ﬁrms
themselves must be held clearly accountable to the public (Diakopoulos 2016 ;
Guszcza et al. 2018 ) (Fig. 8.3).
This requires intelligent regulation ; we need auditing processes that work like a
TÜV
5for algorithms. There are already some private companies doing this algorith-
mic auditing, but these methods must be more standardized in the future, to improvecomparability.
Fig. 8.3 Technology
dependency (Source:
ShotPrime Studio)
5TÜV –Technischer Überwachungs-Verein, a German provider of testing, inspections, and
certiﬁcation services, being worldwide second by revenue [all TÜV-branches Nord, Rheinland,
Süd in 2017, according to (TIC Council 2018 , TÜV 2017 )]. The reputation of a TÜV certi ﬁcate has
been very high for decades, despite the disastrous bursting of the Vale in Brazil in early 2019,shortly after TÜV Süd issued a certi ﬁcate for that dam (see Chap. 1).8 AI in the Financial Industries: Between Apathy and Hysteria 169