Thus, upheavals and their effect on the “human production factor ”are neither
new nor comfortable! However, in the past —i.e., before the information age —the
substitution of human work by machines has mainly focused on physically and
motor challenging activities. This meant that the compilation, analysis, and evalua-tion of information, which ultimately leads to knowledge, was largely reserved forhuman individuals or the societal collective. With the increasing sophistication ofautomats —3D printing comes to mind, for example —and the use of information
processing machines such as Robot Process Automation (RPA; see Sect. 6.4.1 for
more details) with impressive performance in the ﬁeld of pattern recognition ( “weak
AI”), the limit is being pushed even further. Figure 9.2illustrates this context of
value-added versus speci ﬁc capabilities.
Clearly, this has consequences on society: more and more people tend to go for
cognitive jobs based on academic education rather than practical jobs based onapprenticeship. This can be illustrated with the example of Germany in the years2009 –2019: while the entire population increased slightly by 1.7% (CAGR 0.2%),
the number of students increased by 37% (CAGR 3%), whereas the number ofapprenticeships on the demand side decreased by 5% (CAGR /C00.5%) under stable
(CAGR /C00.06%) supply (see Fig. 9.3) (BMBF 2020 ).
In the context of the entire population, the tertiary (academic) education
contributes to less than 1/3 (30%), some 53% are with secondary (apprenticeship)education, and 17% without professional quali ﬁcation (BMBF 2020 ). Very clearly,
the educational standards are country dependent as consequences of their develop-ment stage and educational system. Whereas on a European level, on average 29% ofthe population received tertiary education [spread between as low as 17.1% (Italy)and 37.7% (Switzerland) (Eurostat 2019 )], in the USA 66.2% basically twice as
many high school graduates are enrolled in universities of colleges (US Bureau of
Labor Statistics 2020 ).
Taking a broader view and the analysis shown, current challenges and resolution
approaches can be concluded:
Value add
to entire 
system
CapabilitiesMechanical
forceMotoric 
abilitiesCognitive
abilities
Automation HumanFig. 9.2 Human capabilities
and automation (own
presentation)9 Ethical Best Practice Applying AI in a Socially Sensible Manner 185