expression is rooted back just two decades to Clayton Christensen ’s“the innovator ’s
dilemma ”(Christensen 2003 ), the concept has been described for much longer, as
the Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter1named it “creative destruction. ”On the
other side, humans have a certain inertia, stick to existing behaviors, and tend to
ignore early indicators of change. As the threat initially is tiny compared to thedominant market players in terms of output and pro ﬁt, these threats are identi ﬁed
very often in a stage where it is simply too late to restructure the business andaccelerate on new business opportunities.
Example ice trading: A famous case of disruption is the ice trade industry,
which evolved on a global level throughout the nineteenth century when there
were no refrigerators. At the eve of the twenteeth century, ice trade was
surging in increasing demand in particular in the US East Coast and Midwest
(Cummings 1949 ), where it revolutionized the food industry from local
production and consumption to long-distance trades and provided employ-ment for 90,000 people in the USA alone. The abrupt end came with the newtechnology of refrigerators, which would not justify ice trades on a large scale.The ice trade industry collapsed after World War I into marginality(Cummings 1949 ). Another famous example is former ﬁlm photography
giant Eastman Kodak: this company dominated for decades the market, but
basically failed to transition to future-proven businesses during the shift to
digital photography. Although in a too simplistic approach this example isoften cited to argue management ’s failure to see and react to the disruption, a
closer look reveals that just knowing about an issue is not enough. In thisspeciﬁc case, management ’s awareness about the disruption of their industry
was given (Shih 2016 ), though taking and timing actions accordingly basically
failed. The management ’s task is to fully understand the implications.
The characteristics of the industries that are mostly affected by disruptions like AI
and that may struggle to cope with this challenge can be generalized as follows (seeTable 6.1):
Basically, what used to be a competitive advantage in a surging business envi-
ronment with steady growth ﬁnds itself as a massive and destructive disadvantage at
sunset. In such a situation, it is important that management not only “knows ”about
upcoming industry changes but “understands ”what needs to be done in due time.
Theﬁrst-mover advantage, very well known in management concepts for market
entry, needs to be reversed in regard to “ﬁrst out-mover ”: In a sunsetting business
environment, early discontinuation may provide the advantage of marginal proceedsfrom selling that part of the business before it is (too) late to generate an attractiveprice.
11883 –1950.96 S. H. Vieweg