and penalties of wrongdoing. It would not make too much sense to impose a
punishment like jail for wrongdoing on a robot.
In parallel, consumers need to be incentivized picking up their decision responsi-
bility, apply prudent judgment (reference is made again to the increasing number of
consumers practicing organic food consumption), and restrain from carelessness forconvenience.
11.4.4 The Pillar of Accountability Toward Society
AI technologies have the potential to disrupt social cohabitation. Hence, an ethicalapproach for AI cannot be limited “just”to aspects of individuals such as on data
protection or responsibility delegation (e.g., to an e-person). A single-sided perspec-tive on the opportunities of AI technologies such as ef ﬁciency increase through
automation will brutally fail to consider the societal context in its sphere of in ﬂuence.
An approach to foster accountability in the context of AI technologies should
include assessment measures. Similar to a risk-adjusted perspective well known in
traditional asset management or the life cycle assessment ( “LCA ”) according to ISO
14040/14044
7for the environmental impact, the environmental and social perspec-
tive can be captured in a social adjusted valuation. Such a measure of an “AI social
linked environmental assessment ”(“AISLE ”) can form a basis to combine the
required sustainable perspective. This would need to re ﬂect the socially
disadvantaged.
But it is not only an obligation for businesses, scientists as well take on a very
important role: They need to sensitize politicians on the spillover effects of AI
exploitation, as responsible scientists have done in the 1940s and 1950s with thenuclear potential and threats such as the atomic and hydrogen bomb.
Today ’s data scientists have the same accountability as had the nuclear
scientists some 70 years ago preventing us from the third world war .
Furthermore, taking accountability means clarifying weak structures that the
software industry relied on in the past. In the pre-AI age, this was a minor issue asthere was technology choice, i.e., operating systems, programs, and the like. In theAI age, more and more dependencies on key joint resources emerge. This can beseen by re ﬂecting the driving AI communities and the provision of key inputs such
as speci ﬁc algorithms (for details, it is referred to Sect. 6.6.1 ).
Key assets in the “open ”digital world such as open access software are a
cornerstone of the digital evolution. As proven by many occasions throughout the
last few decades, proprietary approaches deem to block innovation. As an example,since its introduction in 1991, the operating system LINUX (Netmarketshare 2020 )
7LCA as de ﬁned by ISO is a measure to evaluate the environmental impact of products and services.11 Ethical AI Implementation 241