taking into account the volatile but increasing price, e.g., in November 2020, the
price for the Italian fast food, which was originally considered as the meal of the poorpeople, would be almost EUR 186 million.
3
Meanwhile, there are many other crypto-currencies with different technological
conﬁgurations offered, and a lively debate whether BCT-based crypto-currencies are
“currencies ”at all accompanied their wider spread in the market. For example, the
head of the UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), Andrew Bailey, conveyed aserious warning with his opinion in December 2017 that “the rocketing value of
bitcoin can only be temporary, and that it is stuck in a bubble. That could eventuallycome to an end in a spectacular burst ”(Grifﬁn2017 ). Despite the critical views,
crypto-currencies are a fact: as of 2020, there are multiple thousands of crypto-
currencies in offer, though only three have reached a signi ﬁcant volume of >USD
10 Bn (coinmarketcap.com 2020 ).
BCT advocates refer to many other use cases rather than crypto-currencies.
Examples are applications in supply chains where quality standards need to beguaranteed and tight documentation and controls need to be in place such asrefrigerated transport for food and pharmaceutical products. Another example areso-called smart contracts, where (business) customer –supplier relationship manage-
ment can be automated by mirroring intended transactions on a contractual basis
without human interactions. A typical smart contract use case allows for automated
payments as soon as negotiated conditions laid down in the contract are met like aphysical good —with satnav location functionality such as GPS —being delivered to
the customer site, and location update automatically logged. That log update willthen trigger the payment to the supplier (Iansiti and Lakhani 2017 )—a self-executing
contract.
In general, for transactions between two parties that traditionally needed an
intermediary, a clearing house, or trust center, BCT can provide a way without the
need for such third parties. Hence, it is often called a “distributed ledger ”technology
(“DLT ”). This would mean that banker, brokers, lawyers, and notary services are
dispensable and delay-prone bureaucracy can speed up to near-real-time transactionsof the Internet age. The ef ﬁciency increase comes in as lower cost and less delay; see
Fig.6.12. The key role of traditional tripartite transactions is the “party of trust ”who
takes the accountability that both Party A and Party B are identi ﬁed and comply with
their responsibilities to deliver on a contractual promise, i.e., that all informationprovided is correct. In case of default of one of the parties A or B, the intermediary
will clear the situation by rewinding the stalled transaction. This means as well that
the intermediary is in a risk position and covers said risk by asking for risk coveragepremium, which adds to the overall transactional costs.
The blockchain approach uses cryptographical technology that ensures for the
correctness of the information. The most important element is a hash function.Applying adequate cryptographic hash functions ( “CHF ”), it is possible to mark a
data stream such as a text of inde ﬁnite length with a digital mark (i.e., the hash) of
3Based on data from Finanzen.net ( 2020 ).108 S. H. Vieweg