no means integrated into everyday life, than unethical behavior is quickly obvious.
On the other hand, strong role models, which clearly demonstrate to the entireorganization the importance of ethically correct behavior through one ’s own actions
and, if necessary, by assuming responsibility and taking drastic measures in case of
noncompliance, minimize the danger of unethical behavior in the organization.
Managers have a decisive role in setting appropriate goals. If ethical
considerations are not taken into account in the decision-making process, whichultimately leads to the formulation of concrete objectives, unethical behavior isencouraged, since it is not relevant to the achievement of objectives. The classic,short-term oriented management method management-by-objective ( “MBO ”)
illustrates this, since here only the pro ﬁt focus is set ( “whatever it takes ”). Of course,
it is not a management method in itself that promotes or prevents ethical behavior; it
is essentially the design of the parameters that counts, for example, the more modernvariant —the objectives-key-results ( “OKR “)
1—a management system in which the
ethical dimension can be very well represented by formulating economic andethically relevant goals (e.g., in social and ecological aspects).
Ultimately, however, the target level is just as decisive. If it is set too ambitiously
and unrealistically, unethical behavior may result from the fact that (ethicallyquestionable) ways to achieve the goal are sought. The consequences of this canFactors of 
unethical 
behaviorPersonal 
Ethics: 
weak personal 
values, accep-
tance of lower 
ethical stan-
dards in host 
countryCountry 
culture of low 
ethical 
standards (e.g. 
labor law, 
environment, 
corruption)
Organizational 
culture based 
on weak values
Leadership and 
role model 
without high 
ethical valueDecision 
making 
without ethical 
considerations 
(classic MBO)Unrealistic 
performance 
targetsFig. 4.5 Factors of unethical
behavior, especially in an
international context (own
presentation, after (Hill 2014 ))
1This method is based on MBO and the SMART objective and has received a lot of attention due to
its long-term use at Google.4 Ethics in an International Context 67