The example of ﬁshing and over ﬁshing makes this obvious: if the limited
resource of free-living ﬁsh in the waters is over ﬁshed, a collapse is imminent,
as was the case with cod in the Baltic Sea in 2015 (Schröder 2020 ). However,
regulation as practiced in the European Union is a controversial under-catch,because although there is an understanding of the need for catch quotas, the
detailed assessment is usually very controversial, since a very restrictive catch
quota can endanger the existence of ﬁshermen in the short term and the
scienti ﬁcﬁndings that are incorporated into the political decision-making
process are usually still a considerable obstacle to the development of asustainable ﬁsheries policy. In the Brexit situation, the confrontation between
Great Britain and the EU escalated exactly at the point of the catch quotas.
Example Brazil: A further example in South America is the overexploita-
tion of the Brazilian rainforest, which has increased massively since the
election of the controversial Jair Bolsonaro in 2018. Most of the time, large
companies pro ﬁt from the clearing and conversion into arable and pastureland,
displace small farmers, and are devastating for the climate. The extent to whichBrazil ’s (local) economic development should take precedence over a global
commitment to climate protection is the subject of intense international debate.To what extent it is justi ﬁable to involve, for example, German companies
such as Bayer and BASF as suppliers of agricultural products, or SAP as atechnology (software) supplier for digital agriculture, in which fertilizer and
water requirements are determined automatically, cannot be answered trivi-
ally: On the one hand, such companies ultimately help to implement moreeffective agriculture with their products, and on the other hand, such activitiespromote controversial deforestation.
4.6 Extensive Land Use as a Social Hazard, e.g., SARS-CoV-2
The conversion of natural habitat into agricultural land or urban areas has anothereffect worthy of consideration, which must also be ethically located from theperspective of international business management: according to recent scienti ﬁc
ﬁndings, in addition to environmental problems, the conversion into usable land
leads to a worrying change in the animal world. It is not only that the diversity ofspecies is threatened enormously, but also that those animal species that could
become dangerous for humans in the short term are best adapted to the new
conditions: Zoonoses, i.e., diseases that are transmitted from animals to humans(and vice versa), are becoming more prevalent. The typically small host animals suchas mice, rats, bats, or sparrow species serve as host species for corona-, henipa-,arena-, and ﬂaviviruses or bacterial pathogens such as Borrelia and Leptospira (Gibb
et al. 2020 ).
The SARS-CoV-2 virus, which ﬁrst triggered the respiratory disease COVID-19
in Wuhan, China, at the end of 2019 and was classi ﬁed as a pandemic by the World62 S. H. Vieweg