fraud, in operations, in human resources, account opening, payments, and else-
where —anywhere where automated tasks are conducted (see Sect. 6.5.1 ).
This digital transition provides a signi ﬁcant opportunity for investment
professionals to position themselves optimally in this new environment , where
investment roles, technology roles, and innovation roles will be dominant.
According to the recently released CFA Institute study “Investment Professional
of the Future ”(CFA 2019 ), the combination of human intelligence, or H-I, and
artiﬁcial intelligence, A-I, will add more value than either component alone because
it ideally leverages the bene ﬁts of both. Ethical orientation, transparency, communi-
cation, empathy, tacit knowledge, and trust interaction are the key human elementsthat technology cannot (yet) reproduce.
Teams will be more important than star individual portfolio managers and
diversity in teams will be sought to achieve the best results. Professionals willhave to understand how technology is being used in his or her company and thenbe able to translate this into customized information and results for clients.According to Investment Professional of the Future, such T-shaped skills, combiningboth broad and speci ﬁc knowledge, are the most coveted. At the same time,
leadership skills are more desired than ever and the workplace itself is expected togrow in importance and have a far higher in ﬂuence on the employee experience as in
the past.
This provides an exceptional opportunity to create company cultures that are
positive and dynamic, with a clear human-centric impact, especially after theCOVID-19 pandemic lockdown.
This is the future that probably all of us aspire to, but ﬁrst we need to take a look at
where we are now, which is not as clear-cut.
8.5 Current State in the (Traditional) Financial Industries
While many ﬁnance ﬁrms may not be as advanced as their high-tech counterparts,
there is still a pointed need to create a greater transparency in ﬁnance with respect
to AI.
“Fact: We have already turned our world over to machine learning and
algorithms. The question now is, how to better understand and manage what
we have done? ”(Chudakov 2012 ) (see Sect. 1.5.3 on the Collingridge problem
as well)
Between the simple ﬁxed algorithms and true AI “lies an opaque place that we ’ve
already entered with little thought or debate, much less agreement as to aims, ethics,safety, best practice. If the algorithms around us are not yet intelligent, meaningable to recognize “that calculation or action doesn ’t look right: I ’ll try it again ”,
they are starting to learn from their environments. And once an algorithm islearning, no longer is there a chance to know exactly what its rules and parameters166 S. Spinner