production machines from an ef ﬁciency (physical throughout) point of view,
but did not encounter the added value on the information. He is used to takeeconomic investment decisions like investing some €400,000 into a new
machine as the better physical throughput will save him operational costs in
a very short time; the business case pays off.
From the demonstration and analysis, it turned out that just 16 sensors
would be required to establish the information ﬂow to ensure timely
interventions in the process. That would mean that the process would behighly automated, and the quality of the end product can be calculated.
The CEO ’s reaction was outraged, as this would be impossible. Why? “At
this company site, 140 employees are employed, 40 of whom are dedicatedsolely to checking, testing the quality of the product at the end of the machine.
Now you come along and say that if I have the 16 sensors, then I might not
need these people anymore. That can ’t be true, ”he said.
The CEO and the entrepreneur then decided that proof for this thesis should
be provided in a laboratory test setting. In other words, a small machine that,so to speak, reproduces the large machine was to be used to prove that thequality of the products produced could be predicted almost exactly. For half ayear, this machine was actually loaded with different products and in the endan algorithm was developed which allowed to add arbitrary raw materials to
the production process and to predict 99.9% of the product characteristics.
And that was a complete mind shift for the CEO: he said that 50% of all
products produced in the ﬁrst batch are defective. The company spends a lot of
resources —time and money —on engineering to make sure the product is good
again. If this were to be eliminated, the current activities could be monitoredwith only 2 remaining employees instead of 40.
The CEO immediately became aware of the scale and the economies of
scale: 100 sites, 40 employees per site, reduced to 2 remaining employees
each, represent an enormous potential. And the loss of 38 employees would be
applicable just in one department of the entire company.
Here, it is important to note that there is not necessarily an automatism of
decision-making: instead of just looking on the economic dimension of an opportu-
nity (here cost cutting by laying off employees), there is the social dimension ofsustainability as well that needs to be encountered in decision-making.
In the setting of this example: the company is the largest employer in that rural
town, absorbing some 50% of totally available workforce. Laying off people on alarge scale could mean that the entire site may go down the drain.
So, the CEO claimed that this new knowledge is a “weapon. ”He spotted two
things immediately:
(continued)182 S. H. Vieweg