3. ...the processing and the technical environment, e.g., a setting of a trusted
hedged environment (probably with less quality) or an open, cloud-based envi-ronment accessible to an unde ﬁnable group and risk of contamination and attacks
4. ...the environmental footprint
5. ...the interested parties and disclosure or potential con ﬂicts of interest. In this
context, the issue of biased information is crucial as it is misleading. So,“disfaked ”information in an environment of manipulation through AI-based
services should be thought.
Ultimately, the user as individual (human) personality with dignity and account-
ability needs to take the ﬁnal decision. Disregarding the technical quality of a
system,
5theﬁnal accountability cannot be transferred to a non-human entity, even
if judicial constructs like the e-person may be introduced in certain jurisdictions.
To illustrate this basic principle, an extreme example is given where it becomes
obvious that technology has its shortcomings and fatalities and serious damages caneasily occur.
Example: The Man Who Saved the World (Lebedev 2004 )
In 1983, the world was very close to a nuclear world war, with uncalculated
consequences: It was a Russian named Petrov
6who ignored protocols and
procedures and withdrew from ﬁring off a nuclear weapon targeting the USA,
when all Russian technical systems indicated that there is a threatening ﬁrst
nuclear missile strike with some objects from the USA toward the USSR.Petrov concluded that given the situation between the two superpowers theUSA and USSR, a ﬁrst strike from the USA would not make any sense (or if
so, only a massive intervention with hundreds of missiles would) and heassumed that the technical systems provided wrong information: he wasright and probably saved the planet —for now.
There are many other examples that prove keeping humans out of ﬁnal decision
loop leads to fatalities. Reference is made to the 2018 and 2019 disasters of Boeing ’s
737 Max 8 crashes.
Hence, beyond all technical excellence that can be achieved already today and
that will emerge in the future, the ﬁnal accountability needs to be kept to
humans (Precht 2019 ). Why, if there are so many human shortcomings, cognitive
biases, and individual motivations? The answer to this question comes back to thefundamental shortcoming of machines: they do not have a desire; they do not have asocialization that would give them the ethical compass of doing right or wrong.
And—ﬁnally —it would be human persons that have to take the (legal) consequences
5As an example it is referred to the Uber case in Sect. 11.2.1.
6Lebedev, A. ( 2004 ): The Man Who Saved the World Finally Recognized. https://web.archive.org/
web/20110721000030/http://www.worldcitizens.org/petrov2.html . (access 10.08.2020).240 S. H. Vieweg