Figure 6.18 illustrated the two different principal functions of using cryptographical
keys —encryption of messages (to keep the content as a secret) and creation of a
digital signature (providing authentication, which is providing the evidence that theparty claiming a certain identity indeed is the identity claimed to be). The basis forasymmetric cryptographical procedures is that the so-called one-way function
provides one simple and ef ﬁcient way to calculate (i.e., multiplication of prime
numbers), but the reverse is extremely hard (i.e., factorization of a large number).The longer the key, the harder the factorization effort. Hence, there is an ongoingneed to extend key lengths, as computational performance is increasing.
With current computational performance, cyber-attacks typically do not pay off
as the burden is simply too high; it would take much too long to hack a cryptographicsecret. In an environment where exponentially more computational performance isprevailing, brute-force attacks are likely to pay off and may compromise existing
data security infrastructures fundamentally. Invented in the late 1970s by the three
MIT mathematicians Rivest, Sharmir, and Adleman, the famous RSA approach(“RSA ”), which is a deterministic approach based on a set of mathematical
functions, is used today in various applications from e-mail, electronic banking,and electronic passports to Internet transmission protocols. The RSA algorithm hasbeen frequently cracked on various increasing key lengths: Competitive challenges(against a prize setting in the beginning) have shown factorization for keys up to alength of 768 bit (EMC 2020 ). Hence, there is an ongoing need to extend key
lengths, as computational performance is increasing. As of 2020, in Germany the
recommendation is to use key lengths of 2048 bits (BNA 2014 ).
With the emergence of quantum computing, the logic of longer keys will not be
feasible anymore, as there is a massive impediment to the PKC performance as such.Already today, typically RSA is not used to encrypt messages as such, but forPKC
Private Key
Create digital 
signaturesDecrypt 
encrypted 
messagesPublic Key
Encrypt messages 
(only readable 
after decryption)Check digital 
signatures
Fig. 6.18 Principle of a public key cryptography (own presentation)6 Digitization: Learnings from Ancient Disruptions, AI and the Digital ... 117