Example of a Mid-Sized Biochemical Production Company
The company has some 14,000 employees (out of which 140 work in the
headquarters in a small city in a rural area in Bavaria, Germany) worldwidewith eight production sites in Germany and selling in 100 countries. The CEOis 59 years old and supervises the ordinary course of business. He inherited the
business from his father and runs this family-controlled company in second
generation. After World War II this company developed really well andevolved as a hidden champion. So basically, the company is his life. Everynow and then, the CEO read about AI in the news and media, though he neveranticipated that this has anything to do with his company. The company isrunning, so why bothering about AI?
On Christmas Eve, his daughter, who works at Microsoft, talks about the
impressive progress in AI in her area and she asked her father if AI would not
be something to look at for his ﬁrm as well. The CEO, an “old school ”
manager with gravitas and wearing a tie even on weekends at the dinnertable, clearly denies. He plans to hand over the business to his nephew soon,so it will be him to look after these things. Therefore, the daughter approachedher cousin and asked him to have a look into the AI potential for her father ’s
ﬁrm. As a consequence, her cousin invited various IT consulting companies
(all of which are in top league rankings). Those consultants —all in smart
business suits but without emotions toward the company —came in with a
focused approach to trim the company for ef ﬁciency. So, they checked where
to retrieve data. In other words, their approach was data-driven AI .
In this speci ﬁc case, there was an essential problem with the data-driven AI
approach: NO DATA!
The consultants have not found anything that they could have worked with. In an
isolated view —according to the motto “much helps much ”—this would suggest AI
can only contribute an added value if a lot of data is accessible. In contrast to that,this would lead to a discrimination to those circumstances where data are rare. The
good news is that there are well-functioning alternatives to the data-driven approach.
Example US Moon Mission For example, recalling the US moon missions in the
late 1960s: they succeeded by putting “intelligence ”in another area, the process
design (and trajectory of the vehicle) and (mathematically very beautiful) algorithmsthat could cope with slim processing capabilities in the Apollo Guidance Computerand the Lunar Module Guidance Computer, respectively (Will 2018 ), which were
used in the space vehicles with much less than any of today ’s smart phones and a
minimal dataset.
So, the alternative to a pure data-driven approach is the process-driven view. This
enables bene ﬁciaries as well in a slim data setting (in contrast to a big data approach
with some brute force digging algorithms trying to detect common pattern).9 Ethical Best Practice Applying AI in a Socially Sensible Manner 179