3.Quality : ensure that all driving components of any AI application —algorithm,
(training)data, and implementation/processes —are con ﬁgured in such a way that
the intent can be achieved.
4.Efﬁciency : minimize the data and resource consumption, invest in smart
algorithms.
5.Compliance : ensure that the internationally acceptable legal standards are
followed and complied.
Forgovernments and political decision-makers it should be paramount to take
accountability and to drive the independent framing of the “AI playground ”for
social fairness, as AI technologies have disruptive potential and scaling effects to
masses. A starting point can be found in the identi ﬁed six focus areas of the pillar of
accountability of the House of Ethical AI (see 11.4.4). Therefore, scientists need to
take a stance to drive for fair and independent knowledge increase as trustable inputfor the political decision process.
11.6 Finish Line Quiz
11.01 Why are robots not just automatons?
1 They are, there is no difference from automatic machines.2 They have a certain degree of autonomy.3 They are automatons as they are not an independent legal entity.4 They are on the same level as humans.
11.02 What is a likely “legal ”role of a robot?
1 The robot acts as an advisor to a human supervisor.2 The robot acts as a messenger of a human supervisor.3 The robot acts as a negotiator acting on behalf of a human supervisor.4 The robot acts as no degree of freedom in decision-making.
(continued)
5. Compliance : ensure the internationally acceptable legal 
standards are followed and complied 
1. Ethics : Positioning on the ethical minimal standards such as respecting human rights, thrive for self-determination  
/barb4rightIntent2. Governance : establish a leadership approach such as candorship, that conveys the ethical intent3. Quality : ensure that both driving components of any AI application - algorithm and
(training)data – are config ured in such a way that the intent can be achieved4. Efficiency: minimize the data, processing and  resource  (energy)
consumption, invest in smart algorithms
Fig. 11.5 Ethical AI implementation roadmap (own presentation)11 Ethical AI Implementation 247