of the term is followed in order to derive AI functionalities and underlying techno-
logical processes. Speci ﬁcally, this contribution refers to the often-cited de ﬁnition of
Rich ( 1986 ). In HRM, AI describes the ﬁeld of research how to make computers do
things where the HR managers are (currently) better. This understanding of the termconsiders the special strength of human intelligence that humans are able to adaptdynamically to changing conditions by learning (adaptivity). Due to this ability tolearn, humans are currently superior to computers, but this is likely to change in thefuture.
What degrees of AI can be distinguished? The degree of arti ﬁcial intelligence can
be evaluated according to different criteria. In scienti ﬁc research, the differentiation
according to the (1) degree of strength and (2) decision-making competence has
proven to be common. (1) Arti ﬁcial intelligence is basically divided into strong and
weak AI. While weak arti ﬁcial intelligence already reaches or surpasses human
intelligence in de ﬁned sub-areas, strong arti ﬁcial intelligence would be at least on
the same level as the human brain in all areas. In the scienti ﬁc and philosophical
discussion, some systems are referred to as weak arti ﬁcial intelligence, which only
appear to be intelligent, but behind which there is no arti ﬁcial intelligence in the
strict sense. In the majority of cases, these are purely rule-based systems. Weak
artiﬁcial intelligence is already used in many areas of everyday life. Some examples
are character or text recognition, image recognition, speech recognition, individualcontrol of advertising, or automated translation. A strong arti ﬁcial intelligence, by
contrast, no longer acts only reactively, but also on its own initiative, intelligentlyandﬂexibly. As of today, it has not yet been possible to develop strong arti ﬁcial
intelligence. And the discussion about whether the development of such intelligenceis even possible continues. Despite all speculation and uncertainty, there is already afundamental consensus among most researchers and scientists that strong intelli-
gence must have the following characteristics to be considered as such: logical
reasoning ability, decision-making ability even in the face of uncertainty, planningand learning ability, ability to communicate in natural language, and combining allTable 10.1 Selected AI de ﬁnitions (own presentation)
McCarthy et al. ( 1955 ) The science and engineering of making intelligent machines, especially
intelligent computer programs.
Rich ( 1986 ) Arti ﬁcial intelligence is the study of how to make computers do things
at which, at the moment, people are better.
Thurstone ( 1999 ) To build artifacts —computer programs or robots —that can ful ﬁll
human-made goals in a rational and human-like and thuscomprehensible way.
Mainzer ( 2016 ) Simulation of intelligent human thinking.
Heinrich and Stühler
(2018 )AI generally describes the ability of a machine to independently
interpret, solve, and learn from complex problems.
Hagstrom and
Maranzan ( 2019 )Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) refers to the theory and development of
computer systems able to perform tasks that normally require human
intelligence, such as visual perception, speech recognition, decision-
making, and translation between languages.196 M. Groß