to mobile payments, leaving China with some 50 times more mobile payment
transactions than in the USA.
Overall, the population and market size provide some tenfold volume of data,
compared to the USA. As a common proverb indicates: “Data is the new oil ”(and
China is the new Saudi-Arabia) (Lee 2018 ), China is in the pool position to develop
and advance AI systems, as these systems can learn better (from more data) than anyother region. This rapid uptake of new technology leads to better performance. Forexample, in facial detection solutions such as Megvii, the impressive performance ispossible in detection of Chinese people in particular. Other ethnical settings lead todifferent performance (see Sect. 8.5).
By 2020, China has already surpassed the USA in facial detection systems
(Mozur 2019 ). Other applications such as credit checks on the mobile have
transformed a typical long-lasting process into a real-time rating and decisionprocess. Credit check can be provided within less than 10 sec on 5000 parametersusing AI, compared to the traditional 10-parameter risk assessment checks frombanks). In particular, the mobile as such provides already rating information frombattery charging level (low level is seen more critical than fully loaded ones) oroperating system version (as this indicates if the potential lender can afford the
credit, i.e., the newer the better) directly to the usage pattern (i.e., how con ﬁdent or
resistant a user is inputting data).
The usage of these advances needs to be re ﬂected in a societal context. In China,
which is a non-democratic political system, and a typical collectivist society(according to Hofstede), the group prevails over individuals by far. In such a context,state-based supervision is not necessarily negatively perceived, though itencompasses a massive risk of scrutiny on the individuals. China has establishedpublic naming of individuals ’wrongdoing by electronic screens at crossroads:
individuals passing on a red traf ﬁc light will be publicly named on such screens —
based on facial detection systems. Although in 2020 no direct punishment on suchwrongdoing has been introduced (yet?), it is a tiny step and a great danger that thepolitical loyalty will bene ﬁt and opposite opinions will be punished —with high
social credit points, discounts in public transport, with low social points probablytravel ban. Hence, AI emerges into an Orwell-type mighty instrument (Qiang 2019 ).
China shows a paradoxical situation: economic success in a communistic system
is what Orville Shell, the US author, activist, and academic,
10calls “market Lenin-
ism”(Schell and Delury 2014 ): Apparently it is possible to establish in a one-party
system a sector of innovation and technology. It was always thought to be impossi-ble, but apparently it is feasible. China has a clear target to reach AI supremacy by2030. AI helps China to establish a ubiquitous surveillance of their citizens, in orderto establish social stability and to suppress criticism on the political system. Chinahas meanwhile (2020) installed more than 415 million CCTV cameras in the public,
10Former Dean of the University of California Berkeley Graduate School of Journalism, and Arthur
Ross Director of the Center on US –China Relations at the Asia Society in New York.120 S. H. Vieweg