1. For HR managers to perceive AI applications as useful, AI must make HR work
more effective or ef ﬁcient. In order to make AI potential quickly visible, it is
advisable to ﬁrst focus on applications at the assisted intelligence level, whereby
routine tasks can be processed independently or taken over completely (e.g.,
AI-based language assistant for employee self-services). The next step is toconvince HR managers of the usefulness of augmented intelligence applications.For this purpose, the company-wide development of a modular AI architectureseems to make sense. With the help of a portfolio of reusable blocks (e.g., geneticalgorithms for optimization problems), AI could be scaled into HRM via “used
cases ”from other company areas. In this context, an internal AI innovation hub
could be effective, in which representatives of different divisions of the company
could experiment with AI application possibilities together and exchange ideas
with IT specialists. In this way, HR managers would have the opportunity toappreciate the potential of advanced AI applications and bene ﬁt from concrete
examples from other divisions. Basically, in view of the empirical results of thestudy carried out, it is recommended that companies bundle their AI goals or AIactivities within the framework of a meaningful AI strategy. This AI strategyprovides the essential framework conditions against the background of thedynamic developments in technology. In order to increase the perceived useful-
ness (in all business areas), the AI strategy should be designed as a learning
strategy and developed (further) in a participatory way. Taking the company-wide AI strategy into account, HR managers can set priorities for HRM-related AIprojects. The following key questions can be taken into account: Which applica-tion offers the greatest time saving potential? Which decisions could be bettermade with AI support? How can the workforce bene ﬁt from AI?
2. It is obvious that HR managers do not (cannot) program AI applications them-
selves but have to have them programmed. To increase the perceived user-
friendliness, HR managers should be involved in the development of
HRM-related AI applications from the very beginning. The focus should alwaysbe on the end users (either the HR managers themselves or the workforce). Fromuser experience research, three main aspects can be derived that should beconsidered when designing human –machine interaction (Pappas et al. 2019 ):
visual design, information architecture, and interaction design. Visual designrefers to the aesthetics, i.e., the colors, images, and symbols of the user interface.Studies show that the aesthetic design of the user interface positively in ﬂuences
the user experience (Chu 2016 ). In this context, it makes sense to use the
corporate design (e.g., colors and logo) and to consider the aesthetic perceptionof the end user during development. The information architecture describes thestructuring of data and information. It should be designed in such a way that userscanﬁnd information as intuitively as possible. With regard to the perceived user-
friendliness, this primarily involves the intelligent design of navigation conceptsfor input and output data. In order to increase user-friendliness, the AI systemshould allow HR managers to independently modify the database (input). On the
output side, clearly arranged and individually con ﬁgurable dashboards should
support HR managers in their decision-making. The interaction design focuses on212 M. Groß