Having studied mathematical engineering at the Universität der Bundeswehr
Munich, the entrepreneur ’s motivation is to combine different sciences, particularly
electrical engineering, mathematics, computer science, physics, and aerospace engi-
neering. Why is this of interest? In general terms, thorough foundation disciplines
such as mathematics do not ﬁt to the applicational view of engineers or physics. A
mathematician reviewing a physicist ’s formula would probably heavily complain as
the expressions and conditions are not mathematically exact. The mathematicianwould focus on correct expressions, conditions, and settings. In contrast to that,engineers would rather take an output-oriented stance, use all data that they can gethold on, and apply a recipe-type pragmatism of utilizing mathematical procedures(probably not fully knowing about why they can or cannot use them). The task for a
mathematical engineer is to combine these antagonists. Increasingly, this is a similar
task that can be observed in various companies. Typical for-pro ﬁt organizations have
very much a functional setup ( “silos”such as marketing, sales, operations, and
ﬁnance), which means that a (local) optimum is likely to be achieved within one
function, though it does not necessarily lead to the best solution for the company as awhole (Tsvasman and Schild ( 2019 )). Example: if the purchasing department
squeezes the suppliers by forcing lower prices, that may show a great success (i.e.,less cost) ...for the managers in the purchasing department (and their bonuses).
Though, it may lead to unidenti ﬁed quality problems that will back ﬁre, e.g., in the
production or after sales. Hence, the local (here: purchasing) optimum is notnecessarily the sweet spot for the entire organization. The real situation, though, isoften similar to the example above: a cross-functional understanding of what theother part is driving does not exist. Countermeasures are coming more and more inplay such as orchestrating cross-functional agile teams in an appropriate scaling agileenvironment (which will not be discussed here further) and/or technology such asAI. AI technology can only be successful, if in an organizational setup three key
factors ﬁt: (1) algorithms, (2) data, and (3) processes. AI drives an end-to-end view
of value creation throughout the organization. As an example, again our producingcompany: If the core (physical) production process is accompanied by an AI-basedinformation ﬂow including predictive or prescriptive analytics, this will inevitably
mean that to ensure an ef ﬁcient end-to-end value ﬂow, predictions about future
(customer) demand (based on insights from marketing), the raw materials orderingprocess (in the purchasing department) all along the production line, and supplychain right to the delivery of ﬁnished products at the customers side are required. In
other words, this is a cross-functional solution (and global optimum —to take the
mathematician ’s view).
9.3 Ethical Opportunities of AI: A Real-Life Story from an SME
Production Company
As mentioned before, this real-life story is about a boot.AI client, the CEO of a
biochemical production company.178 S. H. Vieweg