1. Which beliefs and ethical norms shall be applied in order to maximize the desired
ethical dimension like deontological or utilitarian ethics (which was shown inSect. 1.4).
2. Where to limit technology in order to prevent or minimize the unwanted effects.
This self-discipline in algorithm design, data gathering, and processing and
utilization of the AI technology will be a key challenge for economies and societies.It would be naïve to assume for a “one-ﬁts-all ”approach. Acceptability can only be
achieved in a societal context and will vary across the globe. From that point of view,in the following section a fundamental challenge regarding human work will beaddressed in general, and speci ﬁc ethical challenges in the dominating superpowers
China and the USA will be discussed.
7.3 Automation (and AI) Effects on Human Work and Jobs
In Chap. 6, it was laid down that disruption is not a new phenomenon, but clearly, the
ongoing digitization “revolution ”has a massive disruptive power. One key aspect
that affects societies is the implication on (human) work, job security, and with that
the possibility for people to make up their living. For the last few (probably hundred)
years, humans live in an unparalleled increase of prosperity, despite the many warsand destruction (Morris 2010 ). In a historical context, over centuries, world powers
come and go (Kennedy 1987 ). With digitization, a new age is arising as human
thinking is extended with AI, so that entirely new and more effective approaches tosolve problems are possible.
Some famous current quotes compare AI as new electricity: “Just as electricity
transformed almost everything 100 years ago, [ ...] AI will transform in the next
several years. ”(Ng2017 )o r—according to Microsoft ’s CEO Brad Smith, as new
combustion engine (Jones 2019 ). Whatever metaphor is used, the impact will be
pervasive to people ’s lives.
A key aspect is the consequence to human jobs. Relevant studies show a range
between 15% [OECD (Nedelkoska and Quintini 2018 )] to 47% [Programme on
Future of Work (Frey and Osborne 2013 )] of job losses. Though scientists cannot
predict when, where, and how many jobs are lost. Some projections are moreconcrete in showing that 50% are lost within the next 15 years (Lee 2018 ). The
situation is similar to the situation during the Industrial Revolution of the nineteenth
century, when e.g. in the UK wages stagnated over decades, prosperity was on adownward slope, whereas technologies emerged.
In concrete terms today, AI has started to and will continue to replace of ﬁce jobs
that are based on quantitative, analytical processes, in particular of transactional andrecurring nature that can be automated: e.g., administrative reporting, foreignexchange, analysts, or customer service (see Sect. 6.4.1 as well). For some manual
jobs requiring a high level of hand –eye coordination, robots are not yet that good. AI
surpasses human capabilities in analytical areas and will be a tool for highly144 S. H. Vieweg