However, setting minimum acceptable standards of compliance with fundamental
workers ’rights is not enough: effective and regular monitoring is needed to ensure
that standards are actually met. Companies based in countries with high CSR
requirements are faced with the great challenge of ensuring the effectiveness of the
review. To illustrate the issue, the KIK example from Sect. 3.3is referred to once
more: even of ﬁcial audits are to be questioned very carefully, since this service is
also in part in strong competition and then unethical courtesy reports seem to bequite common.
Example: the auditing dilemma : Even renowned certi ﬁers are not immune
(if one thinks of the devastating dam burst in Vale, Brazil in 2019): Under the
leadership of ECCHR, a complaint was ﬁled against the auditor TÜV Süd,
since obvious structural defects did not lead to the responsible engineer
(in Germany) refusing to issue the certi ﬁcate (Maus 2019 ). Even if in this
particular case the problem seems to be extended to the fact that in the highlydeveloped home country of the auditor the de ﬁciency was known, the overall
conclusion is that foreign subsidiaries and subcontractors are regularly auditedto ensure that they will meet the standards and take corrective action ifnecessary (Hill 2014 ).
AI provides signi ﬁcant support for ethical decision-making, in particular in an
international context. For example, the current practice of identifying and selectinglocal suppliers (typically in low-cost countries), the process of a strategic purchasingmanager will be quite manual. Search is basically performed via the Internetincumbent search engines (that have their own dynamics in terms of search engine
optimization ( “SEO ”) and AI-based consumer analysis (see Sect. 6.5). Hence, AI
can help in structuring the search for potential supplier identi ﬁcation and later on in
the quali ﬁcation as well as onboarding process. Based on ethical minimum
standards, the selection process can be optimized.
4.3 UN Declaration of Human Rights as Minimum
The basis for an international understanding of basic human rights is the resolutionof the General Assembly of the United Nations of December 10, 1948 (UN 1948 )—
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The most important of the followinghuman rights conventions have developed from this (DIM 2020 ):
1. Civil pact (ICCPR)
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR):
This pact covers protection against torture, slavery, and a general ban on
discrimination; the protection of private life, minorities; freedom rights of expres-sion, religion, assembly; as well as the right to vote and stand for election.4 Ethics in an International Context 57