ethical and trustworthy, an overvaluation of the market (Tobin ’sQ7) and thus added
value for shareholders can be detected.
In order for ethical business convictions to be anchored in business operations, an
ethical business framework is required that applies equally to all players. For
example, the fair design of economic processes requires binding regulations atboth national and global level. Otherwise, two effects become obvious: First, adistortion of competition in favor of the unethically acting (and ethics cost-saving)company, and second, a dilution of the position of the ethically acting company,since the latter can hardly bear the suffered competitive disadvantage in the long runand can hardly defend it against its own stakeholders.
Even though legal regulations are usually implemented reactively, government
intervention via laws and regulations is important to safeguard principles such as
justice, freedom, and responsibility or environmental protection concerns.Imbalances between countries lead to different development perspectives of thecountries concerned: For example, the strong export power of a highly developedcountry (such as Germany) is one reason why the development of precisely thesecompetencies in the importing country is severely limited because they are noteconomically viable.
3.8 Finish Line Quiz
3.01 The inner stakeholder group comprises of ...
1 ...managers, competitors, customers, suppliers.
2 ...managers, customers, suppliers, owners.
3 ...managers, consumers, employees, owners.
4 ...managers, partners, customers, suppliers.
3.02 Consumers ’role on ethical business standards ...
1 ...is often overstated, as it is the producing companies ’customers (business to
business, “B2B ”) that drive the demand.
2 ...cannot be overestimated because ﬁnally it is the end consumer ’s demand that
drives the production and ethical conditions.
3 ...is indifferent, as the consumers themselves are non-rational, hence acting without
and ethical agenda.
4 ...is a non-issue in highly developed countries as broadly consumers demand for
highest ethical production standards.
3.03 How can AI help in fostering ethical standards?
1 Early identi ﬁcation of mismatches and discrepancies between claims and facts.
2 Providing a comprehensive analysis on consistency.
3 Guide consumers to decipher misrepresentations.4 All the above.
(continued)
7Tobin ’s Q is a ﬁnancial ratio that indicates if a corporation or even an entire market is under-(0 –1)
or overpriced ( >1): basically calculated as the total market value divided by the total asset
(or replacement value) of a speci ﬁc corporation or even markets.3 Business Ethics 51