will be more restricted due to the fact of missing infrastructure. For any digitalized
business, data gathering, transmission, processing, and intervention is key. There isno way in providing real-time process adjustments in case of lack of communication
networks to distribute such data. Ambitions on the much hoped for 5G network
generation on mobile communication are exaggerated. Signi ﬁcant bandwidth
improvement are expected everywhere, despite to fact that even in the incumbent4G technology ( “LTE ”) speed is suboptimal in many larger economic heavyweight
countries such as Japan (#34), France (#36), the UK (#41), Germany (#44), or theUSA (#62) (Opensignal 2020 ). The fact that the best 5G antennae will only work on
a high-speed backbone network (i.e., ﬁber), is rarely been discussed and contributes
to the rollout-issue.
6.4 Common Digitization Techniques
Digitization enables automation. Obviously, the typical bene ﬁts to expect are con-
tinuous pre-de ﬁned (higher) quality, reproducibility, higher throughput (from higher
production speed and continuous uptime), and in real terms the most importantfactor: lower costs. Although very often, the former arguments are brought forward,
at the end it is the latter, the cost argument ultimately driving the decision. This
simplistic argumentation is enriched with additional arguments such as job enrich-ment for those remaining non-automated tasks that are taken by the remaininghuman workers. Although this argument can be correct too, it is not the decisiveone. Otherwise, this would mean that a job would not be advertised, would beinteresting for applicants, and could be ﬁlled, because the (manually human) work
would not be rich enough. According to OECD ’s outlook on the future of work
(OECD 2019 ), on average of all OECD countries, 14% of jobs are immediately at
high risk of automation. Although this ﬁgure is smaller than in other studies, 32% of
jobs could be radically transformed. This transformation does not relate to “blue-
collar ”workers only, but increasingly will affect those of “white-collar ”knowledge
workers as well, in repetitive, transactional activities.
-0.3
-0.2
-0.2
-0.1
0.4-0,7Under-employment Finance Functions in Germany 2013-2016
CAGR %
Accounting
Public accountantsControlling
Costing
Taxation
Finance management
Fig. 6.6 Under-employment in ﬁnance functions in Germany 2013 –2016 (own presentation based
on statistics from Bundesagentur für Arbeit, aggregate from Grunwald-Delitz et al. ( 2018 ))6 Digitization: Learnings from Ancient Disruptions, AI and the Digital ... 103