(see also Fig. 10.4). With this functionality digitized knowledge can be
exchanged across applications and platforms. For example, in contrast to aclassical full-text search, a semantic knowledge network is able to link the
terms “production manager ”in a job advertisement and “line manager ”in a
professional network as matching search result. Semantic search algorithms,however, must ﬁrst acquire the background knowledge of job titles, functions,
and competence descriptions, i.e., they must be trained. Often semanticnetworks are implemented as ANN and linked with a curiosity learning functionto track down candidates internally and externally (Roedenbeck 2020 ). Curios-
ity networks identify the desired competencies of a job advertisement andcompare them with the CVs of employees and candidates in the applicant
pool to generate proposals. Further developed systems also include external
CV databases (e.g., professional networks such as XING in Germany orLinkedIn). The partial automation of the search task by means of semanticknowledge networks in combination with machine learning processes cansigniﬁcantly accelerate the ﬁnding of suitable candidates (Kulkarni and Che
2019 ).
5. AI also offers ef ﬁciency potential during the application process in the form of
assistance services . In particular text- and/or language-based dialog systems
(chat bots) are used. These can answer questions from applicants 24/7 and assist
them in real time during the application process. While simple chatbots use adatabase of information and ready-made answers in the sense of a full-textsearch to answer simple questions of applicants, semi-autonomous chatbotsbased on machine learning can also provide intelligent answers to complexquestions and act as virtual personal assistants (Kowald and Bruns 2019 ). In
the following, the application possibilities of AI-based chatbots along theapplication process will be outlined:
(a) If a prospective candidate visits the career site of a company, the correspon-
dence can be taken over by the chatbot. The chatbot answers questionsabout advertised positions, the application process, or the corporate culture.
(b) If an interested candidate decides to apply, the chatbot collects the submit-
ted documents and checks their completeness.
(c) Based on the submitted documents as well as a short interview by the
chatbot, an initial assessment of the person-job- ﬁt can already be made
(see also genetic algorithms for preselection in the following paragraph).
Depending on the results, the documents will be forwarded to the responsi-
ble department, an alternative (better ﬁtting) position will be offered if
available, or admission to the applicant pool will be suggested.
(d) Once the application is completed, the chatbot will keep the applicant
informed of the application status by means of a tracking code.
(e) At the end of the application process, the chatbot records the satisfaction of
the applicants by means of a structured feedback protocol. The use of virtualpersonal assistants not only reduces the administrative expenditure for the
personnel responsible persons but also increases in particular the reaction
speed on the part of the enterprises. This speed of reaction represents a204 M. Groß