Table 11.1 Comparison of GDPR and CCPA (own presentation, data based on (Rosner 2019 ;
Schwenke 2020 )
Subject GDPR CCPA (2018)
Consumer
privacyFundamental right: data processing
illegal unless it complies with at leastone out of six lawful cases.CCPA is not a comprehensive data
protection law, but rather servesconsumer protection. It is deeme
that mutual bene ﬁts are derived out
of a business relationship that issubject to negotiation.
Scope of
businesses
subject to
regulationAny company doing business in the
EU. Hence, it is not focused on EU
citizens only.Applicable on California residents
only. Exempt of smaller companies
(w/o data brokers) (1) annual
revenue below USD 25 m, or(2) data sets of less than 50,000consumers (basis: no. of devices)
or (3) less than 50% of revenue
generated with data selling.
Personal data Personal and pseudonymous data of
individuals (data subjects), andspeciﬁc“sensitive ”data such as
ethnic origin, political opinions,
religious or philosophical beliefs,trade union membership, geneticdata, biometric data, etc.Broader de ﬁnition of any data
related to a consumer ofhousehold, but no distinction of
sensitive of pseudonymous data.
Tracking data like search historycould be included.
Data portability Right to receive own data in
common, machine-readable format
or directly to be transferred to
another company.Right to receive own data in
common, machine-readable format
but no right that such data are
directly transferred to anothercompany.
Right to data
erasure/to be
forgottenObligation for data controllers to
erase data without undue delay and to
inform their data sharing partners
accordingly, on request of theconsumer.Deletion right only applies to
consumer data collected directly
from the consumer, not to any data
collected from third-party sources.Broader exceptions, e.g. maintaindata for internal lawful use.
Right to opt out
of sale of
personalinformationBroad right for consumers to object
any type of commercial use of their
personal data.Speci ﬁcally prohibits “selling ”
(in a broader sense) consumer data
on their opt-out request.
Consequences of
violationsLump-sum ﬁnes per violation: Minor
cases: the larger of 2% of annual
revenue or €10 m; Major cases: the
larger of 4% of annual revenue or€20 mIndividual ﬁne per individual
consumer affected by the
infringement: USD 2500 per
violation and USD 7500 for anintentional violation. As a singleincident can affect millions of
consumers (residents in
California), the resulting ﬁne may
greatly exceed the GDPR cap.
Furthermore, CCPA allows for
USD 100 –750 per affected
consumer as remedy, presumable
(continued)11 Ethical AI Implementation 233