for appropriate damages in a liability lawsuit initiated by ECCHR in German
courts. Although the case was decided against the plaintiffs on formal (statuteof limitations) grounds, there is no decision on the merits of the case itself. Inthe jurisdiction the understanding seems to broaden that the implementation of
minimum standards belongs to the fundamental care obligations of the man-
agement of enterprises starting from a certain size, so that with neglect quitelegal liability consequences can follow (BGH, judgement of 17.9. 2009 , 5 StR
394/08). A uniform international legal regulation on the duties of care in theentire supply chain —as also demanded by the ECCHR —is the basis for legal
security of companies and for the avoidance of distortions of competition.
In a buyer ’s market —and this situation is undoubtedly present in most markets in
the course of globalization and digitization —consumers play the most important
role. However, despite excessive information, consumers are typically hardly able to
understand the complexity of production conditions and supply chains and use themas decision support for their purchase.
The behavior of individual consumers has a direct impact on the individual, but in
the medium term, similar behavior will also have an impact on society. It is wellknown that unhealthy nutrition and lack of exercise leads to obesity and serioushealth problems for the individual. But in the medium term, the entire society is alsoaffected by this, with considerable economic consequences in the form of drastically
rising health costs and reduced performance. In 2017, for example, over 52% of
adults in Germany were overweight, an increase of about 8% compared to 20 yearsearlier (DSTATIS 2017 ). In the same period, healthcare costs have increased by
91%
2; the cost of obesity, a “widespread disease, ”is already estimated to account for
5%–15% of total healthcare expenditure in Western industrialized countries
(DSTATIS 2017 ).
A further example of the ethical implications of consumer behavior is shown by a
non-material consumption —the media consumption. The negative correlations have
now been suf ﬁciently substantiated in scienti ﬁc studies. For example, the study
shows that children and adolescents have developmental disorders (concentration,language, hyperactivity) when they consume media on a daily basis, already over30 min (Büsching and Riedel 2017 ). This raises the question of ethical parenting
responsibility if guardians do not (or cannot) meet their responsibility toward theirchildren.
2Own evaluation based on data according to (BMG 2020 ).3 Business Ethics 43