3.04 The ethical dimensions of customers ’demand toward producers are ...
1 ...quality aspects.
2 ...environmental aspects.
3 ...social and governance aspects.
4 ...all the above.
3.05 The whistle-blowing challenge can be met by the following considerations:
1 Use an internal Ombud person as single point of contact.
2 Extra preventive measures against discrimination even in larger organizations.
3 Larger organizations do not have issues, as whistle-blowing will be done
anonymously.
4 The system shall differentiate between different persons and their status, in order to
ensure a tailor-made dealing with allegations.
3.06 An employee of the investors relations (IR) department is asked by an investor to explain
the supposed massive loss in running last quarter (no public report yet).
1 The IR person shall provide full details in order to act in a trustworthy reliable way by
giving all information to stakeholders.
2 The IR person shall deny that any losses occurred; this is the loyalty obligation
toward the employer.
3 The IR person shall not disclose full details in order to act ethically correct.4 The IR person can disclose the information as it is the obligation of any member of
the IR department to disclose stakeholder relevant information.
3.07 Impact investment re ﬂects ...
1 ...exclusion of genetically manipulated plant or seed, animal testing for cosmetics,
and speculation with raw materials.
2 ...the output of businesses ( “impact ”), disregarding how this is being achieved
(utilitarian approach).
3 ...the allowance of ownership or distribution of nuclear power plants, child labor,
speculation with food.
4 ...only the effects ( “impact ”) of business activities regarding environmental and
social aspects, disregarding economic performance.
3.08 Major elements of normative corporate governance are as follows:
1 Company ’s objectives re ﬂect the vision and philosophical reason for sense.
2 Company ’s purpose re ﬂects its claim.
3 Corporate culture is de ﬁned by organizational norms.
4 Vision and politics are re ﬂected in the company ’s values.
Correct answers can be found in www.vieweg-beratung.de/downloads
References
Bak, P. M. (2014). Wirtschafts- und Unternehmensethik - Eine Einführung.
BGH, judgement of 17.9. (2009), 5 StR 394/08.BMG. (2020). Gesundheitsberichtserstattung. gbe-bund.de. In Statista ID 5463 . Retrieved May
13, 2020.
Böcking, D., Kazim, H., & Klawitter, N. (2015). Umstrittener Textilsdiscounter So biegt sich der
Kik-Chef die Fakten zurecht. Kik-Chef Heinz Speet verteidigt die Strategie des Textildiscounters52 S. H. Vieweg