deals with ethical and privacy implications and explores measures to increase the
perceived usefulness and usability of HRM-related AI applications.
The ethical and data protection-compliant use of AI applications can not only
relieve HR managers of routine tasks, but also strengthen their strategic position
within the company. According to the advertising promises of software providers,there are hardly any limits to the use of AI solutions in HRM systems beyondrecruitment. Among other things, it is postulated that with the help of predictiveanalytics software, numerous factors in ﬂuencing the development of different future
scenarios can be taken into account in personnel requirements planning, thus makingan important contribution to the optimization of personnel budgeting. In the contextof personnel development, it is praised that demand planning can be optimized using
AI by assigning suitable training to required skills using a self-learning system based
on existing skills and training catalogs (Groß and Dorozalla 2020 ). AI should also be
able to improve the recognition of high performers and to enhance the identi ﬁcation
of employees who are suitable for a management career. And, of course, it is nowconsidered good manners to mention in a contribution to AI solutions in HRM thatAI can identify so-called likely leaver pro ﬁles (i.e., employees who intend to resign)
and thus enable early preventive interventions with top performers. While theseexamples in numerous consultant blog posts and HR vendor webinars romanticize
the brave new world of strategic HRM, the reality in most (at least German)
companies looks completely different. The majority of those responsible forHRM —primarily in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) —are already
“struggling ”with the creation of extended reports on key personnel ﬁgures, not to
mention the strategic use of HR analytics (i.e., the statistical analysis of HRM-relateddata for evidence-based decision-making). While other business areas (e.g., market-ing) already use self-detecting analytics by means of machine learning and decisionautomation based on it (e.g., for individualized online advertising), HRM often lags
behind. Analogous data worlds, isolated IT solutions, a lack of technological
competence, and ducking behind legal restrictions often leave HR managers help-less. In order to sensitize HR managers to the potential of AI, the primary goal of thischapter is to systematize the integration possibilities of arti ﬁcial and human intelli-
gence along HRM systems. In concrete terms, it is intended to offer starting pointsfor the strategic use of AI, which also outline the necessary technologicalrequirements in their basic features.
The fact that the HR department is usually lagging behind in the use of AI
compared to other areas of the company is mainly because many HR managers
fear that they do not have the necessary technological skills. They are also concernedthat they could degenerate into an extended arm of the controlling department in thecontext of evidence-driven corporate management, or even become completelyreplaceable. However, waiting in embryonic position until they have rationalizedtheir own way is not a desirable option at this point; instead, the competencies of HRmanagers should be put to the test. Whereas until now they have been primarilyresponsible for personnel administration, staff motivation and development, and
process management, in the future, HR managers will be increasingly called upon
to make strategic value contributions with the help of digital applications. This10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 193