DSGVO principles for data processing. A major restriction results from the
so-called purpose limitation, i.e., that the collection of data without a speci ﬁc
purpose, as is often the case with AI applications in other areas of a company, is
not permitted. At this point, the solution lies in the purposefulness of AI
applications. HR managers must therefore ﬁrst de ﬁne a clear set of questions to
which a speci ﬁc knowledge goal is linked. Furthermore, the data minimization
principle is of high relevance. This principle states that data collection andprocessing must be limited to what is appropriate and necessary for the purpose.Accordingly, it is recommended that the reference to persons or the level ofaggregation of the data and analysis results be geared to the processing purposes(Huff and Götz 2020 ). In this context, it should be noted that when purchasing
programming services for AI applications —especially from non-European
suppliers —it must be ensured that the DSGVO is considered as the legal frame-
work. In principle, it can be assumed that DSGVO-compliant development of AIapplications leads to an increase in trust and thus acceptance can be increased.
4. The development of ethical virtues is a fundamental factor in promoting accep-
tance, because not everything that is legal also meets ethical expectations (seeSect. 10.1). An independent research discourse on the topic of ethics of
algorithms has already established itself in the current ethics literature (see,
among others, Floridi et al. 2018 ). The basis for the discussion of ethical virtues
in the entrepreneurial context is often the corporate ethic virtues model, whichwas developed by Kaptein in 2008. This approach states that both economicallyactive individuals and business organizations should possess certain virtues inorder to be able to act morally. These seven virtues will be discussed below inrelation to the acceptance of AI applications in HRM:
(a)Clarity refers to the extent to which ethical expectations regarding AI
applications are made concrete and understandable. Many companies —
especially large enterprises —have de ﬁned their own AI ethics catalogs,
which they make available not only to their employees but also to the generalpublic (e.g., Google or Deutsche Telekom). In this context, well-soundingterms such as fairness, privacy, responsibility, transparency, trust, security, orscience are often used. In addition to the ethics catalogs de ﬁned by
companies themselves, various institutions, facilities, and associations aredeveloping guidelines with concrete standards (e.g., Hambach Declarationon Arti ﬁcial Intelligence 2019). The guidelines of the “Ethics Council HR
Tech, ”for example, provide solid orientation for HRM. At this point, we
recommend that HR managers participate in the development of ethical AIstandards to ensure that they are not just empty words for external marketing.
(b)Congruency of executives and top managers describes the degree to which
managers, who in most cases de ﬁne the business purpose and underlying
speciﬁcations of AI applications, act as role models. If the behavior of the
management is in line with the normative expectations of the company, themessage to the employees is strengthened to also ful ﬁll these expectations
(Kaptein 2008 ). In concrete terms, this could mean that top management214 M. Groß