Though, there is a turning point when the ﬁne border line between information for
users for their own independent decision-making and manipulation is crossed.
In 2010, Facebook launched a “social in ﬂuence and political mobilization ”study
(Bond et al. 2012 ) to investigate whether it can in ﬂuence user behavior by providing
dedicated messages to them. Randomly chosen 61 million Facebook users saw abutton “I voted, “some with faces of their Facebook friends that have voted; others
saw the button without the friends ’faces. Finally, Facebook proclaimed having
mobilized 340,000 to vote. Although these numbers were impressive, linked to theoverall sample population it represents “just”0.6%. Nevertheless, it clearly marks
evidence of the potential to manipulate. This can be seen e.g. from various studiesthat too much consumption of social media radicalizes and makes people unhappy
and more aggressive (and strengthens belief in abstruse conspiracy theories).
15
GAFAM have built up a surveillance system that becomes even more powerful
through speech assistance systems such as Alexa (Amazon), Siri (Apple), or GoogleHome (Google). They penetrate very deeply into the personal lives of their users, notonly in a snapshot, but in particular by detecting changes over time. The systemslearn from slight changes in e.g. the voice and can use this information to analyze theuser ’s condition such as snif ﬂes or shaky voice as an indicator of a cold or other
mental disposition. At the end, this is the identical micro-behavioral targeting, based
on a detailed understanding of the personality of the user (Zuboff 2019 ). This
targeting is what Cambridge Analytica has done in its massive scandal in 2018,although with a political rather than a marketing objective.
16As Cambridge
Analytica was mainly ﬁnanced by a conservative billionaire (Robert Mercer
(Confessore and Gelles ( 2018 )), it is obvious that anyone with enough money can
acquire AI and scientists to manipulate the public and to undermine democracy.Instead of having learnt from the scandal, the control of information disseminationfor manipulation is continuing at a high pace, including discriminating systems and
wrong decision-making based on algorithmic decision systems ( “ADS ”) (Crawford
et al. 2018 ), e.g., that are used in litigation, and ﬂawed predictions that ultimately
eliminate human rights, purely based on data and algorithms that may be inappro-priate to a given situation.
Although there is a signi ﬁcant risk of misuse of AI (and hence, ethical approaches
are required, which will be discussed in later chapters), the potential is enormous aswell. As Kai-Fu Lee puts it: “Never has the potential for the rise and failure of
mankind been greater ”(Lee 2018 ).
Meanwhile, we are in a fourth wave of AI implementation (see Fig. 6.19) that
allows broader implementations. Some of the examples have been shown in the
15As an example, see Kaczinski et al. ( 2019 ).
16In that scandal, data from 87 million Facebook users were misrouted to the Cambridge Analytica,
which used these data in 2016 to manipulate the US elections and the Brexit referendum in the
UK. it led to a $ 5 BN penalty for Facebook having not protected their users ’data suf ﬁciently
enough.6 Digitization: Learnings from Ancient Disruptions, AI and the Digital ... 125