performance reasons just to encrypt a symmetric key (i.e., both sides use the
same key).
Though, it needs to be re ﬂected that with increasing sophistication of attacking
existing cryptographical approaches, there is as well the innovation of those
approaches that provide new —more secure —opportunities.
6.5 Technical and Economic Trends in AI
AI is a highly dynamic area of technology. Although the idea of AI roots back into
the 1940s, it is just in recent years with the emergence of the Internet services,
so-called social media, and the commercialization of customer data that AI has
become a mainstream technology. Spoiled by speci ﬁcﬂagship applications such as
autonomous driving, AI is an integral part of the complex solution. Meanwhile, thereare so many AI deployments in various areas of the daily lives that it seem to be fairto call it a ubiquitous technology: examples are individualized content(commercials) offered on websites; navigation systems with speech recognition;speech assistant services such as “Alexa, ”Google Home, ”or“Siri”; optical charac-
ter recognition when transferring a PDF (bitmap) into something machine-readable,
facial detection for authentication checks, or body scan (Presize.ai 2020 ) to allow
optimal apparel sizing in online shopping ...The list is endless and very often the
consumer even does not know that AI is included in the service offering provided.
During the last few years, there is a publicly visible race between two nations and
societal systems for the supremacy of AI: the USA and China. Other countriesstarted to catch up, in particular Russia. Europe is still de ﬁning their way forward
(EU2020 ), whereas low-cost Eastern Europe EU countries emerged to the workshop
for many international groups on programming —including AI applications. Russia ’s
AI spend in 2017 on domestic investments was just USD 12 m, still encountering the
projected private sector spend increase to $500 m; this is a fraction of the billionsspent in the USA and China (Bendett 2018 ). Though, the ambition was set by the
Russian President in 2017 in an online session “Russia Focused on the Future ”to
more than one million participants when Putin said “Artiﬁcial intelligence is the
future not only of Russia but of all of mankind, [ ...]. Whoever becomes the leader in
this sphere will become the ruler of the world ”(Gigova 2017 ). Russia has an AI
strategy plan and policies released in 2019 (OECD.AI 2020 ). Due to the fact that
Russia repeatedly misused data from end user for state-directed observations, the
trust in Russian software diminished heavily. Russia was blamed for fraudulentinterventions in the US election 2016 (Ross et al. 2016 ).
Not to forget in this race the UK: It should be realized that cybernetics started off
there in the late 1940s with the scientist W. Grey Walter (1910 –1977) in what
became later the Bristol Robotics Laboratory: his simpli ﬁedﬁrst“tortoise ”robots
had a minimum of self-determination and “learning ”on identifying just with two
sensors and three motors its way to the light, even if there are obstacles in its way
(Holland 2003 ). Since then, the UK is at the forefront of robotics development.118 S. H. Vieweg