chapter highlights the speci ﬁc skills that HR managers of the future will need in
order not to be replaced by codes and algorithms.
While in practice skeptical HR managers and optimistic software vendors face
each other, there is hardly any empirically proven knowledge in science about the
use of AI applications in the HR sector. However, the general interest in the topic ofAI seems to be growing from a scienti ﬁc point of view, which is illustrated by a
doubling of publications (from 470,998 to 948,901) on the scienti ﬁc database
EBSCO Discovery Service in the period from 2015 to 2020. On closer inspection,however, it can be seen that these publications are predominantly of a theoretical andconceptual nature and provide only limited empirical evidence for HR managers.Theﬁrst serious empirical studies in the area of HRM focus primarily on the
acceptance by AI users (e.g., Dahm and Dregger 2019 ; Grotenhermen et al. 2020 ),
but there is no reliable evidence regarding the current penetration at least in Germancompanies. Furthermore, there are hardly any conclusive ﬁndings regarding the
creation of conducive framework conditions for AI applications in HRM. In addi-tion, the number of consultant and software vendor studies is increasing, whichapprove the high potential of AI solutions in all areas of a company, but largelyignore concrete areas of application in HRM and their effectiveness in achievingsuccess. All in all, it can be stated that the research discourse has only just begun.
From a scienti ﬁc point of view, the main goal of this chapter is to synthesize the
knowledge from existing theoretical contributions or empirical studies on AI appli-cation areas in the ﬁeld of HRM and to compare it with the results of my own
empirical study on the status quo in German companies. Based on the task technol-ogyﬁt theory, a conceptual framework for the in ﬂuencing factors and success effects
of AI solutions in HRM will be developed. In summary, the following overarchingresearch question arises for this chapter:
What added value can be generated by the use of AI solutions in human resource
management?
In order to answer this research question, the key questions shown in Fig. 10.1
(own presentation) are examined in this chapter:
To answer the key questions in Fig. 10.1, the present contribution is structured as
follows: After the introduction in Sects. 10.1 and10.2 describes the conceptual
understanding, basic functionalities, and potential added values of AI. Using thistheoretical basis, Sect. 10.3 speciﬁes a conceptual framework for the effectiveness of
HRM-related AI applications, considering the task technology ﬁt theory. Based on
this framework and current literature, Sect. 10.3.1 shows concrete AI application
areas in HRM. In Sect. 10.3.2 , a theory –practice comparison of the described ﬁelds
of application in German enterprises is carried out by means of my own empiricaldata. Sect. 10.4 derives from the results of Sect. 10.3 a framework that is conducive
to AI-based HRM. The chapter is rounded off by the illumination of the required
competencies of the HR manager of the future in Sects. 10.5 and10.6 concludes with
an outlook for future research and derives scienti ﬁc implications.194 M. Groß