the broad mass of organizations is mostly to be considered a failure: the reasons are
to be found in the one-sidedness of the content, the complexity, and the actualmotivation (mostly focused on one ’s own pro ﬁle or business advantage) of those
responsible for implementation. Well-known examples are the “Shareholder
Value “e.g. with the “Economic Value Add —EVA ”or the “Balanced Score Card. ”
The monitoring structure of compliance is no longer up to date, as both the
process-bound internal and the avoidance of independent external (but paid forbefore the organization to be reviewed) review by auditors do not meet the highlycompetitive pressure. Due to
1. Lack of standardization in comprehensive reporting (which in turn is due to
mostly manual or max. Semi-automated processes)
2. Latent and/or concrete dependencies (e.g., in some cases substantial economic
andﬁnancial losses)
there is neither a reliable transparency nor reliability of the audit certi ﬁcates itself. A
good example is the comparison of the Wirecard scandal in 2020 —the now insol-
vent tech company, which barely 2 years earlier had been included in the renownedDAX 30, Germany ’s“most valuable ”30 companies, and whose balance sheet
forgeries were recognized far too late on a large scale. The similarity to the US
scandal about Enron about 20 years earlier is astonishing and sobering: despitetighter regulations and progress in digitization, it is frightening to have to state thatobviously nothing has been learned. In both cases, auditors have a special role toplay, since the expectation of stakeholders (and thus shareholders in the narrowersense) is that reporting is reliable. However, this was not achieved in theabovementioned cases and led to considerable damage to the company ’s reputation,
which, at least in the Enron case, led to the dissolution of the auditing company.
6
Various initiatives that were already concerned with changing or expanding the
reporting system were only able to establish themselves to a limited extent. Thereasons for this are in two areas:
1. Complexity:
There is too much reporting complexity and therefore not operationalizable formany (e.g., GRI —Group Reporting Initiative —an extremely comprehensive set
of rules and regulations with regard to sustainable management, which at best
large companies with a high level of resources can only implement to some
extent
7)
6Arthur Anderson was at that time one of the world ’s“Big Four ”accounting ﬁrms and was
dissolved in the wake of the Enron scandal; the consulting business was renamed “Accenture. ”
The EY involved in the Wirecard case currently has to fear corresponding damage to its reputation;see (FT 2020 ).
7The main manual alone comprises more than 400 pages!2 Human Rationality and Morals 33