Example: AI Bot as Boss at Hitachi
Already back in 2015, Hitachi introduced in their warehouses AI bots that
issue work orders and instructions to employees. It is based on the AI analysisof employees ’previous problem-solving capabilities in ﬁnding more ef ﬁcient
ways –the basic quality management idea of continuous improvement
(Kaizen) (Gershgorn 2015 ).
Depersonalized employment relationships impose a legal challenge. Following
current legal understanding, e.g., in Germany of the Federal Data Protection Act(“BDSG ”) (FDPA 2017 ).
Can a robot be a superior like humans and how is this to be assessed legally and
ethically? The following aspects must be considered: On the one hand, robots are notmere aids; they possess a certain degree of autonomy. On the other hand, they are notan independent legal entity.
Due to their “technically conferred intelligence and their independence, ”robots
cannot be classi ﬁed as a mere tool of the employer. This is the difference between
robots and automatic machines: they not only repeat programmed work sequences,but also have a certain degree of autonomy.
A robot is not a person who can make a “legally binding declaration of intent. ”
Nevertheless, it is more than a “messenger ”of the employer. Most likely, the robot
could be classi ﬁed as a negotiator of the employer, acting on behalf of the employer
but with his own freedom of decision.
A key area of concern is data protection in connection with relatively self-acting
robots. The robots take up enormous amounts of data. But what of this data? Canthey store and use?
Example: A Robot ’s Video Eye
A robot ’s video eye has to notice that a person is in the danger zone of a
production plant and immediately stop the machines. But is the robot alsoallowed to save the fact that the person being observed is not at his workstationat the moment?
Questions of liability are also dif ﬁcult to decide: Who bears the damage if an
autonomous robot causes property damage or even personal injury —the manufac-
turer or the owner? (Groß and Gressel 2016 ).
The European Parliament is the ﬁrst institution worldwide that wants to create a
legal framework for legal and ethical questions concerning arti ﬁcial intelli-
gence (EU 2017 ). Robots are not like other products but are subject to the same
laws. This problem can be demonstrated using the example of autonomous driving:who is liable in case of accident —the manufacturer, the programmer, the driver?
And what kind of ethics is to be applied (e.g., see the “trolley problem ”in Sect. 1.4.2
as well).228 S. H. Vieweg