knowledge is implicit (Kruse et al. 2007 , pp. 534 –535). In this sense, analog and
digital networking allow for higher complexity and are a condition of evolution,creativity, and intelligence. This applies to the networking of technical systems as
well as human –machine systems.
Malone poses the central question: How can people and computers be connected
in such a way that together they act more intelligently than any person, group, orcomputer has ever done before? and “we should move from thinking about putting
humans in the loop to putting computers in the group ”(Malone 2018 , p. 75)
(Fig. 5.3).
In this way, humans can contribute general intelligence and special abilities
machines lack. Machines can provide the knowledge and special abilities humans
do not have. As a result, by creating cyber-human learning loops, a group of people
and computers can act more intelligently than any person, group, or computer hasever done before (Malone 2018 , p. 234).
The interaction between the digital and the analog enables a real “digital trans-
formation, ”which I would like to call “integral intelligence. ”
5.3.3 Laws of Form and Integral Intelligence
Communication between humans and machines and between machines and
machines is complex. The laws of form (Spencer-Brown 1994 ) serve as a suitable
descriptive tool and can be used to create forms of observation and depict differencesas connections (Baecker 2017 ). It is about distinguishing and designating phenom-
ena ( “draw a distinction ”), i.e., inclusion or exclusion relations (Simon 2007 ,
pp. 52 –53). It is a differential approach.
Spencer-Brown symbolizes this with a “cross. ”Every observation requires this
“cross ”to get from unmarked to marked space (Simon 2007 , p. 56). This ﬁrst
distinction can be further developed by other inward/outward distinctions. If, forexample, environments are marked, they can be reintroduced into the system asdistinctions and then observed ( “re-entry ”). If one wants to communicate “about the
outside world, ”one must make the outside world an element of the inside world
(Simon 2007 , p. 58).
The cross as a mark of distinction, and its implementation, can best be illustrated
by taking an object, e.g., in this context man, framing it with the difference implicitly
made long ago and asking what could have been excluded —a machine, for instance
(Fig. 5.4):Input Output Machine Human
Fig. 5.3 Learning loops with human –machine interaction (own presentation based on (Malone
2018 , S.234))5 Value-Based Corporate Management and Integral Intelligence 83