Example: Fatal Accident of Uber Autonomous Driving
In 2018, a self-driving Uber Volvo SUV hit and killed a woman riding her
bicycle, as the car did not recognize the pedestrian ’s crosswalk the bicyclist
was using. The algorithm did not have the capability of classifying an object asa pedestrian unless that object was near a crosswalk, and the safety driver“didn’t keep her eye on road, ”but she “was streaming the television show
‘The Voice ’....”(McCausland 2019 ).
These non-trivial and very complex questions have an essential (to the health and
well-being of humans) and cost-intensive impact. For example, is the programmerresponsible, who designed and con ﬁgured the algorithm or provided training
datasets for the algorithm responsible (see Sect. 6.6as well), even if the environment
inﬂuences the robot?A sensible “risk management approach ”may be taken: That is
the party liable is the one who can minimize these costs most effectively.
Currently in discussion is the approach of a so-called electronic person or
e-person: Basically, this approach suggests treating robots as a corporation with
rights and duties that are purely functional for human interests.
Though, ethical issues remain such as the relationship of dependence of a human
being (especially a person in need of help) on a robot, because robots cannot havereal feelings. The humans the robot is taking care of may not be in a position todifferentiate between a real person and a non-human robot. Although typically it isthought of elderly people, small children, or people with mental disabilities, thatmight actually not be limited to those groups of people, e.g., if addiction of the manyof us to so-called social media is considered.
The legal regulation considered by the EU can be seen as an opportunity for
Europe (Delvaux 2017 ). Standards give legal certainty, which lowers economic
risks, and thus enables investments into the AI technologies under the complianceprovisions set. Here, a competitive advantage can be derived out of virtuous ﬁrst-
mover cycle (see Fig. 11.1).
1. Mover effort:
Initial invest 
in innovation 
(process / product / service)
2. 
Market awareness 
early feedbackFirst mover
Early adopterValue
Mass followers
TimeFirst mover
advantage
3. 
Attract investors4. 
Secure funds
for investments 
into new generationVirtuous
Cycle
Fig. 11.1 First-mover advantage and the virtuous cycle (own presentation)11 Ethical AI Implementation 229