discloses which AI applications they themselves use to manage the company
and how ethical standards are adhered to in doing so.
(c)Feasibility refers to the framework created by the company to enable
managers and employees to comply with AI-related standards. In particular,
AI projects must be adequately budgeted in terms of time and money in orderto meet ethical standards and at the same time achieve value-added results. Inprinciple, it is advisable to set up an AI task force that includes not onlytechnical specialists and divisional representatives but also members of theworks council and trusted representatives.
(d)Supportability is the extent to which a company helps its employees identify
with the company ’s ethics. In this context, HRM can make a signi ﬁcant
contribution by providing training on the use of AI and the associated ethical
standards.
(e)Transparency refers to the degree to which the consequences of one ’s own
behavior are visible in the company. Empirical studies emphasize the greatimportance of transparency not only because of its far-reaching specialpotential to uncover unethical behavior (Tyler and Blader 2005 ; Vieweg
2020 ), but above all because of its bene ﬁcial effect on the acceptance of AI
(Grotenhermen et al. 2020 ). With regard to AI applications, therefore, not
only the processing of input and output variables should be explained (see
also DSGVO for details), but also a look at the AI “black box ”should be
made possible. In this way, managers and employees have the opportunity toraise and discuss ethical questions.
(f) A lively ethical debate ( discussability ) is the basis for learning from the (near)
mistakes and ethical dilemmas of others. The open exchange of informationwith already experienced AI departments opens up the opportunity for HRMto consider ethical questions right at the beginning of AI projects.
(g)Sanctionability describes the extent to which employees believe that miscon-
duct is punished, and ethical behavior is rewarded. Since the lack ofsanctionability undermines the effectiveness of standards, it is important tosanction intentional misconduct in the use of AI under labor law. However,this measure should be the last step; rather, prevention through educationshould be the main focus.
In summary, it can be stated that companies are well advised to develop as manyof the ethical practices as possible in order to increase the acceptance of AI
applications and to establish a permanent AI-af ﬁne culture. HR managers can
beneﬁt twofold from the development of ethical virtues in the context of AI. On
the one hand, they can raise their own pro ﬁle by taking on a moderating role in the
development process, and on the other hand, they can use the virtues as an ethicalframework for building trust.10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 215