The EU will likely remain the standard bearer for data protection and recently has
also created broad ethical guidelines, with seven key requirements for AI. GDPR iscurrently the world data protection standard. Google itself has said that it is no
coincidence that its global Data Safety Engineering Center is located in Munich, as
“Europe is the global leader in data security and Germany is Europe ’s leader ”
(Google 2019 ).
In the USA, the research group DARPA at the Department of Defense is working
on the ambitious project XAI for “EXPLAINABLE AI, ”with the results intended to
be relevant not just for defense but other areas including ﬁnance too (Fig. 8.4).
Being able to understand and interpret the outcome of AI models is essential to
their future use: if people cannot trust the outputs of these models, the models will be
rejected. Transparency and explainability are two key ways to build this trust.
Explainability is also key for legal compliance —as in ﬁnance, where lenders are
often required to tell applicants why they are being refused for a loan —and is crucial
to debug AI systems.
Accenture Labs are working on designing explanation subsystems that help
interpret the outputs of already created “black box ”models that are not transparent
by design, such as neural networks (McGrath et al. 2018 ).
This approach is known as counterfactual explanations (Wachter et al. 2017 ),
which provide the minimal changes required on the input data in order to obtain a
different result. For example, a counterfactual explanation for a rejected loanapplication would tell the user what changes they would have to make to the “inputs ”
of the application, like their income, assets, and so on, in order to have the applica-tion approved (see Sect. 6.6as well on the concrete dataset example).
This all seems very reasonable and even promising, but many companies using
AI techniques are not currently operating in this way. In fact, there has beensomething of a Wild West atmosphere in the AI space; just as the term “manifest
destiny ”deﬁned the right of settlers in the Wild West of the USA to claim lands and
move indigenous peoples, so are many of the current entities in the AI spacebehaving like they have the right to explore, use data, and innovate at any cost.
It is clear that there are ethical considerations to AI, and we are needing to adapt
our current application of business ethics to AI.
Getting Back to Classical Ethics
As broadly known, the three common schools of ethical thought are virtue ethics,
consequentialist or consequence-based ethics, and deontological or duty-based
ethics (see Sect. 1.4for details).
While the attention to duty or consequences is fundamentally a focus on compli-
ance, virtue ethics looks at whether an action is consistent with being a virtuous
person; it is looking at the character of the individual.
Clearly, in companies, the emphasis on compliance has been most profound and
the concept of virtue ethics as having a role in business has been historically ignored.
Only in recent years, since the great ﬁnancial crisis, have companies broadly
accepted how much culture matters and how much that is re ﬂected in the characters
of its employees. Not just the process and the result count, but also the individuals in170 S. Spinner