10.06 It is recommended that companies with a works council in jurisdictions with high data
protection standards (such as the EU with GDPR and Germany in particular) ...
1 ...do not enter into company agreements with the workers ’council on the
AI-based automated collection, processing, analysis, and storage of data, as onlyirrelevant data can be re ﬂected following the law
2 ...do enter into company agreements with the workers ’council on the AI-based
automated collection, processing, analysis, and storage of all employee-related data
(“big bath ”approach).
3 ...do enter into company agreements with the workers ’council in the sense of a
basic permission without stretching its scope beyond the legal minimum.
4 ...do not enter into company agreements with the workers ’council as it would be
illegal.
10.07 What are the expectations on changes for the HR role in an AI environment?
1 No change of HR skills, as HR managers typically would not program the AI
algorithms anyway.
2 No change of HR skills, as HR managers ’activities on focus
(strategic vs. operational) and orientation (human vs. process) remain unchanged.
3 Only in the area of “change agent ”as well as “administrative expert ”HR managers
are expected to foster the use of AI.
4 In all areas such as “strategic partner ”and “employee champion ”HR managers are
expected to foster the use of AI.
10.08 What unique basic skills are required for HR managers to have in an AI environment?
1 HR managers should treat others with respect.2 HR managers should have basic programming skills.3 HR managers should establish ethical virtues in human resources.
4 Competence to design organizational and personal change processes.
10.09 What is a special skill set required for HR managers to have in an AI environment?
1 Seizing: Represent end users ’needs in innovating HR solutions; sensing:
Flexibility; recon ﬁguration: Interdisciplinary networks.
2 Recon ﬁguration: Interdisciplinary networks; sensing: Represent end users ’needs in
innovating HR solutions; sizing: Flexibility.
3 Recon ﬁguration: Convincing employees; sensing: Represent end users ’needs in
innovating HR solutions; seizing: Flexibility.
4 Sensing: Represent end users ’needs in innovating HR solutions; seizing:
Interdisciplinary networks; recon ﬁguration: Flexibility.
10.10 What are suggested next steps to foster AI in HRM?
1 Buildup of competencies internally as well as through job sharing with AI startups.
2 Wait until adequate technology integration (e.g., of AI in ERP systems) becomes
available.
3 Disinvest from “human ”HRM altogether, because all HR managers will be
substituted by self-service-based AI applications anyway.
4 Perform a representative qualitative study to identify the real merits of AI in HRM.
Correct answers can be found in
www.vieweg-beratung.de/downloads10 Yes, AI Can: The Artificial Intelligence Gold Rush Between Optimistic HR ... 221