employees themselves (employee self-service), which leads to a signi ﬁcant time
saving for the HR departments. AI is not necessarily due to the triviality of thesetasks (Roedenbeck 2020 ). However, intelligent personal language assistants are
suitable for advising and supporting employees in employee self-service
(Strohmeier and Piazza 2015 ). Analogous to the language assistants “Siri”
(Apple) or “Alexa ”(Amazon), employees can request information (e.g.,
remaining vacation days) or use assistance services (e.g., forwarding to theinput website for tax class changes). The advantage of these assistants basedon speech recognition for HR managers is that numerous sophisticated speechprocessing systems already exist. The implementation effort is therefore primar-ily focused on the creation of internal knowledge databases, which assign
suitable answers or work orders to the recognized statements (Roedenbeck
2020 ).
The explanations of this chapter illustrate that the ﬁelds of application of AI in
HRM are manifold and go far beyond the ﬁeld of recruitment. Figure 10.4 links the
shown AI functionalities from Sect. 1.3with the described HRM tasks from this
chapter.
10.3.2 Status Quo of HRM-Related AI Applications in German
Companies
Based on the previously outlined application areas of AI in HRM, a
non-representative survey of the status quo in German companies was conducted.
For this purpose, 118 companies of different sizes and branches were interviewed1.
The sample consisted of 60% service companies, 32% manufacturing companies,and 8% public institutions. With regard to company size (number of employees), thedistribution was as follows: 32% with less than 100 employees, 22% with 101 to500 employees, 21% with 501 to 2000 employees, and 25% with more than 2000employees.
First of all, the results are presented and interpreted in terms of selected conditions
that are conducive to the implementation of AI in HRM, before speci ﬁc areas of
application along the HRM systems are examined. With regard to the question ofwhether there is an of ﬁcial AI representative in the company, only 33% of the
respondents answered “yes,”corresponding to 67% “no.”A similar pattern of
answers was found in the question of whether companies have already developedan explicit AI strategy. Here, 38% answered “yes,”corresponding to 62% “no.”
Furthermore, the vast majority of the companies surveyed (83%) have not yet
1At the time of submission of this manuscript, the survey had not yet been completed, so that not all
of the ﬁnal generated data points could be considered in the evaluation of this chapter. The results
presented here are therefore to be considered preliminary.208 M. Groß