1:18 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
The surprise-based memory module [ 104] updates Monly when it cannot represent an xiwell.
Hence, updating Musing this ximakes Mmore expressive, and also reduces the computation cost.
The abstract memory [ 149] uses two memories. One extracts relevant key-value pairs from a fixed
memory containing large-scale machine annotated data set, and the other refines the extracted
values and abstracts out the most useful information for few-shot (image) classification. This idea
is extended to few-shot video classification in [164].
Along this line, some methods pay special attention to protecting the few-shot classes in the
memory. Note that few-shot classes are small, and so have a lower chance of being kept in M.
Each few-shot sample in Mcan also be easily replaced by samples from the more abundant
classes. To alleviate this problem, lifelong memory [ 65] is proposed. Unlike previous memories
[104,114,149,164] which wipe out the memory content across tasks, the lifelong memory erases
the “oldest" memory value when the memory is full. The ages of all the memory slots are then
reset to zero. For a new sample, when the returned Mvalue(i)value matches its ground-truth output,
it is merged with the current Mkey(i)instead of being written to a new memory slot. Hence, it is
more likely that all classes occupy an equal number of memory slots, and rare classes are protected.
Recently, this lifelong memory is adapted to learn word representations in [125].
However, even with the use of a lifelong memory, rare samples can still be forgotten. After each
update, the lifelong memory resets the age of the selected M(i)to zero, and increases the ages of
the other non-empty memory slots by one. When the memory is full and the returned value is
wrong, the oldest memory slot is replaced. As the rare class samples seldom update their M(i)’s,
they have a higher chance of being erased.
4.3.2 Refining Parameters. Recall that the Learnet [ 14] and its variants (Section 4.2.3) map infor-
mation from Dtrainto parameterize the embedding function д(·)for a new xtest. This parameter can
be refined using a memory. Meta Networks (MetaNet) [ 96] parameterizes a classification model
using a “slow" weight which is meta-learned from multiple data sets, and a “fast" weight which is a
task-specific embedding of Dtrain. As shown in [ 97], the computation cost of MetaNet can be reduced
by learning to modify each neuron rather the complete parameter. MN-Net [ 22] uses a memory to
refine the embedding learned in the Matching Nets, whose output is used to parameterize a CNN
as in Learnet.
4.4 Generative Modeling
Generative modeling methods estimate the probability distribution p(x)from the observed xi’s with
the help of prior knowledge (Figure 10). Estimation of p(x)usually involves estimations of p(x|y)
andp(y). Methods in this class can deal with many tasks, such as generation [ 34,76,107,109],
recognition [34, 35, 47, 76, 113, 129, 159], reconstruction [47], and image flipping [107].
Fig. 10. Solving the FSL problem by generative modeling.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.