1:16 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
used in [ 84,115] to leverage information from local neighborhoods. In few-shot reinforcement
learning applications (as in continuous control and visual navigation), temporal information is
important. The Simple Neural AttentIve Learner (SNAIL) [ 91] is an embedding network with
interleaved temporal convolution layers and attention layers. The temporal convolution layer
aggregates information from past time steps, while the attention layer selectively attends to
specific time steps relevant to the current input.
4.2.3 Hybrid Embedding Model. Although task-invariant embedding methods can be applied to
new tasks with a low computation cost, they do not leverage specific knowledge of the current
task. When task specialty is the reason that Dtrainhas only a few examples (such as learning for
rare cases), simply applying a task-invariant embedding function may not be suitable. To alleviate
this problem, hybrid embedding models adapt the generic task-invariant embedding model learned
from prior knowledge by the task-specific information in DtrainThis is done by learning a function
which takes information extracted from Dtrainas input and returns an embedding which acts as the
parameter for f(·)(Figure 8).
Fig. 8. Solving the FSL problem by hybrid embedding model.
Learnet [ 14] improves the task-invariant convolutional siamese net [ 70] by incorporating the
specific information of Dtrain. It learns a meta-learner from multiple meta-training sets, and maps
each training example xi∈Dtrainto the parameter of the learner (a convolutional siamese net).
In this way, the parameter of f(·)changes with the given xi, resulting in a hybrid embedding.
Improved upon Learnet, the classification layer of the learner is replaced by ridge regression in
[13], such that parameters can be efficiently obtained in closed-form. The following two works
[100,162] take Dtrainas a whole to output the task-specific parameter for f(·). Task dependent
adaptive metric (TADAM) [ 100] averages class prototypes into the task embedding, and uses a
meta-learned function to map it to the ProtoNet parameters. Dynamic Conditional Convolutional
Network (DCCN) [ 162] uses a fixed set of filters, and learns the combination coefficients using
Dtrain.
4.3 Learning with External Memory
Learning with external memory [ 49,89,124,145] extracts knowledge from Dtrain, and stores it in
an external memory (Figure 9). Each new sample xtestis then represented by a weighted average of
contents extracted from the memory. This limits xtestto be represented by contents in the memory,
and thus essentially reduces the size of H.
A key-value memory [ 89] is usually used in FSL. Let the memory be M∈Rb×m, with each of
itsbmemory slots M(i)∈Rmconsisting of a key-value pair M(i)=(Mkey(i),Mvalue(i)). A test
sample xtestis first embedded by an embedding function f. However, unlike embedding methods,
f(xtest)is not used directly as the representation of xtest. Instead, it is only used to query for the
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.