1
Generalizing from a Few Examples: A Survey on Few-Shot
Learning
YAQING WANG, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and Baidu Research
QUANMING YAO∗,4Paradigm Inc.
JAMES T. KWOK, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
LIONEL M. NI, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Machine learning has been highly successful in data-intensive applications, but is often hampered when the
data set is small. Recently, Few-Shot Learning (FSL) is proposed to tackle this problem. Using prior knowledge,
FSL can rapidly generalize to new tasks containing only a few samples with supervised information. In this
paper, we conduct a thorough survey to fully understand FSL. Starting from a formal definition of FSL, we
distinguish FSL from several relevant machine learning problems. We then point out that the core issue in
FSL is that the empirical risk minimizer is unreliable. Based on how prior knowledge can be used to handle
this core issue, we categorize FSL methods from three perspectives: (i) data, which uses prior knowledge to
augment the supervised experience; (ii) model, which uses prior knowledge to reduce the size of the hypothesis
space; and (iii) algorithm, which uses prior knowledge to alter the search for the best hypothesis in the given
hypothesis space. With this taxonomy, we review and discuss the pros and cons of each category. Promising
directions, in the aspects of the FSL problem setups, techniques, applications and theories, are also proposed
to provide insights for future research.1
CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence ;Machine learning ;Learning
paradigms .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Few-Shot Learning, One-Shot Learning, Low-Shot Learning, Small Sample
Learning, Meta-Learning, Prior Knowledge
ACM Reference Format:
Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni. 2020. Generalizing from a Few Examples: A
Survey on Few-Shot Learning. ACM Comput. Surv. 1, 1, Article 1 (March 2020), 34 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3386252
1 INTRODUCTION
“Can machines think?” This is the question raised in Alan Turing’s seminal paper entitled “Comput-
ing Machinery and Intelligence” [ 134] in 1950. He made the statement that “The idea behind digital
∗Corresponding Author
1A list of references, which will be updated periodically, can be found at https://github.com/tata1661/FewShotPapers.git .
Authors’ addresses: Yaqing Wang, ywangcy@connect.ust.hk, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Business Intelligence Lab and National Engineering Laboratory of Deep
Learning Technology and Application, Baidu Research; Quanming Yao, yaoquanming@4paradigm.com, 4Paradigm Inc.;
James T. Kwok, jamesk@cse.ust.hk, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology; Lionel M. Ni, ni@ust.hk, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
0360-0300/2020/3-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3386252
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.arXiv:1904.05046v3  [cs.LG]  29 Mar 2020