1:6 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
•Weakly supervised learning [163] learns from experience Econtaining only weak supervision
(such as incomplete, inexact, inaccurate or noisy supervised information). The most relevant
problem to FSL is weakly supervised learning with incomplete supervision where only a small
amount of samples have supervised information. According to whether the oracle or human
intervention is leveraged, this can be further classified into the following:
–Semi-supervised learning [165], which learns from a small number of labeled samples and
(usually a large number of) unlabeled samples in E. Example applications are text and
webpage classification. Positive-unlabeled learning [81] is a special case of semi-supervised
learning, in which only positive and unlabeled samples are given. For example, to recom-
mend friends in social networks, we only know the users’ current friends according to the
friend list, while their relationships to other people are unknown.
–Active learning [117], which selects informative unlabeled data to query an oracle for
outputy. This is usually used for applications where annotation labels are costly, such as
pedestrian detection.
By definition, weakly supervised learning with incomplete supervision includes only classifi-
cation and regression, while FSL also includes reinforcement learning problems. Moreover,
weakly supervised learning with incomplete supervision mainly uses unlabeled data as ad-
ditional information in E, while FSL leverages various kinds of prior knowledge such as
pre-trained models, supervised data from other domains or modalities and does not restrict
to using unlabeled data. Therefore, FSL becomes weakly supervised learning problem only
when prior knowledge is unlabeled data and the task is classification or regression.
•Imbalanced learning [54] learns from experience Ewith a skewed distribution for y. This
happens when some values of yare rarely taken, as in fraud detection and catastrophe
anticipation applications. It trains and tests to choose among all possible y’s. In contrast,
FSL trains and tests for ywith a few examples, while possibly taking the other y’s as prior
knowledge for learning.
•Transfer learning [101] transfers knowledge from the source domain/task, where training
data is abundant, to the target domain/task, where training data is scarce. It can be used in
applications such as cross-domain recommendation, WiFi localization across time periods,
space and mobile devices. Domain adaptation [11] is a type of transfer learning in which the
source/target tasks are the same but the source/target domains are different. For example, in
sentiment analysis, the source domain data contains customer comments on movies, while the
target domain data contains customer comments on daily goods. Transfer learning methods
are popularly used in FSL [ 7,82,85], where the prior knowledge is transferred from the
source task to the few-shot task.
•Meta-learning [59] improves Pof the new task Tby the provided data set and the meta-
knowledge extracted across tasks by a meta-learner. Specifically, the meta-learner gradually
learns generic information (meta-knowledge) across tasks, and the learner generalizes the
meta-learner for a new task Tusing task-specific information. It has been successfully
applied in problems such as learning optimizers [ 5,80], dealing with the cold-start problem
in collaborative filtering [ 137], and guiding policies by natural language [ 25]. Meta-learning
methods can be used to deal with the FSL problem. As will be shown in Sections 4 and 5, the
meta-learner is taken as prior knowledge to guide each specific FSL task. A formal definition
of meta-learning and how it is used for the FSL problem are provided in Appendix A.
2.3 Core Issue
In any machine learning problem, usually there are prediction errors and one cannot obtain perfect
predictions. In this section, we illustrate the core issue of FSL based on error decomposition in
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.