1:22 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
to the parameter values that will be obtained by training on a lot of samples. Similarly, in
[72], the transformation function that maps the embedding of xito a classification decision
boundary is learned.
5.1.2 Aggregating a Set of Parameters. Sometimes, we do not have a suitable θ0to start with.
Instead, we have many models that are learned from related tasks. For example, in face recognition,
we may already have recognition models for the eye, nose, and ear. Therefore, one can aggregate
these model parameters to a suitable model, which is then either directly used or refined by Dtrain
(Figure 12).
Fig. 12. Solving the FSL problem by aggregating a set of parameters θ0’s intoθ. Provided with a set of
pre-trained θ0’s, one only needs to learn the combination weights (blue lines).
As discussed in Section 3, samples from unlabeled data sets (Section 3.2) and similar labeled data
sets (Section 3.3) can be used to augment the few-shot Dtrain. Instead of using the samples directly,
the following methods use models (with parameters θ0’s) pre-trained from these data sets. The
problem is then how to adapt them efficiently to the new task using Dtrain.
(1)Unlabeled data set . Although there is no supervised information, similar samples can be
grouped together. Therefore, one can pre-train functions from the unlabeled data to cluster
and separate samples well. A neural network is then used to adapt them to the new task with
the few-shot Dtrain[142, 143].
(2)Similar data sets . In [ 10], few-shot object classification is performed by leveraging samples
and classifiers from similar classes. First, it replaces the features of samples from these similar
classes by features from the new class. The learned classifier is then reused, and only the
classification threshold is adjusted for the new class. In [ 44,157], they learn to combine
existing parameters learned from similar data sets using Dtrain.
5.1.3 Fine-Tuning Existing Parameter with New Parameters. The pre-trained θ0may not be enough
to encode the new FSL task completely. Hence, an additional parameter(s) δis used to take the
specialty of Dtraininto account (Figure 13). Specifically, this strategy expands the model parameter
to becomeθ={θ0,δ}, and fine-tunes θ0while learning δ. In [ 60], it uses the lower layers of a pre-
trained CNN for feature embedding, and learns a linear classifier on the embedded features using
Dtrain. In font style transfer [ 7], a network is first pre-trained to capture the fonts in gray images.
To generate stylish colored fonts, this is fine-tuned together with the training of an additional
network.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.