Generalizing from a Few Examples: A Survey on Few-Shot Learning 1:3
we conduct a survey on the FSL problem. In contrast, the survey in [ 118] only focuses on concept
learning and experience learning for small samples.
Contributions of this survey can be summarized as follows:
•We give a formal definition on FSL, which naturally connects to the classic machine learning
definition in [ 92,94]. The definition is not only general enough to include existing FSL works,
but also specific enough to clarify what the goal of FSL is and how we can solve it. This
definition is helpful for setting future research targets in the FSL area.
•We list the relevant learning problems for FSL with concrete examples, clarifying their
relatedness and differences with respect to FSL. These discussions can help better discriminate
and position FSL among various learning problems.
•We point out that the core issue of FSL supervised learning problem is the unreliable empirical
risk minimizer, which is analyzed based on error decomposition [ 17] in machine learning.
This provides insights to improve FSL methods in a more organized and systematic way.
•We perform an extensive literature review, and organize them in an unified taxonomy
from the perspectives of data, model and algorithm. We also present a summary of insights
and a discussion on the pros and cons of each category. These can help establish a better
understanding of FSL methods.
•We propose promising future directions for FSL in the aspects of problem setup, techniques,
applications and theories. These insights are based on the weaknesses of the current develop-
ment of FSL, with possible improvements to make in the future.
1.1 Organization of the Survey
The remainder of this survey is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview for FSL,
including its formal definition, relevant learning problems, core issue, and a taxonomy of existing
works in terms of data, model and algorithm. Section 3 is for methods that augment data to solve
FSL problem. Section 4 is for methods that reduce the size of hypothesis space so as to make FSL
feasible. Section 5 is for methods that alter the search strategy of algorithm to deal with the FSL
problem. In Section 6, we propose future directions for FSL in terms of problem setup, techniques,
applications and theories. Finally, the survey closes with conclusion in Section 7.
1.2 Notation and Terminology
Consider a learning task T, FSL deals with a data set D={Dtrain,Dtest}consisting of a training set
Dtrain={(xi,yi)}I
i=1where Iis small, and a testing set Dtest={xtest}. Letp(x,y)be the ground-truth
joint probability distribution of input xand output y, and ˆhbe the optimal hypothesis from xto
y. FSL learns to discover ˆhby fitting Dtrainand testing on Dtest. To approximate ˆh, the FSL model
determines a hypothesis space Hof hypotheses h(·;θ)’s, whereθdenotes all the parameters used
byh. Here, a parametric his used, as a nonparametric model often requires large data sets, and
thus not suitable for FSL. A FSL algorithm is an optimization strategy that searches Hin order to
find theθthat parameterizes the best h∗∈H. The FSL performance is measured by a loss function
ℓ(ˆy,y)defined over the prediction ˆy=h(x;θ)and the observed output y.
2 OVERVIEW
In this section, we first provide a formal definition of the FSL problem in Section 2.1 with concrete
examples. To differentiate the FSL problem from relevant machine learning problems, we discuss
their relatedness and differences in Section 2.2. In Section 2.3, we discuss the core issue that makes
FSL difficult. Section 2.4 then presents a unified taxonomy according to how existing works handle
the core issue.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.