1:28 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
7 CONCLUSION
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) targets at bridging the gap between AI and human learning. It can learn
new tasks containing only a few examples with supervised information by incorporating prior
knowledge. FSL acts as a test-bed for AI, makes the learning of rare cases possible, or helps to
relieve the burden of collecting large-scale supervised date in industrial applications. In this survey,
we provide a comprehensive and systematic review of FSL. We first formally define FSL, and discuss
the relatedness and differences of FSL with relevant learning problems such as weakly supervised
learning, imbalanced learning, transfer learning and meta-learning. We then point out the core
issue of FSL is the unreliable empirical risk minimizer that makes FSL hard to learn. Understanding
the core issue helps categorize different works into data, model and algorithm according to how
they solve the core issue using prior knowledge: data augments the supervised experience of FSL,
model constrains the hypothesis space of FSL to be smaller, and algorithm alters the search strategy
for the best hypothesis in the given hypothesis space. In each category, the pros and cons are
thoroughly discussed and some summary and insights are presented. To inspire future research in
FSL, we also provide possible directions on problem setups, techniques, applications and theories
to explore.
A APPENDIX: META-LEARNING
Meta-learning [ 59] improves Pof the new task Tby the provided data set and the meta-knowledge
extracted across tasks by a meta-learner (Figure 16). Let p(T)be the distribution of task T. In mete-
training, it learns from a set of tasks Ts∼p(T). Each task Tsoperates on data set DsofNclasses,
where Ds={Ds
train,Ds
test}consists of a training set Ds
trainand a test set Ds
test. Each learner learns
from Ds
trainand measures the test error on Ds
test. The parameter θ0of meta-learner is optimized to
minimize the error across all learners, as:
θ0=arg min
θ0ETs∼p(T)Õ
((xi,yi))∈Dsℓ(h(xi;θ0),yi).
In meta-testing, another disjoint set of tasks Tt∼p(T)is used to test the generalization ability
of the meta-learner. Each Ttworks on a data set DtofN′classes, where Dt={Dt
train,Dt
test}. The
learner learns from the training set Dt
trainand evaluates on the test set Dt
test. The loss averaged
across Tt’s is taken as the meta-learning testing error.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is partially done in 4Paradigm Inc. when Yaqing Wang took the internship.
REFERENCES
[1]N. Abdo, H. Kretzschmar, L. Spinello, and C. Stachniss. 2013. Learning manipulation actions from a few demonstrations.
InInternational Conference on Robotics and Automation . 1268–1275.
[2]Z. Akata, F. Perronnin, Z. Harchaoui, and C. Schmid. 2013. Label-embedding for attribute-based classification. In
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 819–826.
[3]M. Al-Shedivat, T. Bansal, Y. Burda, I. Sutskever, I. Mordatch, and P. Abbeel. 2018. Continuous adaptation via meta-
learning in nonstationary and competitive environments. In International Conference on Learning Representations .
[4]H. Altae-Tran, B. Ramsundar, A. S. Pappu, and V. Pande. 2017. Low data drug discovery with one-shot learning. ACS
Central Science 3, 4 (2017), 283–293.
[5]M. Andrychowicz, M. Denil, S. Gomez, M. W. Hoffman, D. Pfau, T. Schaul, and N. de Freitas. 2016. Learning to learn
by gradient descent by gradient descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 3981–3989.
[6]S. Arik, J. Chen, K. Peng, W. Ping, and Y. Zhou. 2018. Neural voice cloning with a few samples. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems . 10019–10029.
[7]S. Azadi, M. Fisher, V. G. Kim, Z. Wang, E. Shechtman, and T. Darrell. 2018. Multi-content GAN for few-shot font
style transfer. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 7564–7573.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.