Generalizing from a Few Examples: A Survey on Few-Shot Learning 1:17
Fig. 9. Solving the FSL problem by learning with external memory. This figure illustrates a simplified example
where the embedding function fis used for representation learning and the memory takes f(xi)as the key
and output yias the label.
most similar memory slots, based on the similarity s(f(xtest),Mkey(i))between f(xtest)and each
keyMkey(i). The values of the most similar memory slots ( Mvalue(i)’s) are extracted and combined
to form the representation of xtest. This is then used as input to a simple classifier (such as a softmax
function) to make prediction. As manipulating Mis expensive, Musually has a small size. When M
is not full, new samples can be written to vacant memory slots. When Mis full, one has to decide
which memory slots to be replaced. Table 6 introduces the characteristics for methods with external
memory.
Table 6. Characteristics of FSL methods based on learning with external memory. Here, fis an embedding
function usually pre-trained by CNN or LSTM.
category methodmemory Msimilarity skeyMkey value Mvalue
MANN [114] f(xi,yi−1) f(xi,yi−1) cosine similarity
APL [104] f(xi) yi squared ℓ2distance
refining abstraction memory[149] f(xi) word embedding of yi dot product
representations CMN [164] f(xi) yi, age dot product
life-long memory [65] f(xi) yi, age cosine similarity
Mem2Vec[125] f(xi) word embedding of yi, age dot product
MetaNet [96] f(xi) fast weight cosine similarity
refining CSNs [97] f(xi) fast weight cosine similarity
parameters MN-Net [22] f(xi) yi dot product
As each xtestis represented as a weighted average of values extracted from the memory, the
quality of key-value pairs in the memory is important. According to the functionality of the memory,
FSL methods in this category can be subdivided into two types.
4.3.1 Refining Representations. The following methods carefully put Dtraininto the memory, such
that the stored key-value pairs can represent xtestmore accurately. Memory-Augmented Neural
Networks (MANN) [ 114] meta-learns the embedding f, and maps samples of the same class to
the same value. Samples of the same class then refine their class representations in the memory
together. This class representation can be viewed as a refined class prototype in ProtoNet [ 121].
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.