Generalizing from a Few Examples: A Survey on Few-Shot Learning 1:11
3.2 Transforming Samples from a Weakly Labeled or Unlabeled Data Set
This strategy augments Dtrainby selecting samples with the target label from a large data set
which is weakly labeled or unlabeled. For example, in photos taken by a surveillance camera, there
are people, cars and roads but none of them are labeled. Another example is a video for a long
presentation. This contains a series of gestures of the speaker, but none of them are annotated
explicitly. As such a data set contains large variations of samples, augmenting them to Dtrainhelps
depict a clearer p(x,y). Moreover, collecting such a data set is easier as human effort is not needed
for labeling. However, though the collection cost is low, a major issue is how to select samples with
the target label to be augmented to Dtrain. In [ 102], an exemplar SVM is learned for each target
label in Dtrain, which is then used to predict labels for samples from a weakly labeled data set.
Samples having the target labels are then added to Dtrain. In [ 32], instead of learning a classifier,
label propagation is directly used to label an unlabeled data set. In [ 148], a progressive strategy is
used to select informative unlabeled samples. The selected samples are then assigned pseudo-labels
and used to update the CNN.
3.3 Transforming Samples from Similar Data Sets
This strategy augments Dtrainby aggregating and adapting input-output pairs from a similar but
larger data sets. The aggregation weight is usually based on some similarity measure between
samples. In [ 133], it extracts the aggregation weight from an auxiliary text corpus [ 133]. As these
samples may not come from the target FSL class, directly augmenting the aggregated samples to
Dtrainmay be misleading. Therefore, a generative adversarial network (GAN) [ 46] is designed to
generate indistinguishable synthetic ˜xaggregated from a data set of many samples [ 42]. It has two
generators, one maps samples of the few-shot class to the large-scale class, and the other maps
samples of the large-scale class to the few-shot class (to compensate for the lack of samples in GAN
training).
3.4 Discussion and Summary
The choice of which augmentation strategy to use depends on the application. Sometimes, a large
number of weakly supervised or unlabeled samples exist for the target task (or class), but few-shot
learning is preferred because of the high cost of gathering annotated data and/or computational
cost (which corresponds to the third scenario introduced in Section 2.1). In this case, one can
perform augmentation by transforming samples from a weakly labeled or unlabeled data set. When
a large-scale unlabeled data set is hard to collect, but the few-shot class has some similar classes,
one can transform samples from these similar classes. If only some learned transformers rather
than raw samples are available, augmentation can be done by transforming the original samples
from Dtrain.
In general, solving a FSL problem by augmenting Dtrainis straightforward and easy to understand.
The data is augmented by taking advantage of the prior information for the target task. On the other
hand, the weakness of solving the FSL problem by data augmentation is that the augmentation
policy is often tailor-made for each data set in an adhoc manner, and cannot be used easily on
other data sets (especially for data sets from other domains). Recently, AutoAugment [ 27], which
automatically learns the augmentation policy for deep network training, is proposed to address
this issue. Apart from that, existing methods are mainly designed for images, as the generated
images can be visually evaluated by humans easily. In contrast, text and audio involve syntax and
structures, and are harder to generate. A recent attempt on using data augmentation for text is
reported in [144].
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.