1:20 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
(VAE) [ 68] is used in [ 34,57,109], autoregressive model [ 135] is used in [ 107], generative adversarial
networks (GAN) [46] is used in [159], and a combination of VAE and GAN is proposed in [47].
4.5 Discussion and Summary
When there exist similar tasks or auxiliary tasks, multitask learning can be used to constrain the
Hof the few-shot task. However, note that joint training of all the tasks together is required. Thus,
when a new few-shot task arrives, the whole multitask model has to be trained again, which can be
costly and slow. Moreover, the sizes of DandDcshould not comparable, otherwise, the few-shot
task may be overwhelmed by tasks with many samples.
When there exist a large-scale data set containing sufficient samples of various classes, one can
use embedding learning methods. These methods map samples to a good embedding space in which
samples from different classes can be well-separated, and so a smaller ˜His needed. However, they
may not work well when the few-shot task is not closely related to the other tasks. Moreover, more
exploration on how to mix the invariant and task-specific information of tasks is helpful.
When a memory network is available, it can be readily used for FSL by training a simple
model (e.g., classifier) on top of the memory. By using carefully-designed update rule, one can
selectively protect memory slots. The weakness of this strategy is that it incurs additional space
and computational costs, which increase with memory size. Therefore, current external memory
has a limited size.
Finally, when one wants to perform tasks such as generation and reconstruction besides FSL,
generative models can be used. They learn prior probability p(z;γ)from the other data sets, which
reducesHto a smaller ˜H. The learned generative models can also be used to generate samples for
data augmentation. However, generative modeling methods have high inference cost, and are more
difficult to derive than deterministic models.
5 ALGORITHM
The algorithm is the strategy to search in the hypothesis space Hfor the parameter θof the
best hypothesis h∗[17,18]. At the tth iteration, θt=θt−1+∆θt−1, where ∆θt−1is the update. For
example, for the popular stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants [ 17,18],θis updated as
θt=θt−1−αt∇θt−1ℓ(h(xt;θt−1),yt), (3)
whereαtis the stepsize. With θinitialized at θ0,θtcan be written as
θt=θ0+tÕ
i=1∆θi−1. (4)
When supervised information is rich, there are enough training samples to update θ, and to find
an appropriate stepsize αby cross-validation. However, in FSL, the provided few-shot Dtrainis not
large enough, and the obtained empirical risk minimizer is unreliable.
Methods in this section use prior knowledge to influence how θis obtained, either by (i) providing
a good initialized parameter θ0, or (ii) directly learning an optimizer to output search steps. In terms
of how the search strategy is affected by prior knowledge, we classify methods in this section into
three groups (Table 7):
(1)Refining existing parameters . An initial θ0learned from other tasks, and is then refined using
Dtrain.
(2)Refining meta-learned parameters . An initial θ0is meta-learned from a set of tasks, which are
drawn from the same task distribution as the few-shot task, and then further refined by the
learner using Dtrain.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.