Generalizing from a Few Examples: A Survey on Few-Shot Learning 1:5
computer programs learn with the Econsisting of both the given examples with supervised
information and pre-trained concepts such as parts and relations as prior knowledge. The
generated characters are evaluated through the pass rate of visual Turing test ( P), which
discriminates whether the images are generated by humans or machines. With this prior
knowledge, computer programs can also learn to classify, parse and generate new handwritten
characters with a few examples like humans.
•Learning for rare cases . When obtaining sufficient examples with supervised information
is hard or impossible, FSL can learn models for the rare cases. For example, consider a
drug discovery task ( T) which tries to predict whether a new molecule has toxic effects [ 4].
The percentage of molecules correctly assigned as toxic or non-toxic ( P) improves with E
obtained by both the new molecule’s limited assay, and many similar molecules’ assays as
prior knowledge.
•Reducing data gathering effort and computational cost . FSL can help relieve the burden of
collecting large number of examples with supervised information. Consider few-shot image
classification task ( T) [35]. The image classification accuracy ( P) improves with the Eobtained
by a few labeled images for each class of the target T, and prior knowledge extracted from
the other classes (such as raw images to co-training). Methods succeed in this task usually
have higher generality. Therefore, they can be easily applied for tasks of many samples.
Table 2. Three FSL examples based on Definition 2.2.
taskTexperience Eperformance Psupervised information prior knowledge
character generation [76]a few examples of new
characterpre-learned knowledge of
parts and relationspass rate of visual
Turing test
drug toxicity discovery [4]new molecule’s limited
assaysimilar molecules’ assaysclassification
accuracy
image classification [70]a few labeled images for
each class of the target Traw images of other classes,
or pre-trained modelsclassification
accuracy
In comparison to Table 1, Table 2 has one extra column under “experience E" which is marked
as “prior knowledge". As Eonly contains a few examples with supervised information directly
related to T, it is natural that common supervised learning approaches often fail on FSL problems.
Therefore, FSL methods make the learning of target Tfeasible by combining the available supervised
information in Ewith some prior knowledge, which is “any information the learner has about the
unknown function before seeing the examples" [ 86]. One typical type of FSL methods is Bayesian
learning [ 35,76]. It combines the provided training set Dtrainwith some prior probability distribution
which is available before Dtrainis given [15].
Remark 1. When there is only one example with supervised information in E, FSL is called one-shot
learning [14,35,138]. When Edoes not contain any example with supervised information for the
target T, FSL becomes a zero-shot learning problem (ZSL) [ 78]. As the target class does not contain
examples with supervised information, ZSL requires Eto contain information from other modalities
(such as attributes, WordNet, and word embeddings used in rare object recognition tasks), so as to
transfer some supervised information and make learning possible.
2.2 Relevant Learning Problems
In this section, we discuss some relevant machine learning problems. The relatedness and difference
with respect to FSL are clarified.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.