Generalizing from a Few Examples: A Survey on Few-Shot Learning 1:19
In generative modeling, the observed xis assumed to be drawn from some distribution p(x;θ)
parameterized by θ. Usually, there exists a latent variable z∼p(z;γ), so that x∼∫
p(x|z;θ)p(z;γ)dz.
The prior distribution p(z;γ), which is learned from other data sets, brings in prior knowledge that
is vital to FSL. By combining the provided training set Dtrainwith this p(z;γ), the resultant posterior
probability distribution is constrained. In other words, His constrained to a much smaller ˜H.
According to what the latent variable zrepresents, we group these FSL generative modeling
methods into three types.
4.4.1 Decomposable Components. Although samples with supervised information are scarce in a
FSL problem, they may share some smaller decomposable components with samples from the other
tasks. For example, consider the recognition of a person using only a few face photos provided.
Although similar faces may be hard to find, one can easily find photos with similar eyes, noses
or mouths. With a larger number of samples, models for these decomposable components can
be easily learned. One then only needs to find the correct combination of these decomposable
components, and decides which target class this combination belongs to. As the decomposable
components are chosen by human, this strategy is more interpretable. Bayesian One-Shot [ 35] uses
a generative model to capture the interactions between decomposable components (i.e., shapes
and appearances of objects) and target class (i.e., objects to be recognized). Bayesian Program
Learning (BPL) [ 76] models characters by separating it into types, tokens and further templates,
parts, primitives. To generate a new character, one needs to search a large combination space
containing theses components. In [ 76], this inference cost is reduced by only considering the top
possible combinations. In natural language processing, a recent work [ 64] models spans instead
of the complete parse tree, and adapts parsers between syntactically distant domains by training
individual classifiers for spans.
4.4.2 Groupwise Shared Prior. Often, similar tasks have similar prior probabilities, and this can
be utilized in FSL. For example, consider the three-class classification of “orange cat", “leopard"
and “Bengal tiger". These three species are similar, but Bengal tiger is endangered, while orange
cats and leopards are abundant. Hence, one can learn a prior probability from “orange cats" and
“leopards", and use this as the prior for the few-shot class “Bengal tiger".
In [113], a set of data sets {Dc}are grouped into a hierarchy via unsupervised learning. Data
sets in each group together learn the class prior probabilities. For a new few-shot class, one first
finds the group this new class belongs to, and then models it by the class prior drawn from the
groupwise shared prior probability. In [ 129], the feature learning step in [ 113] is further improved
with the use of deep Boltzmann machines [112].
4.4.3 Parameters of Inference Networks. To find the best θ, one has to maximize the posterior
p(z|x;θ,γ)=p(x,z;θ,γ)
p(x;γ)=p(x|z;θ)p(z;γ)∫
p(x|z;θ)p(z;γ)dz. (2)
Due to the integral in the denominator, it is intractable to solve (2). A variational distribution
q(z;δ), which is learned from data, is often used to approximate p(z|x;θ,γ). Recently, this q(z;δ)is
approximated via amortized variational inference with the inference network [ 158]. Although zno
longer has semantic meaning, the powerful representation learned by these deep models can lead
to better performance. Once learned, the inference network can be applied to a new task directly,
which is more efficient and requires less human knowledge. As the inference network has a large
number of parameters, it is usually trained using some auxiliary large-scale data sets. Many classic
inference networks are adapted to the FSL problem. For example, the variational auto-encoder
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.