Generalizing from a Few Examples: A Survey on Few-Shot Learning 1:21
(3)Learning the optimizer . This strategy learns a meta-learner as optimizer to output search
steps for each learner directly, such as changing the search direction or stepsize.
Table 7. Characteristics for FSL methods focusing on the algorithm perspective.
strategy prior knowledge how to search θof the h∗inH
refining existing parameters learnedθ0 refineθ0byDtrain
refining meta-learned parameters meta-learner refineθ0byDtrain
learning the optimizer meta-learner use search steps provided by the meta-learner
5.1 Refining Existing Parameters
This strategy takes θ0of a pre-trained model learned from related tasks as a good initialization, and
adapts it to θbyDtrain. The assumption is that θ0captures some general structures of the large-scale
data. Therefore, it can be adapted to Dwith a few iterations.
5.1.1 Fine-Tuning Existing Parameter by Regularization. This strategy fine-tunes the pre-trained
θ0for the few-shot task by regularization (Figure 11), and is popularly used in practice. In [ 21],
a CNN pre-trained on the ImageNet for image classification is tuned using a large data set for
foreground segmentation, then further fine-tuned using a single shot of segmented object for object
segmentation. Given the few-shot Dtrain, simply fine-tuning θ0by gradient descent may lead to
overfitting. Hence, how to adapt θ0without overfitting to Dtrainis a key design issue.
Fig. 11. Solving the FSL problem by fine-tuning existing parameter θ0by regularization.
In this section, methods fine-tune θ0by regularization to prevent overfitting. They can be grouped
as follows:
(1)Early-stopping . It requires separating a validation set from Dtrainto monitor the training
procedure. Learning is stopped when there is no performance improvement on the validation
set [6].
(2)Selectively updating θ0. Only a portion of θ0is updated in order to avoid overfitting. For
example, in [ 67], given a set of pre-trained filters, it only learns a strength parameter that is
multiplied with the filters.
(3)Updating related parts of θ0together . One can group elements of θ0(such as the neurons in
a deep neural network), and update each group jointly with the same update information.
In [155], the filters of a pre-trained CNN are clustered together according to some auxiliary
information, and then fine-tuned by groupwise back-propagation using Dtrain.
(4)Using a model regression network . A model regression network [ 143] captures the task-agnostic
transformation which maps the parameter values obtained by training on a few examples
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.