1:4 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
2.1 Problem Definition
As FSL is a sub-area in machine learning, before giving the definition of FSL, let us recall how
machine learning is defined in the literature.
Definition 2.1 ( Machine Learning [92,94]).A computer program is said to learn from experience
Ewith respect to some classes of task Tand performance measure Pif its performance can improve
with EonTmeasured by P.
For example, consider an image classification task ( T), a machine learning program can improve
its classification accuracy ( P) through Eobtained by training on a large number of labeled images
(e.g., the ImageNet data set [ 73]). Another example is the recent computer program AlphaGo [ 120],
which has defeated the human champion in playing the ancient game of Go ( T). It improves its
winning rate ( P) against opponents by training on a database ( E) of around 30 million recorded
moves of human experts as well as playing against itself repeatedly. These are summarized in
Table 1.
Table 1. Examples of machine learning problems based on Definition 2.1.
taskT experience E performance P
image classification [73] large-scale labeled images for each classclassification
accuracy
the ancient game of Go [120]a database containing around 30 million recorded moves
of human experts and self-play recordswinning rate
Typical machine learning applications, as in the examples mentioned above, require a lot of
examples with supervised information. However, as mentioned in the introduction, this may be
difficult or even not possible. FSL is a special case of machine learning, which targets at obtaining
good learning performance given limited supervised information provided in the training set Dtrain,
which consists of examples of inputs xi’s along with their corresponding output yi’s [15]. Formally,
we define FSL in Definition 2.2.
Definition 2.2. Few-Shot Learning (FSL) is a type of machine learning problems (specified by E,
TandP), where Econtains only a limited number of examples with supervised information for the
target T.
Existing FSL problems are mainly supervised learning problems. Concretely, few-shot classification
learns classifiers given only a few labeled examples of each class. Example applications include
image classification [ 138], sentiment classification from short text [ 157] and object recognition
[35]. Formally, using notations from Section 1.2, few-shot classification learns a classifier hwhich
predicts label yifor each input xi. Usually, one considers the N-way- K-shot classification [ 37,138],
in which Dtraincontains I=KNexamples from Nclasses each with Kexamples. Few-shot regression
[37,156] estimates a regression function hgiven only a few input-output example pairs sampled
from that function, where output yiis the observed value of the dependent variable y, and xiis
the input which records the observed value of the independent variable x. Apart from few-shot
supervised learning, another instantiation of FSL is few-shot reinforcement learning [3, 33], which
targets at finding a policy given only a few trajectories consisting of state-action pairs.
We now show three typical scenarios of FSL (Table 2):
•Acting as a test bed for learning like human . To move towards human intelligence, it is vital
that computer programs can solve the FSL problem. A popular task ( T) is to generate samples
of a new character given only a few examples [ 76]. Inspired by how humans learn, the
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.