1:24 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
(1)Incorporating task-specific information . MAML provides the same initialization for all tasks.
However, this neglects task-specific information, and is appropriate only when the set of
tasks are all very similar. To address this problem, in [ 79], it learns to choose {θ0}from a
subset of a good initialization parameter for a new task.
(2)Modeling the uncertainty of using a meta-learned θ0. Learning with a few examples inevitably
results in a model with higher uncertainty [ 39]. Hence, the learned model may not be able
to perform prediction on the new task with high confidence. The ability to measure this
uncertainty provides hints for active learning and further data collection [ 39]. There are works
that consider uncertainty for the meta-learned θ0[39,156], uncertainty for the task-specific
ϕs[48, 105], and uncertainty for class n’s class-specific parameter ϕs,n[111].
(3)Improving the refining procedure . Refinement by a few gradient descent steps may not be
reliable. Regularization can be used to correct the descent direction. In [ 50], the model
regression network [ 143] is used to regularize task Ts’sϕsto be close to the model trained
with large-scale samples.
5.3 Learning the Optimizer
In Section 5.2, the meta-learner θ0acts as a good initialization for T∼P(T)with data D, and it
is adjusted to a task-specific parameter ϕvia a few effective gradient descent steps. In contrast,
instead of using gradient descent, methods in this section learns an optimizer which can directly
output the update (Ít
i=1∆θi−1in(4)) (Figure 15). There is then no need to tune the stepsize αor
find the search direction, as the learning algorithm does that automatically.
Fig. 15. Solving the FSL problem by learning the optimizer.
At the tth iteration, this line of works [ 5,106] learn an meta-learner which takes the error signal
computed at the(t−1)th iteration, and directly outputs update ∆ϕt−1to update the task-specific
parameterϕt−1of the learner as ϕt=ϕt−1+∆ϕt−1. Therefore, in contrast to strategies mentioned in
Sections 5.1 and 5.2, this strategy provides an optimizer for the new task (which is in turn optimized
by the learner). This ϕtis then used to compute the loss ℓt(ϕt)=ℓ(h(xt;ϕt),yt)using the tth
sample(xt,yt)∈Dtrain, which acts as the error signal to be fed into the meta-learner at the next
iteration. After learning a task, the meta-learner is improved by gradient descent on the loss on
the test set Dtest. By learning from a set of Ts’s drawn from P(T), the meta-learner improves on
proposing efficient algorithms for FSL. Recently, [ 106] obtainsϕtby instantiating (3)with the cell
state update in the LSTM (where ϕis set to the cell state of the LSTM).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.