1:10 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
specific to the data set, making them hard to be applied to other data sets. Moreover, it is unlikely
that human can enumerate all possible invariance. Therefore, manual data augmentation cannot
solve the FSL problem completely [12, 34, 72, 76, 114, 119].
Besides these hand-crafted rules, we review in the following more advanced data augmentation
methods. Depending on what samples are transformed and added to Dtrain, we categorize these
methods as shown in Table 3.
Fig. 4. Solving the FSL problem by data augmentation.
Table 3. Characteristics for FSL methods focusing on the data perspective. The transformer t(·)takes input
(x,y)and returns synthesized sample (˜x,˜y)to augment the few-shot Dtrain.
category input(x,y) transformer t output(˜x,˜y)
transforming samples from
Dtrainoriginal(xi,yi)learned transformation
function on xi(t(xi),yi)
transforming samples from a
weakly labeled or unlabeled
data setweakly labeled or unlabeled
(¯x,−)a predictor trained from
Dtrain(¯x,t(¯x))
transforming samples from
similar data setssamples{(ˆxj,ˆyj)}from
similar data setsan aggregator to combine
{(ˆxj,ˆyj)}(t({ˆxj}),t({ˆyj}))
3.1 Transforming Samples from Dtrain
This strategy augments Dtrainby transforming each (xi,yi)∈Dtraininto several samples with
variations. The transformation procedure is included in experience Eas prior knowledge so as to
generate additional samples. An early FSL paper [ 90] learns a set of geometric transformations
from a similar class by iteratively aligning each sample with the other samples. The learned
transformation is applied to each (xi,yi)to form a large data set, which can then be learned by
standard machine learning methods. Similarly, a set of auto-encoders, each representing one intra-
class variability, are learned from similar classes in [ 116]. New samples are generated by adding the
learned variations to xi. In [53], by assuming that all categories share some transformable variability
across samples, a single transformation function is learned to transfer variation between sample
pairs learned from the other classes to (xi,yi). In [ 74], instead of enumerating the variabilities
within pairs, it transforms each xito several samples using a set of independent attribute strength
regressors learned from a large set of scene images, and assigns the label of the original xito
these new samples. Improved upon [ 74], a continuous attribute subspace is used to add attribute
variations to xin [82].
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.