1:12 Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni
4 MODEL
In order to approximate the ground-truth hypothesis ˆh, the model has to determine a hypothesis
spaceHcontaining a family of hypotheses h’s, such that the distance between the optimal h∗∈H
and ˆhis small.
Given the few-shot Dtrainwith limited samples, one can choose a small Hwith only simple
models (such as linear classifiers) [ 92,94]. However, real-world problems are typically complicated,
and cannot be well represented by an hypothesis hfrom a smallH(which can lead to a large
Eapp(H) in(1)) [45]. Therefore, a large enough His preferred in FSL, which makes standard
machine learning models infeasible. FSL methods in this section manage to learn by constraining
Hto a smaller hypothesis space ˜Hvia prior knowledge in E(Figure 2(b)). The empirical risk
minimizer is then more reliable, and the risk of overfitting is reduced.
In terms of what prior knowledge is used, methods belonging to this category can be further
classified into four types (Table 4).
Table 4. Characteristics for FSL methods focusing on the model perspective.
strategy prior knowledge how to constrainH
multitask learning other T’s with their data sets D’s share/tie parameter
embedding learningembedding learned from/together with
other T’sproject samples to a smaller embedding
space in which similar and dissimilar
samples can be easily discriminated
learning with external memoryembedding learned from other T’s to
interact with memoryrefine samples using key-value pairs
stored in memory
generative modeling prior model learned from other T’s restrict the form of distribution
4.1 Multitask Learning
In the presence of multiple related tasks, multitask learning [23,161] learns these tasks simultane-
ously by exploiting both task-generic and task-specific information. Hence, they can be naturally
used for FSL. Here, we present some instantiations of using multitask learning in FSL .
We are given Crelated tasks T1, . . . , TC, in which some of them have very few samples while
some have a larger number of samples. Each task Tchas a data set Dc={Dc
train,Dc
test}, in which
Dc
trainis the training set and Dc
testis the test set. Among these Ctasks, we regard the few-shot tasks
astarget tasks , and the rest as source tasks . Multitask learning learns from Dc
train’s to obtain θcfor
each Tc. As these tasks are jointly learned, the parameter θcofhclearned for task Tcis constrained
by the other tasks. According to how the task parameters are constrained, we divide methods in
this strategy as (i) parameter sharing; and (ii) parameter tying [45].
4.1.1 Parameter Sharing. This strategy directly shares some parameters among tasks (Figure 5).
In [160], the two task networks share the first few layers for the generic information, and learn
different final layers to deal with different outputs. In [ 61], two natural language processing tasks on
legal texts are solved together: charge prediction and legal attribute prediction. A single embedding
function is used to encode the criminal case description, which is then fed to task-specific embedding
functions and classifiers. In [ 95], a variational auto-encoder is first pre-trained from the source tasks,
and then cloned to the target task. Some layers in the two variational auto-encoders are shared
in order to capture the generic information, while allowing both tasks to have some task-specific
layers. The target task can only update its task-specific layers, while the source task can update
both the shared and task-specific layers. In [ 12], both the original and generated samples are first
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.