Generalizing from a Few Examples: A Survey on Few-Shot Learning 1:25
5.4 Discussion and Summary
Refining existing parameters can reduce the search effort in H. By using an existing θ0as ini-
tialization, these methods usually need a lower computation cost to obtain a good hypothesis
h∈H. Learning focuses on refining these existing parameters. However, as θ0is learned from
tasks different from the current task, this strategy may sacrifice precision for speed.
The other two strategies rely on meta-learning. By learning from a set of related tasks, the meta-
learnedθ0can be closer to the task-specific parameter ϕtfor a new task Tt. Learning search steps
by a meta-learner can directly guide the learning algorithm. In other words, the meta-learner acts
as an optimizer. However, important issues such as how to meta-learn across different granularities
(such as coarse-grained classifications of animals versus fine-grained classification of dog species)
or different data sources (such as images versus texts) [ 131] are still open. From this perspective,
meta-learning and multi-tasks are similar, and so there is also a concern on how to avoid negative
transfer [28]
6 FUTURE WORKS
In this section, we discuss four key directions for the further development of FSL, namely, (i)
problem setups, (ii) techniques, (iii) applications and (iv) theories.
6.1 Problem Setups
Existing FSL methods often use prior knowledge from one single modality (such as images, texts,
or videos). However, though Dtrainhas a few examples for the modality currently used, there may
exist another modality in which supervised samples are abundant. An example is in the study of
extinct animals. While this animal species may only have a limited number of visual examples,
there might be a lot of information about it in the textual domain (such as textbooks or web pages),
as people tend to pay special attention to the rare class. Therefore, prior knowledge from multiple
modalities can provide prior knowledge for complementary views. In zero-shot learning (ZSL),
multi-modality data has been frequently used. Example prior information are attributes [ 2,62],
WordNet [ 2,62], word embeddings [ 133,139], co-occurrence statistics [ 88], and knowledge graphs
[140].
Recently, there have been efforts in borrowing techniques from ZSL methods to FSL problems.
For example, one can use the few-shot Dtrainto fine-tune the parameters learned by ZSL methods
[2,62]. However, fine-tuning using a small number of samples may lead to overfitting. Another
possibility is to force the embedding learned by multiple modalities to match in a shared space
[133,139]. A recent work [ 110] exploits the structured relationships among labels and utilizes a
GNN to align the embedding for FSL. As different modalities may contain different structures, this
should be carefully handled. For example, texts need to obey syntactic structures while images do
not. In the future, a promising direction is to consider the use of multi-modality information in
designing FSL methods.
6.2 Techniques
In previous sections, according to how the prior knowledge in FSL is used, we categorize FSL
methods from the perspectives of data (Section 3), model (Section 4), and algorithm (Section 5).
Each of these components can be improved. For example, using state-of-the-art ResNet [ 55] as the
embedding function can be better than using the VGG [123].
Meta-learning-based FSL methods, as reviewed in Sections 4 and 5, are particularly interesting.
By learning across tasks, meta-learning can adapt to new tasks rapidly with a small inference
cost. However, the tasks considered in meta-learning are often assumed to be drawn from a single
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: March 2020.