Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 11
5.2 Evaluation Results
5.3 Information Quality of Design Principles with Syntactic and
Semantic Criteria
Table 3 presents the questions and qualitative feedback from experts during
our evaluation and the average rating selected by them regarding the informa-
tion quality criteria assessed. Concerning the syntactic quality, our interviewed
experts report that the terminology to describe design principles is extremely
likely to be aligned with their internal practices (adequacy). However, they would
like to have included examples of cases and fraudulent customer journeys. We
suggested the addition of scenarios, such as developed in [11], and the experts
agree those are good examples of additions to the DP for fullling that need.
They also agree that the DP give a sense of better structuring practices and
can serve as documentation to rely on for using explanation methods. Further-
more, experts consider the tasks, requirements, design features, and principles
to bring the primary information they need, which enable them to quickly grasp
the content and discuss with co-workers and interdisciplinary teams (accessibil-
ity). Therefore, experts feel condent in following the principles for setting up
EM, discussing them with co-workers, and feedback that no contradictions were
observed when reading the principles descriptions (consistency).
Concerning the DP's semantic quality, we ask experts regarding DP's unam-
biguity, preciseness, understandability, and interpretability. Experts agree our
principles are extremely likely to be not ambiguous, as they can visualize the
dierences and how each principle guides the implementation of explanations
for AI fraud predictions (unambiguity). They consider the terminology quite
precise compared to their internal reviewing process of fraud cases and their
connection to design features of EM (preciseness). Regarding understandability,
experts highlight the structure of their tasks for analyzing fraud cases is clear
and that the alignment of requirements to design features is comprehensible.
Therefore, they would be able to tackle why to use or follow particular tasks
and use specic EM to deal with the analysis of fraud cases. Therefore, the ex-
perts agree they are extremely likely to re
ect on their needs when reading the
DP for fraud detection, what they can do to support their work, and how to
use them (understandability). They appreciate the levels of detail which match
their practices, and they agree it is understandable that they would analyze AI
predictions with dierent perspectives through a combination of explanations.
Regarding semantic interpretability specically, experts acknowledge the DP
make it extremely likely to interpret their guidance through the established
user, aim, mechanism, and rationale in each principle description (interpretabil-
ity). Experts conclude the DP structure and layout help understand the DP as
it depicts each principle's main goals and what they can do to support their
work. Experts are stimulated to give examples of such understanding. They
give an example that DP could also help set up separate defense lines for fraud
teams, where one team deals with the preliminary ltering of suspicious trans-
actions through the rst EM, and more complex cases or new schemes of fraudThis is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.