Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 3
based on their dimensions of scope (local and global explanations), target (to
explain the data, model, or features), and explanation type [67, 5, 18, 4, 2, 38, 54,
39, 41]. Therefore, each method provides the users with an explanation type for
decision support, and it analyses particular aspects of AI predictions and mod-
els. Recent research in XAI advocates for the importance of user-centric XAI,
relying on Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and interdisciplinary social sci-
ences [1]. The researchers focus on the design of EM following user requirements
to enhance decision support and trust in AI [58].
Design principles are well researched in Information Systems and HCI dis-
ciplines. They enable prescriptive knowledge on establishing and designing de-
cision support systems to aid user practices [52, 15, 53]. Design principles have
also been developed to guide the design of user interactions with AI, support
explanatory data analysis, and debugging AI models [6, 65]. Indeed, [19] high-
lights the need for the development of principles for informed predictions and
interactions between users and AI predictions, which can then be mitigated with
HCI research support.
Previous studies employing XAI and EM for fraud detection explore the ef-
fects and performance of explanations in fraud expert's work. In [31], authors
provide a service architecture for security experts with explanations, aiming to
introduce more context for the outlier score given anomalous records of net-
work 
ows. In [12], authors provide experts with Shapley Additive Explanations
(SHAP) [34] for why particular warranty claims are marked as anomalies by a
machine learning (ML) model. In [61], the authors also work with SHAP expla-
nations for fraud cases, and they observe through experiments that explanations
positively impact the decision-making for fraud alerts. The same authors in [60]
go further and develop case-based explanations with visualizations for similar
fraudulent cases in banking. In [7] authors develop an EM to explain the im-
portance of current and past events and features on sequential data, enabling
experts with a temporal perspective on explanations for recurrent ML models
such as RNNs and LSTMs [25]. They evaluate their model through experiments
and simulations regarding the relevance of features, events, and eciency for pro-
viding explanations that can support debugging AI models for fraud detection.
In [26], authors evaluate popular EM and tools focusing on feature importance
explanations and their impact on user's accuracy and time to make decisions.
However, the assessment of user requirements and exploration of dierent expla-
nation types are left for future studies.
Existing literature employing EM in fraud detection has not tackled fraud
expert's requirements, making it challenging to align explanations and these re-
quirements to establish trustworthy XAIDSS. Furthermore, as used by IS, AI,
and HCI studies, design principles are lacking in fraud scenarios for providing
prescriptive knowledge on how to deploy explanations for fraud expert's deci-
sion support with XAI. This study aims to address this gap by developing and
evaluating principles for user-centric XAI and enable XAIDSS in fraud detection.This is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.