12 D. Cirqueira et al.
go through further analysis. For instance, one expert mentions he could lter
out cases based on Local Feature Importance, and discuss more critical cases
using further methods provided by our principles. They stress this aspect would
also reduce the workload to fraud teams. Finally, experts agree the principles
are extremely likely to be accurate regarding their tasks and requirements for
fraud detection and how AI predictions can be explained based on their context
and dataset that is daily analyzed (accuracy).
Overall, experts regarded the design principles as quite likely to be supportive
in their context, as it can be observed by the average score of 2.33 in Table 3, as
well as qualitative data and feedback provided by experts. The results highlight
our DP's information quality, which would enable fraud experts to re
ect on
their fraud detection practices and how to employ XAIDSS.
5.4 Quality of Design Principles Instantiation through a Simulation
Regarding the simulation results, Table 4 shows the average prediction switching
point for the explanations of LFI, GFI, and FI given dierent AI condence
levels. The explanations are provided with 50 random seeds. For these methods,
the lower the ASP reported, the better the estimated user condence. Columns
3 to 8 show the ASP for the referred methods. Those are compared to a random
deletion of features. The numbers highlighted in bold mean that deleting features
by importance reported by EM requires lesser deletions than a random selection,
which ensures the quality of explanations. Next, Table 5 shows the percentage of
cases with prediction changed following Anchor rules and the cases reported by
Prototypes explanations belonging to the correct suspicious case classication.
For these methods, the higher the reported value, the better the estimated user
condence. Column 3 shows the results for Anchor rules, which should be at
least over 0.5 to be considered good in our scenario. Finally, column 4 shows the
simulation results for Prototypes.
6 Discussion and Implications
6.1 Practical Implications of Design Principles
DP1 Each principle would have practical implications when instantiated by re-
searchers and fraud experts. DP 1 states it is essential to enable fraud experts
with the capabilities and limitations of AI. Probabilities provide an explicit visu-
alization of AI models' condence for predictions based on a trained dataset [47,
32]. Moreover, the method of Adversarial explanations enables experts to assess
the cases that would aect legitimate predictions. Adversarial transactions are
generated in order to deceive the AI, which enables experts to spot weaknesses
of the trained models. Adversarial explanations might also be useful for fraud
prevention purposes, where simulated fraud schemes can be fed to the AI, which
has to determine their legitimacy [66]. Without the instantiation of such a prin-
ciple, experts might become overcondent in AI predictions and explanations.This is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.