4 D. Cirqueira et al.
3 Research Methodology
We follow design science research (DSR) [42], an IS research methodology focused
on interactive developing and evaluating artefacts for solving a practitioner's
problem and bringing research contributions. We start by identifying the research
problem through a literature review presented in the theoretical background
section and discussions with experts in fraud detection within a European bank.
We identify the problem of fraud experts' lack of trust towards AI predictions due
to insucient alignment between their tasks and explanations to review fraud
cases. The next step is to establish the research objective, which is to align
expert's tasks to explanations according to their needs for XAIDSS. Adopting
HCI and IS theoretical lenses, this study develops an artefact, a set of design
principles to guide such alignment.
For the design and development phase of design science research, we rst
need to establish the kernel theory governing the artefact development process
for solving the identied problem [22, 56]. Given the poor alignment between
fraud expert's tasks and explanations for XAIDSS, our problem relates to an
expert's decision-making process when reviewing fraud cases. We then establish
the kernel theory to develop the artefact based on two main sets of constructs:
1) fraud expert tasks and 2) design features revealing meta-design principles of
EM, which facilitate experts to perform their tasks. Those constructs compose
the design knowledge to develop our principles.
Regarding the rst set of constructs for artefact development, we rely on our
previous study results to elicit 13 fraud expert's tasks when analyzing suspi-
cious fraud cases [51]. In the referred study, we adopt expert interviews with a
scenario-based method, and a systematic literature review [11]. Scenario-based
elicitation facilitates an HCI and problem-centered perspective to identify stake-
holder requirements, goals, tasks and knowledge to develop decision support
systems [64]. In the current study, and guided by [51], we extend the previous
work by grouping the tasks into requirements. Those requirements should re
ect
experts' actions and goals when analyzing fraud cases supported by a decision
support system. For instance, experts compare, cluster and contrast cases, so
those tasks are grouped within a requirement established as similarity and pre-
vious pattern matching. We employ the tasks and requirements in our design
principles.
In relation to the second set of constructs for artefact development, we per-
form a systematic literature review following [59] to identify design features
of EM, which enable fraud experts to perform their tasks and understand AI
predictions. Those features help identify meta-design principles, which are post-
instantiated principles found on a class of artefacts [57, 13]. In our case, the class
of artefacts is an EM within the XAI literature. Then, we start dening the main
research question as "What are the design features and meta-design principles of
explanation methods for their user's decision support?". To answer the research
question through relevant literature, we dene a search query as "("explainable
ai" OR "explainable articial intelligence" OR "interpretable machine learn-
ing")" and query the databases of Scopus, ACM Digital Library, IEEEXplore,This is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.