2 D. Cirqueira et al.
oine channels [8]. However, the convenience is followed by increased fraud cases
[30, 33]. Companies increasingly use Articial Intelligence for decision support
and fraud detection systems to automatically classify and alert experts of cases
where revision is needed. However, fraud experts are not knowledgeable about
AI's inner workings and face the black-box problem [35].
Ideally, fraud experts should be able to trust AI partners in such scenarios, as
due to the complexity of their work, if decisions those experts make are wrong,
this might cause harm and nancial loss for institutions and customers [62]. In-
deed, trust in AI is recognized as essential by agencies in Europe and worldwide,
which develop guidelines for trustworthy and responsible AI for businesses and
society [20]. In the meantime, Explainable AI (XAI) research was developed to
optimize a diversity of explanation methods (EM) and to enable user's under-
standing of AI predictions for decision support [2].
Concerning fraud detection specically, previous studies supported by XAI
provide experts with explanations [12], but a user-centric perspective is lacking.
Requirements are not elucidated before the deployment of explanations, and
they also lack prescriptive principles for the alignment between EM and fraud
experts requirements [3, 61]. Therefore, this can cause the lack of trust from
fraud experts in AI predictions [11]. Since XAI research has a major focus on
optimizing EM and AI models, and previous XAI studies for fraud lack a user-
centric perspective, in this work, we develop design principles (DP) to prescribe
the alignment of fraud expert's tasks to EM for enabling Explainable AI decision
support (XAIDSS) in fraud detection. We adopt an Information Systems (IS)
lens and follow a design science research methodology to develop and evaluate
DP through multiple iterations with fraud experts. We evaluate the utility of
our principles through an information quality framework with experts in banking
fraud via interviews and also via a simulation on a real transaction fraud dataset.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the theoretical foun-
dation and related work; Section 3 highlights the research methodology; Section
4 depicts the developed design principles as the core contribution of this study;
Section 5 provides the evaluation design and results for design principles; Section
6 discusses results and implications followed by Section 7 with conclusions.
2 Theoretical Foundation and Related Work
Shopping transactions via digital retail platforms are constantly increasing [10],
which opens opportunities for fraudsters to act. This work focuses on transaction
fraud cases, which occur when a customer card or online account balance is used
without a customer's consent to perform a transaction, for instance, in retail or
via bank transfers[68, 45]. In order to review and make decisions on fraud cases
classied by AI models, experts rely on fraud detection and decision support
systems [14].
Explainable AI research applies and develops a diversity of explanation meth-
ods to explain AI predictions in particular applications [4]. There is no consensus
on how to classify those methods. Currently, well-regarded surveys classify EMThis is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.