Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 5
Science Direct, Springer Link, and arXiv. The database search is performed un-
til July 2020. We obtain 2507 studies and read their abstract, introduction and
conclusion to select papers that discuss explanation methods. That process gives
372 papers, which are thoroughly read following inclusion and exclusion criteria
4. We then obtain 140 papers, for which backward and forward search gives us
additional 51 papers. We also include papers from scientic events focused on
XAI research following our inclusion criteria and extending our coverage, which
adds 43 papers to our pool. Therefore, the total of selected papers was 177.
Those are analyzed to extracting design features of explanation methods. The
complete data for our systematic literature review is available externally5.
To analyze the systematic literature review results and elicit design features
of EM, we adopt a classication for explanations following our theoretical foun-
dation [67, 5, 18, 4, 2, 38, 54, 39, 41]. Given that our DP should align EM to fraud
experts tasks to establish XAIDSS, this foundation guides our elicitation of EM
design features. Therefore, we focus our analysis on every paper selected based
on how the EM employed enables decision support based on the scope, target,
and explanation type they provide. We adopt a Concept Centric Matrix [28]
to structure the ndings and design features of EM from every selected paper.
Finally, we establish the DP re
ecting the instantiated meta-design principles
and design features aligned to fraud expert's tasks.
In the rst iteration of our design science research, the design principles are
discussed with fraud experts in one major bank and our project partner. We ask
the experts about their perceptions regarding the principle's correctness, under-
standability, and comprehensibility according to their tasks and requirements for
analyzing fraud cases. From that iteration, we obtain issues with the terminol-
ogy adopted to describe each principle, which is deemed ambiguous to describe
requirements and their grouping towards design features of EM. After analyzing
our kernel knowledge and references discussing templates for DP development,
we incorporate the guidelines with the anatomy of DP by [23] bringing prin-
ciple's aim, implementer, context, mechanism, and rationale based on expert's
requirements. The authors developed a systematic template for clear delivery
of DP based on rigorous analysis of IS literature, including the development of
intelligent decision support systems, which all relate to our context. The next
round of iterations was focused on evaluating the tasks, requirements, design
features, and DP presented in Section 4.
4Inclusion criteria (IC) for papers: IC1-"Paper focuses on providing explanation meth-
ods for supporting understanding of AI predictions or user decision-making in user
experiments"; IC2-"Paper presents explanation methods that possess an interface
for providing explanations as outputs"; IC3-"Paper focuses on discussing classica-
tions or types of explanation methods". The exclusion criteria (EC) is elaborated
as: EC1-"Paper is not written in English"; EC2-"Paper is not a journal, conference,
workshop article, or Ph.D. thesis"; EC3-"The paper is not fully available".
5https://github.com/dougcirqueira/hcii-design-principles-user-centric-explainable-
ai-fraud-detection/tree/main/resources/systematic literature reviewThis is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available online 
at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2021.