14 D. Cirqueira et al.
as well as the in
uence of past behaviour on current transactions. DP 5 instan-
tiation enables experts to observe the local feature impact and the relationships
between features in the dataset. Furthermore, the relationship between multi-
ple instances, as transactions or customers, is also embedded into this principle.
This principle attends fraud expert tasks when analyzing complex fraud cases
involving multiple actors and comparing past patterns, which is constantly per-
formed during their analyses whether through Feature Impact EM or network
and graph visualizations of multiple customer transactions over time [16, 9, 26].
Without DP 5, experts would lack such features for understanding AI with tem-
poral and multiple feature and instances perspectives. Therefore, we perceive
our design principles are aligned with the user-centric XAI community and can
be useful for instantiating XAIDSS to conducting empirical studies and assess
the impact of explanations on fraud experts' work and condence in AI.
6.2 Simulation Findings
From a quantitative perspective, our simulation results illustrate the quality
of DP's instantiations for fraud experts. For the EM of LFI and GFI, the
ASP is lower for features deleted based on explanations in 6 out of 8 customer
cases, respectively. When changing features based on Anchor rules, the predic-
tion changes for more than 50% of transactions for 5 out of 8 customer cases.
Regarding the EM of Prototypes, the method returns at least 93% of similar
transactions to a suspicious case that belongs to the same class. Therefore, the
reported results obtained based on the ASP computation highlight the data
features deemed as important by the AI model implemented, impacting predic-
tions if compared to random features, which is required by expert tasks when
analyzing suspicious transactions. Finally, experts compare and contrast fraud
cases when analyzing suspicious transactions, and the results are satisfactory to
attend those needs as illustrated by Anchor and Prototype reported simulation
results.
7 Conclusions
Experts recognize the value of Articial Intelligence decision support for fraud
analysis and detection, despite the lack of transparency of black-box models and,
consequently, trust in AI predictions. We develop design principles to align expert
requirements and explanation methods for decision support and understanding
AI predictions. We adopt an Information Systems perspective and a design sci-
ence research methodology in the study. Based on the results, we argue that
IS theoretical lens is valuable towards user-centric Explainable AI development
and worth further investigation. The principles may contribute to user-centric
XAI design knowledge and Explainable AI decision support in fraud detection,
given their foundation based on industry practices and literature. The devel-
oped design principles could impact fraud experts' working processes and guide
designing fraud operations based on the information provided by explanationThis is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.