Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 13
Overcondence is not ideal as users might be misled by blindly believing the AI
is correct in every prediction, which can cause damage to AI stakeholders and
end-users [12].
DP2 The instantiation of DP 2 provides experts with similarities and dissimi-
larities to a current case under analysis. According to experts during our evalu-
ation, it is essential to analyze customer behaviour from a dynamic perspective,
as it changes over time. Such principle supports the analysis of typical patterns
within a dataset [21], as experts need to get insights on typical behaviour of
legitimate users. Notably, the EM of Prototypes and Criticisms would play a
role in the instantiation of DP 2 [27]. Without this principle, experts would rely
only on important features and lack the analogy perspective for understanding
predictions, which is inherently part of how humans aim to digest explanations
[37].
DP3 DP 3 instantiation enables experts to look closely into what data features
the AI is considering as the most important when learning legitimate and fraud-
ulent patterns from the whole dataset of customer transactions. EM methods
fullling this DP are among the most used in extant Explainable AI studies, as
the understanding of important features enables not only explanations for the AI
behaviour but also to clarify if the model is working correctly, which is valuable
for AI engineers aiming to optimize their models [29]. In the scenario of fraud
detection, the analysis of important features is among the rst tasks performed
by experts when reviewing cases [11]. Therefore, without DP 3, experts would
lack explanations for understanding whether the AI is focusing on the correct
parameters, according to their domain knowledge in fraud cases. The wide adop-
tion of such a principle is re
ected by 66% of studies retrieved in our systematic
literature review to establish EM design features, which adopt Global Feature
Importance as part of explanations.
DP4 Fraud experts are constantly under pressure for protecting customers and
being ecient in reviewing fraud cases. DP 4 instantiation enables a friendly
and quick overview of fraud cases, as it advocates for the provision of rules and
human-friendly explanations. With rules, experts have an overview of multiple
data features and values at once. Indeed, experts have highlighted the need to
observe illustrations of the eects of multiple features in AI predictions. When
discussing DP 4, experts emphasize they get the sense that its instantiation
helps them in deciding faster what an AI prediction means, and if it is right,
or if the AI is "thinking wrongly". Without DP 4, experts would not rely on a
language-friendly explanation to digest AI predictions, which might aect their
performance when working with colleagues and communicating to customers the
reasons for suspicious fraud [50].
DP5 Transaction fraud and customer datasets have a temporal nature, and
experts need to analyze the local impact of data features on single transactions,This is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.