8 D. Cirqueira et al.
Table 2. Descriptions for design features, which reveal meta-design principles of ex-
planation methods
Design Features Description
DF1: AI Prediction
Probabilities and
EciencyThe inclusion of prediction probabilities and information on the efficiency of AI may give the
user with an explicit visualization of the AI model confidence, and attend R1.
DF2: Cases Mistaking
PredictionsExplanations containing local (scope) cases (target) which deceive the AI model predictions,
such as those provided by adversarial explanation methods (type). These explanations may
support the understanding of weaknesses of AI models and attend to R1.
DF3: Representative
Cases and PredictionsExplanations containing local (scope) similar cases (target) to a current prediction, such as
those provided by prototypes as explanation methods (type). These explanations may
help the comparison between cases by an expert and attend R2 and R3.
DF4: Dissimilar Cases
and PredictionsExplanations containing local (scope) dissimilar cases (target) to a current prediction, such as
those provided by criticisms as explanation methods (type). These explanations may support
the contrast between true positives and outliers, which can attend R2 and R3.
DF5: Data Features
Aecting PredictionsExplanations containing global (scope) data features (target) considered important by the AI
for learning and predicting classes, such as those provided by Feature Importance (type). These
explanations may help experts in understanding what data features deserve more attention
when deciding on suspicious cases and attend to R5.
DF6: Predictions for
What If Values
of Data FeaturesExplanations containing global and local (scope) changes on values of data features (target)
which can switch the AI model prediction for a case (type), such as those provided by
Counterfactual explanation methods. These explanations help in visualizing needed changes
to shift AI predictions and enable fine-tuning against errors, which can attend R3 and R7.
DF7: Rules as
Conditions for
PredictionsExplanations containing rules in natural language for global predictions (scope) which possess
data feature values (target) and their combinations for AI model predictions,
such as those provided by rule-based explanations and Decision Trees (type). These
explanations provide human-readable relationships from the data and AI and attend to R6.
DF8: Data Features
Impacting Particular
PredictionsExplanations containing local (scope) data features (target) that impact the AI model
predictions for a given class, such as those provided by Feature Impact methods (type). These
explanations may enable the user with understanding the important features that impact local
cases towards being true positives for the target class and attend to R3, R4 and R7
start of the project [42]. The ex-ante evaluation aims to assess the partial design
of artefacts before their deployment in real settings. We interviewed three fraud
experts (minimum of 3 years of experience) within a bank partner. To struc-
ture the evaluation, we adopt the utility and information quality framework of
[24]. Those authors there provided a practical framework with semiotic-based
pragmatic, semantic, and syntactic levels to establish evaluation criteria for the
information quality of DSR artefacts. The framework is suitable for complex
design environments, which matches our study context of aligning diverse expla-
nation methods to user requirements for XAIDSS in fraud detection.
To perform an evaluation following [24] framework, we employ a problem-
centered interview method [63], which is an approach ratied for ex-ante eval-
uation in DSR studies [55]. We interviewed each expert for one hour on the
matters on how they perceive the correctness of DP's terminology matching
their experience and knowledge based on syntactic quality (adequacy, accessibil-
ity, consistency), semantic quality (unambiguity, preciseness, understandability,
interpretability, and accuracy), and the principle's instantiation helping in every-
day work. We also encourage experts to provide reasons for their views and enrich
our qualitative data collection. We aim to understand their stressing points and
issues worthy of further investigation. Our evaluation strategy matches current
research assessing the utility and impact of DP [36]. To structure the feedback
collected, we also allow experts to provide their answers based on objective cri-
teria following a Likert scale from extremely unlikely to likely.This is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.