6 D. Cirqueira et al.
4 Design Principles
Figure 1 presents developed design principles from our study. It starts with the
13 fraud expert's tasks when analyzing fraud cases (T1 - T13). Those tasks
are grouped, and 7 requirements are established (R1 - R7), as described in our
methodology in Section 3. Table 1 presents the descriptions for requirements.
Table 1. Grouped fraud expert tasks and requirements with descriptions
Tasks Requirements Description
T1, T2R1: System Condence
and LimitationsTo provide predicted fraud cases based on a probability ranking, and
the limitations for classifying cases based on the current AI model
performance on training and validation datasets
T3, T5, T6R2: Similarity and
Previous Pattern
MatchingTo provide similar and dissimilar classified fraud cases to enable
comparative analysis of AI predictions
T3, T12R3: System
InteractivityTo provide interactivity and enable experts with a dynamic view on
data and detail when comparing fraud cases or investigating the impact
of attributes on predictions
T4, T7, T13 R4: RelationshipsTo provide relationships between attributes in single and multiple
classified fraud cases
T8, T9R5: Importance
of AttributesTo provide the importance of attributes used by the AI model for
classifying fraud cases
T10, T11 R6: Inference PathTo provide the reasoning process of the AI model for classifying
fraud cases, based on rules and a friendly language for fraud experts
T12, T13R7: Impact on
Specic DecisionsTo provide the impact of attributes used by the AI model on specific
classifications given to suspicious fraud cases
The fraud expert's tasks and requirements are aligned with the 8 design fea-
tures extracted from existing explanation methods (DF1 - DF8). Table 2 presents
the descriptions for each design feature. According to the explanation scope, tar-
get, and type, the dimensions of EM are also highlighted within the description
of each design feature. Those design features reveal meta-design principles of
EM, from which we derive the ve design principles (DP1 - DP5) developed for
user-centric XAIDSS in fraud detection.
Therefore, our design principles aim to provide utility and information qual-
ity to fraud experts and researchers in XAI to clearly understand how to set
up explanation methods for decision support in fraud detection. Each principle
highlights the users, aim, mechanism, and rationale for supporting experts with
explanations to understand AI predictions for fraud. We focus on the alignment
between explanations and expert's tasks and requirements. Section 5 presents
the evaluation of our principles regarding the achievement of the goal established
in this study.
5 Evaluation and Results
5.1 Evaluation and Experiment Design
We conduct a naturalistic ex-ante evaluation to assess the extent to which our
design principles attend the utility and quality requirements established at theThis is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.