Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 9
We also perform a simulation to evaluate the quality of design principles
based on their instantiation. We instantiate the principles by developing an in-
terface mockup to implement explanation methods that re
ect the design fea-
tures within our principles, illustrated in Figure 2. The mockup instantiates
DP1 by showing the AI condence after the training and testing phases (DP1).
It instantiates DP3 and DP5 by presenting the EM of Local Feature Importance
(LFI), Global Feature Importance (GFI), and Feature Impact (FI) to provide
relevant data features for predictions and their relationships. We instantiate DP2
and DP4 by presenting the EM of Prototypes for providing experts with similar
cases to the fraud under analysis, and we provide Anchors for presenting rules
governing predictions. The explanation methods described explain the predic-
tions of a Random Forest model trained on a bank partner's dataset with 3269
suspicious cases out of 7653 transactions over three months. The transactions
belong to ten customers of the institution. The set of features adopted for train-
ing and testing are: amount, device, anonymous receiver ID, receiver location,
sender location, and currency. For each customer, the institution has provided
75% of past transactions for training and 25% for testing. Python programming
language version 3.8 is adopted for this implementation and the scikit-learn6
library for training and testing ML models. Python libraries for LIME [48], An-
chors [49] and SHAP [34] are adopted for the implementation of LFI, GFI, FI
and Anchor rules. Regarding the EM of Prototypes, we follow the guidelines of
[38, 60] and train a KNearestNeighbor [44] classier based on the SHAP values
of the training instances. The complete implementation and dataset used for our
simulation results are available externally7.
An expert would use the described mockup and explanations following our
principles. Therefore, this simulation focuses on automatically evaluating the
goodness of those explanations to estimate the user condence in them. The
methodology is aligned with the functionally-grounded evaluation established
by [17], where an author denes proxy tasks for assessing how good an ex-
planation is in achieving its goal without human participation. Given that our
interface has multiple EMs, their goodness is computed according to the expla-
nation types. For Local Feature Importance, Anchors, GFI, and FI, we compute
their delity to the AI model being explained [40, 43, 46]. For that, we retrieve
the features highlighted in those explanations and change their values in data
instances until the prediction for those instances changes. We report the average
prediction switching point (ASP). Lower values for switching prediction point
indicate that the EM presents the features that contributed most towards the
predicted class, which would foster user condence in the explanation [40]. We
compare this result with a random deletion of features. Ideally, the average pre-
diction switching point should be lower than a random deletion switching point
to assure the quality of explanations.
6https://scikit-learn.org/
7https://github.com/dougcirqueira/hcii-design-principles-user-centric-explainable-
ai-fraud-detection/tree/main/resources/simulationThis is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.