Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 19
Table 3. Information quality evaluation results for design principles (Expert rating
goes from a -3 to 3 scale, where -3 and 3 represent extremely unlikely and likely,
respectively. The letter E stands for Expert)
Theme Questions and Qualitative Feedback (A for Answer)Quantitative Average
Expert Rating
E1E2E3Average
Syntactic
Information
Quality1) Do you consider the design principles have an adequate representation in
accordance with existing instructional material you have seen and used in your
organization to understand software tools? (Adequacy)
A1: DP terminology is aligned with internal practices. The principles could
be accompanied by scenarios to illustrate the fraud detection context they are
applicable.322 2.33
2) Do you consider that the design principles have a good accessibility
to yourself and for your discussion with colleagues regarding your needs for
fraud detection, and how Explainable AI and methods can support you?
(Accessibility)
A1: DP can structure their practices and primary information for interdisciplinary
discussions with colleagues that do not have deep knowledge of AI. There is no
need for lengthy material given the principles
A2: DP can serve as documentation to rely on for using EM to analyze and
understand fraud cases331 2.33
3) Do you consider that the descriptions for design principles are consistent
and do not bring contradictions? (Consistency)
A1: No contradictions were observed when reading the DP descriptions. Each
DP description is unique to understand their guidance and capabilities when
instantiated
A2: DP bring confidence for interdisciplinary discussion with colleagues from
various departments, including technical and management levels322 2.33
Semantic
Information
Quality4) Do you consider the design principles description is not ambiguous and
that there are no principles that could be viewed as the same? (Unambiguity)
A1: DP description and template enable the visualization of the differences
and how each principle guides the implementation of explanations for AI
fraud predictions331 2.33
5) Do you consider the terminology in the design principles is precise to
describe your needs for fraud detection tasks and analysis? (Preciseness)
A1: DP terminology is precise compared to their internal discussion themes
and analysis tasks for fraud cases, as well as design features of EM322 2.33
6) Can you interpret what the design principles can do to support your
work based on their description for understanding fraud cases classified
by Artificial Intelligence? (Understandability)
A1: The flow from tasks to requirements and design principles is
comprehensible and reasonable
A2: Experts can understand why to use or follow particular tasks and
using specific EM, as well as what EM can do to support their work and
how to use them
A3: DP highlight the different perspectives through a combination of
explanations that can be leveraged to understand AI and review fraud cases312 2
7) Do you consider it is easy to understand the description of design principles
related to your current work? (Interpretability)
A1: Experts can understand the DP as it depicts each principle's main goals,
what is behind them, and what they can do to support their work
A2: DP can be considered for guiding organizational changes, such as for
setting up separate defense lines for fraud teams332 2.66
8) Do you consider the description of design principles is accurate and free
of error when you relate it to your current work and tools for fraud detection?
(Accuracy)
A1: DP description is accurate to reflect experts tasks and requirements for
fraud detection, and how AI predictions can be explained
A2: DP give the confidence to refer to internal practices and select appropriate
tools for fraud detection while interacting with AI predictions322 2.33This is an open access post-print version; the final authenticated version is available 
online at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-77772-2_2 by © Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2021.