Atmosphere 2019 ,10, 373 15 of 19
Atmosphere  2019, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   15 of 20 
  
Figure 9. Spearman ʹs correlation  coefficient  heat map for the study variables  shown above. Positive 
correlations  are marked by red while negative  correlations  are marked by blue. 
Air temperature  and pressure,  dew point, and RH are dependent  on altitude. We did not use the 
exact meteorological  parameters  for each station because of a lack of data; however,  meteorological  
parameters  can be modeled  and predicted  for each station based on altitude and other available  
features.  Based on the Spearman  correlation  heat map, RH and air pressure  are highly correlated  with 
temperature.  Considering  the cost of prediction,  they can be used as substitutes  for each other. Some 
features such as temperature,  RH, and pressure  have a seasonal trend, and thus the feature “day of 
year” can facilitate  modeling  and improve the performance.  Its ranking varies from 2 to 10 with a 
median value of 5.5. 
In this study, three‐machine learning techniques  (RF, Deep learning,  and XGBoost)  were used 
to predict PM 2.5 concentration.  The XGBoost  technique  demonstrated  the highest performance  and 
an acceptable  time of training.  To detect features importance,  permutation  and recursive  feature 
removal,  in addition  to RF and XGBoost  built‐in functions,  were used. Some of differences  in features 
importance  ranking could be a result of features dependency.  However,  overall, the features rankings  
obtained  in this paper are logical and beneficial  for future studies. 
5. Conclusions  
In this study, we utilized Random  forest, XGBoost,  and Deep learning machine  learning 
techniques  to predict PM 2.5 concentration  in Tehran’s  urban area. Widely distributed  ground 
measured  PM 2.5 data, meteorological  features,  and remote sensing AOD data were used. In previous  
research,  different  methods  and features were employed  for PM 2.5 concentration  prediction.  
However,  few studies dealt with the limitations  of our study area, including  the high rate of PM 2.5 
and AOD missing values. In addition,  the air pollution  monitoring  sites in our study area were 
densely distributed,  with just one available  weather station. We also utilized 3 and 10 km MODIS 
AOD products,  and geographic  properties  of the monitoring  stations such as latitude, longitude,  and 
topography.  Also included  were historical  observation  values of PM 2.5 and rainfall, in addition to day 
Figure 9. Spearman’s correlation coe cient heat map for the study variables shown above. Positive
correlations are marked by red while negative correlations are marked by blue.
5. Conclusions
In this study, we utilized Random forest, XGBoost, and Deep learning machine learning techniques
to predict PM 2.5concentration in Tehran’s urban area. Widely distributed ground measured PM 2.5
data, meteorological features, and remote sensing AOD data were used. In previous research, di erent
methods and features were employed for PM 2.5concentration prediction. However, few studies dealt
with the limitations of our study area, including the high rate of PM 2.5and AOD missing values.
In addition, the air pollution monitoring sites in our study area were densely distributed, with just
one available weather station. We also utilized 3 and 10 km MODIS AOD products, and geographic
properties of the monitoring stations such as latitude, longitude, and topography. Also included
were historical observation values of PM 2.5and rainfall, in addition to day of year, day of week,
and season. Features importance and correlation were evaluated using the Spearman correlation
method, permutation, recursive feature removal, and default built-in functions of the XGBoost and
RFF techniques.
In comparison to RF and Deep learning methods, XGBoost achieved the best performance of
approximately R2=0.81 (R =0.9), MAE =09.92 g/m3, and RMSE =13.58 g/m3, with very low cost of
time (19 s). Although a DNN model was used for modeling and prediction, XGBoost with its simple
structure, performed better. However, all three ML methods performed similarly and R2varied from
0.63 to 0.67, when Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) at 3 km resolution was included, and 0.77 to 0.81,
when AOD at 3 km resolution was excluded. Based on feature importance ranking, we found that
there are features with high dependency on other features. Therefore, some features can be ranked
dierently based on machine learning structure. We investigated 23 features and determined that
by using eight to 12 features, we can achieve acceptable PM 2.5prediction performance. For example,
with MAE based XGBoost feature removal, by using only nine of the most important features, such
as PM2.5_lag1, day of year, wind speed, visibility, latitude, air pressure, dew point, PM2.5_lag2, and