Atmosphere 2019 ,10, 373 7 of 19
Table 4. The deep learning layer conﬁguration. A six-layer neural network with a “relu” activation
function that is equipped with regularization to avoid overﬁtting, was used.
Layer Layer TypeNeurons
CountRegularization
TypeRegularization
ValueActivation
Function
1 Input 270 None 0 relu
2 Hidden 120 L2 0.002 relu
3 Hidden 70 L2 0.002 relu
4 Hidden 50 L2 0.002 relu
5 Hidden 20 L2, L1 0.001, 0.001 relu
6 Output 1 None 0 relu
Atmosphere  2019, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   7 of 20 
 2  Hidden  120  L2  0.002  relu 
3  Hidden  70  L2  0.002  relu 
4  Hidden  50  L2  0.002  relu 
5  Hidden  20  L2, L1  0.001, 0.001  relu 
6  Output  1  None  0  relu 
   
Figure 2. The deep neural network configuration  with six layers (4 hidden layers) employed  in this 
study to predict PM 2.5 concentration  value. 
2.3.6. Feature Importance  Assessment  
A Spearman  correlation  coefficient  analysis was carried out, to evaluate the mutual associations  
of the features (for more details please refer to Supplementary  Material Section S2). Moreover,  
features were analyzed  for their importance  in PM 2.5 concentration  prediction.  This provides  a better 
understanding  of the trained model and feature importance.  Eliminating  the features with negative  
or neutral effect on the model’s performance  can improve  the cost and prediction  performance.   
In this study, we used three methods  for feature importance  estimation.  First, we utilized built‐
in functions  of random forest and XGBoost  regression  that estimate feature importance,  based on the 
impurity  variance of decision tree nodes, a fast but not perfect method. Second, features permutation  
was implemented.  In this step, the performance  (R2, MAE, and RMSE) of a well‐trained deep neural 
network considering  all features was obtained.  Performance  of the trained model was evaluated  by 
permuting  just one of the features in each round. Lower performance  can be seen for permuted  
features with higher importance.  This method is fast and reliable and has very low computation  cost. 
Third, XGBoost  was used for recursive  feature elimination.  Here, MAE metrics were used for model 
performance  evaluation.  In the first step, a model was trained using all features and the performance  
of the model was measured.  In step 2, model training and performance  calculation  were repeated  by 
excluding  just one of the features at once and including  the others. In the third step, the excluded  
feature that caused the highest prediction  performance  (lowest MAE) was removed  from the features 
list and this step was repeated,  until just three features remained  for modeling.  
3. Results 
Descriptive  statistics  of meteorological  data and APM sites for the entire 4 year study period are 
illustrated  in the Supplementary  Materials  Section S3 and Tables S1 and S2. The missing value rate 
for most of the variables  is less than 1.3% and for visibility  only is 10.19%. The missing value for PM 2.5 
was approximately  54.11%. This is caused by a critical failure of stations or power outage, 
maintenance,  and so on [17]. The AOD03 data show a high rate of missing values of approximately  
94.09%. Thus, although  there is an improvement  in version 6.1 of the MODIS AOD product,  it is not 
acceptable  for this study area. The proportion  of missing values in AOD10 is approximately  63.13%, 
Figure 2. The deep neural network conﬁguration with six layers (4 hidden layers) employed in this
study to predict PM 2.5concentration value.
2.3.6. Feature Importance Assessment
A Spearman correlation coe cient analysis was carried out, to evaluate the mutual associations
of the features (for more details please refer to Supplementary Material Section S2). Moreover,
features were analyzed for their importance in PM 2.5concentration prediction. This provides a better
understanding of the trained model and feature importance. Eliminating the features with negative or
neutral e ect on the model’s performance can improve the cost and prediction performance.
In this study, we used three methods for feature importance estimation. First, we utilized built-in
functions of random forest and XGBoost regression that estimate feature importance, based on the
impurity variance of decision tree nodes, a fast but not perfect method. Second, features permutation
was implemented. In this step, the performance (R2, MAE, and RMSE) of a well-trained deep neural
network considering all features was obtained. Performance of the trained model was evaluated
by permuting just one of the features in each round. Lower performance can be seen for permuted
features with higher importance. This method is fast and reliable and has very low computation cost.
Third, XGBoost was used for recursive feature elimination. Here, MAE metrics were used for model
performance evaluation. In the ﬁrst step, a model was trained using all features and the performance
of the model was measured. In step 2, model training and performance calculation were repeated
by excluding just one of the features at once and including the others. In the third step, the excluded
feature that caused the highest prediction performance (lowest MAE) was removed from the features
list and this step was repeated, until just three features remained for modeling.
3. Results
Descriptive statistics of meteorological data and APM sites for the entire 4 year study period are
illustrated in the Supplementary Materials Section S3 and Tables S1 and S2. The missing value rate for
most of the variables is less than 1.3% and for visibility only is 10.19%. The missing value for PM 2.5was