Atmosphere 2019 ,10, 373 4 of 19
satellite-derived AOD. The AOD is calculated based on variations in the Dark Target (DT) and Deep
Blue (DB) Aerosol retrievals algorithm, over urban areas. The recent version of the product o ered
by the MODIS atmosphere algorithm developer’s team has improved the estimation of AOD values.
In particular, improvements have been made for areas with extremely variable topography, such as
Iran. However, there is still a high rate of missing values, and bias in AOD values is observed for our
study area.
Atmosphere  2019, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   3 of 20 
 been increasing  over the last few decades.  According  to the national census conducted  in 2016, the 
population  was 8.69 million, which was 10.8% of the total population  of the country (80.28 million). 
Based on the newest revision of the UN World Urbanization  Prospects,  the population  of Tehran is 
estimated  to be ~9 million in 2019 [19]. Although  Tehran is not the most polluted city in Iran, more 
people are exposed to air pollution  than in other cities because of its high population  density. Tehran 
is located on the southern  slope of Alborz Mountain,  which has a significant  effect on the region’s 
weather.  Air pollution  in Tehran mainly originates  from three major sources: transportation,  
industry,  and dust storms. Tehran is supported  by 42 air pollution  monitoring  stations that were 
established  by the Department  of Environment  (23 stations) and the Municipality  of Tehran (19 
stations).  The nearest meteorological  station to the APM sites is Mehrabad,  located in the urban area. 
The average distance of APM sites from Mehrabad  is approximately  10 km (1 to 20 km for APM 
stations with missing data less than 75%). 
 
Figure 1. Study area, situated in the northern  central part of Iran. There are 42 air pollution  monitoring  
stations installed  in the urban area of Tehran by two organizations.  The Department  of the 
Environment  has 23 monitoring  stations (red stars) and the Municipality  of Tehran city has 19 stations 
(green stars). The nearest weather station to the urban area is Mehrabad  meteorology  station, marked 
by a green triangle.  
2.2. Data 
Ground measured  PM 2.5 concentration , satellite‐derived AODs at 3 and 10 km spatial resolution,  
and meteorological  data were utilized (see Table 1). Also, other auxiliary  data was used, such as APM 
site geographic  information  (longitude,  latitude, and altitude)  and historical  parameters  of records 
such as day of year, day of week, and season. The study period was from 2015 to the end of 2018.  
Table 1. List of data and study information.  
Data 
Type Parameter   Abbreviation   Unit   Period  Source 
Climatic  Temperature   T  °C 
2015.1–
2018.12 IRAN 
Meteorological  
Organization  Temperature  max  T_max  °C 
Temperature  min  T_min  °C 
Relative humidity   RH  % 
Daily rainfall  Rainfall  mm 
Visibility   Visibility   km 
Wind speed  Windsp  m/s 
Figure 1. Study area, situated in the northern central part of Iran. There are 42 air pollution monitoring
stations installed in the urban area of Tehran by two organizations. The Department of the Environment
has 23 monitoring stations (red stars) and the Municipality of Tehran city has 19 stations (green
stars). The nearest weather station to the urban area is Mehrabad meteorology station, marked by
a green triangle.
The aerosol optical depth products (Both 10 and 3 km spatial resolution) were downloaded for
the study period of 2015 to the end of 2018, from the NASA Atmosphere Archive & Distribution
System (LAADS) archive portal [ 45]. Products are in the Hierarchical Data Format (HDF) with
several subdatasets. The “AOD_550_Dark_Target_Deep_Blue_Combined” subdataset from the 10 km
resolution product (MOD04_L2) and “Optical_Depth_Land_And_Ocean” subdataset from MOD04_3k
were extracted from the main datasets.
2.2.3. Meteorological Data
The climatic features utilized in this study include air temperature (T), maximum and minimum
air temperature (T_max,T_min), relative humidity (RH), daily rainfall, visibility, wind speed (Windsp),
sustained wind speed (ST_windsp), air pressure, and dew point. Climatic data from Mehrabad weather
station was used for all APM stations, because it is the nearest meteorological station to the study
area and the APM stations are all within about 10 km of it. Data were downloaded from the Iran
Meteorological Organization (IMO) portal [46].
2.3. Methodology
This work involved sampling, data pre-processing, data aggregation, and using three modeling
methods for prediction and validation of PM 2.5concentration. Out of 42 available sites, 37 APM sites
were used in the modeling. The purpose of the current study is to ﬁnd the best model to predict
PM 2.5at selected sites, using climatic, satellite, and auxiliary data. We analyzed and introduced
the most important features for the study area, based on several methods. The Random Forest and
XGBoost algorithms have built-in methods for detection of important features, but for deep leaning