Atmosphere 2019 ,10, 373 13 of 19
Atmosphere  2019, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW   13 of 20 
  
Figure 8. Feature removal using the XGBoost  machine  learning method, based on MAE metrics. In 
each step, one feature was removed  based on its impact on model performance.  From the dotted red 
line to the right side, features have higher impact on model performance  than features on the left side. 
From the left side of the figure to the blue line, MAE is still below 10 µg/m3. 
These results demonstrate  that removing  RH in the first step improved  the model. Model 
performance  did not decrease  when RH, longitude,  T, sustained  wind speed, distance,  rainfall_lag2,  
T_min, org., and weekdays  (located on the left side of the dashed blue line in Figure 8 were removed.  
In addition,  removing  season, T_max, AOD10, and rainfall did not change the R2 value and had a 
small effect on MAE and RMSE. Feature dependency  may be the reason for the low changes in model 
performance.  The best model performance  obtained  by this method was R2 = 0.81.  
4. Discussion  
Using different  methods  for feature importance  evaluation,  we achieved  slightly different  
results. However,  in most of the methods,  historical  observations  of PM 2.5, wind speed, visibility,  day 
of the year, altitude, and temperature  were very important  in modeling.  The features importance  
ranking based on different  modeling  approaches  is presented  in Table 7. The rankings  median value 
for each feature is presented  in Table 7. Features  are sorted from top down, based on the median of 
feature importance  rankings.  Features  such as latitude are important  for RF and XGBoost,  but rank 
lower in the deep learning features permutation  method. This is because some features are dependent  
and can be replaced  by other features.   
The features used in this study can be divided into three categories.  The first category  is features 
that directly carry spatial information,  such as latitude, longitude,  and altitude. The second category  
is features that indirectly  carry APM station spatial information,  such as AOD10, AOD03, 
PM2.5_lag1,  and PM2.5_lag2.  The third category  is the parameters  that are shared for all stations, 
such as meteorological  data and day of year, day of week, and sampling  season. 
Figure 8. Feature removal using the XGBoost machine learning method, based on MAE metrics. In
each step, one feature was removed based on its impact on model performance. From the dotted red
line to the right side, features have higher impact on model performance than features on the left side.
From the left side of the ﬁgure to the blue line, MAE is still below 10 g/m3.
These results demonstrate that removing RH in the ﬁrst step improved the model.
Model performance did not decrease when RH, longitude, T, sustained wind speed, distance,
rainfall_lag2, T_min, org., and weekdays (located on the left side of the dashed blue line in Figure 8
were removed. In addition, removing season, T_max, AOD10, and rainfall did not change the R2value
and had a small e ect on MAE and RMSE. Feature dependency may be the reason for the low changes
in model performance. The best model performance obtained by this method was R2=0.81.
4. Discussion
Using di erent methods for feature importance evaluation, we achieved slightly di erent results.
However, in most of the methods, historical observations of PM 2.5, wind speed, visibility, day of the
year, altitude, and temperature were very important in modeling. The features importance ranking
based on di erent modeling approaches is presented in Table 7. The rankings median value for each
feature is presented in Table 7. Features are sorted from top down, based on the median of feature
importance rankings. Features such as latitude are important for RF and XGBoost, but rank lower in
the deep learning features permutation method. This is because some features are dependent and can
be replaced by other features.
The features used in this study can be divided into three categories. The ﬁrst category is features
that directly carry spatial information, such as latitude, longitude, and altitude. The second category is
features that indirectly carry APM station spatial information, such as AOD10, AOD03, PM2.5_lag1, and
PM2.5_lag2. The third category is the parameters that are shared for all stations, such as meteorological
data and day of year, day of week, and sampling season.