In light of these challenges, it sufﬁces to say that we are aware of no global convergence results for
independent policy gradient methods (or any other independent distributed protocol, for that matter)
in general ﬁnite state/action zero-sum stochastic games.
4 Main Result
We show that independent policy gradient algorithms following the updates in (3)converge to a Nash
equilibrium, so long as their learning rates follow a two-timescale rule. The two-timescale rule is a
simple modiﬁcation of the usual gradient-descent-ascent scheme for minimax optimization in which
the min-player uses a much smaller stepsize than the max-player (i.e., ⌘x￿⌘y), and hence works on
a slower timescale (or vice-versa). Two-timescale rules help to avoid limit cycles in simple minimax
optimization settings [ 31,43], and our result shows that their beneﬁts extend to MARL as well.
Assumptions. Before stating the result, we ﬁrst introduce some technical conditions that quantify
the rate of convergence. First, it is well-known that policy gradient methods can systematically under-
explore hard-to-reach states. Our convergence rates depend on an appropriately-deﬁned distribution
mismatch coefﬁcient which bounds the difﬁculty of reaching such states, generalizing results for the
single-agent setting [ 2]. While methods based on sophisticated exploration (e.g., [ 15,33]) can avoid
dependence on mismatch parameters, our goal here—similar to prior work in this direction [ 2,8]—is
to understand the behavior of standard methods used in practice, so we take the dependence on such
parameters as a given.
Given a stochastic game G, we deﬁne the minimax mismatch coefﬁcient for Gby:
CG∶=max￿max
⇡2min
⇡1∈⇧￿
1(⇡2)￿d⇡1,⇡2⇢
⇢￿
∞,max
⇡1min
⇡2∈⇧￿
2(⇡1)￿d⇡1,⇡2⇢
⇢￿
∞￿, (5)
where ⇧￿
1(⇡2)and⇧￿
2(⇡1)each denotes the set of best responses for the min- (resp. max-) player
when the max- (resp. min-) player plays ⇡2(resp. ⇡1).
Compared to results for the single-agent setting, which typically scale with ￿d⇡￿
⇢￿⇢￿∞, where ⇡￿
is an optimal policy [ 2], the minimax mismatch coefﬁcient measures the worst-case ratio for each
player, given that their adversary best-responds. While the minimax mismatch coefﬁcient in general
is larger than its single-agent counterpart, it is still weaker than other notions of mismatch such as
concentrability [ 54,12,25], which—when specialized to the two-agent setting—require that the ratio
is bounded for allpairs of policies. The following proposition makes this observation precise.
Proposition 1. There exists a stochastic game with ﬁve states and initial distribution ⇢such that CG
is bounded, but the concentrability coefﬁcient max ⇡1,⇡2￿d⇡1,⇡2⇢
⇢￿
∞is inﬁnite.
Next, to ensure the variance of the REINFORCE estimator stays bounded, we require that both
players use "-greedy exploration in conjunction with the basic policy gradient updates (3).
Assumption 1. Both players follow the direct parameterization with "-greedy exploration: Policies
are parameterized as ⇡x(a￿s)=(1−"x)xs,a+"x￿￿A￿and⇡y(a￿s)=(1−"y)ys,b+"y￿￿B￿, where
"x,"y∈[0,1]are the exploration parameters .
We can now state our main result.
Theorem 1. Let✏>0be given. Suppose both players follow the independent policy gradient scheme
(3)with the parameterization in Assumption 1 . If the learning rates satisfy ⌘x￿✏10.5and⌘y￿✏6
and the exploration parameters satisfy "x￿✏, "y￿✏2, we are guaranteed that
E￿1
N∑N
i=1max ⇡2V⇢(⇡x(i),⇡2)￿−min ⇡1max ⇡2V⇢(⇡1,⇡2)≤✏ (6)
after N≤poly (✏−1,CG, S, A, B, ⇣−1)episodes.
This represents, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst ﬁnite-sample, global convergence guarantee for indepen-
dent policy gradient updates in stochastic games. Some key features are as follows:
●Since the learning agents only use their own trajectories to make decisions, and only store a single
parameter vector in memory, the protocol is independent in the sense of Section 3 . However, an
5