Both centralized [ 64,57,69] and independent [ 47,26] algorithms have enjoyed practical success
across different domains. However, while centralized algorithms have experienced recent theoretical
development, including provable ﬁnite-sample guarantees [ 71,6,73], theoretical guarantees for
independent reinforcement learning have remained elusive. In fact, it is known that independent
algorithms may fail to converge even in simple multi-agent tasks [ 14,67,13]: When agents update
their policies independently, they induce distribution shift, which can break assumptions made by
classical single-player algorithms. Understanding when these algorithms work, and how to stabilize
their performance and tackle distribution shift, is recognized as a major challenge in multi-agent RL
[47,30].
In this paper, we focus on understanding the convergence properties of independent reinforcement
learning with policy gradient methods [72,66]. Policy gradient methods form the foundation for
modern applications of multi-agent reinforcement learning, with state-of-the-art performance across
many domains [ 61,62]. Policy gradient methods are especially relevant for continuous reinforcement
learning and control tasks, since they readily scale to large action spaces, and are often more stable
than value-based methods, particularly with function approximation [ 35]. Independent reinforcement
learning with policy gradient methods is poorly understood, and attaining global convergence results
is considered an important open problem [ 75, Section 6].
We analyze the behavior of independent policy gradient methods in Shapley’s stochastic game
framework [ 63]. We focus on two-player zero-sum stochastic games with discrete state and action
spaces, wherein players observe the entire joint state, take simultaneous actions, and observe rewards
simultaneously, with one player trying to maximize the reward and the other trying to minimize it.
To capture the challenge of independent learning, we assume that each player observes the state,
reward, and their own action, but not the action chosen by the other player. We assume that the
dynamics and reward distribution are unknown, so that players must optimize their policies using
only realized trajectories consisting of the states, rewards, and actions. For this setting, we show
that—while independent policy gradient methods may not converge in general—policy gradient
methods following a two-timescale rule converge to a Nash equilibrium. We also show that moving
beyond two-timescale rules by incorporating optimization techniques from matrix games such as
optimism [ 19] or extragradient updates [ 37] is likely to require new analysis techniques.
At a technical level, our result is a special case of a more general theorem, which shows that
(stochastic) two-timescale updates converge to Nash equilibria for a class of nonconvex minimax
problems satisfying a certain two-sided gradient dominance property. Our results here expand the
class of nonconvex minimax problems with provable algorithms beyond the scope of prior work [ 74],
and may be of independent interest.
2 Preliminaries
We investigate the behavior of independent learning in two-player zero-sum stochastic games (or,
Markov games), a simple competitive reinforcement learning setting [ 63,44]. In these games,
two players—a min-player and a max-player —repeatedly select actions simultaneously in a shared
Markov decision process in order to minimize and maximize, respectively, a given objective function.
Formally, a two-player zero-sum stochastic game is speciﬁed by a tuple G=(S,A,B,P,R,⇣,⇢):
•Sis a ﬁnite state space of size S=￿S￿.
•AandBare ﬁnite action spaces for the min- and max-players, of sizes A=￿A￿andB=￿B￿.
•Pis the transition probability function , for which P(s′￿s, a, b )denotes the probability
of transitioning to state s′when the current state is sand the players take actions aandb.
In general we will have ⇣s,a,b∶=1−∑s′∈SP(s′￿s, a, b )>0; this quantity represents the
probability that Gstops at state sif actions a, bare played.
•R∶S×A×B→[−1,1]is the reward function ;R(s, a, b )gives the immediate reward
when the players take actions a, bin state s. The min-player seeks to minimize Rand the
max-player seeks to maximize it.1
•⇣∶=min s,a,b{⇣s,a,b}is a lower bound on the probability that the game stops at any state s
and choices of actions a, b. We assume that ⇣>0throughout this paper.
1We consider deterministic rewards for simplicity, but our results immediately extend to stochastic rewards.
2