Independent Policy Gradient Methods
for Competitive Reinforcement Learning
Constantinos Daskalakis
costis@csail.mit.eduDylan J. Foster
dylanf@mit.eduNoah Golowich
nzg@mit.edu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Abstract
We obtain global, non-asymptotic convergence guarantees for independent learn-
ing algorithms in competitive reinforcement learning settings with two agents
(i.e., zero-sum stochastic games). We consider an episodic setting where in each
episode, each player independently selects a policy and observes only their own
actions and rewards, along with the state. We show that if both players run policy
gradient methods in tandem, their policies will converge to a min-max equilibrium
of the game, as long as their learning rates follow a two-timescale rule (which is
necessary). To the best of our knowledge, this constitutes the ﬁrst ﬁnite-sample con-
vergence result for independent policy gradient methods in competitive RL; prior
work has largely focused on centralized, coordinated procedures for equilibrium
computation.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL)—in which an agent must learn to maximize reward in an unknown
dynamic environment—is an important frontier for artiﬁcial intelligence research, and has shown
great promise in application domains ranging from robotics [ 34,41,39] to games such as Atari,
Go, and Starcraft [ 52,64,69]. Many of the most exciting recent applications of RL are game-
theoretic in nature, with multiple agents competing for shared resources or cooperating to solve a
common task in stateful environments where agents’ actions inﬂuence both the state and other agents’
rewards [ 64,57,69]. Algorithms for such multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) settings must
be capable of accounting for other learning agents in their environment, and must choose their actions
in anticipation of the behavior of these agents. Developing efﬁcient, reliable techniques for MARL is
a crucial step toward building autonomous and robust learning agents.
While single-player (or, non-competitive RL has seen much recent theoretical activity, including
development of efﬁcient algorithms with provable, non-asymptotic guarantees [ 15,4,33,22,2],
provable guarantees for MARL have been comparatively sparse. Existing algorithms for MARL can
be classiﬁed into centralized/coordinated algorithms and independent/decoupled algorithms [ 75].
Centralized algorithms such as self-play assume the existence of a centralized controller that joinly
optimizes with respect to all agents’ policies. These algorithms are typically employed in settings
where the number of players and the type of interaction (competitive, cooperative, etc.) are both
known a-priori. On the other hand, in independent reinforcement learning, agents behave myopically
and optimize their own policy while treating the environment as ﬁxed. They observe only local
information, such as their own actions, rewards, and the part of the state that is available to them. As
such, independent learning algorithms are generally more versatile, as they can be applied even in
uncertain environments where the type of interaction and number of other agents are not known to
the individual learners.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.