In Way (2018) , I provide  a number of problems with such metrics, as well as others arising 
from their (mis)use in the field. I  will not rehash those here, but ultimately an MT system 
needs to be used for a particular use -case, which is where task-based evaluation  comes in : 
who is the translation actually for? As I point out in that paper:  
“WMT evaluations regularly include speci fic tasks nowadays, including medical 
translation (e.g. Zhang et al., 2014), automatic post -editing (e.g. Chatterjee et al., 
2015) and MT for the IT domain (e.g. Cuong et al., 2016). We take this as evidence 
that the community as a whole is well aware of t he fact that when evaluating MT 
quality, the actual use -case and utility of the translations therein need to be borne in 
mind .” 
III.2 Does MT Evaluation need to change with NMT coming onstream?  
It has to be acknowledged that the problem of MT quality assessment is an unsolved one, 
and research efforts are ongoing to improve on the metrics that are commonly used today.  
One question that is worth asking is the extent to which such metrics are sufficiently 
discriminative to accurately demonstrate the real  improvement that NMT offers over SMT.  
The translational improvements discovered by Bentivogli et al. (2016) are astonishing, 
especially bearing in mind that PBMT  had been the dominant paradigm for 25 years or so, 
and that NMT has only come in as a realistic alternative in the past four years. In my opinion, 
n-gram -based metrics such as BLEU  significantly underplay the real benefit to be seen when 
NMT output is evaluated. As I note in Way (2018), it simply cannot  be the case that a 2-point 
improvement in BLEU score – almost an irrelevance on a real industrial translation use -case 
– which was typically seen in WMT -2016  where NMT systems swept the board on all tasks 
and language -pairs (Sennrich et al., 2016) , can be reflective of the improvements in word 
order and lexical selection noted by Bentivogli et al. ( 2016) . Note that Shterionov et al. ( 2018) 
actually computed the degree of underestimation in quality of three popular automatic 
evaluation metrics – BLEU, METEOR and TER – showing that for NMT, this may be up to 
50%.  
Metrics such as ChrF (Popović, 2015) which operate at the character level  – or 
combinations of word - and character -based models (e.g. Chung et al. 2016; Luong & 
Manning, 2016)6 – may be  a mov e in the right direction, but the field  will doubtless see new 
metrics tuned particularly to NMT in the very near future.  
III.3 Is the Tran slation Industry r eady to provide NMT?  
Let us suppose  that NMT either already is the new state -of-the-art in terms of MT quality, or 
very soon will be. The big free online players – Google Translate and Bing Translator  – have 
both switched over at least some of their language -pairs to NMT models. Note that Amazon 
AWS only very recently announced their own NMT service,7 so there is no doubt that where 
the largest multinational companies are concerned, the decision has been made to t hrow in 
their lot with NMT.  
                                                           
6 In order to mitigate the problem of unknown words , character -based NMT models were proposed; if a word is 
unknown at the level of the lemma, some translation knowledge may be available at the subword level. 
Passban et al. (2018) demonstrate that splitting lemmas into roots and morphemes in a principled l inguistic 
manner outperforms such arbitrary subword models.  
7 https://aws.amazon.com/translate/