length inputs and outputs. Accordingly, it can be seen quite quickly  that the number of 
calculations is astronomical. Billions of tweaks of the weights are needed before the optimal 
configuration of the neural net is arrived at, and no further improvement can be seen. This is 
why GPUs – excellent at performing calculations on matrices, which are standard structures 
used in neural processing – are needed for network training, although decoding can be run 
fairly smoothly on CPUs.  
The mathematical underpinning  of neural networks is fairly hair -raising, but I anticipate that 
the description of neural nets provided together with my description of the state -of-the-art 
NMT model today and the explanation provided in Forcada (2017) will suffice for most 
translators  to know how the whole set -up works, and how they may help deep -learning 
engineers improve their systems. At the same time, I trust that this will prove useful to other 
industry players not au fait  with the current technology, in order for them to consider  using 
NMT to underpin their translation service s. 
VI. Concluding Remarks  
This paper has undertaken several challenges: (i ) to discuss different MT paradigms, (ii) to 
argue which of those paradigms might be considered state -of-the-art today, (iii) to explain to 
non-experts how neural MT works, (iv) to discuss whether today’s automatic evaluation 
metrics are sufficiently fine -grained to accurately reflect the dramatic improvements we have 
seen recently in terms of MT quality, and (v) to reflect on the relationship between academia 
and industry in the field of MT today.  
We concluded that if NMT is not already  the state -of-the-art in the field , it certainly has the 
potential to become so, and very soon. Accordingly, I trust that the description of the 
underlying deep -learning technology and the state -of-the-art NMT configuration may benefit 
a wide range of non -experts, who might b e struggling to understand how this new paradigm 
actually works, why it outperforms PBMT , but also what pro blems remain to be solved. 
These can be examined both from a research perspective – including providing fine -grained 
MT evaluation metrics to accurat ely reflect the considerable improvement in MT quality that 
has recently been  seen  – and an optimisation point of view, especially in terms of improving 
NMT engine training times.  
By providing an insight into how academia and industry need to help each other in these 
turbulent times, I anticipate that this will contribute to the building of stronger bridges 
between academic res earch and the language industry . As we concluded in Way & Hearne 
(2011), this collaboration is sorely needed if the field as a whole is to benefit. While SMT 
appears to have only a limited future , with NMT having  emerged as the dominant force in 
MT, such collabor ation is needed more than ever. It is encouraging  to see that the lesson  
learned by SMT practitioners regarding the improvements to be seen by incorporating 
linguistic information seem to be being taken onboard, by some  NMT practitioners  at least 
(cf. García -Martí nez et al., 2016; Sennrich & Haddow, 2016 ).  
With the considerable improvements in MT quality that have been seen in recent times has 
come an increase in hype, most notably from journalists, most of whom don’t understand 
how the technology works, but also from MT developers such as the Google and Microsoft 
NMT team s; the claim by Wu et al. (2016) that Google NMT was “ bridging the gap between  
human and machine translation [quality] ” led to considerable  hyperbole an d hysteria from 
different camps, which was amplified recently by the claim by Hassan  et al. (2018) that