Microsoft had “achieved human parity” in terms of translation quality .16 Those of us who have 
seen many paradigms come and go know that overgilding the lily does none of us any good, 
especially those of us who have been trying to build b ridges between MT developers and the 
translation community  for many years . The human -in-the-loop will always  remain the most 
important link in the chain , at least where dissemination of translated material is required ; all 
MT system developers are trying t o do is improve the output from thei r systems to make 
technology -savvy translators more productive. MT systems are unlikely ever to “bridge the 
gap” or “achieve human parity” with human quality translation. Just because a new paradigm 
is in vogue does not mean that MT has become easy, or a solved problem, as some would 
like to make o ut (e.g. Goodfellow et al., 2016 :473). Let’s see how many of the newcomers to 
MT are still here in a decade; my prediction is that a good percentage of them will indeed 
discover  that MT is too difficult , and that certain problems remain  hard to solve, just like 
they’ve always been … which is why translators are very much still needed, and always will 
be. 
Acknowledgements  
Many thanks indeed to the anonymous reviewers of this paper , as well as to Mikel Forcada, 
whose comments served to improve this paper considerably. This work has been supported 
by the ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology which is funded under the SFI 
Research Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2106) and is co -funded under the European 
Region al Development Fund.  
References  
Arnold, D., D. Moffat, L. Sadler , and A. Way . (1993),  Automatic Generation of Test Suites. 
Machine Translation  8:29—38.  
Bahdanau, D., K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. (2014 ), Neural Machine Translation  by Jointly 
Learning to Align and Translate. eprint arXiv:1409.0473 
(https://arXiv.org/abs/1409.0473 ). 
Banerjee, S. , and A. Lavie. (2005 ), METEOR: An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with 
Improved Correlation with Human Judgments. In ACL 2005, Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for MT and/or Summarization 
at the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, pp.65 —72.  
Benjamin,  B., L.  Gerber , K. Knight, and D. Marcu. (2003 ), Language Weaver: the next 
generation of machine translation . MT Summit IX , New Orleans, USA, pp.229 —231. 
Bentivogli, L., A.  Bisazza, M. Cettolo, and M. Federico. (2016 ), Neural versus Phrase -
Based Machine Translat ion Quality: a Case Study. In Proceedings of the 2016 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Austin, Texas, 
pp.257 —267. 
                                                           
16 Even more recently, SDL announced on June 19th 2018 that they had “cracked Russian to English Neural 
Machine Translation ”: https://www.sdl.com/about/news -media/press/2018/sdl -cracks -russian -to-english -
neural -machine -translation.html . As with the other similar claims, this has met with som e incredulity on social 
media platforms, including by this author (@tarfandy).