Chapter 3.3: Machine Translation : where are we at today?   
Andy Way  
I. Introduction  
Machine translation (MT) usage t oday is staggering. C onsider Google Translate,1 which as of 
May 2016 was translating an average of 143 billion words a day – 20 words/day for every 
person on the planet , just for a single  (albeit the largest) MT service provider – across 100 
language combinations, a doubling in translation volume in just 4 years. This number alone 
already means that MT quality is ‘good enough ’ for a range of use -cases, so continuing to 
question  the utility of MT is moot.  
The aim of this chapter is to explain to translati on/interpreting students and academics, 
professional translators and other industry stakeholders how  MT works today, and how the 
field has altered in the last 30 years. I describe the underlying reasons why MT engine -
building changed from being underpinned  by grammatical rules to the situation today where it 
is almost e ntirely data -driven; while for some time most of the research in academia was 
corpus -based, the leading MT engines in industry remained almost wholly  rule-based, but 
this dichotomy has now largely disappeared, principally due to the introduction of the Mos es 
Statistical MT (SMT) toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007) , and the subsequent rise of Neural MT 
(NMT) . 
While it was already the case that the dominant paradigm was SMT , a performance ceiling 
was reached relatively quickly, such that for the past ten years or so , MT system developers 
have been ‘ smuggling in ’ linguistic information in order to improve performance  as 
demonstrated by both automatic and human evaluation . Until just three  or four years ago, 
SMT was undoubtedly state -of-the-art, but NMT has recently  emerged , and in academic 
circles at least, appears to be so promising that many protagonists are already claiming it to 
have surpassed the performance of SMT . In this chapter, I will consider the extent to which it 
is appropriate at this juncture to make t his call; SMT remains dominant in the translation 
industry  among many translation providers, but the big players like Google Translate and 
Bing Translator2 have already launched NMT systems for many of their language pairs .  
When SMT was launched, many pra ctitioners advocated a ‘pure’ approach, where the 
strategy taken was “let the data decide”; no data cleaning or annotation was countenanced, 
at least initially, so that whatever quality was obtained was due entirely to the intrinsic 
characteristics of the approach rather than any pre -processing techniques.  Nonetheless, as 
mentioned  above, SMT system developers observed improvements in performance as 
measured by automatic evaluation metrics when introducing linguistic information into the 
engine -building pro cess. With the advent of NMT , similarly ‘pure’ approaches to NMT are in 
vogue, but I  question whether here too quality will improve only if syntactic, semantic and 
discourse features are integrated.  
It is clear that human translators have for some time now  been using Translation Memory 
(TM) systems (Heyn, 1998) to good effect. Many researchers have demonstrated that SMT 
and TM can be integrated to improve translator productivity  (e.g. Ma et al., 2011; Bulté et 
al., 2018 ), and these benefits now appear fairly regularly in today’s industry -leading CAT 
                                                           
1 https://translate.google.com  
2 https://www.bing.com/translator