were quickly deployed  to good effect  in real industrial scenarios .3 SMT was robust, and 
capable of ve ry good translation output, but suffered from problems such as the omission of  
target -language equivalents to parts of the source sentence (including on occasion really  
important words like not), and wrong target -language word order. As with RBMT, PBMT 
worked especially well between closely -related languages, and much less well when 
translating into morphologically complex languages (like German).  
It was certainly the case when SMT first came along that most system developers relied 
solely on larger and lar ger amounts of training  data to deliver impro vements in translation 
quality, as measured by automatic metrics like BLEU ( Papineni et al., 2002) , METEOR 
(Banerjee & Lavie, 2005 ) and TER (Snover et al., 2006). However, l ittle by little , SMT engine -
builders began to realise that the only way to break th rough the performance ceiling –often a 
pretty good level of quality, mind – was to integrate additional syntactic and semantic 
information  (e.g. Chiang, 2005) . By 2015 or so, such linguisti cally informed PBMT systems 
were acknowledged to be the state -of-the-art in the field.  
II.2 From SMT to NMT  
However, around this time, researchers (including many newcomers to the field of MT) 
started to demonstrate that  NMT systems could be built with good performance . While the 
preferred system set -ups were not so different from those that had been conceived some 
time bef ore (e.g. Forcada & Ñeco, 1997), the hardware that facilitated the huge explosion in 
computation req uired was now sufficiently powerful to allow these systems to be built in 
practice.  
The first NMT systems started off  using convolutional neural nets  (Kalchbrenner & 
Blunsom, 2013), but could not beat a PBMT  baseline  (cdec: Dyer e t al, 2010) . Improvements 
were seen quite quickly with the first  encoder -decoder frameworks (Sutskever et al. , 2014), 
which were subsequently extended with a source -language attention model (Bahdanau et al., 
2014 ). While further improvements have been seen in the interim, this set -up – an encoder -
decoder model with attention – remains pretty much the state -of-the-art today.  
What really disrupted the field were the results achieved by NMT systems at the 
International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation in 2015 .4 Luong and Manning 
(2015 ) demonstrated clear wins over a range of different SMT systems for English -to-
German, a significantly difficult language pair , in terms of automatic evaluation scores . 
Bentivogli et al . (2016 ) performed an in -depth human evaluation of exactly how the NMT 
model of Luong and Manning (2015) improved in terms of quality , noting that s ignificantly 
fewer morphological, lexical and  word order errors were m ade compared to SMT. They also 
demonstrated that NMT lowered overall post -editing effort  by about 25%.   
One of the main reasons why NMT improves compared to SMT on a range of use -cases is 
that once the source sentence has been processed by the encoder, the full context of the 
sentence is available  to the decoder for consideration as to wha t targe t-language words and 
phrases should be suggested as part of the translation. That is, all source words and their 
context – what are known as “word embeddings” (cf. Mikolov et al., 2013), i.e. how each 
word relates to each other in the particular sen tence at hand – are encoded in a single  
                                                           
3 The first commercial system, LanguageWeaver, was based not on Moses but rather on the SMT models of 
Kevin Knight and Dan Marcu at ISI (cf. Benjamin et al., 2003).  
4 http://workshop2015.iwslt.org/