numerical representation (a vector of numbers indicating the final state of the encoder) which 
is sent to the decoder to generate a target -language string. In SMT, a source sentence is 
only translated using lexical a nd phrasal chunks; unless it is very short, it is never translated 
en bloc . Clearly having a window on the full source sentence is advantageous compared to a 
restriction of just a few words at a time , but managing all that information is non -trivial . 
The e ncoder -decoder architecture works well, but significant improvement came about 
when the source -language attention m odel was added. Rather than accepting  that all source 
words are equally imp ortant in suggesting all target -language words, the attention model 
(similar to word and phrase alignments in SMT ) demonstrates  which source words are most 
relevant when it comes to hypothesising target -language equivalents. In practice, this means 
that each translation is genera ted from  specific encoder states, with information which is 
much less relevant from other words – perhaps some distance away from the current word of 
focus and of little or no relevance to its translation – being ignored.  
III. Is NMT the new state -of-the-art? 
While the study by Bentivogli et al. (2016) was significant and far -reaching, it has to be noted 
that it only examined one language pair (English -to-German) and one use -case (TED talks). 
Further studies (e.g. Castilho et al. (2017)) have shown that there are s ituations where PBMT  
can still beat NMT  in terms of both human and automatic evaluation . It is widely recognized  
that much larger amounts of training data are needed for good NMT performance compared 
to SMT  (cf. Koehn & Knowles, 2017) , and training and translation times remain much slower 
than for SMT.  
Nonetheless, m any MT practitioners believe that NMT  is – or at least will be very soon – 
the new state -of-the-art, to the extent that all MT papers in the very top academic 
conferences feature only NMT mod els, and Moses scores are only given as comparative 
baseline levels of quality.  
III.1 How is MT Quality Measured?  
In Way (2018) , I note  that there are three ways in which MT quality is typically measured: via 
human evaluation, automatic evaluation, and tas k-based evaluation. In the former, human 
raters are asked to select from a (more or less) fine -grained numerical scale for “fidelity ” (or 
“accuracy”  or “adequacy” ), the extent to which a translated text contains the same 
information as the source text; and  (ii) intelligibility  (or “fluency”), the extent to which the 
output sentence is a well -formed example of the target language.5 While such evaluations 
are (usually) very informative, they are subjective, often inconsistent and take a long time to 
carry out . Accordingly, as is often the case in MT, insights from speech recognition were 
brought to bear in this field too, in particular Word Error Rate (WER: Levenshtein, 1966), a nd 
Position -Independent Word Er ror Rate (PER: Tillmann et al., 1997) . However, it w asn’t until 
the BLE U metric  came in that MT evaluation per se  took off. BLEU (and NIST (Doddington, 
2002), which came along around the same time) used different (but related) ways to compute 
the similarity between one or more  human supplied ‘gold standard’  reference s and the MT 
output string based (largely) on n-gram co -occurrence.  
                                                           
5 Here I give primacy to the terms originally used in the ALPAC report (Pierce et al., 1966), with more usual 
terms given in parentheses.