just in terms of direct employment and return to the exchequer b ut also as it  pertains to 
ancillary services – if those companies want a steady stream of suitably equipped new staff 
with up -to-date skill -sets trained by the best available lecturing staff, then they too will need 
to (at least part -)pay towards the tools  and services required for their education.  
As this problem resolves itself, further and deeper collaboration between industry and 
research  is likely to be seen . More and more researchers are interested not just in an 
academic publication, but also in solv ing real problems of benefit not just to industry, but also 
relevant  to their fellow academics. While  many authors of papers at leading conference s in 
the field seldom consider potential end -users, it was recently announced that from 2018 , the 
North Americ an branch of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL ) will feature 
an industry track, focu sing on disseminating results which apply cutting -edge research to real 
world problems. While plenty of such work exists already (e.g. Wang et al., 2016; Calixto et 
al., 2017), anything which explicitly gets more researchers to try to focus on truly impactful 
endeavours as opposed to being strictly of academic value is to be welcomed.  
V. Informing the industry through research  
There are d iffering view s on whether users of a technology need to know the principles on 
which it is founded in order to (i) understand how the outputs are formed, and (ii) try to 
improve the underlying technology. Assuming  that knowing how an MT system is built is 
useful, there is no doubt that non -experts found the principles of SMT hard to understand. In 
two companion papers (Hearne & Way, 2011; Way & Hearne, 2011), we provided an 
explanation of SMT for linguists and tran slators  which attracted positive feedback .  
Accordingly, translators  that have already embraced MT have just about gotten their heads 
around SMT an d how it works, but now NMT looks like eclipsing that framework . While 
PBMT quickly consolidated ar ound the M oses toolkit, in contrast there i s a proliferation of 
deep neural net tools in existence which NMT developers can use, including Tensorflow,11 
OpenNMT,12 PyTorch,13 and Nematus.14 
Again, unsurprisingly, many non -experts – even those who have been around the 
language industry for some time – find recent r esearch papers on NMT unintelligible. I have 
already provided a high -level explanation of how an NMT system works in Section II.2 , and I 
hope that my description of the encoder -decoder system with attention is  understandable to 
a broad audience; interested readers should consult Forcada (2017) for another explanation 
of NMT for non -experts.  
                                                           
11 https://www.tensorflow.org/  
12 http://opennmt.net  
13 https://pytorch.org/  
14 https://github.com/rsennrich/nematus