Figure 4 : a schematic depiction of a feed -forward neural network  
NMT is just one example of sequence -to-sequence learning using a neural network; others 
include text summarization  and speech recognition. Essentially the neural network comprises 
(i) a set of input nodes, (ii) a set of hidden nodes (in one or more hidden layers; if there is 
more than one, the network is said to be ‘deep’, hence “deep learning”), and (iii) a set of 
output nodes, as in Figure 4. Each input node is connected to each hidden unit, and each 
hidden unit is connected to each output node; if there is more than one hidden layer, then 
each node in one hidden layer is connected to all the nodes in the next hidden layer, and so 
on. The mathematical complexity of deep learning comes about as the weight (or 
importance) of every connection between every no de needs to be optimised. One way of 
doing t his in the “training” phase is to (i) initially assign  random weights to each connection,15 
(ii) supply  a set of inputs where the outputs are known (e.g. if a vectoral representation of an 
image of a bird  is input , the neural net can be expected to predict the label “bird”, not “dog”)), 
and (iii) percolate  (via “back -propagation” : Rumelhart et al. (1986) ) any error s back through 
the network until the weights are optimally adjusted and no further improvement in accu racy 
can be seen . The neural net is then frozen, and new inputs are provided to the system (in the 
“testing” phase) and the accuracy is evaluated by observing how often the neural net 
accurately predicts the correct label.  
Most people acknowledge  that MT is one of the hardest problems we are trying to address 
in computer science, as so many inputs (each word in each sentence) are required, many 
hidden units in many hidden layers are needed, and many outputs (i.e. possible translations) 
may be observed. Note too  that unlike the feed-forward neural network in Figure 4, most 
state -of-the-art networks are “recurrent” , meaning that some units are linked to themselves; 
this permits inputs and outputs of any size, whereas feed -forward networks allow only f ixed-
                                                           
15 Including to “bias” nodes, which are connected to each hidden unit to prevent that hidden unit from being 
‘switched off’ in case of a zero -sum input.