Accordingly, those language service providers (LSPs) who rely on online MT provided by 
third-parties such as these will already have benefit ed from the improvements in quality 
afforded by NMT. But what about those MT providers w ho have developed services in -house 
around the Moses platform?  I have already noted that neural MT engine training times are 
much slower – typically of the order of several  weeks – than their SMT counterparts, so 
much so that people are claiming PBMT  training times to be fast nowadays, although of 
course nothing has changed  in that regard ; it is simply the case that in comparison, NMT 
model training is incredibly slow, with billions of mathematical optimisations needed until the 
neural net converges to its optimal set-up. I have also noted that typically an order of 
magnitude larger data is needed to train a good NMT model compared to PBMT , and it is a 
fact that these datasets do not exist for almost all industry clients.  In addition, the hardware 
needed to train an NMT system is expensive; GPUs contain thousands of CPUs, each of 
which can carry out its own calculation in parallel. Assuming most suppliers of customised 
MT engines do not have such hardware in -house, but rat her rely on cloud -based services, 
the cost of additional MT engine training will have to be passed on to clients, although the 
latter should see most if not all of this returned by the huge improvements in MT quality and 
resultant decrease in post -editing effort required.  
Those forward -thinking translators who have already integrated MT into their pipeline 
should benefit immediately from the improvements  in MT quality to be seen. As I  noted in the 
previous section, current MT quality assessment metrics are insufficiently discriminative to 
provide a realistic representation of the absolute improvement in quality seen with NMT, so it 
is open to doubt as to whether LSPs will be able to reflect this better quality in terms of 
higher levels of TM fuzzy matches  (Sikes, 2007) , with the concomitant reductions in pay to 
translators who are post -editing MT output.  It seems to me that this is a good time for 
translators who have yet to use MT in their translation workflow to consider doing so without 
delay, as their pro ductivity should rise pre tty quickly, while LSPs are still tied in to post -
editing rates of pay related to SMT.  
MT has been integrated very well now with existing TM tools, with TM matches above  well-
defined thresholds being suggested to translators for po st-editing, and MT used for all 
segments below such thresholds.8 NMT shouldn’t make too much of a difference, here, 
except that  even more so than SMT, NMT output can be deceptively fluent; sometimes 
perfect target -language sentences are output, and less th orough translators and 
proofreaders may be seduced into accepting such translations,  despite the fact that they may 
not be related to  the source sentence at hand at all! In contrast, when the attention model 
provides too much focus on particular source -language words, errors such as that  in Figure 3 
can be seen; fort unately, these are easy to spot.  
Finally, on the subject of quality, for a long time SMT models failed to deliver good enough 
quality for English -to-Japanese for Japanese translators t o even consider post -editing MT 
output. Mike Dillinger (personal communication) now informs me that the quality seen from 
NMT is leading them to reconsider, and the sorts of questions being asked are exactly  the 
same as those raised  years ago in the scope of European languages.  
 
                                                           
8 Moorkens  and Way (2016) discuss the extent to which translation jobs should be carved up in this way, as 
well as how MT output is significantly preferred to TM matches when fuzzy match thresholding is removed.