shou ld decree ungrammatical and cause further processing to cease . There were two main 
problems with such an approach: (i) there was a general assumption that people  would 
always try to input well -formed sentences into an MT system, and (ii) given that the parser 
was based on a set of handcrafted rules by an expert linguist which was necessarily 
incomplete, the system could not tell the difference between a truly ill -formed string and well -
formed input that simply was not covered by the set of linguistic rules in the grammar.  
Note that in transfer -based systems, the three processes do ‘about the same’ amount of 
work: the source string is parsed into a syntactic (consti tuency or dependency ) tree indicating 
the main actors in the sentence as well as any modifiers; this s ource -language 
representation i s then passed to the transfer component per se , where appropriate lexical, 
syntactic and semantic rules generated a ‘meanin g-equivalent’ target -language structure ; this 
target dependency tree i s then input into the generation (or ‘synthesis’) phase, where a se t of 
target -language rules try  to produce an appropriate translation.  
In contrast, in interlingual systems, there was no explicit transfer phase, so that the output 
from the  deep analysis phase was exactly  the same as the input to the deep synthesis 
phase . While this was very attractive in theory, it proved impossible to bring about from a 
practical perspective. Languages simply don’t act the same way, with different languages 
having different ways of representing similar concepts. For example, in English,  the 
periphrastic expression “to bake  with cheese on top” has to be used, while French has a 
single lexical item – gratiner  – to represent the same concept. Assuming an interlingual  
system  involving French, English and Japanese, the amount of work that wou ld need to be 
done in (say) a French -to-English engine just because Japanese has different words for “my 
mother ”, “your mother ” and “mothers in general ” would be wasteful, given that neither French 
nor English has different lexical entries for these concep ts (Hutchins & Somers, 1992) . 
At the onset of SMT in the late -80s, it was clear what camp you were in: either the transfer 
camp or the interlingual camp. However, in Way (2009), I noted that pretty quickly, these two 
camps merged to form a de facto  allianc e against this arrogant statistical newcomer which 
was set to undo all that they stood for. Despite this resistance, the language used early on by 
the new statistical practitioners was conciliatory, indicating a hope that the two communities 
would work together for the betterment of the discipline. I lamented that  this did not happen,  
and that  this impaired the creation and adoption of the syntax -based systems that came  
onstream in the l ate 200 0s. 
Nonetheless, certainly by the mid -1990s , SMT had come to be dominant, largely due to 
the very influential IBM models laid out in Brown et al. (1993), one of the seminal papers in 
the field. At this time, however, most SMT was word -based, which w as odd when one 
considers that example -based MT (Nagao, 1984; Carl & Way, 2003) had from its very 
inception considered the phrase – not the word – as the primary linguistic construct  to be 
used as the unit of translation . Koehn et al. (2003) demonstrated h ow SMT might work in a 
phrase -based manner, and with the advent of tools like Giza++ (Och & Ney, 2003, for word 
alignment) and the Moses toolkit (including phrase alignment) in 2007, phrase -based SMT  
(PBMT)  became the dominant paradigm for the next ten yea rs.  
Larger and larger amounts of SMT training data came onstream (e.g. Europarl: Koehn, 
2005), which allowed better and better PBMT  models to be built, but only for those 
languages and genres where sufficiently large sets of aligned source —target sentences 
existed. The licence issued with Moses allowed it to be used commercially, so SMT systems