We produce optimal sparse decision trees taking a different approach than mathematical programming,
greedy methods, or brute force. We ﬁnd optimal trees according to a regularized loss function that
balances accuracy and the number of leaves. Our algorithm is computationally efﬁcient due to a
collection of analytical bounds to perform massive pruning of the search space. Our implementation
uses specialized data structures to store intermediate computations and symmetries, a bit-vector
library to evaluate decision trees more quickly, fast search policies, and computational reuse. Despite
the hardness of ﬁnding optimal solutions, our algorithm is able to locate optimal trees and prove
optimality (or closeness of optimality) in reasonable amounts of time for datasets of the sizes used in
the criminal justice system (tens of thousands or millions of observations, tens of features).
Because we ﬁnd provably optimal trees, our experiments show where previous studies have claimed
to produce optimal models yet failed; we show speciﬁc cases where this happens. We test our method
on benchmark data sets, as well as criminal recidivism and credit risk data sets; these are two of
the high-stakes decision problems where interpretability is needed most in AI systems. We provide
ablation experiments to show which of our techniques is most inﬂuential at reducing computation
for various datasets. As a result of this analysis, we are able to pinpoint possible future paths to
improvement for scalability and computational speed. Our contributions are: (1) The ﬁrst practical
optimal binary-variable decision tree algorithm to achieve solutions for nontrivial problems. (2) A
series of analytical bounds to reduce the search space. (3) Algorithmic use of a tree representation
using only its leaves. (4) Implementation speedups saving 97% run time. (5) We present the ﬁrst
optimal sparse binary split trees ever published for the COMPAS and FICO datasets.
The code and the supplementary materials are available at https://github.com/xiyanghu/OSDT .
2 Related Work
Optimal decision trees have a quite a long history [ 3], so we focus on closely related techniques.
There are efﬁcient algorithms that claim to generate optimal sparse trees, but do not optimally balance
the criteria of optimality and sparsity; instead they pre-specify the topology of the tree ( i.e., they know
a priori exactly what the structure of the splits and leaves are, even though they do not know which
variables are split) and only ﬁnd the optimal tree of the given topology [ 16]. This is not the problem
we address, as we do not know the topology of the optimal tree in advance. The most successful
algorithm of this variety is BinOCT [ 20], which searches for a complete binary tree of a given depth;
we discuss BinOCT shortly. Some exploration of learning optimal decision trees is based on boolean
satisﬁability (SAT) [ 17], but again, this work looks only for the optimal tree of a given number of
nodes. The DL8 algorithm [ 18] optimizes a ranking function to ﬁnd a decision tree under constraints
of size, depth, accuracy and leaves. DL8 creates trees from the bottom up, meaning that trees are
assembled out of all possible leaves, which are itemsets pre-mined from the data [similarly to 2]. DL8
does not have publicly available source code, and its authors warn about running out of memory when
storing all partially-constructed trees. Some works consider oblique trees [ 6], where splits involve
several variables; oblique trees are not addressed here, as they can be less interpretable.
The most recent mathematical programming algorithms are OCT [ 5] and BinOCT [ 20]. Example
ﬁgures from the OCT paper [ 5] show decision trees that are clearly suboptimal. However, as the code
was not made public, the work in the OCT paper [ 5] is not easily reproducible, so it is not clear where
the problem occurred. We discuss this in Section §4. Verwer and Zhang’s mathematical programming
formulation for BinOCT is much faster [ 20], and their experiments indicate that BinOCT outperforms
OCT, but since BinOCT is constrained to create complete binary trees of a given depth rather than
optimally sparse trees, it sometimes creates unnecessary leaves in order to complete a tree at a given
depth, as we show in Section §4. BinOCT solves a dramatically easier problem than the method
introduced in this work. As it turns out, the search space of perfect binary trees of a given depth is
much smaller than that of binary trees with the same number of leaves. For instance, the number of
different unlabeled binary trees with 8 leaves is Catalan (7) = 429 , but the number of unlabeled
perfect binary trees with 8 leaves is only 1. In our setting, we penalize (but do not ﬁx) the number
of leaves, which means that our search space contains all trees, though we can bound the maximum
number of leaves based on the size of the regularization parameter. Therefore, our search space is
much larger than that of BinOCT.
Our work builds upon the CORELS algorithm [ 1,2,13] and its predecessors [ 14,21], which create
optimal decision lists (rule lists). Applying those ideas to decision trees is nontrivial. The rule list
2