we sayd0
unstarts withdun. We deﬁne(d)to be all descendents of d:
(d) =f(d0
un;0
un;d0
split;0
split;K0;Hd0) :d0
undun;d0dg: (2)
If we have two trees d= (dun;un;dsplit;split;K;H )andd0= (d0
un;0
un;d0
split;0
split;K0;H0), where
H0=H+ 1;d0d;d0
undun,i.e.,d0contains one more leaf than dandd0
unstarts withdun, then
we deﬁned0to be a child of danddto be a parent of d0.
Note that two trees with identical leaf sets, but different assignments to dunanddsplit, are different
trees. Further, a child tree can only be generated through splitting leaves of its parent tree within dsplit.
A treedclassiﬁes datum xnby providing the label prediction ^y(leaf)
k of the leaf whose pkis true
forxn. Here, the leaf label ^y(leaf)
kis the majority label of data captured by the leaf k. Ifpkevaluates
to true forxn, we say the leaf kof leaf setduncapturesxn. In our notation, all the data captured by
a preﬁx’s leaves are also captured by the preﬁx itself.
Letbe a set of leaves. We deﬁne cap(xn;) = 1 if a leaf incaptures datum xn, and 0 otherwise.
For example, let dandd0be leaf sets such that d0d, thend0captures all the data that dcaptures:
fxn:cap(xn;d)gfxn:cap(xn;d0)g.
The normalized support of , denoted supp (;x), is the fraction of data captured by :
supp(;x) =1
NNX
n=1cap(xn;): (3)
3.1 Objective Function
For a treed= (dun;un;dsplit;split;K;H d), we deﬁne its objective function as a combination of the
misclassiﬁcation error and a sparsity penalty on the number of leaves:
R(d;x;y) =`(d;x;y) +Hd: (4)
R(d;x;y)is a regularized empirical risk. The loss `(d;x;y)is the misclassiﬁcation error of d,
i.e., the fraction of training data with incorrectly predicted labels. Hdis the number of leaves in the
treed.Hdis a regularization term that penalizes bigger trees. Statistical learning theory provides
guarantees for this problem; minimizing the loss subject to a (soft or hard) constraint on model size
leads to a low upper bound on test error from the Occham’s Razor Bound.
3.2 Optimization Framework
We minimize the objective function based on a branch-and-bound framework. We propose a series of
specialized bounds that work together to eliminate a large part of the search space. These bounds are
discussed in detail in the following paragraphs. Proofs are in the supplementary materials.
Some of our bounds could be adapted directly from CORELS [2], namely these two:
(Hierarchical objective lower bound) Lower bounds of a parent tree also hold for every child tree of
that parent (§3.3, Theorem 3.1). (Equivalent points bound) For a given dataset, if there are multiple
samples with exactly the same features but different labels, then no matter how we build our classiﬁer,
we will always make mistakes. The lower bound on the number of mistakes is therefore the number
of such samples with minority class labels (§B, Theorem B.2).
Some of our bounds adapt from CORELS [ 1] with minor changes: (Objective lower bound with
one-step lookahead) With respect to the number of leaves, if a tree does not achieve enough accuracy,
we can prune all child trees of it (§3.3, Lemma 3.2). (A priori bound on the number of leaves) For
an optimal decision tree, we provide an a priori upper bound on the maximum number of leaves (§C,
Theorem C.3). (Lower bound on node support) For an optimal tree, the support traversing through
each internal node must be at least 2(§3.4, Theorem 3.3).
Some of our bounds are distinct from CORELS, because they are only relevant to trees and not to
lists: (Lower bound on incremental classiﬁcation accuracy) Each split must result in sufﬁcient
reduction of the loss. Thus, if the loss reduction is less than or equal to the regularization term,
we should still split, and we have to further split at least one of the new child leaves to search for
the optimal tree (§3.4, Theorem 3.4). (Leaf permutation bound) We need to consider only one
4