Optimal Sparse Decision Trees
Xiyang Hu1, Cynthia Rudin2, Margo Seltzer3
1Carnegie Mellon University, xiyanghu@cmu.edu
2Duke University, cynthia@cs.duke.edu
3The University of British Columbia, mseltzer@cs.ubc.ca
Abstract
Decision tree algorithms have been among the most popular algorithms for inter-
pretable (transparent) machine learning since the early 1980’s. The problem that
has plagued decision tree algorithms since their inception is their lack of optimality,
or lack of guarantees of closeness to optimality: decision tree algorithms are often
greedy or myopic, and sometimes produce unquestionably suboptimal models.
Hardness of decision tree optimization is both a theoretical and practical obstacle,
and even careful mathematical programming approaches have not been able to
solve these problems efﬁciently. This work introduces the ﬁrst practical algorithm
for optimal decision trees for binary variables. The algorithm is a co-design of
analytical bounds that reduce the search space and modern systems techniques,
including data structures and a custom bit-vector library. Our experiments highlight
advantages in scalability, speed, and proof of optimality.
1 Introduction
Interpretable machine learning has been growing in importance as society has begun to realize
the dangers of using black box models for high stakes decisions: complications with confounding
have haunted our medical machine learning models [ 22], bad predictions from black boxes have
announced to millions of people that their dangerous levels of air pollution were safe [ 15], high-stakes
credit risk decisions are being made without proper justiﬁcation, and black box risk predictions have
been wreaking havoc with the perception of fairness of our criminal justice system [ 10]. In all of
these applications – medical imaging, pollution modeling, recidivism risk, credit scoring – accurate
interpretable models have been created (by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Arnold
Foundation, and others). However, such interpretable-yet-accurate models are not generally easy to
construct. If we want people to replace their black box models with interpretable models, the tools to
build these interpretable models must ﬁrst exist.
Decision trees are one of the leading forms of interpretable models. Despite several attempts over the
last several decades to improve the optimality of decision tree algorithms, the CART [ 7] and C4.5
[19] decision tree algorithms (and other greedy tree-growing variants) have remained as dominant
methods in practice. CART and C4.5 grow decision trees from the top down without backtracking,
which means that if a suboptimal split was introduced near the top of the tree, the algorithm could
spend many extra splits trying to undo the mistake it made at the top, leading to less-accurate and
less-interpretable trees. Problems with greedy splitting and pruning have been known since the
early 1990’s, when mathematical programming tools had started to be used for creating optimal
binary-split decision trees [ 3,4], in a line of work [ 5,6,16,18] until the present [ 20]. However, these
techniques use all-purpose optimization toolboxes and tend not to scale to realistically-sized problems
unless simpliﬁed to trees of a speciﬁc form. Other works [ 11] make overly strong assumptions (e.g.,
independence of all variables) to ensure optimal trees are produced using greedy algorithms.
Authors are listed alphabetically.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.