Fig.2 Example of a convolutional DNN, LeNet-5, LeCun et al. ( 1998). The input is an image of hand-written
digit (0-9), the output is a probability over 10 possible outcomes (classes), which predicts the digit written
on the image. Diagram credit: Zhang et al. ( 2019)
learning model refers to the combination of network architecture, the learned parameters
(e.g., weights), and the configuration hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate). A key technicaladvantage of deep learning is that it can automatically learn the features of the input dataand map them to the desired output using large amounts of data without human interven-tion (feature engineering Hall 1999), which makes deep learning an end-to-end learning
approach that requires less domain knowledge. Nevertheless, understanding and interpret-ing the learned model is still a challenging comprehension task, and it is an active researchfield (Montavon et al. 2018; Tantithamthavorn et al. 2018;C h e ne ta l . 2016).
Figure 2illustrates a sample of a classical convolutional neural network (CNN), called
LeNet, which was developed by Yann LeCun to recognize hand-written digit images (Lecunet al. 1990, 1998). CNNs are mostly used in computer vision applications (Lawrence et al.
1997;K r i z h e v s k ye ta l .2012;K a r p a t h ye ta l .2014;Y ue ta l .2018). In addition to the typical
layers in the DNN, CNN has special types of layers, such as convolutional and pooling
layers. These layers can be organized in different architectures while each of the layers canhave a distinct set of parameters (e.g., activation function, size). For example, LeNet hastwo convolutional layers, each followed by a pooling layer, and two fully-connected layers,Fig. 2illustrates the architecture of LeNet and its configuration. The number of layers,
their configuration, the learning rate, and other parameters that drive the overall trainingprocess are known as hyperparameters. Optimizing the hyperparameters plays a critical
success factor in training the model. For example, the famous CNNs that won the ImageNetILSVRC competition (Russakovsky et al. 2015) each had a distinct set of hyperparameters
and a unique architecture, including ResNet (He et al. 2016), AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al.
2012), VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), and LeNet (LeCun et al. 1990).
2.2 DeepLearningModelingLifecycle
While both software and machine learning aim to introduce efficient and reliable solu-tions, their overall development lifecycles have differences that require diverse managementapproaches and toolsets. This subsection focuses on illustrating the development differencebetween machine learning and traditional software engineering. The goal is to shed light onthe main machine-learning development differences that cause its management challenges
versus traditional software development.
Unlike traditional software development that aims at meeting a set of well-defined func-
tional and non-functional requirements, the process of training an efficient deep learningmodel aims at optimizing a specific metric (e.g., minimizing a loss function). Table 1
illustrates some of the differences between traditional software development and machine(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 5 of 33 17