paper, ModelKB also aims at providing a cloud-based repository for publishing and explor-
ing trained models, similar to sharing source code at GitHub. Note that ModelKB in itself isnot a modeling framework, rather a complementary system that can automatically manageexperiments in their native framework, including TensorFlow 2.0, Keras, and PyTorch.
Automatic extraction and tracking of the metadata are achieved using Callbacks. We
provide customized Callbacks to collect metadata about each experiment. Metadata refersto all data that governs the learning task, including hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate),parameters (e.g., weights), and context data (e.g., required libraries). Once the metadatais automatically extracted, we use this data to automatically generate source code fordeployment, sharing, and reproducibility. We also provide a GUI to monitor the progressthroughout the lifecycle and allow users to explore and analyze their experiments. Thisis also beneficial to provide insights for future training tasks (e.g., what optimizationalgorithms work best for voice data). Moreover, our approach provides the means to runinference tasks using the deployed models. This allows deep learning practitioners to testtheir models on-the-fly using a web-based interface without having to code the predictionfunction. Thus, our system can facilitate the overall modeling lifecycle from training todeployment and sharing, which are otherwise expensive and time-consuming tasks.
In order to assess the usefulness of ModelKB in managing the overall modeling lifecy-
cle, we conducted a user study followed by a survey to collect users’ feedback. In all cases,ModelKB was used to manage the modeling lifecycle, including monitoring the experi-ments through their evolution, deploy particular trained models locally and remotely, sharemodels and reproduce them, and run simple inference tasks on the deployed models. Wealso assessed the overhead in execution time using ModelKB, which is negligible comparedto the long periods required for training a deep learning model.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: We present a brief background of deep
learning and its modeling challenges in Section 2. We introduce our approach in Section 3.
The implementation of ModelKB and its evaluation are presented in Sections 4and 5,
respectively. We present the current related work in Section 6. We conclude our paper in
Section 7and briefly discuss our future work in Section 8.
2 BackgroundandChallenges
This section introduces the context of our research work, including a brief introduction todeep learning, its modeling lifecycle, and discusses the modeling challenges that motivateour work–i.e., the absence of a proper model management system.
2.1 DeepLearning
Deep learning can be defined as a mapping function composed of simple but nonlinearprocessing layers that map raw input data (e.g., images) to the desired output (e.g., classifi-cation labels) by learning hierarchical representations of the data in each layer. The mappingprocess takes place in particular transformation layers, called hidden layers, which receive
weighted input from the input layer, transform it using nonlinear activation functions (e.g.,
ReLU), and then pass these values to the next hidden layers until the last layer in the struc-ture, i.e., output layer, which outputs the final results. The organization of these layers and
their connections are referred to as Deep Neural Network (DNN) Architecture . DNNs often
consist of tens to hundreds of transformation layers, hence the name deep learning . A deep(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 17Page 4 of 33