main features of ModelKB is to facilitate automatic deployment of trained models locally
and semi-automatic deployment on the cloud using “one-click” directly from the GUI.
First, ModelKB uses a templating engine to generate inference functions automatically
and Docker containers to wrap those functions and their requirements in a proper con-figuration to be run across platforms. To generate the inference functions automatically,we developed a set of Jinja templates capable of parsing the collected metadata and sub-sequently generating proper inference functions. A proper inference function is a Pythonfunction that “knows” the data type, size, and the preprocessing steps required by the corre-sponding model. It also knows the required libraries, dependencies, and the output type andshape of the model. Listing 4illustrates a snippet of a template that is used to generate infer-
ence functions for computer vision models (i.e., models that expect images as an input). AndListing 5illustrates a fully functional inference function that was automatically generated
by ModelKB. Our deployment templates support tabular, textual, and image data types.
Once an inference function is generated, ModelKB can then parse the required config-
urations and dependencies, such as the deep learning platform version, and build a Dockercontainer to facilitate deploying the model either locally or on the cloud (as shown inFig. 10). Notice that we also generate a set of REST APIs, one for inference and one for
downloading the entire Docker image. Docker images are also created automatically bygenerating a Docker file using our templating engine. For cloud deployment, the user isrequired to provide the authentication information to access their hosting service.
Our containers are currently served on the Kubernetes (https://kubernetes.io/ ) serving
system via remote procedure calls. Deep learning practitioners are not required to be famil-iar with the underlying serving functions; instead, ModelKB will set up the necessarycontainers and protocols. However, users are responsible for double-checking the generatedinference functions’ correctness, which rarely might require additional information that isnot present in the extracted metadata, such as class labels.
3.4 ModelSharing
ModelKB provides a simplified approach to share models among users based on whetheror not the remote user uses ModelKB. Specifically, we present two approaches to sharemodels:
Listing 5 A code snippet of an inference function that was automatically generated by ModelKB. Fully
qualified paths are shortened for visualization purposes(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 17 of 33 17