make great incentives for malicious adversaries. For example, adversaries can poison public
datasets with wrongly-labeled data, which can ease future attacks on models trained usingsuch datasets (Goodfellow et al. 2018). Another popular set of attacks includes adversarial
attacks that aim at introducing small perturbations in the input data to fool a deployed model,causing it to produce wrong predictions (Goodfellow et al. 2014). Therefore, we aim to
focus, in our future work, on automating the assessment of model vulnerability during thetraining phase, with minimal user intervention. We strongly believe that our customizedCallbacks developed in this work can facilitate the development of automated vulnerabilitytests without additional training cycles.
Our initials trials illustrate that Callbacks can be beneficial to integrate training cycles
with vulnerability tests to assess the privacy and security of deep learning models undertraining. For example, we developed a Callback to assess the model vulnerability towardsthe Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), which requires access to
the model and its parameters. We evaluated the vulnerability of the model while training aLeNet architecture using the MNIST-Digits dataset. Figure 13illustrates the accuracy of the
model with several values of epsilon (i.e., the amount of perturbation) added to the inputimages and their classification results given the shape: ground truth - >prediction result. We
notice that the accuracy drastically drops from about 98% without attacking the model toless than 10% when attacking the model with an epsilon value of 0.15.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Sirisha Rella and Duy Ho for their help in some implementation
parts in early versions of ModelKB. We would like to thank the Ph.D. students and the industry participants
who helped in conducting the user study and evaluate the software system. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for their time and effort in reviewing this work. The first author thanks Yasmin Hussein for her
help and support throughout this work. The coauthor, Yugyung Lee, would like to acknowledge the partialsupport of the NSF Grant No. 1747751
References
Abadi M, Agarwal A, Barham P, Brevdo E, Chen Z, Citro C, Corrado GS, Davis A, Dean J, Devin M,
Ghemawat S, Goodfellow I, Harp A, Irving G, Isard M, Jia Y, Jozefowicz R, Kaiser L, Kudlur M,
Levenberg J, Man ´e D, Monga R, Moore S, Murray D, Olah C, Schuster M, Shlens J, Steiner B, Sutskever
I, Talwar K, Tucker P, Vanhoucke V, Vasudevan V, Vi ´egas F, Vinyals O, Warden P, Wattenberg M,
Wicke M, Yu Y, Zheng X (2015) TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems.
https://www.tensorflow.org/, Software available from tensorflow.org
Abadi M, Barham P, Chen J, Chen Z, Davis A, Dean J, Devin M, Ghemawat S, Irving G, Isard M et al (2016)
Tensorflow: a system for large-scale machine learning. In: OSDI, vol 16, pp 265–283
Albishri AA, Shah SJH, Schmiedler A, Kang SS, Lee Y (2019) Automated human claustrum segmentation
using deep learning technologies. arXiv: 1911.07515
Bergstra J, Breuleux O, Bastien F, Lamblin P, Pascanu R, Desjardins G, Turian J, Warde-Farley D, Bengio
Y (2010) Theano: A cpu and gpu math compiler in python. In: Proc. 9th Python in Science Conf, vol 1,pp 3–10
Castelvecchi D (2016) Can we open the black box of ai? Nat 538(7623):20Chen X, Duan Y, Houthooft R, Schulman J, Sutskever I, Abbeel P (2016) Infogan: Interpretable representa-
tion learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp 2172–2180
Chollet F et al (2015) Keras. https://keras.io
DeepCognition (2019) One stop for deep learning developers. https://deepcognition.ai/
Documentation P (2019) Abstract syntax trees. https://docs.python.org/3/library/ast.html
Facebook (2019) Introducing fblearner flow: Facebook’s ai backbone. https://conferences.oreilly.com/strata/
big-data-conference-ny-2015/public/schedule/detail/42988
Garcia R, Sreekanti V, Yadwadkar N, Crankshaw D, Gonzalez JE, Hellerstein JM (2018) Context: The
missing piece in the machine learning lifecycle. In: KDD CMI Workshop, vol 114(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 17Page 30 of 33