a local software library that automates the overall modeling lifecycle. The Server side is
responsible for providing services for remote sharing and deployment. The managementtasks, e.g., data visualization and model deployment, are automated/semi-automated byModelKB. Python, an object-oriented programming language, is used for the implementa-tion tasks, and it is the language supported by our approach. The technical contributions ofModelKB include unifying the entire lifecycle management in a single system using a widerange of software methods and tools, including the use of Python Callbacks for extracting
metadata; Abstract Syntax Trees (AST) (Documentation 2019) for tracking data province,
and Jinja (Jinja 2019) template language for generating code automatically–to name a few.
Additionally, ModelKB facilitates its usage by providing the user with an intuitive GUI anda set of abstract APIs that can be used in any integrated development environment (IDE).The Server is mainly used to deploy trained models on the cloud and provides a set of RESTAPIs for the inference tasks. It is also used to facilitate publishing and sharing models. Pub-
lishing refers to the process of sharing a model publicly (akin to sharing source code on
GitHub) while Sharing refers to the process of sharing a model between users.
A ss h o w ni nF i g . 4, ModelKB consists of the following components: Metadata Extractor
for automatically extracting the metadata from the source code of different deep learningframeworks. Local Repository is the local storage unit for the metadata and other artifacts
implemented in two parts: a distributed file system and an SQLite database (SQL 2019)
organized by the Data Storage component. Visualization is used to visualize projects, exper-
iments, and their metadata. Upload and Download is responsible for sharing models among
users. Moreover, our system can automatically generate prediction functions that exposethe trained models for inference requests. The software features of ModelKB are accessi-ble through command-line promotes and a web-based Graphical User Interface,w h i c hi s
used to visualize, explore, compare, and test experiments. We further explain each softwarecomponent as follows.
3.1 AutomaticMetadataExtraction
The availability of metadata constitutes a concrete stepping-stone that enables the rest ofour system’s tasks. We use the term Metadata to refer to all types of data and parame-
ters that govern the modeling lifecycle, including hyperparameters, parameters, and contextmetadata. Hyperparameters refers to variables that govern the learning algorithm and are
set by the user, such as optimization algorithm, learning rate, loss function, and the numberof epochs. Parameters refers to the variables learned by the algorithm–specifically weights
and biases. Furthermore, we use the term Context metadata to refer to additional data about
Table2 A brief list of the types of metadata extracted from each experiment
Type Dataset Model Context
Metadata - Batch size - Pointer to dataset
location - Data type (e.g.,
images, tabular)- Preprocess-ing steps- Architecture and itsconfiguration - Parame-ters (weights and biases)- Hyperparameters (learn-
ing rate, epochs, input
shape, output shape, opti-mization algorithm, lossfunction, etc.) - Accuracy
and Loss- Project info.- User - Imple-
mentation - Environment -Dependencies(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 9 of 33 17