– Remote user with ModelKB: If the receiving user already has ModelKB installed on
their system, they can use the download feature to clone a remote model to their system
locally by providing the model’s global ID. This will download and unpack a Dockercontainer and create a new database entry to host the model locally.
– Remote user without ModelKB: A user that does not have ModelKB installed on their
system can download a remote project hosted on ModelKB Server as a zipped file,which contains a Docker container to run an image locally with the inference function,the model file, the inference function as a
.py file, and the training source code.
The major technical contribution here is facilitating the process of sharing a model.
Specifically, to download a model that is already hosted at ModelKB, the user needs only toprovide its unique ID at ModelKB Client-side, and the model download and set-up will beinitiated automatically. The new cloned model will be available to view locally and importedinto a proper IDE for further reusability. In contrast, the user can download a shared modelmanually, as explained above. Figure 10illustrates the interface that allows users to host
their models remotely in addition to a set of generated APIs for download and inferencetasks. An additional technical advantage of automatic APIs generation is that a user canshare their model functionality by exposing the API without sharing the actual model fileand, therefore, preserving the privacy and intellectual property of the model.
3.5 Reproducibility
With the recent surge in the number of research papers reporting state-of-the-art results indeep learning, the challenge of reproducing a deep learning experiment has come to theforefront. Without proper tracking of the experiment’s metadata and the environment set-up,it is difficult to share or reproduce a deep learning model. ModelKB addresses this issue byproviding the functionality to package the deep learning model, its metadata, artifacts into areusable docker image that can be shared through ModelKB Server, and then imported anddeployed on the other end. Packaging and downloading a model can be done directly fromthe ModelKB interface. Using the automatically extracted metadata and unifying the seedvalue among experiments, ModelKB can enhance the reproducibility of the trained models.
Due to the importance of model reproducibility, one of the most popular conferences in
the neural networks domain, NeurIPS, has recently published a reproducibility checklist
Fig.10 Share view allows users to share their experiments remotely, which automatically deploys the model
on the cloud and exposes REST APIs to run inference tasks and download the model(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 17Page 18 of 33