We followed the same approach mentioned above to develop the Callbacks for PyTorch.
However, unlike Keras and TensorFlow 2.0, PyTorch does not provide .fit() or
.fit_generator() functions to invoke model training. Therefore, we had first to
develop these two functions to imitate our approach in the case of Keras and TensorFlow 2.0.
We argue that developing these functions, especially given the availability of Keras open-course code, provide a much easier approach to reuse our Callbacks rather than developinga new set of Callbacks for PyTorch. This also holds true for other deep learning frameworks.Listing 6illustrates a snippet of our implementation for the
fit function in PyTorch, which
is inspired by the implementation of the fit f u n c t i o ni nK e r a s .
The rest of the implementation tasks were reasonably straightforward. We used the
SQLite database management system to facilitate the storage and query of the metadata. Wealso used a folder storage system to store the serialized models and other file-based artifacts.Developing the user interface was a straight forward process. We used Flask as the underly-ing server to serve the web-based interface locally. Visualizing the model’s architecture andconfiguration was adapted from Netron (Roeder 2019), an open-source tool that can visu-
alize the model’s architecture using an interactive interface, where the user can click anylayer to visualize its configuration. We used Jinja templating engine to write templates forautomatic inference function generation. We used Docker containers to package the modelsfor deployment and utilized Kubernetes for serving our models.
The wide range of software methods and tools used to enable this project illustrates the
importance of interdisciplinary research. In particular, this project demonstrates that someinnovative solutions from the machine learning domain heavily rely on technical solutions,methods, and tools from the software engineering community.
5E v a l u a t i o n
In order to assess the usefulness of ModelKB, we conducted a user study that consisted ofsix industry participants and seven academic researchers. We also assessed the performanceoverhead of using ModelKB by measuring its required execution time. The six industryparticipants included a Data Scientist from H&R Block Inc., an ML Engineer intern, and aTechnical Client Experience Professional both working at IBM, a Data Engineer from QuestAnalytics Inc., and a Product Manager and a Design Engineer from Sprint. Additionally,the user study included seven Ph.D. researchers from the Computer Science Department atUMKC, who are developing deep learning solutions for real-world problems.
None of the participants was involved in the development of ModelKB. Some of their
projects include classifying EEG signals, Alzheimer’s disease prediction (Velazquez et al.2019), building autoencoders for textual data (Goudarzvand et al. 2020), and image segmen-
tation for brain MRI scans (Albishri et al. 2019). Seven of the participants used Keras, four
of them used TensorFlow 2.0, and two of them used PyTorch. We asked the participants touse ModelKB to manage their deep learning projects and then answer a survey to quantifytheir feedback. Additionally, we collected data from their experiments on the performanceoverhead of using ModelKB (i.e., its execution time).
5.1 Objectives
The overarching goal of our user study is to assess the usefulness and applicability of oursoftware system in managing the development lifecycle of a realistic deep learning project,(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 21 of 33 17