Listing2 A code snippet illustrating how to use ModelKB in Keras
is identical in the case of TensorFlow 2.0; the only change needed is to use the proper
Callback name, which is TensorflowCallbacks and importing its library.
Another contribution of our work is the hierarchical organization of deep learning
projects. Each project consists of several experiments, often tens to hundreds. A project iscreated by the user when declaring the experiment object by specifying a project name, asshown in line 4 of Listing 2. This project is different from the project created by the IDE.
We use Projects to group experiments that belong to the same modeling task. Once a projectis created, we assign it a unique identifier, a timestamp, and a username. Then, as long asthe project name is not changed, all experiments created under that project will be groupedtogether. This holds in real practice since each project involves running tens to hundredsof experiments, where each experiment involves exploring different hyperparameters untilreaching a satisfying result. In our approach, users do not need to specify names for eachexperiment, which further reduces the modeling overhead. We automatically assign everyexperiment a unique ID and name it using a combination of its ID and the training start time.
For example, given an object detection task, the developer might declare her experiment
as
my_exp = Experiment(’FaceDetector’, ’Alice’) . Then, she experiments
with different hyperparameters, such as different optimization algorithms (SGD, Adam)and fine-tunes other hyperparameters. Every time Alice runs the experiment, she does notchange the name of the project. She only passes our Callbacks to her
fit function on the
first experiment run and then continues her modeling tasks as usual. The management taskswill be carried out automatically by ModelKB without any further intervention from Alice.
Similarly, users of PyTorch can use ModelKB to manage their experiments automatically.
However, unlike Keras and TensorFlow, PyTorch does not provide a predefined functionto train the model and evaluate its performance. Instead, users must implement the train-ing steps using predefined high-level functions. For example, a training cycle in PyTorchconsists of the following steps: After preparing the dataset and the neural network,
model ,
the user passes the data through the neural network in a process known as feedforwardusing the defined model,
pred = model(training_data) , then she computes the loss,
loss = criterion(pred, target) , with respect to the generated predictions, and
then updates the weights of the model optimizer.step() . These functions are then
wrapped inside a forloop, for e in epochs , to repeat each training cycle (i.e., epoch)
a certain number of times. Therefore, to facilitate the usage of ModelKB within PyTorch,we first implemented a high-level function wrapper, fit, and then developed the necessary
Callbacks to enable metadata extraction.(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 11 of 33 17