Out of the 13 participants, 1 disagree and 10 agree (out of which 5 strongly agree)t h a t
the automatically generated inference function is useful. However, it seemed from the sur-
vey that 2 participants had issues with the generated inference function; they disagree that
the functionality worked correctly. Upon further investigation, we learned that one of theparticipants was training a time series model using voice data. While ModelKB was help-ful to carry out all of its functionalities, it failed to generate a proper inference function forvoice data due to special data preprocessing steps that required a large number of externaldependencies, which are not downloaded automatically by our system, and hence the infer-ence function failed to work. Overall, not only can our system deploy a given model, but italso provides a proper web interface to test the deployed model, which participants foundvery helpful as discussed above.
A side-positive effect of the automatically-generated inference function was noticed by
researchers who build models for different domains than computer science. Specifically, itwas beneficial for practitioners whose research involved collaboration with medical doc-tors. The physicians had no technical knowledge about deep learning, but they providedthe datasets and defined the research problem. The casual inference feature, based onthe deployed model, provided the physicians with an excellent method to test the devel-oped models and assess their performance. Before ModelKB, researchers had to conductweekly meetings to run inference examples on their machines and report their results to thephysicians manually, case by case.
Reproducibility: Reproducibility is evaluated by the ability to reproduce similar results of
a previous experiment. In practice, it is critical to reproduce an older version of a modelthat is not available or reproduce a model given its metadata, such as models reported inresearch papers without their implementation. Following our tasks and survey, 8 participantsagree that ModelKB helps to facilitate model reproducibility, and 5 participants strongly
agree with that statement. Note that it is challenging to reproduce identical results due to the
high degree of randomness involved in training deep learning models. For example, everyoptimization algorithm (e.g., Stochastic Gradient Descent) has a dedicated technique toinitialize the weights in the first step of the training phase, which is challenging to reproduce.
Our experiments illustrated that when trying to reproduce a new model, the extracted
metadata helped reproduced models with very similar results, given identical datasets. Insome of the experiments, we activated our seed generator to improve reproducibility further.In the worst case, when the seed generator was not used, the highest accuracy differencein a reproduced experiment for an image classification task was 3.7%. Even in this subjectstudy, we considered such a result to be acceptable given that reproducing a model was notdone heuristically; instead, it was trained using the metadata and hyperparameters providedby our tool. Hence, the Metadata Extractors are helpful and feasible to provide a sturdystepping-stone for reproducing experiments.
ModelSharing: ModelKB provided an efficient approach to share models among partici-
pating members. To share a trained model, the developer had to first upload it to ModelKBServer, which is done automatically in one click. Once a model is published, other mem-bers were able to download the model, with one click as well, by providing the model’s ID.Participants reported that sharing models is very useful. Specifically, 8 participants strongly
agree , and 5 participants agree that ModelKB is helpful for sharing models.(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 25 of 33 17