i.e., automatically/semi-automatically monitor , organize, share, deploy, and visualize the
model throughout its lifecycle . Specifically, our evaluation objectives include the following:
1. We investigate the benefits, issues, and difficulties of using ModelKB in deep learning
projects. We are specifically interested in whether or not our software can extract and
track essential metadata about each experiment and how helpful it is to visualize thesemetadata for practitioners, e.g., data scientists.
2. We validate the semi-automatic deployment feature locally and on the cloud, which can
deploy a model that was managed using our system.
3. We illustrate the benefits and current limitations of the Sharing feature.4. We evaluate how our system can improve the reproducibility task. This goal is particu-
larly validated through sharing metadata among different team members working on thesame project to regenerate a previous experiment. We also compare our system repro-ducibility features to the recent reproducibility checklist required for papers acceptedat NeurIPS Conference ( https://nips.cc/ ).
5.2 Methodology
To conduct our evaluation, we developed a set of tasks that applies all features of ModelKBto be carried out by the participants and then asked them to answer a Likert-Scale surveyto quantify their feedback. Table 4lists the set of questions used in our survey, which was
developed and collected using Google Forms. Participants respond to each item in the surveyby a score from 1 to 5 (1: strongly disagree, 2: disagree, 3: neutral, 4: agree, 5: stronglyagree). The tasks included the following steps:
Table4 Questions of the user study questionnaire
It is important to manage deep learning lifecycle in my work.
It was easy to install ModelKB.
It was easy to use ModelKB for tracking experiments.ModelKB’s interface is intuitive and user-friendly.
Experiments tracking and monitoring in ModelKB is useful.
The hyperparameters collected and visualized by ModelKB are informative.ModelKB helped me to query my experiments and find their differences.
ModelKB correctly organized my experiments within projects.
The inference function generated by ModelKB worked correctly without errors.The inference function is useful.
Model architecture visualization was useful.
ModelKB facilitates sharing models.ModelKB facilitates reproducibility.
ModelKB saves a lot of time and effort in managing the deep learning lifecycle.
Overall, ModelKB helped me focus on the modeling tasks rather than their management.Overall, I am satisfied with ModelKB performance (i.e., its execution time).
I have used other model management tools before, e.g., Tensorboard.
ModelKB is easier to use compared to other model management tools.I will continue to use ModelKB in future projects.(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 17Page 22 of 33