(https://www.cs.mcgill.ca/ ∼jpineau/ReproducibilityChecklist.pdf ). Authors submitting
papers to the conference are required to answer every question on the list. Not only does
answering the entire checklist is a time-consuming process, but our study and experimentsprove that such information might be difficult to collect without using a proper management
Table3 A comparison between the Reproducibility Checklist requested by NeruIPS and ModelKB features
that facilitate reproducibility
The machine learning reproducibility checklist ModelKB support
A clear description of the math-
ematical setting, algorithm, and/or
model.Automatic extraction of the
model’s architecture, parameters,
and hyperparameters.
An analysis of the complexity(time, space, sample size) of any
algorithmNot supported
A link to a downloadable source
code, with specification of alldependencies, including external
libraries.A docker container includ-
ing source code, dependencyspecification, and all external
libraries
A complete description of the data
collection process, including sam-ple size.Name and sample size of thedataset and all preprocessing stepsare collected automatically.
A link to a downloadable version ofthe dataset or simulation environ-ment.The user can log the dataset link manually
An explanation of any data thatwere excluded, description of anypre-processing step.User can provide explanations ascomments. Preprocessing steps arerecorded automatically
The range of hyper-parameters
considered, method to select the
best hyper-parameter configu-ration, and specification of allhyper-parameters used to generateresultsHyperparameters from all experi-
ments are collected automatically.
An explanation of how samples
were allocated for training / valida-tion / testing.Information about the size andmetadata for each group are col-lected automatically. Explanationscan be provided by the user as com-
ments
The exact number of evaluation
runs.Collected automatically.
A description of how experimentswere run.Automatic collection of contextmetadata, environment, time, data,username, etc.
A clear definition of the specific
measure or statistics used to report
resultsAccuracy and loss metrics are
extracted automatically. Additional
metrics can be logged manually bythe user.
A description of results with central
tendency (e.g. mean) & variation
(e.g. stddev).Not supported.
A description of the computing infrastructure used. Automatic collection of context
metadata, environment, time, data,
username, etc.(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 19 of 33 17