Execution time overhead: We evaluated the execution time overhead in training three
architectures of different sizes from small to large: LeNet, ResNet50, and ResNet150 mod-
els with and without using ModelKB. We trained each model for 50, 100, and 150 epochs,using MNIST dataset for training the LeNet and CIFAR-10 for ResNet50 and ResNet150.We conducted the experiments on a Linux Ubuntu 16.04 machine, 16 GB RAM, andNVIDIA GTX 1080 GPU. Overall, the execution time difference averaged 2 to 6 secondsmore when using ModelKB to manage the experiments. However, we argue that this timedifference is neglectable compared to the expensive training time itself, which lasted forhours. The survey also illustrated that all of the participants agree that they were satisfiedwith the ModelKB performance (i.e., execution time).
Overall, all participants reported that using ModelKB eliminated the need for manually
keeping track of the hyperparameters and metadata. They also agreed that using Mod-elKB required minimal code changes. Overall, 9 out of 13 participants strongly agree that
ModelKB saves a lot of time and effort in managing the lifecycle tasks and the other 4 par-ticipants agree with this statement. Additionally, 11 out of 13 participants strongly agree
that ModelKB helps them focus on the actual modeling tasks rather than their management,which is usually done manually. The survey also illustrated that more than 70% of the par-ticipants did not use a management tool before due to several factors, including the codechanges required by such tools. Additionally, out of the 30% participants who used othermanagement tools, 75% of them mentioned that ModelKB is easier to use than some toolsthey used previously. The other 25% mentioned that ModelKB was “somehow easier to usethan other tools.” In all cases, we argue that compared to the tools that participants usedbefore, such as TensorBoard, ModelKB is the only tool the covers all phases of the lifecycle.
5.4 ThreatstoValidity
A primary risk to our evaluation is the small number of study participants. However, weargue that our study participants represent a wide range of deep learning developers, fromacademic researchers to machine learning engineers to software developers. Moreover, thestudy subjects, i.e., models, included a wide range of deep learning models from multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) to autoencoders, U-Nets, ResNet150, and GAN models. Thus,those study subjects covered a wide range of neural network architectures, learning algo-rithms, optimization approaches, different tasks, and large datasets with different data types,including images and textual data.
Another possible threat to our validity is using a predefined cloud serving system for
deploying the models, which might not be scalable for a production-level system. In prac-tice, systems like ModelKB will not provide “free” serving and deployment for models onthe cloud. Users will have first to set up and connect ModelKB to their deployment servers.Then, ModelKB will be responsible for automatically collecting all required configurations,including dependencies, model parameters, the automatically generated prediction function,and then creating the docker image to be deployed on the user’s selected service.
6 RelatedWork
There are two main approaches to manage the modeling lifecycle. First, using a graph-ical workflow management system that provides user-friendly drag-and-drop features tobuild and train the model, which is mainly adopted by industry systems such as MicrosoftMachine Learning Studio (Microsoft 2017), Digits (Nvidia 2019), and Deep Cognition(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 17Page 26 of 33