Table 1 A brief comparison between conventional software development and Machine Learning
development
Traditional software development Machine learning development
Goal To meet a set of functional require-
mentsTo optimize a metric (e.g., maxi-
mize accuracy)
Quality Depends on written code (i.e.,
developers expertise)Depends on data and used hyperpa-
rameters
Tools Each entity, e.g., industry, uses a
specific software stackInvolves experimenting with a wide
range of libraries, platforms, and
algorithms
Maintenance Less frequent based on version basis Requires continuous monitoring
and maintenance (training on new
samples)
Management Uses mature tools, e.g., git Often done manually using spread-
sheets due to the lack of mature
management tools
Deployment Done by software developers who
are familiar with the systemReal-world models are deployed in
a collaborative manner among ML
engineers and software engineers
Sharing Uses mature tools, e.g., GitHub Done manually or using git-like
systems that are not built for model
sharing
Reproducibility Easy to achieve Very challenging due to limited
tools that track all involved hyper-
parameters and requirements
learning development, which motivate the need for novel software tools that facilitate the
management of the machine learning lifecycle. In the Table, we focus on the differencesonly, not the commonalities. For example, both tasks’ goal is to create useful applicationsthat help the end-user, but here we point to the differences that introduce management chal-lenges. Note that “Goal” in the Table refers to the development objective, not the overallprocess of creating a software or a model. Additionally, “Quality” refers to the leading qual-ity differences in both cases. For example, executing the same implementation (code) on agiven input will always produce the same results in a traditional software tool. This is nottrue in machine learning, where the quality of the final output, during the training phase,depends on several other factors than the code implementation, such as random idealiza-tion of the DNN. Thus, we consider that the quality of traditional software developmentdepends mainly on the quality of its implementation, while it depends on additional factorsin the case of machine learning development. Additionally, due to limited knowledge of themeaning of well-trained models, the model development process is carried out in an ad-hoc,trial-and-error approach by experimenting with different sets of hyperparameters, data trans-formations, and even different software libraries. For example, Fig. 3illustrates a real-world
scenario of a large number of models produced by competitors solving real-world problemswith deep learning at www.kaggle.com. Note that competitors upload the best model they
produce only. Nevertheless, we notice that top competitors submit an average of 140 mod-els before the competition deadline. In contrast, a typical software engineering hackathonincludes a single submission per team.
Therefore, we first need to understand the modeling lifecycle in deep learning, which
typically goes through the following phases (refer to Fig. 1):(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 17Page 6 of 33