The recent surge in deep learning research and applications has led to the development
of several systems that focus on training deep learning models, such as Theano (Bergstra
et al. 2010), TensorFlow by Google (Abadi et al. 2015), CNTK by Microsoft (Seide and
Agarwal 2016), PyTorch by Facebook (Paszke et al. 2017), and Keras (Chollet and et al
2015). Note that Keras–one of the most popular libraries for building neural networks–is aset of high-level APIs, written in Python, capable of running on top of TensorFlow, CNTK,or Theano. These systems focus on the Experiment phase (i.e., training and validation)while largely ignore model management tasks. Without a proper approach and tool supportto address the lifecycle management challenges, deep learning practitioners spend lots oftime and effort to track their experiments, log the used parameters, version their models,and visualize their results–to name a few. Not only is manual management expensive, time-consuming, and inefficient, but it also hinders subsequent tasks–especially model sharingand reproducibility.
As these challenges became more evident recently, several systems from academia and
industry emerged to address different aspects of the management challenges. Examplesfrom academia include ModelDB (Vartak et al. 2016), ModelHub (Miao et al. 2017a),
ProvDB (Miao and Deshpande 2018; Schelter et al. 2017), Ground (Hellerstein et al. 2017;
K u m a re ta l .2016), and our own previous work (Gharibi et al. 2019a, b). While most of
the work in academia is often made available as open-source systems, these systems eitheraddress a single phase of the modeling lifecycle, e.g., tracking experiments, or require sig-nificant code changes to instrument the source code, which adds extra overhead in themodeling lifecycle.
The industry has also realized the importance of machine learning management systems,
which led to the emergence of several tools. For example, FBLearner Flow for PyTorch(Facebook 2019), TensorBoard for TensorFlow (Google 2019), Digits by Nvidia (Nvidia
2019), and Michelangelo by Uber (Uber 2019). However, these systems restrict the user
to specific frameworks, processing pipelines, and deployment options. Other managementsystems include tools that recently emerged from industry startups that realized the crit-ical need for management systems, such as CometML ( https://www.comet.ml/), Weights
and Biases ( https://www.wandb.com), Neptune ( https://neptune.ml/ ), and MLFlow (Zaharia
et al. 2018). Overall, these systems often address a particular phase of the modeling lifecycle
or require code changes to manage the modeling lifecycle.
To this end, we present a unified approach for managing the deep learning lifecycle
end-to-end. We equip our approach with a software system for automated model manage-ment, named ModelKB (Model Knowledge Base). Our overarching goal is to facilitateand accelerate the modeling lifecycle with minimal user intervention. Our approach’s nov-elty crystallizes in unifying the lifecycle management in a single system and utilizingthe automatically extracted metadata to automate subsequent tasks, including deployment,sharing, and reproducibility. The main objectives are to monitor models, track their evolu-tion, facilitate reproducibility, accelerate deployment, and enhance collaboration, i.e., modelsharing and publishing. This allows data scientists to focus on the modeling process with-out worrying about managing their experiments or being restricted to a specific modelingframework.
Our main contribution is a unified approach to manage the deep learning lifecycle
equipped with a software system–ModelKB. ModelKB can (1) automatically extract andmonitor the model’s metadata and experiments’ artifacts; (2) visualize, query, and com-pare experiments; (3) semi-automatically deploy models locally and on the cloud forsimple inference tasks; and (4) reproduce models when needed through model sharing andpublishing. ModelKB is a stand-alone Python library. While not a direct contribution of this(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 3 of 33 17