as a Deep Neural Network (DNN), can be defined as a mapping function composed of
a large number of simple but nonlinear processing layers that map raw input data (e.g.,
images) to the desired output (e.g., classification labels) by learning hierarchical represen-tations from the data. Unlike traditional machine learning algorithms (e.g., Support VectorMachines) that require a thorough feature engineering phase before training the model (Hall1999), deep learning is an end-to-end learning approach that can automatically learn thefeatures from the input data (Goodfellow et al. 2016). While this key advantage of deep
learning plays a significant role in its wide-spread and adoption, it is also considered oneof the main reasons that hinder the understandability and interpretation of deep learningmodels. Consequently, it is not uncommon to refer to DNNs as black box models/functions
(Castelvecchi 2016; Vartak and Madden 2018b; Garcia et al. 2018).
Due to limited knowledge on the meaning of well-trained DNN parameters (i.e., weights
and biases), training a deep learning model is an ad-hoc search task that goes throughtens to hundreds of iterations ( experiments) before arriving at a satisfactory result. Experi-
ments involve exploring different architectures, data transformations, and hyperparameters(e.g., optimization algorithm and learning rate). Each experiment produces a large num-ber of artifacts such as learned parameters, validation scores (e.g., loss and accuracy), andsource code. Thus, the final selection of an efficient model heavily relies on comparing theexperiments’ artifacts since the best model is not necessarily the last trained model.
Figure 1illustrates the typical deep learning lifecycle, which we summarize in two
phases: Experiments and Deployment. The Experiments phase focuses on preparing thedata, creating or reusing an existing architecture, training the model, and validating itsperformance. The Deployment phase focuses on deploying the model in a production envi-ronment. Not only does the deep learning lifecycle involves several phases, but it alsoinvolves several members with different backgrounds and technical expertise, such as datascientists, machine learning engineers, and software developers. For example, given a pre-diction task with a well-defined objective, the data scientist collects and prepares the data,the machine learning engineer focuses on developing and training the model, and the soft-ware engineer works on deploying the trained model in a production environment (e.g.,software system, cloud service, edge device).
Therefore, in addition to the common development challenges known to the software
engineering community, e.g., code review and debugging (Ghezzi et al. 2002), the heuristic
and iterative nature of deep learning presents a new set of challenges–particularly managing
a large number of experiments and artifacts throughout their lifecycle (Sculley et al.
2015; Miao et al. 2017b; Kumar et al. 2017; Schelter et al. 2018a; Vartak and Madden
2018b). We define deep learning lifecycle management as the task of tracking, organizing,
visualizing, and facilitating the essential tasks of the lifecycle (i.e., training, evaluation,and deployment) and then transferring this data into information for sharing, analysis, andreproducibility.
Fig.1 Deep Learning Development Lifecycle. Adopted from Miao et al. ( 2017b)1 (2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 17 Page 2 of 33