– Step 1: Clone ModelKB from our private repository in GitHub and set it up locally.
– Step 2: Use ModelKB to track experiments and then visualize work evolution using its
GUI dashboard.
– Step 3: Use ModelKB to select the top three performing models in a given project and
find out their differences and what parameters lead to producing the best model.
– Step 4: Use ModelKB to print the model’s architecture.– Step 5: Use ModelKB to run inference tasks using the trained model. This step must
be without any user intervention., i.e., the user should not implement the inferencefunction or expose it on a GUI manually. Instead, the user should use ModelKB featuresto automatically generate the inference function and expose it via a GUI.
– Step 6: Deploy the model remotely using ModelKB’s GUI and use the automatically
generated inference API to run inferences from a different application.
– Step 7: Delete the deep learning project from ModelKB and download it from the
remote Server. Alternatively, download the hosted model as a zipped file and run theinference function locally using the downloaded docker container.
These tasks were performed on different machines, different integrated development
environments including PyCharm, Spider, and Jupyter Notebooks, and three deep learningframeworks, including Keras, TensorFlow 2.0, and PyTorch (Fig. 11).
5.3 Results
Workmotivation: Before discussing the validation of ModelKB, it is essential to mention
here that our first question in the survey asked participants about the importance of manag-
ing the lifecycle of their work. 92.3% of the participants (i.e., 12 out of 13) strongly agree
that managing the deep learning lifecycle is important in their work. Only one participant
I am satisfied with ModelKB's performance.
ModelKB helped me focus on modeling tasks.
ModelKB saves time and effort in management tasks.
ModelKB facilitates reproducibility.
ModelKB facilitates sharing models.
Model architecture visualization was useful.The inference function was useful.The inference function worked correctly without errors.ModelKB correctly organized my experiments within projects.
ModelKB helped me to query experiments and their differences.
Hyperparameters' collection and visualization are informative.
Experiments tracking and monitoring is helpful.
ModelKB's interface is intuitive and user-friendly. 
It was easy to use ModelKB for tracking experiments.
It was easy to download ModelKB.
It is important to manage the DL lifecycle in my work.Disagree
Neutral Agree Strongly Agree
Fig.11 Likert-scale answers to the survey. Total number of participates: 13(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 23 of 33 17