Fig.5 The Dashboard of ModelKB (landing page)
3.2 DataVisualization
ModelKB provides a local web-based visualization that allows users to explore, analyze,
compare, and run inference tasks. Specifically, ModelKB provides three main views: Dash-board, Project view, and Experiment view. The GUI of ModelKB is built on top of Flask
(https://palletsprojects.com/p/flask/ ), a set of open-source tools and libraries to build web
applications. We selected Flask because it is a lightweight framework, easy to implement,and requires little to no external dependencies. Moreover, Flask is popular and has anoutstanding support community, making it easy to extend and debug (Grinberg 2018).
After each experiment, we print the local URL address of our flask-based server, where
ModelKB is hosted. The user can click on the active URL address to visit the landing pageof ModelKB–the Dashboard. The Dashboard (see Fig. 5) provides a high-level view of
all projects stored in the system and a tabular view of the recent experiments sorted bydate. Each of the projects is represented in a blue box (the user can select different colortemplates) that shows the project’s title, owner, application (e.g., stock prediction), and thetotal number of experiments inside that project. Clicking on a particular project will lead tothe Project view, which we explain as follows.
The Project view, illustrated in Fig. 6, lists a summary of all experiments related to the
open project. The user can customize the information shown in the table using a drop-down menu on top of the table. The user can select to show the number of layers in eachexperiment, the accuracy score, and the learning rate. Moreover, the user can also selectdifferent filters to query specific results. For example, the user can search for experimentswith a specific learning rate and an accuracy score over a given value created betweentwo specific dates. For example, in Fig. 6, we query models with
epochs > 10 &&
Optimizer=Adam && Accuracy >0.9 . Another important feature of this view is the
ability to compare two models. The user can select two models and click the Compare but-ton. This will lead to a side-by-side comparison for the two models based on the data thatthe user selects to view (e.g., architecture, accuracy, used dataset). Clicking on any of theexperiments will lead to the experiment view. Note that users can download those tables in(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 13 of 33 17