While not an explicit goal of this work, but a direct technical contribution is the devel-
opment of high-level abstract functions, fit andfit_generator for PyTorch, inspired
by Keras implementation. Refer to Section 4for more implementation details. On the one
hand, we found that these functions can significantly reduce the overhead in implementing
the training cycle, as explained above. Other well-known frameworks, specifically fast.ai
(www.fast.ai), have already done this–provided high-level APIs to use PyTorch. We did
not reinvent the wheel in this work, rather developed the two functions necessary for ourapproach. Thus, reducing the overhead in implementing those abstract functions is a pos-itive side-effect of our approach. On the other hand, these functions drastically simplifiedthe process of extracting the metadata using Callbacks. We needed to implement both
fit
andfit_generator similar to Keras’ implementation to facilitate reusing/extending our
already-developed Callbacks for PyTorch.
Listing 3illustrates a code snippet of using ModelKB in PyTorch. The user needs first
to import the necessary libraries, define an Experiment object and initialize its requiredparameters, and finally pass the
PytorchCallbacks function with the experiment object
as a parameter to the fit function, which is also provided by ModelKB.
An essential feature of our approach is the ability to unify the seed value among
experiments–if needed. It is challenging to automatically obtain the seed value from theunderlying system during the training phase. If known and managed correctly, the seedvalue can improve the reproducibility of experiments since training deep neural networksdepends on several stochastic techniques and involves several random variables. However,extracting the seed value from the system is not an easy task, and sometimes that value isnot accessible. Therefore, we allow the user to manually set and unify a seed value acrossall experiments to facilitate reproducibility. Note that several deep learning practitionersalready follow this training convention but lack the proper tools to track the seed valuesacross different experiments.
At the end of the training cycle, we organize the extracted metadata into dictionaries and
store them in a local database along with the model file (i.e., model architecture and param-eters) and implementation files (source code). The model file is then parsed to visualizeits architecture and per-layer configuration. Then, the deployment functionality is invokedto generate a prediction function for the inference task automatically. After that, a web-based dashboard is automatically created and populated with the experiment metadata andartifacts, and its URL is sent to the user’s IDE.
Listing3 A code snippet illustrating how to use ModelKB in PyTorch using our customized fitfunction(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 17Page 12 of 33