Fig.3 An example illustrating the large number of models ( Entries) submitted by top three winners of three
randomly selected Kaggle competitions
– Data Preparation: Collecting and preparing the datasets needed to develop the model.
– Model Search: Searching for a model with a similar goal for reusability through the
transfer learning process, rather than creating a new model from scratch. However, if
no such model exists, a new model needs to be created.
– Training and Evaluation: Training and evaluating the model are the most expensive
and time-consuming tasks. As mentioned before, training a deep learning model can bedefined as an iterative search problem that goes through tens to hundreds of iterationsbefore arriving at a satisfactory result.
– Model Deployment: After training a model, it is necessary to deploy it in a production
environment (e.g., a software system) or expose its functionality through APIs.
– Maintenance: Deployed models still require continuous monitoring to identify defects
and continuously maintain their performance. Here, the maintenance process ofteninvolves retraining the model on new data instances that were not included in theprevious training dataset.
Therefore, the iterative nature and the large number of involved parameters and arti-
facts in deep learning projects introduce a new set of challenges–particularly managing themodeling lifecycle–which we present in the next subsection.
2.3 ChallengesofDeepLearningModelingLifecycle
The deep learning lifecycle involves experimenting with several neural architectures,datasets, learning algorithms, and configuration hyperparameters over hundreds of exper-iments. Metadata about these experiments and their artifacts play a significant role ininforming the next set of experiments and identifying best-performing models. However,without a proper management system, experiments and their metadata are lost, and valuabletime and resources are wasted–sometimes even running the same experiments. Subse-quently, the lack of an adequate management system for deep learning has revealed severalchallenges that hinder its overall lifecycle, including the following tasks:
– Monitoring Experiments: Training a deep learning model is a trial-and-error approach
experimenting with different sets of hyperparameters, data transformations, and even
different software libraries. Each experiment generates a rich set of artifacts that canbe used to analyze, explore, and derive insights about future experiments (e.g., what
hyperparameters work best with similar datasets ). These artifacts play a critical role
in comparing trained models when identifying the best-produced model. It is currentlychallenging to track each experiment, model evaluation, analyze abnormal behaviors,identify data provenance, and reason for the produced results. The large number ofinvolved metadata elements make it challenging to track experiments manually, andit is expensive and time-consuming to build efficient automated tracking systems.(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 Page 7 of 33 17