answered that they agree with this statement, which is probably due to their technical back-
ground. Similar conclusions have been drawn in previous studies that interviewed a much
larger number of participants (Vartak 2018a).
InstallingModelKB: It was expected before setting up the user study that ModelKB would
require installing several dependencies before becoming fully-functional. ModelKB is stilla research tool that requires some efforts to be installed, which is not at the core of its objec-tives. Nevertheless, 10 of the participants were able to install ModelKB on their own. Weprovided direct assistance to install ModelKB for 3 participants only. Therefore, we noticefrom the survey that 46% of the participants were neutral, 31% agree, and 23% disagree thatinstalling ModelKB was easy. While this question, in particular, does not affect the useful-ness of ModelKB, we included it in the survey to assess the easiness of its installation forfuture improvements.
Trackingexperiments: ModelKB was able to extract the metadata from all projects, across
all experiments, with minimal user intervention, and using all three frameworks. About 77%of the participants strongly agree that it was easy to use ModelKB to track their experiments.
Users had to add two lines of source code only to their existing or new experiments to initi-ate ModelKB. 12 out of 13 participants answered that they strongly agree on the usefulness
of the experiment tracking in ModelKB. Participants also agree that the collected metadata
is informative and helpful in providing information to lead the upcoming experiments. How-ever, one of the open comments that were provided by a participant mentioned the lack ofseed values among the collected hyperparameters. This is because seed values that are notcontrolled by the user are extremely challenging–if not impossible–to be extracted. How-ever, ModelKB allows the user to set a specific seed value and unify it across experiments,which in this case, the seed value will be collected automatically.
visualizationandanalysis: All participants agree that ModelKB visualization and its inter-
face are intuitive and user-friendly. Additionally, metadata visualization played a criticalrole in analyzing and comparing the experiments, which without our system, is often donemanually, and expensive runs are lost unsaved. Practitioners were able to compare theirexperiments and derive new insights regarding the next experiments using the visual inter-face. For example, it was easy to practice the early stopping regularization technique by
looking at the accuracy graphs generated by our system to detect overfitting visually. Itwas also beneficial to organize the work among different members of the team by learningwhich member ran what experiment. Overall, 6 participants strongly agree,6 agree ,a n d1
was neutral that ModelKB visualization helps query and compare experiments.
Automatic deployment: To validate the importance and benefits of the semi-automated
deployment feature, we asked our study subjects to deploy their models on a free web serv-ing service, such as Amazon Web Service or Kubernetes, and provide APIs for runninginference tasks remotely. Only five of the thirteen participants (two academic researchersand three software developers) had previous expertise deploying models on the could. Someof the participants–who did not have a previous experience deploying models–were ableto deploy their models and provide REST APIs for inference tasks in as little as threedays, while other participants needed about two weeks. In contrast, ModelKB is capable ofdeploying the model both locally and in the cloud within seconds.(2021)26:1 EmpirSoftwareEng 7 17Page 24 of 33