(a) Visualization results on
Mean Magnitude features of
Channels (MMC).Method mini CUB
Pretrained 0.5567 1.5584
FEAT [55] 0.5386 1.5367
Ours 0.1256 1.2550
(b) Maximum Mean Discrep-
ancy (MMD) results on differ-
ent test datasets.
Figure 5: (a) MMC before and after applying the pro-
posed FGFL method. (b) MMD results of few-shot meth-
ods trained over miniImageNet. The lower MMD value in-
dicates a smaller gap and better performance. ‘Pretrained’
denotes the feature extractor ( i.e., ResNet-12) pre-trained
on the training set of miniImageNet.
Augmented classification loss. To better classify samples
in the query set Q, we use generated support images Sumin
Xumto enhance the support set for classification. Specifi-
cally, we build a new support set by combining the original
support and unmasked support set as Saug=S ∪ S um.
Hence, we conduct few-shot classification on query set Q
based on Saugand minimize the cross-entropy loss:
Laug=QX
j=1LCE(fθ(Xj;Saug), yj). (11)
3.2.3 Objective, Model Training, and Inference
Combining with the standard few-shot classification, the
overall objective function is defined as:
Ltotal=Lsp
cls+Lfq
cls+λ1·Lswtri+λ2·Lcwctr+λ3·Laug,
(12)
where Lsp
clsandLfq
clsrepresent the cross-entropy loss for
few-shot classification in the spatial and frequency branch,
respectively. λ1,λ2, and λ3denote the weighting parame-
ters of the corresponding losses, respectively.
During the training phase, we first generate frequency
masks based on the frequency branch and then adopt the
proposed multi-level metrics for model training. During the
inference time, our proposed method strictly follows the in-
ductive setting. We only feed the support set into the fre-
quency branch to generate unmasked support images to re-
fine the support set for classification.
3.3. Empirical Validation
The proposed FGFL framework aims to utilize frequency
information to guide the spatial feature extractor towards
class-discriminative features and avoid over-fitting to thetraining patterns, thus generalizing well to testing scenar-
ios. To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method,
we conduct experiments about learned features on two as-
pects: channel distribution shift and domain distance.2
Mean Magnitude of Channels (MMC) Luo et al. [26]
shows the channel bias problem affects the generalizabil-
ity of few-shot methods and utilizes MMC to visualize and
measure the channel response to features, where effective
few-shot methods might have a more uniform MMC curve
in the testing set. Inspired by this work, we visualize the
MMC before and after applying FGFL over miniImageNet.
We can observe a channel magnitude change in Figure 5 (a),
which validates that our proposed method can alleviate the
channel bias problem, thus improving the performance.
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) The MMD [15] is
a distance measure between two domains based on the em-
bedding of distribution measures in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space, which has been widely applied in transfer
learning problems. We adopt class-wise MMD to measure
the distribution gap between the training and testing sets
with different methods trained over miniImageNet. Figure 5
(b) shows different gaps between one training set and dif-
ferent testing sets. We can also observe that our proposed
method helps to reduce the domain shift.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
Datasets. We conduct extensive experiments on four few-
shot datasets, i.e.,miniImageNet [40], tiered ImageNet [34],
CUB [41], and FS-DomainNet [6].
Implementation Details. For fair comparisons with pre-
vious methods, we adopt the ResNet-12 network with
[64,160,320,640] channels as our backbone in each
branch, and set the input image size as 84×84for all
datasets. We combine our proposed FGFL with FEAT [55],
which adopts a linear projection layer for feature adaptation.
We randomly select 15 samples of each class to construct
the query set for 5-way 1-shot and 5-way 5-shot settings.
The backbone networks are pre-trained on the training set
following the typical classification task. The weighting pa-
rameters λ1,λ2, andλ3are all set to 0.1to balance the scale
between the classification loss and the corresponding losses
for all datasets.3
4.2. Few-shot Classification
We conduct experiments on two standard few-shot set-
tings, i.e., general and fine-grained classification, shown in
Table 2. Table 2 (a) shows that our proposed FGFL can
2More details are included in Supplementary.
3More details about datasets and experimental settings are included in
Supplementary.
11819