Frequency Guidance Matters in Few-Shot Learning
Hao Cheng1Siyuan Yang1Joey Tianyi Zhou2,3Lanqing Guo1Bihan Wen1*
1Nanyang Technological University2Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
3Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), A*STAR, Singapore
{hao006,siyuan005,lanqing001,bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg zhouty@cfar.a-star.edu.sg
Abstract
Few-shot classification aims to learn a discriminative
feature representation to recognize unseen classes with few
labeled support samples. While most few-shot learning
methods focus on exploiting the spatial information of im-
age samples, frequency representation has also been proven
essential in classification tasks. In this paper, we inves-
tigate the effect of different frequency components on the
few-shot learning tasks. To enhance the performance and
generalizability of few-shot methods, we propose a novel
Frequency-Guided Few-shot Learning framework (dubbed
FGFL), which leverages the task-specific frequency com-
ponents to adaptively mask the corresponding image in-
formation, with a novel multi-level metric learning strat-
egy including a triplet loss among original, masked and un-
masked image as well as a contrastive loss between masked
and original support and query sets to exploit more dis-
criminative information. Extensive experiments on four
benchmarks under several few-shot scenarios, i.e., stan-
dard, cross-dataset, cross-domain, and coarse-to-fine an-
notated classification, are conducted. Both qualitative and
quantitative results show that our proposed FGFL scheme
can attend to the class-discriminative frequency compo-
nents, thus integrating those information towards more ef-
fective and generalizable few-shot learning.
1. Introduction
Deep learning typically relies on large-scale annotated
datasets to achieve superior results on image classification
tasks. However, the learned deep models may fail to gener-
alize under some severe conditions, e.g., few data or annota-
tions. Correspondingly, the task to classify a query sample
using only a few labeled data is known as few-shot classifi-
cation [10, 40]. The key challenge is to learn the discrim-
inative feature representation that can be generalized from
the given training set to novel testing classes. Recently, sev-
*Corresponding author.
Support Query
Frequency 
MaskFigure 1: Visualizations of samples with different frequency
masks on the CUB dataset [41]. Samples with the same
color box belong to the same class. It is easier to distin-
guish two classes with masked specific frequency compo-
nents. Each square on the left represents the masked status
of corresponding frequency components, i.e., the dark and
light color for masked and reserved, respectively. For each
row (column), top-to-bottom and left-to-right represent low
frequency to high frequency, respectively.
eral few-shot methods [36, 48,58] have applied the meta-
learning framework [40] to build a discriminative feature
space by simulating numerous meta-tasks to obtain the gen-
eralized feature representation, achieving superior perfor-
mance for recognizing novel classes.
However, very recent studies [3, 17,26,39] report that
existing methods may fail to generalize well to novel classes
due to large domain gaps between training and testing
sets, e.g., from general to fine-grained tasks or a specific
domain. In these cases, the learned feature embeddings
based on spatial images may capture excessive domain-
variant information from the training patterns, leading to
degraded performance in the test scenario with a large do-
main gap. Several domain adaptation-based few-shot al-
gorithms [26, 37,39,57] have been proposed to alleviate
the domain shift issues on few-shot classification. These
This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
11814