Original Image Image w/o High FCs Image w/ High FCsCUB Quickdraw
Figure 2: T-SNE visualization of all image features of 20
test classes in the CUB (top) and 15 test classes in the
Quickdraw (bottom) dataset. The few-shot model is trained
on the miniImageNet dataset. A cluster that is clearer and
more compact within each class is better.
Method miniImageNet CUB
Quickdraw
ProtoNet [
36] 79.86 66.29 64.32
ProtoNet w/ High FCs 56.47 37.96 66.26
ProtoNet w/o High FCs 77.75 67.09 65.99
Table 1: Few-shot classification results under the 5-way 5-
shot setting trained with the miniImageNet dataset. Pro-
toNet is trained on miniImageNet dataset and evaluated on
several datasets with specific frequency components.
source and target domain samples. GFNet [32] considers
the attention in the FFT frequency domain to replace the
self-attention module in the vision transformer. However,
FFT requires double the memory for complex coefficients.
Therefore, some recent works [4, 31,50] consider apply-
ing the Discrete Cosine Transformation (DCT) to learn in
the frequency domain. For example, Wang et al. [43] first
applies the DCT to speed up the network. Instead of in-
putting RGB pixels, Gueguen et al. [16] convert the JPEG-
compressed image to its 8×8block DCT coefficients as the
input of the neural network. FcaNET [31] adopts DCT to
generalize the compression of the channel attention mecha-
nism in the frequency domain. Specifically, Chen et al. [4]
select pre-defined channels in the DCT frequency domain
to improve the performance for few-shot classification.
In this work, we also employ the DCT to transform the
images to the frequency domain. Unlike previous work [4],
we consider the interaction between spatial and frequency
domains and learn to generate the discriminative frequency
mask to enhance learning in the spatial domain.
3. Proposed Method
In this section, we first investigate the impact of fre-
quency components in different few-shot classification sce-
narios. Then the proposed FGFL framework is describedand explained in detail, followed by the loss function of our
method and empirical validations.
3.1. Frequency Analysis on Few-shot Classification
We first investigate the impact of frequency components
on the generalized performance of current few-shot meth-
ods under different few-shot settings by removing and pre-
serving partial frequency components of each image in the
meta-task for class prediction.
To generate the frequency representation of an input
RGB image X∈RH×W×3, we apply the 2D-Discrete Co-
sine Transform [1] (2D-DCT) function as D=DCT(X )∈
RH×W×3. We can then remove or preserve partial fre-
quency components of each input image, followed by an
Inverse 2D-DCT function as ˆX=IDCT( ˆD)to transform it
back into the spatial domain with the original input size.
With the help of the DCT functions, we can decompose
the raw data into two parts, X={XO, XH}, where XH
andXOrepresent high-frequency components (dubbed w/
high FCs), and other components (dubbed w/o high FCs).
For a given few-shot task Ttest= (S,Q)on the novel testing
set, we can reconstruct images with partial frequency infor-
mation to update the testing task as ˜Ttest={˜S,˜Q}. Then
we adopt the existing few-shot methods to make predictions
for each query sample ˜Xjwith ˜S.
Table 1shows classification accuracy on different test
domains and Figure 2plots the t-SNE visualizations of im-
age features extracted by the trained feature encoder. We
can observe that removing specific frequency components
can improve the generalized performance of few-shot mod-
els but degrade standard few-shot performance in the same
testing scenario.
To this end, frequency information plays different roles
in different classification scenarios. Through evaluation and
observation, it can be conjectured that the generalization be-
haviors of few-shot methods are relevant to frequency com-
ponents which may vary across datasets and domains.1
3.2. Frequency-Guided Few-shot Learning
Different FCs encode specific image information, we
propose the Frequency-Guided Few-shot Learning (FGFL)
framework, which utilizes the frequency mask to guide the
training in the spatial domain. As shown in Figure 3, FGFL
has two branches with two encoders EfqandEspfor fea-
ture extraction in the frequency and spatial domains, re-
spectively. FGFL generates the frequency mask based on
the task-specific attention map for the given few-shot task,
which is then adopted to generate additional images, guid-
ing the network updates in the spatial domain. Moreover,
we propose a multi-level metric to force the network to cap-
ture specific frequency components for classification.
1More implementation details and evaluation results for all frequency
components of more few-shot methods are provided in Supplementary.
11816