𝑬𝒔𝒑Cosine
Similarity
𝐿𝑐𝑙𝑠𝑓𝑞QuerySupport
DCT
𝑬𝒇𝒒 Predicted ClassFreq Input
Grad -CAM𝐿𝑐𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑝 Few-shot 
Methods
Unmasked FreqIDCTSpatial Domain FSL
𝓣
Frequency -Mask Generation
Masked FreqIDCTUnmasked Set 𝑋𝑢𝑚Masked Set 𝑋𝑚Generated Few -shot Tasks
Multi -Level 
Metrics
Predicted ClassFigure 3: Overview of our proposed Frequency-Guided Few-shot Learning framework (FGFL). We first generate the task-
specific class-discriminative frequency mask based on the classification in the frequency domain. Then we convert the masked
and unmasked frequency samples back to the spatial domain and generate two image sets (masked set Xmand unmasked set
Xum) according to the mask and unmask regions, respectively. Furthermore, we adopt novel multi-level metrics (shown in
Figure 4) on the original and generated image sets to make class predictions.
3.2.1 Task-Specific Frequency Mask Generation
To obtain a task-specific attention mask of frequency com-
ponents for each few-shot task, we first transform the input
spatial input image XtoDin the frequency domain. Then
we generate the attention map by Grad-CAM [35] based on
the output feature map M∈RC×h×wof the last convolu-
tion layer in the frequency encoder ( e.g., ResNet-12), where
Cis the channel number of the feature map, handwindi-
cate the height and width of the feature map, respectively.
For its ground-truth class c, we compute the gradient
of the score scwith respect to the feature map activation
Mk∈Rh×was∂sc
∂Mk, where kindicates the channel in-
dex of the feature map. These gradients flowing back will
pass through a global average pooling layer (denoted as
GAP (·)) to obtain the neuron importance weights wc
k:
wc
k=GAP(∂sc
∂Mk). (1)
The weight wc
kreflects the importance of activation map
Mkto make the prediction of class cfor the input D. We
then perform a weighted combination with a ReLU function
to integrate the positive influence of feature maps across dif-
ferent channels of Mfor class cas:
Ac=ReLU (X
kwc
kMk), (2)
where Ac∈Rh×wis the heatmap reflecting frequency com-
ponents that have a positive impact on the ground-truth class
cof a given frequency input.
Note that previous works [35, 22] utilize a fully con-
nected (fc) layer to obtain the classification score scfor theground-truth class cwith the same training and testing class
set. However, since the training and testing classes in few-
shot scenarios are non-overlap, directly applying fc layers
for gradient computation may be prone to overfitting.
To this end, we compute the cosine similarity between
each sample and class prototype as the classification score
for each given N-way K-shot task in few-shot learning,
where NandKindicates the number of selected classes
and labeled support samples from each class, respectively.
Specifically, given a few-shot task with support set Sf=
{Dm, ym}NK
m=1, and a query set Qf={Dn, yn}Q
n=1in the
frequency domain, we compute the cosine similarity score
scbetween each query sample q∈RCand each class pro-
totype vc∈RCas:
sc=p(y=c|q) =qTvc
∥q∥∥vc∥, (3)
where vc=1
KPK
k=1zkis the mean feature vector of the
support features zkof the c-th class. Note that, it is easy to
prove Eq. (3) is equivalent to an fc layer when neglecting the
bias of the fc layer. Moreover, the classification weights vc
are flexible and task-dependent, i.e., only based on the cur-
rent few-shot task. Hence, the network can learn to generate
a task-specific heatmap Acof each sample to find specific
frequency components that contribute most to the current
task, which avoids over-fitting to the training set.
We then up-sample Acto the original size and generate
the frequency mask following previous works [45, 22] as:
Maskc=1−Sigmoid (Up(Ac)), (4)
11817