methods focus on learning a flexible feature embedding or
fine-tuning on less novel support samples to transfer knowl-
edge across domains. However, they cannot achieve stable
performance improvements for different few-shot scenar-
ios. Moreover, most domain adaption-based methods only
focused on exploiting the image spatial features.
Beyond spatial features, the frequency-domain represen-
tation plays a vital role for various computer vision tasks,
e.g., deep fake recognition [12, 24,27], domain generaliza-
tion [19] and image classification [4, 32,42,50]. Different
frequency components naturally convey discriminative and
interpretive features for visual understanding [19, 32],e.g.,
the selected frequency components (FCs) of input images
can be used to interpret the learned CNN features in classi-
fication [42, 50]. In few-shot learning, Chen et al. [4] is the
first attempt to apply image frequency spectrum for classi-
fication, in which frequency information is naively concate-
nated as an extra feature, without exploiting different effects
of its FCs. Figure 1provides an example, clearly show-
ing that certain FCs are more discriminative, thus should be
selected and highlighted for more effective classification.
However, no work to date has systematically investigated
the roles of different FCs and how to adaptively select im-
portant FCs for effective few-shot learning.
In this paper, we propose a novel Frequency-Guided
Few-shot Learning (FGFL) framework towards highly ef-
fective few-shot classification and generalization. For each
input image, FGFL adaptively generates a task-specific
class-discriminative mask in the frequency domain using
Grad-CAM [35], where the activated FCs represent the im-
portant frequency information associated with the current
task. Then we convert the masked and unmasked frequency
components output back to the spatial domain for generat-
ing the masked and unmasked images, which contain lim-
ited and rich task-specific class-discriminative information,
respectively. After that, for each image in the meta-task, we
construct its triplet with its corresponding unmasked and
masked images as positive and negative samples. We also
construct two additional few-shot tasks by regrouping the
masked and original support and query images, i.e.,Tms
with masked support set and original query set, and Tmq
with original support set and masked query set. In addi-
tion, we propose two types of ranking losses, including the
triplet and contrastive loss functions at single images and
tasks (i.e., TmsandTmq) levels, respectively, to force the
model to capture task-specific class-discriminative informa-
tion that can well generalize to the novel classes. Moreover,
the unmasked images are also added to the support set to
enhance the discriminability of feature embeddings.
The contributions of this work are fourfold. First, we
propose a Frequency-Guided Few-shot Learning (FGFL)
framework to utilize the frequency information to enhance
the performance and generalizability of few-shot methodsin the spatial domain. Second, we propose two types
of ranking loss, including the triplet and contrastive loss
functions at both sample and task levels based on origi-
nal and generated images, to force the network to focus on
class-discriminative frequency components for each few-
shot meta-task. In addition, the generated unmasked im-
ages are also utilized to augment the support set to en-
hance the discriminability of feature embeddings. Third,
we investigate the impact of frequency components on cur-
rent methods under several generalized few-shot settings,
namely cross-dataset, cross-domain, and coarse-to-fine an-
notated generalization. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work that exploits the effect of different frequency
components on few-shot classification and generalization
tasks explicitly. Last, experimental results and visualiza-
tions demonstrate that the proposed FGFL can improve the
performance and generalizability of few-shot methods and
achieve superior results under several few-shot settings.
2. Related Work
2.1. Few-shot Classification
Few-shot learning aims to recognize novel query sam-
ples with only a few available support samples. Recently,
existing deep few-shot methods can be divided into three
main categories. First, optimization-based meta-learning
methods [2, 11,20,28,33] design a good model initializa-
tion or optimization strategy that can quickly adapt to novel
tasks. Second, metric-based methods [7, 29,30,36,48,
55,58] focus on constructing an appropriate latent space to
extract discriminative feature embeddings and then predict
based on the similarity between support and query samples.
Third, data generative and augmentation-based methods fo-
cus on generating more variant samples to learn a more ac-
curate classifier, e.g., applying data rotation or transforma-
tion [21] by self-supervised learning, synthesizing new data
with a generative model [14, 23], or using external data with
pseudo labels [18, 44,52].
Most above-mentioned algorithms only employ spatial
images as the network input without exploiting the fre-
quency information. In our work, we investigate the effect
of the frequency information in the Discrete Cosine Trans-
formation (DCT) domain and leverage it to guide few-shot
classification in the spatial domain.
2.2. Learning in the Frequency Domain
Frequency components contain rich patterns for image
understanding and have been widely studied in several com-
puter vision tasks such as compressed sensing [43, 51,56],
visual pre-training [47], domain transfer [19, 53], and image
classification [4, 8,32,42,50]. Yang et al. [53] use the Fast
Fourier Transformation (FFT) to achieve domain alignment
by simply swapping the low-frequency spectrum between
11815