Water 2022 ,14, 2221 13 of 21
Furthermore, in the case of the veriﬁcation loss value, it was possible to check the
performance difference according to the input data. Similarly, when the input data size
was 5 and 10, a phenomenon in which the loss value bounced due to overﬁtting was
found. Even when the size of the input data was 30, the ﬁnal convergence loss value was
high. Among the ﬁve types, it was conﬁrmed that excellent performance was shown when
the input data size was 20 and 15, with the input data size of 20 showing slightly better
performance. Therefore, the size of the ﬁnal input data was selected as 20.
3.2. Experimental Design
In this paper, an experiment was conducted according to the input data using the
LSTM model and the GRU model. There were three model conﬁgurations to be used in the
experiment as follows: 1. the multi-LSTM model with 2 LSTM layers; 2. the multi-GRU
model with 2 GRU layers; 3. the LSTM–GRU model with LSTM and GRU layers. As for
the dataset to be used for model training, a total of three datasets were used: a dataset
consisting of water level data only, a dataset consisting of water level data and AWS
meteorological data, and a dataset consisting of water level data and ASOS meteorological
data. We compared the performance of a total of nine models for three models and three
datasets. Table 2 shows the details of the experiment.
Table 2. Experiment Details.
Model CaseDetails of
Input VariableMeteorology Data Type
Multi LSTMS1_LSTM Upstream water level, downstream water level —
S2_LSTMUpstream water level, downstream water level,
temperature, humidity, rainfallAWS
S3_LSTMUpstream water level, downstream water level,
temperature, humidity, rainfallASOS
Multi GRUS1_GRU Upstream water level, downstream water level —
S2_GRUUpstream water level, downstream water level,
temperature, humidity, rainfallAWS
S3_GRUUpstream water level, downstream water level,
temperature, humidity, rainfallASOS
LSTM-GRUS1_LSTM_GRU Upstream water level, downstream water level —
S2_LSTM_GRUUpstream water level, downstream water level,
temperature, humidity, rainfallAWS
S3_LSTM_GRUUpstream water level, downstream water level,
temperature, humidity, rainfallASOS
S1 means a scenario using the water level dataset as training data, S2 means a scenario
using the water level dataset and AWS weather dataset as training data, and S3 uses the
water level dataset and the ASOS dataset as training data. Therefore, we conducted a
performance comparison experiment according to nine scenarios.
3.3. Model Structures
There are three structures of the water level prediction model used in this paper, and
the overall model conﬁguration can be conﬁrmed through Figure 13.
All three models commonly use data from the past 20 h as input data. In this instance,
when the learning data corresponding to scenario S1 is used, the form of the input data
consists of [None,2], and in the case of S2 and S3, it consists of [None, 5]. Finally, it goes
through the dense layer and eventually predicts the data of the 21st hour through the
data of the past 20 h. In the case of the multi-LSTM, all hidden layers are composed of
LSTM layers, and in the multi-GRU, both layers are composed of GRUs. In the LSTM–GRU