Water 2022 ,14, 2221 14 of 21
model, the ﬁrst hidden layer is composed of an LSTM layer and the second hidden layer is
composed of a GRU layer. The performance comparison results according to the input data
through the three models are described in Section 4.
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 23 
 
  
Figure 13. Construction of the proposed model. 
All three models commonly use data from the past 20 h as input data. In this instance, 
when the learning data corresponding to scenar io S1 is used, the form of the input data 
consists of [None, 2], and in th e case of S2 and S3, it consists  of [None, 5]. Finally, it goes 
through the dense layer and eventually predicts the data of the 21st hour through the data 
of the past 20 h. In the case of the multi- LSTM, all hidden layers are composed of LSTM 
layers, and in the multi-GRU, both layers  are composed of GRUs. In the LSTM–GRU 
model, the first hidden layer is composed of an LSTM layer and the second hidden layer 
is composed of a GRU layer. The performance comparison results according to the input 
data through the three models are described in Section 4. 
4. Results 
The water level and meteorological data sets described in Section 2 were used for the 
data for the experiment, and the experiment  was conducted using the input data and 
model consisting of nine types of input data using the three models described in Section 
3. 
The total collection period of all training and test data was measured at 1-h intervals 
from 2 October 2013 to 9 June 2022. Of the data consisting of a total of 76,152 rows, 57,114 
rows (75%) were used as training data and va lidation data, and the remaining 19,018 rows 
(25%) were used as test data. In the case of  a flood prediction model, it is important to 
predict a high-water level due to a rapid in crease. In this instance, the maximum value 
among all the measured water levels exists in the test data, so that the validity of the model 
can be verified. 
4.1. Training and Validation Result 
MSE was used as the basic loss function for model training, and NSE and MAE indi-
cators were used as auxiliary indicators for actual test data to compare observed values 
and predicted values. In addition, Adam was used as the optimization function, the num-
ber of units of the LSTM and GRU models was 256, and the number of training iterations 
(epoch) was 200, which was performed under the same conditions. The reason for select-ing the parameters of the model was to derive the optimal values through preliminary 
experiments. In the case of the learning model, a total of nine cases were carried out as in 
the case summarized in Table 2, information on each model training and validation can 
be checked in Table 3, and the change in loss value according to epoch during model 
training is shown in Figure 10. In the case of the learning model, a total of nine cases were 
Figure 13. Construction of the proposed model.
4. Results
The water level and meteorological data sets described in Section 2 were used for
the data for the experiment, and the experiment was conducted using the input data and
model consisting of nine types of input data using the three models described in Section 3.
The total collection period of all training and test data was measured at 1-h intervals
from 2 October 2013 to 9 June 2022. Of the data consisting of a total of 76,152 rows,
57,114 rows (75%) were used as training data and validation data, and the remaining
19,018 rows (25%) were used as test data. In the case of a ﬂood prediction model, it
is important to predict a high-water level due to a rapid increase. In this instance, the
maximum value among all the measured water levels exists in the test data, so that the
validity of the model can be veriﬁed.
4.1. Training and Validation Result
MSE was used as the basic loss function for model training, and NSE and MAE
indicators were used as auxiliary indicators for actual test data to compare observed
values and predicted values. In addition, Adam was used as the optimization function,
the number of units of the LSTM and GRU models was 256, and the number of training
iterations (epoch) was 200, which was performed under the same conditions. The reason for
selecting the parameters of the model was to derive the optimal values through preliminary
experiments. In the case of the learning model, a total of nine cases were carried out as
in the case summarized in Table 2, information on each model training and validation
can be checked in Table 3, and the change in loss value according to epoch during model
training is shown in Figure 10. In the case of the learning model, a total of nine cases were
performed as in the case summarized in Tables 2 and 3 and shows information about each
model learning and validation. Figure 10 shows the change in loss value according to epoch
during model training.
According to the characteristics of the LSTM model, the multi-LSTM model had the
largest number of hyperparameters, and the multi-GRU model had the smallest number
of hyperparameters. In the case of training time, the GRU model took the least amount
of time, but it was conﬁrmed that the number of hyperparameters and the training time
were not proportional. In addition, looking at Figure 14, the loss value converges to close
to 0 according to the epoch in all cases, and it was determined that the learning was well
accomplished. It was considered that overﬁtting occurred, but for equality with other
models, the epochs were maintained at 200 and the experiment was conducted. In the case