Water 2022 ,14, 2221 19 of 21
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we propose an approach for data-based water level prediction using
actual observation data. In order to predict the data of the 21st hour using the data of the
past 20 h through the data of the upstream and downstream of Yeojubo in Gyeonggi-do,
Republic of Korea, a model was constructed using the LSTM and GRU models, and a
performance comparison experiment was conducted according to the input data. For
comparative experiments, a model composed of LSTM and GRU was used. In this instance,
the optimal model conﬁguration was selected through experiments, and LSTM composed of
two layers and GRU composed of two layers were selected as ﬁnal comparative models. The
existing hydrological method used for ﬂood prediction has a problem in that it is difﬁcult
to build a model because various factors, including soil and watershed characteristics, must
be considered, and there is a disadvantage that requires high hydrological competence of
the researcher. The water level prediction model proposed in this paper has the advantage
of being able to predict the water level more easily by using only the meteorological
data set and the water level data set. Multi-LSTM, multi-GRU, and LSTM–GRU models
were used to conduct a performance comparison experiment according to a total of nine
cases, and it was conﬁrmed that there was a signiﬁcant performance difference when the
input data was conﬁgured differently according to each model. The three types of input
data are: S1 case using water level data only, S2 case using water level data and AWS
data provided by the Korea Meteorological Administration, and ASOS data provided by
the Korea Meteorological Administration. When looking at the data quality information
provided by the Korea Meteorological Administration, the quality of the ASOS data was
higher, but due to the concentrated heavy rain that fell in a narrow range in a short period
of time in summer due to the seasonal nature of Korea, the AWS data were used in the
comparative experiment. The LSTM and LSTM–GRU-based models conﬁrmed good results
for all three data types, but in the case of the GRU model, it was conﬁrmed that the results
were slightly inferior when the data of S2 and S3 cases with large input data dimensions
were used. It was determined that the GRU, which reduced the number of parameters
by simplifying the LSTM, did not effectively learn the characteristics of the training data
used in this paper. In this instance, the case that obtained the best results used ASOS data
and water level data, which are S3 cases, as training data, and the water level prediction
model learned through the LSTM–GRU model obtained the best results. The test MSE of
this model was 3.92, NSE was 0.942, and MAE was 2.22, showing the best performance
in all evaluation indicators, and the maximum water level prediction error was 55.49 cm,
which was the best result. In order to predict ﬂoods, the ability to predict a sudden rise in
water level due to heavy rainfall, etc. is a very important factor, so the model is judged to
be the most suitable among the nine cases. The NSE of the LSTM–GRU model proposed
in this paper conﬁrmed a high score of 0.942, and it is considered that it can be used for
ﬂood management.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.C.; methodology, M.C. and C.K.; formal analysis, M.C.
and K.J.; writing—original draft, M.C.; supervision, H.J. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This study was carried out with the support of R&D Program for Forest Science Tech-
nology (Project No. 2021340A00-2123-CD01) provided by Korea Forest Service (Korea Forestry
Promotion Institute).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors also greatly appreciate the anonymous reviewers and academic
editor for their careful comments and valuable suggestions to improve the manuscript.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.