Water 2022 ,14, 2221 2 of 21
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 23 
 
  
Figure 1. Total disaster events by type: 1980–1999 vs. 2000–2019 from Ref. [3]. 2020, Centre for Re-
search on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED)  & UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction 
(UNDRR). 
In the case of the hydrological model, it is a model that analyzes the characteristics 
of the hydrological gate and physically describes the discharge confluence point. It is 
based on the theory of fluid mechanics and is a method for researchers to derive a conflu-
ence equation by combining physical laws su ch as mass, momentum, and conservation of 
energy. It has been used in the past for flood prediction and management even before studies through machine learning and deep learning were actively conducted, and vari-
ous studies have been conducted using the model [7–12]. However, the model requires a 
deep hydrological knowledge of the researcher , and there is variability due to erosion of 
the topography over time, so it is difficult to use it in the long term. In addition, it is diffi-
cult to construct input data with various variables, and low prediction accuracy is ob-tained due to non-linearity. Fu rthermore, since each river has different characteristics of 
the watershed, it is necessary to create an individual model applied to each river, so there 
is a lack of versatility [13]. 
In the case of a data-based intelligent model, it is a method of predicting water level 
and runoff through data analysis based on observed data. Data analysis and data mining 
technologies are being researched in many fields and are rapidly developing [14]. Regard-
less of fields such as medicine [15], economy [16,17], environment [18], and tourism 
[19,20], a great deal of research is being conducted by applying machine learning and deep learning, and it has been confirmed that it shows excellent performance. One of the data-
based intelligent models applied in the hydrological field for predicting and managing 
floods is the artificial neur al network (ANN) model. The ANN model developed by [21] 
uses water level and meteorolog ical data as input data and estimates the water flow by 
applying harmony search (HS) [22] and differential evolution (DE) [23]. By utilizing HS and DE, overfitting was prevented by updating the parameters of the architecture and 
selecting important features. Compared with the radial basis function neural network 
(BRFNN) [24] and multi-layer perceptron (M LP) [25] models, ANN with HS and DE was 
confirmed to show good performance, and it was proved that the ANN model can be used 
for water flow prediction. In addition, many studies have been conducted to predict key factors of flooding using models such as ANN-based water level prediction models and 
runoff prediction models [26–30]. However, most of the related studies utilize hydrologi-
cal data and meteorological data, which are cate gories of time series data, as input data 
[31,32]. In the case of the ANN model, there is a problem of insufficient memory when 
operating on sequential data and time series data and it is difficult to find an optimal 
parameter in the learning process [33,34]. 
Recently, deep neural network (DNN) data-based intelligent models with two or 
more hidden layers that have improved so me problems of the ANN model have been 
Figure 1. Total disaster events by type: 1980–1999 vs. 2000–2019 from Ref. [3].
In the case of the hydrological model, it is a model that analyzes the characteristics of
the hydrological gate and physically describes the discharge conﬂuence point. It is based
on the theory of ﬂuid mechanics and is a method for researchers to derive a conﬂuence
equation by combining physical laws such as mass, momentum, and conservation of
energy. It has been used in the past for ﬂood prediction and management even before
studies through machine learning and deep learning were actively conducted, and various
studies have been conducted using the model [ 7–12]. However, the model requires a deep
hydrological knowledge of the researcher, and there is variability due to erosion of the
topography over time, so it is difﬁcult to use it in the long term. In addition, it is difﬁcult to
construct input data with various variables, and low prediction accuracy is obtained due to
non-linearity. Furthermore, since each river has different characteristics of the watershed,
it is necessary to create an individual model applied to each river, so there is a lack of
versatility [13].
In the case of a data-based intelligent model, it is a method of predicting water level
and runoff through data analysis based on observed data. Data analysis and data mining
technologies are being researched in many ﬁelds and are rapidly developing [ 14]. Regard-
less of ﬁelds such as medicine [ 15], economy [ 16,17], environment [ 18], and tourism [ 19,20],
a great deal of research is being conducted by applying machine learning and deep learning,
and it has been conﬁrmed that it shows excellent performance. One of the data-based
intelligent models applied in the hydrological ﬁeld for predicting and managing ﬂoods
is the artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) model. The ANN model developed by [ 21] uses
water level and meteorological data as input data and estimates the water ﬂow by applying
harmony search (HS) [ 22] and differential evolution (DE) [ 23]. By utilizing HS and DE,
overﬁtting was prevented by updating the parameters of the architecture and selecting
important features. Compared with the radial basis function neural network (BRFNN) [ 24]
and multi-layer perceptron (MLP) [ 25] models, ANN with HS and DE was conﬁrmed to
show good performance, and it was proved that the ANN model can be used for water
ﬂow prediction. In addition, many studies have been conducted to predict key factors
of ﬂooding using models such as ANN-based water level prediction models and runoff
prediction models [ 26–30]. However, most of the related studies utilize hydrological data
and meteorological data, which are categories of time series data, as input data [ 31,32]. In
the case of the ANN model, there is a problem of insufﬁcient memory when operating on
sequential data and time series data and it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd an optimal parameter in the
learning process [33,34].
Recently, deep neural network (DNN) data-based intelligent models with two or more
hidden layers that have improved some problems of the ANN model have been extensively
studied. In this case, LSTM and GRU models based on recurrent neural networks (RNN),
which show excellent performance in time series data processing, are being widely used.
Le et al. [ 35] proposed an LSTM model for ﬂood forecasting. In this study, daily runoff
and rainfall data were used as input datasets, and a performance comparison experiment