Water 2022 ,14, 2221 18 of 21
data had a large number of dimensions. When the data of S1 case were used, the best
results were obtained in the GRU model, but it was conﬁrmed that the results were inferior
compared to other models. For S2 and S3, the NSE values were 0.2 and 0.3, respectively,
which were the lowest among the nine cases. Furthermore, in the case of S3, it was
conﬁrmed that the maximum water level prediction error was 211.77, being the lowest
result among all scenarios.
The LSTM–GRU model showed the best performance on average among the three
models, and in the case of S1, it was conﬁrmed that the NSE was slightly lower than that of
the LSTM model. However, in the case of S2 and S3, the NSE values were 0.920 and 0.942,
respectively, and the maximum water level error was 79.64 and 55.49, which showed much
better performance than other models.
Of these, when the S3 case was used, the best results were obtained among the nine
models in all evaluation indicators, including MSE, NSE, MAE, and maximum water
level prediction error. Therefore, it is determined that the most suitable weather data
for the test bed, Yeojubo, is the ASOS data corresponding to the S3 case in view of the
model’s performance.
5. Discussion
Due to global warming and abnormal climate changes, the frequency of and damage
from ﬂoods are steadily increasing. Therefore, many studies are being conducted for ﬂood
management to minimize ﬂood damage. Hydrological models and data-based intelligent
models are mainly used to predict the water level, the most important parameter of ﬂooding.
In this paper, we propose the LSTM–GRU water level prediction model included in the
data-based intelligent model. In this study, Yeojubo in Gyeonggi-do, Korea was selected as
the test area, and the water level datasets upstream and downstream of Yeojubo were used.
In addition, using meteorological data, comparison experiments between ASOS data and
AWS data were conducted.
First, we conducted two experiments to ﬁnd the most suitable parameters for the
LSTM–GRU model. The two experiments were as follows: 1. experiment according to the
number of units of the LSTM and GRU layers; and 2. performance comparison experiment
according to input data size. As a result of the experiment, the best results were obtained
when the number of units was 256, and the best performance was obtained when the
size of the input data was used for the past 20 h. Next, to select a comparative model, a
model composed of LSTM and GRU, which shows good performance in time-series data
processing, was used. In this case, a performance comparison experiment was conducted
according to the number of hidden layers to ﬁnd the most suitable model conﬁguration.
When both LSTM and GRU were composed of two hidden layers, the best performance
was shown, and multi-LSTM and multi-GRU models were selected as comparative models.
Next, a comparison experiment was conducted according to the three input data sets,
and the three data sets consist of the following: 1. water level dataset; 2. water level
dataset + AWS dataset; and 3. water level dataset + ASOS dataset. Experiments were
conducted on nine scenarios using three datasets for a total of three models, and the model
performance was evaluated using MSE, NSE, MAE, and maximum water level error. In the
case of MSE, as an evaluation index sensitive to outliers, it was selected because a fatal error
can occur if an outlier occurs in response to a rapidly rising water level. In the case of NSE,
it is a model widely used for performance evaluation of hydrological models, and MAE
has the strength of intuitively checking errors. Lastly, the reason for using the maximum
water level error is that the historical highest water level of Yeojubo in the test data set
occurred, so it was used as an evaluation index to check to what extent the water level
can be predicted. In this instance, the LSTM–GRU model proposed in this study obtained
the best results among nine scenarios when the water level dataset and the ASOS dataset
were combined as input data. If the LSTM–GRU model proposed in this paper is used, it is
considered that it can be used as a preliminary study of a ﬂood management system that
can predict the water level in advance, and evacuate through risk assessment.