Water 2022 ,14, 2221 3 of 21
was conducted according to the input data of the model. An experiment was conducted
in the Da River basin of Vietnam, and the performance comparison experiment of the
model according to the input data was conducted using the runoff and precipitation data
sets. The output of the model was conﬁgured to predict the amount of runoff for 1, 2, and
3 days into the future. The performance evaluation was conducted using the Nash–Sutcliffe
efﬁciency (NSE) and root mean squared error (RMSE) indicators [ 36]. Finally, the NSE value
of the ﬁrst day data was around 99.1%, the NSE value of the second day was 94.9%, and
the 3rd day NSE value was 87.2%, so it was possible to obtain more than 87.2% accuracy
for all output data. Through this study, it was conﬁrmed that the LSTM model, which is
widely used for time series data processing, performed well enough for ﬂood prediction.
In addition, RNN-based LSTM and GRU models are continuously being studied for ﬂood
prediction and are showing good performance as they are specialized models for time series
data prediction [ 37–42]. In addition, there are many studies using artiﬁcial intelligence such
as ANN and RNN for ﬂood management which consider the ratio of training data and
validation data [ 43] or which compare the performance according to the size of the input
data of the model [ 44]. All of these studies greatly affect the performance of the model, and
the difference in the current paper is that other types of meteorological data are used to
conduct a performance comparison experiment according to the meteorological data. As a
result of the experiment, the best data set for the study area obtained the best results when
water level data and ASOS data were used. There are two or more types of meteorological
data measured in most research areas. Therefore, as suggested in this paper, it is considered
that there is a possibility that the performance of the model will be improved if appropriate
meteorological data are used in the papers related to water level prediction.
In this paper, we propose an LSTM-GRU-based water level prediction model using
water level data and meteorological data as input data. In addition, two types of weather
data provided by the Korea Meteorological Administration, the Automated Synoptic
Observing System (ASOS) data set and the Automatic Weather System (AWS) data set, are
used to test which data are more suitable for the study area. In addition, for water level data,
data from upstream and downstream of Yeojubo, Icheon-si, Gyeonggi province, Republic
of Korea were used, and performance comparison experiments of the multi-LSTM model,
multi-GRU model, and LSTM-GRU model were conducted. A total of three evaluation
indicators were used: MSE, NSE, and MAE, and the maximum water level prediction error
was additionally used. The LSTM-GRU model proposed in this paper showed the best
performance among all cases. The mean squared error (MSE) value of the LSTM-GRU
model was 3.92, the Nash–Sutcliffe coefﬁcient of efﬁciency (NSE) value was 0.942, the
mean absolute error (MAE) value was 2.22, and the maximum water level error was 55.49,
conﬁrming the best performance in all indicators.
Section 2 describes the study area, training data, and deep learning techniques used in
model development. Experimental scenarios and model design are described in Section 3,
and a model performance comparison is conducted in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 reviews
and concludes the results of this study.
2. Methodology
2.1. Study Area
One of the main causes of ﬂooding is localized heavy rain which is accompanied by
a large amount of rainfall in a short period of time. To select a test area where extensive
damage occurred due to rainfall, the data on the current situation of heavy rain damage by
region, published by the Ministry of Public Administration and Security of the Republic
of Korea, were used. The Ministry of Public Administration and Security is the central
administrative agency of the Republic of Korea in charge of affairs related to disaster
prevention, such as establishing, generalizing, and co-ordinating safety and disaster policies.
The current status of heavy rain damage by region over the past 30 years was investigated.
Figure 2 shows the amount of rain damage and the frequency of occurrence of rain damage
for each city in Korea.