Water 2022 ,14, 2221 5 of 21
and can be conﬁrmed by visualizing the entire dataset upstream and downstream through
Figure 4.
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 23 
 
 2.2. Meteorological Dataset and Water Level Dataset 
For the water level dataset, the Korea Water Management Information System 
(WAMIS) [45] was referred to, and the water level measurement station used data from 
upstream and downstream water level measurem ent stations in Yeojubo. The water level 
dataset and the meteorological dataset are used as input data for the water level prediction 
model in this paper, and data were measured  at 1 h intervals from 2 October 2013 to 9 
June 2022. The total dataset for upstream and downstream consists of 71,136 rows each 
and can be confirmed by visualizing the enti re dataset upstream and downstream through 
Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4. Water level dataset visualization. ( a) Water level dataset upstream of Yeojubo; ( b) water 
level dataset downstream of Yeojubo. 
The upstream and downstream datasets maintain an appropriate water level except 
in the summer when there is high rainfall; neve rtheless, they have the same characteristic 
in that the water level increases rapidly in the summer when there is high rainfall. How-
ever, in the case of upstream of Yeojubo, it  was confirmed that the amount of increase 
when rainfall occurred compared to the water level in the period when there was little 
rainfall was significant compared to the downstream recordings. 
In this paper, two types of data provided by the Korea Meteorological Administra-
tion were used for meteorological training data for the model. The Korea Meteorological 
Administration uses a variety of meteorological eq uipment to observe the weather in the 
field, such as ground, high-rise, marine, and aviation. In this paper, data from the Auto-matic Weather System (AWS) and the Automa ted Synoptic Observing System (ASOS) 
were used to observe the weather on the ground. In the case of the AWS, it is a device 
designed for automatic observation without human observation, and it automatically han-
dles all processes such as real-time measurem ent, calculation, stor age, and display. The 
items to be observed include ai r pressure, temperature, humi dity, wind direction, wind 
speed, precipitation, etc., an d are observed in real time. Both ASOS and AWS datasets 
used temperature, humidity, and precipitation parameters as input data. Furthermore, as 
with the water level data set, data measurements were carried out at 1-h intervals. Figure 
5 shows the quality information of AWS and ASOS data provided by the Korea Meteoro-
logical Administration [46]. Korea has a hot and humid climate in summer, which causes high rainfall and a large number of typhoons, an d it can be seen that the accuracy of AWS 
Figure 4. Water level dataset visualization.
The upstream and downstream datasets maintain an appropriate water level except in
the summer when there is high rainfall; nevertheless, they have the same characteristic in
that the water level increases rapidly in the summer when there is high rainfall. However,
in the case of upstream of Yeojubo, it was conﬁrmed that the amount of increase when
rainfall occurred compared to the water level in the period when there was little rainfall
was signiﬁcant compared to the downstream recordings.
In this paper, two types of data provided by the Korea Meteorological Administration
were used for meteorological training data for the model. The Korea Meteorological
Administration uses a variety of meteorological equipment to observe the weather in
the ﬁeld, such as ground, high-rise, marine, and aviation. In this paper, data from the
Automatic Weather System (AWS) and the Automated Synoptic Observing System (ASOS)
were used to observe the weather on the ground. In the case of the AWS, it is a device
designed for automatic observation without human observation, and it automatically
handles all processes such as real-time measurement, calculation, storage, and display. The
items to be observed include air pressure, temperature, humidity, wind direction, wind
speed, precipitation, etc., and are observed in real time. Both ASOS and AWS datasets
used temperature, humidity, and precipitation parameters as input data. Furthermore,
as with the water level data set, data measurements were carried out at 1-h intervals.
Figure 5 shows the quality information of AWS and ASOS data provided by the Korea
Meteorological Administration [ 46]. Korea has a hot and humid climate in summer, which
causes high rainfall and a large number of typhoons, and it can be seen that the accuracy
of AWS data operated unattended during the corresponding period is lower than that of
other periods or ASOS observation equipment. However, the location of the nearest AWS
observatory is located about 8 km away from Yeojubo, the actual test area, and the location
of the nearest ASOS observatory is about 20 km away from Yeojubo. Figure 6 shows the
locations of the water level and meteorological data stations in the test area.