Water 2022 ,14, 2221 17 of 21
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 23 
 
  
Figure 15. Comparison graph of observed and predicted values for each model in S1 case. ( a) Multi-
LSTM; ( b) multi-GRU; and ( c) LSTM–GRU.  
 
Figure 16. Comparison graph of observed and predicted values for each model in S2 case. ( a) Multi-
LSTM; ( b) multi-GRU; and ( c) LSTM–GRU. 
Figure 16. Comparison graph of observed and predicted values for each model in S2 case.
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 23 
 
  
Figure 17. Comparison graph of observed and predicted values for each model in S3 case. ( a) Multi-
LSTM; ( b) multi-GRU; and ( c) LSTM–GRU. 
The test results are similar to the model training and validation results. In the multi-LSTM model, 
no significant difference was found depending on the input data, but the NSE value obtained the best result when the data corresponding to the S1 case were used as the in put data. In addition, it 
was confirmed that the difference in the predicted maximum water level included in the test data 
was 91.27 cm in the S1 case, which obtained the best result. Among the LSTM models, when the S2 
case data were used, the NSE was 0.834, which was s lightly lower than those of the S1 and S3 cases, 
and the maximum water level prediction error was also the lowest at 117.87 cm. 
In the case of the multi-GRU model, the lowest performance was confirmed in all 
cases compared to other models. Similarly, in the results of verification it was confirmed 
that the GRU-based water level prediction model effectively learned S1 with a small num-
ber of dimensions from the experimental re sults but showed poor performance when the 
input data had a large number of dimensions. When the data of S1 case were used, the 
best results were obtained in the GRU model, but it was confirmed that the results were 
inferior compared to other models. For S2 an d S3, the NSE values were 0.2 and 0.3, re-
spectively, which were the lowest among the nine cases. Furthermore, in the case of S3, it 
was confirmed that the maximum water level prediction error was 211.77, being the low-est result among all scenarios. 
The LSTM–GRU model showed the best performance on average among the three 
models, and in the case of S1, it was confirm ed that the NSE was slightly lower than that 
of the LSTM model. However, in the case of  S2 and S3, the NSE values were 0.920 and 
0.942, respectively, and the maximum water level error was 79.64 and 55.49, which showed much better performance than other models. 
Of these, when the S3 case was used, the best results were obtained among the nine 
models in all evaluation indicators, includin g MSE, NSE, MAE, and maximum water level 
prediction error. Therefore, it is determined that the most suitable weather data for the 
test bed, Yeojubo, is the ASOS data correspo nding to the S3 case in view of the model’s 
performance. 
Figure 17. Comparison graph of observed and predicted values for each model in S3 case.
In the case of the multi-GRU model, the lowest performance was conﬁrmed in all cases
compared to other models. Similarly, in the results of veriﬁcation it was conﬁrmed that the
GRU-based water level prediction model effectively learned S1 with a small number of
dimensions from the experimental results but showed poor performance when the input