some additional filtering to remove uninteresting images: For the training and validation sets, we
define images with more than three objects as “interesting” and select those for question writing. For
the test set, which lacks object annotation, we train a ResNet-50 classifier to distinguish “interesting”
images based on this criteria, achieving an accuracy of 78% on the validation set. After multiple
rounds of filtering (described below), we obtain 23.7K unique images.
Question collection & filtering. The questions in A-OKVQA were written and refined over several
rounds of annotation by 437 crowd-workers on the Amazon Mechanical Turk platform and refined
through several manual and automated filtering steps to increase overall quality. As a first quality
assurance measure, workers completed a qualification task to demonstrate their ability to write
questions that met our criteria, namely that questions require: (1) looking at the image to answer,
(2) some commonsense or specialized knowledge, (3) some thinking beyond merely recognizing an
object, and (4) not be too similar to previous questions.
To help ensure the last point, we clustered images by CLIP [ 42] visual features and batched similar
images together so that the same worker wrote questions sequentially for related images (e.g., a
worker might write questions for several images showing baseball games in one task) to cut down on
repetitive questions. As an added measure to encourage question diversity, we maintained a database
of questions written and required users to check a new question against these by displaying the five
previous questions most similar in terms of their RoBERTa [ 31] embeddings. We used Pythia [ 51]
pre-trained on VQAv2 as a first automated check for questions we considered trivial, removing any
question for which the model predicted the correct answer choice. Next, questions were screened by
three other workers and only included if the majority agreed that it met our criteria for inclusion. In
all, 37,687 questions, or 60% of post-qualification questions were excluded from the dataset by this
process. After questions and their multiple choice options were complete, nine additional free-form
answers were collected for each question by a separate pool of workers.
Rationales. After questions and multiple-choice answer options were collected and validated, we
initiated a task to collect rationales. Workers were given a question and answer options and asked to
explain in one to two simple sentences why a particular answer was correct, including any necessary
facts or knowledge about the world not contained in the images. Workers were given examples and
went through a qualification process to assure high-quality output. For each question, we collected
three rationales.
4 Dataset Statistics
Question/Answer/Rationale statistics. After all rounds of annotation, the A-OKVQA dataset
contains 24,903 Question/Answer/Rationale triplets, split into 17.1K/1.1K/6.7K for train, validation
and test. These preserve the COCO 2017 train/val/test splits. The average length of the questions,
answers, and rationales, and the number of their unique words are shown in Table 1.
In Figure 2a we show the distribution of answer options in our dataset. What we see is a fairly typical
long-tail distribution of labels, as is seen in many open-labeled image tasks [ 68]. A few answers
occur quite often in the dataset, but overall, most answers in the dataset fall into the long tail of the
distribution.
We are also interested to know the amount of overlap in the answer set between the train set and val
and test sets. We find that in the val set, the ground-truth answer for 87.6%of questions appears in
the train set while in the test set 82.7%do. This shows that there is indeed some reasonable similarity
between the sets, but also that a significant portion of the held out sets require an answer that the
model will not have seen during training, requiring the model to be able to generate out-of-distribution
answers or generate answers based on some knowledge outside of the dataset.
Comparison with other datasets. In Table 1 we show dataset properties and statistics for A-OKVQA
compared to related datasets. We see that compared to the more knowledge-focused natural image
datasets such as OK-VQA, we have between 2-10x more questions while VCR (focused on images of
people in movies) has about 10x as ours. This is unsurprising because we intentionally filter similar
questions, making our questions more diverse (see Table 2), but difficult to collect at scale. Our
dataset has annotations for both multiple choice and direct answer evaluation. Our dataset also has
rationales, unlike OK-VQA, S3VQA and KB-VQA. FVQA has knowledge tuples as rationales rather
than full sentences. Most similar to our rationales is VCR. Unlike all of these, we collect 3 rationales
4