Multiple Choice Direct Answer
Method Val Test Val Test
(a) ClipCap →Cap.→GPT 42.51 43.61 16.59 15.79
(b) ClipCap →Ratl.→GPT 44.00 43.84 18.11 15.81
Oracles
(c) GT Caption →GPT 45.40 — 16.39 —
(d) GT Rationale →GPT 56.74 56.75 24.02 20.75
Table 4: Models using generated and GT rationales as described in Sec. 5.3. We are unable to
evaluate the GT Caption →GPT setting on the test set, as captions are not available in the COCO [ 11]
test set.
provide GPT-3 with the prompt template “Question: ... Answer: [...]”, expecting it to complete the
answer for each evaluation question.5
ClipCap [ 37] (row p) is an image captioning method that passes CLIP image features through a
trained network to GPT-2 (as input tokens). We adapt this model by adding question tokens (and
answer choices if applicable) to the prompt of GPT-2, generate answers instead of captions, and
fine-tune on our data. We provide additional details, diagrams, and variations in Appx. B.
Results. Table 3 shows the results of our evaluation of these models. Rows a-cshow the biases in
our dataset, but that the direct answer setting is appropriately challenging. Question-only baselines
(rows d-h) show poor performance in both MC and DA settings. However, it is interesting that GPT-3
performs similarly to the fine-tuned CLIP models (whichever is better per setting). The zero-shot
CLIP model (row f) is least effective, indicating that training is necessary to repurpose CLIP text
encodings for language-only tasks. Unsurprisingly, CLIP image features are very strong for zero-shot
multiple choice matching (row k). However, they are not as strong as for the fine-tuned classifier (row
j) in DA. ClipCap (row p) outperforms all other baselines in DA, because we use powerful image
features and also fine-tune a strong language model for our task.
5.3 Rationale Generation
We are interested in whether we can improve GPT-3 prompting results by providing additional
image- and question- specific context and report results for the following methods in Table 4. So,
we fine-tune ClipCap (given images and questions, but not choices) as above, but for the task of
generating rationales instead of answers. Our model scores 10.2 (val) / 9.58 (test) on SacreBLEU [ 41]
and0.271 (val) / 0.256 (test) on METEOR [ 3]. We can then prompt GPT-3 (as above) but also provide
these generated rationales as “Context: ...”. This model is denoted by ‘ClipCap →Ratl.→GPT’. We
provide additional details, diagrams, and examples of generated rationales in Appx. C. We repeat this
experiment using captions (generated from only images) from the original ClipCap model: ‘ClipCap
→Cap.→GPT’.
Results. We show results from these experiments in Table 4. Interestingly, prompting GPT-3 with
ground-truth rationales (row d) is competitive with the best model in Sec. 5.2 (Table 3, row p) in
MC and significantly outperforms the question-only GPT-3 method (Table 3, row h). When we
prompt GPT-3 with ground-truth rationales (row d), we see higher performance than when we provide
ground-truth captions (row c). This affirms that rationales contain useful information (i.e. specific to
our questions and answers) in addition to captions. However, the additional performance of prompting
GPT-3 using generated rationales (row b) over generated captions (row a) is not as significant. This
indicates potential room for improvement in our approach for generating rationales.
5.4 Specialized Models
In this section, we evaluate some recent high-performing, open-source models trained on knowledge-
based VQA or the traditional VQA. The models we consider are Pythia [ 24], VilBERT [ 32],
LXMERT [ 54], KRISP [ 35], and GPV-2 [ 26]. As the first four models are part of MMF [ 50],
it is easier to compare them fairly. KRISP is a high-performing model on OK-VQA [ 36]. It provides
a suitable baseline as it addresses knowledge-based VQA. GPV-2 performs multiple vision and
5During MC, we also tried prompting GPT-3 with “Choices: ...”, but find that this actually hurts performance.
8