Q: What is the frequent vehicle on 
this pictured street?
(A) motorcycle (B) van (C) semi (D) bicycle
Generated: There are many 
motorbikes on the street.
Ground -truth: A large group of 
people on motorcycles are gathered 
in the middle of the street.
Q: What will happen if the ball is hit 
past the fence by the batter?
(A) home run (B) out (C) walk (D) game over
Generated: If the ball is hit past the 
fence by the batter, the ball will be 
thrown back to the pitcher
Ground -truth: The two men are 
playing baseball and ball over it 
means run all bases for one score.
What kind of flavor would 
the fruit on the pizza add?
(A) sweet (B) spicy (C) sour (D) 
umami
Generated: The fruit on the 
pizza adds a lot of flavor to it.
Ground -truth: Most fruits are 
sugary.Figure 9: Examples of rationales generated by our modified ClipCap method for examples in our
validation set.
answers that appeared two or more times in the training set. This includes 2,133 bi-grams or unigrams,
with 1,937 words.
Pythia [24] Pythia is a modification of [ 1] that introduces changes to the architecture and learning
schedule and utilizes more training data. We fine-tune it on the A-OKVQA dataset. For fine-
tuning, we replace the top classification layer with a randomly initialized layer for our set of answer
vocabulary.
LXMERT [54] LXMERT is a Transformer-based vision and language model pre-trained using a
large amount of image-sentence pairs for a set of pre-training tasks such as masked language modeling
and object prediction. The model is pre-trained on VQAv2 [ 16], GQA [ 18], VG-QA [ 69], COCO
captions [ 11], and Visual Genome captions [ 27]. We then fine-tune the model using the training set
of A-OKVQA.
VilBERT [32] ViLBERT is an extension of the BERT architecture to process vision and language
modalities for learning a joint representation for them. ViLBERT has been pre-trained on proxy tasks,
but it has been evaluated on VQA as a downstream task. ViLBERT is pre-trained using Conceptual
Captions [ 49] and fine-tuned on A-OKVQA . To evaluate how well a model trained on VQAv2 or
OK-VQA performs on A-OKVQA , we fine-tune ViLBERT after training them on thoese datasets.
These models are referred to as ‘ViLBERT-VQA’ and ‘ViLBERT-OK-VQA’ in Table 5.
KRISP [35] KRISP is a method for knowledge-based VQA which combines multi-modal Transform-
ers with graph neural networks methods on knowledge graphs. We use the same models and data and
knowledge sources and pre-processing steps as in that work, but filter the knowledge graph based on
A-OKVQA rather than OK-VQA (see Sec. 3.2 of [35]).
GPV-2 [26] GPV-2 [26] is a generative vision and language model built using the T5 [44] language
model and VinVL [ 67] image features. It was pre-trained on Conceptual Captions [ 49] and then
fine-tuned in a multi-task setting on image captioning, visual question answering, object localization,
and classification, as well on web-search images for 10,000 visual concepts.
We fine-tune the fully-trained model on A-OKVQA by training it to generate the most common
answer for each question. For direct answer evaluations, answers are then generated using beam
search with 20 beams. For multiple choice, the answers are ranked by the log-probability score
assigned to them by the model.
We perform two additional experiments with rationales with this model. First, ground-truth rationales
are appended to the question as additional input text. Recall that we do not provide rationales at test
19