Q:What does the man who sits have trouble doing?
MC Answers:(a) Riding (b) Breathing (c) Walking(d) MagicDirect Answers:Walking, Walking, …Rationale: The vehicle being used is for people who cannot use their legs properly and need it for assistance in being mobile.Q: What could block the washer's door?MC Answers:(a) Stool (b) Stove(c) Window (d) SinkDirect Answers:Stove, Oven, …Rationale: The washer door is right in front of the range preventing it from opening.Q: How many people will dine at this table?MC Answers:(a) Two (b) One(c) None (d) FiveDirect Answers:One, One person, …Rationale: There is only one cup of water and main dish at this table. Figure 1: A-OKVQA dataset. The dataset includes questions that require reasoning using a variety
of knowledge types such as commonsense, world knowledge and visual knowledge. We provide
Multiple-Choice (MC) as well as Direct Answer evaluation settings. There is a rationale associated
to each question in the train set providing the explanation/knowledge for answering the question.
commonsense knowledge about human social behavior, knowledge about the physics of the world,
and visual knowledge. Not only do we expand the variety of knowledge our agent needs, but we
also increase the complexity of reasoning systems needed to answer questions. We need models to
recognize the image, understand the question, recall relevant knowledge, and use reasoning to arrive
at an answer. For instance, in the first question shown in Figure 1, the model should reason that
people use that type of cart to avoid walking. Therefore, the old man should have trouble walking. In
general, our dataset requires additional types of world knowledge compared to our previous work
OK-VQA [36]. Hence, we call it Augmented OK-VQA (A-OKVQA).
A-OKVQA is composed of about 25K questions paired with both multiple choice (MC) answer
options and ten free-form answers to allow for direct answer (DA) evaluation. The MC component of
the dataset bypasses many difficulties inherent in direct answer evaluation and allows for a simple,
clean accuracy score. This is particularly helpful given the greater variety in answers in A-OKVQA
questions. At the same time, we believe direct answer evaluation is important to encourage models
with more real-world applicability. In addition to the questions and answers, we provide rationales for
each question. This is to allow for models to use this extra annotation to train reasoning or knowledge
retrieval methods or to build more explainable VQA models. The rationales also validate that both
reasoning and knowledge are required for answering questions in the dataset.
In this work, our contributions are: (i) A new benchmark VQA dataset requiring diverse sources of
outside knowledge and reasoning; (ii) A detailed analysis of the dataset that highlights its diversity
and difficulty; (iii) An evaluation of a variety of recent baseline approaches in the context of the
challenging questions in A-OKVQA ; (iv) An extensive analysis of the results leading to interesting
findings (e.g., how well models perform when answers are in the tail of the distribution, and also the
complementarity of the studied models). We will release this dataset publicly.
2 Related Work
Visual Question Answering. Visual Question Answering (VQA) has been a common and popular
form of vision and language reasoning. Many datasets on this task have been proposed [ 34,2,13,65,
47,69,55,27] but most of these do not require much outside knowledge or reasoning, often focusing
on recognition tasks such as classification, attribute detection and counting.
Knowledge-based VQA datasets. Several previous works have studied the problem of knowledge-
based VQA. The earliest explicitly knowledge-based VQA datasets were KB-VQA [ 56] and
FVQA [ 57]. While these benchmarks did specifically require knowledge for questions, the knowledge
required for these benchmarks is completely “closed”. FVQA [ 57] is annotated by selecting a triplet
2