Dataset Mean Q distance Mean rationale distance
FVQA [57] 0.6199 ✗
VCR [66] 0.7095 0.8017
KB-VQA [56] 0.7192 ✗
S3VQA [23] 0.8050 ✗
VQAv2 [16] 0.8405 0.8228
OK-VQA [36] 0.8428 ✗
A-OKVQA 0.8564 0.8779
Table 2: Question and Rationale Diversity. Mean pairwise cosine distances in a sentence trans-
former space for various datasets. ✗indicates lack of rationale. We choose one rationale per question
onA-OKVQA to make the comparison to other datasets with only one rationale. Rationales for
VQAv2 come from the VQA-X. dataset [38].
(e.g., shaded areas have a lower temperature than other areas). The distribution is shown in Figure 2b.
Most of our questions focus around commonsense and visual knowledge. It should be noted that
sometimes there is no clear distinction between these two categories, and a question can belong to
either category.
Question diversity. To analyze the diversity of A-OKVQA compared to other datasets, as a proxy,
we use the average pairwise cosine distance between the questions in the dataset. We run our questions
through a sentence transformer1and compute the cosine distance between all pairs in the dataset. We
then take the average of these. We see from Table 2 that our dataset has the most diversity on this
metric. In particular, we see a large difference compared to VCR which has many similar questions
such as “What is going to happen next?” and questions relating to what specific people in the scene
are doing and why. We also compare the diversity of rationales to VCR and VQAv2 (using rationales
from VQA-X [ 38] rationales). We also find that our rationales are much more diverse than in these
datasets. Qualitatively, we also find that our dataset tends to have much more varied questions because
it is taken from the more visually diverse COCO dataset (a quality shared by OK-VQA and VQAv2
which do almost as well on this metric) and requires more diverse kinds of knowledge.
Finally, we use the same mean pairwise distance to look in particular at how different our questions
are from OK-VQA which is the most similar prior work to ours. To do this we compare the minimum
pairwise distance between every question in the OK-VQA training set to every question in the
OK-VQA test set and our test set. We find that the average minimum distance from OK-VQA train to
test is 0.256 compared to 0.311 between OK-VQA train and our test set2. This shows that there is in
fact a significant difference between our question set and OK-VQA in this feature space.
5 Experiments
Next, we benchmark the A-OKVQA dataset and compare the performance of different models. We
consider three classes of methods: (1) large-scale pre-trained models such as CLIP [ 42] and GPT-
3 [7], (2) models that generate and use rationales , and (3) specialized models that are designed
for knowledge-based VQA (KRISP [35]) or tested for VQA (e.g., VilBERT [32]).
5.1 Evaluation
In the multiple choice (MC) setting, a model chooses its answer from one of four options and we
compute accuracy as the evaluation metric. In the direct answer (DA) setting, a model can generate
any text as its answer and we use the standard VQA evaluation from [2].
5.2 Large-scale Pre-trained Models
We compare three types of large-scale pre-trained models (discriminative, contrastive, and generative)
in Table 3. We also test these models in different input settings (where questions, images, or both are
provided).
1Specifically multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1 [19] to avoid overlap with RoBERTa.
2To make this comparison even, we chose a random subset of our test set to be the same size as OK-VQA
test set so that the minimum is over the same number of possible choices in both cases.
6