A-OKVQA: A Benchmark for Visual Question
Answering using World Knowledge
Dustin Schwenk1, Apoorv Khandelwal1, Christopher Clark1
Kenneth Marino2,Roozbeh Mottaghi1
1PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI
2Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
The Visual Question Answering (VQA) task aspires to provide a meaningful
testbed for the development of AI models that can jointly reason over visual
and natural language inputs. Despite a proliferation of VQA datasets, this
goal is hindered by a set of common limitations. These include a reliance on
relatively simplistic questions that are repetitive in both concepts and linguistic
structure, little world knowledge needed outside of the paired image, and limited
reasoning required to arrive at the correct answer. We introduce A-OKVQA , a
crowdsourced dataset composed of a diverse set of about 25K questions requiring
a broad base of commonsense and world knowledge to answer. In contrast to
the existing knowledge-based VQA datasets, the questions generally cannot
be answered by simply querying a knowledge base, and instead require some
form of commonsense reasoning about the scene depicted in the image. We
demonstrate the potential of this new dataset through a detailed analysis of its
contents and baseline performance measurements over a variety of state-of-the-art
vision–language models.
http://a-okvqa.allenai.org/
1 Introduction
The original conception of the Visual Question Answering (VQA) problem was as a Visual Turing
Test [ 15]. Can we give a computer an image and expect it to answer any question we ask to fool us
into thinking it is a human? To truly solve this Turing Test, the computer would need to mimic several
human capabilities including: visual recognition in the wild, language understanding, basic reasoning
capabilities and a background knowledge about the world. Since the VQA problem was formulated,
many of these aspects have been studied. Early datasets mostly studied the perception and language
understanding problem on natural image datasets [ 2,34,16]. Other datasets studied complex chains
of reasoning about procedurally generated images [ 25]. More recently, datasets include questions
which require factual [36, 56, 57] or commonsense knowledge [66].
But, to a large extent, VQA has been a victim of its own success. With the advent of large-scale
pre-training of vision and language models [ 67,62,32,33,12,43,8] and other breakthroughs in
multi-modal architectures, much of the low-hanging fruit in the field has been plucked and many of
the benchmark datasets have seen saturated performance. Even performance on the newer knowledge-
based datasets has been improved by such models [ 67]. So how can we continue developing yet more
challenging datasets? What human capabilities are not yet expressed by current models?
We propose the following. First, continuing the direction of past work in knowledge-requiring VQA,
we further expand the areas of knowledge required. Our dataset requires diverse forms of outside
knowledge including explicit fact-based knowledge that is likely to be contained in knowledge bases,