from a fixed knowledge graph. This forces the questions to require knowledge, but because the
question is written based on this knowledge, these questions are fairly trivial once the knowledge is
known and do not require much reasoning. In addition, the knowledge required is explicitly closed
to the knowledge graphs used to generate the dataset, so these datasets can only test knowledge
retrieval on those specific graphs. KVQA [ 48] is based on images in Wikipedia articles. Because of
the source of the images, these questions tend to mostly test recognizing specific named entities (e.g.,
Barrack Obama) and then retrieving Wikipedia knowledge about that entity rather than commonsense
knowledge.
Most similar to our work is OK-VQA [ 36]. This dataset was an improvement over prior work in terms
of scale, and the quality of questions and images. It also has the property that the required knowledge
was not “closed” or explicitly drawn from a particular source, and could be called “open”-domain
knowledge. While this is an improvement over the previous works, it still suffers from problems
which we address in this work. The knowledge required, while “open” is still biased towards simple
lookup knowledge (e.g., what is the capital of this country?) and most questions do not require much
reasoning. In contrast, our dataset is explicitly drawn to rely on more common-sense knowledge and
to require more reasoning to solve. In addition, our dataset includes “rationale” annotations, which
allow knowledge-based VQA systems to more densely annotate their knowledge acquisition and
reasoning capabilities. S3VQA [ 23] analyzes OK-VQA and creates a new dataset which includes
questions that require detecting an object in the image, replacing the question with the word for that
object and then querying the web to find the answer. Like OK-VQA, it even more explicitly has the
problem of questions usually requiring a single retrieval rather than much commonsense knowledge
or reasoning.
Another related line of work is Visual Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) [ 66] and VisualCOMET [ 39].
VCR is also a VQA dataset, but is collected from movie scenes and is quite focused on humans
and their intentions (e.g. “why is [PERSON2] doing this”), whereas our dataset considers questions
and knowledge about a variety of objects. Similarly, VisualCOMET tests commonsense language
and vision models on a movie dataset, but its expected output is a scene graph for the image (e.g.,
“After, [PERSON] is likely to”). Additionally, the Ads Dataset [ 22] is a dataset requiring knowledge
about the topic and sentiments of the ads. Other datasets have considered knowledge-based question
answering for a sitcom [14] and by using web queries [9].
Explanation / Reasoning VQA. Visual reasoning on its own has been studied in several VQA
datasets. In CLEVR [ 25], the image and question are automatically generated from templates and
explicitly require models to go through multiple steps of reasoning to correctly answer. This dataset
and similar datasets which rely on simulated images suffer from lack of visual realism and lack of
richness in the images and questions and are thus prone to be overfit to with methods achieving
nearly 100% accuracy [ 64]. Our dataset requires reasoning on real images and free-form language.
Other works [ 38,28] have collected or extracted justifications on the VQAv2 [ 16] dataset. However,
VQAv2 mostly focuses on questions about object attributes, counting and activities, which do not
require reasoning on outside knowledge.
Knowledge / Commonsense in NLP. Question answering with knowledge and commonsense is
also a well-studied problem in natural language processing. This takes the form of knowledge base
completion [ 6], knowledge-based question answering [ 46] to open-domain question answering [ 10].
[4,63,5] address question answering from specific knowledge sources. This includes open-domain
question answering [ 10,58,61,60,52] and question answering from Wikipedia SQu–AD [ 46,45].
Much work has also been done in commonsense question answering as in CommonsenseQA [ 53],
where there is no direct source of knowledge but the agent must have general “commonsense” to
answer the question.
3 A-OKVQA Collection
Image source. The first requirement of an image source for this knowledge-based VQA task is that it
has an abundance of visually rich and interesting images. Images containing a small number of objects
are typically quite challenging to write questions requiring outside knowledge to answer. We used
images from the 2017 partitioning of the COCO dataset [ 29] in the creation of A-OKVQA because:
(1) it has many images cluttered with multiple objects and entity types, (2) it is an established dataset
with many associated models already in existence. To ensure suitable images for annotation, we do
3