A Additional details of dataset collection
A.1 Examples of rejected questions
With a focus on overall question quality, we removed around 60% of questions written for having any
of several flaws. The vast majority of questions removed exhibited one or more four flaws: 1) Only
required recognition of a common object, 2) only required counting a readily specified object, 3) did
not require looking at the image to answer, 4) only asked about the color of a readily specified object.
Examples of questions from each of these categories are shown in Fig. 4.
Reason rejected: Question only asks about the color of a clearly speciﬁed object.Reason rejected: Question only requires recognition of a common object. 
Reason rejected: Question only requires counting speciﬁed objects.
Reason rejected: Question doesn’t require looking at the image to answer.
Figure 4: Examples of questions rejected for not meeting our criteria.
A.2 Data collection interface
The data-collection interface used by crowdworkers to write questions is shown in Fig. 5. Detailed
instructions along with examples of good and bad questions were provided. After writing a question,
workers were required to press the “Check for similar question" button. This sent a request to a
server which returned the five questions closest to those already written in our growing dataset. We
asked workers to rewrite or rephrase questions that were too similar, but did not enforce a minimum
distance cutoff. The set of questions queried were reset when collecting the val and test sets to allow
a greater degree of overlap with the training set. After satisfied with their question, workers advanced
to the next image. Each task workers performed included four images, nearby neighbors in a CLIP
embedding space, which encouraged creative differences in questions written for similar images.
Workers were only required to write two questions (out of four possible images) to allow them to
skip images they didn’t feel they could write a suitable questions for. This cut down on unsuitable
questions that they would have otherwise been forced to write in order to complete the task. After
completing two questions, workers were allowed to submit their work and advance to the next image
set.
The data-collection interface used by crowdworkers to write rationales is shown in Fig. 6. Detailed
instructions along with examples of good rationales were provided. We first asked workers to confirm
the correct answer or provide the answer they thought was correct. This allowed a check on the
correctness of the original question, and questions with a disagreement were removed from the dataset.
Workers then provided a 1-2 sentence explanation of why the answer was correct that included any
external knowledge needed to arrive there.
B Additional Details for Large-scale Pre-trained Models
We produce the vocabulary for the experiments in Sec. 5.2 from the training set by selecting all
correct choices, as well as all choices and direct answers that appear in at least three questions. This
results in a vocabulary with 10,424 answers.
15