layers, GNNs can suffer over-smoothing problem that the learned
node embeddings become totally indistinguishable [18, 22, 28].
Inthiswork,weaim todesignanewgraphconvolutionmodel
that can better preserve the original node similarity. In essence,
we are faced with two challenges. First, how to balance the in-
formation from graph structure and node features during
aggregation? We propose an adaptive strategy that coherently in-
tegratesthegraphstructureandnodefeaturesinadata-drivenway.Itenableseachnodetoadaptivelyadjusttheinformationfromgraph
structure and node features. Second, how to explicitly capture
thecomplexpairwisefeaturesimilarityrelations? Weemploy
aself-supervisedlearningstrategytopredictthepairwisefeature
similarity from the hidden representations of given node pairs. By
adoptingsimilaritypredictionastheself-supervisedpretexttask,
we are allowed to explicitly encode the pairwise feature relation.
Furthermore, combining the above two components leads to our
proposed model, SimP-GCN, which can effectively and adaptively
preservefeature andstructuralsimilarity, thusachievingstate-of-
the-artperformanceonawiderangeofbenchmarkdatasets.Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:
•WetheoreticallyandempiricallyshowthatGCNcandestroy
original node feature similarity.
•We propose a novel GCN model that effectively preserves
featuresimilarityandadaptivelybalancestheinformation
fromgraphstructureandnodefeatureswhilesimultaneously
leveraging their rich information.
•Extensiveexperimentshavedemonstratedthattheproposed
framework can outperform representative baselines on both
assortative and disassortative graphs. We also show that
preservingfeaturesimilaritycansignificantlyboostthero-
bustness of GCN against adversarial attacks.
2 RELATED WORK
Overthepastfewyears,increasingeffortshavebeendevotedto-
ward generalizing deep learning to graph structured data in the
formofgraphneuralnetworks.Therearemainlytwostreamsof
graphneuralnetworks,i.e.spectralbasedmethodsandspatialbased
methods[ 24].Spectralbasedmethodslearnnoderepresentations
based on graph spectral theory [ 29]. Bruna et al. [ 3] first gener-
alize convolution operation to non-grid structures from spectral
domain by using the graph Laplacian matrix. Following this work,
ChebNet[ 6]utilizesChebyshevpolynomialstomodulatethegraph
Fourier coefficients and simplify the convolution operation. The
ChebNetisfurthersimplifiedtoGCN[ 15]bysettingtheorderof
the polynomial to 1 together with other approximations. While
being a simplified spectral method, GCN can be also regarded as a
spatial based method. From a node perspective, when updating its
noderepresentation,GCNaggregatesinformationfromitsneigh-
bors. Recently, many more spatial based methods with different
designs to aggregate and transform the neighborhood information
are proposed including GraphSAGE [ 10], MPNN [ 9], GAT [33], etc.
While graph neural networks have been demonstrated to be
effective in many applications, their performance might be im-
paired when the graph structure is not optimal. For example, their
performancedeterioratesgreatlyondisassortativegraphswherehomophilydoesnothold[ 27]andthusthegraphstructureintro-
ducesnoises;adversarialattackcaninjectcarefully-craftednoise
to disturb the graph structure and fool graph neural networks into
making wrong predictions [ 34,44,45]. In such cases, the graph
structure information may not be optimal for graph neural net-
works to achieve better performance while the original features
could come as a rescue if carefully utilized. Hence, it urges us todevelopanewgraphneuralnetworkcapableofpreservingnode
similarity in the original feature space.
3 PRELIMINARY STUDY
Inthissection,weinvestigateiftheGCNmodelcanpreservefeature
similarity via theoretical analysis and empirical study. Before that,
we first introduce key notations and concepts.
Graph convolutional network (GCN) [ 15] was proposed to solve
semi-supervised node classificationproblem, where only a subset
of the nodes with labels. A graph is defined as G=(V,E,X),
whereV={𝑣1,𝑣2,...,𝑣𝑛}isthesetof 𝑛nodes,Eisthesetofedges
describingtherelationsbetweennodesand X=[x/latticetop
1,x/latticetop2,...,x/latticetop𝑛]∈
R𝑛×𝑑is the node feature matrix where 𝑑is the number of features
andx𝑖indicates the node features of 𝑣𝑖. The graph structure can
also be represented by an adjacency matrix A∈{0,1}𝑛×𝑛where
A𝑖𝑗=1 indicates the existence of an edge between nodes 𝑣𝑖and
𝑣𝑗, otherwise A𝑖𝑗=0. A single graph convolutional filter with
parameter 𝜃takestheadjacencymatrix Aandagraphsignal f∈R𝑛
as input. It generates a filtered graph signal f/primeas:
f/prime=𝜃˜D−1
2˜A˜D−1
2f, (1)
where˜A=A+Iand˜Dis the diagonal matrix of ˜Awith˜D𝑖𝑖=/summationtext.1
𝑗˜A𝑖𝑗. The node representations of all nodes can be viewed as
multi-channel graph signals and the 𝑙-th graph convolutional layer
with non-linearity is rewritten in a matrix form as:
H(𝑙)=𝜎(˜D−1/2˜A˜D−1/2H(𝑙−1)W(𝑙)), (2)
whereH(𝑙)is the output of the 𝑙-th layer, H(0)=X,W(𝑙)is the
weightmatrixofthe 𝑙-thlayerand 𝜎istheReLUactivationfunction.
3.1 Laplacian Smoothing in GCN
As shown in Eq. (1), GCN naturally smooths the features in the
neighborhoodsaseachnodeaggregatesinformationfromneigh-
bors. This characteristic is related to Laplacian smoothing and itessentially destroys node similarity in the original feature space.
While Laplacian smoothing in GCN has been studied [
18,38], in
this work we revisit this process from a new perspective.
Given a graph signal fdefined on a graph Gwith normalized
Laplacian matrix L=I−˜D−1
2˜A˜D−1
2, the signal smoothness over
the graph can be calculated as:
f𝑇Lf=1
2/summationdisplay.1
𝑖,𝑗˜A𝑖𝑗/parenleftBigg
f𝑖√1+𝑑𝑖−f𝑗/radicalbig
1+𝑑𝑗/parenrightBigg2
. (3)
where𝑑𝑖and𝑑𝑗denotes the degree of nodes 𝑣𝑖and𝑣𝑗respectively.
Thusasmallervalueof f𝑇Lfindicatessmoothergraphsignal,i.e.,
smaller signal difference between adjacent nodes.
Supposethatwearegivenanoisygraphsignal f0=f∗+𝜂,where
𝜂is uncorrelated additive Gaussian noise. The original signal f∗
isassumedtobesmoothwithrespecttotheunderlyinggraph G.
Session 4: Networks
 
WSDM ’21, March 8–12, 2021, Virtual Event, Israel
149