Broader impact
Data-driven generative modeling means learning a computational recipe for generating complicated
data based purely on examples. This is a foundational problem in machine learning. In addition
to their fundamental nature, generative models have several uses within applied machine learning
research as priors, regularizers, and so on. In those roles, they advance the capabilities of computer
vision and graphics algorithms for analyzing and synthesizing realistic imagery.
The methods presented in this work enable high-quality generative image models to be trained using
signiﬁcantly less data than required by existing approaches. It thereby primarily contributes to the
deep technical question of how much data is enough for generative models to succeed in picking up
the necessary commonalities and relationships in the data.
From an applied point of view, this work contributes to efﬁciency; it does not introduce fundamental
new capabilities. Therefore, it seems likely that the advances here will not substantially affect the
overall themes — surveillance, authenticity, privacy, etc. — in the active discussion on the broader
impacts of computer vision and graphics.
Speciﬁcally, generative models’ implications on image and video authenticity is a topic of active
discussion. Most attention revolves around conditional models that allow semantic control and
sometimes manipulation of existing images. Our algorithm does not offer direct controls for high-
level attributes (e.g., identity, pose, expression of people) in the generated images, nor does it enable
direct modiﬁcation of existing images. However, over time and through the work of other researchers,
our advances will likely lead to improvements in these types of models as well.
The contributions in this work make it easier to train high-quality generative models with custom sets
of images. By this, we eliminate, or at least signiﬁcantly lower, the barrier for applying GAN-type
models in many applied ﬁelds of research. We hope and believe that this will accelerate progress in
several such ﬁelds. For instance, modeling the space of possible appearance of biological specimens
(tissues, tumors, etc.) is a growing ﬁeld of research that appears to chronically suffer from limited
high-quality data. Overall, generative models hold promise for increased understanding of the
complex and hard-to-pinpoint relationships in many real-world phenomena; our work hopefully
increases the breadth of phenomena that can be studied.
References
[1]A. Aksac, D. J. Demetrick, T. Ozyer, and R. Alhajj. BreCaHAD: A dataset for breast cancer histopatholog-
ical annotation and diagnosis. BMC Research Notes , 12, 2019.
[2]M. Arjovsky and L. Bottou. Towards principled methods for training generative adversarial networks. In
Proc. ICLR , 2017.
[3]M. Bi ´nkowski, D. J. Sutherland, M. Arbel, and A. Gretton. Demystifying MMD GANs. In Proc. ICLR ,
2018.
[4]A. Bora, E. Price, and A. Dimakis. AmbientGAN: Generative models from lossy measurements. In Proc.
ICLR , 2018.
[5]A. Brock, J. Donahue, and K. Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high ﬁdelity natural image synthesis.
InProc. ICLR , 2019.
[6]T. Chen, X. Zhai, M. Ritter, M. Lucic, and N. Houlsby. Self-supervised GANs via auxiliary rotation loss.
InProc. CVPR , 2019.
[7]Y . Choi, Y . Uh, J. Yoo, and J.-W. Ha. StarGAN v2: Diverse image synthesis for multiple domains. In Proc.
CVPR , 2020.
[8]E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, D. Mané, V . Vasudevan, and Q. V . Le. AutoAugment: Learning augmentation
policies from data. In Proc. CVPR , 2019.
[9]E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, J. Shlens, and Q. V . Le. RandAugment: Practical automated data augmentation
with a reduced search space. CoRR , abs/1909.13719, 2019.
[10] T. De Vries and G. Taylor. Improved regularization of convolutional neural networks with cutout. CoRR ,
abs/1708.04552, 2017.
[11] X. Gong, S. Chang, Y . Jiang, and Z. Wang. AutoGAN: Neural architecture search for generative adversarial
networks. In Proc. ICCV , 2019.
[12] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y . Bengio.
Generative adversarial networks. In Proc. NIPS , 2014.
[13] I. Gulrajani, F. Ahmed, M. Arjovsky, V . Dumoulin, and A. C. Courville. Improved training of Wasserstein
GANs. In Proc. NIPS , pages 5769–5779, 2017.
10