Latents Reals Latents
G G
D DAug Aug
D loss G loss–f (x) –f (x) –f(–x) (x–y)2 (x–y)2(a) bCR (previous work)
Latents
G
D
G loss–f (x)AugReals
D loss–f (x)DLatents
G
–f(–x)Aug Augp (b) Oursp= 0 p= 0:1p= 0:2p= 0:3p= 0:5p= 0:8
(c) Effect of augmentation probability p
Figure 2: (a,b) Flowcharts for balanced consistency regularization (bCR) [ 43] and our stochastic
discriminator augmentations. The blue elements highlight operations related to augmentations,
while the rest implement standard GAN training with generator Gand discriminator D[12]. The
orange elements indicate the loss function and the green boxes mark the network being trained. We
use the non-saturating logistic loss [ 12]f(x) = log (sigmoid( x)). (c) We apply a diverse set of
augmentations to every image that the discriminator sees, controlled by an augmentation probability p.
enforce discriminator consistency for both real and generated images, whereas no augmentations or
consistency loss terms are applied when training the generator (Figure 2a). As such, their approach
effectively strives to generalize the discriminator by making it blind to the augmentations used in
the CR term. However, meeting this goal opens the door for leaking augmentations, because the
generator will be free to produce images containing them without any penalty. In Section 4, we show
experimentally that bCR indeed suffers from this problem, and thus its effects are fundamentally
similar to dataset augmentation.
Our solution is similar to bCR in that we also apply a set of augmentations to all images shown to the
discriminator. However, instead of adding separate CR loss terms, we evaluate the discriminator only
using augmented images, and do this also when training the generator (Figure 2b). This approach that
we call stochastic discriminator augmentation is therefore very straightforward. Yet, this possibility
has received little attention, possibly because at ﬁrst glance it is not obvious if it even works: if the
discriminator never sees what the training images really look like, it is not clear if it can guide the
generator properly (Figure 2c). We will therefore ﬁrst investigate the conditions under which this
approach will not leak an augmentation to the generated images, and then build a full pipeline out of
such transformations.
2.2 Designing augmentations that do not leak
Discriminator augmentation corresponds to putting distorting, perhaps even destructive goggles on
the discriminator, and asking the generator to produce samples that cannot be distinguished from the
training set when viewed through the goggles. Bora et al. [ 4] consider a similar problem in training
GANs under corrupted measurements, and show that the training implicitly undoes the corruptions
and ﬁnds the correct distribution, as long as the corruption process is represented by an invertible
transformation of probability distributions over the data space. We call such augmentation operators
non-leaking .
The power of these invertible transformations is that they allow conclusions about the equality or
inequality of the underlying sets to be drawn by observing only the augmented sets. It is crucial to
understand that this does notmean that augmentations performed on individual images would need to
be undoable. For instance, an augmentation as extreme as setting the input image to zero 90% of the
time is invertible in the probability distribution sense: it would be easy, even for a human, to reason
about the original distribution by ignoring black images until only 10% of the images remain. On the
other hand, random rotations chosen uniformly from f0;90;180;270gare not invertible: it is
impossible to discern differences among the orientations after the augmentation.
The situation changes if this rotation is only executed at a probability p <1: this increases the
relative occurrence of 0, and now the augmented distributions can match only if the generated
images have correct orientation. Similarly, many other stochastic augmentations can be designed to
be non-leaking on the condition that they are skipped with a non-zero probability. Appendix C shows
that this can be made to hold for a large class of widely used augmentations, including deterministic
mappings (e.g., basis transformations), additive noise, transformation groups (e.g, image or color
space rotations, ﬂips and scaling), and projections (e.g., cutout [ 10]). Furthermore, composing
non-leaking augmentations in a ﬁxed order yields an overall non-leaking augmentation.
3