Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 11 of 13
the advertisement interval signiﬁcantly increased the possibility of packet collisions, thus
increasing the energy consumption of the nodes. In [ 27], Giovanelli et al. evaluated
three BLE modules in terms of throughput, latency, and power consumption. The results
showed that optimizing the connection parameters, such as the CI, could improve the
system efﬁciency while maintaining the required throughput. In [ 28], Fu et al. proposed
Q-learning-based resource scheduling in a WSN to enhance the energy efﬁciency while
providing a QoS guarantee speciﬁed by a packet loss rate.
To the best of our knowledge, most existing IoT-related studies considered energy
efﬁciency and throughput as performance metrics; however, only a little work considering
the QoS has been reported. Nonetheless, the studies by Rioual et al. in [ 29] and Collotta et al.
in [30] are relatively close to our research. In [ 29], Rioual et al. used Q-learning to manage
the energy of sensor nodes by adjusting the sleep duration. This scheme tuned the processor
frequency of the nodes by considering the energy harvested from the environment. In
particular, they found that Q-learning is sufﬁcient to handle a moderate size of this problem,
though it is less appropriate for a large or nearly inﬁnite state space. In [ 30], Collotta et
al. proposed a fuzzy-based scheme that scheduled the sleeping time of IoT nodes by
considering the battery levels and the throughput-to-workload ratio. Compared to the
schemes that used a ﬁxed sleeping time, the proposed method increased the node lifetime
by 30%. However, this simulation was based on a simple network environment (i.e., only
one peripheral device), and the sleeping duration was ambiguous due to the inclusion of
unknown environmental parameters.
6. Conclusions
In this study, we proposed a practical DQN-based packet scheduling algorithm that
coordinates the transmission of multiple slaves in a WSN. The scheduler embedded in
the master dynamically adjusts the CI and the number of packets transmitted by each
slave within the interval. The experimental results conﬁrmed that the DQN scheduler can
adapt to dynamic network environments via continuous learning and can prolong network
lifetime while providing QoS guarantees. Moreover, an in-depth analysis of the optimized
scheduler’s policy revealed that immediate transmission of packets using the maximum CI
is optimal, rather than using batch transmission by deferring the transmissions. As future
research suggestions, there may be a need for ways to reuse previously learned policies
in highly mobile network environments in which the node population in the WSN varies
signiﬁcantly over time. It is also interesting to analyze how the optimal policy changes as
the amount and pattern of scheduling overhead vary.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.G.K.; methodology, J.G.K.; software, X.F. and J.G.K.;
validation, X.F. and J.G.K..; formal analysis, X.F.; investigation, X.F.; resources, X.F.; data curation,
X.F.; writing—original draft preparation, X.F.; writing—review and editing, J.G.K.; visualization, X.F.;
supervision, J.G.K.; project administration, J.G.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: All data derived from this study are presented in the article.
Acknowledgments: This research was conducted as part of the Research Year Program, Kyung Hee
University, 2021.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.