Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 5 of 13
real-world problems. To address these issues, the deep Q-network (DQN) proposed in [ 17]
uses a neural network to approximate the Q-function. Moreover, two key components are
incorporated into the DQN to stabilize the learning: experience replay and a duplicated
Q-network [ 15,17]. Experience replay employs mini-batching to update the Q-network
for better stability. The target network, which is duplicated from the main Q-network, is
devised to improve the stability of the learning, and Q-values are used to train the main
Q-network.
3.2. DQN-Based Scheduling Algorithm
The scheduling of transmission parameters in our WSN model is formulated as a
sequential decision-making problem under the RL framework. In this formulation, the
agent corresponds to the master node, and everything beyond the master node is considered
the environment. The environment presents the system state and the reward to the agent,
as shown in Figure 2. We assume that this state information is provided through the
return packets from the slaves during the CP , as shown in Figure 1. The master node takes
scheduling actions in response to the system state information by selecting appropriate
transmission parameters.
Figure 3 shows the architecture of a DQN-based scheduling algorithm in the WSN
environment that was described earlier. The master node observes a state stat time t
and takes an action atby selecting the CI and the number of packets to transmit per
CI. According to the master’s scheduling action, the communication between the master
and the slaves takes place during the CI. At the end of the CI, a quadruple experience
sequence (st,at,rt,st+1), which represents the current observation state, current action,
current reward at time t, and next state at t+1, is fed back to the master. These quadruple
data are stored in a replay buffer, and a mini-batch is randomly sampled from the buffer
to train the DNN. The main Q-network’s parameters are updated at each training step.
Detailed speciﬁcations on the states, actions, and rewards are described below.
Figure 3. Architecture of the DQN-based scheduling algorithm. At the beginning of the CI, the
DQN-based scheduler receives state information (i.e., the remaining lifetime of packets in the queue
(D1,D2,. . .,DN)) from the slaves. Then it performs scheduling actions, i.e., choosing the CI length
and the number of packets transmitted by each slave (L,n1,n2,. . .,nN). The reward ris given to the
scheduler as feedback along with the updated state s2. Such a sequence of relevant information (i.e.,
current state s1, action a, reward r, and next state s2) is stored in the replay buffer for the training of
the DQN-based scheduler.