Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 3 of 13
determines the number of packets to be transmitted for each slave and grants permission
to transmit packets by polling each slave. Since the CP is ﬁxed and very small compared to
the DP , the DP accounts for most of the CI. After the transmission is completed in the DP ,
the slaves return to the sleep mode until the CI ends, and they become active again when
the next CI starts.
In this study, we assume that the master, which incorporates a packet scheduler,
dynamically sets the CI length, as well as the number of packets that need to be sent during
the CI for each slave. Such scheduling information is broadcast by the master, and the slaves
then react accordingly upon receiving the information. The notion of QoS is incorporated
into our system model, which assumes that the packets have a latency limit. For instance,
if a packet in the queue waits longer than this latency limit, e.g., 10 s, the packet will be
discarded by the slave and considered lost. Upon making a connection, the packet loss rate
is speciﬁed as a QoS parameter between the master and slaves.
Regarding the energy model, we assume that the slave nodes are powered by a
ﬁnite-capacity battery, although the master is supplied with sufﬁcient energy via either
a high-capacity battery or wired power sources [ 13,14]. As such, the network lifetime is
mostly determined by the slave nodes, which become inoperable if the battery runs out. It
is also assumed that energy is consumed by communication only, i.e., packet transmission
or reception. One unit of energy is set to be consumed for the transmission/reception of
a data packet that is 37bytes long. For packets of other sizes, the energy consumption is
proportional to the packet size.
S3 S2S1S5
S4
MConnection Interval. . .
Control
PeriodData
Period
. . .
time
M
S1
n1
S2
n2
1
(a)
S3 S2S1S5
S4
MConnection Interval. . .
Control
PeriodData
Period
. . .
time
M
S1
n1
S2
n2
1 (b)
Figure 1. (a) Master Mand multiple slaves Siconnected in a star topology. ( b) Packet exchanges
between the master and slaves over time. The nidenotes the number of packets trasnsmitted by the
ith slave.
2.2. Problem Formulation
To formulate the problem, we consider a WSN model that contains a master node and
Nslave nodes, as shown in Figure 1a. Since communication continues until the battery is
exhausted, the lifetime of the ith slave, V(i), is deﬁned as
V(i)=M
å
k=1Lk, for e(i)
M<E(i)
s<e(i)
M+1
where Lkdenotes the length of the kth CI, Mrepresents the index of the last CI, e(i)
kdenotes
the cumulative power consumption of the ith slave until the kth CI, and E(i)
srepresents
the initial battery level of the ith slave. In this study, the network lifetime is deﬁned as the
time until one of the nodes runs out of battery for the ﬁrst time. Assuming that the slaves
use a limited amount of energy compared to the master, the network lifetime is completely