Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 2 of 13
reinforcement learning (DRL)-based scheduling strategy for allocating channels and time
slots in the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). The proposed deep scheduling algorithm,
which was named DISA, was intended to operate in an edge-computing-based network for
communication scheduling.
This paper proposes an energy-efﬁcient packet scheduling algorithm based on a
DQN. We considered an application scenario of a WSN in which multiple slave nodes
centered around the master node were connected in a star topology, similarly to [ 13]. The
master collected the sensed data transmitted from the slaves while completely controlling
the slaves’ transmissions through scheduling. In time-division multiple access (TDMA)-
based transmissions with variable CIs [ 14], the master node controls the length of the CIs
and the number of packets to be transmitted per CI for each slave. Furthermore, QoS
requirements were imposed on packets, so each packet needed to be transmitted within a
predetermined time. In this situation, it was not obvious to design an optimal scheduling
algorithm that maximized the network’s lifetime while satisfying the QoS requirements.
In particular, a traditional scheduling algorithm would hardly capture the complicated
interplay between operating transmission parameters, the imposed constraints (e.g., QoS
requirements, limited battery capacity, etc.), and the network lifetime.
To address the complexity of the problem, we relied on an AI technique called rein-
forcement learning (RL) [ 15]. In the framework of RL, the master incorporating the packet
scheduler acts as an agent, and the rest of the parts of the WSN other than the master
correspond to the environment. The master performs a sequence of scheduling actions over
time and receives feedback in the form of state updates and rewards from the environment.
Properly designed reward functions drive the DQN-based packet scheduler to converge to
the desired form through learning over multiple episodes. Experiments were conducted
in various network environments to measure the performance of the optimized DQN
scheduler. In WSN environments, factors that affect the scheduler’s policy include the
node population, mobility, data arrival process, packet lifetime, etc. Through extensive
experiments, we examined how the DQN scheduler adapted to the time-varying network
environment, and we compared the performance of the DQN scheduler with that of other
existing methods in terms of the network lifetime and degree of QoS guarantee. Addition-
ally, by analyzing the policy of the optimized DQN scheduler, we aimed to gain insight
into scheduling methods based on RL. These efforts are expected to not only increase the
understanding of the underlying processes of AI-based solutions, but also provide many
insights into designing solutions for non-AI techniques through reverse engineering.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the system model
and the problem formulation. In Section 3, an energy-efﬁcient packet scheduling algorithm
based on a DQN is proposed. Section 4 presents the experimental methods and numerical
results. In Section 5, a review of related work is presented. Finally, this paper concludes in
Section 6.
2. System Model
2.1. Network Model
In this study, we consider a WSN model that consists of one master and multiple
slaves connected to the master in a star topology, as shown in Figure 1a. All communication
occurs between the master and one slave at a time, and the master switches between slaves
via TDMA. A slave can transmit packets only when granted permission by the master.
These characteristics of our model are similar to those of the BLE-connected mode in [ 13,14].
In fact, our network model can be viewed as an extension of the BLE-connected mode to
accommodate additional functionalities required for AI-based scheduling.
After establishing the connection, the master and slaves communicate with each other
during a predeﬁned connection interval (CI), which consists of a control period (CP) and
data period (DP), as shown in Figure 1b. In the CP , the master collects information on the
transmission status from each slave. This information, including the number of packets in
the queue and the packet delay, is used for scheduling decisions. In the DP , the scheduler