Sensors 2023 ,23, 1339 8 of 13
scheme, which is abbreviated as DET, in which the value of the CI was always chosen at its
maximum, and as many packets as were in the queue were sent.
Table 1. Parameters used in the numerical experiments.
Parameters Values
Connection interval length ( L) 0.0075 3.8825 s
Discretized delay levels 20
Packet arrival rate ( l) 0.5/s
Transmission speed of link 1 Mbps
Interframe space (IFS) 0.15 ms
Master packet size 12 bytes
Slave packet size 37 bytes
Packet lifetime ( t) 2–4 s
Initial battery capacity 1000.0
Energy consumed by transmitting/receiving a
data packet1.0
Energy consumed by transmitting/receiving
an empty/control packet0.3243
In Figure 4, we evaluate the performance of the DQN-based scheduler in terms of the
cumulative reward, network lifetime, and transmission ratio by increasing the number of
episodes to be learned. As shown in the ﬁgure, all three metrics converged while learning
350 episodes. In particular, the convergence became clear and steady after 100 or more
episodes. According to the experimental results, the cumulative reward, network lifetime,
and transmission ratio converged to 15, 800 ,1450 , and 0.99, respectively. It was peculiar
that a sharp increase in the network lifetime was observed around the 15th episode. This
was caused by the action of ‘never transmitting’ becoming dominant during the early stage
of learning. Note that our reward function in (6) was designed to favor a longer CI and no
packet loss. Thus, a simple policy of ‘transmitting no packets, but taking the maximum CI’
can result in a relatively longer network lifetime. Obviously, this simple policy cannot be
optimal, since the DQN-based scheduler maximizes the cumulative reward rather than the
network lifetime. Consider that the value of the transmission ratio around the 15th episode
is very low, whereas the corresponding network lifetime is large. Since the rewards are
roughly a product of the network lifetime and transmission ratio, the value of cumulative
rewards around the 15th episode remains almost unaffected. This suboptimal policy was
overwhelmed by better policies and was eventually ﬁltered out through learning.
Figure 5 shows the average cumulative reward, network lifetime, and transmission
ratio for the DQN and DET. Here, the DET was divided into two cases, namely, DET2
and DET4, which denote the DET cases with packet lifetimes of 2 and 4 s, respectively.
In the ﬁgure, we can see that performance of the DQN was similar to DET4’s, but was
superior to DET2’s. DET4 could outperform DET2, since the larger packet lifetime of DET4
would reduce the packet loss rate for the DET schedulers, in which a ﬁxed CI was used.
Speciﬁcally, consider a packet that arrives during the CI. This packet will not be dropped
due to its longer lifetime for the DET4 scheduler. However, the chance that this packet
will be dropped becomes higher for the DET2 scheduler. Selecting a ﬁxed CI length that is
larger than the packet lifetime leads to higher packet losses and, consequently, aggravates
the stability of the scheduling. DET4 accidentally operated with parameters that yielded
optimal performance, but there was no guarantee of tuning to optimal parameters when
operating in a time-varying communication environment. The results show that dynamic
adjustment of transmission parameters through learning can show better performance than
deterministic scheduling.