:4 MinChen,WeiLi,GiancarloFortino,YixueHao,LongHu,an d IztokHumar
solve the problems of how to compute, but also to solve what to compute and where to compute,
whichneedsto deploy cognitive computingat the edgeofthe netwo rk.
There are some researches on applying cognitive computing to ed ge computing in [ 16]. The
authors ﬁrst introduced deep learning for IoTs into the edge-com puting environment. They also
designedanoveloﬄoadingstrategytooptimizetheperformanceo fIoTdeep-learningapplications
withedgecomputingsincetheexisting edgenodeshavelimitedpr ocessingcapability.Theworks
in [17] and [18] proposed a novel deep-reinforcement-learning approach to solv e the resource al-
location problems in terms of networking, caching and computing i n edge computing. However,
the above researches did not apply the cognition for applicati ons to guide network-resource op-
timization, but only considered the resource allocation using s ome intelligent algorithms, which
cannotprovide elastic cognitive computingservices.
3 THEPROPOSED ECC ARCHITECTUREAND DESIGN ISSUES
The proposed ECC architecture mainly consists of two components :the edge network andthe
edge cognition as shown in Fig. 1. The edge network mainly provides the access and resource
management of various edge devices. The edge cognition mainly re lates to the cognition to edge
data, involving service data and network and computing resource da ta. The edge cognition is
mainly composed of two core parts, data cognitive engine and resou rce cognitive engine. The
interaction between data cognitive engine and resource cognitive engine is the key design issue
whichis alsoshown atthe top ofFig. 1.
In the architecture, the data cognitive engine mainly relies on c ognitive computing technolo-
gies while the resource cognitive engine mainly uses the related technologiesof edge computing.
By combining key technologies in cognitive computing (i.e., big- data analysis, machine learning,
deeplearning)withthoseinedgecomputing(i.e.,computingoﬄo adandmigration,mobilityman-
agement,intelligent proactive caching,resource cooperation management),ECC can better solve
the problem of communication bandwidth and delay by the fusion o f computing, communica-
tion,and storage, and thus improving the network intelligence. Bel ow we will introduce the ECC
architectureindetailsfromthreeaspects:resourcecognit iveengine,datacognitiveengineandthe
interaction between them.
3.1 Resource CognitiveEngine
Thisengine can learn the characteristicsof edge cloudcomput ing resources, environmental com-
munication resources, and network resources by cognition, and fee dbackthe integrated resource
data to the data cognitive engine in real time. At the same time, i t can accept the analysis re-
sult of the data cognitive engine and realize the real-time dynami coptimization andallocation of
resources. As shown in Fig. 1, it mainly includes the resource data pool, network software te ch-
nologies and resource management technologies.More speciﬁcall y,the function of this engine is
to:
(1)ResourceDataPool: Realizethemassive,heterogeneousandreal-timeconnectionbe tween
terminals (such as smart clothing, intelligent robot, intellige nt traﬃc car, and other access
devices),ensurethesecurity,reliabilityandinteroperabil ityofconnection,andconstitutethe
resourcedatapool(computingresources,communicationreso urcesandnetworkresources)
asa basic architecture fordata transmission.
(2)Network Softwarization: Utilize the network software technologies involving network
functionvirtualization(NFV),software-deﬁnednetwork(SDN ),self-organizednetwork(SON),
andnetworkslicingtorealizehighreliabilityandﬂexibility, ultra-lowlatency,andextendibil-
ity ofthe edgecognitive system.
ACMTransactions on InternetTechnology, Vol. 1,No. 1, Article. Pub lication date: August 2018.