:10 MinChen,WeiLi,GiancarloFortino,YixueHao,LongHu,a nd IztokHumar
to bedelivered tothe otheredgenode,speciﬁcally,in thiswo rk,it stands forthesize ofthe video
content or the storage resource consumed by the emotion detecti on (e.g., the processing code
and parameter(s)). Finally, oirepresents the data size of the task result. For instance, in the video
decoding case, ωiis the computing resource needed for the video decoding, siis the video data
size, and oiis the data size of the decoded video. After the computation, t he Service Provider m
sends thetranscodedvideo content backtothe user.
Migration Cost: The traﬃc volume of migrating a virtual server usually cannot be neglected
due to the large size of the server states. The migration cost of a virtual server depends upon the
size of the server as well as the bandwidth available on the mig ration path. For example, for the
emotion detection service, the migration cost depends on the emotion recognition models. For
a video-streaming service, the migration cost depends on the d ata size of the decoded video. A
higherservice resolution hasa highermigration cost.
Migration Goal: Minimize the service costs, and in the meantime, improve the QoE by pro-
viding diﬀerent service resolutions based on user demands, user mobility and dynamic network
resources. For xt, a service request at time t, we deﬁne the score (the metric for user acquired
experience) under some migration strategy πasScore(xt,π)and the cost of Cost(xt,π), so the
optimization objective canbe deﬁned asfollows.
max F(x,π)=/summationdisplay.1
t∈0,1,...NScore(xt,π)−Cost(xt,π) (1)
Where,Score(xt,π)=R(xt)−E(xt)
Dela/y.alt(xt,π),R(xt)is the service type acquired by the service request, i.e.,
theserviceresolution.Wesetthevalueof(0,1,2),respecti velycorrespondingtolow,mediumand
high service resolution. E(xt)is the expectation of a service request. Dela/y.alt(xt,π)is the time of
service acquisition under strategy π, relevant to ωiandoi.Cost(xt,π)isrelevant to si.
From the deﬁnition of Score(xt,π), it is observed that, in the case of a deﬁnite latency and a
deﬁnite service demand of the user, the higher the service reso lution is provided, and the higher
the user experience is gained. While providing the same service resolution, the higher the user
expectation is, the lower the score is. R(xt)−E(xt)can well reﬂect the relationship between the
service acquired by the user and the user expectation. This mea ns that we can provide the low-
resolutionservice ifthequalityoftheservicerequirement softheuserisnothigh,soastoreduce
theenergyconsumption,withoutinﬂuencingtheuserQoE.Whenthes erviceacquiredbytheuser
andtheuserexpectationaredeﬁnite,thehigherthedelayofse rviceacquiredis,thelowerthescore
is.
Optimal Problem Formulation: Our problem can be described as a reinforcement learning
scenario.Theobjectiveistoﬁndanagentthatmakestheoptimal migrationpolicyforeachservice
request.Theoptimal migration policydenoted by π∗canmaximize the system reward given by:
π∗=argmax
π/summationdisplay.1
x∈XF(x,π) (2)
LetSidenotethestateofenvironmentattime i,deﬁnedbythelocationsofthe nservicesatthat
time. For a sequence of batchrequests X={x1,x2,...,xN}, the goal of the service migration is to
determine S1,S2,...,SNto maximize the system reward deﬁned byEq.( 2).
Q-learning is one of the most popular Reinforcement Learning [ 23] (RL) methods that is ap-
plied in many research areas. Thegeneral procedure of the Q-le arning algorithmis shown as the
Algorithm 1.
We deﬁne thereward after theaction atakenon Stas:
Ra
t+1=Score(St+1)−(Score(St)+Cost(St,St+1)) (3)
ACMTransactions on InternetTechnology, Vol. 1,No. 1, Article. Pub lication date: August 2018.