A DynamicService-MigrationMechanism :3
•We propose an ECC-based dynamic cognitive service-migration mechanism that considers
boththeelastic allocationofthecognitive computingservic esandtheuser mobility,topro-
vide a mobility-aware dynamicservice-adjustment scheme.
•We develop an ECC-based test platform for dynamic service mig ration and evaluate it by
meansofseveral experiments,withtheresults showingthatthe proposedECCcanprovide
dynamicservices accordingto diﬀerent user demands.
Theremainder ofthe paperis organizedasfollows.Section IIi ntroducesthe related work.Sec-
tion IIIpresents theproposed architectureforedgecognitiv e computingin detail. Section IVstip-
ulates the related design issues. Section V introduces the dy namic cognitive service migration
mechanism.SectionVIdemonstratestheECCtestplatformford ynamicservicemigration.Finally,
Section VIIconcludesthe paperand reportssome openissues.
2 RELATED WORK
The need for on-demand state-of-the-art services (smart sensing , e-healthcare, smart transporta-
tion, etc.) and the latency issues that aﬀect the overall Qualit y of Service (QoS) for various appli-
cationshave paved the wayto the powerful paradigmofedgecom puting.
Thereisalotofresearchonedgecomputingwithrespecttoener gyeﬃciencyandlatency.The
cooperationandinterplay amongcloudandedgedevicescanhelpt oreduceenergyconsumption
inadditiontomaintainingtheQoSforvariousapplications.How ever,alargenumberofmigrations
amongedge devices and cloud servers leads to congestion in the u nderlying networks. Hence,to
handlethisproblem,[ 7]presentedanSDN-basededge-cloudinterplay tohandlethestr eaming of
big data in the Industrial IoT environment. Edge computing is expe cted to support not only the
ever-growingnumberofusersanddevices,butalsoadiverse set ofnewapplicationsandservices.
Theworkin[ 1]introducedasystemthatcanpervasivelyoperateinanynetwor kingenvironment
andallowsforthedevelopmentofinnovative applicationsbypush ingservicesneartotheedgeof
the network.
Intermsofsecurityandprivacyin edgecomputing,thereisani ncreasing realisation thatedge
devices,whichareclosertotheuser,canplayanimportantpa rtinsupportinglatencyandprivacy-
sensitive applications [ 8,9]. Therefore, the security challenges relate to the protecti on of device
data, such that an unauthorized person cannot access the data, p roviding secure data sharing be-
tween the device andthe edgecloud,and safe data storage onthe edgecloud[ 10–12].
However, the above researches on edge computing mostly focus ed on solving the communica-
tionproblemsbyleveragingcomputingandstorage,likehowtor educethenetworkload,improve
thenetworkeﬃciencyandreducethetransmissiondelay.Inaddit ion,theseworksdidnotconsider
how to solve the personalization ofactual AI applications and h ow to provide elastic storage and
computingservices.
Applyingcognitivecomputinginvariousapplicationsforsmart citieshasbeenwidelyresearched,
for example, authors in [ 13] studied the role of intelligence algorithms such as machine le arning
and data analytics within the framework of smart-city applica tions such as smart transportation,
smart parking and smart environment, to address the challenges of b ig data. [14] also explored
howdeepreinforcementlearninganditsshift towardssemi-super vision canhandlethecognitive
side of smart-city services. The work in [ 15] indicated that the application of deep networks has
already been successful in big-data areas, and fog-to-things computing can be the ultimate bene-
ﬁciary of the approach for attack detection because the mass ive amount of data produced by IoT
devices enables deep models to learn better than shallow algo rithms. In summary, most of the
current researches on cognitive computing has focused on the de sign of algorithms. However, if
cognitivecomputingwantstobeappliedanddeployedonalargesc ale,it isnecessarynotonlyto
ACMTransactions on InternetTechnology, Vol. 1,No. 1,Article. Pub lication date: August 2018.