A DynamicService-MigrationMechanism :11
Similarly,wecanalsoconstructamatrix Qtomemorizetheexperiencethattheagenthasgained
fromtheenvironment.TheQ-valueofthestate-actionpair, Q(St,a),representstheexpectedtotal
beneﬁtscausedbyaction atakeninstate St.Thesolutionistoexploitfromtheinitialstatetoaﬁnal
optimalstatethroughupdatingaccordinglybyAlgorithm 1.Ineachiterationofthealgorithm,the
agent observes the current state Sand takes action ato move to the next state S′by receiving an
immediate reward Rt+1, which is used to update the Q(s,a)by following Eq. ( 4), and then begins
the next iteration.
Q(St,At)←Q(St,At)+α(Rt+1+γmax
aQ(St+1,a)−Q(St,At)) (4)
Theαmeanslearningratewhichdetermineshowmuchthenewinformationo verwritestheold
one.Thediscount factor γgives moreweight to the mostrecent reward thanothersin the f uture.
ALGORITHM 1: Q-learning algorithm.
Initialization Q(s,a)
Repeat(for each episode):
Initial stateS
Repeat(for each step inepisode):
Usesomepolicysuch as ( ϵ- greedy),and selectanactionfor executionbased onthesta teS
Afterexecuting theaction,observereward and new state S′
Q(St,At)←Q(St,At)+α(Rt+1+γmaxaQ(St+1,a)−Q(St,At))
S←S′
End
5 TESTBED AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Toverifytheproposedarchitecture,anECCtestplatformwa ssetup,andaperformanceevaluation
of the dynamic service migration mechanism was conducted in the experimental testbed for the
user mobility.
To create the ECC environment, we used several edge-computing nod es that realize the func-
tions of emotion detection and video streaming as shown in Fig 4(a).Theself-designed hardware
is with core processor of 4 x ARM Cortex-A33 and the algorithm e xecution in edge device needs
deployingTensorFlowenvironment.We alsousedanAndroidphoneasa user mobiledevice,and
designed the Android application program as shown in Fig 4(b), and realized the signal monitor-
ing of the edge-computing node, task uploading, result downloadi ng, and service migration. Fig
4(c) illustrates the software interface running on Windows. Fig 4(d) shows the UI of the emotion
detection application.
In the experimental setup, we use four edge nodes and two servers , i.e.,m=4,n=2. For the
performance comparison, two schemes are compared with the pro posed ECC-based scheme: 1)
Nomigrationscheme:servicemigrationisnotconsidered;2)N earestmigrationscheme:ifneeded,
service will bemigrated toclose accesspoint.
Table3liststhevaluesofimportantparametersconsideredintheexp eriments.Thetaskloadin
the high-resolution migration was 256 MB, the task load in th e middle-resolution migration was
compressed to 128 MB, and the task load in the low-resolution m igration was compressed to 64
MB.Thetransmission bandwidth between the edgenodeswas 5Mbps .
Fig.5and6plottheexperimentalresultsfortheperformanceanalysis.Fi g.5showstheconver-
gence performance of diﬀerent scenarios in the proposed scheme u sing the deep reinforcement
learning algorithm. From Fig. 5we can see that the total utility (the cumulative rewards, i. e., the
object function Fdeﬁned in Eq. 1) of the diﬀerent scenarios in the proposed scheme is very low
ACMTransactions on InternetTechnology, Vol. 1,No. 1,Article. Pub lication date: August 2018.