:2 MinChen,WeiLi,GiancarloFortino,YixueHao,LongHu,an d IztokHumar
among edge networks with the access of cloud-based services. S uch a mediating level is respon-
sible for carrying out a substantial amount of data storage and pr ocessing to reduce the retrieval
time and have more control over the data with respect to cloud-b ased services, and to consume
fewer resources and energyto reducethe workload[ 2,3].
The edge computing paradigm has multiple advantages. Firstly , the edge node can reduce the
traﬃc load of backhaul by providing a certain amount computing c apability, which is signiﬁcant
for applications such as an online games that need to transmit 60 or even 120 frames per second.
Asanalternativesolution,theserveronlysendsparameterssuc hascharacterposition,timestamp
and attribute changes(some commondata), and leaves the edge nod e to compute and render the
visual image.Secondly,as a result of the large number of edge no des deployed in 5G and the big-
data analysis based on user preference, the popular contents can be acquired in advance in the
interconnecting edgedevices, whichare onlyone hopaway fromthe u ser.
However, edge computing is also faced with many challenges. Fir stly, the operation and pro-
cessing capabilities of an edge device are limited and can fail to meet the demands on real-time
service, data optimization, and application intelligence. Sec ondly,the intelligence of most typical
edge-computing services is only embodied in the artiﬁcial inte lligence (AI)-enabled data storage
and processing on the edge. However, the intelligence is missing f rom the aspects of behavior
feedback,automatic networking,loadbalance,anddata-driven network optimization.
Cognitivecomputingoriginatesfromcognitivescientiﬁctheory .Now,itmakesmachinesachieve
“brain-like”cognitiveintelligencethroughaninteractivecog nitionloopwithmachine,cyberspace
andhumans.Comparedtobig-dataanalytics,itpossessesthefo llowingfeatures:1)analysisofthe
existing data and information in cyber space, to improve the inte lligence of the machine; 2) the
machinereinterpretsandexplainstheinformationintheexisting cyberspace,andaccordinglygen-
eratesnewinformation;humansalsoparticipateinthisprocess ;3)thecognitionofthemachineto
thehumanprovidesamoreintelligentcognitive service.Itsena blingparadigms(e.g.,agent-based
computing)hadbeenresearchedandtherelatedconcreteapplic ationsbasedoncognitiveInternet
ofThings(IoT)platformsand frameworkshave been studied in [ 4–6].
Nevertheless, the cognitive computing application mainly dep ends on the machine-learning
model trained on the cloud,while the real-time inference reque sts are made by end edge devices,
whichsofarhavebeenthemostcommondeploymentmodeoftheco gnitiveservice.Theexisting
problem of such a mode is the large latency in the network operat ion and the service delivery.
However, if the cognitive service is deployed on the network ed ge,the latency of the network re-
sponsetotheuserrequestwillbegreatlyreduced,sotherese archofedgedeploymentfortraining
and inference machineisrapidly increasing.
Therefore, considering both the advantages and disadvantages of edge computing and cogni-
tive computing,anew computingparadigmcalledEdge Cognitive C omputing (ECC)isproposed,
which combines edge computing and cognitive computing. Such a new a rchitecture integrates
communication, computation, storage and application on edge net works; it can achieve data and
resourcecognitionbycognitivecomputing.Moreover,itcanpr ovidepersonalizedservicesnearby,
enabling thenetwork to have a deeper,human-centeredcognitive int elligence.
Themain contributions ofthispaper are asfollows:
•WeproposeanewECCarchitecturethatdeployscognitivecompu tingattheedgeofthenet-
worktoprovidedynamicandelasticstorageandcomputingservic es.Inaddition,thedesign
issues of how to fuse these key technologies of cognitive compu ting and edge computing
are illustrated in detail.
ACMTransactions on InternetTechnology, Vol. 1,No. 1, Article. Pub lication date: August 2018.