:6 MinChen,WeiLi,GiancarloFortino,YixueHao,LongHu,an d IztokHumar
data mining, machine learning, deep learning, and artiﬁcial intellig ence as shown in Fig. 1. The
main data sourcesare:
(1) Collecttheexternaldatafromthedatasourceintheappli cationenvironment,suchasphysi-
calsignsandreal-timediseaserisklevelunderthecognitivehe althsurveillance,orreal-time
behavior information onthe mobile user;
(2) Collectdynamicallytheinternaldataoncomputingresource s,communicationresourcesand
networkresourcesoftheedgecloud,suchasnetworktype,serv icedataﬂow,communication
quality, andother dynamicenvironmental parameters.
Thekeypointoftheintelligentenhancementofdatacognitionenginei sthatmulti-dimensional
data (including external data related to the user and the service , and the internal data in the re-
source network environment) are adopted in cognitive computing te chnology, which is not the
case in the traditional data-analysis methods. The data cognit ive engine conducts an analysis of
the existing dataand information (e.g.,using deep convolutional network(DCNN)forfacial emo-
tion recognition and using hidden markov model (HMM) for user mo bility prediction). It then
feeds them back to the resource cognitive engine, after which th e resource cognitive engine con-
ductsareinterpretation and analysis ofthe informationto gener ate new information,whichmay
befurtherutilized bythedatacognitiveengine.Forinstance,in healthmonitoring,afterthemon-
itoring and analysisofthe physicalhealthofa smart-cloth-wo rnuser using cognitive computing,
a health-risk level of that user will be obtained; then the res ource allocation in the whole edge-
computing network will be comprehensively adjusted to the risk level of each user, i.e., the data
areutilized forthesecondtimeandserve resourceallocation andnetworkoptimization inturnto
formaclosed-loopsystem forcognitive intelligence.
3.3 The Interaction between Data CognitiveEngineand Resou rce CognitiveEngine
ThekeydesignissueoftheECCistheinteractionbetweendata cognitiveengineandresourcecog-
nitive engine. In the edge cognitive computing, we put forwards th e design idea of realizing the
closed-loopoptimizationwiththedoublecognitiveenginetoo ptimizethenetworkresourceman-
agementtechnologysuchasnetworkslice.Herewetakecognitive networkslicingasanexample
to illustrate howto fuse the related technologiesin cognitiv e computingand edgecomputing.
AsshowninFig. 1,datacognitiveengineﬁrstperceivedmanyrequests.Thereques ttypesofthe
network-sliceservicediﬀerfromonetoanotheraccordingtodiﬀ erentdemands(latency,reliability
andﬂexibility) ofdiﬀerent cognitive applications. Thendata c ognitive engine will conductthefu-
sioncognitiveanalysisoftheheterogeneousdatabasedoncurr entresourcedistribution situation
and real-time requests of the tenant with methods of machine lear ning and deep learning. Next
thedatacognitiveenginewillreporttheanalyzeddynamictraﬃcp atterntotheresourcecognitive
engine.Intheresourcecognitiveenginethereisajointoptimizat ionofthecomprehensivebeneﬁts
andtheresourceeﬃciency.Firstly,conductadmissioncontrolt operceivedrequests,thenconduct
the dynamic resource scheduling and distribution based on the c ognition of network resources,
and feed the scheduling results back to the data cognitive engine, to realize the cognition of the
network-slice resources.
4 DYNAMIC COGNITIVESERVICEMIGRATION MECHANISM
Under the ECC architecture, due to the mobility of the user, th e heterogeneity of the edge device
andthedynamicsofthenetworkresources(suchastheavailable storage,thecomputingresources
andthenetworkbandwidth),weshouldoﬀertheelasticcognitive service,i.e.,oﬀeringtheservice
in accordancewith the personalized demands of the user. Theamo unt of computation consumed
by cognitive computing is particularly large, so the computing resources are required to be more
ACMTransactions on InternetTechnology, Vol. 1,No. 1, Article. Pub lication date: August 2018.