A DynamicService-MigrationMechanism :9
6HUYLFH0DQDJHU 
'HFLVLRQ 
(QJLQH 
KHWHURJHQHRXVQHWZRUNUHVRXUFHV x 8VHUPRELOLW\ 
x 6HUYLFHUHVROXWLRQ 
x &RPSXWLQJWDVN GHSOR\VHUYLFH 
ZLWK4R6 VHUYLFHUHSR 
Ċ
nservice service 
'DWD&RJQLWLYH 
(QJLQH 5HVRXFH 
&RJQLWLYH(QJLQH 
(GJH 
5HVRXUFH 
3RRO 
6HUYLFHPLJUDWLRQ 
Fig.3. Servicedeploymentarchitecture for ECC.
2) Video Streaming: Similar to emotion detection, we provide three service resol utions for a
video streaming application, i.e., in consideration of diﬀere nt user demands, user mobility and a
dynamicnetwork environment simultaneously, we provide the video decodingwith diﬀerent res-
olutions, respectively, and decompose the video decoding task into diﬀerent resolution tasks in
a similar way. When the user is moving, the edge device node bett er judges whether to conduct
the task migration and which resolution of the task migration is conductedaccording to the user
mobilitybehavior.Forexample,whentheusermovestotheot heredgenodewithoutdetermining
a long-term stay or a short-term stay, the video decoding task w ith low resolution can be ﬁrstly
migrated.Inthecaseofalong-termstayoftheuser,thehigh- resolutionservicecanbeoﬀered,for
avoidanceoftheuntimelymigrationandresourcewaste.Inaddi tiontoconsideringtheusermobil-
ity,themigrationcostsshouldbeconsidered.Thelow-resol utionservicehasthelowestmigration
cost,and thehigh-resolution service hasthe highest migrat ion cost.
4.2 DynamicService Migration Mechanism
When and how to conduct migration are the two major concerns in dyna mic service migration
mechanisms.Mostmigrationmechanismsdecidewhentomigrate onlyrelyingonnetworkcondi-
tion,fewofthemtaketheuserbehaviorintoaccount[ 21,22].However,decidingwhentomigrate
according to user behavior and mobility has large inﬂuence on imp roving user experience and
resource utilization.
As shown in Fig. 3, the Service Manager implements all the functionalities that an edge node
needstodeployitsservices.Itincludesaservicerepository (servicerepo)whereservices( ser/v.altice 1,...,ser/v.alticen)
to be provided are stored, e.g. dockerized compressed image s or the emotion recognition models.
The Decision Engine is responsible for deciding which services t o deploy. In Fig. 3, the resource
cognitive engine manages the computing and network resources of the heterogeneous edge de-
vice, and cognizes the user mobility, user demands for service r esolution and resource demands
for computing tasks in combination with the data cognitive engine . The Decision Engine makes
thedecisioninaccordancewiththeinformationandmigrations trategy(basedonQ-learning,see
below),and accordinglyoﬀersthe dynamicandelastic cognitive s ervices.
The service providers (SPs), i.e., the edge nodes, manage the v irtual networks and let M=
{1,...,M}be the set of SPs.Let t∈{0,1,2,...,N}denote thetime instant ofservice request.
We assume that the edge device has nservices that need to be migrated and the set of tasks is
denotedasT={T1,T2,...,Tn}.Forthemigration task Ti,Ti={ωi,si,oi},whereωiistheamount
of computing resource required for the task Ti, i.e., the total number of CPU cycles needed to
completethetask,and siisthedatasizeofthecomputationtask Ti,i.e.,theamountofdatacontent
ACMTransactions on InternetTechnology, Vol. 1,No. 1,Article. Pub lication date: August 2018.