arXiv:1808.07198v1  [cs.NI]  22 Aug 2018ADynamic Service-Migration Mechanism in EdgeCognitive
Computing
MINCHEN, HuazhongUniversity of Science and Technology, China
WEILI, HuazhongUniversity of Science and Technology, China
GIANCARLOFORTINO, University of Calabria,Italy
YIXUEHAO, HuazhongUniversity of Science and Technology, China
LONG HU, HuazhongUniversity ofScience and Technology,China
IZTOKHUMAR, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
Driven by the vision of edge computing and the success of rich cognitive services based on artiﬁcial intel-
ligence, a new computing paradigm, edge cognitive computin g (ECC), is a promising approach that applies
cognitivecomputingattheedgeofthenetwork.ECChasthepo tentialtoprovidethecognitionofusers and
networkenvironmental information,andfurthertoprovide elasticcognitivecomputingservicestoachievea
higher energy eﬃciency and a higher QualityofExperience(Q oE) comparedtoedgecomputing.This paper
ﬁrstly introduces our architecture of the ECC and then descr ibes its design issues in detail. Moreover, we
proposeanECC-baseddynamic servicemigrationmechanism t oprovideaninsight intohowcognitive com-
putingiscombinedwithedgecomputing.Inordertoevaluate theproposedmechanism,apracticalplatform
fordynamic servicemigrationisbuiltup,wheretheservice s aremigratedbasedonthebehavioralcognition
ofamobileuser.Theexperimentalresultsshowthattheprop osedECCarchitecturehasultra-lowlatencyand
ahighuserexperience,whileprovidingbetterservicetoth euser,savingcomputingresources,andachieving
a high energy eﬃciency.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: cognitive computing, clo ud computing, edge computing, mobile cloud
computing,service migration
ACM Reference Format:
Min Chen, Wei Li, Giancarlo Fortino, Yixue Hao, Long Hu, and I ztok Humar. 2018. A Dynamic Service-
MigrationMechanisminEdgeCognitiveComputing. ACMTrans.InternetTechnol. 1,1(August2018), 15pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3239565
1 INTRODUCTION
The massive proliferation of personal computing devices is op ening up new human-centered de-
signs that blur the boundaries between humans and machines [ 1]. Now, the frontier for research
ondata managementisrelated to theso-callededgecomputatio n andcommunication,consisting
ofanarchitectureofoneormorecollaborativemultitude(s) ofcomputingnodesthatarepositioned
Authors’ addresses: Min Chen, Huazhong University of Science and Tech nology, Wuhan, 430074, China, minchen@ieee.
org; Wei Li, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 4300 74, China, weili_epic@hust.edu.cn; Giancarlo
Fortino, University of Calabria, Rende, 87036, Italy, g.fortino@unica l.it; Yixue Hao, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China, yixuehao@hust.edu.cn; Long Hu, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, 430074,China, longhu.cs@gmail.com; Iztok Humar, Universit y of Ljubljana,Slovenia, iztok.humar@fe.uni-lj.si.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work f or personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or comme rcial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of th is work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopy otherwise,orrepublis h,topost onserversortoredistributetolists,requires
prior speciﬁc permission and/or afee.Request permissions fromperm issions@acm.org.
© 2018Association for Computing Machinery.
1533-5399/2018/8-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3239565
ACMTransactions on InternetTechnology, Vol. 1,No. 1,Article. Pub lication date: August 2018.