Bridging Knowledge Graphs
to Generate Scene Graphs
Alireza Zareian, Svebor Karaman, and Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University, New York NY 10027, USA
faz2407,sk4089,sc250 g@columbia.edu
Abstract. Scene graphs are powerful representations that parse images
into their abstract semantic elements, i.e., objects and their interactions,
which facilitates visual comprehension and explainable reasoning. On the
other hand, commonsense knowledge graphs are rich repositories that
encode how the world is structured, and how general concepts interact.
In this paper, we present a unied formulation of these two constructs,
where a scene graph is seen as an image-conditioned instantiation of a
commonsense knowledge graph. Based on this new perspective, we re-
formulate scene graph generation as the inference of a bridge between
the scene and commonsense graphs, where each entity or predicate in-
stance in the scene graph has to be linked to its corresponding entity
or predicate class in the commonsense graph. To this end, we propose
a novel graph-based neural network that iteratively propagates informa-
tion between the two graphs, as well as within each of them, while gradu-
ally rening their bridge in each iteration. Our Graph Bridging Network,
GB-Net , successively infers edges and nodes, allowing to simultaneously
exploit and rene the rich, heterogeneous structure of the interconnected
scene and commonsense graphs. Through extensive experimentation, we
showcase the superior accuracy of GB-Net compared to the most re-
cent methods, resulting in a new state of the art. We publicly release the
source code of our method.1
1 Introduction
Extracting structured, symbolic, semantic representations from data has a long
history in Natural Language Processing (NLP), under the umbrella terms seman-
tic parsing at the sentence level [9,8] and information extraction at the document
level [22,41]. The resulting semantic graphs orknowledge graphs have many ap-
plications such as question answering [7,17] and information retrieval [6,50]. In
computer vision, Xu et al. have recently called attention to the task of Scene
Graph Generation (SGG) [44], which aims at extracting a symbolic, graphical
representation from a given image, where every node corresponds to a local-
ized and categorized object (entity), and every edge encodes a pairwise inter-
action (predicate). This has inspired two lines of follow-up work, some improv-
ing the performance on SGG [24,31,52,47,23,43,11,10,2], and others exploiting
1https://github.com/alirezazareian/gbnetarXiv:2001.02314v4  [cs.CV]  18 Jul 2020