4 Alireza Zareian et al.
information propagation network operates on a larger graph which consists of
not only object nodes, but also predicate nodes and commonsense graph nodes,
and has a more complex structure. Secondly, we do not classify each object
and relation using classiers, but instead use a pairwise matching mechanism to
connect them to corresponding class nodes in the commonsense graph.
More recently, a few methods [52,10,2] have used external knowledge to en-
hance scene graph generation. This external knowledge is sometimes referred
to as \commonsense", because it encodes ontological knowledge about classes,
rather than specic instances. Despite encouraging results, these methods have
major limitations. Specically, [52] used triplet frequency to bias the logits of
their predicate classier, and [2] used such frequencies to initialize edge weights
on their graphs. Such external priors have been also shown benecial for recog-
nizing objects [45,46] and relationships [26,53], that are building blocks for SGG.
Nevertheless, neither of those methods can incorporate other types or knowledge,
such as the semantic hierarchy concepts, or object aordances. Gu et al. [10] pro-
pose a more general way to incorporate knowledge in SGG, by retrieving a set of
relevant facts for each object from a pool of commonsense facts. However, their
method does not utilize the structure of the commonsense graph, and treats
knowledge as a set of triplets. Our method considers commonsense as a general
graph with several types of edges, explicitly integrates that graph with the scene
graph by connecting corresponding nodes, and incorporates the rich structure of
commonsense by graphical message passing.
2.2 Graph-based neural networks
By Graph-based Neural Networks (GNN), we refer to the family of models that
take a graph as input, and iteratively update the representation of each node by
applying a learnable function (a.k.a., message) on the node's neighbors. Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN) [19], Gated Graph Neural Networks (GGNN)
[25], and others are all specic implementations of this general model. Most
SGG methods use some variant of GNNs to propagate information between
region proposals [44,24,47,2]. Our message passing method, detailed in Section 4,
resembles GGNN but instead of propagating messages through a static graph, we
update (some) edges as well. Few methods exist that dynamically update edges
during message passing [35,51], but we are the rst to rene edges between a
scene graph and an external knowledge graph.
Apart from SGG, GNNs have been used in several other computer vision
tasks, often in order to propagate context information across dierent objects in
a scene. For instance, [28] injects a GNN into a Faster R-CNN [36] framework
to contextualize the features of region proposals before classifying them. This
improves the results since the presence of a table can aect the detection of a
chair . On the other hand, some methods utilize GNNs on graphs that represent
the ontology of concepts, rather than objects in a scene [29,42,21,16]. This often
enables generalization to unseen or infrequent concepts by incorporating their
relationship with frequently seen concepts. More similarly to our work, Chen et
al.[3] were the rst to bring those two ideas together, and form a graph by objects