Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 7
Fig. 2. An illustrative example of the GB-Net process. First, we initialize the scene
graph and entity bridges using a Faster R-CNN. Then we propagate messages to update
node representations, and use them to update the entity and predicate bridges. This
is repeated Ttimes and the nal bridge determines the output label of each node.
In this paper, the rst term is implemented as a region proposal network that
infersN?
SEgiven the image, followed by a simple predicate proposal algorithm
that considers all possible entity pairs as N?
SP. The second term is fullled by the
proposed GB-Net which infers bridge edges by incorporating the rich structure
of the scene and commonsense graphs. Note that unlike most existing methods
[52,2], we do not factorize this into predicting entity classes given the image, and
then predicate classes given entities. Therefore, our formulation is more general
and allows the proposed method to classify entities and predicates jointly.
4 Method
The proposed method is illustrated in Figure 2. Given an image, our model rst
applies a Faster R-CNN [36] to detect objects, and represents them as scene
entity (SE) nodes. It also creates a scene predicate (SP) node for each pair of
entities, which forms a scene graph proposal, yet to be classied. Given this graph
and a background commonsense graph, each with xed internal connectivity, our
goal is to create bridge edges between the two graphs that connect each instance
(SE and SP node) to its corresponding class (CE and CP node). To this end, our
model initializes entity bridges by connecting each SE to the CE that matches
the label predicted by Faster R-CNN, and propagates messages among all nodes,
through every edge type with dedicated message passing parameters. Given the
updated node representations, it computes a pairwise similarity between every
SP node and every CP node, and nds maximal similarity pairs to connect scene
predicates to their corresponding classes, via predicate bridges. It also does the
same for entity nodes to potentially rene their bridges too. Given the new
bridges, it propagates messages again, and repeats this process for a predened
number of steps. The nal state of the bridge determines which class each node
belongs to, resulting in the output scene graph.