20 Alireza Zareian et al.
Table 1. Time and memory cost of our method compared to the state of the art
MethodTest time Train time # parameters
(sec/image) (min/epoch) (million)
KERN [2] 0.79 401.2 405.2
GB-Net 0.52 191.6 444.6
Ti with 11 gigabytes of memory, and summarize the results in Table 1. Perhaps
the most important aspect of computation is the run time when deploying the
model on new images. To this end, we run each trained model on the entire test
set of Visual Genome (VG), i.e.26446 images, and get the average run time over
all images in terms of seconds. Our method is 34% faster than the state of the
art, while being signicantly more accurate as demonstrated in Table 1 of the
main paper.
Another important factor is the duration of training. We record the time it
takes to train each model on one epoch of the VG training set, i.e.56224 images,
and get the average over 10 training epochs. As Table 1 shows, our method is
more than twice faster than the state of the art. One of the reasons is that
KERN has two stages of message passing, each with three steps, rst to infer
entities, and then to infer predicates, while our method infers both entities and
predicates jointly, through 3 steps of global message passing.
Finally, we compare the number of trainable parameters each method has.
Our method has 10% more parameters than KERN, while it is 52% and 34%
faster than KERN during training and test respectively. Note that in all methods,
139.8 millions of the parameters belong to the Faster R-CNN detector, which we
x while training for scene graph generation.
C Commonsense graph construction
Our method utilizes a background knowledge graph which encodes commonsense
knowledge about the target entity and predicate classes. Such information have
been proved to be eective for scene graph generation [2,10]. Intuitively, this is
because they can help the model disambiguate between possible visual classes,
using higher-level semantic meanings and relationships of classes. For instance,
object aordance is a type of commonsense, because a typical human knows
aBike can be used for riding . This fact can be used by the model when it
perceives a bounding box of Person above a bounding box of Bike , and it is not
sure whether to classify their relationship as riding oronTopOf ormountedOn .
Commonsense does not have to be homogeneous. Besides aordance, onto-
logical hierarchy is another type of useful information for scene graph generation.
A typical human knows ManandWoman are both subtypes of Person , and hence
can generalize the properties of MantoWoman . Another example is statistical
commonsense, where an average human knows a Vase is more likely to be on