Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 3
fail to exploit the rich, graphical structure of commonsense knowledge [10]. To
devise a general framework for incorporating any type of graphical knowledge
into the process of scene understanding, we take inspiration from early works on
knowledge representation and applying structured grammars to computer vision
problems [55,32,40], and redene those concepts in the light of the recent ad-
vances in graph-based deep learning. Simply put, we formulate both scene and
commonsense graphs as knowledge graphs with entity and predicate nodes, and
various types of edges. A scene graph node represents an entity or predicate in-
stance in a specic image, while a commonsense graph node represents an entity
or predicate class, which is a general concept independent of the image. Simi-
larly, a scene graph edge indicates the participation of an entity instance ( e.g.
as a subject or object) in a predicate instance in a scene, while a commonsense
edge states a general fact about the interaction of two concepts in the world.
Figure 1 shows an example scene graph and commonsense graph side by side.
Based on this unied perspective, we reformulate the problem of scene graph
generation from entity and predicate classication into the novel problem of
bridging those two graphs. More specically, we propose a method that given
an image, initializes potential entity and predicate nodes, and then classies
each node by connecting it to its corresponding class node in the commonsense
graph, through an edge we call a bridge . This establishes a connectivity between
instance-level, visual knowledge and generic, commonsense knowledge. To incor-
porate the rich combination of visual and commonsense information in the SGG
process, we propose a novel graphical neural network, that iteratively propagates
messages between the scene and commonsense graphs, as well as within each of
them, while gradually rening the bridge in each iteration. Our Graph Bridging
Network, GB-Net , successively infers edges and nodes, allowing to simultane-
ously exploit and rene the rich, heterogeneous structure of the interconnected
scene and commonsense graphs.
To evaluate the eectiveness of our method, we conduct extensive experi-
ments on the Visual Genome [20] dataset. The proposed GB-Net outperforms
the state of the art consistently in various performance metrics. Through abla-
tive studies, we show how each of the proposed ideas contribute to the results.
We also publicly release a comprehensive software package based on [52] and [2],
to reproduce all the numbers reported in this paper. We provide further quan-
titative, qualitative, and speed analysis in our Supplementary Material, as well
as additional implementation details.
2 Related work
2.1 Scene graph generation
Most SGG methods are based on an object detection backbone that extracts
region proposals from the input image. They utilize some kind of information
propagation module to incorporate context, and then classify each region to
an object class, as well as each pair of regions to a relation class [44,52,47,2].
Our method has two key dierences with this conventional process: rstly, our