Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 5
in an image as well as object classes in the ontology. Nevertheless, the class
nodes in that work were merely an auxiliary means to improve object features
before classication. In contrast, we classify the nodes by explicitly inferring their
connection to their corresponding class nodes. Moreover, we iteratively rene
the bridge between scene and commonsense graphs to enhance our prediction.
Furthermore, their task only involves objects and object classes, while we explore
a more complex structure where predicates play an important role as well.
3 Problem Formulation
In this section, we rst formalize the concepts of knowledge graph in general, and
commonsense graph and scene graph in particular. Leveraging their similarities,
we then reformulate the problem of scene graph generation as bridging these two
graphs.
3.1 Knowledge graphs
We dene a knowledge graph as a set of entity and predicate nodes ( NE;NP),
each with a semantic label, and a set of directed, weighted edges Efrom a
predened set of types. Denoting by a node type (here, either entity E or
predicate P), the set of edges encoding the relation rbetween nodes of type 
and0is dened as
E!0
rNN0!R: (1)
A commonsense graph is a type of knowledge graph in which each node repre-
sents the general concept of its semantic label, and hence each semantic label (en-
tity or predicate class) appears in exactly one node. In such a graph, each edge en-
codes a relational fact involving a pair of concepts, such as Hand-partOf-Person
andCup-usedFor-Drinking . Formally, we dene the set of commonsense entity
(CE) nodesNCEand commonsense predicate (CP) nodes NCPas all entity and
predicate classes in our task. Commonsense edges ECconsist of 4 distinct subsets,
depending on the source and destination node type:
EC=fECE!CP
rg[fECP!CE
rg[
fECE!CE
rg[fECP!CP
rg:(2)
A scene graph is a dierent type of knowledge graph where: (a) each scene entity
(SE) node is associated with a bounding box, referring to an image region, (b)
each scene predicate (SP) node is associated with an ordered pair of SE nodes,
namely a subject and an object, and (c) there are two types of undirected edges
which connect each SP to its corresponding subject and object respectively. Here
because we dene knowledge edges to be directed, we model each undirected
subject or object edge as two directed edges in the opposite directions, each