22 Alireza Zareian et al.
conditional probabilities of subject given predicate, object given predicate, pred-
icate given subject, predicate given object, subject given object, and object given
subject, as well as the correlation of entity classes as they connect to the same
predicate, and the correlation of predicate classes as they connect to the same
entity. These edge types capture a variety of statistical interactions between
classes. Each of those statistics result in a pairwise matrix, which we then spar-
sify by keeping the top 5 element in each row and setting the rest to zero. For
instance, riding is connected to its top 5 most likely objects, namely Horse ,
Bike ,Skateboard ,Motorcycle andWave . Note that although riding is not con-
nected to Elephant , its 6th most likely object, Elephant and Horse are both
connected to Animal through isAedges, and they are connected to each other
through WordNetSimilarTo , allowing our message passing framework to exploit
this rich structure and infer Elephant can be ridden too.
Overall, these three sources lead to 19 edge types (including backward edge
types for asymmetric relationships). Carefully compiled from multiple sources,
our commonsense graph is more sophisticated and complete, compared to those
made for recent knowledge-aware computer vision systems such as [3] and [16].
Note that none of those papers publicized their knowledge graph, so we were
unable to compare. The process of graph generation involves manual eort, thus
we have made our commonsense graph publicly available as a part of our code.
D Qualitative results
To demonstrate the performance of our method qualitatively, Figures 2-10 show
examples of scene graphs generated by our method, compared to the ones gener-
ated by KERN. These examples illustrate how our method predicts more com-
monsensical graphs despite visual ambiguities in the scene. We observed several
patterns in which our method outperforms KERN. Since KERN (and most other
SGG methods such as [52]) rst classify each entity and then classify predicates,
they are unable to utilize predicate semantics to enhance entity classication.
Thus in many cases, KERN misclassies an entity, due to visual ambiguity and
clutter, while our method makes the correct prediction that might be less ap-
parent visually, but lead to a more consistent scene graph semantically. In some
other cases, KERN misclassies an entity not because it is visually cluttered, but
because the bounding box is too loose and covers a big portion of background.
Our method is more robust to such bounding box inaccuracies, resulting a higher
overall performance. Finally, in some cases entities are classied correctly by
KERN, but the choice of predicates is inappropriate. Our method usually picks
the correct predicate, in accordance to commonsense knowledge, such as object
aordances. More detailed discussion can be found in each gure's caption.
E Software package
We will provide a software package that reproduces every single reported num-
ber, i.e., all numbers in Table 1 and 2 of the main paper. To make it easy to