12 Alireza Zareian et al.
recall for all triplets (R) [2]. We comprehensively report both mean and overall
recall, both with and without GC, and conventionally use both 50 and 100 for
K, resulting in 8 metrics for each task, 24 in total.
5.2 Implementation details
We use three-layer fully connected networks with ReLU activation for all train-
able networks init,send,receive andatt. We set the dimension of node rep-
resentations to 1024, and perform 3 message passing steps, except in ablation
experiments where we try 1, 2 and 3. We tried various values for . Generally
the higher it is, mean recall improves and recall falls. We found 0 :999 is a good
trade-o, and chose Kbridge = 5 empirically. All hyperparameters are tuned us-
ing a validation set randomly selected from training data. We borrow the Faster
R-CNN trained by [52] and shared among all our baselines, which has a VGG-16
backbone and predicts 128 proposals.
In our commonsense graph, the nodes are the 151 entity classes and 51 pred-
icate classes that are xed by [44], including background. We use the GloVE
[33] embedding of category titles to initialize their node representation (via
init), and x GloVE during training. We compile our commonsense edges from
three sources, WordNet [30], ConceptNet [27], and Visual Genome. To sum-
marize, there are three groups of edge types in our commonsense graph. We
have SimilarTo from WordNet hierarchy, we have PartOf ,RelatedTo ,IsA,
MannerOf , and UsedFor from ConceptNet, and nally from VG training data we
have conditional probabilities of subject given predicate, predicate given subject,
subject given object, etc.We explain the details in the supplementary material.
The process of compiling and pruning the knowledge graph is semi-automatic
and takes less than a day from a single person. We make it publicly available
as a part of our code. We have also tried using each individual source (e.g. only
ConceptNet) independently, which requires less eort, and does not signicantly
impact the performance. There are also recent approaches to automate the pro-
cess of commonsense knowledge graph construction [1,13], which can be utilized
to further reduce the manual labor.
5.3 Main results
Table 1 summarizes our results in comparison to the state of the art. IMP+ refers
to the re-implementation of [44] by [52] using their new Faster R-CNN backbone.
That method does not use any external knowledge and only uses message passing
among the entities and predicates and then classies each. Hence, it can be seen
as a strong, but knowledge-free baseline. FREQ is a simple baseline proposed
by [52], which predicts the most frequent predicate for any given pair of entity
classes, solely based on statistics from the training data. FREQ surprisingly
outperforms IMP+, conrming the ecacy of commonsense in SGG.
SMN [52] applies bi-directional LSTMs on top of the entity features, then
classies each entity and each pair. They bias their classier logits using statis-
tics from FREQ, which improves their total recall signicantly, at the expense of