Bridging Knowledge Graphs to Generate Scene Graphs 11
= 0 leads to a regular cross-entropy loss, and the more it approaches 1, the
more strictly it suppresses frequent classes. To be fair in comparison with other
methods, we include a variant of our method without reweighting, which still
outperforms all other methods.
5 Experiments
Following the literature, we use the large-scale Visual Genome benchmark [20]
to evaluate our method. We rst show our GB-Net outperforms the state of the
art, by extensively evaluating it on 24 performance metrics. Then we present an
ablation study to illustrate how each innovation contributes to the performance.
In the Supplementary Material, we also provide a per-class performance break-
down to show the consistency and robustness of our performance across frequent
and rare classes. That is accompanied by a computational speed analysis, and
several qualitative examples of our generated graphs compared to the state of
the art, side by side.
5.1 Task description
Visual Genome [20] consists of 108,077 images with annotated objects (entities)
and pairwise relationships (predicates), which is then post-processed by [44]
to create scene graphs. They use the most frequent 150 entity classes and 50
predicate classes to lter the annotations. Figure 1 shows an example of their
post-processed scene graphs which we use as ground truth. We closely follow
their evaluation settings such as train and test splits.
The task of scene graph generation, as described in Section 4, is equivalent to
theSGGen scenario proposed by [44] and followed ever since. Given an image,
the task of SGGen is to jointly infer entities and predicates from scratch. Since
this task is limited by the quality of the object proposals, [44] also introduced
two other tasks that more clearly evaluate entity and predicate recognition. In
SGCls , we take localization (here region proposal network) out of the picture, by
providing the model with ground truth bounding boxes during test, simulating a
perfect proposal model. In PredCls , we take object detection for granted, and
provide the model with not only ground truth bounding boxes, but also their
true entity class. In each task, the main evaluation metric is average per-image
recall of the top K subject-predicate-object triplets. The condence of a triplet
that is used for ranking is computed by multiplying the classication condence
of all three elements. Given the ground truth scene graph, each predicate forms a
triplet, which we match against the top Ktriplets in the output scene graph. A
triplet is matched if all three elements are classied correctly, and the bounding
boxes of subject and object match with an IoU of at least 0 :5. Besides the choice
ofK, there are two other choices to be made: (1) Whether or not to enforce the
so-called Graph Constraint (GC), which limits the top K triplets to only one
predicate for each ordered entity pair, and (2) Whether to compute the recall
for each predicate class separately and take the mean (mR), or compute a single