intermediate embeddings, leading to O(N FL)memory require-
ment, which is not scalable. Furthermore, although the time per
epoch is efficient, the convergence of gradient descent is slow
since the parameters are updated only once per epoch.
[memory: bad; time per epoch: good; convergence: bad]
•Mini-batch SGD is proposed in [ 5]. Since each update is only
based on a mini-batch gradient, it can reduce the memory re-
quirement and conduct many updates per epoch, leading to
a faster convergence. However, mini-batch SGD introduces a
significant computational overhead due to the neighborhood
expansion problem —to compute the loss on a single node at
layer L, it requires that node’s neighbor nodes’ embeddings at
layer L−1, which again requires their neighbors’ embeddings
at layer L−2and recursive ones in the downstream layers. This
leads to time complexity exponential to the GCN depth. Graph-
SAGE [ 5] proposed to use a fixed size of neighborhood samples
during back-propagation through layers and FastGCN [ 1] pro-
posed importance sampling, but the overhead of these methods
is still large and will become worse when GCN goes deep.
[memory: good; time per epoch: bad; convergence: good]
•VR-GCN [ 2] proposes to use a variance reduction technique
to reduce the size of neighborhood sampling nodes. Despite
successfully reducing the size of samplings (in our experiments
VR-GCN with only 2 samples per node works quite well), it
requires storing all the intermediate embeddings of all the nodes
in memory, leading to O(N FL)memory requirement. If the num-
ber of nodes in the graph increases to millions, the memory
requirement for VR-GCN may be too high to fit into GPU.
[memory: bad; time per epoch: good; convergence: good.]
In this paper, we propose a novel GCN training algorithm by
exploiting the graph clustering structure. We find that the efficiency
of a mini-batch algorithm can be characterized by the notion of “em-
bedding utilization”, which is proportional to the number of links
between nodes in one batch or within-batch links. This finding mo-
tivates us to design the batches using graph clustering algorithms
that aims to construct partitions of nodes so that there are more
graph links between nodes in the same partition than nodes in dif-
ferent partitions. Based on the graph clustering idea, we proposed
Cluster-GCN, an algorithm to design the batches based on efficient
graph clustering algorithms (e.g., METIS [ 8]). We take this idea
further by proposing a stochastic multi-clustering framework to im-
prove the convergence of Cluster-GCN. Our strategy leads to huge
memory and computational benefits. In terms of memory, we only
need to store the node embeddings within the current batch, which
isO(bFL)with the batch size b. This is significantly better than
VR-GCN and full gradient decent, and slightly better than other
SGD-based approaches. In terms of computational complexity, our
algorithm achieves the same time cost per epoch with gradient de-
scent and is much faster than neighborhood searching approaches.
In terms of the convergence speed, our algorithm is competitive
with other SGD-based approaches. Finally, our algorithm is simple
to implement since we only compute matrix multiplication and no
neighborhood sampling is needed. Therefore for Cluster-GCN, we
have[memory: good; time per epoch: good; convergence: good].
We conducted comprehensive experiments on several large-scale
graph datasets and made the following contributions:•Cluster-GCN achieves the best memory usage on large-scale
graphs, especially on deep GCN. For example, Cluster-GCN
uses 5x less memory than VRGCN in a 3-layer GCN model on
Amazon2M. Amazon2M is a new graph dataset that we construct
to demonstrate the scalablity of the GCN algorithms. This dataset
contains a amazon product co-purchase graph with more than 2
millions nodes and 61 millions edges.
•Cluster-GCN achieves a similar training speed with VR-GCN
for shallow networks (e.g., 2 layers) but can be faster than VR-
GCN when the network goes deeper (e.g., 4 layers), since our
complexity is linear to the number of layers Lwhile VR-GCN’s
complexity is exponential to L.
•Cluster-GCN is able to train a very deep network that has a
large embedding size. Although several previous works show
that deep GCN does not give better performance, we found that
with proper optimization, deeper GCN could help the accuracy.
For example, with a 5-layer GCN, we obtain a new benchmark
accuracy 99.36 for PPI dataset, comparing with the highest re-
ported one 98.71 by [16].
2 BACKGROUND
Suppose we are given a graph G=(V ,E,A), which consists of
N=|V|vertices and|E|edges such that an edge between any
two vertices iandjrepresents their similarity. The corresponding
adjacency matrix Ais an N×Nsparse matrix with(i,j)entry equal-
ing to 1 if there is an edge between iandjand0otherwise. Also,
each node is associated with an F-dimensional feature vector and
X∈RN×Fdenotes the feature matrix for all Nnodes. An L-layer
GCN [ 9] consists of Lgraph convolution layers and each of them
constructs embeddings for each node by mixing the embeddings of
the node’s neighbors in the graph from the previous layer:
Z(l+1)=A′X(l)W(l),X(l+1)=σ(Z(l+1)), (1)
where X(l)∈RN×Flis the embedding at the l-th layer for all
theNnodes and X(0)=X;A′is the normalized and regularized
adjacency matrix and W(l)∈RFl×Fl+1is the feature transformation
matrix which will be learnt for the downstream tasks. Note that for
simplicity we assume the feature dimensions are the same for all
layers ( F1=···=FL=F). The activation function σ(·)is usually
set to be the element-wise ReLU.
Semi-supervised node classification is a popular application of
GCN. When using GCN for this application, the goal is to learn
weight matrices in (1) by minimizing the loss function:
L=1
|YL|Õ
i∈YLloss(yi,zL
i), (2)
whereYLcontains all the labels for the labeled nodes; z(L)
iis the
i-th row of Z(L)with the ground-truth label to be yi, indicating the
final layer prediction of node i. In practice, a cross-entropy loss is
commonly used for node classification in multi-class or multi-label
problems.
3 PROPOSED ALGORITHM
We first discuss the bottleneck of previous training methods to
motivate the proposed algorithm.
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
258