Figure 1: The neighborhood expansion difference between
traditional graph convolution and our proposed cluster ap-
proach. The red node is the starting node for neighbor-
hood nodes expansion. Traditional graph convolution suf-
fers from exponential neighborhood expansion, while our
method can avoid expensive neighborhood expansion.
by which we connect the efficiency of SGD updates with graph
clustering algorithms.
Now we formally introduce Cluster-GCN. For a graph G, we par-
tition its nodes into cgroups:V=[V1,···V c]whereVtconsists
of the nodes in the t-th partition. Thus we have csubgraphs as
¯G=[G1,··· ,Gc]=[{V 1,E1},··· ,{Vc,Ec}],
where eachEtonly consists of the links between nodes in Vt.
After reorganizing nodes, the adjacency matrix is partitioned into
c2submatrices as
A=¯A+∆=A11··· A1c
.........
Ac1··· Acc(4)
and
¯A=A11··· 0
.........
0··· Acc,∆=0··· A1c
.........
Ac1··· 0, (5)
where each diagonal block Attis a|Vt|×|V t|adjacency matrix
containing the links within Gt.¯Ais the adjacency matrix for graph
¯G;Astcontains the links between two partitions VsandVt;∆is
the matrix consisting of all off-diagonal blocks of A. Similarly, we
can partition the feature matrix Xand training labels Yaccording to
the partition[V1,··· ,Vc]as[X1,··· ,Xc]and[Y1,··· ,Yc]where
XtandYtconsist of the features and labels for the nodes in Vt
respectively.
The benefit of this block-diagonal approximation ¯Gis that the
objective function of GCN becomes decomposible into different
batches (clusters). Let ¯A′denotes the normalized version of ¯A, the
final embedding matrix becomes
Z(L)=¯A′σ(¯A′σ(···σ(¯A′XW(0))W(1))···) W(L−1)(6)
=¯A′
11σ(¯A′
11σ(···σ(¯A′
11X1W(0))W(1))···) W(L−1)
...
¯A′ccσ(¯A′ccσ(···σ(¯A′ccXcW(0))W(1))···) W(L−1)due to the block-diagonal form of ¯A(note that ¯A′
ttis the correspond-
ing diagonal block of ¯A′). The loss function can also be decomposed
into
L¯A′=Õ
t|Vt|
NL¯A′
ttandL¯A′
tt=1
|Vt|Õ
i∈Vtloss(yi,z(L)
i).(7)
The Cluster-GCN is then based on the decomposition form in
(6)and(7). At each step, we sample a cluster Vtand then conduct
SGD to update based on the gradient of L¯A′
tt, and this only re-
quires the sub-graph Att, the Xt,Yton the current batch and the
models{W(l)}L
l=1. The implementation only requires forward and
backward propagation of matrix products (one block of (6)) that is
much easier to implement than the neighborhood search procedure
used in previous SGD-based training methods.
We use graph clustering algorithms to partition the graph. Graph
clustering methods such as Metis [ 8] and Graclus [ 4] aim to con-
struct the partitions over the vertices in the graph such that within-
clusters links are much more than between-cluster links to better
capture the clustering and community structure of the graph. These
are exactly what we need because: 1) As mentioned before, the em-
bedding utilization is equivalent to the within-cluster links for each
batch. Intuitively, each node and its neighbors are usually located
in the same cluster, therefore after a few hops, neighborhood nodes
with a high chance are still in the same cluster. 2) Since we replace A
by its block diagonal approximation ¯Aand the error is proportional
to between-cluster links ∆, we need to find a partition to minimize
number of between-cluster links.
In Figure 1, we illustrate the neighborhood expansion with full
graph Gand the graph with clustering partition ¯G. We can see that
cluster-GCN can avoid heavy neighborhood search and focus on
the neighbors within each cluster. In Table 2, we show two differ-
ent node partition strategies: random partition versus clustering
partition. We partition the graph into 10 parts by using random
partition and METIS. Then use one partition as a batch to perform
a SGD update. We can see that with the same number of epochs,
using clustering partition can achieve higher accuracy. This shows
using graph clustering is important and partitions should not be
formed randomly.
Time and space complexity. Since each node inVtonly links
to nodes insideVt, each node does not need to perform neigh-
borhoods searching outside Att. The computation for each batch
will purely be matrix products ¯A′
ttX(l)
tW(l)and some element-wise
operations, so the overall time complexity per batch is O(∥Att∥0F+
bF2). Thus the overall time complexity per epoch becomes O(∥A∥0F+
N F2). In average, each batch only requires computing O(bL)embed-
dings, which is linear instead of exponential to L. In terms of space
complexity, in each batch, we only need to load bsamples and store
their embeddings on each layer, resulting in O(bLF)memory for
storing embeddings. Therefore our algorithm is also more memory
efficient than all the previous algorithms. Moreover, our algorithm
only requires loading a subgraph into GPU memory instead of the
full graph (though graph is usually not the memory bottleneck). The
detailed time and memory complexity are summarized in Table 1.
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
260