Table 1: Time and space complexity of GCN training algorithms. Lis number of layers, Nis number of nodes, ∥A∥0is number
of nonzeros in the adjacency matrix, and Fis number of features. For simplicity we assume number of features is fixed for all
layers. For SGD-based approaches, bis the batch size and ris the number of sampled neighbors per node. Note that due to the
variance reduction technique, VR-GCN can work with a smaller rthan GraphSAGE and FastGCN. For memory complexity,
LF2is for storing{W(l)}L
l=1and the other term is for storing embeddings. For simplicity we omit the memory for storing the
graph (GCN) or sub-graphs (other approaches) since they are fixed and usually not the main bottleneck.
GCN
[9] V
anilla SGD GraphSA
GE [5] FastGCN
[1] VR-GCN
[2] Cluster-GCN
Time
complexity O(L∥A∥0F+L
N F2) O(dLN
F2) O(rLN
F2) O(r
LN F2) O(L∥A∥0F+L
N F2+rLN F2)O(L∥A∥0F+L
N F2)
Memory complexity O(L
N F+LF2) O(b
dLF+LF2)O(b
rLF+LF2)O(b
rLF+LF2) O(L
N F+LF2) O(b
LF+LF2)
In the original paper [ 9], full gradient descent is used for training
GCN, but it suffers from high computational and memory cost.
In terms of memory, computing the full gradient of (2)by back-
propagation requires storing all the embedding matrices {Z(l)}L
l=1
which needs O(N FL)space. In terms of convergence speed, since
the model is only updated once per epoch, the training requires
more epochs to converge.
It has been shown that mini-batch SGD can improve the training
speed and memory requirement of GCN in some recent works [ 1,
2,5]. Instead of computing the full gradient, SGD only needs to
calculate the gradient based on a mini-batch for each update. In this
paper, we useB⊆[ N]with size b=|B|to denote a batch of node
indices, and each SGD step will compute the gradient estimation
1
|B|Õ
i∈B∇loss(yi,z(L)
i) (3)
to perform an update. Despite faster convergence in terms of epochs,
SGD will introduce another computational overhead on GCN train-
ing (as explained in the following), which makes it having much
slower per-epoch time compared with full gradient descent.
Why does vanilla mini-batch SGD have slow per-epoch
time? We consider the computation of the gradient associated with
one node i:∇loss(yi,z(L)
i). Clearly, this requires the embedding
of node i, which depends on its neighbors’ embeddings in the
previous layer. To fetch each node i’s neighbor nodes’ embeddings,
we need to further aggregate each neighbor node’s neighbor nodes’
embeddings as well. Suppose a GCN has L+1layers and each node
has an average degree of d, to get the gradient for node i, we need to
aggregate features from O(dL)nodes in the graph for one node. That
is, we need to fetch information for a node’s hop- k(k=1,··· ,L)
neighbors in the graph to perform one update. Computing each
embedding requires O(F2)time due to the multiplication with W(l),
so in average computing the gradient associated with one node
requires O(dLF2)time.
Embedding utilization can reflect computational efficiency.
If a batch has more than one node, the time complexity is less
straightforward since different nodes can have overlapped hop-
kneighbors, and the number of embedding computation can be
less than the worst case O(bdL). To reflect the computational effi-
ciency of mini-batch SGD, we define the concept of “embedding
utilization” to characterize the computational efficiency. During
the algorithm, if the node i’s embedding at l-th layer z(l)
iis com-
puted and is reused utimes for the embedding computations at
layer l+1, then we say the embedding utilization of z(l)
iisu. For
mini-batch SGD with random sampling, uis very small since thegraph is usually large and sparse. Assume uis a small constant
(almost no overlaps between hop- kneighbors), then mini-batch
SGD needs to compute O(bdL)embeddings per batch, which leads
toO(bdLF2)time per update and O(NdLF2)time per epoch.
We illustrate the neighborhood expansion problem in the left
panel of Fig. 1. In contrary, full-batch gradient descent has the
maximal embedding utilization—each embedding will be reused d
(average degree) times in the upper layer. As a consequence, the
original full gradient descent [ 9] only needs to compute O(NL)em-
beddings per epoch, which means on average only O(L)embedding
computation is needed to acquire the gradient of one node.
To make mini-batch SGD work, previous approaches try to re-
strict the neighborhood expansion size, which however do not
improve embedding utilization. GraphSAGE [ 5] uniformly samples
a fixed-size set of neighbors, instead of using a full-neighborhood
set. We denote the sample size as r. This leads to O(rL)embedding
computations for each loss term but also makes gradient estima-
tion less accurate. FastGCN [ 1] proposed an important sampling
strategy to improve the gradient estimation. VR-GCN [ 2] proposed
a strategy to store the previous computed embeddings for all the
Nnodes and Llayers and reuse them for unsampled neighbors.
Despite the high memory usage for storing all the NLembeddings,
we find their strategy very useful and in practice, even for a small
r(e.g., 2) can lead to good convergence.
We summarize the time and space complexity in Table 1. Clearly,
all the SGD-based algorithms suffer from exponential complexity
with respect to the number of layers, and for VR-GCN, even though
rcan be small, they incur huge space complexity that could go
beyond a GPU’s memory capacity. In the following, we introduce
our Cluster-GCN algorithm, which achieves the best of two worlds—
the same time complexity per epoch with full gradient descent and
the same memory complexity with vanilla SGD.
3.1 Vanilla Cluster-GCN
Our Cluster-GCN technique is motivated by the following ques-
tion: In mini-batch SGD updates, can we design a batch and the
corresponding computation subgraph to maximize the embedding
utilization? We answer this affirmative by connecting the concept
of embedding utilization to a clustering objective.
Consider the case that in each batch we compute the embeddings
for a set of nodesBfrom layer 1toL. Since the same subgraph
AB,B(links withinB) is used for each layer of computation, we can
then see that embedding utilization is the number of edges within
this batch∥AB,B∥0. Therefore, to maximize embedding utilization,
we should design a batch Bto maximize the within-batch edges,
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
259