Table 2: Random partition versus clustering partition of
the graph (trained on mini-batch SGD). Clustering partition
leads to better performance (in terms of test F1 score) since it
removes less between-partition links. These three datasetes
are all public GCN datasets. We will explain PPI data in the
experiment part. Cora has 2,708 nodes and 13,264 edges, and
Pubmed has 19,717 nodes and 108,365 edges.
Dataset random partition clustering partition
Cora 78.4 82.5
Pubmed 78.9 79.9
PPI 68.1 92.9
Figure 2: Histograms of entropy values based on the la-
bel distribution. Here we present within each batch using
random partition versus clustering partition. Most cluster-
ing partitioned batches have low label entropy, indicating
skewed label distribution within each batch. In comparison,
random partition will lead to larger label entropy within a
batch although it is less efficient as discussed earlier. We par-
tition the Reddit dataset with 300 clusters in this example.
3.2 Stochastic Multiple Partitions
Although vanilla Cluster-GCN achieves good computational and
memory complexity, there are still two potential issues:
•After the graph is partitioned, some links (the ∆part in Eq. (4))
are removed. Thus the performance could be affected.
•Graph clustering algorithms tend to bring similar nodes together.
Hence the distribution of a cluster could be different from the
original data set, leading to a biased estimation of the full gradi-
ent while performing SGD updates.
In Figure 2, we demonstrate an example of unbalanced label dis-
tribution by using the Reddit data with clusters formed by Metis.
We calculate the entropy value of each cluster based on its label
distribution. Comparing with random partitioning, we clearly see
that entropy of most clusters are smaller, indicating that the label
distributions of clusters are biased towards some specific labels.
This increases the variance across different batches and may affect
the convergence of SGD.
To address the above issues, we propose a stochastic multiple
clustering approach to incorporate between-cluster links and re-
duce variance across batches. We first partition the graph into p
clustersV1,··· ,Vpwith a relatively large p. When constructing a
batch Bfor an SGD update, instead of considering only one cluster,
we randomly choose qclusters, denoted as t1, . . . , tqand include
Figure 3: The proposed stochastic multiple partitions
scheme. In each epoch, we randomly sample qclusters ( q=2
is used in this example) and their between-cluster links to
form a new batch. Same color blocks are in the same batch.
Figure 4: Comparisons of choosing one cluster versus multi-
ple clusters. The former uses 300 partitions. The latter uses
1500 and randomly select 5 to form one batch. We present
epoch (x-axis) versus F1 score (y-axis).
their nodes{Vt1∪···∪V tq}into the batch. Furthermore, the links
between the chosen clusters,
{Aij|i,j∈t1, . . . , tq},
are added back. In this way, those between-cluster links are re-
incorporated and the combinations of clusters make the variance
across batches smaller. Figure 3 illustrates our algorithm—for each
epochs, different combinations of clusters are chosen as a batch. We
conduct an experiment on Reddit to demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed approach. In Figure 4, we can observe that using
multiple clusters as one batch could improve the convergence. Our
final Cluster-GCN algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1.
3.3 Issues of training deeper GCNs
Previous attempts of training deeper GCNs [ 9] seem to suggest that
adding more layers is not helpful. However, the datasets used in
the experiments may be too small to make a proper justification.
For example, [ 9] considered a graph with only a few hundreds of
training nodes for which overfitting can be an issue. Moreover, we
observe that the optimization of deep GCN models becomes difficult
as it may impede the information from the first few layers being
passed through. In [ 9], they adopt a technique similar to residual
connections [ 6] to enable the model to carry the information from
a previous layer to a next layer. Specifically, they modify (1)to add
the hidden representations of layer linto the next layer.
X(l+1)=σ(A′X(l)W(l))+X(l)(8)
Research Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
261