34
unexpected as well as unwanted risks associated with
these models. For example, data leakage from these
models is of primary concern especially when the model
is pretrained over private data. As the model is pre-
trained over a large amount of text data, it is possible to
recover sensitive data including personally identiﬁable
information [294]–[297]. This prevents the public release
of models pretrained on private data. Recently, Carlini
et al. [295] showed that GPT-2 model generates the
entire postal address of a person which is included in
training data when prompted with the person’s name.
Recently frameworks like KART [294] are introduced in
the Biomedical domain which performs various attacks
to assess data leakage. There is a great need to develop
more sophisticated attacks to assess data leakage and
also methods to prevent leakage of sensitive data from
pretrained models.
8.12 Mitigating Bias
Deep learning-based models are increasingly used in
many real-world applications including speciﬁc domains
like Biomedical [298] and Legal [299]. However, these
models are prone to learn and amplify the bias already
present in training data. As a result, the decisions from
these models are biased i.e., may favor a particular race,
gender, or aged people. This behavior is completely
undesirable. Some of the recent works focused on iden-
tifying and mitigating bias. For example, Minot et al.
[182] proposed a data augmentation-based approach to
reduce gender bias while Liang et al. [300] proposed
A-INLP approach which dynamically identiﬁes bias-
sensitive tokens. Further research in this area helps to
mitigate bias in pretrained models and help them to
make fair decisions.
8.13 Mitigating Fine-Tuning Instabilities
Fine-tuning is the most widely adopted approach to
adapt PTLMs to the downstream task. Though ﬁne-
tuning achieves good performance, it is unstable i.e.,
ﬁne-tuning the model with different random seeds re-
sults in the large variance of downstream performance.
It is believed that catastrophic forgetting and the small
size of datasets are possible reasons for ﬁne-tuning
instabilities [2], [301], [302]. However, Mosbach et al.
[303] showed that ﬁne-tuning instability is not caused
by any of these two and further showed that ﬁne-tuning
instability can be attributed to a) optimization difﬁculties
which lead to vanishing gradients and b) generalization
issues. The possible solutions to mitigate ﬁne-tuning
instability are a) intermediate ﬁne-tuning [214] b) mix-
out [301] c) smaller learning rates in early epochs and
ﬁne-tuning the model for more number of epochs [303]
and d) use of supervised contrastive loss along with
cross-entropy loss [304]. Further work related to this will
make ﬁne-tuning more stable.9 C ONCLUSION
In this survey paper, we present a comprehensive review
of recent research works in transformer-based pretrained
language models. This paper covers various pretraining
methods, pretraining tasks, embeddings, downstream
adaptation methods, intrinsic and extrinsic benchmarks,
useful libraries to work with T-PTLMs. We also present
a new taxonomy to categorize various T-PTLMs. We
discuss various future research directions which will
direct the research community to further improve T-
PTLMs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Kalyan would like to thank his father Katikapalli Sub-
ramanyam for giving a) $750 to buy a new laptop, 24-
inch monitor and study table. b) $180 for one year sub-
scription of Medium, Overleaf and Edraw MindMaster
software. Edraw MindMaster is used to create all the
diagrams in the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, and I. Sutskever, “Im-
proving language understanding by generative pre-training,”
2018.
[2] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language un-
derstanding,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[3] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. R. Salakhutdinov,
and Q. V . Le, “Xlnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining
for language understanding,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , vol. 32, pp. 5753–5763, 2019.
[4] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy,
M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and V . Stoyanov, “Roberta: A ro-
bustly optimized bert pretraining approach,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692 , 2019.
[5] K. Clark, M.-T. Luong, Q. V . Le, and C. D. Manning, “Electra: Pre-
training text encoders as discriminators rather than generators,”
inInternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2019.
[6] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena,
Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P . J. Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer
learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.10683 , 2019.
[7] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P . Sharma, and
R. Soricut, “Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of
language representations,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2019.
[8] M. Lewis, Y. Liu, N. Goyal, M. Ghazvininejad, A. Mohamed,
O. Levy, V . Stoyanov, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Bart: Denoising
sequence-to-sequence pre-training for natural language gener-
ation, translation, and comprehension,” in Proceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
2020, pp. 7871–7880.
[9] J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, M. Saleh, and P . Liu, “Pegasus: Pre-training
with extracted gap-sentences for abstractive summarization,” in
International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 2020, pp.
11 328–11 339.
[10] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efﬁcient esti-
mation of word representations in vector space,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781 , 2013.
[11] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vec-
tors for word representation,” in Proceedings of the 2014 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) , 2014,
pp. 1532–1543.