12
Fig. 8: Embeddings in T-PTLMs
3.4 Embeddings
Deep learning models expect the input in the form of
a matrix of numbers and then apply a sequence of
matrix operations. As deep learning models including
transformers expect numerical input, input text should
be mapped to a sequence of dense, low dimensional vec-
tors (commonly called embeddings in natural language
processing). In transformer-based pretrained language
models, character or sub-word embeddings are preferred
over word embeddings. This is because a) small vo-
cabulary size in character and sub-word embeddings
compared to word embeddings. The vocabulary of word
embeddings consists of all the unique words (or all
the words above the cut-off frequency) in the pretrain-
ing corpus, whereas vocabulary in character embedding
models consists of all the characters and vocabulary in
sub-word embedding models consists of all the char-
acters, frequently occurring sub-words and words. The
size of vocabulary also determines the overall size of
pretrained language model [116]. b) can represent any
word and hence overcome the problem of OOV words
which is a serious problem with word embeddings c)
can encode ﬁne-grained information at character or sub-
word levels in word representation. Apart from repre-
senting input data using embeddings, it is also necessary
additional information like position, language, etc. We
classify embeddings into main and auxiliary depending
on whether they represent the input data or provide
additional information to the model (refer Figure 8).
3.4.1 Main Embeddings
- Main embeddings represent the input data in dense
low dimensional vectors. In TPLMs, the input data
is mostly a sequence of words. However, in domain-
speciﬁc models like BERT-EHR [117], MedBERT [118],and BEHRT [119] the input is a sequence of medical
codes. All these three models are pretrained on medical
text from electronic health records (EHRs).
Text Embeddings : Input for most of the TPLMs is the
sequence of words. Input text can be represented using
character, sub-word, or combination of character and
sub-word embeddings. Models like CharacterBERT [66],
AlphaBERT [120] use character embeddings, and models
like CharBERT [121] use both character and sub-word
embeddings. Models like BERT, RoBERTa, XLNet, T5,
and BART use sub-word embeddings but the tokenizer
used to generate the vocabulary is different in these
models.
Character Embeddings : Character embeddings map
each character to a dense low dimensional vector. The
vocabulary of character embeddings includes all the
characters like letters, symbols, punctuations, and num-
bers. Once the vocabulary is ﬁnalized, the embedding of
each character in the vocabulary is randomly initialized
and then learned during model pretraining. TPLMs use
character embeddings in two ways. The ﬁrst one is,
character level word representation is generated from
character embeddings and then a sequence of trans-
former layers are applied to encode contextual infor-
mation [66]. For example in CharacterBERT [66], ﬁne-
grained word representation is generated from character
embeddings using a character encoder based on Char-
CNN and highway layer [122]. The second one is based
on context string embedding [123]. Here, there is no no-
tion of the explicit word, and input text is modeled as a
sequence of characters. In AlphaBERT [120], transformer
layers are directly on character embeddings whereas
in CharBERT [121] transformer layers are applied after
applying BiGRU on character embeddings. Here BiGRU
processes the input at the character level and generates