8
Fig. 4: Continual Pretraining (CPT)
agreements, XLM [63] parameters are used to initialize
both encoder and decoder layers in XNLG. Unlike in
PTS, in continual pretraining the model parameters are
not learned from scratch. Instead, the parameters are
initialized with existing language model parameters and
then adapted to the target domain by further pretraining
(refer Figure 4). Continual pretraining is commonly used
to develop T-PTLMs in speciﬁc domains like social me-
dia [81], [111], [112], biomedical [45], Legal [32], News
[34], Computer Networking [41] etc. The main advantage
of continual pretraining is that it avoids training a model
from scratch and makes use of the existing language
model parameters. As CPT starts from existing model
parameters, it is less expensive and requires less training
time and computational resources compared to PFS.
However, the lack of target domain-speciﬁc vocab-
ulary is a drawback in CPT when the target domain
consists of many domain-speciﬁc words. For example,
BioBERT [45] is initialized from general BERT and fur-
ther pretrained on biomedical text. Though the language
model is adapted to the biomedical domain, the vocab-
ulary which is learned over general domain text does
not include many of the domain-speciﬁc words. As a
result, domain-speciﬁc words are split into a number of
sub-words which hinders model learning and degrades
its performance in downstream tasks. Similarly, mBERT
accommodates more than 100 languages, the number of
tokens in its vocabulary (110K) speciﬁc to a language is
less. A possible solution for this is continual pretraining
with target domain or language-speciﬁc vocabulary [75]–
[77]. Here, new vocabulary is generated over the target
domain or language text. During continual pretraining,
the embedding layer is randomly initialized and all other
layer parameters are initialized with existing language
model parameters. For example, models like RuBERT
[74], PortugueseBERT [75], SlavicBERT [76] are initial-
ized from mBERT but further pretrained with language-
speciﬁc vocabulary. Similarly, PPT5 [77] is initialized
from the T5 model but further pretrained with language-
speciﬁc vocabulary. However, the performance of the
model obtained by continual pretraining with new vo-
cabulary is slightly less but on par with the performance
of the model trained from scratch. As CPT is computa-
tionally less expensive, CPT with new vocabulary can
be preferred over PTS in resource-constrained situations.
Recently, Yao et al. [78] proposed Adapt and distill
approach to adapt general models to a speciﬁc domain
using vocabulary expansion and knowledge distillation.
Different from existing adaptation methods, Adapt anddistill approach not only adapt general models to speciﬁc
domain but also reduces the size of the model.
It is not necessary to use the same set of pretraining
tasks used by the existing model for continual pretrain-
ing. For example, BERT-SentiX [83] model is initialized
from BERT and further pretrained on product reviews
using four sentiment-aware pretraining tasks. Similarly,
TOD-BERT [40] is initialized from BERT and further
pretrained on dialogue corpus text using MLM and
response contrastive loss (RCL).
3.2.3 Simultaneous Pretraining (SPT)
Domain-speciﬁc T-PTLMs can be developed by training
from scratch or by continual pretraining. Both these
pretraining methods require large volumes of domain-
speciﬁc unlabelled text to pretrain the model. However,
the availability of domain-speciﬁc text is limited in many
domains. Moreover, domain-speciﬁc text in languages
other than English is available in small quantities only.
For example, in the biomedical domain, MIMIC-III [84]
is the largest publicly available (English) medical records
dataset. However, it is difﬁcult to obtain such large
volumes of medical records in languages like Japanese
[79]. PTS or CPT using a small amount of domain-
speciﬁc text overﬁts the model. Simultaneous pretraining
(SPT) allows the model to pretrain from scratch using a
corpus having both general and domain-speciﬁc text [79]
(refer Figure 5). Here, up sampling of domain-speciﬁc
text is done to ensure a good number of domain-speciﬁc
terms in model vocabulary and also to have a balanced
pretraining. Wada et al. [79] showed that Japanese clin-
ical BERT pretrained using SPT outperforms Japanese
clinical BERT trained from scratch.
Fig. 5: Simultaneous Pretraining (SPT)
3.2.4 Task Adaptive Pretraining (TAPT)
Pretraining approaches like PTS, CPT and SPT allow the
model to learn universal or domain-speciﬁc language
representations by training on large volumes of general
or domain-speciﬁc or combined text. As all these ap-
proaches involve training over a large amount of text,
these approaches are expensive. Task Adaptive Pretrain-
ing (TAPT) allows the model to learn ﬁne-grained task-
speciﬁc knowledge along with domain-speciﬁc knowl-
edge by pretraining on a small amount of task-speciﬁc
unlabelled text [34] (refer Figure 6). As TAPT requires
only a small amount of text, it is less expensive compared
to other pretraining methods. Additional task-related
sentences can be obtained from large domain corpus
using lightweight approaches like VAMPIRE [113] which
embeddings all the sentences using a simple bag-of-
words language model. Gururangan et al. [34] showed