13
contextualized character embeddings [124].
Sub-Word Embeddings : Unlike character embed-
dings, the vocabulary of sub-word embeddings con-
sists of characters, frequently occurring sub-words, and
words. Here the vocabulary can be generated using any
of the tokenizers like WordPiece [59], Byte Pair Encoding
(BPE) [60], Byte Level BPE (bBPE) [61], Unigram [125],
and SentencePiece [62]. Except Unigram, tokenizers like
WordPiece, BPE, bBPE generate vocabulary by starting
with base vocabulary having only the characters and
iteratively augment the vocabulary until the predeﬁned
size is reached. BPE chooses the new symbol pair to be
included in the vocabulary based on frequently while
WordPiece does it based on language model probabil-
ity. bBPE is the same as BPE except that it represents
each character as a byte. Unigram starts with a large
vocabulary and then arrives at a vocabulary of prede-
ﬁned size by iteratively cutting the characters which is
exactly opposite to what happens in BPE and WordPiece.
Tokenizers like WordPiece and BPE assume space as a
word separator in the input text which is not true in all
cases. To overcome this, SentencePiece tokenizer treats
space as a character and then generates the vocabulary
using BPE or Unigram.
The size of the vocabulary must be chosen carefully.
Too small vocabulary size results in longer input se-
quences as more words will be split into many sub-
words which hinders model learning and increases pre-
training time. Too large vocabulary represents more
words using a single token but increases the size overall
of the model [126]. However, in the case of multilingual
models like mBERT, XLM, and XLM-R, it is necessary
to have a large vocabulary to accommodate more lan-
guages. Once the vocabulary is generated, each token in
the vocabulary is assigned with a randomly initialized
embedding and then learned during model pretraining.
Hybrid Embeddings : To leverage the beneﬁts in both
character and sub-word embeddings, models like Char-
BERT [121] uses both character and sub-word embed-
dings. The model uses dual-channel CNN-based interac-
tion module to model the interaction between character
and sub-word embeddings.
Code Embeddings : In the medical domain, each con-
cept is represented using a standard code from ontology.
Here the concept can be a disease, drug, symptom, etc.
All the information during patient visits to a hospital
is represented using medical codes in EHRs. Pretrained
language models in the biomedical domain like BERT-
EHR [117], MedBERT [118], and BEHRT [119] expect
a sequence of medical codes as input. So, in these
models vocabulary consists of medical codes from stan-
dard clinical ontologies. Embeddings for these medical
codes are randomly initialized and learned during model
pretraining.
3.4.2 Auxiliary Embeddings
Auxiliary embeddings provide additional information to
the model. Each auxiliary embeddings have its purpose.For example, positional embeddings represent the posi-
tion, while segment embeddings distinguish tokens from
different sentences in the input sentence pair, language
embeddings in multilingual pretrained models like XLM
[63] and Unicoder [103] provide information about the
language of the input sentence. Among auxiliary embed-
dings, position and segment embeddings are commonly
used while the other embeddings are used in speciﬁc
pretrained language models. For example, age, gender,
and semantic group embeddings are used in biomedical
pretrained language models only [117], [119], [127].
Position Embeddings : In traditional deep learning
models like CNN and RNN, it is not necessary to
provide any auxiliary embeddings along with text em-
beddings to represent the position of input tokens. This
is because these models implicitly learn the order of
input tokens. For example, RNN process input sequence
character by character or word by word, and hence
it automatically learns the order. In CNN, convolution
operations are performed at a ﬁxed size window level
instead of character or word level and hence it also
learns the order automatically. As transformers do not
have convolution or recurrent layers to learn order,
position embeddings are provided. Position embeddings
can be absolute [2], [4], [5], [117] or relative [3]. In
models like BERT, RoBERTa, ELECTRA absolute position
embeddings are learned along with other parameters of
the model. However, in models like BERT-EHR [117] and
BEHRT [119], absolute position embeddings are prede-
termined to handle an imbalance in patient sequence
length.
Segment Embeddings : In the case of sentence pair
tasks, the model takes both the input sentences at the
same time. So, it is necessary to distinguish tokens of two
input sentences using segment embeddings. Position
embedding is different for different tokens in the input
sentence, but segment embedding is the same for all the
tokens in each input sentence.
Language Embeddings : Language embeddings are
used in cross-lingual pretrained language models like
XLM [63], Unicoder [103], and XNLG [106]. For exam-
ple, models like XLM are pretrained using a) MLM on
monolingual text data in 100 languages and b) TLM
using parallel data. Language embeddings are used to
explicitly inform the model about the language of the
input sentence. In MLM which involves sentences in one
language, language embedding will be the same for all
the tokens in the input sentence. In the case of TLM
which involves a pair of sentences from two different
languages, language embedding will be the same for all
the tokens in a sentence but different from the language
embedding assigned to tokens in other input sentence.
However, language embeddings are not used in XLM-R
[64] model to allow the model to better deal with code-
switching.
Entity Type Embeddings : OAG-BERT [42] is a pre-
trained academic language model like SciBERT [43]. It
is pretrained on academic text corpus. Unlike SciBERT