24
Fig. 10: Downstream adaptation methods
be used in downstream tasks in three ways namely
a) feature-based b) ﬁne-tuning and c) prompt-based
tuning (refer Figure 10). The feature-based approach
involves generating contextual word embeddings from
language models and then using them as input fea-
tures in task-speciﬁc downstream models. Fine-tuning
involves adapting model weights to downstream tasks
by minimizing task-speciﬁc loss.
5.1 Feature-based
In traditional deep learning models like CNN or RNN,
word embeddings generated using embedding models
like Word2Vec [10] or Glove [11] are used as word fea-
tures. In feature-based approach, BERT [2] based models
are used to generate contextual word vectors, and then
they are used as input features similar to Word2Vec or
Glove embeddings in task-speciﬁc downstream models.
BERT-based contextual word embeddings are much bet-
ter as a) they are contextual unlike Word2Vec and Glove
embeddings b) overcome the issue of OOV words and c)
encode more information in word vectors because of the
deep layered model architecture. Here, word vectors can
be taken from the last layer (or from multiple layers us-
ing any of the pooling strategies) [2]. The advantage with
the feature-based approach is that contextualized word
vectors can be used any in any of the handcrafted state-
of-the-art task speciﬁc-architectures. However, feature-
based approach involves training the downstream model
from scratch (except embeddings) which requires a large
number of labeled instances.
5.2 Fine-tuning
Pretraining allows the pretrained language model to gain
universal language knowledge. However, the perfor-mance of the model in downstream tasks requires task-
speciﬁc knowledge i.e., for the model to perform well
in downstream tasks, its weights should be close to the
ideal setting for the target task [214]. Fine-tuning imparts
task-speciﬁc knowledge to the model by adapting its
weights based on task-speciﬁc loss [2]. Moreover, ﬁne-
tuning enhances the model performance because it clus-
ters the points of different labels away from each other
such that there is a large separation between the cluster
regions [215]. Fine-tuning updates all the transformer
layers including the embedding layer but the higher
layers are subjected to more changes compared to the
lower layers [215]–[218].
Models like BERT, RoBERTa, and ELECTRA do not
follow uniﬁed input-output format across tasks i.e., dif-
ferent tasks have different input and output formats. So,
it is required to add task-speciﬁc layers in these models
during ﬁne-tuning. However, in models like T5 [6] which
follow the same input-output format across tasks, there
is no need to add any extra layers speciﬁc to each task.
T5 follows a text-to-text format in any task i.e., input for
the model is some text and the model has to produce
some text as output.
Fine-tuning can be a) Vanilla ﬁne-tuning [2] b) In-
termediate ﬁne-tuning [214], [219], [220] c) Parameter
efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning and d) Multi-task ﬁne-tuning [221]–
[224]. Unlike Vanilla ﬁne-tuning which is prone to overﬁt
the model on small datasets, intermediate ﬁne-tuning
or multi-task ﬁne-tuning avoid overﬁtting the model
on small datasets. As ﬁne-tuning involves adjustments
to the entire model weights, methods like adapters or
pruning-based ﬁne-tuning help to ﬁne-tune the model
in a parameter-efﬁcient way.