Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 5 of 16
contrary, if there is a situation of no such bright ﬁreﬂy, all the ﬁreﬂies move around in a haphazard
fashion in any direction.
3. The brightness of the ﬂashing light being the criteria for attraction is the objective function to be
optimized in the algorithm.
The basic schema followed in this algorithm 1 is:
Algorithm 1: Pseudo Code of Fireﬂy Algorithm [36]
Objective function makespan, z= (P1,P2...Pn)
Generate machines (i=1, 2... m)
Generate job sequences (j=1, 2... n)
Evaluate makespan (P1,P2,P3. . . . Pn)for all population
while Gen.<MaxGen .do
foreach job sequence j = (1, 2, 3. . . , n)do
forFor each lot sizes X ijdo
Move ﬁreﬂy in d-dimensional space
Determine the attractiveness based on distance Rij
Evaluate makespan
Assess light intensity
Select job sequences and lot sizes for Gen.+1E
4. Experimental Setting
The experimental setting of proposed methodology is illustrated in Figure 1. The dataset used
in this work has 19 contributing attributes. The values of these attributes are of different range. This
variation in the range of the values of the attributes may lead to varied weights of some instances which
may results in biased prediction results. In order to avoid such heterogeneity, as part of pre-processing,
a StandardScaler method is used in the proposed work. Standardscaler method normalizes the data
converting it to a common range to eliminate bias in the prediction results. The Principal Component
Analysis algorithm is then applied on this normalized data. The main reason for using PCA is to
eliminate the insigniﬁcant attributes from consideration for training the DNN. To further strengthen
the feature engineering process, one of the popular nature inspired algorithms, Fireﬂy Optimization
Algorithm, is used in this work. The main strength of Fireﬂy algorithm is that it tunes the parameters
in such a way that this algorithm chooses the optimal parameters, whose convergence rate would
be very fast avoiding local minima. This property of Fireﬂy algorithm makes it an ideal choice for
feature engineering to choose optimal parameters which inﬂuence the classiﬁcation in a positive
way thereby reducing training time. The dimensionally reduced dataset is then fed to DNN for
classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy datasets. Adam optimizer and Softsign activation function was
used at each layer except the output layer. The output layer used sigmoid activation function to classify
the Diabetic Retinopathy dataset, since it is a binary classiﬁer. For backpropagation the Root mean
square propagation (RMSprop) error was used. The dataset was split into 8:2 ratio to train and test
respectively. Instead of training entire 80 percent of data and then testing the model on remaining 20
percent of data at one go, for every epoch a batch of 64 records were fed to the model, out of which 80
percent of the records were used to train the model and remaining 20 percent of those records were
used to test the model. The proposed model is summarized as follows:
Input: Diabetic Retinopathy Dataset
Output: Classiﬁcation of class label
1. Data Transformation : Normalization of the input dataset is done using StandardScaler.
2. Dimensionality Reduction : Input the transformed dataset to the PCA for dimensonality
reduction. To further reﬁne feature engineering use ﬁreﬂy optimization algorithm.