Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 6 of 16
3. Classiﬁcation : Feed the extracted features to the DNN for classifying the Diabetic
Retinopathy dataset.
4. Evaluation : Evaluate the performance of the model using several measures like Accuracy,
Precision, Recall, Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity.
5. Comparison : Comparison of the experimental results of the proposed model with traditional
ML algorithms.
Figure 1. DNN-PCA Model for Diabetic Retinopathy
5. Results and Discussion
This section discusses about the dataset used, experimental framework, metrics used and the
experimental results.
The diabetic retinopathy dataset used in this study had 1151 instances and 20 attributes.
The attributes of the dataset used in this paper are discussed in Table 1. Softsign activation fnction was
used in all the layers except at the output layer.
The experimentation was carried out on Diabetic Retinopathy Debrecen dataset from UCI machine
learning repository [ 40]. The attributes in this dataset were the features extracted from the Messidor
image dataset. A personal computer with 8 GB RAM was used for performing the experimentation
using Python.
Table 1. Dataset Description
Attribute Number Description of the Attribute
1 0 – represents bad quality;
2 1 – represents severe retinal abnormality and 0 – represents lack of retinal abnormality
3 to 8 Microaneurysm (MA) detection. It causes blood leakage to the retina. Exach feature value is the no.
9 to 16 Same as 3-8 for exudates. But, in order to compensate different image sizes, these are normalized
17 This column represents the euclidean distance between the center of optical disc to that of center
18 Diameter of the Optic Disc
19 The binary value of amplitude-modulation-frequency-modulation(AM/FM)-based classiﬁcation.
20 Class label. 1 - signs of DR and 0 - no signs of DR.
5.1. Metrics for Evaluation of the Model
The following metrics are used to evaluate the proposed model.
Accuracy: It is the percentage of correct predictions that a classiﬁer has made when compared
to the actual value of the label in the testing phase. Also, it can be said as the ratio of Number of