Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 2 of 16
Duration of Diabetes acts as one of the primary cause for patients getting affected with retinopathy
wherein with longer duration, the probability of occurrence of the disease gets enhanced. Hence it is
evident that retinopathy initiates when the patient has diabetes for a longer timeframe being completely
unaware, ignorant and untreated on the possibilities of diabetic retinopathy as a natural progression
from diabetes [ 4]. The onset of diabetes happens when there is an abnormal ﬂuctuation in the blood
sugar level. Normally the glucose in the body gets transformed into energy helping to conduct regular
human activities. But in an adverse situation when there is abnormal shooting up of blood sugar
level, the excess blood sugar generated ﬁnds no other option but to get accumulated in blood vessels
of various organs in the body including human eye [ 3]. This phenomenon is called hyperglycemia.
Diabetic eye disease or retinopathy has two stages namely Non-proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy
(NPDR) and Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy (PDR). In NPDR the retina gets swollen, a case of
macular edema, due accumulation of glucose leading to blood vessel leakages in the eyes. The swelling
could be so worse that the vessels could get completely blocked resulting, in macular ischemia. In all
of the instances the patient loses vision partially, completely or sometimes suffers from blurred vision.
The PDR occurs at a much advanced stage of diabetes when new blood vessels start growing in the
retina, a case known as neovascularization. The new blood vessels are extremely thin and fragile being
more prone to haemorrhage. The blood from the haemorrhage leads to partial or complete vision loss.
Also the newly created blood vessels form scar tissues which lead to detachment of retina resulting
in loss of central or peripheral vision. The symptoms of NPDR and PDR include blurred vision,
haemorrhages, wool spots, double vision, corneal abnormalities, intra-retinal abrasions, microvascular
abnormalities, microaneurysms and increase in retinal permeability [5].
The popular diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy includes ﬂuorescein angiography and optical
coherence tomography. In ﬂuorescein angiography, the physician injects a dye in the patient’s arm
vein and pictures are taken as the dye ﬂows through the blood vessels in the eyes detecting cases
of blockages, leakages and haemorrhage. In optical coherence tomography, tests are conducted to
take cross sectional images of the retina which helps to identify issues pertinent to ﬂuid leakages or
damages in the retinal tissue [6].
It is thus evident from the fact that detection of the disease plays a major role in saving patients
from vision loss. The more time the disease gets lingered being ignorant or untreated, the consequences
could be severe. Machine learning algorithms have been a prevalent choice in the prediction of various
diseases. The concept of machine learning was framed by Arthur Samuel in 1959 as a technique for
computers to automatically learn without programming interventions and further make decisions
from the experiences of learning. Deep neural network is based on the concept of machine learning
and artiﬁcial neural networks [ 7–10]. DNN has successfully contributed towards analysis and decision
making in the ﬁelds of computer vision, speech recognition, drug design, medical image processing
and many others. The implementation of such advanced machine learning approaches as DNN had
signiﬁcantly contributed towards pathological screening and disease predictions thereby reducing the
burden of human interpretations. With such glorifying results of application of DNN and machine
learning approaches in various other ﬁelds of healthcare, application of the same in the detection
of diabetic retinopathy was a natural point of interest with an objective to reduce occurrence of this
disease [11,12]. Thus motivation of the present study was:
1. Early detection of the diabetic retinopathy disease giving opportunity for medical practitioners to
treat and cure the same at an early stage with higher accuracy.
2. Focus on the most signiﬁcant factors of the disease eliminating the irrelevant ones ensuring more
accurate classiﬁcation.
A Deep neural network model is used in the present study in convergence with Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) and ﬁreﬂy algorithm for the classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy set.
The dataset is collected from the publicly available UCI machine learning repository. The data being
collected from the public domain includes attributes which are irrelevant and inclusion of the same
would only increase burden on the ML model. Hence Principal component analysis (PCA) algorithm