Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 14 of 16
Figure 12. Comparison of Training Time for DNN based models
6. Conclusions and Future Work
In the present study a hybrid principal component analysis (PCA) – ﬁreﬂy based deep neural
network model is used for the classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy dataset. The dataset is collected
from the publicly available UCI machine learning repository which at its raw state had redundant
and irrelevant attributes. Rigorous pre-processing was the prime focus of the study and hence a three
layered pre-processing framework was initiated. At the outset, standardscalar technique was employed
to normalize the dataset and then Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was used for feature selection.
Further, Fireﬂy algorithm was used for the purpose of dimensionality reduction. This reduced dataset
was fed into the deep neural network (DNN) which generated classiﬁcations results with enhanced
accuracy. The results of the model were also evaluated with the predominant machine learning
approaches wherein the results defended the superiority of the model in terms of the Accuracy,
Precision, Recall, Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity. The major beneﬁts of the model as highlighted, includes
its potential to be implemented on any high dimensional dataset in various other domains. However,
the same performance may not be observed in case of low domensional dataset with possibilities of the
model being overﬁtted acting as its limitation. As part of the future study, the proposed model could
be utilized for data sets in other domains. The performance of the proposed model therefore motivates
to conduct similar studies in various other domains having high dimensional data. This approach can
also be used for eliminating noisy data in Magnetoencephalography (MEG) data analysis contributing
towards better prediction in healthcare.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.R.G., M.A.; Data curation, S.S., P .K.R.M.; Formal analysis, N.K.;
Investigation, S.B.; Methodology, T.R.G., I.-H.R.; Project administration, M.A., I.-H.R.; Resources, N.K.; Software,
T.R.G., S.S.; Visualization, P .K.R.M.; Writing—S.B., M.A., N.K.; Writing—review and editing, T.R.G., S.B., S.S.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the Institute for Information and communications Technology Promotion
(IITP) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (No. 2018-0-00508), Development of blockchain-based
embedded devices and platform for MG security and operational efﬁciency.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.