Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 3 of 16
is implemented for feature extraction from DR image dataset. To further improve on the classiﬁcation
results, ﬁreﬂy algorithm is implemented for dimensionality reduction. The resultant reduced dataset is
fed into the deep neural network model generating enhanced classiﬁcation of the diabetic retinopathy
dataset. The result of the proposed model is evaluated against the traditional state of the model to
establish its superiority in terms of the accuracy, speciﬁcity, precision, recall and sensitivity.
The following sections of the paper are organized as follows: Section 2 presents an explicit
literature review, Section 3 discusses the preliminaries and experimental setting, Section 4 describes
the methodology, Section 5 highlights the results and Section 6 provides conclusion and scope of
future work.
2. Related Work
The study in [ 13] developed a deep learning system for identiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy with
enhanced accuracy than existing studies. The analysis was performed on a small percentage of images
with higher resolutions. The results highlighted the ability of deep learning models to diagnose the
disease achieving the desired performance level considering limitations in cost as well.
The study in [ 14] has implemented adjudication for the quantiﬁcation of errors in diabetic
retinopathy (DR) focusing on grading of the disease using a deep learning algorithm. The kappa score
was measured and performance of the model was compared based on sensitivity, accuracy and area
under the curve (AUC).
The research work conducted in [ 15] developed a data oriented deep learning model for DR
detection wherein the coloured fundus images [ 16] of the disease were processed and the classiﬁcation
model helped to segregate the diseased ones from the healthy images.
In [17] a deep learning model was designed to detect diabetic retinopathy and macular edema
from images of retinal fundus. A deep convolutional neural network [ 18] was used to train a retinal
image dataset consisting of 128175 images. The sensitivity and speciﬁcity scores in the study helped to
detect referable diabetic retinopathy (RDR among diabetic patients using a deep neural network model.
The study by Swapna et. al [ 19] designed a deep learning model for the classiﬁcation of diabetes
using HRV data. The dynamic features relevant to the HRV data were extracted using a combination of
long-short-term memory (LSTM) and convolutional neural network. The output of the model achieved
prominent accuracy in detection of diabetes in HRV data.
The study in [ 20] presented a hybrid technique incorporating image processing and deep learning
for detection and classiﬁcation of diabetic retinopathy. The model was validated using the retinal
fundus dataset consisting of 400 images of the MESSIDOR database yielding good results.
The study in [ 21] developed a computer-aided screening system that helped to analyse fundus
images having different illumination and views. The study basically helped to detect the severity level
of DR using ML models. The model used AdaBoost classiﬁer for feature extraction and analysed the
data using Gaussian Mixture Model, KNN, SVM to classify retinopathy lesion cases from nonlesions.
The study in [ 22,23] developed an FFBAT-based algorithms for classiﬁcation of diabetes.
The unique contribution of the study was its use of LPP algorithm using fuzzy rules for feature
extraction and the FFBAT-ANN model for classiﬁcation. This combination helped to achieve better
classiﬁcation results yielding improve accuracy in the results.
Various studies have also used Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN), Bayesian Classiﬁcation and
Support Vector Machines (SVM) for the classiﬁcation NPDR and PDR types of diabetic retinopathy.
The images of haemorrhages [ 24] of blood vessels and analysed using image processing techniques
and the extracted features when fed into the classiﬁers help to classify the types of DR diseases [ 25–27].
It is quite evident from the related work that majority of the work in diabetic retinopathy detected
revolves around use of various machine learning models and comparison of the performance of these
models. It is also observed that less emphasis has been given on improvement of quality of the diabetic
retinopathy dataset which could lead to more accurate results. It is important to highlight the fact that
the reliability of results generated from the machine learning model depends on the features of the