Electronics 2020 ,9, 274 4 of 16
dataset. Extraction of the most signiﬁcant features in the dataset and use of appropriate dimensionality
reduction techniques help to enhance accuracy of the prediction results of the machine learning models.
The present focuses on this aspect and adopts a two layered dimensionality reduction approach
followed by the use of deep neural network model for classiﬁcation. The unique contributions of the
proposed work include:
1. A three layered rigorous pre-processing approach is adopted to enhance the quality of the dataset
and include relevant and signiﬁcant attributes alone for training the proposed model.
2. The implementation of PCA+Fireﬂy is used to signiﬁcantly reduce the training time of the ML
based models.
3. Preliminaries and Experimeental Setting
This section discusses the methodologies used in the proposed model namely, PCA and Fireﬂy
algorithms. The detailed architecture of the proposed model is also presented.
3.1. Principal Component Analysis
The concept of PCA is based on the objective of reduction in dimensionality of a data set consisting
of multiple variables which are correlated with each other while retaining maximum variability in
the data set [ 28,29]. The algorithm transforms the variables in the data set to a new set of orthogonal
principal components ordered in a manner such that the retention of variation in the original variables
decreases while traversing down the order. Hence the ﬁrst principal component retains maximum
variation present in the original components. The principal components are the eigenvectors in
covariation matrix which are orthogonal. The dataset to be used in PCA needs to be a scaled one
and the method summarizes the data generating results which are also sensitive to relative scaling.
The principal component is deﬁned as a “linear combination of optimally weighted observed variables”.
The output generated from PCA are such principal components whose numbers are either lesser or
equal to the original variables. The steps involved in implementing PCA on a two dimensional data
set starts with Normalization of the data. This is done by subtracting the respective means from each
of the respective columns in the data set computing a data set with mean of zero. The second step
involves calculation of the covariation matrix. Then the Eigen values and Eigen vectors are calculated
for the covariance matrix. The Eigen values are then ordered in a descending order to provide the
order of signiﬁcance for the components and the dimensionality is reduced by choosing ﬁrst set of
Eigen values and ignoring the rest. A matrix of vectors is formed to create a feature vector. In the
ﬁnal step the principal components are formed by considering the transpose of the feature vector and
computing the left multiplication with the transpose of scaled version of the data set. The concept
of dimensionality reduction in PCA pitches its use in facial recognition, computer vision and image
compression. It has also wide spectrum of applications in pattern identiﬁcation of high dimensional
data pertaining to the ﬁeld of ﬁnance, datamining, bio-informatics and psychology [30–33].
3.2. Fireﬂy Algorithm
Fireﬂy algorithm is a “nature—inspired” algorithm based on the behaviour of ﬂies. Nature
inspired algorithms are extensively used in several stages of machine learning process [ 34,35].
The ﬁreﬂies have natural lights emitting from their body that help them to attract or ﬁnd other
ﬂying mates [ 36–38]. It also helps them to catch their prey and protect themselves from predators.
The algorithm is based on three primary assumptions [39]:
1. The artiﬁcial ﬁreﬂies are unisex and their attraction are not dependent on gender.
2. The attractiveness of a ﬁreﬂy is proportional to the brightness of the lights emitted and hence
it decreases as they move away from each other due to absorption of the light by air. Since all
ﬁreﬂies emit light, the one emitting the brightest one attracts most of its neighbours. On the