JournalofHealthcareInformaticsResearch(2021)5:1–19
discuss promising applications in other domains since some principles can be applied
to healthcare.
3.1 Healthcare
EHRs have emerged as a crucial source of real world healthcare data that has been
used for an amalgamation of important biomedical research [ 30,47], including for
machine learning research [ 72]. While providing a huge amount of patient data for
analysis, EHRs contain systemic and random biases overall and specific to hospitals
that limit the generalizability of results. For example, Obermeyer et al. [ 76] found
that a commonly used algorithm to determine enrollment in specific health programs
was biased against African Americans, assigning the same level of risk to healthier
Caucasian patients. These improperly calibrated algorithms can arise due to a variety
of reasons, such as differences in underlying access to care or low representation in
training data. It is clear that one way to alleviate the risk for such biased algorithms is
the ability to learn from EHR data that is more representative of the global population
and which goes beyond a single hospital or site. Unfortunately, due to a myriad of
reasons such as discrepant data schemes and privacy concerns, it is unlikely that data
will eve be connected together in a single database to learn from all at once. The
creation and utility of standardized common data models, such as OMOP [ 44], allow
for more wide-spread replication analyses but it does not overcome the limitations
of joint data access. As such, it is imperative that alternative strategies emerge for
learning from multiple EHR data sources that go beyond the common discovery-
replication framework. Federated learning might be the tool to enable large-scale
representative ML of EHR data and we discuss many studies which demonstrate this
fact below.
Federated learning is a viable method to connect EHR data from medical institu-
tions, allowing them to share their experiences, and not their data, with a guarantee
of privacy [ 9,25,34,45,65,82]. In these scenarios, the performance of ML model
will be significantly improved by the iterative improvements of learning from large
and diverse medical data sets. There have been some tasks were studied in fed-
erated learning setting in healthcare, e.g., patient similarity learning [ 62], patient
representation learning, phenotyping [ 55,67], and predictive modeling [ 10,45,90].
Specifically, Lee et al. [ 62] presented a privacy-preserving platform in a federated
setting for patient similarity learning across institutions. Their model can find sim-
ilar patients from one hospital to another without sharing patient-level information.
Kim et al. [ 55] used tensor factorization models to convert massive electronic health
records into meaningful phenotypes for data analysis in federated learning setting.
Liu et al. [ 67] conducted both patient representation learning and obesity comorbidity
phenotyping in a federated manner and got good results. Vepakomma et al. [ 103] built
several configurations upon a distributed deep learning method called SplitNN [ 36]
to facilitate the health entities collaboratively training deep learning models without
sharing sensitive raw data or model details. Silva et al. [ 93] illustrated their federated
learning framework by investigating brain structural relationships across diseases
and clinical cohorts. Huang et al. [ 45] sought to tackle the challenge of non-IID
ICU patient data by clustering patients into clinically meaningful communities that10