JournalofHealthcareInformaticsResearch(2021)5:1–19
1 Introduction
The recent years have witnessed a surge of interest related to healthcare data analyt-
ics, due to the fact that more and more such data are becoming readily available from
various sources including clinical institutions, patient individuals, insurance compa-
nies, and pharmaceutical industries, among others. This provides an unprecedented
opportunity for the development of computational techniques to dig data-driven
insights for improving the quality of care delivery [ 72,105].
Healthcare data are typically fragmented because of the complicated nature of
the healthcare system and processes. For example, different hospitals may be able
to access the clinical records of their own patient populations only. These records
are highly sensitive with protected health information (PHI) of individuals. Rigorous
regulations, such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
[32], have been developed to regulate the process of accessing and analyzing such
data. This creates a big challenge for modern data mining and machine learning (ML)
technologies, such as deep learning [ 61], which typically requires a large amount of
training data.
Federated learning is a paradigm with a recent surge in popularity as it holds great
promise on learning with fragmented sensitive data. Instead of aggregating data from
different places all together, or relying on the traditional discovery then replication
design, it enables training a shared global model with a central server while keeping
the data in local institutions where the they originate.
The term “federated learning” is not new. In 1976, Patrick Hill, a philosophy pro-
fessor, first developed the Federated Learning Community (FLC) to bring people
together to jointly learn, which helped students overcome the anonymity and isolation
in large research universities [ 42]. Subsequently, there were several efforts aiming at
building federations of learning content and content repositories [ 6,74,83]. In 2005,
Rehak et al. [ 83] developed a reference model describing how to establish an inter-
operable repository infrastructure by creating federations of repositories, where the
metadata are collected from the contributing repositories into a central registry pro-
vided with a single point of discovery and access. The ultimate goal of this model
is to enable learning from diverse content repositories. These practices in federated
learning community or federated search service have provided effective references
for the development of federated learning algorithms.
Federated learning holds great promises on healthcare data analytics. For both
provider (e.g., building a model for predicting the hospital readmission risk with
patient Electronic Health Records (EHR) [ 71]) and consumer (patient)-based appli-
cations (e.g., screening atrial fibrillation with electrocardiograms captured by smart-
watch [ 79]), the sensitive patient data can stay either in local institutions or with
individual consumers without going out during the federated model learning process,
which effectively protects the patient privacy. The goal of this paper is to review the
setup of federated learning, discuss the general solutions and challenges, and envision
its applications in healthcare.
In this review, after a formal overview of federated learning, we summarize the
main challenges and recent progress in this field. Then we illustrate the potential of
federated learning methods in healthcare by describing the successful recent research.2