JournalofHealthcareInformaticsResearch(2021)5:1–19
selection can be completely random or only the parameters whose current values
are farther away from their local optima are selected, i.e., those that have a larger
gradient. Nishio et al. [ 75] proposed a new protocol referred to as FedCS ,w h e r e
the central server manages the resources of heterogeneous clients and determines
which clients should participate the current training task by analyzing the resource
information of each client, such as wireless channel states, computational capacities,
and the size of data resources relevant to the current task. Here, the server should
decide how much data, energy, and CPU resources used by the mobile devices such
that the energy consumption, training latency, and bandwidth cost are minimized
while meeting requirements of the training tasks. Anh [ 5] thus proposes to use the
Deep Q-Learning [ 102] technique that enables the server to find the optimal data
and energy management for the mobile devices participating in the mobile crowd-
machine learning through federated learning without any prior knowledge of network
dynamics.
2.2.2 ModelCompression
The goal of model compression is to compress the server-to-client exchanges to
reduce uplink/downlink communication cost. The first way is through structured
updates, where the update is directly learned from a restricted space parameterized
using a smaller number of variables, e.g., sparse, low-rank [ 58], or more specifically,
pruning the least useful connections in a network [ 37,113], weight quantization [ 17,
89], and model distillation [ 43]. The second way is lossy compression, where a full
model update is first learned and then compressed using a combination of quantiza-
tion, random rotations, and subsampling before sending it to the server [ 2,58]. Then
the server decodes the updates before doing the aggregation.
Federated dropout, in which each client, instead of locally training an update to
the whole global model, trains an update to a smaller sub-model [ 12]. These sub-
models are subsets of the global model and, as such, the computed local updates
have a natural interpretation as updates to the larger global model. Federated dropout
not only reduces the downlink communication but also reduces the size of uplink
updates. Moreover, the local computational costs is correspondingly reduced since
the local training procedure dealing with parameters with smaller dimensions.
2.2.3 UpdatesReduction
Kamp et al. [ 52] proposed to average models dynamically depending on the utility of
the communication, which leads to a reduction of communication by an order of mag-
nitude compared to periodically communicating state-of-the-art approaches. This
facet is well suited for massively distributed systems with limited communication
infrastructure. Bui et al. [ 11] improved federated learning for Bayesian neural net-
works using partitioned variational inference, where the client can decide to upload
the parameters back to the central server after multiple passes through its data, after
one local epoch, or after just one mini-batch. Guha et al. [ 35] focused on techniques
for one-shot federated learning, in which they learn a global model from data in
the network using only a single round of communication between the devices and7