JournalofHealthcareInformaticsResearch(2021)5:1–19
At last, we discuss the main opportunities and open questions for future applications
in healthcare.
DiﬀerencewithExistingReviews There has been a few review articles on federated
learning recently. For example, Yang et al. [ 109] wrote the early federated learning
survey summarizing the general privacy-preserving techniques that can be applied
to federated learning. Some researchers surveyed sub-problems of federated learn-
ing, e.g., personalization techniques [ 59], semi-supervised learning algorithms [ 49],
threat models [ 68], and mobile edge networks [ 66]. Kairouz et al. [ 51] discussed
recent advances and presented an extensive collection of open problems and chal-
lenges. Li et al. [ 63] conducted the review on federated learning from a system
viewpoint. Different from those reviews, this paper provided the potential of feder-
ated learning to be applied in healthcare. We summarized the general solution to the
challenges in federated learning scenario and surveyed a set of representative feder-
ated learning methods for healthcare. In the last part of this review, we outlined some
directions or open questions in federated learning for healthcare. An early version of
this paper is available on arXiv [ 107].
2 FederatedLearning
Federated learning is a problem of training a high-quality shared global model with
a central server from decentralized data scattered among large number of different
clients (Fig. 1). Mathematically, assume there are Kactivated clients where the data
reside in (a client could be a mobile phone, a wearable device, or a clinical institution
data warehouse, etc.). Let Dkdenote the data distribution associated with client kand
Fig.1 Schematic of the federated learning framework. The model is trained in a distributed manner: the
institutions periodically communicate the local updates with a central server to learn a global model; the
central server aggregates the updates and sends back the parameters of the updated global model3