JournalofHealthcareInformaticsResearch(2021)5:1–19
Table2 Popular tools for federated learning research
Project name Developer Description
PySyft [ 87] OpenMined It decouples private data from model
training using federated learning, DP,
and MPC within PyTorch. TensorFlow
bindings are also available [ 77].
TFF [ 31] Google With TFF, TensorFlow provides users
with a flexible and open framework
through which they can simulate dis-
tributed computing locally.
FATE [ 3] Webank FATE support the Federated AI
ecosystem, where a secure computing
protocol is implemented based on
homomorphic encryption and MPC.
Tensor/IO [ 24] Dow et al. Tensor/IO is a lightweight cross-
platform library for on-device
machine learning, bringing the power
of TensorFlow and TensorFlow Lite
to iOS, Android, and React native
applications.
machine learning model weather we are dealing with federated learning scenario
or not.
–Incorporating Expert Knowledge . In 2016, IBM introduced Watson for Oncol-
ogy, a tool that uses the natural language processing system to summarize
patients’ electronic health records and search the powerful database behind it
to advise doctors on treatments. Unfortunately, some oncologists say they trust
their judgment more than Watson tells them what needs to be done.1Therefore,
hopefully doctors will be involved in the training process. Since every data set
collected here cannot be of high quality, so it will be very helpful if the standards
of evidence-based machine are introduced, doctors will also see the diagnostic
criteria of artificial intelligence. If wrong, doctors will give further guidance to
artificial intelligence to improve the accuracy of machine learning model during
training process.”
–Incentive Mechanisms . With the internet of things and the variety of third party
portals, a growing number of smartphone healthcare apps are compatible with
wearable devices. In addition to data accumulated in hospitals or medical cen-
ters, another type of data that is of great value is coming from wearable devices
not only to the researchers but more importantly for the owners. However,
during federated model training process, the clients suffer from considerable
overhead in communication and computation. Without well-designed incentives,
self-interested mobile or other wearable devices will be reluctant to participate
1http://news.moore.ren/industry/158978.htm13