JournalofHealthcareInformaticsResearch(2021)5:1–19
in federal learning tasks, which will hinder the adoption of federated learn-
ing [53]. How to design an efficient incentive mechanism to attract devices with
high-quality data to join federated learning is another important problem.
–Personalization . Wearable devices are more focus on public health, which
means helping people who are already healthy to improve their health, such as
helping them exercise, practice meditation, and improve their sleep quality. How
to assist patients to carry out scientifically designed personalized health man-
agement, correct the functional pathological state by examining indicators, and
interrupt the pathological change process are very important. Reasonable chronic
disease management can avoid emergency visits and hospitalization and reduce
the number of visits. Cost and labor savings. Although there are some general
work about federated learning personalization [ 48,94], for healthcare informat-
ics, how to combining the medical domain knowledge and make the global model
be personalized for every medical institutions or wearable devices is another
open question.
–Model Precision . Federated tries to make isolated institutions or devices share
their experiences, and the performance of machine learning model will be signif-
icantly improved by the formed large medical dataset. However, the prediction
task is currently restricted and relatively simple. Medical treatment itself is a very
professional and accurate field. Medical devices in hospitals have incomparable
advantages over wearable devices. And the models of Doc.ai could predict the
phenome collection of one’s biometric data based on its selfie, such as height,
weight, age, sex, and BMI.2How to improve the prediction model to predict
future health conditions is definitely worth exploring.
Funding The work is supported by ONR N00014-18-1-2585 and NSF 1750326. FW would also like
to acknowledge the support from Amazon AWS Machine Learning Research Award and Google Faculty
Research Award.
CompliancewithEthicalStandards
C o n f l i c to fI n t e r e s t The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
1. Abadi M, Chu A, Goodfellow I, McMahan HB, Mironov I, Talwar K, Zhang L (2016) Deep learning
with differential privacy. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and
communications security. ACM, pp 308–318
2. Agarwal N, Suresh AT, Yu FXX, Kumar S, McMahan B (2018) cpsgd: communication-efficient
and differentially-private distributed sgd. In: Advances in neural information processing systems,
pp 7564–7575
3. AI W (2019) Federated ai technology enabler. https://www.fedai.org/cn/
4. Anguita D, Ghio A, Oneto L, Parra X, Reyes-Ortiz JL (2012) Human activity recognition on smart-
phones using a multiclass hardware-friendly support vector machine. In: International workshop on
ambient assisted living. Springer, pp 216–223
2https://doc.ai/blog/do-you-know-how-valuable-your-medical-da/14