JournalofHealthcareInformaticsResearch(2021)5:1–19
captured similar diagnoses and geological locations and simultaneously training one
model per community.
Federated learning has also enabled predictive modeling based on diverse sources,
which can provide clinicians with additional insights into the risks and benefits of
treating patients earlier [ 9,10,90]. Brisimi et al. [ 10] aimed to predict future hospital-
izations for patients with heart-related diseases using EHR data spread among various
data sources/agents by solving the l1-regularized sparse Support Vector Machine
classifier in federated learning environment. Owkin is using federated learning to
predict patients’ resistance to certain treatment and drugs, as well as their survival
rates for certain diseases [ 99]. Boughorbel et al. [ 9] proposed a federated uncertainty-
aware learning algorithm for the prediction of preterm birth from distributed EHR,
where the contribution of models with high uncertainty in the aggregation model is
reduced. Pfohl et al. [ 80] considered the prediction of prolonged length of stay and
in-hospital mortality across thirty-one hospitals in the eICU Collaborative Research
Database. Sharma et al. [ 90] tested a privacy preserving framework for the task of
in-hospital mortality prediction among patients admitted to the intensive care unit
(ICU). Their results show that training the model in the federated learning frame-
work leads to comparable performance to the traditional centralized learning setting.
Summary of these work is listed in Table 1.
3.2 Others
An important application of federated learning is for natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. When Google first proposed federated learning concept in 2016, the
application scenario is Gboard—a virtual keyboard of Google for touchscreen mobile
devices with support for more than 600 language varieties [ 39,70]. Indeed, as users
increasingly turn to mobile devices, fast mobile input methods with auto-correction,
word completion, and next-word prediction features are becoming more and more
important. For these NLP tasks, especially next-word prediction, typed text in mobile
apps is usually better than the data from scanned books or speech-to-text in terms
of aiding typing on a mobile keyboard. However, these language data often contain
sensitive information, e.g., passwords, search queries, or text messages with personal
information. Therefore, federated learning has a promising application in NLP like
virtual keyboard prediction [ 7,39,70].
Other applications include smart retail [ 112] and finance [ 54]. Specifically, smart
retail aims to use machine learning technology to provide personalized services to
customers based on data like user purchasing power and product characteristics for
product recommendation and sales services. In terms of financial applications, Ten-
cent’s WeBank leverages federated learning technologies for credit risk management,
where several Banks could jointly generate a comprehensive credit score for a cus-
tomer without sharing his or her data [ 109]. With the growth and development of
federated learning, there are many companies or research teams that have carried out
various tools oriented to scientific research and product development. Popular ones
are listed in Table 2.11