JournalofHealthcareInformaticsResearch(2021)5:1–19
Fig.3 Privacy-preserving schemes. aSecure multi-party computation. In security sharing, security values
(blue and yellow pie) are split into any number of shares that are distributed among the computing nodes.
During the computation, no computation node is able to recover the original value nor learn anything about
the output (green pie). Any nodes can combine their shares to reconstruct the original value. bDifferential
privacy. It guarantees that anyone seeing the result of a differentially private analysis will make the same
inference (answer 1 and answer 2 are nearly indistinguishable)
the central server. Besides above works, Ren et al. [ 84] theoretically analyzed the
detailed expression of the learning efficiency in the CPU scenario and formulate a
training acceleration problem under both communication and learning resource bud-
get. Reinforcement learning and round robin learning are widely used to manage the
communication and computation resources [ 5,46,106,114].
2.2.4 Peer-to-PeerLearning
In federated learning, a central server is required to coordinate the training process of
the global model. However, the communication cost to the central server may be not
affordable since a large number of clients are usually involved. Also, many practical
peer-to-peer networks are usually dynamic, and it is not possible to regularly access a
fixed central server. Moreover, because of the dependence on central server, all clients
are required to agree on one trusted central body, and whose failure would interrupt
the training process for all clients. Therefore, some researches began to study fully
decentralized framework where the central server is not required [ 41,60,85,91]. The
local clients are distributed over the graph/network where they only communicate
with their one-hop neighbors. Each client updates its local belief based on own data
and then aggregates information from the one-hop neighbors.
2.3 PrivacyandSecurity
In federated learning, we usually assume the number of participated clients (e.g.,
phones, cars, clinical institutions...) is large, potentially in the thousands or millions.
It is impossible to ensure none of the clients is malicious. The setting of federated
learning, where the model is trained locally without revealing the input data or the
model’s output to any clients, prevents direct leakage while training or using the
model. However, the clients may infer some information about another client’s pri-
vate dataset given the execution of f(w), or over the shared predictive model w[100].
To this end, there have been many efforts focus on privacy either from an individual8