JournalofHealthcareInformaticsResearch(2021)5:1–19
/summationtextK
k=1nk
nDk,w h e r e ¯Dis the target data distribution for the learning model. However,
this specific uniform distribution is not an adequate solution in most scenarios.
To address this issue, the recent proposed solution is to model the target distribu-
tion or force the data adapt to the uniform distribution [ 73,111]. Specifically, Mohri
et al. [ 73] proposed a minimax optimization scheme, i.e., agnostic federated learning
(AFL), where the centralized model is optimized for any possible target distribution
formed by a mixture of the client distributions. This method has only been applied
at small scales. Compared to AFL, Li et al. [ 64] proposed q-Fair Federated Learning
(q-FFL ), assigning higher weight to devices with poor performance, so that the distri-
bution of accuracy in the network reduces in variance. They empirically demonstrate
the improved flexibility and scalability of q-FFL compared to AFL.
Another commonly used method is globally sharing a small portion of data
between all the clients [ 75,111]. The shared subset is required containing a uniform
distribution over classes from the central server to the clients. In addition to han-
dle non-IID issue, sharing information of a small portion of trusted instances and
noise patterns can guide the local agents to select compact training subset, while the
clients learn to add changes to selected data samples, in order to improve the test
performance of the global model [ 38].
2.1.2 PluralisticSolution
Generally, it is difficult to find a consensus solution wthat is good for all components
Di. Instead of wastefully insisting on a consensus solution, many researchers choose
to embracing this heterogeneity.
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a natural way to deal with the data drawn from
different distributions. It directly captures relationships among non-IID and unbal-
anced data by leveraging the relatedness between them in comparison to learn a
single global model. In order to do this, it is necessary to target a particular way in
which tasks are related, e.g., sharing sparsity, sharing low-rank structure, and graph-
based relatedness. Recently, Smith et al. [ 96] empirically demonstrated this point on
real-world federated datasets and proposed a novel method MOCHA to solve a gen-
eral convex MTL problem with handling the system challenges at the same time.
Later, Corinzia et al. [ 22] introduced VIRTUAL , an algorithm for federated multi-task
learning with non-convex models. They consider the federation of central server and
clients as a Bayesian network and perform training using approximated variational
inference. This work bridges the frameworks of federated and transfer/continuous
learning.
The success of multi-task learning rests on whether the chosen relatedness
assumptions hold. Compared to this, pluralism can be a critical tool for dealing with
heterogeneous data without any additional or even low-order terms that depend on
the relatedness as in MTL [ 28]. Eichner et al. [ 28] considered training in the presence
of block-cyclic data and showed that a remarkably simple pluralistic approach can
entirely resolve the source of data heterogeneity. When the component distributions
are actually different, pluralism can outperform the “ideal” IID baseline.5