Figure 2. Strongly correlated ﬁlters are selected and make them
highly correlated. Finally, one redundant ﬁlter is pruned.
starts penalizing the important ﬁlters as well and, therefore,
cannot achieve a signiﬁcant compression. If we increase
theℓ2penalty, it starts controlling the model complexity.
Largeℓ2penalty results in underﬁtting. Therefore these ap-
proaches can only lead to limited levels of ﬁlter pruning. In
contrast, in our proposed approach, we learn a minimal ba-
sis of ﬁlters that are highly uncorrelated. Figure 2 illustrates
the basic idea of our approach.
Correlation is the most common and one of the simplest
statistical measures to quantify data dependence or associ-
ation. Correlation often refers to how close two variables
are to have a linear relationship with each other. Let Xand
Yare two random variables with expected values µXand
µYand standard deviations σXandσYrespectively. The
correlation ρXYcan be deﬁned as
ρXY=E[(X−µX)(Y−µY)]
σXσY(7)
HereρXY∈[−1,1], with a high negative or high positive
value indicates a high degree of linear dependence between
the two variables. When the correlation is near zero, the two
variables are linearly independent.
3.3.1 Episode Selection
Let us deﬁne the two terms which we will use in the
proposed pruning process - “Ready-to-prune ( Ri)” and
“Pruned ( Pi)”. Here Ridenotes ﬁlter pairs selected from
the layerLifor the optimization process (details in the next
section). Pidenotes the ﬁlters that are eventually selected
(one from each pair of Ri) for pruning from the model after
optimization. Therefore if Nﬁlter pairs are selected in Ri
then|Pi|=N, i.e., from the layer Li,Nﬁlters will get
pruned.
In each layer Li, we ﬁnd out the ﬁlter pairs that have
the maximum correlation. For calculating the correlation,
we select all ﬁlters FLi={f1,f2,...,f co}on a layer Li
withcooutput channels. Each ﬁlter fion the layer Liisof dimension ( wk,hk,cin) is ﬂattened to a vector of size
wk×hk×cin. Now we can calculate the correlation co-
efﬁcient for ﬁlter pair by using Eq. 7. In our approach,
we have considered the magnitude of the correlation coefﬁ-
cient, thereby giving the same importance for positive and
negative correlation values. Based on the magnitude of the
correlation coefﬁcient of each pair, ﬁlter pairs are ordered.
The ﬁlter pair with the largest correlation value has the
minimum importance. Some least important ﬁlter pairs are
selected for the ready-to-prune set Ri(select the ﬁlter pair
(fa,fb) such that a/\e}atio\slash=b). LetIiare the remaining ﬁlter pairs
at layerLi. Then:
PFLi=Ri∪Iis.t.Ri∩Ii=φ (8)
HerePFLi={(fa,fb) :a∈ {1,2,...co}, b∈
{1,2,...co}}. The same process is repeated for each layer.
This selected set of ﬁlter pairs from all the layers ( St) is
called one episode. Where Stis the set of ﬁlter pairs se-
lected attthepisode from all Kconvolutional layers.
St={R1,R2,...,RK} (9)
This setStis the collection of the ready-to-prune ﬁlter pairs
from all the layers and used for further optimization such
that both ﬁlters in each pair contain similar information af-
ter optimization. Therefore we can safely remove one ﬁlter
from each pair. The optimization process is explained in the
next section.
3.3.2 Optimization
LetC(Θ)be the cost function of the original model and Θ
be the model parameters. We optimize this cost function
with the new regularizer applied to the selected episode (set
of ﬁlter pairs) St. Our new regularizer (CSt)is as follows:
CSt= exp
−/summationdisplay
X,Y∈Ri,∀Ri∈St|ρXY|
 (10)
Here|ρXY|is the magnitude of correlation coefﬁcient of
the ﬁlter pair (X,Y)inRiandRi∈St. The idea is here to
make the strongly correlated ﬁlter pair highly correlated (as
illustrated in Figure 2). Note that Eq. 10 will be minimized
when/summationtext
X,Y∈Ri,∀Ri∈St|ρXY|term is maximum, i.e. each
ﬁlter pair’s magnitude of correlation coefﬁcient |ρXY| →1.
This new regularizer is added to the original cost function
so our new objective function is as follows:
Θ = argmin
Θ(C(Θ)+λ∗CSt) (11)
Hereλis the hyper-parameter to control the regularization
term. Minimizing the Eq. 11 will optimize such that without
degrading the model performance, it increases the correla-
tion as high as possible between ﬁlters in each pair belong-
ing toRi. Therefore we can safely remove one ﬁlter from
each pair.
838