In this work, we propose iteratively removing the ﬁlters
containing redundant information and getting a subset of
ﬁlters that are minimally correlated. As also evidenced in
other recent work, uncorrelated ﬁlters help to reduce over-
ﬁtting [6, 44] and give a compact model with minimal re-
dundancy. There are no beneﬁts by keeping redundant ﬁl-
ters in the model, and it will only result in overﬁtting or
reduced generalization performance [6, 44]. The works in
[3, 58] also eliminate the redundancy in convolutional ﬁl-
ters by applying clustering to feature maps to perform ﬁlter
pruning. In contrast, we use ﬁlter correlation to measure the
redundancy present in the pairs of ﬁlters.
In particular, we present a ﬁlter pruning approach based
on the correlation coefﬁcient (Pearson correlation coefﬁ-
cient) of ﬁlter pairs. Unlike other prior works [14, 17, 31,
25] on ﬁlter pruning, instead of measuring individual ﬁl-
ter importance, we measure importance for each pair of ﬁl-
ters. Filter pairs that have the largest correlation (high re-
dundancy) are given the lowest importance and are chosen
for further optimization, before eventual pruning. In the op-
timization step, we further increase the correlation between
each chosen ﬁlter pair and then ﬁnally prune (discard) one
ﬁlter from the pair. This optimization step helps to trans-
fer the knowledge of the ﬁlter to another one before dis-
carding it. For example, suppose two ﬁlters f1,f2in a pair
have 60% pairwise correlation. If we discard one ﬁlter, we
lose some of the information. However, suppose prior to
pruning, we optimize the model in a way such that the ﬁl-
ter pair’s correlation increases to 99%. If we now discard
one of the ﬁlters, we lose little information, and it would be
safe to prune one of the ﬁlters from the pair (since the two
ﬁlters in the pair have a high degree of similarity), and ﬁne-
tuning can quickly recover it. Our approach starts with the
pre-trained model and then iteratively prunes the redundant
ﬁlters as shown in Figure 1.
2. Related Work
Most of the recent work on deep model compression can
be categorized into three broad categories.
2.1. Connection Pruning
Connection pruning is a direct way to introduce spar-
sity into the CNN model. One approach for CNN com-
pression is to prune the unimportant parameters. How-
ever, it is challenging to deﬁne the importance of parame-
ters quantitatively. There are several approaches to measure
the importance of the parameters. Optimal Brain Damage
[24] and Optimal Brain Surgeon [12] used the second order
Taylor expansion to calculate the parameters importance.
However, the second order derivative calculations are very
costly. [5] used hashing to randomly group the connection
weights into a single bucket and then ﬁnetune the network.
[62] proposed the skip layer approach for network compres-
Figure 1. Correlation-based ﬁlter pruning where strongly corre-
lated ﬁlter pairs are selected for optimization. The compression
of the model depends on the user-deﬁned error tolerance limit ( ǫ).
Henceǫcan be seen as the stopping criteria in our approach.
sion. [11] proposed an iterative approach where absolute
values of weights below a certain threshold are set to zero,
and the drop in accuracy is recovered by ﬁnetuning. This
approach is very successful when most of the parameters
lie in the fully connected layer. The main limitation of these
approaches is the requirement of special hardware/software
for acceleration at run-time.
2.2. Filter Pruning
Filter pruning approaches (which is the focus of our
work too) do not need any special hardware or software for
acceleration. The basic idea in ﬁlter pruning [14, 17, 31, 25]
is to get an estimate of the importance of the ﬁlters and dis-
card the unimportant ones. After that, at each pruning step,
re-training is needed to recover from the accuracy drop.
[19] evaluates the importance of ﬁlter on a subset of the
training data based on the output feature map. [1] used a
greedy approach for pruning. They evaluated the ﬁlter im-
portance by checking the model accuracy after pruning the
ﬁlter. [37, 25] used similar approach but different measure
for ﬁlter pruning. [7, 64, 20] used the low-rank approxima-
tion. [49] used a data-driven approach for calculating ﬁlter
importance and pruning. [29] performed the channel level
pruning based on the scaling factor in the training process.
Recently, group sparsity is also a popular method for ﬁlter
pruning. [50, 22, 61, 65, 2] explored the ﬁlter pruning based
on the group sparsity.
2.3. Quantization
Weight quantization based approaches have also been
used in prior works on model compression. [11, 9, 56]
compressed CNN by combining pruning, quantization, and
huffman coding. [34] conducted the network compression
based on the ﬂoat value quantization for model storage.
Binarization [41] can be used for the network compres-
sion where each ﬂoat value is quantized to a binary value.
Bayesian methods [30] are also used for the network quanti-
zation. The quantization methods require special hardware
support to get the advantage of the compression.
Our method is generic and does not require any special
hardware/software, with the special support we can further
836