Leveraging Filter Correlations for Deep Model Compression
Pravendra Singh∗Vinay Kumar Verma∗Piyush Rai Vinay P. Namboodiri
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, India
{psingh, vkverma, rpiyush, vinaypn }@iitk.ac.in
Abstract
We present a ﬁlter correlation based model compression
approach for deep convolutional neural networks. Our ap-
proach iteratively identiﬁes pairs of ﬁlters with the largest
pairwise correlations and drops one of the ﬁlters from each
such pair. However, instead of discarding one of the ﬁl-
ters from each such pair na ¨ıvely, the model is re-optimized
to make the ﬁlters in these pairs maximally correlated, so
that discarding one of the ﬁlters from the pair results in
minimal information loss. Moreover, after discarding the
ﬁlters in each round, we further ﬁnetune the model to re-
cover from the potential small loss incurred by the compres-
sion. We evaluate our proposed approach using a compre-
hensive set of experiments and ablation studies. Our com-
pression method yields state-of-the-art FLOPs compression
rates on various benchmarks, such as LeNet-5, VGG-16,
and ResNet-50,56, while still achieving excellent predictive
performance for tasks such as object detection on bench-
mark datasets.
1. Introduction
Recent advances in convolutional neural networks
(CNN) have yielded state-of-the-art results on many com-
puter vision tasks, such as classiﬁcation, detection, etc.
However, training data and storage/computational power re-
quirements limit their usage in many settings. To address
this, one line of research in this direction has focused on
training CNNs with limited data [10, 57, 21, 42, 40, 60].
Another line of work has focused on model compression
to make it more efﬁcient in terms of FLOPs (speedup) and
memory requirements. The memory requirement in CNNs
can be viewed either as runtime CPU/GPU memory usage
or storage space for the model. A number of recent works
[7, 1, 53, 54, 49, 50, 64, 14, 17, 48, 33, 55, 52, 51, 31, 25]
have explored such possibilities for efﬁcient deep learning.
Most existing model compression/pruning methods can
be divided into three categories. The ﬁrst category [5, 11]
has broadly considered introducing sparsity into the model
∗Equal contribution.parameters. These approaches give a limited compression
rate on FLOPs and Total Runtime Memory (TRM), and
need special software (sparse libraries) support to get the
desired compression. These approaches provide a good
compression rate in terms of weights storage, but provide
limited FLOPs and TRM compression.
The second category of methods [11, 41, 30, 39, 35]
has broadly focused on quantization based pruning. Spe-
cial hardware is needed to provide the acceleration for the
ﬁnal compressed model. These kinds of model compression
techniques are primarily designed for IoT devices.
The third category of methods [7, 1, 64, 50, 49] fo-
cuses on ﬁlter pruning. These approaches are generic and
can be used practically without needing any special soft-
ware/hardware needed for acceleration. These approaches
provide a high compression rate in terms of FLOPs and
TRM because of pruning of the whole convolutional ﬁlters
from the model, which also reduces the depth of the fea-
ture maps. Sparsity and quantization based approaches are
complementary to these approaches.
Filter pruning approaches require some measure to cal-
culate the importance of the ﬁlter, which is a difﬁcult task
in general, and many heuristics have been used to measure
ﬁlter importance. For example, [1] used a brute-force ap-
proach to discard the ﬁlters. They prune each ﬁlter sequen-
tially and measure the importance of ﬁlters based on their
corresponding accuracy drop, which can be impractical for
large networks. [25] uses the ℓ1norm (sum of absolute val-
ues) of the ﬁlter to measure the ﬁlter importance, assuming
that a high ℓ1norm ﬁlter is more likely to have a bigger
inﬂuence on the feature map. [37, 46] use Taylor expan-
sion based ﬁlter importance, which is motivated by the early
work on optimal brain damage [24, 12].
As discussed in [16], ﬁlter importance based pruning
methods have certain limitations in the form of require-
ments that are not always met. Compressed models pro-
duced by such methods suffer from redundancy because
these methods don’t consider ﬁlter redundancy while prun-
ing. Therefore, the ﬁlter importance based pruning method
is unable to reduce the redundancy present in the model and
achieve the optimal solution.
835