increase the FLOPs and memory compression because our
method is complementary to other pruning methods such as
binary/quantized weights, connection pruning, etc.
3. Proposed Approach
3.1. Terminology
LetLibe theithlayer and i∈[1,2,...K]where
Kis the number of convolutional layers. The layer Li
hascoﬁlters which is the number of output channels.
The set of ﬁlters at layer Liis denoted as FLi, where
FLi={f1,f2,...,f co}. Each ﬁlter fiis of dimension
(hk,wk,cin), wherehk,wkandcinare height, width and
number of input channels, respectively.
3.2. FLOPs and Memory Size Requirements
Here we provide a brief analysis to help illustrate the
effect of architecture hyperparameters on the FLOPs and
memory consumption (which we will use in our experimen-
tal results to compare the various approaches).
For a CNN model, the total number of FLOPs on the
layerLi(convolutional (FLOPs conv)or fully connected
(FLOPs fc)) with the batch size B can be given as:
FLOPs convi=cinwkhkwohoco∗B (1)
FLOPs fci=cinco∗B (2)
Here (win,hin,cin) is the input feature map, ( wk,hk,cin) is
the convolutional ﬁlter and ( wo,ho,co) is the output feature
map. The total FLOPs across network can be deﬁned as:
FLOPs =K/summationdisplay
i=1FLOPs convi+N/summationdisplay
j=1FLOPs fcj(3)
HereK,N is the number of convolutional and fully con-
nected layers respectively. Convolutional ﬁlter of dimen-
sion (wk,hk,cin) is applied wohocotimes to the input fea-
ture map of dimension ( win,hin,cin) to produce output fea-
ture map of dimension ( wo,ho,co). Also, there are two
sources of memory consumption: 1- feature map size, 2-
parameter weight size. There are some other memory con-
sumptions as well, but these are not feasible to estimate like
those that are related to the implementation details of the
model, the framework used, etc. So we can estimate the
lower bound of memory size. The estimated memory re-
quirement for layer Lican be calculated as
Mfmi= 4wohoco∗B (4)
Mwi= 4wkhkcinco (5)
WhereMfmiis memory required for the feature map
(wo,ho,co) andMwiis the memory required for parame-
ter storage at layer Li. So the total memory requirementacross each layers can be calculated as:
TRM=K+N/summationdisplay
i=1Mfmi+K+N/summationdisplay
j=1Mwj (6)
For the fully connected layer wk,hk,wo,ho= 1 and
cin,coare the number of incoming and outgoing connec-
tions respectively. For the convolutional layer cin,cois the
number of input and output channel respectively. Please
note that Mfmidepends on the batch size. Therefore the
methods that are based on sparsity but not ﬁlter pruning only
reduceMwi. For such approaches, the feature map size re-
mains the same and grows linearly with respect to the batch
size.
3.3. Our Approach
Our approach iterative prunes a pre-trained model. In
each iteration, we choose correlated ﬁlter pairs from each
layer and optimize the selected ﬁlter pairs such that ﬁlters
in each selected pair are as highly correlated as possible.
This enables us to safely discard, without information loss,
one of the ﬁlters (which is redundant) from each of the se-
lected pairs. We ﬁnetune the compressed model after prun-
ing. This constitutes one iteration of pruning (Figure 1),
which can be further repeated to more iterations until we
could recover accuracy with in the tolerance limit.
In our approach, we consider the importance of ﬁlter
pairs for pruning. We use the correlation coefﬁcient of the
ﬁlter pair to quantify their importance. The ﬁlter pair that
has the largest correlation coefﬁcient is deﬁned as the least
important . It is considered as the least important ﬁlter pair
because of the presence of redundancy (one of the ﬁlters
from the pair is redundant). However, if we drop one of the
ﬁlters from this pair, we might also be losing their mutually-
complementary information, which may or may not be cap-
tured by the other ﬁlters. Therefore, before discarding one
of the ﬁlters from the pair, we need to transfer this infor-
mation to the other ﬁlters by optimizing the model before
pruning. There may be the case when a ﬁlter belongs to
multiple highly correlated pairs, then that ﬁlter is pruned
in the process. It may also be possible that both ﬁlters are
important in highly correlated ﬁlter pair, and accuracy may
drop after pruning, but the small ﬁnetuning (1-2 epoch) will
recover it as we have only removed a redundant ﬁlter from
the pair.
Some of the previous approaches like [8, 11, 25] used the
ℓ1orℓ2regularizer for deﬁning the ﬁlter importance. How-
ever, using the ℓ1orℓ2regularizer typically works well only
when there is signiﬁcant redundancy in the model. These
approaches are unable to give a highly compressed model
without sacriﬁcing accuracy. If we try to get a highly com-
pact model with these approaches, the system performance
degrades rapidly because the strong ℓ1orℓ2regularizer
837