A survey of loss functions for semantic
segmentation
Shruti Jadon
IEEE Member
shrutijadon@ieee.org
Abstract —Image Segmentation has been an active ﬁeld of
research as it has a wide range of applications, ranging from
automated disease detection to self driving cars. In the past
5 years, various papers came up with different objective loss
functions used in different cases such as biased data, sparse
segmentation, etc. In this paper, we have summarized some of the
well-known loss functions widely used for Image Segmentation
and listed out the cases where their usage can help in fast
and better convergence of a model. Furthermore, we have also
introduced a new log-cosh dice loss function and compared its
performance on NBFS skull-segmentation open source data-set
with widely used loss functions. We also showcased that certain
loss functions perform well across all data-sets and can be taken
as a good baseline choice in unknown data distribution scenarios.
Index Terms —Computer Vision, Image Segmentation, Medical
Image, Loss Function, Optimization, Healthcare, Skull Stripping,
Deep Learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning has revolutionized various industries ranging
from software to manufacturing. Medical community has
also beneﬁted from deep learning. There have been multiple
innovations in disease classiﬁcation, example, tumor segmen-
tation using U-Net and cancer detection using SegNet. Image
segmentation is one of the crucial contribution of deep learning
community to medical ﬁelds. Apart from telling that some
disease exists it also showcases where exactly it exists. It
has drastically helped in creating algorithms to detect tumors,
lesions etc. in various types of medical scans.
Image Segmentation can be deﬁned as classiﬁcation task
on pixel level. An image consists of various pixels, and these
pixels grouped together deﬁne different elements in image. A
method of classifying these pixels into the a elements is called
semantic image segmentation. The choice of loss/objective
function is extremely important while designing complex
image segmentation based deep learning architectures as they
instigate the learning process of algorithm. Therefore, since
2012, researchers have experimented with various domain
speciﬁc loss function to improve results for their datasets.
In this paper we have summarized ﬁfteen such segmentation
based loss functions that have been proven to provide state
of art results in different domains. These loss function can
be categorized into 4 categories: Distribution-based, Region-
based, Boundary-based, and Compounded (Refer I). We have
also discussed the conditions to determine which objective/loss
function might be useful in a scenario. Apart from this, wehave proposed a new log-cosh dice loss function for semantic
segmentation. To showcase its efﬁciency, we compared the
performance of all loss functions on NBFS Skull-stripping
dataset [1] and shared the outcomes in form of Dice Co-
efﬁcient, Sensitivity, and Speciﬁcity. The code implementa-
tion is available at GitHub: https://github.com/shruti-jadon/
Semantic-Segmentation-Loss-Functions.
Fig. 1. Sample Brain Lesion Segmentation CT Scan [2]. In this segmentation
mask you can see, that number of pixels of white area(targeted lesion) is less
than number of black pixels.
TABLE I
TYPES OF SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION LOSSFUNCTIONS [3]
Type Loss Function
Distribution-based Loss Binary Cross-Entropy
Weighted Cross-Entropy
Balanced Cross-Entropy
Focal Loss
Distance map derived loss penalty term
Region-based Loss Dice Loss
Sensitivity-Speciﬁcity Loss
Tversky Loss
Focal Tversky Loss
Log-Cosh Dice Loss (ours)
Boundary-based Loss Hausdorff Distance loss
Shape aware loss
Compounded Loss Combo Loss
Exponential Logarithmic Loss
II. L OSSFUNCTIONS
Deep Learning algorithms use stochastic gradient descent
approach to optimize and learn the objective. To learn an
objective accurately and faster, we need to ensure that our
mathematical representation of objectives, also known as loss
978-1-7281-9468-4/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEEarXiv:2006.14822v4  [eess.IV]  3 Sep 2020