Scattering GCN: Overcoming Oversmoothness in
Graph Convolutional Networks
Yimeng Min
Mila – Quebec AI Institute
Montreal, QC, Canada
minyimen@mila.quebecFrederik Wenkel
Dept. of Math. and Stat.
Université de Montréal
Mila – Quebec AI Institute
Montreal, QC, Canada
frederik.wenkel@umontreal.caGuy Wolf
Dept. of Math. and Stat.
Université de Montréal
Mila – Quebec AI Institute
Montreal, QC, Canada
guy.wolf@umontreal.ca
Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have shown promising results in processing
graph data by extracting structure-aware features. This gave rise to extensive
work in geometric deep learning, focusing on designing network architectures that
ensure neuron activations conform to regularity patterns within the input graph.
However, in most cases the graph structure is only accounted for by considering
the similarity of activations between adjacent nodes, which limits the capabilities
of such methods to discriminate between nodes in a graph. Here, we propose
to augment conventional GCNs with geometric scattering transforms and resid-
ual convolutions. The former enables band-pass ﬁltering of graph signals, thus
alleviating the so-called oversmoothing often encountered in GCNs, while the
latter is introduced to clear the resulting features of high-frequency noise. We
establish the advantages of the presented Scattering GCN with both theoretical
results establishing the complementary beneﬁts of scattering and GCN features,
as well as experimental results showing the beneﬁts of our method compared to
leading graph neural networks for semi-supervised node classiﬁcation, including
the recently proposed GAT network that typically alleviates oversmoothing using
graph attention mechanisms.
1 Introduction
Deep learning approaches are at the forefront of modern machine learning. While they are effective in
a multitude of applications, their most impressive results are typically achieved when processing data
with inherent structure that can be used to inform the network architecture or the neuron connectivity
design. For example, image processing tasks gave rise to convolutional neural networks that rely
on spatial organization of pixels, while time series analysis gave rise to recurrent neural networks
that leverage temporal organization in their information processing via feedback loops and memory
mechanisms. The success of neural networks in such applications, traditionally associated with signal
processing, has motivated the emergence of geometric deep learning, with the goal of generalizing
the design of structure-aware network architectures from Euclidean spatiotemporal structures to a
wide range of non-Euclidean geometries that often underlie modern data.
Geometric deep learning approaches typically use graphs as a model for data geometries, either
by constructing them from input data (e.g., via similarity kernels) or directly given as quantiﬁed
interactions between data points [ 1]. Using such models, recent works have shown that graph neural
networks (GNNs) perform well in multiple application ﬁelds, including biology, chemistry and
social networks [ 2–4]. It should be noted that most GNNs consider each graph together with given
Equal contribution; order determined alphabetically
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.