Bridging Ofﬂine Reinforcement Learning and
Imitation Learning: A Tale of Pessimism
Paria Rashidinejad
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94709
paria.rashidinejad@berkeley.eduBanghua Zhu
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94709
banghua@berkeley.edu
Cong Ma
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
congm@uchicago.eduJiantao Jiao
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94709
jiantao@berkeley.eduStuart Russell
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94709
russell@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Ofﬂine (or batch) reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms seek to learn an optimal
policy from a ﬁxed dataset without active data collection. Based on the composition
of the ofﬂine dataset, two main methods are used: imitation learning which is
suitable for expert datasets, and vanilla ofﬂine RL which often requires uniform
coverage datasets. From a practical standpoint, datasets often deviate from these
two extremes and the exact data composition is usually unknown. To bridge this
gap, we present a new ofﬂine RL framework that smoothly interpolates between
the two extremes of data composition, hence unifying imitation learning and
vanilla ofﬂine RL. The new framework is centered around a weak version of the
concentrability coefﬁcient that measures the deviation of the behavior policy from
the expert policy alone. Under this new framework, we ask: can one develop
an algorithm that achieves a minimax optimal rate adaptive to unknown data
composition? To address this question, we consider a lower conﬁdence bound
(LCB) algorithm developed based on pessimism in the face of uncertainty in ofﬂine
RL. We study ﬁnite-sample properties of LCB as well as information-theoretic
limits in multi-armed bandits, contextual bandits, and Markov decision processes
(MDPs). Our analysis reveals surprising facts about optimality rates. In particular,
in both contextual bandits and RL, LCB achieves a faster rate of 1=Nfor nearly-
expert datasets compared to the usual rate of 1=p
Nin ofﬂine RL, where Nis the
batch dataset sample size. In contextual bandits, we prove that LCB is adaptively
optimal for the entire data composition range, achieving a smooth transition from
imitation learning to ofﬂine RL. We further show that LCB is almost adaptively
optimal in tabular MDPs.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have recently achieved tremendous empirical success
including beating Go champions [ 45,46] and surpassing professionals in Atari games [ 30,31], to
name a few. Most success stories, however, are in the realm of online RL in which active data
collection is necessary. This online paradigm falls short of leveraging previously-collected datasets
and dealing with scenarios where online exploration is not possible [ 10]. To tackle these issues, ofﬂine
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).