[52] Tengyang Xie and Nan Jiang. Batch value-function approximation with only realizability. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.04990 , 2020.
[53] Ming Yin, Yu Bai, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Near optimal provable uniform convergence in
off-policy evaluation for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.03760 , 2020.
[54] Ming Yin, Yu Bai, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Near-optimal ofﬂine reinforcement learning via double
variance reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01748 , 2021.
[55] Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea
Finn, and Tengyu Ma. MOPO: Model-based ofﬂine policy optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.13239 , 2020.
[56] Tianhe Yu, Aviral Kumar, Rafael Rafailov, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea
Finn. COMBO: Conservative ofﬂine model-based policy optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.08363 , 2021.
[57] Ekim Yurtsever, Jacob Lambert, Alexander Carballo, and Kazuya Takeda. A survey of au-
tonomous driving: Common practices and emerging technologies. IEEE Access , 8:58443–58469,
2020.
Checklist
1. For all authors...
(a)Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reﬂect the pa-
per’s contributions and scope? [Yes] In the abstract, we describe our contributions
on proposing a new ofﬂine RL framework and analyzing the adaptive optimality of
pessimism under this framework. In the introduction, we discuss these contributions
in more detail, compare them with related work, and give a summary Figure 2 on our
theoretical ﬁndings.
(b)Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes] We discuss our analysis limitation
in proving adaptive optimality of LCB in MDP and provide extensive discussion on
our conjecture in Section 6. In Section 5.2, we also point out that Algorithm 2 does
not achieve optimal dependency in effective horizon and discuss possible methods to
address this limitation. Furthermore, as explained in Section 7, this work is limited
to the tabular setting and analyzes adaptive optimality of one conservative algorithm
developed based on the pessimism principle.
(c)Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [No] The frame-
work, algorithm, and theoretical analysis presented in this paper are general-purpose
and can help RL algorithms utilize previously-collected datasets more effectively. We
do not foresee any direct negative societal impacts.
(d)Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
them? [Yes] We have read the ethics review guidelines and our paper conforms to
them.
2. If you are including theoretical results...
(a)Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [Yes] Assumptions
are layed out in theorem statements.
(b)Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [Yes] All proofs are
presented in the Appendix.
3. If you ran experiments...
(a)Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main exper-
imental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [N/A] We do not
include any experiments.
(b)Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
were chosen)? [N/A]
(c)Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
ments multiple times)? [N/A]
14