3
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Quantum Machine Learning
Machine learning (ML) is the construction of algo-
rithms and statistical models which can extract infor-
mation hidden within a dataset. By learning a model
from a dataset, one then has the ability to make predic-
tions on unseen data from the same underlying probabil-
ity distribution. For several decades, research in machine
learning was focused on models that can provide theoret-
ical guarantees for their performance [1–4]. However, in
recent years, methods based on heuristics have become
dominant, partly due to an abundance of data and com-
putational resources [5].
Deep learning is one such heuristic method which has
seen great success [6, 7]. Deep learning methods are
based on learning a representation of the dataset in the
form of networks of parameterized layers. These parame-
tersarethentunedbyminimizingafunctionofthemodel
outputs, called the loss function. This function quantiﬁes
the ﬁt of the model to the dataset.
In parallel to the recent advances in deep learning,
therehasbeenasigniﬁcantgrowthofinterestinquantum
computing in both academia and industry [8]. Quan-
tum computing is the use of engineered quantum sys-
tems to perform computations. Quantum systems are
described by a generalization of probability theory al-
lowing novel behavior such as superposition and entan-
glement, which are generally diﬃcult to simulate with
a classical computer [9]. The main motivation to build
a quantum computer is to access eﬃcient simulation of
these uniquely quantum mechanical behaviors. Quan-
tum computers could one day accelerate computations
for chemical and materials development [10], decryption
[11], optimization [12], and many other tasks. Google’s
recent achievement of quantum supremacy [13] marked
the ﬁrst glimpse of this promised power.
How may one apply quantum computing to practical
tasks? One area of research that has attracted consider-
able interest is the design of machine learning algorithms
that inherently rely on quantum properties to accelerate
their performance. One key observation that has led to
the application of quantum computers to machine learn-
ing is their ability to perform fast linear algebra on a
state space that grows exponentially with the number of
qubits. These quantum accelerated linear-algebra based
techniques for machine learning can be considered the
ﬁrst generation of quantum machine learning (QML) al-
gorithms tackling a wide range of applications in both su-
pervised and unsupervised learning, including principal
component analysis [14], support vector machines [15], k-
means clustering [16], and recommendation systems [17].
These algorithms often admit exponentially faster solu-
tions compared to their classical counterparts on certain
types of quantum data. This has led to a signiﬁcant
surge of interest in the subject [18]. However, to apply
these algorithms to classical data, the data must ﬁrstbe embedded into quantum states [19], a process whose
scalability is under debate [20]. Additionally, many com-
monapproachesforapplyingthesealgorithmstoclassical
datarelyonspeciﬁcstructureinthedatathatcanalsobe
exploited by classical algorithms, sometimes precluding
the possibility of a quantum speedup [21]. Tests based
on the structure of a classical dataset have recently been
developed that can sometimes determine if a quantum
speedup is possible on that data [22]. Continuing de-
bates around speedups and assumptions make it prudent
to look beyond classical data for applications of quantum
computation to machine learning.
With the availability of Noisy Intermediate-Scale
Quantum (NISQ) processors [23], the second generation
of QML has emerged [8, 12, 18, 24–44]. In contrast to
the ﬁrst generation, this new trend in QML is based on
heuristic methods which can be studied empirically due
to the increased computational capability of quantum
hardware. This is reminiscent of how machine learning
evolved towards deep learning with the advent of new
computational capabilities [45]. These new algorithms
use parameterized quantum transformations called pa-
rameterized quantum circuits (PQCs) or Quantum Neu-
ral Networks (QNNs) [24, 43]. In analogy with classical
deep learning, the parameters of a QNN are then opti-
mized with respect to a cost function via either black-box
optimization heuristics [46] or gradient-based methods
[47], in order to learn a representation of the training
data. In this paradigm, quantum machine learning is the
development of models, training strategies, and inference
schemes built on parameterized quantum circuits .
B. Hybrid Quantum-Classical Models
Near-termquantumprocessorsarestillfairlysmalland
noisy, thus quantum models cannot disentangle and gen-
eralize quantum data using quantum processors alone.
NISQ processors will need to work in concert with clas-
sical co-processors to become eﬀective. We anticipate
that investigations into various possible hybrid quantum-
classical machine learning algorithms will be a produc-
tive area of research and that quantum computers will
be most useful as hardware accelerators, working in sym-
biosiswithtraditionalcomputers. Inordertounderstand
thepowerandlimitationsofclassicaldeeplearningmeth-
ods, and how they could be possibly improved by in-
corporating parameterized quantum circuits, it is worth
deﬁning key indicators of learning performance:
Representation capacity : the model architecture has
the capacity to accurately replicate, or extract useful in-
formation from, the underlying correlations in the train-
ing data for some value of the model’s parameters.
Training eﬃciency : minimizing the cost function via
stochastic optimization heuristics should converge to an
approximateminimumofthelossfunctioninareasonable
number of iterations.
Inference tractability: the ability to run inference on