5
near-term quantum devices and quantum processors.
Of course, this is not a comprehensive list of quantum
data. We hope that, with proper software tooling, re-
searchers will be able to ﬁnd applications of QML in all
of the above areas and other categories of applications
beyond what we can currently envision.
D. TensorFlow Quantum
Today, exploring new hybrid quantum-classical mod-
els is a diﬃcult and error-prone task. The engineering
eﬀort required to manually construct such models, de-
velop quantum datasets, and set up training and valida-
tion stages decreases a researcher’s ability to iterate and
discover. TensorFlow has accelerated the research and
understanding of deep learning in part by automating
common model building tasks. Development of software
tooling for hybrid quantum-classical models should simi-
larly accelerate research and understanding for quantum
machine learning.
To develop such tooling, the requirement of accommo-
dating a heterogeneous computational environment in-
volving both classical and quantum processors is key.
This computational heterogeneity suggested the need to
expand TensorFlow, which is designed to distribute com-
putationsacrossCPUs, GPUs, andTPUs[67], toalsoen-
compass quantum processing units (QPUs). This project
has evolved into TensorFlow Quantum. TFQ is an inte-
gration of Cirq with TensorFlow that allows researchers
and students to simulate QPUs while designing, training,
andtestinghybridquantum-classicalmodels,andeventu-
ally run the quantum portions of these models on actual
quantum processors as they come online. A core con-
tribution of TFQ is seamless backpropagation through
combinations of classical and quantum layers in hybrid
quantum-classical models. This allows QML researchers
to directly harness the rich set of tools already available
in TF and Keras.
The remainder of this document describes TFQ and a
selection of applications demonstrating some of the chal-
lenges TFQ can help tackle. In section II, we introduce
the software architecture of TFQ. We highlight its main
features including batched circuit execution, automated
expectationestimation, estimationofquantumgradients,
hybrid quantum-classical automatic diﬀerentiation, and
rapid model construction, all from within TensorFlow.
We also present a simple “Hello, World" example for bi-
nary quantum data classiﬁcation on a single qubit. By
the end of section II, we expect most readers to have suf-
ﬁcient knowledge to begin development with TFQ. For
readers who are interested in a more theoretical under-
standing of QNNs, we provide in section III an overview
of QNN models and hybrid quantum-classical backprop-
agation. For researchers interested in applying TFQ to
their own projects, we provide various applications in
sections IV and V. In section IV, we describe hybrid
quantum-classicalCNNsforbinaryclassiﬁcationofquan-tum phases, hybrid quantum-classical ML for quantum
control, and MaxCut QAOA. In the advanced applica-
tions section V, we describe meta-learning for quantum
approximate optimization, discuss issues with vanishing
gradients and how we can overcome them by adaptive
layer-wise learning schemes, Hamiltonian learning with
quantum graph networks, quantum mixed state genera-
tion via classical energy-based models, subspace-Search
variational quantum eigensolver for excited states to il-
lustrateanintegrationwithOpenFermion, quantumclas-
siﬁcation of quantum phase transitions, entangling quan-
tum generative adversarial networks, and quantum rein-
forcement learning.
We hope that TFQ enables the machine learning and
quantum computing communities to work together more
closely on important challenges and opportunities in the
near-term and beyond.
II. SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE & BUILDING
BLOCKS
As stated in the introduction, the goal of TFQ is
to bridge the quantum computing and machine learn-
ing communities. Google already has well-established
products for these communities: Cirq, an open source
library for invoking quantum circuits [68], and Tensor-
Flow, an end-to-end open source machine learning plat-
form[67]. However, theemergingcommunityofquantum
machine learning researchers requires the capabilities of
both products. The prospect of combining Cirq and Ten-
sorFlow then naturally arises.
First, we review the capabilities of Cirq and Tensor-
Flow. We confront the challenges that arise when one
attempts to combine both products. These challenges
inform the design goals relevant when building software
speciﬁc to quantum machine learning. We provide an
overview of the architecture of TFQ and describe a par-
ticular abstract pipeline for building a hybrid model for
classiﬁcation of quantum data. Then we illustrate this
pipeline via the exposition of a minimal hybrid model
which makes use of the core features of TFQ. We con-
clude with a description of our performant C++ sim-
ulator for quantum circuits and provide benchmarks of
performance on two complementary classes of dense and
sparse quantum circuits.
A. Cirq
Cirq is an open-source framework for invoking quan-
tum circuits on near term devices [68]. It contains
the basic structures, such as qubits, gates, circuits, and
measurement operators, that are required for specifying
quantum computations. User-speciﬁed quantum compu-
tations can then be executed in simulation or on real
hardware. Cirq also contains substantial machinery that
helpsusersdesigneﬃcientalgorithmsforNISQmachines,