7
Figure 2. The states-as-edges approach to embedding quan-
tum computation in TensorFlow. Blue nodes are input ten-
sors, arrowsaretensorsﬂowingthroughthegraph, andorange
nodes are TF Ops transforming the simulated quantum state.
Note that the above is not the architecture used in TFQ but
rather an alternative which was considered, see Fig. 3 for the
equivalent diagram for the true TFQ architecture.
This architecture may at ﬁrst glance seem like an at-
tractive option as it is a direct formulation of quantum
computation as a dataﬂow graph. However, this ap-
proach is suboptimal for several reasons. First, in this
architecture, the structure of the circuit being run is
static in the computational graph, thus running a diﬀer-
ent circuit would require the graph to be rebuilt. This is
far from ideal for variational quantum algorithms which
learn over many iterations with a slightly modiﬁed quan-
tum circuit at each iteration. A second problem is the
lack of a clear way to embed such a quantum dataﬂow
graph on a real quantum processor: the states would
have to remain held in quantum memory on the quan-
tum device itself, and the high latency between classi-
cal and quantum processors makes sending transforma-
tions one-by-one prohibitive. Lastly, one needs a way
to specify gates and measurements within TF. One may
be tempted to deﬁne these directly; however, Cirq al-
ready has the necessary tools and objects deﬁned which
are most relevant for the near-term quantum computing
era. Duplicating Cirq functionality in TF would lead to
several issues, requiring users to re-learn how to inter-
face with quantum computers in TFQ versus Cirq, and
adding to the maintenance overhead by needing to keep
two separate quantum circuit construction frameworks
up-to-date as new compilation techniques arise. These
considerations motivate our core design principles.
D. TFQ architecture
1. Design Principles and Overview
To avoid the aforementioned technical hurdles and in
order to satisfy the diverse needs of the research commu-
nity, we have arrived at the following four design princi-
ples:
1.Diﬀerentiability . As described in the introduc-
tion, gradient-based methods leveraging autodiﬀer-
entiation have become the leading heuristic for op-
timization of machine learning models. A software
framework for QML must support diﬀerentiation of
quantum circuits so that hybrid quantum-classical
models can participate in backpropagation.
2.Circuit Batching . Learning on quantum data re-
quires re-running parameterized model circuits on
Figure 3. The TensorFlow graph generated to calculate the
expectation value of a parameterized circuit. The symbol
values can come from other TensorFlow ops, such as from
the outputs of a classical neural network. The output can be
passed on to other ops in the graph; here, for illustration, the
output is passed to the absolute value op.
each quantum data point. A QML software frame-
work must be optimized for running large num-
bers of such circuits. Ideally, the semantics should
match established TensorFlow norms for batching
over data.
3.Execution Backend Agnostic . Experimen-
tal quantum computing often involves reconciling
perfectly simulated algorithms with the outputs of
real, noisy devices. Thus, QML software must al-
low users to easily switch between running models
insimulationandrunningmodelsonrealhardware,
such that simulated results and experimental re-
sults can be directly compared.
4.Minimalism . Cirq provides an extensive set of
tools for preparing quantum circuits. TensorFlow
provides a very complete machine learning toolkit
through its hundreds of ops and Keras high-level
API,withamassivecommunityofactiveusers. Ex-
isting functionality in Cirq and TensorFlow should
be used as much as possible. TFQ should serve as a
bridge between the two that does not require users
to re-learn how to interface with quantum comput-
ers or re-learn how to solve problems using machine
learning.
First, we provide a bottom-up overview of TFQ to
provide intuition on how the framework functions at a
fundamental level. In TFQ, circuits and other quantum
computing constructs are tensors, and converting these
tensors into classical information via simulation or exe-
cution on a quantum device is done by ops. These ten-
sorsarecreatedbyconvertingCirqobjectstoTensorFlow
string tensors, using the tfq.convert_to_tensor function.
This takes in a cirq.Circuit orcirq.PauliSum object and
creates a string tensor representation. The cirq.Circuit
objects may be parameterized by SymPy symbols.
These tensors are then converted to classical informa-
tion via state simulation, expectation value calculation,
or sampling. TFQ provides ops for each of these compu-
tations. The following code snippet shows how a simple
parameterized circuit may be created using Cirq, and
its^Zexpectation evaluated at diﬀerent parameter values