8
using the tfq expectation value calculation op. We feed
the output into the tf.math.abs op to show that tfq ops
integrate naively with tf ops.
qubit = cirq . GridQubit (0, 0)
theta = sympy . Symbol (’theta ’)
c = cirq . Circuit ( cirq .X( qubit ) ** theta )
c_tensor = tfq. convert_to_tensor ([c] * 3)
theta_values = tf. constant ([[0] ,[1] ,[2]])
m = cirq .Z( qubit )
paulis = tfq . convert_to_tensor ([m] * 3)
expectation_op = tfq . get_expectation_op ()
output = expectation_op (
c_tensor , [’theta ’], theta_values , paulis )
abs_output = tf. math .abs ( output )
We supply the expectation op with a tensor of parame-
terizedcircuits, alistofsymbolscontainedinthecircuits,
a tensor of values to use for those symbols, and tensor
operators to measure with respect to. Given this, it out-
puts a tensor of expectation values. The graph this code
generates is given by Fig. 3.
The expectation op is capable of running circuits on
a simulated backend, which can be a Cirq simulator or
our native TFQ simulator qsim (described in detail in
section IIF), or on a real device. This is conﬁgured on
instantiation.
The expectation op is fully diﬀerentiable. Given
that there are many ways to calculate the gradient of
a quantum circuit with respect to its input parame-
ters, TFQ allows expectation ops to be conﬁgured with
one of many built-in diﬀerentiation methods using the
tfq.Differentiator interface, such as ﬁnite diﬀerencing,
parameter shift rules, and various stochastic methods.
The tfq.Differentiator interface also allows users to de-
ﬁne their own gradient calculation methods for their spe-
ciﬁc problem if they desire.
The tensor representation of circuits and Paulis along
with the execution ops are all that are required to solve
any problem in QML. However, as a convenience, TFQ
provides an additional op for in-graph circuit construc-
tion. This was found to be convenient when solving prob-
lems where most of the circuit being run is static and
only a small part of it is being changed during train-
ing or inference. This functionality is provided by the
tfq.tfq_append_circuit op. It is expected that all but
the most dedicated users will never touch these low-
level ops, and instead will interface with TFQ using our
tf.keras.layers that provide a simpliﬁed interface.
ThetoolsprovidedbyTFQcaninteractwithbothcore
TensorFlow and, via Cirq, real quantum hardware. The
functionality of all three software products and the inter-
faces between them can be visualized with the help of a
“software-stack" diagram, shown in Fig. 4. Importantly,
these interfaces allow users to write a single TensorFlow
Quantum program which could then easily be run locally
on a workstation, in a highly parallel and distributed set-
ting at the PetaFLOP/s or higher throughput scale [22],
or on real QPU device [76].
In the next section, we describe an example of an
abstract quantum machine learning pipeline for hybrid
TF Keras ModelsTF Layers TF Execution Engine       TPUCirq TFQ OpsTFQ LayersTFQ DifferentiatorsTFQTensorFlowClassical hardwareQuantum hardwareTFQ qsimGPUCPUQPUTF OpsClassical Data: integers/ﬂoats/stringsQuantum Data: Circuits/OperatorsFigure 4. The software stack of TFQ, showing its interactions
with TensorFlow, Cirq, and computational hardware. At the
top of the stack is the data to be processed. Classical data
is natively processed by TensorFlow; TFQ adds the ability to
process quantum data, consisting of both quantum circuits
and quantum operators. The next level down the stack is the
Keras API in TensorFlow. Since a core principle of TFQ is
native integration with core TensorFlow, in particular with
Keras models and optimizers, this level spans the full width
of the stack. Underneath the Keras model abstractions are
our quantum layers and diﬀerentiators, which enable hybrid
quantum-classical automatic diﬀerentiation when connected
with classical TensorFlow layers. Underneath the layers and
diﬀerentiators, we have TensorFlow ops, which instantiate the
dataﬂow graph. Our custom ops control quantum circuit ex-
ecution. The circuits can be run in simulation mode, by in-
voking qsim or Cirq, or eventually will be executed on QPU
hardware.
discriminator model that TFQ was designed to support.
Then we illustrate the TFQ pipeline via a Hello Many-
Worlds example, which involves building the simplest
possible hybrid quantum-classical model for a binary
classiﬁcation task on a single qubit. More detailed in-
formation on the building blocks of TFQ features will be
given in section IIE.
2. The Abstract TFQ Pipeline for a speciﬁc hybrid
discriminator model
Here, we provide a high-level abstract overview of the
computational steps involved in the end-to-end pipeline
for inference and training of a hybrid quantum-classical
discriminative model for quantum data in TFQ.
(1) Prepare Quantum Dataset: In general, this
might come from a given black-box source. However,
as current quantum computers cannot import quantum
data from external sources, the user has to specify quan-
tum circuits which generate the data. Quantum datasets
are prepared using unparameterized cirq.Circuit ob-
jects and are injected into the computational graph using
tfq.convert_to_tensor .
(2) Evaluate Quantum Model: Parameterized
quantum models can be selected from several categories