9
Prepare  Quantum DatasetEvaluate Quantum ModelSample or AverageEvaluate Classical ModelEvaluate Cost Function𝛉
Evaluate Gradients & Update Parameters
Figure 5. Abstract pipeline for inference and training of
a hybrid discriminative model in TFQ. Here, represents
the quantum model parameters and represents the classical
model parameters.
based on knowledge of the quantum data’s structure.
The goal of the model is to perform a quantum compu-
tation in order to extract information hidden in a quan-
tum subspace or subsystem. In the case of discrimina-
tive learning, this information is the hidden label pa-
rameters. To extract a quantum non-local subsystem,
the quantum model disentangles the input data, leaving
the hidden information encoded in classical correlations,
thus making it accessible to local measurements and clas-
sical post-processing. Quantum models are constructed
using cirq.Circuit objects containing SymPy symbols,
and can be attached to quantum data sources using the
tfq.AddCircuit layer.
(3) Sample or Average: Measurement of quantum
states extracts classical information, in the form of sam-
ples from a classical random variable. The distribution
of values from this random variable generally depends on
both the quantum state itself and the measured observ-
able. As many variational algorithms depend on mean
values of measurements, TFQ provides methods for av-
eraging over several runs involving steps (1) and (2).
Sampling or averaging are performed by feeding quan-
tum data and quantum models to the tfq.Sample or
tfq.Expectation layers.
(4) Evaluate Classical Model: Once classical
information has been extracted, it is in a format
amenable to further classical post-processing. As the
extracted information may still be encoded in classi-
cal correlations between measured expectations, clas-
sical deep neural networks can be applied to distill
such correlations. Since TFQ is fully compatible with
core TensorFlow, quantum models can be attached di-
rectly to classical tf.keras.layers.Layer objects such as
tf.keras.layers.Dense .
(5) Evaluate Cost Function: Given the results of
classical post-processing, a cost function is calculated.
This may be based on the accuracy of classiﬁcation if the
quantum data was labeled, or other criteria if the taskis unsupervised. Wrapping the model built in stages (1)
through (4) inside a tf.keras.Model gives the user access
to all the losses in the tf.keras.losses module.
(6) Evaluate Gradients & Update Parameters:
After evaluating the cost function, the free parame-
ters in the pipeline is updated in a direction expected
to decrease the cost. This is most commonly per-
formed via gradient descent. To support gradient de-
scent, TFQ exposes derivatives of quantum operations
to the TensorFlow backpropagation machinery via the
tfq.differentiators.Differentiator interface. This allows
both the quantum and classical models’ parameters to
be optimized against quantum data via hybrid quantum-
classical backpropagation. See section III for details on
the theory.
In the next section, we illustrate this abstract pipeline
by applying it to a speciﬁc example. While simple, the
example is the minimum instance of a hybrid quantum-
classical model operating on quantum data.
3. Hello Many-Worlds: Binary Classiﬁer for Quantum
Data
Binary classiﬁcation is a basic task in machine learn-
ing that can be applied to quantum data as well. As a
minimal example of a hybrid quantum-classical model,
we present here a binary classiﬁer for regions on a sin-
gle qubit. In this task, two random vectors in the X-Z
plane of the Bloch sphere are chosen. Around these two
vectors, we randomly sample two sets of quantum data
points; the task is to learn to distinguish the two sets. An
example quantum dataset of this type is shown in Fig. 6.
The following can all be run in-browser by navigating to
the Colab example notebook at
research/binary_classifier/binary_classifier.ipynb
Additionally, thecodeinthisexamplecanbecopy-pasted
into a python script after installing TFQ.
To solve this problem, we use the pipeline shown in
Fig.5, specializedtoone-qubitbinaryclassiﬁcation. This
specialization is shown in Fig. 7.
The ﬁrst step is to generate the quantum data. We can
use Cirq for this task. The common imports required for
working with TFQ are shown below:
import cirq , random , sympy
import numpy as np
import tensorflow as tf
import tensorflow_quantum as tfq
The function below generates the quantum dataset; la-
bels use a one-hot encoding:
def generate_dataset (
qubit , theta_a , theta_b , num_samples ):
q_data = []
labels = []
blob_size = abs( theta_a - theta_b ) / 5
for _ in range ( num_samples ):
coin = random . random ()
spread_x , spread_y = np. random . uniform (