48
random access memory (QRAM) that stores the classi-
cal dataset in superposition. More particularly, a set of
classical data can be described by the empirical distribu-
tionfPigover all possible input data i. Most quantum
machine learning algorithms require the conversion from
fPiginto a quantum stateP
ipPij ii, i.e. a superposi-
tion of orthogonal basis states j iirepresenting each sin-
gle classical data entry with an amplitude proportional
to the square root of the classical probability Pi. Prepar-
ing such a superposition of an arbitrary set of nstates
takesO(n)operations at best, which ruins the exponen-
tial speedup. Given a suitable ansatz, we may use an
EQ-GAN to learn a state approximately equivalent to
the superposition of data.
To demonstrate a variational QRAM, we consider a
dataset of two peaks sampled from diﬀerent Gaussian
distributions. Exactly encoding the empirical probability
densityfunctionrequiresaverydeepcircuitandmultiple-
control rotations; similarly, preparing a Gaussian dis-
tribution on a device with planar connectivity requires
deep circuits. Hence, we select shallow circuit ansatzes
that generate concatenated exponential functions to ap-
proximate a symmetric peak [169]. Once trained to ap-
proximatetheempiricaldatadistribution, thevariational
QRAM closely reproduces the original dataset (Fig. 33).
(a) Empirical PDF(b) Variational QRAM
Figure 33. Two-peak total dataset (sampled from normal dis-
tributions, N= 120) and variational QRAM of the training
dataset (N= 60). The variational QRAM is obtained by
training an EQ-GAN to generate a state with the shallow
peak ansatz to approximate an exact superposition of states
. The training and test datasets (each N= 60) are both
balanced between the two classes.
AsaproofofprincipleforusingsuchQRAMinaquan-
tum machine learning context, we demonstrate in the ex-
ample code an application of the QRAM to train a quan-
tum neural network [24]. The loss function is computed
either by considering each data entry individually (en-
coded as a quantum circuit) or by considering each class
individually (encoded as a superposition in variational
QRAM). Given the same number of circuit evaluations
to compute gradients, the superposition converges to a
better accuracy at the end of training despite using an
approximate distribution.H. Reinforcement Learning with Parameterized
Quantum Circuits
1. Background
Reinforcement learning (RL) [170] is one of the three
main paradigms of machine learning. It pertains to a
learning setting where an agent interacts with an en-
vironment as to solve a sequential decision task set by
this environment, e.g., playing Atari games [171] or nav-
igating cities without a map [172]. This interaction is
commonly divided into episodes (s0;a0;r0;s1;a1;r1;:::)
of states, actions and rewards exchanged between agent
and environment. For each state sthe agent perceives, it
performs an action asampled from its policy (ajs), i.e.,
a probability distribution over actions given states. The
environment then rewards the agent’s action with a real-
valued reward rand updates the state of the agent. This
interaction repeats cyclically until episode termination.
The goal of the agent here is to optimize its policy (ajs)
as to maximize its expected rewards in an episode, and
hence solve the task at hand. More precisely, the agent’s
ﬁgure of merit is deﬁned by a so-called value function
V(s0) =E"HX
t=0
trt#
(43)
whereHis the horizon (or length) of an episode, and

is a discount factor in [0;1]that adjusts the relative
value of immediate versus long-term rewards.
Traditionally, RL algorithms belong to two families:
•Policy-based algorithms, where an agent’s policy is de-
ﬁned by a parametrized model (ajs)and is updated
via steepest ascent on its resulting value function.
•Value-based algorithms, where a parametrized model
V(s)is used to approximate the optimal value func-
tion, i.e., associated to an optimal policy. The agent
interacts with the environment with a policy that gen-
erally depends on V(s)and its experienced rewards
are used to improve the quality of the approximation.
When facing environments with large (or continuous)
state/action spaces, DNNs recently became the standard
models used in both policy-based and value-based ap-
proaches. Deep RL has achieved a number of unprece-
dented achievements, such as superhuman performance
in Go [173], StarCraft II [174] and Dota 2 [175]. More re-
cently, several proposals have been made to enhance deep
RL agents with quantum analogues of DNNs (QNNs,
or PQCs), both in policy-based [176] and value-based
RL [177–180]. These works essentially described how to
adapt deep RL algorithms to work with PQCs as either
policiesorvalue-functionapproximators, andtestedtheir
performance on benchmarking environments [181]. As
pointed out in [176, 179], certain design choices of PQCs
can lead to signiﬁcant gaps in learning performance. The