4
a given model in a scalable fashion is needed in order to
make predictions in the training or test phase.
Generalization power : the cost function for a given
modelshouldyieldalandscapewheretypicallyinitialized
and trained networks ﬁnd approximate solutions which
generalize well to unseen data.
In principle, any or all combinations of these at-
tributes could be susceptible to possible improvements
by quantum computation. There are many ways to com-
bine classical and quantum computations. One well-
known method is to use classical computers as outer-
loop optimizers for QNNs. When training a QNN with
a classical optimizer in a quantum-classical loop, the
overall algorithm is sometimes referred to as a Varia-
tional Quantum-Classical Algorithm . Some recently pro-
posed architectures of QNN-based variational quantum-
classical algorithms include Variational Quantum Eigen-
solvers (VQEs) [29, 48], Quantum Approximate Opti-
mization Algorithms (QAOAs) [12, 28, 49, 50], Quan-
tum Neural Networks (QNNs) for classiﬁcation [51, 52],
Quantum Convolutional Neural Networks (QCNN) [53],
and Quantum Generative Models [54]. Generally, the
goal is to optimize over a parameterized class of compu-
tations to either generate a certain low energy wavefunc-
tion (VQE/QAOA), learn to extract non-local informa-
tion (QNN classiﬁers), or learn how to generate a quan-
tum distribution from data (generative models).
It is important to note that in the standard model ar-
chitecture for these applications, the representation typ-
ically resides entirely on the quantum processor, with
classical heuristics participating only as optimizers for
the tunable parameters of the quantum model. One of
major obstacles in training of such quantum models is
known as barren plateaus [52], which generally arises
when a network architecture is lacking any structure and
it is randomly initialized. This unusual ﬂat energy land-
scape of quantum models could seriously hinder the per-
formance of both gradient-based and gradient-free opti-
mization techniques [55]. We discuss various strategies
for overcoming this issue in section VB.
While the use of classical processors as outer-loop op-
timizers for quantum neural networks is promising, the
reality is that near-term quantum devices are still fairly
noisy, thus limiting the depth of quantum circuit achiev-
able with acceptable ﬁdelity. This motivates allowing as
much of the model as possible to reside on classical hard-
ware. Several applications of quantum computation have
venturedbeyondthescopeoftypicalvariationalquantum
algorithms to explore this combination. Instead of train-
ing a purely quantum model via a classical optimizer,
one then considers scenarios where the model itself is a
hybrid between quantum computational building blocks
and classical computational building blocks [56–59] and
is trained typically via gradient-based methods. Such
scenarios leverage a new form of automatic diﬀerentia-
tion that allows the backwards propagation of gradients
in between parameterized quantum and classical compu-
tations. The theory of such hybrid backpropagation willbe covered in section IIIC.
In summary, a hybrid quantum-classical model is a
learning heuristic in which both the classical and quan-
tum processors contribute to the indicators of learning
performance deﬁned above.
C. Quantum Data
Although it is not yet proven that heuristic QML can
provide a speedup on practical classical ML applications,
there is growing evidence that hybrid quantum-classical
machine learning applications on “ quantum data ” can
provide a quantum advantage over classical-only machine
learning for reasons described below. These results mo-
tivate the development of software frameworks that can
combine coherent access to quantum data with the power
of machine learning.
Abstractly, any data emerging from an underlying
quantum mechanical process can be considered quan-
tum data. This can be the classical data resulting from
quantum mechanical experiments [22], or data which is
directly generated by a quantum device and then fed
into an algorithm as input [60]. A quantum or hybrid
quantum-classical model will be at least partially repre-
sentedbyaquantumdevice,andthereforehavetheinher-
ent capacity to capture the characteristics of a quantum
mechanical process. Concretely, we list practical exam-
ples of classes of quantum data, which can be routinely
generated or simulated on existing quantum devices or
processors:
Quantum simulations : Thesecanincludeoutputstates
of quantum chemistry simulations used to extract in-
formation about chemical structures and chemical reac-
tions [61]. Potential applications include material sci-
ence, computational chemistry, computational biology,
and drug discovery. Another example is data from quan-
tum many-body systems and quantum critical systems in
condensed matter physics, which could be used to model
and design exotic states of matter which exhibit many-
body quantum eﬀects.
Quantum communication networks : Machine learn-
ing in this class of systems will be related to distilling
small-scale quantum data; e.g., to discriminate among
non-orthogonal quantum states [43, 62], with applica-
tion to design and construction of quantum error cor-
recting codes for quantum repeaters, quantum receivers,
and puriﬁcation units, devices which are critical for the
construction of a quantum internet [63].
Quantum metrology : Quantum-enhanced high preci-
sion measurements such as quantum sensing and quan-
tum imaging are inherently done on probes that are
small-scale quantum devices and could be designed or
improved by variational quantum models [64].
Quantum control : Variationally learning hybrid
quantum-classical algorithms can lead to new optimal
open or closed-loop control [65], calibration, and error
mitigation, correction, and veriﬁcation strategies [66] for