14
Figure 8. Visualization of the qsim fusing algorithm. In this
example, a set of single and two-qubit gates are fused into
three or four-qubit gates, increasing the speed of subsequent
circuit simulation. qsim supports gate fusions for larger num-
bers of qubits (up to 6 qubits at a time).
we fuse each q-qubit gate ( q2) with smaller or same
size neighbors in time direction that act on the same set
of qubits. Second, we greedily (in increasing time order)
combine small gates that are neighbors in space and time
to construct the largest gates possible (up to Fqubits).
TypicallyF= 4is optimal for many threads and F= 2
orF= 3is optimal for one or two threads.
3. Hardware-Acceleration
With the given quantum circuit fused into the mini-
mal number of up to F-qubit gates, we need simulators
optimized for applying up to 2F2Fmatrices to state
vectors. TFQ will adapt to the user’s available hard-
ware. For CPU based simulations, SSE2 instruction set
[82] and AVX2 + AVX512 instruction sets [83] will be
detected and used to increase performance. If a compat-
ible CUDA GPU is detected TFQ will be able to switch
to GPU based simulation as well. The next section illus-
trates this power with benchmarks comparing the per-
formance of TFQ to the performance of parallelized Cirq
runninginsimulationmode. Inthefuture, wehopetoex-
pand the range of custom simulation hardware supported
to include TPU integration.
4. Benchmarks
Here, we demonstrate the performance of TFQ, backed
by qsim, relative to Cirq on two benchmark simula-
tion tasks. As detailed above, the performance diﬀer-
ence is due to circuit pre-processing via gate fusion com-
bined with performant C++ simulators. The bench-
marks were performed on a desktop equipped with an In-
tel(R)Xeon(R)Gold6154CPU(18coresand36threads)
and an NVidia V100 GPU.
The ﬁrst benchmark task is simulation of 500
random (early variant of beyond-classical/supremacy-
style) circuits batched 50 at a time. These
15 20 25 30
Number of qubits12345log10(Simulation time) (s)Simulator
TFQ qsim - GPU
TFQ qsim - CPU
Cirq + Multiprocessing
Circuit Type
Dense
SparseFigure 9. Performance of TFQ and Cirq on simulation tasks.
The plots show the base 10 logarithm of the total time to
solution (in seconds) versus the number of qubits simulated.
Simulation of 500 random circuits, taken in batches of 50.
Circuits were of depth 40. In the dense case, we see that
TFQ + qsim on CPU is around 10x faster than Cirq. With
the GPU this gap grows to approximately 50x. In the case of
sparse circuits, qsim gate fusion makes this speed diﬀerence
even more pronounced reaching well over 100x performance
diﬀerence on both CPU and GPU.
circuits were generated using the Cirq function
cirq.generate_boixo_2018_supremacy_circuits_v2 . These
circuits are only tractable for benchmarking due to the
small numbers of qubits involved here. These circuits
involve dense (subject to a constraint [84]) interleaved
two-qubit gates to generate entanglement as quickly as
possible. In summary, at the largest benchmarked prob-
lem size of 30 qubits, qsim achieves an approximately
10-fold improvement in simulation time over Cirq. The
performance curves are shown in Fig. 9.
When the simulated circuits have more sparse struc-
ture, the Fusion algorithm allows us to achieve a larger
performance boost by reducing the number of gates that
ultimately need to be simulated. The circuits for this
task are a factorized version of the supremacy-style cir-
cuits which generate entanglement only on small subsets
of the qubits. In summary, for these circuits, we ﬁnd
a roughly 100 times improvement in simulation time in
TFQ versus Cirq. The performance curves are shown in
Fig. 9.
Thus we see that in addition to our core functionality
of implementing native TensorFlow gradients for quan-
tum circuits, TFQ also provides a signiﬁcant boost in
performance over Cirq when running in simulation mode.
Additionally, as noted before, this performance boost is
despite the additional overhead of serialization between
the TensorFlow frontend and qsim proper.