12
symbol_values = [[0.5]] ,
operators = q_measure )
In Fig. 3, we illustrate the dataﬂow graph which backs
theexpectationlayer, whentheparametervaluesaresup-
pliedbyaclassicalneuralnetwork. Theexpectationlayer
is capable of using either a simulator or a real device for
execution, and this choice is simply speciﬁed at run time.
While Cirq simulators may be used for the backend, TFQ
provides its own native TensorFlow simulator written in
performant C++. A description of our quantum circuit
simulation code is given in section IIF.
Having converted the output of a quantum model into
classical information, the results can be fed into subse-
quent computations. In particular, they can be fed into
functions that produce a single number, allowing us to
deﬁne loss functions over quantum models in the same
way we do for classical models.
4. Diﬀerentiating Quantum Circuits
We have taken the ﬁrst steps towards implementation
of quantum machine learning, having deﬁned quantum
models over quantum data and loss functions over those
models. As described in both the introduction and our
ﬁrst guiding principle, diﬀerentiability is the critical ma-
chinery needed to allow training of these models. As de-
scribed in section IIB, the architecture of TensorFlow is
optimized around backpropagation of errors for eﬃcient
updates of model parameters; one of the core contribu-
tions of TFQ is integration with TensorFlow’s backprop-
agation mechanism. TFQ implements this functionality
with our diﬀerentiators module. The theory of quan-
tumcircuitdiﬀerentiationwillbecoveredinsectionIIIC;
here, we overview the software that implements the the-
ory.
Since there are many ways to calculate gra-
dients of quantum circuits, TFQ provides the
tfq.differentiators.Differentiator interface. Our
Expectation and SampledExpectation layers rely on
classes inheriting from this interface to specify how
TensorFlow should compute their gradients. While
advanced users can implement their own custom diﬀer-
entiators by inheriting from the interface, TFQ comes
with several built-in options, two of which we highlight
here. These two methods are instances of the two main
categories of quantum circuit diﬀerentiators: the ﬁnite
diﬀerence methods and the parameter shift methods.
The ﬁrst class of quantum circuit diﬀerentiators is the
ﬁnite diﬀerence methods. This class samples the primary
quantum circuit for at least two diﬀerent parameter set-
tings, then combines them to estimate the derivative.
The ForwardDifference diﬀerentiator provides most ba-
sic version of this. For each parameter in the circuit, the
circuit is sampled at the current setting of the parame-
ter. Then, each parameter is perturbed separately and
the circuit resampled.For the 2-local circuits implementable on near-term
hardware, methods more sophisticated than ﬁnite diﬀer-
ences are possible. These methods involve running an
ancillary quantum circuit, from which the gradient of the
primary circuit with respect to some parameter can be
directly measured. One speciﬁc method is gate decompo-
sition and parameter shifting [79], implemented in TFQ
as the ParameterShift diﬀerentiator. For in-depth discus-
sion of the theory, see section IIIC2.
The diﬀerentiation rule used by our layers is speciﬁed
through an optional keyword argument. Below, we show
the expectation layer being called with our parameter
shift rule:
diff = tfq . differentiators . ParameterShift ()
expectation = tfq . layers . Expectation (
differentiator = diff )
For further discussion of the trade-oﬀs when choosing
between diﬀerentiators, see the gradients tutorial on our
GitHub website:
docs/tutorials/gradients.ipynb
5. Simpliﬁed Layers
Some workﬂows do not require control as sophisticated
as our Expectation ,Sample, and SampledExpectation lay-
ers allow. For these workﬂows we provide the PQCand
ControlledPQC layers. Both of these layers allow parame-
terized circuits to be updated by hybrid backpropagation
without the user needing to provide the list of symbols
associated with the circuit. The PQClayer provides au-
tomated Keras management of the variables in a param-
eterized circuit:
q = cirq . GridQubit (0, 0)
(a, b) = sympy . symbols ("a b")
circuit = cirq . Circuit (
cirq .Rz(a)(q), cirq .Rx(b)(q))
outputs = tfq . layers . PQC ( circuit , cirq .Z(q))
quantum_data = tfq . convert_to_tensor ([
cirq . Circuit () , cirq . Circuit ( cirq .X(q))])
res = outputs ( quantum_data )
When the variables in a parameterized circuit will be
controlled completely by other user-speciﬁed machinery,
for example by a classical neural network, then the user
can call our ControlledPQC layer:
outputs = tfq . layers . ControlledPQC (
circuit , cirq .Z( bit ))
model_params = tf. convert_to_tensor (
[[0.5 , 0.5] , [0.25 , 0.75]])
res = outputs ([ quantum_data , model_params ])
Notice that the call is similar to that for PQC, except
that we provide parameter values for the symbols in the
circuit. These two layers are used extensively in the ap-
plications highlighted in the following sections.