20
Figure 12. High-level depiction of a quantum-classical neural
network. Blue blocks represent Deep Neural Network (DNN)
function blocks and orange boxes represent Quantum Neural
Network (QNN) function blocks. Arrows represent the ﬂow
of information during the feedforward (inference) phase. For
an example of the interface between quantum and classical
neural network blocks, see Fig. 13.
using twice the memory. See Figure 11 for a depiction
of the adjoint-backpropagation-based gradient computa-
tion described above. This is to be contrasted with, for
example, ﬁnite-diﬀerence gradients, which would require
2Mforward passes for Mparameters. Thus, adjoint dif-
ferentiation is a useful method for rapid prototyping of
QNN’susingclassicalsimulatorsofquantumcircuitssuch
as qsim in TFQ.
D. Hybrid Quantum-Classical Computational
Graphs
Now that we have reviewed various ways of obtaining
gradients of expectation values, let us consider how to go
beyond basic variational quantum algorithms and con-
sider fully hybrid quantum-classical neural networks. As
we will see, our general framework of gradients of cost
Hamiltonians will carry over.
1. Hybrid Quantum-Classical Neural Networks
Now, we are ready to formally introduce the no-
tion of Hybrid Quantum-Classical Neural Networks
(HQCNN’s). HQCNN’s are meta-networks comprised
of quantum and classical neural network-based function
blocks composed with one another in the topology of a
directed graph. We can consider this a rendition of a hy-
brid quantum-classical computational graph where the
inner workings (variables, component functions) of vari-
ous functions are abstracted into boxes (see Fig. 12 for a
depiction of such a graph). The edges then simply repre-
sent the ﬂow of classical information through the meta-
network of quantum and classical functions. The key will
be to construct parameterized (diﬀerentiable) functions
f:RM!RNfrom expectation values of parameterized
quantum circuits, then creating a meta-graph of quan-
tumandclassicalcomputationalnodesfromtheseblocks.Let us ﬁrst describe how to create these functions from
expectation values of QNN’s.
As we saw in equations (6) and (7), we get a diﬀer-
entiable cost function f:RM7!Rfrom taking the ex-
pectation value of a single Hamiltonian at the end of the
parameterized circuit, f() =h^Hi. As we saw in equa-
tions (7) and (8), to compute this expectation value, as
the readout Hamiltonian is often decomposed into a lin-
ear combination of operators ^H=^h(see (7)), then
the function is itself a linear combination of expectation
values of multiple terms (see (8)), h^Hi=hwhere
hh^hi2RNis a vector of expectation values. Thus,
before the scalar value of the cost function is evaluated,
QNN’s naturally are evaluated as a vector of expectation
values,h.
Hence, if we would like the QNN to become more like
a classical neural network block, i.e. mapping vectors to
vectorsf:RM!RN, we can obtain a vector-valued
diﬀerentiable function from the QNN by considering it
as a function of the parameters which outputs a vector
of expectation values of diﬀerent operators,
f:7!h (17)
where
(h)k=h^hkih	0j^Uy()^hk^U()j	0i:(18)
WerepresentsuchaQNN-basedfunctioninFig.13. Note
that, in general, each of these ^hk’s could be comprised of
multiple terms themselves,
^hk=NkX
t=1
t^mt (19)
hence, one can perform Quantum Expectation Estima-
tion to estimate the expectation of each term as h^hki=P
t
th^mti.
Note that, in some cases, instead of the expectation
values of the set of operators f^hkgM
k=1, one may instead
want to relay the histogram of measurement results ob-
tained from multiple measurements of the eigenvalues
of each of these observables. This case can also be
phrased as a vector of expectation values, as we will
now show. First, note that the histogram of the mea-
surement results of some ^hkwith eigendecomposition
^hk=Prk
j=1jkjjkihjkjcan be considered as a vec-
tor of expectation values where the observables are the
eigenstate projectors jjkihjkj. Instead of obtaining a
single real number from the expectation value of ^hk, we
can obtain a vector hk2Rrk, whererk=rank(^hk)and
the components are given by (hk)jhjjkihjkji. We
are then eﬀectively considering the categorical (empiri-
cal) distribution as our vector.
Now, if we consider measuring the eigenvalues of mul-
tiple observables f^hkgM
k=1and collecting the measure-
ment result histograms, we get a 2-dimensional tensor
(h)jk=hjjkihjkji. Without loss of generality, we