46
the critical point, and then see how well the classiﬁer
generalizes to states outside of the seen data.
2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4
g0.75
0.50
0.25
0.000.250.500.75Output Layer
Figure 31. Quantum classiﬁer output versus order value g
of the two-dimensional TFIM. The dashed line indicates the
critical point g3:04.
G. Quantum Generative Adversarial Networks
1. Background
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [164] have
met widespread success in classical machine learning.
While classical data can be seen as a special case of data
corresponding to a probabilistic mixture, we consider the
task of adversarially learning most general form of data:
quantum states. A generator seeks to create a circuit
that reproduces a given quantum state, while a discrim-
inatorcircuit is presented either with the true data or
with fake data from the generator. In this section, we
presentviableapplicationsofanewquantumGANarchi-
tecture for both purely quantum datasets and quantum
states built from classical datasets.
Recent work on a quantum GAN (QuGAN) [54, 165]
has proposed a direct analogy of the classical GAN ar-
chitecture in designing the generator and discriminator
circuits. However, the QuGAN does not always converge
butratherincertaincasesoscillatesbetweenaﬁnitesetof
states due to mode collapse, and in general suﬀers from a
non-unique Nash equilibrium [76]. This motivates a new
entangling quantum GAN (EQ-GAN) with a uniquely
quantum twist: rather than providing the discriminator
witheithertrueorfake data, we allow the discriminator
to entangle bothtrue and fake data. The convergence of
the EQ-GAN to the global optimal Nash equilibrium is
theoretically veriﬁed and numerical experiments conﬁrmthat the EQ-GAN converges on problem instances that
the QuGAN failed on [76].
A pervasive issue in near-term quantum computing is
noise: when performing an entangling operation, the re-
quired two-qubit gate introduces phase errors that are
diﬃculttofullycalibrateagainstduetoatime-dependent
noise model. However, such operations are required to
measure the overlap between two quantum states, in-
cluding the assessment of how close the fake data is to
the true data. This issue provides further motivation for
the use of adversarial generative learning. Without ad-
versarial learning, one may freeze the discriminator to
perform an exact ﬁdelity measurement between the true
and fake data. While this would replicate the original
state in the absence of noise, gate errors in the imple-
mentation of the discriminator will cause convergence to
the incorrect optimum. As seen in the ﬁrst example be-
low, the adversarial approach of the EQ-GAN is more
robust to such errors than the simpler supervised learn-
ing approach. Since training quantum machine learning
models can require extensive time to compute gradients
on current quantum hardware, resilience to gate errors
drifting during the training process is especially valuable
in the noisy intermediate-scale quantum era of quantum
computing.
Most proposals for quantum machine learning algo-
rithms on classical data require a quantum random
access memory (QRAM) [166]. A QRAM typically
stores the classical dataset in a superposition of quan-
tum states, allowing a quantum device to eﬃciently ac-
cessthedataset. However, aQRAMisdiﬃculttoachieve
experimentally, posing a further roadblock for near-term
quantum machine learning applications. We provide an
example application of the EQ-GAN to create an approx-
imate QRAM by learning a shallow quantum circuit that
generates a superposition of classical data. In particular,
the QRAM is applied to quantum neural networks [24],
improving the performance of a quantum neural network
for a classiﬁcation task.
Target problems :
1. Suppress noise in a generative learning task for
quantum states
2. Prepare an approximate quantum memory for
faster training of a quantum neural network
Required TFQ functionalities :
1. Use of a quantum hardware backend
2. Shared variables between quantum neural network
layers
3. Training on a noisy quantum circuit
2. Noise Suppression with Adversarial Learning
To run this example, see the Colab notebook at:
research/eq_gan/noise_suppression.ipynb