23
We can think of this as a supervised classiﬁcation task:
our training data will consist of a variety of correctly
and incorrectly prepared cluster states, each paired with
their label. This classiﬁcation task can be generalized
to condensed matter physics and beyond, for example to
the classiﬁcation of phases near quantum critical points,
where the degree of entanglement is high.
Since our simple cluster states are translationally in-
variant, we can extend the spatial parameter-tying of
convolutional neural networks to quantum neural net-
works, using recent work by Cong, et al. [53], which
introduced a Quantum Convolutional Neural Network
(QCNN) architecture. QCNNs are essentially a quan-
tumcircuitversionofaMERA(MultiscaleEntanglement
RenormalizationAnsatz)network[111]. MERAhasbeen
extensively studied in condensed matter physics. It is a
hierarchical representation of highly entangled wavefunc-
tions. The intuition is that as we go higher in the net-
work, the wavefunction’s entanglement gets renormalized
(coarse grained) and simultaneously a compressed repre-
sentation of the wavefunction is formed. This is akin to
the compression eﬀects encountered in deep neural net-
works [112].
HereweextendtheQCNNarchitecturetoincludeclas-
sical neural network postprocessing, yielding a Hybrid
Quantum Convolutional Neural Network (HQCNN). We
perform several low-depth quantum operations in order
to begin to extract hidden parameter information from a
wavefunction, then pass the resulting statistical informa-
tion to a classical neural network for further processing.
Speciﬁcally, wewillapplyonelayerofthehierarchyofthe
QCNN. This allows us to partially disentangle the input
state and obtain statistics about values of multi-local ob-
servables. In this strategy, we deviate from the original
construction of Cong et al. [53]. Indeed, we are more in
the spirit of classical convolutional networks, where there
are several families of ﬁlters, or feature maps , applied in
a translationally-invariant fashion. Here, we apply a sin-
gle QCNN layer followed by several feature maps. The
outputs of these feature maps can then be fed into clas-
sical convolutional network layers, or in this particular
simpliﬁed example directly to fully-connected layers.
Target problems :
1. Learntoextractclassicalinformationhiddenincor-
relations of a quantum system
2. Utilize shallow quantum circuits via hybridization
with classical neural networks to extract informa-
tion
Required TFQ functionalities :
1. Hybrid quantum-classical network models
2. Batch quantum circuit simulator
3. Quantum expectation based backpropagation
4. Fast classical gradient-based optimizer
Figure 14. The quantum portion of our classiﬁers, shown on
4 qubits. The combination of quantum convolution (blue)
and quantum pooling (orange) reduce the system size from 4
qubits to 2 qubits.
2. Implementations
As discussed in section IID2, the ﬁrst step in the QML
pipeline is the preparation of quantum data. In this ex-
ample, our quantum dataset is a collection of correctly
and incorrectly prepared cluster states on 8 qubits, and
the task is to classify theses states. The dataset prepara-
tion proceeds in two stages; in the ﬁrst stage, we generate
a correctly prepared cluster state:
def cluster_state_circuit ( bits ):
circuit = cirq . Circuit ()
circuit . append ( cirq .H. on_each ( bits ))
for this_bit , next_bit in zip (
bits , bits [1:] + [ bits [0]]) :
circuit . append (
cirq .CZ( this_bit , next_bit ))
return circuit
Errors in cluster state preparation will be simulated by
applyingRx()gatesthatrotateaqubitabouttheX-axis
of the Bloch sphere by some amount 02. These
excitations will be labeled 1 if the rotation is larger than
some threshold, and -1 otherwise. Since the correctly
prepared cluster state is always the same, we can think
of it as the initial state in the pipeline and append the
excitation circuits corresponding to various error states:
cluster_state_bits = cirq . GridQubit . rect (1, 8)
excitation_input = tf. keras . Input (
shape =() , dtype =tf. dtypes . string )
cluster_state = tfq. layers . AddCircuit ()(
excitation_input , prepend =
cluster_state_circuit ( cluster_state_bits ))
Note how excitation_input is a standard Keras data in-
gester. The datatype of the input is stringto account
for our circuit serialization mechanics described in sec-
tion IIE1.
Having prepared our dataset, we begin construction of
our model. The quantum portion of all the models we
consider in this section will be made of the same oper-
ations:quantum convolution andquantum pooling . A
visualization of these operations on 4 qubits is shown in
Fig. 14. Quantum convolution layers are enacted by ap-
plying a 2 qubit unitary U(~)with a stride of 1. In anal-