22
Figure 13. Example of inference and hybrid backpropaga-
tion at the interface of a quantum and classical part of a hy-
brid computational graph. Here we have classical deep neural
networks (DNN) both preceding and postceding the quan-
tum neural network (QNN). In this example, the preceding
DNN outputs a set of parameters which are used as then
used by the QNN as parameters for inference. The QNN
outputs a vector of expectation values (estimated through
several runs) whose components are (h)k=h^hki. This
vector is then fed as input to another (post-ceding) DNN,
and the loss function Lis computed from this output. For
backpropagation through this hybrid graph, one ﬁrst back-
propagates the gradient of the loss through the post-ceding
DNN to obtain gk=@L=@hk. Then, one takes the gradi-
ent of the following functional of the output of the QNN:
f=gh=P
kgkh;k=P
kgkh^hkiwith respect to the
QNN parameters (which can be achieved with any of the
methods for taking gradients of QNN’s described in previous
subsections of this section). This completes the backprop-
agation of gradients of the loss function through the QNN,
the preceding DNN can use the now computed @L=@to fur-
therbackpropagategradientstoprecedingnodesofthehybrid
computational graph.
Thus, by taking gradients of the expectation value of
thebackpropagatedeﬀectiveHamiltonian, wecangetthe
gradients of the loss function with respect to QNN pa-
rameters, thereby successfully backpropagating gradients
through the QNN. Further backpropagation through the
preceding function block fprecan be done using standard
classical backpropagation by using this evaluated QNN
gradient.
Note that for a given value of g, the eﬀective back-
propagated Hamiltonian is simply a ﬁxed Hamiltonian
operator, as such, taking gradients of the expectation
of a single multi-term operator can be achieved by any
choice in a multitude of the methods for taking gradients
of QNN’s described earlier in this section.
Backpropagation through parameterized quantum cir-
cuits is enabled by our Differentiator interface.
We oﬀer both ﬁnite diﬀerence, regular parameter shift,
and stochastic parameter shift gradients, while the gen-
eral interface allows users to deﬁne custom gradient
methods.IV. BASIC QUANTUM APPLICATIONS
The following examples show how one may use the var-
ious features of TFQ to reproduce and extend existing
results in second generation quantum machine learning.
EachapplicationhasanassociatedColabnotebookwhich
can be run in-browser to reproduce any results shown.
Here, we use snippets of code from those example note-
books for illustration; please see the example notebooks
for full code details.
A. Hybrid Quantum-Classical Convolutional
Neural Network Classiﬁer
To run this example in the browser through Colab,
follow the link:
docs/tutorials/qcnn.ipynb
1. Background
Supervised classiﬁcation is a canonical task in classical
machine learning. Similarly, it is also one of the most
well-studied applications for QNNs [15, 31, 43, 106, 107].
As such, it is a natural starting point for our exploration
of applications for quantum machine learning. Discrimi-
native machine learning with hierarchical models can be
understood as a form of compression to isolate the infor-
mation containing the label [108]. In the case of quantum
data, the hidden classical parameter (real scalar in the
case of regression, discrete label in the case of classiﬁca-
tion) can be embedded in a non-local subsystem or sub-
space of the quantum system. One then has to perform
some disentangling quantum transformation to extract
information from this non-local subspace.
To choose an architecture for a neural network model,
one can draw inspiration from the symmetries in the
training data. For example, in computer vision, one of-
ten needs to detect corners and edges regardless of their
position in an image; we thus postulate that a neural net-
work to detect these features should be invariant under
translations. In classical deep learning, an example of
such translationally-invariant neural networks are convo-
lutional neural networks . These networks tie parameters
across space, learning a shared set of ﬁlters which are
applied equally to all portions of the data.
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is no
strong indication that we should expect a quantum ad-
vantagefortheclassiﬁcationofclassicaldatausingQNNs
in the near term. For this reason, we focus on classifying
quantum data as deﬁned in section IC. There are many
kindsofquantumdatawithtranslationalsymmetry. One
example of such quantum data are cluster states. These
states are important because they are the initial states
for measurement-based quantum computation [109, 110].
In this example we will tackle the problem of detect-
ing errors in the preparation of a simple cluster state.