THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  19  hybrid  model  could  better  capture  a variety  of learning  challenges,  such  as the game  
fizz-buzz,  which  defied  a multlayer  perceptron . A team  of people  including  Smolensky  
and Schmidhuber  have  produced  better  results  on a mathematics  problem  set by 
combining  BERT  with  a tensor  products  (Smolensky  et al., 2016) , a formal  system  for 
representing  symbolic  variables  and their  bindings  (Schlag  et al., 2019) , creating  a new  
system  called  TP-Transformer . 
Foundational  work  on neurosymbolic  models  is (D’Avila  Garcez,  Lamb,  & Gabbay,  
2009)  which  examined  the mappings  between  symbolic  systems  and neural  networks,  
and showed  important  limits  on the kinds  of knowledge  that could  be represented  in 
conventional  neural  networks,  and demonstrated  the value  in constructing  mixed  
systems  (symbols  and neural  networks)  in terms  of repre sentational  and inferential  
capacity.  To a first approximation,  conventional  neural  networks  can be thought  of as 
engines  for propositional  logic,  and lack good  ways  of representing  quantified  
statements,  as one would  find in predicate  calculus  with  quantifiers  such  as every  and 
some ). Logic  tensor  networks  (Serafini  & Garcez,  2016)  aim to implement  a formal  logic  
in deep  tensor  neural  networks.   
Statistical  relational  learning  (Raedt  et al., 2016)  represents  another  interesting  
approachs  that aims  to combine  logical  abstraction  and relations  with  probability  and 
statistics , as does  recent  work  by Vergari  et al. on probabilistic  circuits  (Vergari,  Di 
Mauro,  & Van den Broek,  2019) . Domingo's  Markov  Logic  Networks  seeks  to combine  
symbol -manipulation  with  the strengths  of machine  learning  (Richardson  & Domingos,  
2006) . Uber's  Pyro  (Bingham  et al., 2019)  
Arabshahi  et al., (Arabshahi,  Lu, Singh,  & Anandkumar,  2019)  show  how  a tree-LSTM  
can be augmented  by an external  memory  that serves  as a stack.  Fawzi  et al. (Fawzi,  
Malinowski,  Fawzi,  & Fawzi,  2019)  recently  presented  a hybrid  system  for searching  
proofs  of polynomial  inequalities.  Minervini  et al (Minervini,  Bošnjak,  Rocktäschel,  
Riedel,  & Grefenstette,  2019)  recently  presented  a hybrid  neurosymbolic  reasoning  
system  called  a Greedy  Neural  Theorem  Prover  (GNTP)  that worked  with  large -scale  
databases;  Gupta  et al (Gupta,  Lin, Roth,  Sing h, & Gardner,  2019)  also have  made  
progress  in reasoning.  The Allen  Institute  for AI’s ARISTO  is a complex,  multi -part 
hybrid  that has significantly  outperformed  other  systems  on eighth -grade  science  exams  
(Clark  et al., 2019) . Battaglia  has produced  a number  of interesting  papers  on physical  
reasoning  with  systems  that integrate  symbolic  graphs  and deep  learning  (e.g.,  
Cranmer,  Xu, Battaglia,  & Ho, 2019)  
And  all these  are just a few examples  of a quickly  growing  field.  It is too early  to 
handicap  winners,  but there  are plenty  of first steps  towards  building  architectures  that 
combine  the strengths  of the symbolic  approaches  with  insights  from  machine  learning,  
in order to develop  better  techniques  for extracting  and generalizing  abstract  
knowledge  from  large,  often  noisy  data  sets.