THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  51  synthetic  cognition  need  to be. Deep  learning  has—remarkably —largely  achieved  what  
it has achieved  without  such  conventional  computational  niceties,  and without  
anything  that looks  like explicit  modules  for physical  reasoning,  psychological  
reasoning  and so forth.  
But it is a fallacy  to suppose  that what  worked  reasonably  well  for domains  such as 
speech  recognition  and object  labeling—which  largely  revolve  around  classification —
will necessarily  work  reliably  for language  understanding  and higher -level  reasoning.  
A number  of language  benchmarks  have  been  beaten,  to be sure,  but something  
profo und is still missing.  Current  deep  learning  systems  can learn  endless  correlations  
between  arbitrary  bits of information,  but still go no further;  they  fail to represent  the 
richness  of the world,  and lack even  any understanding  that an external  world  exists at 
all.  
That’s  not where  we want  to be. 
Towards  the end of Rebooting  AI,  Ernest  Davis  and I urged  the following  
In short,  our recipe  for achieving  common  sense,  and ultimately  general  intelligence,  is 
this:  Start  by developing  systems  that can represe nt the core frameworks  of human  
knowledge:  time,  space,  causality,  basic  knowledge  of physical  objects  and their  
interactions,  basic  knowledge  of humans  and their  interactions.  Embed  these  in an 
architecture  that can be freely  extended  to every  kind of knowledge,  keeping  always  in 
mind  the central  tenets  of abstraction,  compositionality,  and tracking  of individuals.  
Develop  powerful  reasoning  techniques  that can deal with knowledge  that is complex,  
uncertain,  and incomplete  and that can freely  work  both top-down  and bottom -up. 
Connect  these  to perception,  manipulation,  and language.  Use these  to build  rich 
cognitive  models  of the world.  Then  finally  the keystone:  construct  a kind of human -
inspired  learning  system  that uses all the knowledge  and cognitive  abilities  that the AI 
has; that incorporates  what  it learns  into its prior  knowledge;  and that, like a child,  
voraciously  learns  from every  possible  source  of information:  interacting  with the world,  
interacting  with people,  reading,  watching  videos,  even being explicitly  taught.  Put all 
that together,  and that’s how you get to deep understanding.  (Marcus  & Davis,  2019) . 
We concluded  "It’s a tall order,  but it’s what  has to be done."  Even  after  the dramatic  
rise of Transformers  such  GPT -2, which  came  out after  we went  to press,  I see no reason  
to change  our order.  
3.2 Is there  anything  else we can do? 
Yes, absolutely.  
3.2.1  Engineering  practice  
To begin  with,  achieving  robustness  isn't just about  developing  the right  cognitive  
prerequisites,  it is also about  developing  the right  engineering  practice.  Davis  and I 
discuss  this briefly  in Chapter  X of Rebooting  AI, and Tom  Dietterich  has an excellent