THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  12  issues,  failing  to generalize  abstract  patterns  to novel  words  in various  ways.  Bengio  
made  limits  on the abilities  of extant  neural  networks  central  at his recent  NeurIPS  talk 
(Bengio,  2019) . Within  canonical  neural  network  architectures),  non-uniform  extension  
of broad  universals  (such  as identity)  is surprisingly  common,  and in my view  it 
remains  a central  obstacle  to progress.  
 § 
In essence,  extant  neural  networks  of certain  sorts  (such  as the multilayer  perceptrons  
trained  with  backpropagation  discussed  here)  excel  at two things:  memorizing  training  
examples,  and interpolating  within  a cloud  of points  that surround  those  examples  in 
some  cluster  of a hyperdimensional  space  (which  I call generalizing  within  a training  
space),  but they  generalize  poorly  outside  the training  space  (in Bengio's  phrasing,  the 
training  distribution).  
5  
Multilayer  perceptrons:  good  at generalizing  within the space  of training  examples            
poor at generalizing  the identity  function  outside  the space  of training  examples.   
What  one winds  up with  in consequence  is a pair of closely  related  problems:  
1. Idiosyncrasy : systems  that lack solid  ways  of generalizing  beyond  a space  of 
training  examples  cannot  be trusted  in open -ended  domains.  If you think  of each  
individual  system  as a function  approximator,  currently  popular  systems  tend  to be 
great  at memorized  examples,  and good  at many  (though  not all) examples  near  the 
training  examples—which  makes  them  useful  for many  applications  revolving  
around  classification.  But they  are poor  when  pushed  beyond  the training  
distribution.  A recent  math  learning  system,  for example , was good  at 1+1=2;  
1+1+1=3  up to 1+1+1+1+1+1=6,  but fell apart  for 1+1+1+1+1+1+1=7  and all larger  
examples.  (Imagine  writing  a FOR  loop  in a computer  program,  in which  one could  
trust  execution  only  for counter  values  of less than  7). (By comparison,  Microsoft  
Excel’s  Flash  fill, a symbolic  system  based  on inductive  program  synthesis,  is far 
more  effective  in many  cases  of this variety  (Polozov  & Gulwani,  2015) . 
 
5 The exact  details  of when  a system  will succeed  or not at a given  generalization  are highly  dependent  on 
how  problem  is set up, e.g., what  representational  schemes  are used;  for a fuller  discussion,  the reader  is 
referred  to Marcus,  1998  and Marcus , 2001.