THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  20  2.1.3.  Common  objections  to hybrid  models  and symbol -manipulation  
Despite  the growing  interest  and multiple  considerations  in favor  of investigating  
hybrid  models,  antipathy  to symbol -manipulation  looms  large  in some  quarters  of the 
machine  learning  community.  As mentioned  earlier,  Geoffrey  Hinton,  for example,  has 
argued  that European  investment  into hybrid  models  would  be a "huge  mista ke", and 
likened  the study  of hybrid  models  to the use of obsolete  gasoline  engines  in the era of 
electric  cars.  
Yet so far as I know  Hinton  has not written  anything  lengthy  in recent  years  about  why 
he objects  to hybrid  models  that are partly  symbolic.  
Here  are some  common  objections  that I have  heard  from  others,  with  brief  responses  to 
each:  
• Symbols  are not biologically  plausible . There  are at least  four  problems  with  this 
objection  (see also Gallistel  and King  (Gallistel  & King,  2010)  for a similar  
perspective).   
First,  just because  we have  not yet decisively  identified  a neural  mechanism  
supporting  symbol -manipulation  doesn't  mean  that we won't  ever.  Some  
promising  possible  neural  substrates  have  already  been  identified  (Frankland  & 
Greene  JD, 2019;  Marcus,  Marblestone,  & Dean,  2014;  Legenstein,  
Papadimitriou,  Vempala,  & Maass,  2016) , and other  literature  has pointed  to 
theoretical  plausibly  neural  substrates  (Marcus,  2001) . No compellin g evidence  
shows  that no such  mechanism  simply  could  not exist  in the wetware  of the 
brain.  Already  this year  we have  seen  even  a single  compartment  in a dendrite  
can compute  XOR  (Gidon  et al., 2020) , raising  the possibility  that individual  
neurons  may  be much  more  sophisticated  than  is often  assumed.  The storage  
and retrieval  of values  of variables  that is central  to symbol -manipulation,  for 
example,  could  act within  single  neurons  (Gallistel  & King,  2010) . 
Second,  a great  deal  of psychological  evidence,  reviewed  above  in Section  2.1.1.,  
supports  the notion  that symbol -manipulation  is instantiate d in the brain,  such  
as the ability  of infants  to extend  novel  abstract  patterns  to new  items,   the 
ability  of adults  to generalize  abstract  linguistic  patterns  to nonnative  sounds  
which  they  have  no direct  data  for, the ability  of bees  to generalize  the solar  
azimuth  function  to lighting  conditions  they  have  not directly  observed.  Human  
beings  can also learn  to apply  formal  logic  on externally  represente d symbols,  
and to program  and debug  symbolically  represented  computers  programs,  all of 
which  shows  that at least  in some  configurations  neural  wetware  can indeed  (to 
some  degree,  bound ed partly  by memory  limitations)  manipulate  symbols.  And  
we can underst and language  in essentially  infinite  variety,  inferring  an endless  
range  of meanings  from  an endless  range  of sentences.  The kind  of free 
generalization  that is the hallmark  of operations  over  variables  is widespread,  
throughout  cognition