THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  47  and (except  in narrow  domains  like autonomous  driving)  ever  fewer  are focusi ng on the 
related  challenge  of discovering  general  ways  of deriving  and updating  cognitive  models  
relative  to streams  of input  (such  as text or video).   Even  fewer  are focused  on reasoning  
about  such  models  in conjunction  with  prior  commonsense  knowledge,  such  as the size 
of an elephant  relative  to a cat, and how  that relates  to mats  of various  sizes.  
In my view,  building  systems  that can map  language  and perceptual  input  into rich,  
evolving  cognitive  models  should  be one of the highest  priorities  in the field. 
To put it somewhat  differently,  and more  urgently,  every  moment  spent  on improving  
massive  models  of word -level  prediction,  a la GPT -2 and Meena,  is (despite  potential  
short -term  utility.  e.g., in improving  translations)  a moment  that might  be better  spent  
on developing  techniques  for deriving,  updating,  and reasoning  over  cognitive  models.   
If we want  to build  robust  AI, we can ill afford  to wait.   
3. Discussion  
3.1. Towards  an intelligence  framed  around  enduring,  abstract   
knowledge  
Without  us, or other creatures  like us, the world  would  continue  to exist,  but it would  
not be described,  distilled,  or understood.   A bird might  flap its wings,  and the bird 
might  be carried  along  in flight.  There  would  be correlation,  but not causal  description.  
Human  lives are filled with  abstraction  and causal  description.  Our children  spend  a 
large  part of their  time  asking  why;  scientists  ask such  questions  in order  to generate  
theories.  A significant  part of our power  comes  from  our effort  to understand  and 
character ize the world,  in the form  of science,  culture,  and technology.  
Much  of that effort  culminates  in the form  of knowledge,  some  specific,  some  general,  
some  made  verbal,  some  not. A large  part of the goal  of classical  AI was to distill  such  
knowledge  in mach ine-interpretable  form;  CYC  was the largest  project  in that vein.  
Somewhere  along  the way,  the field  of AI took  a different  direction.  Most  researchers,  if 
they  know  CYC  at all, regard  it as a failure,  and few current  researchers  would  describe  
their  goal  as accumulating  knowledge  in anything  like the sense  that Lenat  described.18 
The partial  success  of systems  like Transformers  has led to an illusory  feeling  that CYC -
scale  machine -interpretable  representations  of human  knowledge  is unnecessary,  but I 
have  argued  that this is a mistake.  As we have  seen,  however,  although  Transformer s 
are immensely  impressive  as statistical  inference  engines,  they  are a long  way  from  
being  a sound  basis  for robust  intelligence.  They  are unreliable,  their  knowledge  spotty.  
 
18 Perhaps  Google  Knowledge  Graph  comes  closest,  but from  what  I understand,  the goal  of Knowledge  
Graph  is to accumulate  specific  facts  that can help  in disambiguating  search queries,  such  as the fact that 
there  is a city called  Paris  in France,  rather  than  abstract  common  sense.