THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  16  capacities  too seem  central  to human  language  (as in recursive  sentence  structure)  and 
in our knowledge  of individual  people  and objects  as they  change  over  time  (Marcus,  
2001).  (Chapter  5 of The Algebr aic Mind  gives  a range  of examples  that lie outside  the 
scope  of eliminative  connectionist  models,  many  resting  on the persistence  of entities  
over  time.)  
Such  machinery  is overwhelmingly  powerful.  All the world's  web browsers,  all the 
world's  operating  systems,  all the world's  apps,  and so forth  are built  upon  them.  (The  
same  tools  are also,  ironically,  used  in the specification  and execution  of virtually  all of 
the world's  neural  networks).   
§ 
Yet historically  mainstream  deep  learning  has largely  tried  to do without  the machinery  
of symbol -manipulation —often  deliberately  eschewing  it, as a part of a rallying  cry for 
why  neural  networks  offer  an alternative  to classical  paradigms.  In the famous  PDP 
books  that anticipated  much  of modern  deep  learning,  Rumelhart  and McClelland  (, 
1986,  #39979;)  dismissed  symbol -manipulation  as a marginal  phenomenon,  “not  of the 
essence  human  computation”.  In 2015  Hinton  likened  symbols  to "luminiferous  aether ", 
arguing  that the pursuit  of symbolic  logic  as a component  of artificial  intelligence  is " 
as incorrect  as the belief  that a lightwave  can only travel  through  space  by causing  
disturbances  in the luminiferous  aether....  [with]  scientists  ... misled  by compelling  but 
incorrect  analogies  to the only systems  they knew  that had the required  properties.    
Ideas  like database -style  records  for individuals,  too, have  been  surprisingly  absent  
from  the vast preponderance  of work  on neural  networks,  and complex  structured  
representations  such  as hierarchically -structured  sentences  are found  only  in a small  
fraction  of research,  whereas  the norm  for both  input  and output  is the simple  vector  or 
two-dimensional  bitmap,  whereas  hierarchical  data  structures  and records  for 
individuals  studiously  avoided.6 
It doesn't  have  to be that way.  In principle,  for example,  one could  try either  to build  
neural  networks  that are compatible  with symbol  manipulation  ("implementational  
connectionism"  in terminology  introduced  by Fodor  and Pylyshyn  (Fodor  & Pylyshyn,  
1988)  and adopted  by Marcus  (2001)  or neural  networks  that operate  without  owing  
anything  thing  to the principles  of symbol -manipulation  ("eliminative  connectionism"),  
or, for some  sort of hybrid  between  the two.  The vast majority  of work  so far has been  
of the eliminativist  variety—but that preponderance  reflects  sociological  fact, not logic  
necessity.  
Withi n a few years,  I predict,  many  people  will wonder  why  deep  learning  for so long  
tried  to do so largely  without  the otherwise  spectacularly  valuable  tools  of symbol -
manipulation;  virtually  all great  engineering  accomplishments  of humankind  have  
rested  on some sort of symbolic  reasoning,  and the evidence  that humans  make  use of 
 
6 DeepMind's  interesting  new  MEMO  architecture  (Banino  et al., 2020)  comes  close  to representing  a 
database  of records.