THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  6  number)  and again  fails to grasp  the detail.  As discussed  in Marcus  (Marcus,  2020;  
Marcus,  2019)  such  errors are widespread.  We will clearly  need  a more  stable  substrate  
in order  to achieve  robustness.  
§ 
Business  as usual  has focused  primarily  on steadily  improving  tools  for function  
approximation  and composition  within  the deep  learning  toolbox,  and on gath ering  
larger  training  sets and scaling  to increasingly  larger  clusters  of GPUs  and TPUs.  One 
can imagine  improving  a system  like GPT -2 by gathering  larger  data  sets,  augmenting  
those  data  sets in various  ways,  and incorporating  various  kinds  of improvement s in 
the underlying  architecture.  While  there  is value  in such  approaches,  a more  
fundamental  rethink  is required.  
Many  more  drastic  approaches  might  be pursued.  Yoshua  Bengio,  for example,  has 
made  a number  of sophisticated  suggestions  for significantly  broadening  the toolkit  of 
deep  learning,  including  developing  techniques  for statistically  extracting  causal  
relatio nships  through  a sensitivity  to distributional  changes  (Bengio  et al., 2019)  and 
techniques  for automatically  extracting  modular  structure  (Goyal  et al., 2019) , both  of 
whic h I am quite  sympathetic  to.   
But I don’t  think  they  will suffice;  stronger  medicine  may  be needed.  In particular,  the 
proposal  of this paper  that we must  refocus,  working  towards  developing  a framework  
for building  systems  that can routinely  acquire,  represent,  and manipulate  abstract  
knowledge,  using  that knowledge  in the service  of building,  updating,  and reasoning  
over  complex,  internal  models  of the external  world . 
§ 
In some  sense  what  I will be counseling  is a return  to three  concerns  of classical  artificial  
intelligence —knowledge,  internal  models,  and reasoning—but with  the hope  of 
addressing  them  in new  ways,  with  a modern  palette  of techniques.   
Each  of these  concerns  was central  in classical  AI. John  McCarthy,  for example,  noted  
the value  of commo nsense  knowledge  in his pioneering  paper  "Programs  with  
Common  Sense"  [McCarthy  1959];  Doug  Lenat  has made  the representation  of common -
sense  knowledge  in machine -interpretable  form  his life's  work  (Lenat,  Prakash,  & 
Shepherd,  1985;  Lenat,  2019) . The classical  AI "blocks  world"  system  SHRLDU , 
designed  by Terry  Winograd  (mentor  to Google  founders  Larry  Page  and Sergey  Brin)  
revolved  around  an internal,  updatable  cognitive  model  of the world,  that represented  
the software's  understanding  of the locations  and properties  of a set of stacked  physical  
objects  (Winograd,  1971) . SHRLDU  then  reasoned  over  those  cogn itive  models,  in order  
to make  inferences  about  the state  of the blocks  world  as it evolved  over  time.2 
 
2 Other  important  components  included  a simple  physics,  a 2-D renderer,  and a custom,  domain -specific  
language  parser  that could  decipher  complex  sentences  like does the shortest  thing the tallest  pyramid's  
support  supports  support  anything  green?