THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  22  reader  would  recognize  this.  The words  hybrid  and symbolic  were  never  mentioned.  and 
must  be inferred,  whereas  the word  neural  appears  13 times.  
Because  you can’t  always  tell us how  a given  system  works  just from  cursory  
inspection,  it's logically  possible  to unintentionally  build  a machine  that effectively  
implements  symbol -manipulation  without  any awareness  of doing  so. Indeed  a 
network  designer  could  stumble  onto something  that is isomorphic  to a symbolic  FPGA  
without  ever  knowing  it. 
While  it is certainly  conceivable  that deep  learning  systems  might  offer  a genui ne 
alternative  to symbol -manipulation,  as Bengio  suggested  in our recent  post -debate  
dialog : 
My bet is that deep learning  variants  can achieve  the form of symbolic -like computation  
which  humans  may actually  perform  but using  a substrate  very different  from GOFAI,  
with limitations  similar  to what  humans  experience  (e.g. only few levels  of recursion),  
and circumventing  a major  efficiency  issue associated  with the search  problem  in 
GOFAI  reasoning  in addition  to enabling  learning  and handling  of uncertainty.  
we can’t  take  it for granted  that any given  neural  network  offer s an alternative . 
The only  way  to evaluate  whether  a system  performs  an alternative  to “symbol -like 
computation”  or computes  with  bona  fide symbol -manipulating  operations  is to explore  
mappings : to consider  that architecture  and whether  or not its components  map  onto  the 
components  of symbol -manipulation  (in someth ing like sense  in which  chemistry  maps  
onto  physics).   Marr’s   (Marr,  1982)  levels  of computation  make  it clear  that this must  be 
the case:  any given  computation  can be implemented  in many  ways,  and not every  
implementation  is transparent.  Chemistry  maps  onto  physics,  but that doesn’t  mean  
that the mapping  was easy  to discover.  The “right”  neural  network  might  or might  not 
map  onto  symbol -manipulating  machinery;  the truth  may  be hard  to discern.   
My own  strong  bet is that any robust system  will have  some  sort of mechanism  for 
variable  binding,  and for performing  operations  over  those  variables  once  bound.  But 
we can’t  tell unless  we look.   
§ 
Lest this sound  strange,  recall  that mapping  is no less essential  for understanding  
neuros cience  and how  it relates  to computation.  Whatever  computations  have been 
implemented  in our brains  got there  without  any conscious  decision -making  at all; they evolved . 
And  few of them  are transparent.  It is the job of neuroscientists  and those  AI 
researc hers  committed  to brain -inspired  approaches  to AI to reverse  engineer  the brain  
in order  to figure  out what  computations  are there.  Whatever  drives  the brain  may  or 
may  not map  onto  our current  theories.  When  we evaluate  some  theory  of how  the 
brain  might  work,  we are evaluating  whether  the machinery  of the brain  does or does not 
map onto  that theory.  Some  theories  will contain  constructs  that are isomorphic  to actual  
processes  that take  place  in the brain,  others  will not. Knudsen  and Konishi's  (Knudsen  
& Konishi,  1979)  careful  work  on sound  localization  in the barn  owl is a beautiful