THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  44  children,  age 5.5 and 7, might  not spontaneo usly comprehend  Shakespeare,  but the 
intelligence  that they  do have  is, for the most  part,  robust;  they  understand  much  of 
what  there  is to know  about  the physical  interactions  of everyday  objects,  and enough  
about  human  goals  and motives  to understand  an enormous  number  of children's  
books;  already,  early  in elementary  school,  they  have  grasped  concepts  such  as 
deception  and misapprehension  and motivation  that are key in the Romeo  and Juliet  
story.   They  can climb  and maneuver  through  playgrounds  of immens e variety,  and 
converse  on a vast (though  not infinite)  range  of topics.  
Ultimately,  reasoning  and cognitive  models  can be combined,  in an almost  infinite  
number  of ways.  Suppose,  for example,  that at 12:00  pm a child has been  left alone  in a 
room  with  a closed  cookie  jar containing  a cookie.   At 12:05 pm it is observed  that the jar 
is closed,  but the cookie  is nowhere  to be seen.  What  happened  in between?  Combining  
tempora l and spatial  reasoning,  you can readily  infer  that (a)  The child  opened  the jar 
(b) the child  removed  the cookie,  (c) the child  ate the cookie,  and (d) the child  closed  the 
jar. For bonus  points  you can infer  that (b) must  have  happened  before  both  (c) and (d), 
but also that the order  of (c) versus  (d) is unknown.  In conjunction  with  a theory  of 
biology,  you can construe  the child  as a container  and realize  that the cookie  is now  
contained  (partly  digested)  within,  having  traversed  from  an aperture  (a mou th) into 
yet another  container  (the stomach)  within.  There  is no reason  whatsoever  to think  that 
AI will be able to make  these  kind  of inferences  robustly  without  both  internal  cognitive  
models  and mechanisms  to reason  over  them.  Without  this, there  is no way  to reliably  
understand  a detective  story,  a conversation  that goes  beyond  small  talk,  or virtually  
any narrative  of human  interaction.  
Two  conjectures  I would  make  are these  
• We cannot  construct  rich cognitive  models  in an adequate,  automated  way  withou t 
the triumvirate  of hybrid  architecture,  rich prior  knowledge,  and sophisticated  
techniques  for reasoning.  To take  one example,  if we saw ripples  in a body  of water  
that were  vaguely  reminiscent  of a car, under  ordinary  circumstances,  we ought  to 
assume  that those  ripples  are just ripples,  based  on e.g., the knowledge  that cars don't  
float.  But we might  change  our priors  in the context  of a gangster  movie,  in which  cars 
might  deliberately  be pushed  into the water.  Scene  comprehension  is ultimately  not 
just about  labeling  objects,  it's about  making  a coherent  interpretation  using  the best 
available  data,  and that requires  some  degree  of reasoning  over  that data,  in 
conjunction  with  prior  knowledge.  Any  purely -bottom  up approach  that relied  on 
labeled  images  alone  is likely  to fail in a variety  of outlier  cases,  as we have  seen  in 
efforts  thus  far even  in the narrow  domain  of autonomous  driving  on well -mapped  
public  roads,  despite  tremendous  efforts  and billions  of dollars  in investment.   
• We cannot  achieve  robust  intelligence  without  the capacity  to induce  and represent  
rich cognitive  models.  Reading,  for example,  can in part be thought  a function  that 
takes  sentences  as input  and produces  as its output  (internal)  cognitive  models.  When  
we discover  that Romeo  has killed  himself,  based  on a misapprehension  of the facts,