THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  14  2.1. Hybrid  architecture  
2.1.1.  Symbolic  operations  over variables  offer the only known  solution,  but the 
solution  is partial  
Symbolic  operations  over  variables  offer  one potential  answer—a solution  that is used  
trillions  and trillions  of times  every  second  of every  day,  underlying  virtually  all of the 
world's  software.  In particular,  four  basic  ideas  undergird  virtually  every  compute  
program:  variables,  instances,  bindings  that tie variables  to instances,  and operations  
over  variables.   
Each  of these  ideas  is familiar  from  grade  school  algebra,  in which  entities  like x and y 
are variables . Specific  numbers  (2, 3.5, etc) are insta nces that those  variables  might  be 
bound  to (e.g,  x might  currently  equal  3). Operations  include  things  like addition  and 
multiplication.  These  make  it possible  to represent  relationships,  such  as y = x + 2, that 
automatically  extend  to all values  in some  class  (eg all numbers).  The process  of 
connecting  a variable  to instance  is sometimes  also referred  to as variable  binding . 
Computer  programs  are, of course,  built  on the same  bedrock;  algorithms  are largely  
specified  in terms  of operations  that are performed  over  variables.  Variables  get bound  
to instances,  algorithms  get called,  operations  are performed,  and values  are returned.   
Importantly,  core operations  are typically  specified  in such  a way  as to apply  to all 
instances  of some  class  (eg all integers,  all strings,  or all floating -point  numbers).  Core  
operations  typically  include  basic  things  like arithmetical  operations  (addition,  
multiplication,  and so forth),  comparisons  (is the value  of x greater  than  the value  of y) 
and control  structures  (do something  n times,  for whatever  value  the variable  n 
currently  happens  to be bound  to; choose  alternative  a if the value  of x exceeds  the 
value  of y, otherwise  choose  alternative  b, etc).  To a first approximation  (ignoring  bugs,  
errors  in a programmer's  logic,  etc), this means  that properly  implemented  functions  
work  for all inputs  in some  class,  completely  independently  of what  inputs  they  may  or 
may  not have  been  exposed  to. 
It is worth  noting  that this approach  of defining  thing s in terms  of functions  that are 
defined  in terms  of operations  is a completely  different  paradigm  from  standard  
machine  learning.  Whereas  machine  learning  systems  typically  learn  to approximate  
functions  relating  input  variables  to output  variables,  via a process  that Judea  Pearl  has 
likened  to curve  fitting,  programmers  typically  define  their  algorithms  independently  of 
training  data,  in terms  of operations  over  variables.  Needless  to say, it has served  
conventional  computer  programmers  well,  supporting  everything  from  operating  
systems  to web  browsers  to video  games  to spreadsheets,  and so on and so forth.  
Crucially  a system's  core operations  over  variables  are generally  built  to work  
systematically - independently  of experience . The mechanics  of a circular  bit shift  operation  
in a microprocessor,  for example,  is defined  by a set of parallel  suboperations,  one for 
each  bit up to the width  of the microprocessor's  word;  the operation  works  the same