THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  48  They  reason  poorly,  and they  fail to build  cognitive  models  of events  as those  events  
unfold  over  time;  there  is no obvious  way  to connect  them  to more  sophisticated  
systems  for reason ing and cognitive  model  building,  nor to use them  as framework  for 
interpretable,  debuggable  intelligence.   
The burden  of this paper  has been  to argue  for a shift  in research  priorities,  towards   
four  cognitive  prerequisites  for building  robust  artificial  intelligence:  hybrid  
architectures  that combine  large -scale  learning  with  the representational  and 
computational  powers  of symbol -manipulation,  large -scale knowledge  bases—likely  
leveraging  innate  frameworks —that incorporate  symbolic  knowledge  along  with  other  
forms  of knowledge,  reasoning  mechanisms  capable  of leveraging  those  knowledge  
bases  in tractable  ways,  and rich cognitive  models  that work  togethe r with  those  
mechanisms  and knowledge  bases.  
Along  with  this goes  a need  for architectures  that are likely  more  heterogeneous.  A lot 
of machine  learning  to date  has focused  on relatively  homogeneous  architectures  with  
individual  neurons  capable  of little  more than  summation  and integration,  and often  no 
more  than  a handful  of prespecified  modules.  As recent  work  has shown,  this is wild  
oversimplification;  at the macro -level,  the cortex  alone  has hundreds  of anatomically  
and likely  functionally  areas  (Van  Essen,  Donahue,  Dierker,  & Glasser,  2016) ; at the 
micro -level,  as mentioned  earlier,  even  a single  dendritic  compartment  of a single  
neurons  can compute  the nonlinearity  of XOR  (Gidon  et al., 2020) . Adam  Marblestone,  
Tom  Dean  and I argued  (Marcus  et al., 2014) , the cortex  is (contra  a common  trope)  
unlikely  to compute  all of its functions  with  a single  canonical  circuit;  there  is likely  to 
be an important  diversity  in neural  computation  that has not yet been  captured  either  in 
computational  neuroscience  or in AI.  
Two  figures  capture  in a qualitative  way  what  I think  we has been  going  on in recent  
years,  and what  we should  be going  after.  The first and most  important  point  of these  
figures  is simply  this: the space  of potential  AI (and  machine  learning)  models  is vast, 
and only  a tiny bit of what  could  exist  has been  explored.  Blank -slate  empiricist  models  
have  been  very  well  studied,  and very  well -funded,  indulged  with  computational  
resources  and databases  that were  unimaginable  in the early  days  of AI; there  has been 
some  genuine  progress,  but brittleness,  in so many  forms,  remains  a serious  problem;  it 
is time  to explore  other  approaches  with  similar  vigor.  
Moving  forward  requires,  minimally,  that we build  models  that in principle  can 
represent  and learn  the kinds  of things  that we need  for language  and higher -level  
cognition.   
Most  current  systems  aren't  even  in the right  ballpark.  At a minimum,  adequate  
knowledge  frameworks  will require  that we can represent  and manipulate  some  
fraction  of our knowledge  in algebra ic ways,  by means  of operations  over  variables;  it is 
likely  that some  (large)  subset  of that knowledge  is encoded  and maintained  in terms  of 
structured  representations,  and much  of that knowledge  must  pertain  to and allow  the 
tracking  of specific  individu als.