THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  21  Third,  the lack of extant  current  evidence  of neural  realization  tells us almost  
nothing.  We currently  have  no detailed  understanding  of how  Garry  Kasparov -
level  chess  playing  could  be implemented  in a brain,  but that does  not mean  that 
Garry  Kasparov's  chess  playing  someh ow relied  on a non-neural  mechanism.   
Finally,  even if it turned  out that brains  didn't  use symbol -manipulating  machinery,  
there  is no principled  argument  for why AI could  not make  use of such mechanisms.  
Humans  don't  have  floating  point  arithmetic  chips  onboard,  but that hardly  
means  they  should  be verboten  in AI. Humans  clearly  have  mechanisms  for 
write -once,  retrieve  immediately  short -term  memory,  a precondition  to some  
forms  of variable  binding,  but we don't  know  what  the relevant  mechanism  is. 
That  doesn't mean  we shouldn't  use such  a mechanism  in our AI. 
• Symbolic  systems/hybrid  systems  haven't  worked  well  in the past. I have  often  
heard  this claimed,  but it seems  to me to be a bizarre  claim.  It is simply  not an 
accurate  picture  of reality  to portray  hybrid models  either  as demonstrably  ineffective  
or as old-fashioned,  when  in fact there  is active  and effective  research  into them,  
described  earlier  in section  2.1.2.10  
• Symbol -manipulation/hybrid  systems  cannot  be scaled . Although  there  are real 
problems  to be solved  here,  and a great  deal of effort  must  go into constraining  
symbolic  search  well  enough  to work  in real time  for complex  problems,  Google  
Knowledge  Graph  seems  to be at least  a partial  counterexample  to this objection,  as 
do large  scale  recent  successes  in software  and hardware  verification.  Papers  like 
Minervini  et al (Minervini  et al., 2019)  and Yang  et al (Yang,  Yang,  & Cohen,  2017)  
have  made  real progress  towards  building  end-to-end differentiable  hybrid  
neurosymbolic  systems  that work  at scale.  Meanwhile.  no formal  proof  of the 
impossibility  of adequate  scaling,  given  appropriate  heuristics,  exists.     
Over  the last three  decades,  I have  seen  a great  deal  of bias against  symbols,  but I have  
yet to see a compelling  argument  against  them.  
2.1.4.  Determining  whether  a given  system  is a hybrid  system  is not always  trivial  
A common  (though  not universal)  bias against  symbols  has given  rise to a peculiar  
sociological  fact: researchers  occasionally  build  systems  containing  the apparatus  of 
symbol -manipulation,  without  acknowledging  (or even  considering  the fact)  that they  
have  done  so; I gave  some  specific  examples  of this in Marcus,  2001.  For example,  as 
noted  above  the Open  AI Rubik’s  cube  solver  (OpenAI  et al., 2019)  contained  a symbolic  
component  known  as Kociemba’s  algorithm,  but only  a very  careful  and sophisticated  
 
10 It's also worth  noting  that induction  on the past can easily  lead to erroneous  inferences;  deep  learning  
was left for dead  in the early  2000's,  given  results  that at the time  were  not competitive,  only  to 
blossom  soon  thereafter,  spurred  more  by new  hardw are and larger  data  sets than  fundamental  
algorithmic  change.