THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  5  AI has …  been falling  short  of its ideal:  although  we are able to engineer  systems  that 
perform  extremely  well on specific  tasks,  they have still stark  limitations,  being  brittle,  
data-hungry,  unable  to make  sense  of situations  that deviate  slightly  from their  training  
data or the assumptions  of their  creators,  and unable  to repurpose  themselves  to deal 
with novel  tasks without  significant  involvement  from  human  researchers.  
In the words  of a team  of Facebook  AI researchers  (Nie  et al., 2019)   
"A growing  body  of evidence  shows  that state -of-the-art models  learn  to exploit  spurio us 
statistical  patterns  in datasets...   instead  of learning  meaning  in the flexible  and 
generalizable  way that humans  do." 
A key weakness,  as Yoshua  Bengio  put it in a recent  article  (Bengio  et al., 2019) , is that 
Current  machine  learning  methods  seem  weak  when  they are required  to generalize  
beyond  the training  distribution,  which  is what  is often  needed  in practice.   
What  can we do to take AI to the next  level?  
§ 
In my view,  we have  no hope  of achieving  robust  intelligence  without  first developing  
systems  with  what  Ernie  Davis  and I have  called  deep understanding , which  would  
involve  an ability  not only  to correlate  and discern  subtle  patterns  in complex  data  sets,  
but also the capacity  to look  at any scenario  and address  questions  such  as a journalist  
might  ask: who, what , where , why, when,  and how.  
On a good  day,  a system  like the widely  discussed  neural  network  GPT -2, which  
produces  stories  and the like given  sentence  fragments,  can convey  something  that 
ostensibly  seems  to reflect  a deep  understanding.  Given,  for example,  a sentence  
fragment  (in bold)  like, "Two  soldiers  walked  into a bar",  it can often  generate  a fluent  
and plausible -sounding  continuation  that captures,  for example,  the relation  between  
people,  bars,  drinks  and money:  
Two  soldiers  walked  into a bar in Mosul  and spent  all of their  money  on drinks.  
But no matter  how  compelling  many  of GPT -2 examples  seem,  the reality  is that its 
representations  are thin and unreliable,  akin  in to what  Nie et al (2019)  note  above,  
often  falling  apart  under  close  inspection  (Marcus,  2020) . Here  are two typical  cases,  
drawn  from  an in-development  benchmark  I presented  at NeurIPS  in December  2019  
(Marcus,  2019) .  
• Yesterday  I dropped  my clothes  off at the dry cleaners  and have  yet to pick  them  up. 
Where  are my clothes?  at my mom's  house.   
• There  are six frogs  on a log. Two  leave,  but three  join.  The number  of frogs  on the log is 
now  seventeen  
In the first,  GPT -2 correctly  predicts  the category  of elements  that follows  the query  
fragment  (viz.  a location)  but fails to keep  track  of where  the dry cleaning  is. In the 
second,  GPT -2 again  correctly  predicts  the correct  response  category  (in this case a