THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  23  example  of how  one neural  circuit  was eventually  deciphered  and mapped  onto  
underlying  computations;  few research  programs  have  yet equaled  it. 
Parallel questions  arise  in AI: when  a system  works,  it is valuable  but often  nontrivial  to 
understand  what  drives  its performance.  
A system  that stores  every  experience  in a separate  memory  than  can be retrieved  and 
computed  over  might  be described  in "neural'  terms  yet have  components  that 
recognizably  play  the role of maintaining  variables,  bindings,  instances,  and operations  
(eg retrieval)  over  variables.  
If we create  adequate  synthetic  systems  through  some  sort of search  process,  be it 
random,  trial-and-error,  evolution,  AutoML,  or other  means,  we will have  solved  part 
of the engineering  problem,  but not necessarily  yet understood  scientifically  what  makes  
those  models  work . The latter  is a job for reverse  engineering,  and the discovery  and 
rejection  of possible  mappings,  just as it is neuroscience.   
If the perfect  neural  network  were  to descend  on us, we might  discover  through  
extensive  testing  that it worked;  it would  take still another  stage  of scientific  discovery  
to understand  how  it worked.  If we discover  some  neural  network  that succeeds  and it 
turns  out that its constituents  should  happen  to map perfectly  onto symbol -manipulation,  it will 
be a victory  not only for neural  networks  but also for symbol -manipulation  — regardless  of what  
the system' s designers  may have intended.  Correspondingly,  if none  of that system's  
constituents  map  onto  symbol -manipulation,  it would  be a defeat  for symbol -
manipulation.   
Any  reasonable  person  will recognize  how  hard  it has been  so far to understand  how  
human  brains work,  and the same  will become  true for neural  networks  as they  become  
more  complex.  The human  brain  itself  is an example  of an impressive  neural  network  
that has effectively  (via evolution)  descended  upon  us; it seems  to work  quite  well,  but 
we have  no idea  why .11 
2.1.5.  Summary  
Symbol -manipulation,  particularly  the machinery  of operations  over  variables,  offers  a 
natural  though  incomplete  solution  to the challenge  of extrapolating  beyond  a training  
regime:  represent  an algorithm  in terms  of operations  over  variables,  and it will 
inherently  be defined  to extend  to all instances  of some  class.   It also provides  a clear  
basis  for representing  structured  representations  (such  as the tree structures  that are 
 
11 Seeking  mappings  between  implementational  details  and algorithmic  description,  if they  exist,  may  
also have  practical  value,  since,  for example,  some  low-level  neural  network -like computation s might  
conceivably  be more  efficiently  computed  at a purely  symbolic  level,  once  those  mappings  are 
discovered.  Conversely,  some  models  that are pitched  as neural  networks,  such  as Lample  and 
Charton's  recent  work  on symbolic  integration   (Lample  & Charton,  2019)  turns  out on careful  
inspection  to have  serious  limits  and to be heavily  dependent  on symbolic  processors  (Davis,  2019) . A 
clear,  principled  understanding  on how  symbolic  and neural  components  work  together  is likely  to be 
quite  valuable .