THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  9  properties  are, and how  those  entities  relate  to one another.   Cognitive  scientists  
universally  recognize  that such  cognitive  models  may  be incomplete  or inaccurate,  but 
also see them  as central  to how  an organism  views  the world  (Gallistel,  1990;  Gallistel  & 
King,  2010) . Even  in imperfect  form,  cognitive  models  can serve  as a powerful  guide  to 
the world;  to a great  extent  the degree  to which  an organism  prospers  in the world  is a 
function  of how  good  those  internal  cognitive  models  are.  
Video  gam es are essentially  run according  to a similar  logic:  the system  has some  kind  
of internal  model  of the world,  and that model  is periodically  updated  based  on user  
input  (and  the activities  of other  entities  in the simulated  world  of the game).  The 
game's  internal  model  might  track  things  like a character's  location,  the character's  
health  and possessions,  and so forth.).  What  happens  in the game  (where  or not there  is 
a collision  after  a user  moves  in particular  direction)  is function  of dynamic  updates  to 
that model.  
Linguists  typically  understand  language  according  to a similar  cycle:  the words  in a 
sentence  are parsed  into a syntax  that maps  onto  a semantics  that specifies  things  like 
events  that various  entities  participate  in. That  semantics  is used  to dynamically  update  
a model  of the world  (e.g, the current  state  and location  of various  entities).  Much  
(though  by no means  all) work  in robotics  operates  in a similar  way:  perceive,  update  
models,  make  decisions.  (Some  work,  particularly  end-to-end deep  learning  for object  
grasping  does  not.)  
The strongest,  most  central  claim  of the current  paper  is that if we don't  do something  
analogous  to this,  we will not succeed  in the quest  for robust  intelligence.  If our AI 
systems  do not represent  and reason  over  detailed,  structured,  internal  models  of the 
external  world,  drawing  on substantial  knowledge  about  the world  and its dynamics,  
they  will forever  resemble  GPT -2: they  will get some  things  right,  drawing  on vast 
correlative  databases,  but they  won't  understa nd what's  going  on, and we won't  be able 
to count  on them,  particularly  when  real world  circumstances  deviate  from  training  
data,  as they  so often  do.4   
§ 
What  computational  prerequisites  would  we need  in order  to have  systems  that are 
capable  of reasoning  in a robust  fashion  about  the world?  And  what  it would  take to 
bridge  the worlds  of deep  learning  (primarily  focused  on learning)  and classical  AI 
(which  was more  concerned  with  knowledge,  reasoning,  and internal  cognitive  
models)?  
 
4 Would  GPT -2 do better  if its input  were  broadened  to include  perceptual  input  rather  than  mere  text?  
Perhaps,  but I don't  think  merely  broadening  the range  of input  would  solve  the system's  fundamental  
lack of articulated  internal  models.  Meanw hile,  it is interesting  to note  that,  blind  children  develop  rich 
internal  models  and learn  quite  a bit about  language  and how  to relate  it those  models,  entirely  without  
visual  input  (Landau,  Gleitman,  & Landau,  2009) .