THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  30  Ernest  Davis,  Noah  Frazier -Logue  and I, proposed  a framework  (Davis,  Marcus,  & 
Frazier -Logue,  2017)  that could  help  with  this sort of challenge:  a large  set of 
independently -motivated  logical  axioms—none  specific  to tea kettles,  all of general  
utility,  largely  consisting  of  abstractions  that most  ordinary  people  would  on reflection  
recognize  to be true—from  which  correct inferences  about  containers  might  be made.   
Overall,  the framework  in which  the axioms  are situated  is fairly  general:  axioms  about  
time,  space,  manipulation,  history,  action  and so forth.  The axioms  included  statements  
such  as the following  (a few slightly  simplified  here  for exposition):  
• The physical  world  consists  of a collection  of objects,  which  move  around  in time over space.  
• Objects  are distinct;  that is, one object  cannot  be part of another  or overlap  spatially  with another.  
• An object  occupies  a region  of some  three -dimensional  extent;  it cannot  be a one-dimensional  
curve  or two-dimensional  surface.   
• A particular  quantity  of liquid  can occupy  any region  of a specific  volume.  
• A closed  container  is an object  or set of objects  that completely  envelopes  an internal  cavity.  
• An upright  open  container  is an open  container  with the opening  on top. 
An exploratory  robot  armed  with  such  knowledge  (and  other  machinery  for connecting  
that knowledge  with  perception  and cognitive  models)  coul d perhaps  then  make  
inferences  about  the use and function  of an unusually  shaped  kettle  with  a nearly -
hidden  spout:  
 
Tea kettle  believed  to have been designed  by Richard  Williams  Binns,  (1837 -1903)  with concealed  
spout,  underneath  the hand  on the right.  
 
With  some  extension,  such  a system  could  then  provide  the foundations  of a system  
that could  reason  about  the affordances  of a yarn  feeder,  even  if one had not seen  one 
before;  ultimately,  one hopes,  those  foundations  could  then  serve  as component  in a 
robotic  system  that could  apply  that knowledge  in the course of an action,  such  as 
knitting.