THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  27  Eberhard,  & Sedivy,  1995) . Systems  like GPT  have  some  measure  of the cont ext of 
word -usage,  but lack reliable  representations  of cognitive  context  and plausibility.   
Interpretability  and explainability  would  also prove  elusive  in a system  laden  with  such  
shallow  conceptual  understanding.  A system  that gloms  together  cotton  balls and 
lighters  as equally  valid  ways  of lighting  fires  may  not have  internal  consistency  to 
satisfy  the needs  of interpretability.   
And  where  there  is no coherent,  causal  understanding  of basic  concepts,  there  may  be 
no way  to engineer  robustness  in comple x real-world  environments.  Pearl  is right:  if our 
systems  rely on curve -fitting  and statistical  approximation  alone,  their  inferences  will 
necessarily  be shallow.  
This  brings  me to the second  major  claim  of the current  paper:  systematic  ways  to induce,  
represent,  and manipulate  large  databases  of structured,  abstract  knowledge,  often  in causal  
nature,  are a prerequisite  to robust  intelligence . 
2.2.1  What  kind of knowledge  will robust  artificial  intelligence  require?  
Here  are some  basic  considerations.  
• Most—but importantly  but not all of that knowledge  (see below)—is likely  to be 
learned . No human  is born  knowing  that lighters  start  fires,  nor that dry cotton  balls  
do not, nor what  a glass  bottle  might  do when  it is broken.  One might  conceivably  
hard -wire that knowledge  into an AI system,  along  the lines  of CYC  manually  hard -
wiring  each  fact, but modern  enthusiasts  of machine  learning  would  obviously  prefer  
not to.  And  because  there  is always  new  knowledge  to be gleaned,  mechanisms  for 
learning  new  abstr act, often  causal  knowledge  are a necessity.  
• Some  significant  fraction  of the knowledge  that a robust  system  is likely  to draw  
on is external,  cultural  knowledge  that is symbolically  represented . The great  
majority  of Wikipedia,  for example,  is represented  verbally,  and a robust  intelligence  
ought  to be able to draw  on that sort of knowledge.  (Current  deep  learning  systems  
can only  do this to a greatly  limited  extent.)  Much  of that knowledge  is effectively  
encoded  in terms  of quantified  relationships  between  variables  (e.g.,  for all x, y, and z, 
such  that x, y, and z  are people,  person  x is the grandchild  of person  z  if there  is some  
person  y that is a parent  of x and a child  of z; for all x such  that x is a species,  
organisms  of species  x give  rise to offspring  that are also of species  x, etc). 
• Some  significant  fraction  of the knowledge  that a robust  system  needs  is likely  to 
be abstract.  Current  systems  are good  at representing  specific  facts like 
BORN (ABRAHAM  LINCOLN , KENTUCKY ) and CAPITAL (KENTUCKY , FRANKFORT ), but lack 
ways  of representing  and effectively  manipulating  information  like the fact that the 
contents  of a bottle  can escape,  other  things  being  equal,  if the bottle  is broken .  
• Rules  and exceptions  must  co-exist . Regular  verbs  (walk-walked ) co-exist  with  
irregular  verbs   (sing-sang ). Penguins  that can't  fly exist  alongside  many  other  birds