THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  15  whether  or not it has ever  been  used  before,  and no learning  is required.  The 
programmer  can safely  anticipate  that the shift  operation  will work  regardless  of 
experience,  and that it will continue  in that fashion  in the future,  again regardless  of 
experience.   The virtue  of all that machinery —variables,  instances,  bindings,  and 
operations —is that it allows  the programmer  to specify  things  at a certain  level  of 
abstraction,  with  a certain  kind  of reliability  as a byproduct.  
Collective ly, these  four assumptions  about  variables,  bindings,  instances,  and 
operations  over  variables  comprise  the core of symbol -manipulation  (Newell,  1980;  
Marcus,  2001) . (Symbols  themselves  are simply  way s of encoding  things  that get used  
by other  systems,  such  as a pattern  of binary  digits  used  to represent  a letter  in the 
ASCII  code,  or an encoding  that allows  an output  node  in a neural  network  to represent  
a specific  word.  So far as I can tell, all current systems  make  use of them;  see Marcus  
2001,  Chapter  2). Some  symbol -manipulation  systems  might  have  only  a small  number  
of operations,  such  as addition,  concatenation,  and comparison,  others  might  have  
richer  operations  (e.g.,  the unification  of complex  logical  formulae),  just as 
microprocessors  can vary  in terms  of the sizes  of their  core instruction  sets.  Recursion  
can be built  on a symbol -manipulating  architecture  but is not an absolute  logical  
requirement.   
As I have  argued  (Marcus,  2001;  Marcus,  1998;  Marcus,  Vijayan,  Bandi  Rao,  & Vishto n, 
1999;  Berent,  Marcus,  Shimron,  & Gafos,  2002;  Berent,  Vaknin,  & Marcus,  2007)  symbol -
manipulation  in some  form  seems  to be essential  for human  cognition,  such  as when  a 
child  learns  an abstract  linguistic  pattern,  or the meaning  of a term  like sister   that can be 
applied  in an infinite  number  of families,  or when  an adult  extends  a familiar  linguistic  
pattern  in a novel  way  that extends  beyond  a training  distributions  (Berent  et al., 2002; 
Berent  et al., 2007) .  Some  of the most  compelling  evidence  for this came  from  a 1999  
study  (Marcus  et al., 1999)  in which  my colleagues  and I showed  that 7-month  old 
infants  could  recognize  simple  abstract  patterns  such  as the ABB  pattern  in la ta ta and 
extrapolate  them  beyond  a set of training  examples  to novel  strings  composed  entirely  
of different  syllables  that didn't  phonetically  overlap  with  their  training  set. Subsequent  
work  shows  that even  newborns  seem  capable  of this sort of extrapolation.  Gallistel  and 
King  (Gallistel  & King,  2010)  have  argued  that the storage  and retrieval  of variables  is 
essential  for animal  cognition.  Honeybees,  for example,  appear  to be capable  of 
extending  the solar  azimuth  function  to lighting  conditions  that they  have  not been  
exposed  to. (Dyer  & Dickinson,  1994) . 
The versatile  machinery  of symbol -manipulation  also provides  a basis  for structured  
representations  (Marcus,  2001) . Computer  programs,  for example,  routinely  use tree 
structures,  constructed  out of symbols  that are combined  via operations  over  variables,  
to represent  a wide  variety  of things  (such  as the hierarchical  structure  folders  or 
directories).  
Likewise,  the the machinery  of symbol -manipulation  allows  to keep  track  of properties  
of individuals  as they  change  over time  (e.g.,  in the form  of database  records).  These