THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  17  them  in everyday  cognition  is immense.  And  in fact, as I will discuss  below,  things  are 
finally  starting  to change,  with  hints  of a new,  broader  pragmatism  that I hope  will 
overcome  prior dogma.   
The first major  claim  this essay  is this:  To build  a robust,  knowledge -driven  approach  to 
AI we must  have  the machinery  of symbol -manipulation  in our toolkit.  Too much  of 
useful  knowledge  is abstract  to make  do without  tools  that represent  and manipulate  
abstraction,  and to date,  the only  machinery  that we know  of that can manipulate  such  
abstract  knowledge  reliably  is the apparatus  of symbol -manipulation.   
Alas,  by themselves7, the apparatus  of operations  over  variables  tells nothing  about  
learning .  
It is from  there  that the basic  need  for hybrid  architectures  that combine  symbol -
manipulation  with  other  techniques  such  as deep  learning  most  fundamentally  
emerges.  Deep  learning  has raised  the bar for learning,  particularly  from  large  data  sets,  
symbol  manipulation  has set the standard  for representing  and manipulating  
abstractions.  It is clear  that we need  to bring  the two (or something  like them8) together.   
2.1.2  Hybrids  are often  effective  
Hybrids  are nothing  new:  Pinker  and I proposed  three  decades  ago (Marcus  et al., 1992)  
that the best account  of how  children  learned  the English  past tense  involve  a hybrid:  a 
rule (add  -ed to a verb  stem)  for formi ng the past tense  of regular  verbs,  and a neural -
network -like system  for acquiring  and retrieving  irregular  verbs.  And  there  has long  
been  obvious  need  for combining  symbolic  knowledge  with  perceptual  knowledge  
(e.g.,  one wants  to be able to recognize  zebr as by combining  perceptual  knowledge  of 
what  horses  look  like with  a verbal  definition  that likens  zebras  to horses  with  stripes9). 
Computer  scientists  such  as Ron Sun (Sun,  1996)  advocated  for hybrid  models  
throughout  the 1990 s; Shavlik  (Shavlik,  1994)  showed  that it was possible  to translate  a 
(limited)  subset  of logic  into neural  networks.  D’Avila  Garcez,  Lamb,  and Gabbay  
(D’Avila  Garcez,  Lamb,  & Gabbay,  2009)   is an impo rtant  early  work  on neuro -symbolic  
approaches.  Even  Hinton  was once  warmer  to the hybrids,  too (Hinton,  1990) . 
 
7 Inductive  logic  programming  (Cropper,  Morel,  & Muggleton,  2019)  is a purely -rule based  approach  to 
learning  that is worth  some  consideration,  though  outside  the scope  of the current  paper.  
8 Although  I am fairly  confident  that robust  intelligence  will depend  on some  sort of hybrid  that 
combines  symbolic  operations  with  machine  learning  mechanisms,  it's not clear  whether  deep  learning  
(as currently  practiced)  will play  last in its role as dominant  machine  learning  mechanisms,  or whether  
that role will be played  some  successor  that is, e.g., more  tractable  or more  efficient,   in terms  of data  and 
energy  usage.  Approaches  such  as statistical  relational  learning  (Raedt,  Kersting,  Natarajan,  & Poole,  
2016)  and probabilistic  programming  (Bingham  et al., 2019)  that have  received  much  less attention  are 
well  worth  considering;  see van den Broeck  (Van  den Broeck,  2019)  for an overview.  
9 An existing  zero -shot learning  literature  has tried  to integrate  various  forms  of multimodal  knowledge,  
but as far as I know,  no current  system  can leverage  the precise  information  that would  be found  in a 
dictionary  definition.