THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  24  taken  as bedrock  in generative  linguistics)  and records  of individuals  and their  
properties.  
What  it lacks  is a satisfactory  framework  for learning.  Hybrids  could  be a way  of 
combining  the best of both  worlds:  the capacity  to learn  from  large  scale  data  sets,  as 
exemplified  by deep  learning,  with  the capa city to represent  abstract  representations  
that are syntactic  and semantic  currency  of all the world's  computer  programming  
languages.  I conjecture  that they  are a prerequisite  for safely  arriving  at robust  
intelligence.  
Far fewer  resources  have  gone  into studying  the universe  of hybrid  models  than  have  
gone  into "pure"  deep  learning  systems  that eschew  symbol -manipulating,  but the 
growing  strand  of work  reviewed  in section  2.1.2,  from  a wide  range  of research  labs,  to 
say nothing  of the success  of Google  Search,  all point  to the value  of greater  study  of 
hybrid  architectures.   
Sadly,  we are not out of the woods  yet, though.  Hybrid  models that combine  powerful  
data -driven  learning  techniques  with  the representational  and computational  resources  
of symbol -man ipulation  may  be necessary  for robust  intelligence,  but they  are surely  
not sufficient.   In what  follows  I will describe  three  further  research  challenges.  
2.2. Large -scale  knowledge,  some  of which  is abstract  and causal  
 
Symbol -manipulation  allows  for the representation  of abstract  knowledge,  but the 
classical  approach  to accumulating  and representing  abstract  knowledge,  a field  known  
as knowledge  representation,  has been  brutally  hard  work,  and far from  satisfactory.   In 
the history  of AI, the single  largest  effort  to create  commonsense  knowledge  in a 
machine -interpretable  form,  launched  in 1984  by Doug  Lenat,  is the system  known  as 
CYC  (Lenat  et al., 1985) . It has required  thousands  of person -years,  an almost  Herculean  
effort,  to capture  facts  about  psychology,  politics,  economics,  biology,  and many,  many  
other  domains,  all in a precise  logical  form.    
Thus  far, the payoff  has not been  compelling.  Relatively  little  has been  published  about  
CYC  (making  evaluation  challenging,  though  see this interesting  Hacker  News  thread ), 
and the commercial  applications  seem  modest,  rather  than  overwhelming.  Most  people,  
if they  know  CYC  at all, regard  it as a failure,  and few current  researchers  make  
extensive  use of it. Even  fewer  seem  inclined  to try to build  competing  systems  of 
comparable  breadth.  (Large -scale  databases  like Google  Knowledge  Graph,  Freebase  
and YAGO  focus  primarily  on facts  rather  than  commonsense.)  
Given  how  much  effort  CYC  required,  and how  little  impact  it has had on the field  as a 
whole,  it's hard  not to be excited  by Transformers  like GPT -2. When  they  work  well,  
they  seem  almost  magical,  as if they  automatically  and almost  effortles sly absorbed  
large  swaths  of common -sense  knowledge  of the world.  For good  measure,