THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  54  To put things  slightly  differently:  one approach  to research,  which  is the one I am 
calling  for, would  be to identify  a well -motivated  set of initial  primitives  (which  might  
include  operations  over  variables,  mechanisms  for attention,  and so forth)  first,  and 
then  learn  about  ways  of recombining  those  primitiv es after,  essentially  learning  what  
constitutes  good  practice,  given  those  primitives.  Only  later,  once  those  principles  of 
good  software  engineering  were  settled,  might  we go on to immensely  complex  real-
world  capabilities.  Most  machine  learning  work  essentially  tries  to skip the opening  
steps,  tackling  complex  problems  empirically,  without  ever  trying  to build  a firm  
understanding  about  what  initial  primitives  are really  required  for language  and 
higher -level  cognition.   Skipping  those  first steps  has not gotten  us thus  far to language  
understanding  and reliable  trustworthy  systems  that can cope  with  the unexpected;  it is 
time  to reconsider.    
In my judgement,  we are unlikely  to resolve  any of our greatest  immediate  concerns  
about  AI if we don’t  change  course. The current  paradigm—long  on data,  but short  on 
knowledge,  reasoning  and cognitive  models—simply  isn’t  getting  us to AI we can trust  
(Marcus  & Davis,  2019) . Whether  we want  to build  general  purpose  robots  that live 
with  us in our homes,  or autonomous  vehicles  that drive  us around  in unpredictable  
places,  or medical  diagnosis  systems  that work  as well  for rare diseases  as for common  
ones,  we need  systems  that do more  than  dredge  immense  datasets  for subtler  and 
subtler  correlations.  In order  to do better,  and to achieve  safety  and reliability,  we need  
systems  with  a rich causal  understanding  of the world,  and that needs  to start  with  an 
increased  focus  on how  to represent,  acquire,  and reason  with  abstract,  causal 
knowledge  and detailed  internal  cognitive  models.   
§ 
Rome  won't  built  in a day.  Children  have  a great  deal  of common  sense,  can reason,  and 
represent  complex  knowledge,  but it still takes  years  before  they  have  the 
sophistication,  breadth,  and competen ce of (most)  adults.  They  have  started  to acquire  
some  of the knowledge,  particular  aspects  of the concrete  here  and now,  but still have  to 
learn,  particularly  about  nuanced  domains  like politics,  economics,  sociology,  biology,  
and everyday  human  interacti on.  
Figuring  out how  to reliably  build,  represent  and reason  with  cognitive  models  and 
large -scale  background  knowledge,  presumably  by leveraging  innovations  in hybrid  
architectures,  such  as those  described  in Section  2.1.2,  will be an important  step,  and 
likely  to profitably  occupy  much  of the next  decade,  but will not be the whole  journey.   
Importantly,  progress  in these  critical  cognitive  prerequisites  may  position  AI to be a 
self-sufficient  learner,  like a bright  school  child—but they  cannot  in themsel ves provide  
a guarantee  of yielding  a complete  cognitive  being.   That  said,  they  might  lead to self-
teaching  machines  that are in some  ways  like a child,  with  an incomplete  understanding  
of the world  but a powerful  talent  for acquiring  new  ideas.   It's surely just a start,  but it 
will make  what  has come  far seem  like mere  prelude,  to something  new  that we can’t  
yet fully  envision.