THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  8  The problem  is, even  with  massive  amounts  of data,  and new  architectures,  such  as the 
Transformer  (Vaswani  et al., 2017) , which  underlies  GPT -2 (Radford  et al., 2019) , the 
knowledge  gathered  by contemporary  neural  networks  remains  spotty  and pointillistic,  
arguably  useful  and certainly  impressive,  but never  reliable  (Marcus,  2020) .   
That  spottiness  and unreliability  is implicit  in the kinds  of examples  above  (if you leave  
your  laundry,  it obviously  can't  still be at your  mother's  house)  and in more  explicit  
tests  of GPT -2 like these:  
If you break  a glass  bottle  of water,  the water  will probably  roll.  
If you break  a glass  bottle  of water,  the water  will probably  break  some  more  and splatter  on 
the floor.  Water  creates  bubbles,  which  expand  when  the amount  of water  in the bottle  increases.  
If you break  a glass  bottle  that  holds  toy soldiers,  the toy soldiers  will probably  follow  
you in there.  
Crucially,  Sutton’s  examples  for the value  of "general  methods"  in lieu of human  
knowledge  come  from  closed -ended  domains,  such  as games,  object  classification,  and 
speech  recognition,  whereas  common -sense  is open -ended.  Winning  at a game  like Go 
is very  different  from  interpreting  and evaluating  a news  story  or solving  an 
unexpected  planning  problem  in the real world  word,  like the Apollo  13 situation  of 
figuring  how  to solve  an air filter  issue  on an endangered  spacecraft  where  the 
astronauts  are quickly  running  out of air., a kind  of one-off solution  that seems  well  
outside  the scope  of what   knowledge -free deep  reinforcement  learning  might  manage.  
When  it comes  to knowing  where  the dry cleaning  has been  left (as in the earlier  
example,  Yesterday  I dropped  my clothes  off at the dry cleaners  and have yet to pick them  up. 
Where  are my clothes ), you need  an internal  model  of the world,  and a way  of updating  
that model  over  time,  a process  some  linguists  refer  to as discourse  update  (Bender  & 
Lascarides,  2019) . A system  like GPT -2 simply  doesn't  have  that.   
When  sheer  computational  power  is applied  to open -ended  domain s—such  as  
conversational  language  understanding  and reasoning  about  the world—things  never  
turn  out quite  as planned.  Results  are invariably  too pointillistic  and spotty  to be 
reliable.  
It's time  for a rethink:  what  would  our systems  look  like if we took  the lessons  of deep  
learning,  but human  knowledge  and cognitive  models  were  once  again  a first-class  
citizen  in the quest  for AI? 
2. A hybrid,  knowledge -driven , cognitive -model -based  approach  
Many  cognitive  scientists,  including  myself,  view  cognition  in terms  of a kind  of cycle:  
organisms  (eg humans)  take in perceptual  information  from  the outside,  they  build  
internal  cognitive  models  based  on their  perception  of that information,  and then  they  
make  decisions  with  respect  to those  cognitive  models,  which  might  include  
information  about  what  sort of entities  there  are in the external  world,  what  their