THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  34  the entities  in a domain,  however,  if they could  not single  out those  entities  in their 
surroundings.  
Davis  and I have  similarly  stressed  the value  of prior  frameworks  for space,  time, and 
causality  both  in our analysis  of containers  (see the figure  above  (Davis  et al., 2017) )  
and in our recent  book  (Marcus  & Davis,  2019) ; a host  of other  developmental  
psychologists  have  pointed  in similar  directions  over  the years  (Landau,  Gleitman,  & 
Landau,  2009;  Carey,  2009;  Leslie,  1982;  Mandler,  1992) .  
As Spelke  and Kant  both emphasized,  once  you know  about  objects  and how  they  
travel  through  time.  you can begin  to fill in their  properties  and start  to acquire  the 
knowledge  that you need  for traveling  through  the world.   
The brute  fact is that the opposite  approach—starting  with  a near  blank  slate  and 
training  them  on massive  data  sets—simply  hasn’t  panned  out so far (Marcus  2020).  
Relatively  blank -slate  models  trained  by large  data  sets have  been  given  a full-throated  
test by some  of the largest  companies  in the word  (Google , Facebook,  Microsoft,  and so 
forth),  and provided  with  almost  limitless  resources  of time,  money,  computation,  and 
research  personnel,  yet they  still have  not been  able to reason  reliably  about  time,  space,  
or causality.  Absent  such  capacities,  our system s will never  be robust  enough  to cope  
with  the variability  of the real-world.  
It’s surely  time  to consider  a more  nativist  approach.  
§ 
The good  news  is that although  nativism  has often  been  frowned  on in the deep  
learning  community,  historically,  there  are some  growing  signs  of a greater  openness  to 
“priors”  (e.g.,  Burgess  et al., 2019;  Rabinowitz  et al., 2018;  Maier  et al., 2017) . 
Of course,  every  neural  network  is actually  filled  with  priors,  in the form  of innate  (i.e., 
preestablished,  rather  than  learned  by the system  in quest ion) commitments  to 
particular  numbers  of layers,  particular  learning  rules,  particular  connectivity  patterns,  
particular  representational  schemes  (eg what  input  and output  nodes  stand  for), and so 
forth.  But few of these  priors  are conceptual  in nature.  
The real question  may  be about  what  kinds  of priors  can be represented,  and whether  
the priors  that we need  can naturally  be represented  with  the tools  we already  have,  or 
whether  we need  new  tools  in order  to represent  a broader  range  of priors.  The deep  
learning  community  seems  to be fine with  making  use of convolution  (which  fits 
naturally  within  a neural  network  framework)  as a prior,  but thus  far the community  
has given  far less attention  to models  with  more  complex  priors,  such  as innate  
knowledge  abou t the persistence  of objects13, or a temporal  calculus  for understanding  
events  over  time.    
 
13 See Marcus  (2001),  Chapter  5 for a discussion  of why  estimating  the trajectory  of an object is not in itself  
sufficient.