THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  25  Transformers  give  the appearance  of seamlessly  integrating  whatever  knowledge  they  
absorb  with  a seemingly  sophisticated  understanding  of human  language.   
The contrast  is striking.  Whereas  the knowledge  representation  community  has 
struggled  for decades  with   precise  ways  of stating  things  like the relationship  between  
containers  and their  contents,  and the natural  language  understanding  community  has 
struggled  for decades  with semantic  parsing,  Transformers  like GPT2  seem  as if they  
cut the Gordian  knot—without  recourse  to any explicit  knowledge  engineering   (or 
semantic  parsing)—whatsoever.   
There  are, for example,  no knowledge -engineered  rules  within  GPT -2, no specificatio n 
of liquids  relative  to containers,  nor any specification  that water  even  is a liquid.  In the 
examples  we saw earlier  
If you break  a glass  bottle  of water,  the water  will probably  flow out if it's full, it will make  
a splashing  noise.  
there  is no mapping  from  the concept  H20 to the word  water , nor any explicit  
representations  of the semantics  of a verb,  such  as break  and flow.  
To take  another  example,  GPT -2 appears  to encode  something  about  fire, as well:  
a good  way  to light  a fire is to use a lighter.   
a good  way  to light  a fire is to use a match  
Compared  to Lenat’s  decades -long  project  to hand  encode  human  knowledge  in 
machine  interpretable  form,  this appears  at first glance  to represent  both  an overnight  
success  and an astonishing  savings  in labor.  
§ 
The trouble  is that GPT -2’s solution  is just an approximation  to knowledge,  and not 
substitute  for knowledge  itself.  In particular  what  it acquires  is an approximation  to the 
statistics  of how  words  co-occur  with  one another  in large  corpora—rather than  a clean  
representation  of concepts  per se. To put it in a slogan,  it is a model  of word  usage,  not 
a model  of ideas,  with  the former  being  used  as an approximation  to the latter.    
Such  approximations  are something  like shadows  to a complex  three -dimensional  
world.  The concepts  of bottles  and breaking,  via the usage  of words  associated  with  
them,  cast shadows  on corpora  that encode  a subset  of human  interaction.  Transformers  
analyze  the shadows  left by the words,  like the prisoners  in Plato’s  allegory  of the cave . 
The trouble  is that that analysis  of shadows—the analysis  of co-occurrence  statistics  of 
how  the words  are used  in those  corpora—doesn't  necessarily  reveal  anything  about  
what a bottle  actually  is or what  it is to shatter  one. 
The truth  is that GPT -2 has little  clue about  what  is (and  is not) relevant  about  the 
concepts  that underlie  the words  that it analyzes.  Consider  what  happens  for example  if, 
following  classic  experimen ts by Frank  Keil (Keil,  1992) ], you pit perceptual  features  
against  deeper  conceptual  understanding: