THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  33  interested  in understanding  ‘learning’ that naturally  leads  you to disparage  ‘hand  
coding.’”  
My December  2019  debate  with  Yoshua  Bengio  was similarly  revealing.  He said that it 
was acceptable  to prespecify  convolution,  because  it would  only  take “three  lines  of 
code”, but worried  about  expanding  the set of priors  (bits  of innate/prior  knowledge)  
far beyond  convolution,  particularly  if those  priors  would  require  that more  than  a few 
bits of information  be specified.   
As I expressed  to him there,  I wouldn’t  worry  so much  about  the bits. More  than  90% of 
our genome  is expressed  in the development  of the brain  (Miller  et al., 2014;  Bakken  et 
al., 2016) , and a significant  number  of those  genes  are expressed  selectively  in particular  
areas,  giving  rise to detailed  initial  structure.  And  there  are many  mechanisms  by which  
comp lex structures  are specified  using  a modest  number  of genes;  in essence  the 
genome  is compressed  way  of building  structure,  semi -autonomously  (Marcus,  2004) ; 
there’s  no reason  to think  that biological  brains  are limited  to just a few “small”  priors.   
Kevin  Mitchell  recently  summed  up the situation  nicely,  in a post -debate  followup . 
It’s certainly  true that there  isn’t enough  information  in the genome  to specify  the 
precise  outcome  of neural  development,  in terms  of the number  and position  and 
connectivity  of every  neuron  in the brain.  The genome  only encodes  a set of mindless  
biochemical  rules  that, when  played  out across  the dynamic  self-organising  system  of the 
developing  embryo,  lead to an outcome  that is within  a range  of operational  parameters  
defined  by natural  selection.  But there’s  plenty  of scope  for those  operational  parameters  
to include  all kinds  of things  we would recognise  as innate  priors.  And there  is plenty  of 
evidence  across  many  species  that many  different  innate  priors  are indeed  pre-wired  into 
the nervous  system  based  on instructions  in the genome.  
And  if the genome  has plenty  of scope  for innate  priors , modern  AI systems  presumably  
have  scope  for even  more;  we live in an era in which  computer  memory  is measured  in 
gigabytes  and terabytes,  not bytes  or kilobytes.  The real question  for AI should  be not, 
how small  can we make  our library  of priors ?, but what set of priors  could  most  effectively  set 
the stage  for learning ? Minimizing  the number  of bits, per se, really  shouldn’t  be the 
objective.  
§ 
If there  are three  proposals  for innateness  that come  up over  and over  again,  they  are 
frameworks  for time,  spac e and causality.  
Kant,  for example,  emphasized  the value  of starting  with  a "manifold"  for time,  space,  
and causality.   Spelke  has long  argued  that some  basic,  core knowledge  of objects,  sets 
and places  might  be prerequisite  for acquiring  other  knowledge.  As she put it (Spelke,  
1994) ,  
If children  are endowed  [innately]  with abilities  to perceive  objects,  persons,  sets, and 
places,  then they may use their  perceptual  experience  to learn  about  the properties  and 
behaviors  of such entities…  It is far from  clear  how children  could  learn  anything  about