THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  36  has already  been  codified;  why,  for example,  make  every  system  learn  anew  that object s 
continue  to exist  in space  and time  even  when  they  are occluded,  when  that is a 
universal  truth?  Moreover,  as we have  seen,  eg in the discussion  of GPT -2, learning  
from  scratch  has thus  far been  unreliable.  Without  some  prior  knowledge,  such  as the 
rudim ents of physical  and psychological  reasoning,  almost  none  of what  we might  call 
common  sense  is learned  well.  We need  some  core  knowledge  in order  to direct  the rest 
of what  we learn.  
The need  for a compromise  and innovation  is again  manifest.  We patently  need  systems  
(presumably  neurosymbolic  hybrids)  that can acquire  new  causal  knowledge,  but in 
order  to acquire  that knowledge  we likely  need more  powerful  priors  than we have used to 
date.  
Hence  my third  major  claim::  rather  than  starting  each  new  AI system from  scratch,  as a 
blank  slate,  with  little  knowledge  of the world,   we should  seek  to build  learning  
systems  that start  with  initial  frameworks  for domains  like time,  space,  and causalit y,  
in order  to speed  up learning  and massively  constrain  the hypothesis  space .   
Whether  such  frameworks  represented  in formal  logic  (a la Cyc)  or other  means,  
perhaps  not yet invented,  I strongly  suspect  they  are a prerequisite  for any serious  
progress  towards  robust  intelligence.   No amount  of innateness  can be a substitute  for 
learning,  but unfocused  learning  is not enough.  The name  of the game  is to find the set 
of innate  priors,  however  small  or large,  that will best facilitate  the learning  of the 
immense  library  of knowledge  our systems  ultimately  need.  
All that said, knowledge  by itself  is not enough.  That  knowledge  must  be put into 
practice—with  tools  for reasoning,  and in the context  of cognitive  models—the two 
topics  to which  I turn  to next.  
2.3. Reasoning  
In a famous  anecdote,  probably  made  better  in the retel ling but apparently  based  in a 
kernel  of truth ,  the legendary  actor  Laurence  Olivier  is on set with  the young  Dustin  
Hoffman,  who  has given  up some  sleep  in order  that his character  might  appear  to be 
exhausted.  Olivier  says  to Hoffman,  "Dear  boy,  you look  absolutely  awful.  Why don't  
you try acting?  It's so much  easier."   
I feel the same  way  about  memorization  versus  reasoning.  Current  approaches  to AI are 
largely  trying  to cope  with  the complexity  of the world  by trying  to memorize  (or at 
least  approximate)  the probability  density  function  for the entire  world—at the cost of 
insatiably  needing  more  and more  data.  Given  the exponential  complexity  of the world,  
it's a strategy  that is unlikely  to work.  
Reasoning  offers  an alternative;  instead  of memorizing  everything,  or interpolating  
between  near  neighbors  that you might  have  previously  encountered,  you draw  
inferences.  Instead  of memorizing  the fact that Plato  and Aristotle  and Euripides  and 
each  of the other  billions  of other  individuals  preceding  us were  all mortal,  you learn  a