THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  43  a large  degree  on verbal  overlap  between  question  and answer  and (c) have  very  
limited  ability  to incorporate  prior  knowledge.  Perhaps  most  importantly,  (d) they  don't  
produce  rich cognitive  models  that could  be passed  to reasoners  as their  output.  Peter  
Norvig's  dissertation  on story  understanding  (Norvig,  1986)  attempted  to do something  
like this in a classic  symbol -manipulation  framework , as was much  of Schank’s  and 
Abelseon’s   (Schank  & Abelson,  1977)  seminal  work,  but so far as I know  story  
understanding  is no longer  an active  current  area of research.   It is a  vital  question  that 
has been  abandoned,  rather  than  resolved.  (Schank  & Abelson,  1977)  
The closest  active  literature  I know  of is work  on scene  comprehension,  which  
ultimately  aims  to interpret  visual  scenes  not only  in terms  of what  objects  are there,  but 
how  the objects  relate  to one another,  e.g. not just identifying  a glass  and a table,  but 
taking  note  of the fact that a particular  glass  is on a table,  in a particular  room,  that that 
glass  is near  the edge  of the table  and that it is supported  by the table,  and so forth.  This  
is already  somewhat  beyond  the state  of the art17; ultimately,  cognitive  model  induction  
needs  to go much  further;  we also need  for example  to identify  psych ological  
relationships,  both  at a superficial  level  eg. person  1 is talking  to person  2, and 
ultimately  at a more  sophisticated  level  (e.g. person  1 is talking  to person  2 in order  to 
deceive  person  2, such  that person  2 will give  person  1 money).  At least  some  of our 
symbols  must  in some  way  ground  in our perceptual  experience,  and if we are to 
interpret  scenes  in terms  of symbols,  we must  have  ways  of inferring  symbols  (and  
structured  relationships  among  symbols)  from  input.   Building  adequate  models  will 
also require  systems  that can infer  temporal  boundaries  and temporal  relationships,  and 
so forth.  
Scene  comprehension  is just one instance  of a larger  problem;  we need  to do the same  
thing  every  time  we understand  a story,  or read  an article,  in this case from  words  
rather  than  direct  visual  experience.   
In our first forays  into robust  intelligence,  we cannot  expect  to build  machines  that 
comprehend  Shakespeare,  but we can aspire  for much  more  than  we've  got. My 
 
17 In my view  current  work  scene  comprehension  is poor,  in part because  a lot of the work  tries  
to recognize  scenes  as a whole  ("pers on cooking  meal")  rather  than  in terms  of sets of 
individuals  (such  as people  or objects)  and relations  between  those  entities,  and in part 
because  it aims  to do largely  without  reasoning,  and reasoning  is sometimes  essential  for 
constructing  models  that are coherent.  Because  the number  of possibilities  is exponentially  
large,  techniques  that are suitable  for classifying  images  from  finite  set of categories  unlikely  
to suffice;  rather,  reasoning  itself  must  contribute  (alongside  of object  classification)  to the 
process  of inducing  cognitive  models  from  scenes.  One  promising  recent  probabilistic  
generative  model , GENESIS,  explicitly  models  dependencies  between  scene  components  
(Engelcke,  Kosiorek,  Jones,  & Posner,  2019 ). See also DeepMind’s  MONet  (Burgess  et al., 
2019) and MERLIN  (Wayne  et al., 2018)  as well  the expressive  generative  model  in (Gregor  et 
al., 2019) ] and.  e.g., inverse  graphics  papers  by Vicarious  (Kansky  et al., 2017;  George  et al., 
2017)  and Josh  Tenenbaum’s  group  (Mao  et al., 2019;  Veerapaneni  et al., 2019) .