THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  40  able to tell until  we get our first two houses --architecture  and knowledge  
representation -in order.  
But we can already  know  this:   because  of the complexity  of the world,  we need something  of 
the sort. And it is clear  that we need  new  benchmarks  to push  our systems  to do the 
kind  of sophisticated  reasoning  that the Romeo  and Juliet  scenario  exemplifies . Because  
we can neither  encode  every  scenario  in advance,  nor hope  always  to interpolate  
between  known  cases , a reasoning  system  that can leverage  large -scale  background  knowledge  
efficiently,  even when  available  information  is incomplete  is a prerequisite  to robustness .   
Recent  work  by Minervini  et al (Minervini  et al., 2019)  gives  me hope  that a 
neurosymbolic  hybrid  approach  could  break  new  ground.  Besold  et al. (Besold,  Garcez,  
Stenning,  van der Torre,  & van Lambalgen,  2017)  offer  another  starting  point.  The very  
fact that people  are trying  gives  me more  hope;  reasoning  and knowledge  need  to be 
first-class  citizens  if we are to move  forward,  and it is good  to see people  trying.  
2.4. Cognitive  models  
A special  sort of knowledge  is the knowledge  that accumulates  over  time  about  
particular  states  of affairs,  such  as what  we might  learn  about  a friend  in the course  of a 
conversation,  about  a nation  in the course  reading  the news,  or about  a set of people  as 
we read  a book.  In cognitive  psychology,  we call such  accumulating  representations,  
cognitive  models. Your  cognitive  model  might  differ  from  mine;  yours  might  be more  
detailed,  mine  might  be less detailed,  but we both  use them,  routinely.  But minimally,  a 
cognitive  model  might  consist  of knowledge  about  some  set of entities  (e.g.,  the 
characters  in a story  and the objects  they  have  available  to them),  some  set of properties  
(e.g.,  the size and colors  of the objects,  the goals  of the characters,  etc), and information  
about  time  and events  (at what  time  t did character  x meet  character  y, and what  did x  
know  at time  t). 
The propositions  and time  markers  in the CYC/Romeo  and Juliet  illustration,  such  as 
sets of explicit  representations  of complex  facts  about  believed  what  and when,  are one 
example  of what  a rich cognitive  model  might  encode  in an AI syste m. One can also 
think  of Johnson -Laird's  (Johnson -Laird,  1983)  work  on mental  models.  If I tell you that 
there  is an empty  bookshelf,  and explain  that I then  place  two books  on the shelf,  you 
construct  some  sort of internal  repr esentation  of bookshelf  containing  two books.  If I 
then  tell you that I have  added  another  book  to the shelf,  you update  your  representation  
such  that you now  have  an internal  representation  of a bookshelf  containing  three  
books.  To understand  something  is, to a large  degree,  to infer  a model  of what  it is, and 
ultimately  to be able to make  inferences  about  how  it operates,  and what  might  happen  
next.   
This  is by no means  a trivial  process.  Any  GOFAI  researcher  can describe  how,  in 
principle,  one can constr uct (some)  complex  cognitive  models  manually,  but inferring  
what  the right  cognitive  model  might  be on a particular  occasion  is a complex  process,