THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  18  The bad news  is that these  early  hybrid  approaches  never  got much  traction.  The results  
in those  days  were  not compelling  (perhaps  partly  because  in those  pre-TPU  days  
neural  networks  themselves  then  were  underpowered).  And  the neural  network  
community  has often  been  dismissive  of hybrids  (and  of anything  involving  symbol -
manipulation).  All too often,  until  recently,  hybrids  have  historically  been caught  in a 
crossfire  between  symbolic  and neural  approaches.  
The good news  is that a long -overdue  thaw  between  the symbol -manipulation  world  
and the deep -learning  field  seems  finally  to be coming.  Yoshua  Bengio,  for example,  in 
our December  2019  debate  talked  about  incorporating  techniques  that could  pass  
variables  by name,  a standard  symbol -manipulating  technique  used  in some  earlier  
computer  languages.  And  there  is a growing  effort  that is actively  trying  to build  
symbols  and neural  networks  closer  together,  sometimes  out of practical  necessity,  
sometimes  in a research  effort  to develop  new  approaches.  
Some  of the most  massive,  active  commercial  AI systems  in the world,  such  as Google  
Search,  are in fact hybrids  that mix symbol -manipulation  operations  with deep  
learning.  While  Google  Search  is hardly  what  we have  in mind  for robust  artificial  
intelligence,  it is a highly  effective  AI-powered  information  retrieval  system  that works  
at enormous  volume  with  a high  degree  of accuracy.  Its designers  have  optimized  it 
extensively  in a highly  data -driven  way  and are currently  (according  to multiple  
sources)  achieving  best results  by mixing  techniques  from  classic,  symbol -manipulating  
AI (e.g.,  tools  for representing  and querying  Google  Knowledge  Graph,  which  
represents  knowledge  using  classic  symbolic  graph  structures  that)  with  tools  from  the 
neural  network  community  (e.g.,  BERT  and RankBrain).   Google  does  an enormous  
empirical  experimentation  to see what  works  well  on a vast scale,  and the fact they  still 
make  use of Google  Knowledge  Graph,  even  in the era of deep  learning,  speaks  both  to 
the value  of symbols  and the value  of hybrids.  (Unfortunately,  I know  of no detailed  
public  discussion  of the relative  strengths  and weaknesses  of the various  components.)  
AlphaGo  is a merger  of Monte  Carlo  Tree  Search  (wherein  a dynamically -constructed,  
symbolically -represented  search  tree is traversed  and evaluated ) and a variety  of deep  
learning  modules  for estimating  the value  of various  positions.  Deep  learning  alone  
produ ces weaker  play.  
OpenAI's  Rubik's  solver  (OpenAI  et al., 2019)  is (although  it was not pitched  as such)  is 
a hybrid  of a symbolic  algorithm  for solving  the cognitive  aspects  of a Rubik's  cube,  and 
deep  reinforcement  learning  for the manual  manipulation  aspects.   
At a somewhat  smaller  scale  Mao  et al., (Mao,  Gan,  Kohli,  Tenenbaum,  & Wu, 2019)  
have  recently  proposed  a hybrid  neural  net-symbolic  system  for visual  question  
answering  called  NS-CL (short  for the Neuro -Symbolic  concept  learner)  that surpasses  
the deep  learning  alternatives  they  examined.  Related  work  by Janner  et al (Janner  et al., 
2018) . pairs  explicit  records  for individual  objects  with  deep  learning  in order  to make  
predictions  and physics -based  plans  that far surpass  a comparable  pure  black  box deep -
learning  approach.   Evans  and Grefenstette  (Evans  & Grefenstette,  2017)  showed  how  a