THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  35  What  we should  be asking  is not what’s  the least innate  structure  I can get away  with?  but 
rather  what  sorts  of priors  do I need?, and can my existing  architectures  incorporate  them  
effectively?  Can we build  a richer  innate  basis  with  a deep  learning  substrate,  or are there  
limits  to what  can be conveniently  innately  represented  in that framework?  Might  we 
need  explicit  symbol -manipulati ng machinery  in order  to represent  other  types  of 
abstractions,  such  as causal  ones?  Deep  learning  has proven  adept  at representing  
knowledge  about  what  objects  look  like,  but less adept  at acquiring  and representing  
knowledge  about  how  the physical  world  works  (Zhang,  Wu, Zhang,  Freeman,  & 
Tenenbaum,  2016) , and about  how  humans  interact  with  one another,  and more  
generally  about  causal  relationships.   
Other  approaches,  such  as probabilistic  programming,  that allow  for explicitly -
represented  symbolic  constraints  while  at the same  time  striving  to learn  from  subtle  
statistical  information,  are worth  serious  consideration.  
§ 
Taking  a step back  to stock,  the vast majority  of what  human  beings  know  about  the 
world  is learn ed: 
the fact that boats  tend to float rather  than sink 
the facts boats  do tend to sink if they develop  holes  below  the water  line. 
the fact that lighters  are better  than cotton  balls for starting  fires 
the fact that shattered  bottles  leak 
and on and on, almost  endlessly.  Whatever  core knowledge  we possess  clearly  must  be 
supplemented  by an enormous  amount  of learned  knowledge  
It is not unreasonable  to think  that the average  human  being  might  know  (or 
immediately  recognize  as true)  millions  or perhaps  tens of millions  of such  facts;  the 
great  majority  of these  must  be learned,  whether  through  experience,  or explicit  
instruction,  or other  means.  Importantly,  virtually  any of that knowledge  can be put 
into practice,  governing  action  and decision -making  (e.g.,  we would  choose  not to 
board  a boat  if we discovered  that the boat  had a hole  below  the water  line).  
But importantly,  a significant  fraction  of our learned  knowledge  is both  causal  and 
abstract,  which  likely  necessitates  the uses  of some  sort of hybrid  arch itecture,  per the 
discussion  in the previous  section.  
Meanwhile,  pure  prewiring  will never  suffice,  because  the world  itself  constantly  
changes;  there  will always,  for example,  be new causal  principles  associated  with  new  
bits of technology.  If someone  introduces  a popular  new  gadget  called  a Framulator™,  
we quickly  learn  what  a Framulator  does,  how  to turn  it on and off, and how  to make  it 
do its thing.  Children  do this naturally,  as Gopnik  and Sobel  (Gopnik  & Sobel,  2000)  
have  elegantly  shown;  we need  machines  that can do the same.   
But we probably  cannot  and should  not learn  all of our abstract  and causal  knowledge  
from  experience  alone.  Doing  so would  be wildly  inefficient,  when  so much  knowledge