THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  53  write  this essay  at all. But, maybe,  just maybe  there's  enough  already  out there  that if 
we squint,  and look  at all the pieces  around  us, we might  be able to imagine  what  the 
elephant  might  look  like, if we were  to put it all together.  
 A few thoughts:  
• Deep  learning  has shown  us how  much  can be learned,  from  massive  amounts  of 
data.  Co-occurrence  statistics  and the like may  be mere  shadows  of robust  knowledge,  
but there  are sure are a lot of shadows,  and maybe  we can put those  shadows  to use, 
with  more  sophisticated  techniques,  so long  as we are keenly  aware  of both  their  
strengths  and their  limitations.   
• CYC  shows  the potential  power  of sophisticated  reasoning  in the presence  of rich 
knowledge  bases  and rich cognitive  models,  even  if on its own,  it is not capable  of 
deriving  those  models  directly  from  language  or perceptual  inputs.  
• Systems  like NS-CL (Mao  et al., 2019)  show  us that symbol  manipulation  and deep  
learning  can, at least  in principle,  if not yet at scale,  be integrated  into a seamless  
whole  that can both  perceive  and reason.  
That's  a lot. If we can break  out of silos,  and cease  the hostilities  that have  slowed  
progress  for six decades,  and instead  focus  on an earnest  effort  to try bridging  these  
worlds,  prospects  are good.  Mixing  metaphors  slightly,  perhaps  the best way  to stave  
off the next  possible  AI winter  may  be to rest our tent not on one pole,  but on many.  
3.4 Conclusions,  prospects,  and implications  
Nothing  requires  us to abandon  deep  learning,  nor ongoing  work  that focuses  on topics  
such  as new  hardware,  learning  rules,  evaluation  metrics,  and training  regimes,  but it 
urges  a shift  from  a perspective  in which  learning  is more  or less the only  first-class  
citizen  to one in which  learning  is a central  member  of a broader  coalition  that is more  
welcoming  to variables,  prior  knowledge,  reasoning,  and rich cognitive  models.  
I have  advocated  for a four -step program:  initial  development  of hybrid  neuro -symbolic  
architectures,  followed  by construction  of rich,  partly -innate  cognitive  frameworks  and 
large -scale  knowledge  databases,  followed  by further  development  of tools  for abstract  
reasoning  over  such  frameworks,  and,  ultimately,  more  sophisticated  mechanisms  for 
the representation  and induction  of cognitive  models.  Taken  together,  progress  towards  
these  four prerequisites  could  provide  a substrate  for richer,  more  intelligent  systems  
than  are currently  possible.   Ultimately,  I think  that will redefine  what  we even  mean  by 
learning , leading  to a (perhaps  new)  form  of learning  that traffics  in abstract,  language -
like generalizations,  from  data,  relative  to knowledge  and cognitive  models,  
incorporating  reasoning  as part of the learning  process.  
If none  of what  I described  is individually  or even  collectively  sufficient,  it is, I believe,  
at least  enough  to bring  us much  closer  to a framework  for AI that we can trust.