THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  52  discussion  in his AAAI  Presidential  Address  (Dietterich,  2017)  that I discovered  
belatedly,  after  Rebooting  AI came  out. Davis  and I emphasized  techniques  like 
redundancy  and specifying  tolerances  that have  long  served  other  forms  of engineering.  
Dietterich  made  eight  suggestions,  well  worth reading,  such  as constructing  
optimizations  functions  to be sensitive  to reward  and directly  constructing  machinery  
for detecting  model  failures;  like us, he also emphasized  the need  for causal  models  and 
the value  of redundancy.  Joelle  Pineau's  points  about  replicability  are also essential  
(Henderson  et al., 2017) . 
3.2.2.  Culture  
There  is something  else that needs  to be fixed,  having  to do with  neither  cognitive  
prerequisites  nor sound  engineering  practice,  and that is culture:  something  is seriously  
amiss  with  certain  elements  of the deep  learning  community,  in a way  that is not 
conducive  to progress.  This  is an elephant  in the room,  and it must  be acknowledged  
and addressed,  if we are to move  forw ard. 
In particular  outside  perspectives,  particularly  critical  ones,  are often  treated  with  a 
kind  of extreme  aggression  (borne  of decades  of counterproductive  hostilities  on both  
side)19 that should  have  no place  in intellectual  discourse,  particularly  in a field  that 
almost  certainly  needs  to become  interdisciplinary  if it is to progress.    
Students  are not blind  to this dynamic,  and have  come  to recognize  that speaking  up for 
symbol -manipulation  as a component  to AI can cause  damage  to their  careers.  After my 
debate  with  Bengio,  for example,  a young  researcher  from  a prominent  deep  learning  
lab wrote  to me privately,  saying   "I've  actually  wanted  to write  something  … about  
symbolic  AI for two years,  and refrained  from  doing  it every  time  over  fear that it could  
have  repercussions  of one kind  or another  on my future  career  path."   
This  is a counterproductive  state  of affairs.  As Hinton  himself  once  said, "Max  Planck  
said,  'Science  progresses  one funeral  at a time.'20 The future  depends  on some  graduate  
student  who  is deeply  suspicious  of everything  I have  said."  Progress  often  depends  on 
students  recognizing  the limits  of the theories  of their  elders;  if students  are afraid  to 
speak,  there  is a serious  problem.   
3.3. Seeing  the whole  elephant,  a little  bit at a time  
The good  news  is that if we can start  to work  together,  progress  may  not be so far away.    
If the problem  of robust  intelligence  had already  been  solved,  there  would  be no need  to 
 
19 A second  cultural  issue,  as one reader  of this manuscript  pointed  out, is that advocates  of deep  learning  
have  often  put far too much  stock  in big data,  often  assuming,  sometimes  incorrectly,  that the answers  
to complex  problems  can largely  be found  in ever -bigger  data  sets and larger  and larger  clusters  of 
compute.  Whole  fields,  such  as linguistics,  have  largely  been  dismissed  along  the way.  This  cannot  be 
good.  
20 Strictly  speaking,  Planck  never  actually  said quite  that:  see 
https://quoteinvestigator.com/2017/09/25/progress/