THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  39  • This  represen ts a best-case  proof  of concept  that shows  the potential  value  of 
having  rich cognitive  models  and rich knowledge  about  biology,  theory  of mind,  
and so forth.  
• It relies  heavily,  however,  on a great  deal of prior  work  that has done  by hand  by 
knowledge  engi neers  that have  manually  translated  Romeo  and Juliet  into formal  
logic;  a system  that could  generate  representations  of this sort automatically  and 
reason  at comparable  levels  would  represent  a major  breakthrough.   
• Reasoning  per se is not necessarily  the bottleneck  towards  robust  AI; the real 
bottleneck  may  lie in having  the right  information  accessible  in the context  of real-
world  inference.  
Of course,  CYC  is far from  perfect . And  too little  in the world  comes  in sufficiently  
prepackaged  form  for CYC  to work  with.  CYC  doesn't  have  much  of a natural  language  
front -end and no vision;  to get it to reason,  you need  to have  your  problem  already  
represented  in logical  form.  Since  very  few problems  come  prepackaged  that way,  there  
is comparatively  little  immediate  commercial  application.  But it is an existence  proof  
that subtle  reasoning  is possible,  within  a system  that combines  large -scale  abstract  
knowledge  with  higher -order  reasoning  implemented  in a variety  of formal  logic.  
Even  in CYC's  ability  to reason,  there  is no doubt  plenty  of room  for improvement.  Its 
representations  are primarily  (or perhaps  entirely)  the stuff  of higher -order  logic;  it's 
not clear  to what  degree  it can represent  uncertainty , and reason  over  statistical  
distributions,  and so forth.  As Bertrand  Russell  once  put it, "All human  knowledge  is 
uncertain,  inexact,  and partial”  and it's not clear  how  much  of that uncertainty,  
incompleteness  and inexactitude  CYC  can deal with.14  
And  one suspects  that,  like much  else in classical  and neural  AI, it is likely  to be brittle,  
highly  dependent  on both  the specific  knowledge  in its databases  and the precise  ways  
in which  a complex  scenario  is mapped  onto  its internal  logic.  
Still,  it–or something  else capable  of doing  similar  work,  perhaps  using  a different  approach–
seems  like a necessary  step along  the way  to robust  reasoning.  An AI that can't  
understand  a plot summary  of Romeo  and Juliet  is not likely  to be competent  in the 
complexity  of the real world.  An AI that can reason  about  the motivations  of interacting  
humans  as complex  events  as they  unfold  over  time  has a fighting  chance.  
An optimistic  possibility  is that reasoning  may  sort itself  out, once  the prerequisites  of 
hybrid  architec ture knowledge  are better  developed;  a pessimistic  possibility  is that we 
may  need  significant  improvements  in reasoning  per se, at the very  least  in terms  of 
scalability  and the ability  to deal with  incomplete  knowledge.   We may  not really  be 
 
14 Another  issue  is the many  limitations  humans  face in reasoning,  such  as confirmation  bias,  motivated  
reasoning,  context  effects,  the conjunction  fallacy,  and so forth.  In an ideal  world,  we would  learn  from  
what  humans  do well,  but leave  these  anomalies  behind.  For discussions  of why  humans  might  have  
evolved  such  cognitive  inefficiencies  even  though  such  cognitive  errors  may  not be functionally  optimal  
see Marcus  (Marcus,  2008) .