THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  46  Human:  What  are some  of your  new year resolutions?  
Meena:  Lose 60 pounds  Learn  Cantonese  Learn  French  
Human:  Don't  you think,  that's  pretty  far fetched?  :P 
Meena:  Not really.  I'm currently  down  35 pounds,  I can already  speak  Cantonese  to a basic  level,  
and I'm already  learning  French  in school.  
Human:  Wao!  That's  impressive!  
Meena:  I'm learning  French  on the side, it's really  easy for me since  I'm a native  Cantonese  
speaker.  
There  is no recognition  that you can't  learn  a language  that you already  know  (missing  
background  knowled ge) and no underlying  internal  model  of whether  Meena  does  or 
does  not speak  Cantonese.  The sentence -by-sentence  predictions  are outstanding;  the 
totality  is incoherent.  
§ 
While  I was revising  an early  draft  of this paper  I started  drafting  a figure  with  the 
sentence  The cat is on the mat.  My plan  was to show  how  the sentence  was interpreted,  
following  a path  from  syntax  to semantics  to updatable  cognitive  models  that would  
keep  track  of entities  (e.g, cats and mats)  and their  properties  and relations  betwe en one 
another;  the goal  was to show  how  GPT -2 was trying  to short -circuit  that path,  to mixed  
results.  
 Before  I could  finish  drafting  the figure,  though,  my 5.5- and 7-year -old children  looked  
over  my shoulder,  and read  the cat on mat sentence  aloud,  giggling.   I turned  to the 
older  one and asked  him,  "could  you put an elephant  on the mat?"  He answered,  it 
depends;  if it was a really  big mat,  you could,  if it was a little  mat you couldn't.  He had 
instantaneously  formed  a model  of a fictional  world  and the entities  that populated  that 
world,  and applied  his general  commonsense  knowledge  to reason  about  the world,  
entirely  without  labeled  examples.   
When  he left the room,  I quizzed  his sister,  my 5.5 year -old daughter.  She understood  
the earlier  conversation  perfectly  well,  and provided  a similarly  appropriate,  it-depends  
answer  to my elephant  and mat query.   When  I then  asked  her whether  a house  could  
fit on the mat,  she proved  equally  adept  at constructing  a model  and reasoning  over  its 
unspecif ied parameters  in order  to derive  reasonable  conclusions.  
There  is just no way  we can build  reliable,  robust  AI with  systems  that cannot  match  the 
basic  reasoning  and model  construction  young  children  routinely  do. Waiting  for 
cognitive  models  and reasonin g to magically  emerge  from  larger  and larger  training  
corpora  is like waiting  for a miracle.  
The bottom  line is this: too little  current  research  is being  directed  towards  building  
systems  with  cognitive  models.  The emphasis  on end-to-end learning  with  massive 
training  sets has distracted  from  the core of what  higher -level  cognition  if about.  Most  
researchers  aren't  even  trying  to build  systems  that revolve  around  cognitive  models,