THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  28  that can. Machines  must  be able to represent  knowledge  in something  like the way  in 
which  we represent  what  linguists  call generics:  knowledge  that is generally  true,  but 
admits  of exceptions  (airplanes  fly, but we recognize  that a particular  plane  might  be 
grounded)  and need  not even  be statistically  true in a proponderance  of cases  
(mosquitos  carry  malaria  is important  knowledge,  but only  a small  fraction  of 
mosquitos  actually  carry  malaria).  Systems  that can only  acquire  rules  but not 
exceptions  (e.g.  Evans  and Grefenstette  (Evans  & Grefenstette,  2017) ]) are an 
interesting  step along  the way  to building  systems  that can acquire  abstract  
knowledge,  but not sufficient.  
• Some  significant  fraction  of the knowledge  that a robust  system  is likely  to be 
causal,  and to support  counterfactuals.   Sophisticated  people  don’t,  for example,  just 
know  that states  have  capitals,  they  know  that those  capitals  are determined,  
politically,  by the actions  of people,  and that those  decisions  can occasionally  be 
changed.  Albany  is the present  capital  of New  York  State,  but if the capital  were 
(counterfactually)  burned  to the ground,  we recognize  that the state  might  choose  a 
new  capital.   Children  know  that when  glass  bottles  drop  against  hard  floors,  those  
bottles  may  break.  
• Although  it is relatively  easy  to scrape  the web  for factual  knowl edge,  such  as 
capitals  and birthplaces,  a lot of the abstract  knowledge  that we have  is harder  to 
glean  through  web -scraping ; few people,  for example,  write  essays  about  broken  
bottles  and their  contents.  For the most  part,  as Lenat  once  noted,  writers  don't write  
down  common  sense,  because  their  readers  already  know  it.  (Blind  webscraping  has 
other  issues  too; for example,  historical  biases,  such  doctors  being  male,  tend  to get 
automatically  perpetuated  by naive  scraping  systems.)  
• The relevant  knowledge  needs  to be extremely  broad  in scope . Understanding  a 
single  novel,  for example,  could  require  knowledge  of technology,  political  entities,  
money,  weather,  human  interaction,  etiquette,  sexuality,  violence,  avarice,  and so 
forth.  The crucial  plot turn  in John Grisham’s  first bestselling  novel  The Firm , for 
example,  rested  on an understanding  of what  a photocopier  could  do, and how  fast it 
could  do it, juxtaposed  against  a deep  understanding  of human  motivations  and 
temporal  reasoning.  
• Putting  knowledge  into practice  is hard . It's one thing  to have  a giant  database  of 
knowledge  that includes.,  e.g, facts  about  photocopiers  and their  speed  of operation,  
and another  to integrate  just that knowledge  (amid  a vast library  of other  less relevant  
information)  in the context  of mission -critical  temporal  reasoning  concerning  the 
narrow  time  window  in which  the heroic  lawyer  had available  before  he would  be 
caught  in his secretive  but noble  information  gather ing act. Connecting  abstract  
knowledge  to specific  real-world  situations  at scale  in an efficient  fashion  is 
essentially  an unsolved  problem.