THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  42  considerable  retraining,  precisely  because  they  lack rich cognitive  models  of the 
environments  in which they  operate.16  
The range  of failures  in language  understanding  of current  Transformers  such  as GPT -2 
(see Marcus,  2019,  2020)  reflects  something  similar:  the schism  between  predicting  
general  tendencies  (like  the likelihood  of the phrase  mom's  house  appearing  the 
neighbo rhood  of the words  and phrases  such  as  drop,  off, pick,  up and clothing  in the 
corpora  GPT -2) and the capacity  to represent,  update,  and manipulate  cognitive  
models . When  BERT  and GPT -2 failed  to track  where  the dry cleaning  would  be it was a 
direct  reflection  of the fact GPT  and BERT  have no representation  of the properties  of individual  
entities  as they evolve  over time. Without  cognitive  models,  systems  like these  are lost. 
Sometimes  they  get lucky  from  statistics,  but lacking  cognitive  models  they  have  no 
reliable  foundation  with  which  to reason  over.  
The lack of cognitive  models  is also bleak  news  for anyone  hoping  to use a Transformer  
as input  to a downstream  reasoning  system.  The whole  essence  of lang uage  
comprehension  is to derive  cognitive  models  from  discourse;  we can then  reason  over  
the models  we derive.  Transformers,  at least  in their  current  form,  just don't  do that 
Predicting  word  classes  is impressive,  but in of itself  prediction  does  not equa l 
understanding.  
§ 
As we saw with  the Romeo  and Juliet  example  in Section  4.3, CYC  is immensely  better  
off inasmuch  as it can (at least  to some  non-trivial  degree)  reason  over  cognitive  models  
(eg its list of time  points  and facts  about  characters  and locales known  at various  time  
points,  excerpted  in Figure  2) in association  with  background  (common  sense  
knowledge) --but still tragically  flawed  because  it cannot,  on its own,  derive  the relevant  
cognitive  models.   Any  system  that could  take  natural  language  Wikipedia  plot 
summaries  on their  own  (such  as the one in Figure  2 left panel)  as input  and 
automatically  derive  detailed  cognitive  models  on its own  (of the sort CYC’s  
programmers  manually  constructed)  such  that downstream  reasoners  could  reason  
over  them  would  be a major  step forward  relative  to current  AI.  
Unfortunately,  very  few people  are working  on deriving  rich cognitive  models  from  
texts  (let alone  videos)  that describe  events  that develop  over  time  A paper  by Pasupat  
and Liang  (Pasupat  & Liang,  2015)  tries  to parse  sentences  into programmable  queries  
that can be run over  tables,  but that system  doesn't  try to accumulate  models  over  time.  
A few papers  from  Facebook  AI Research  on models  such  as Memory  Networks  
(Bordes,  Usunier,  Chopra,  & Weston,  2015)  and Recurrent  Entity  Networks  (Henaff,  
Weston,  Szlam,  Bordes,  & LeCun,  2016)  that can take  simple  stories  as input  and answer  
some  basic  questi ons about  them.  But these  systems  (a) require  a large  amount  of input  
relative  to each  question  that they  answer  and (b) seem  to be limited  in scope,  relying  to 
 
16 Interesting  work  towards  integrating  more  Ha and Schmidhuber  (Ha & Schmidhuber,  2018)  and 
(Veerapaneni  et al., 2019) .