THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  41  often  with  more  than  one plausible  answer  in a given  situation,  and in no way  yet 
automated.   
The CYC  example  Romeo  and Juliet  is compelling  in that the inferences  the system  
derives  are sophisticated  and sensible,  but disappointing  in that the underlying  model  
is hand -coded,  rather  than  induced  from  a script  of the play.  That  makes  the system  fine 
for demonstrat ion purposes,  but in the real world,  for cognitive  models  to pave  the way  
to robust  artificial  intelligence,  we to find ways  of inferring  them  from  streams  of data  
(such  as video  or texts)  automatically .   
That's  such  a hard  problem  that (outside  of the domain  of scene  comprehension,  
discussed  below)  most  people  instead  work  on other  things,  and to a surprising  extent  
try to make  do without  cognitive  models  altogether.  
§ 
DeepMind's  Atari  game  system,  DQN,  for example,  almost  entirely  lacks  explicit  
cognitiv e models.  When  DQN  learned  to play  Breakout  it did not abstract  individual  
board  positions  into scene  graphs  representing  the location  and extent  of individual  
bricks;  there  was no direct  representation  of where  the paddle  is, the velocity  of the ball,  
or the underlying  physics  of the game,  nor any abstract  realization  of the ricochet  
dynamic  that makes  the game  so engaging.   In the language  of reinforcement  learning,  
the system  was model -free.15 Yet superhuman  achievement  was achieved.  (Remarkably,  
in some  games,  like Pong,  that are strictly  deterministic  with  known  starting  conditions,  
successful  play  can be achieved  without  looking  at the screen  at all (Koul,  Greydanus,  
Fern  - arXiv  preprint  arXiv:1811.12530,  & 2018,  ). 
But what  is the lesson  from  the success  of systems  like DQN?  In my opinion,  the field  
has overgeneralized.  In closed -end domains  like Breakout,  model -free reinforcement  
learning  often,  given  enough  data  (generally  far more  than  humans  would  require  in 
similar  circumstances),  works  remarkably  well.   But that doesn't  mean  that model -free 
reinforcement  learning  is a good  general  solution  to intelligence.  
The catch  is that model -free solutions  generalize  poorly  outside  the exact  environments  
in which  they  were  induced.   Kansky  et al.,  (Kansky  et al., 2017)  showed  this in a 
compelling  way  by tinkering  with  Breakout;  even  minor  changes—such  as moving  the 
paddle  up a few pixels  up—led to drastic  reductions  in performance.  A human—
working  with  an internal  cognitive  model— could  quickly  compensate;  model -free 
deep  reinforcement  learning  systems  often  can't,  instead  frequently  requiring  
 
15  Hair -splitter s might  argue  that there  is some  sort of internal  model  that is self-generated,  pointing  to 
internal  states  of the system  that to some  degree  correlate  with  classic  cognitive  states,  the more  so with  a 
system  like MuZero  (Schrittwieser  et al., 2019) . In my view,  the limited  ability  of such  systems  to transfer  
to novel  circumstances  (see main  text)  undermine  any strong  claims  of this sort.