THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  26  If you put a costume  on a raccoon  to make  it look  a skunk,  it will be a skunk.  
If you paint  an airplane  so that  it looks  like a dragon,  it will be a dragon.  
Clearly,  knowing  some  statistical  properties  of how  words  are used  in a concept  is not 
sufficient  for understanding  the nature  of the underlying  concepts,  such  as what  makes  
an airplane  an airplane  rather  a dragon  (and  vice versa).   This  recent  anonymous,  under  
review  manuscript  make  a similar  point.  
I am reminded  of a  Scrabble  champions  like Nigel  Richards,  who  won  a French  
Scrabble™  tournament  without  knowing  Frenc h; the individual  words  were  used  as 
mere  game  tokens,  without  any regard  whatsoever  to their  meaning.  In essence,  GPT -2 
predicts  the properties  of sequences  of words  as game  tokens,  without  a clue as to the 
underlying  concepts  being  referenced.   
It does  this so well  that it sometimes  induces  an "Eliza  effect " in which  naive  humans  
attribute  more  to the machine  than  is really  there,  but there's  never  anything  more  than  
a superficial  conceptual  under standing.   
We get similar  results  if we continue  to probe  the fire-starting  example  
a good  way  to light  a fire is to use a dry cotton  ball to cover  the fuse!   
a good  way  to light  a fire is to use a pint-sized  furnace  
The words  fire and fuse and light and so forth  are all intercorrelated;  GPT -2 gets that,  but 
that’s  not enough  for GPT -2 to induce  a conceptual  understanding  of the nature  of fire; 
the results  are spotty.  To put it in an entirely  different  way,  as Judea  Pearl  might  put it, 
this sort of anomalou s behavior  is what  you get when  you try to induce  how  the world  
works  through  approximating  the curves  of the statistics  of how  words  are used,  rather  
than  inducing  a more  abstract,  causal  understanding  of the world.12 Sometimes  that 
works,  sometimes  it doesn’t.   
One cannot  engineer  a robust  system  out of parts  with  so little  guarantee  of reliability.   
§ 
One problem  with  trying  to build  a system  out of parts  with  such  little  reliability  is that 
downstream  inference  will inevitably  suffer.  The whole  point  of having  knowledge  is to 
use it in action  and interpretation  and decision -making.   If you don't  know  what  can 
cause  a fire, or what  happens  when  a bottle  breaks,  it’s hard  to make  inferences  about  
what  is happening  around  you.  Likewise,  you cannot  reliably  plan.  Imagine  a domestic  
robot,  unable  to light  a recalcitrant  stove,  spending  hours  with  dry cotton  balls,  
covering  one fuse after  the next.   
Language  understandin g inevitably  suffers,  as well,  since  we often  disambiguate  
utterances  based  on their  plausibility  and context  (Tanenhaus,  Spivey -Knowlton,  
 
12 There  is an active  effort  within  some  parts  of the deep  learning  community  to try to integrate  causal  
methods;  my guess  is that this cannot  succeed  without  adding  some  amount  of innate  constraint  on how  
causal  knowledge  is represented  and manipulated,  likely  leading  to hybrid  networks  of some  sort.