THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  13  2. Excessive  dependency  on exact  details  of traini ng regime:  whereas  all normal  
human  learners  acquire  their  native  language  and an understanding  of the world,  
despite  highly  varied  circumstances,  neural  networks  often  tend  to be quite  
sensitive  to exact  details  such  as the order  in which  training  items  are presented  
(hence  a literature  on "curricula"  for neural  networks).  Likewise,  it has been  known  
for three  decades  that they  are vulnerable  to a problem  known  as catastrophic  
interference  in which  earlier  associations  are overwritten  by later  associations  
(McCloskey  & Cohen,  1989) , making  them  highly  sensitive  to the sequence  in which  
items  are presented.  Potential  solutions  continue  to be proposed  regularly  
(McClelland,  2019) but the issue  remains.  Likewise,  as one recent  paper  (Hill  et al., 
2019)  put it, “the degree  of generalisation  that networks  exhibit  can depend  
critically  on particulars  of the environment  in which  a given  task is instantiated ”  
§ 
The idiosyncrasy  and inability  to extrapolate  beyond  a training  distribution  is at odds  
with  the generality  of much  of our commonsense  knowledge.   It also makes  causality  
difficult  to reckon  with;  see also Pearl  and Mackenzie  (Pearl  & Mackenzie,  2018) . 
Extending  an example  from  the introduction,  most  ordinary  adults  and children  would  
recognize  (presumably  inducing  from  specific  experiences)  that the following  abstract,  
causal  generalization  is true:  
IF YOU  BREAK  A BOTTLE  THAT  CONTAINS  A LIQUID , SOME  OF THE  LIQUID  WILL  (OTHER  THINGS  
BEING  EQUAL ) PROBABLY  ESCAPE  THE  BOTTLE .   
Such  truths  are abstract  in that they  hold  not just for a few specific  items  but for large,  
essentially  open -ended  classes  of entities,  regardless  of what  color  or shape  the bottle  or 
size the bottle  is, and whether  the bottle  contained  water,  coffee,  or an unusual  soft 
drink.   We expect  a similar  generalization  to hold  for bottles containing  ball bearings  or 
game  dice,  too, even  if our prior  experience  with  broken  bottles  pertained  almost  
exclusively  to bottles  containing  liquids.  
Virtually  everyone  would  also recognize  that the following  generalization  as 
implausible:   
IF YOU  BREAK  A BOTTLE  THAT  CONTAINS  LIQUIDS , SOME  OF THE  LIQUID  WILL  (OTHER  THINGS  
BEING  EQUAL)  PROBABLY  WIND  UP 300 METERS  AWAY . 
Again,  regardless  of individual  experience,  we can extend  this knowledge  in many  
ways,  recognizing  that the claim  is unlikely  to be true of bottles  both  small  and large,  
even  bottles  far smaller  or larger  than  those  previously  encountered.  
How  can we represent  and manipulate  and derive  knowledge  that is that abstract  in 
this sense,  pertaining  not just to specific  entities  but to whole  classes  of things?  
Challenges  in extrapolation  mean  that common  tools  like backpropagation -trained  
multilayer  perceptrons  on their  own  are not the right  tool for the job.  Instead,  it is 
imperative  that we find an alternative  mechanism  for learning,  repres enting,  and 
extending  abstract  knowledge.