THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  7  Scan  the titles  of the latest  papers  in machine  learning,  and you will find fewer  
references  to these  sorts  of ideas.  A handful  will mention  reasoning,  another  smattering  
may  mention  a desire  to implement  common  sense,  most  will (deliberately)  lack 
anything  like rich cognitive  models  of things  like individual  people  and objects,  their  
properties,  and their  relationships  to one another.  
A system  like GPT -2, for instance,  does  what  it does,  for better  and for worse,  without  
any explicit  (in the sense  of directly  represented  and readily  shared)  common  sense  
knowledge,  without  any explicit  reasoning,  and without  any explicit  cognitive  models  
of the world  it that tries  to discuss.   
Many  see this lack of laboriously  encoded  explicit  knowledge  as advantage.  Rather  than  
being  anomalous,  GPT -2 is characteristic  of a current  trend  away  from  the concerns  of 
classical  AI, and towards  a different,  more  data -driven  para digm  that has been  powered  
by the resurgence  of deep  learning  (circa  2012).  That  trend  accelerated  with  DeepMind 's 
much -heralded  Atari  game  system  (Mnih  et al., 2015)  which,  as discussed  later,  
succeeded  in playing  a wide  variety  of games  without  any use of detailed  cognitive  
models.   
This  trend  was recently  crystallized  in a widely  read  essay  by Rich  Sutton,  one of 
founder s of reinforcement  learning.  The essay,  called  "The Bitter  Lesson ", counseled  
explicitly  against  leveraging  human  knowledge:  
The biggest  lesson  that can be read from  70 years  of AI research  is that general  methods  
that leverage  computation  are ultimately  the most  effective,  and by a large  
margin…researchers  seek to leverage  their human  knowledge  of the domain,  but the only 
thing  that matters  in the long run is the leveraging  of computation.  … the human -
knowledge  approach  tends  to complicate  methods  in ways  that make  them  less suited to 
taking  advantage  of general  methods  leveraging  computation.  
To some  extent,  building  human  knowledge  into machine  learning  systems  has even  
been  viewed  within  machine  learning  circles  as cheating,  and certainly  not as desirable.  
In one of DeepMind’s  most  influential  paper  “Mastering  the game  of Go without  human  
knowledge”,  the very  goal  was to dispense  with  human  knowledge  altogether,  so as to 
“learn,  tabula  rasa, superhuman  proficiency  in challenging  domains”  (Silver et al., 2017) . 
If common  sense  could  be induced  from  large -scale  corpora,  with  minimal  prior  
constraint,  a large  subset  of the machine  learning  community  would  be immensely  
pleased.3 Model -building  too, has proven  to be hard  work,  and the general  sentiment  
has been  that life would  be easier  if that step too could  be skipped.  
§ 
 
3 Of course,  blindly  assimilating  all that humans  have  to say, warts  and all, would  be problematic  in its 
own  way.  As ConceptNet's  lead  maintainer  Robyn  Speer  put it, our ambitions  should  be better:  "We want  
to avoid  letting  computers  be awful  to people  just because  people  are awful  to people.  We want  to 
provide  [knowledge  representations]  that are not just the technical  best,  but also moral ly good."