THE NEXT  DECADE  IN AI / GARY  MARCUS  
  3  [the]  capacity  to be affected  by objects , must  necessarily  precede  
all intuitions  of these  objects,..  and so exist[s]  in the mind  a priori.  
— Immanuel  Kant  
 
Thought  is ... a kind of algebra  … 
— William  James  
 
You can’t  model  the probability  distribution  function  for the 
whole  world,  because  the world  is too complicated.   
— Eero  Simoncelli  
 
1. Towards  robust  artificial  intelligence   
Although  nobody  quite  knows  what  deep  learning  or AI will evolve  into the coming  
decades,  it is worth  considering  both  what  has been  learned  from  the last decade,  and 
what  should  be investigated  next,  if we are to reach  a new  level.  
Let us call that new  level  robust  artificial  intelligence : intelligence  that,  while not 
necessarily  superhuman  or self-improving,  can be counted  on to apply  what  it knows  to 
a wide  range  of problems  in a systematic  and reliable  way,  synthesizing  knowledge  from  
a variety  of sources  such  that it can reason  flexibly  and dynamically  about  the world,  
transferring  what  it learns  in one context  to another,  in the way  that we would  expect  of 
an ordinary  adult.  
In a certain  sense,  this is a modest  goal,  neither  as ambitious  or as unbounded  as 
"superhuman"  or "artificial  general  intelligence"  but perhaps  nonetheless  an important,  
hopefully  achievable,  step along  the way—and a vital  one, if we are to create  artificial  
intelligence  we can trust,  in our homes,  on our roads,  in our doctor's  offices  and 
hospitals,  in our businesses,  and in our communit ies.  
Quite  simply,  if we cannot  count  on our AI to behave  reliably,  we should  not trust  it.1 
§ 
One might  contrast  robust  AI with,  for example,  narrow  intelligence , systems  that 
perform  a single  narrow  goal  extremely  well  (eg chess  playing  or identifying  dog 
breeds)  but often  in ways  that are extremely  centered  around  a single  task and not 
robust  and transferable  to even  modestly  different  circumstances  (eg to a board  of 
different  size,  or from  one video  game  to another  with  the same  logic  but different  
characters  and settings)  without  extensive  retraining.  Such  systems  often  work  
impressively  well  when  applied  to the exact  environments  on which  they  are trained,  
 
1 Of course,  the converse  is not true:  reliability  doesn't  guarantee  trustworthiness;  it's just one prerequisite  
among  many,  including  values  and good  engineering  practice;  see Marcus  and Davis  (Marcus  & Davis,  
2019)  for further  discussion.