2 QIU XP, et al. Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey March (2020)
are usually very shallow for computational e ciencies, such
as Skip-Gram [ 11] and GloVe [ 12]. Although these pre-trained
embeddings can capture semantic meanings of words, they are
context-free and fail to capture higher-level concepts in con-
text, such as polysemous disambiguation, syntactic structures,
semantic roles, anaphora. The second-generation PTMs focus
on learning contextual word embeddings, such as CoVe [ 13],
ELMo [ 14], OpenAI GPT [ 15] and BERT [ 16]. These learned
encoders are still needed to represent words in context by
downstream tasks. Besides, various pre-training tasks are also
proposed to learn PTMs for di erent purposes.
The contributions of this survey can be summarized as
follows:
1.Comprehensive review. We provide a comprehensive
review of PTMs for NLP, including background knowl-
edge, model architecture, pre-training tasks, various
extensions, adaption approaches, and applications.
2.New taxonomy. We propose a taxonomy of PTMs for
NLP, which categorizes existing PTMs from four dif-
ferent perspectives: 1) representation type, 2) model
architecture; 3) type of pre-training task; 4) extensions
for speciﬁc types of scenarios.
3.Abundant resources. We collect abundant resources
on PTMs, including open-source implementations of
PTMs, visualization tools, corpora, and paper lists.
4.Future directions. We discuss and analyze the limi-
tations of existing PTMs. Also, we suggest possible
future research directions.
The rest of the survey is organized as follows. Section 2
outlines the background concepts and commonly used nota-
tions of PTMs. Section 3 gives a brief overview of PTMs
and clariﬁes the categorization of PTMs. Section 4 provides
extensions of PTMs. Section 5 discusses how to transfer the
knowledge of PTMs to downstream tasks. Section 6 gives the
related resources on PTMs. Section 7 presents a collection of
applications across various NLP tasks. Section 8 discusses the
current challenges and suggests future directions. Section 9
summarizes the paper.
2 Background
2.1 Language Representation Learning
As suggested by Bengio et al. [17], a good representation
should express general-purpose priors that are not task-speciﬁc
but would be likely to be useful for a learning machine to solve
AI-tasks. When it comes to language, a good representation
should capture the implicit linguistic rules and common senseknowledge hiding in text data, such as lexical meanings, syn-
tactic structures, semantic roles, and even pragmatics.
The core idea of distributed representation is to describe the
meaning of a piece of text by low-dimensional real-valued vec-
tors. And each dimension of the vector has no corresponding
sense, while the whole represents a concrete concept. Figure
1 illustrates the generic neural architecture for NLP. There are
two kinds of word embeddings: non-contextual and contex-
tual embeddings. The di erence between them is whether the
embedding for a word dynamically changes according to the
context it appears in.
ex1 ex2 ex3 ex4 ex5 ex6 ex7Non-contextual
Embeddingsh1 h2 h3 h4 h5 h6 h7Contextual
Embeddings
Contextual EncoderTask-Specifc Model
Figure 1: Generic Neural Architecture for NLP
Non-contextual Embeddings The ﬁrst step of represent-
ing language is to map discrete language symbols into a dis-
tributed embedding space. Formally, for each word (or sub-
word) xin a vocabularyV, we map it to a vector ex2RDewith
a lookup table E2RDejVj, where Deis a hyper-parameter
indicating the dimension of token embeddings. These em-
beddings are trained on task data along with other model
parameters.
There are two main limitations to this kind of embeddings.
The ﬁrst issue is that the embeddings are static. The embed-
ding for a word does is always the same regardless of its
context. Therefore, these non-contextual embeddings fail to
model polysemous words. The second issue is the out-of-
vocabulary problem. To tackle this problem, character-level
word representations or sub-word representations are widely
used in many NLP tasks, such as CharCNN [ 18], FastText [ 19]
and Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) [20].
Contextual Embeddings To address the issue of polyse-
mous and the context-dependent nature of words, we need
distinguish the semantics of words in di erent contexts. Given
a text x1;x2;;xTwhere each token xt2V is a word or
sub-word, the contextual representation of xtdepends on the
whole text.
[h1;h2;;hT]=fenc(x1;x2;;xT); (1)
where fenc() is neural encoder, which is described in Sec-
tion 2.2, htis called contextual embedding ordynamical em-