QIU XP, et al. Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey March (2020) 3
h1 h2 h3 h4 h5
x1 x2 x3 x4 x5
(a) Convolutional Model
h1 h2 h3 h4 h5
x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 (b) Recurrent Model
h1 h2 h3 h4 h5
x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 (c) Fully-Connected Self-Attention Model
Figure 2: Neural Contextual Encoders
bedding of token xtbecause of the contextual information
included in.
2.2 Neural Contextual Encoders
Most of the neural contextual encoders can be classiﬁed into
two categories: sequence models and non-sequence models.
Figure 2 illustrates three representative architectures.
2.2.1 Sequence Models
Sequence models usually capture local context of a word in
sequential order.
Convolutional Models Convolutional models take the em-
beddings of words in the input sentence and capture the mean-
ing of a word by aggregating the local information from its
neighbors by convolution operations [2].
Recurrent Models Recurrent models capture the contextual
representations of words with short memory, such as LSTMs
[21] and GRUs [ 22]. In practice, bi-directional LSTMs or
GRUs are used to collect information from both sides of a
word, but its performance is often a ected by the long-term
dependency problem.
2.2.2 Non-Sequence Models
Non-sequence models learn the contextual representation with
a pre-deﬁned tree or graph structure between words, such
as the syntactic structure or semantic relation. Some popu-
lar non-sequence models include Recursive NN [ 6], TreeL-
STM [7, 23], and GCN [24].
Although the linguistic-aware graph structure can provide
useful inductive bias, how to build a good graph structure is
also a challenging problem. Besides, the structure depends
heavily on expert knowledge or external NLP tools, such as
the dependency parser.
Fully-Connected Self-Attention Model In practice, a
more straightforward way is to use a fully-connected graph
to model the relation of every two words and let the model
learn the structure by itself. Usually, the connection weights
are dynamically computed by the self-attention mechanism,
which implicitly indicates the connection between words. Asuccessful instance of fully-connected self-attention model is
the Transformer [ 10,25], which also needs other supplement
modules, such as positional embeddings, layer normalization,
residual connections and position-wise feed-forward network
(FFN) layers.
2.2.3 Analysis
Sequence models learn the contextual representation of the
word with locality bias and are hard to capture the long-range
interactions between words. Nevertheless, sequence models
are usually easy to train and get good results for various NLP
tasks.
In contrast, as an instantiated fully-connected self-attention
model, the Transformer can directly model the dependency
between every two words in a sequence, which is more power-
ful and suitable to model long range dependency of language.
However, due to its heavy structure and less model bias, the
Transformer usually requires a large training corpus and is
easy to overﬁt on small or modestly-sized datasets [15, 26].
Currently, the Transformer has become the mainstream
architecture of PTMs due to its powerful capacity.
2.3 Why Pre-training?
With the development of deep learning, the number of model
parameters has increased rapidly. The much larger dataset is
needed to fully train model parameters and prevent overﬁt-
ting. However, building large-scale labeled datasets is a great
challenge for most NLP tasks due to the extremely expen-
sive annotation costs, especially for syntax and semantically
related tasks.
In contrast, large-scale unlabeled corpora are relatively easy
to construct. To leverage the huge unlabeled text data, we can
ﬁrst learn a good representation from them and then use these
representations for other tasks. Recent studies have demon-
strated signiﬁcant performance gains on many NLP tasks with
the help of the representation extracted from the PTMs on the
large unannotated corpora.
The advantages of pre-training can be summarized as fol-
lows:
1.Pre-training on the huge text corpus can learn universal