.Invited Review .
Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey
Xipeng Qiu*, Tianxiang Sun, Yige Xu, Yunfan Shao, Ning Dai & Xuanjing Huang
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433 , China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shanghai 200433 , China
Recently, the emergence of pre-trained models (PTMs) *has brought natural language processing (NLP) to a new era. In this
survey, we provide a comprehensive review of PTMs for NLP. We ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce language representation learning and its
research progress. Then we systematically categorize existing PTMs based on a taxonomy from four di erent perspectives. Next,
we describe how to adapt the knowledge of PTMs to downstream tasks. Finally, we outline some potential directions of PTMs for
future research. This survey is purposed to be a hands-on guide for understanding, using, and developing PTMs for various NLP
tasks.
Deep Learning, Neural Network, Natural Language Processing, Pre-trained Model, Distributed Representation, Word
Embedding, Self-Supervised Learning, Language Modelling
1 Introduction
With the development of deep learning, various neural net-
works have been widely used to solve Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) tasks, such as convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [ 1–3], recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [ 4,5], graph-
based neural networks (GNNs) [ 6–8] and attention mecha-
nisms [ 9,10]. One of the advantages of these neural models
is their ability to alleviate the feature engineering problem.
Non-neural NLP methods usually heavily rely on the discrete
handcrafted features, while neural methods usually use low-
dimensional and dense vectors (aka. distributed representa-
tion) to implicitly represent the syntactic or semantic features
of the language. These representations are learned in speciﬁc
NLP tasks. Therefore, neural methods make it easy for people
to develop various NLP systems.
Despite the success of neural models for NLP tasks, the
performance improvement may be less signiﬁcant comparedto the Computer Vision (CV) ﬁeld. The main reason is that
current datasets for most supervised NLP tasks are rather small
(except machine translation). Deep neural networks usually
have a large number of parameters, which make them overﬁt
on these small training data and do not generalize well in
practice. Therefore, the early neural models for many NLP
tasks were relatively shallow and usually consisted of only
13 neural layers.
Recently, substantial work has shown that pre-trained mod-
els (PTMs), on the large corpus can learn universal language
representations, which are beneﬁcial for downstream NLP
tasks and can avoid training a new model from scratch. With
the development of computational power, the emergence of
the deep models (i.e., Transformer [ 10]), and the constant
enhancement of training skills, the architecture of PTMs has
been advanced from shallow to deep. The ﬁrst-generation
PTMs aim to learn good word embeddings. Since these mod-
els themselves are no longer needed by downstream tasks, they
* Corresponding author (email: xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn)
*PTMs are also known as pre-trained language models (PLMs). In this survey, we use PTMs for NLP instead of PLMs to avoid confusion with the narrow
concept of probabilistic (or statistical) language models.arXiv:2003.08271v4  [cs.CL]  23 Jun 2021