16 QIU XP, et al. Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey March (2020)
syntactic information appears earlier in the network, while
high-level semantic information appears at higher layers.
LetH(l)(16l6L) denotes the l-th layer representation
of the pre-trained model with Llayers, and g() denote the
task-speciﬁc model for the target task.
There are three ways to select the representation:
a)Embedding Only. One approach is to choose only the
pre-trained static embeddings, while the rest of the model still
needs to be trained from scratch for a new target task.
They fail to capture higher-level information that might
be even more useful. Word embeddings are only useful in
capturing semantic meanings of words, but we also need to
understand higher-level concepts like word sense.
b)Top Layer. The most simple and e ective way is to feed
the representation at the top layer into the task-speciﬁc model
g(H(L)).
c)All Layers. A more ﬂexible way is to automatic choose
the best layer in a soft version, like ELMo [14]:
rt=
LX
l=1lh(l)
t; (7)
wherelis the softmax-normalized weight for layer land
is
a scalar to scale the vectors output by pre-trained model. The
mixup representation is fed into the task-speciﬁc model g(rt).
5.2.3 To tune or not to tune?
Currently, there are two common ways of model transfer: fea-
ture extraction (where the pre-trained parameters are frozen),
and ﬁne-tuning (where the pre-trained parameters are unfrozen
and ﬁne-tuned).
In feature extraction way, the pre-trained models are re-
garded as o -the-shelf feature extractors. Moreover, it is im-
portant to expose the internal layers as they typically encode
the most transferable representations [190].
Although both these two ways can signiﬁcantly beneﬁt
most of NLP tasks, feature extraction way requires more com-
plex task-speciﬁc architecture. Therefore, the ﬁne-tuning way
is usually more general and convenient for many di erent
downstream tasks than feature extraction way.
Table 4 gives some common combinations of adapting
PTMs.
Table 4: Some common combinations of adapting PTMs.
Where FT /FE?yPTMs
Embedding Only FT /FE Word2vec [11], GloVe [12]
Top Layer FT BERT [16], RoBERTa [43]
Top Layer FE BERTx[191, 192]
All Layers FE ELMo [14]
yFT and FE mean Fine-tuning and Feature Extraction respectively.
xBERT used as feature extractor.5.3 Fine-Tuning Strategies
With the increase of the depth of PTMs, the representation cap-
tured by them makes the downstream task easier. Therefore,
the task-speciﬁc layer of the whole model is simple. Since
ULMFit and BERT, ﬁne-tuning has become the main adaption
method of PTMs. However, the process of ﬁne-tuning is often
brittle: even with the same hyper-parameter values, distinct
random seeds can lead to substantially di erent results [ 193].
Besides standard ﬁne-tuning, there are also some useful
ﬁne-tuning strategies.
Two-stage ﬁne-tuning An alternative solution is two-stage
transfer , which introduces an intermediate stage between pre-
training and ﬁne-tuning. In the ﬁrst stage, the PTM is trans-
ferred into a model ﬁne-tuned by an intermediate task or cor-
pus. In the second stage, the transferred model is ﬁne-tuned
to the target task. Sun et al. [64] showed that the “further pre-
training” on the related-domain corpus can further improve
the ability of BERT and achieved state-of-the-art performance
on eight widely-studied text classiﬁcation datasets. Phang
et al. [194] and Garg et al. [195] introduced the intermedi-
ate supervised task related to the target task, which brings a
large improvement for BERT, GPT, and ELMo. Li et al. [65]
also used a two-stage transfer for the story ending prediction.
The proposed TransBERT (transferable BERT) can transfer
not only general language knowledge from large-scale unla-
beled data but also speciﬁc kinds of knowledge from various
semantically related supervised tasks.
Multi-task ﬁne-tuning Liu et al. [67] ﬁne-tuned BERT un-
der the multi-task learning framework, which demonstrates
that multi-task learning and pre-training are complementary
technologies.
Fine-tuning with extra adaptation modules The main
drawback of ﬁne-tuning is its parameter ine ciency: every
downstream task has its own ﬁne-tuned parameters. There-
fore, a better solution is to inject some ﬁne-tunable adaptation
modules into PTMs while the original parameters are ﬁxed.
Stickland and Murray [68] equipped a single share BERT
model with small additional task-speciﬁc adaptation modules,
projected attention layers (PALs). The shared BERT with
the PALs matches separately ﬁne-tuned models on the GLUE
benchmark with roughly 7 times fewer parameters. Similarly,
Houlsby et al. [69] modiﬁed the architecture of pre-trained
BERT by adding adapter modules. Adapter modules yield a
compact and extensible model; they add only a few trainable
parameters per task, and new tasks can be added without re-
visiting previous ones. The parameters of the original network
remain ﬁxed, yielding a high degree of parameter sharing.