QIU XP, et al. Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey March (2020) 21
8 Future Directions
Though PTMs have proven their power for various NLP tasks,
challenges still exist due to the complexity of language. In
this section, we suggest ﬁve future directions of PTMs.
(1) Upper Bound of PTMs Currently, PTMs have not yet
reached its upper bound. Most of the current PTMs can be
further improved by more training steps and larger corpora.
The state of the art in NLP can be further advanced by
increasing the depth of models, such as Megatron-LM [ 243]
(8.3 billion parameters, 72 Transformer layers with a hidden
size of 3072 and 32 attention heads) and Turing-NLG9)(17
billion parameters, 78 Transformer layers with a hidden size
of 4256 and 28 attention heads).
The general-purpose PTMs are always our pursuits for
learning the intrinsic universal knowledge of languages (even
world knowledge). However, such PTMs usually need deeper
architecture, larger corpus, and challenging pre-training tasks,
which further result in higher training costs. However, train-
ing huge models is also a challenging problem, which needs
more sophisticated and e cient training techniques such as
distributed training, mixed precision, gradient accumulation,
etc. Therefore, a more practical direction is to design more
ecient model architecture, self-supervised pre-training tasks,
optimizers, and training skills using existing hardware and
software. ELECTRA [ 56] is a good solution towards this
direction.
(2) Architecture of PTMs The Transformer has been
proved to be an e ective architecture for pre-training. How-
ever, the main limitation of the Transformer is its computation
complexity, which is quadratic to the input length. Limited
by the memory of GPUs, most of current PTMs cannot deal
with the sequence longer than 512 tokens. Breaking this limit
needs to improve the architecture of the Transformer. Al-
though many works [ 25] tried to improve the e ciency of
Transformer, there remains much room for improvement.
Besides, searching for more e cient alternative non-
Transformer architecture for PTMs is important to capture
longer-range contextual information. The design of deep
architecture is challenging, and we may seek help from
some automatic methods, such as neural architecture search
(NAS) [245].
(3) Task-oriented Pre-training and Model Compression
In practice, di erent downstream tasks require the di erent
abilities of PTMs. The discrepancy between PTMs and down-
stream tasks usually lies in two aspects: model architecture
and data distribution. A larger discrepancy may result in that
the beneﬁt of PTMs may be insigniﬁcant. For example, textgeneration usually needs a speciﬁc task to pre-train both the
encoder and decoder, while text matching needs pre-training
tasks designed for sentence pairs.
Besides, although larger PTMs can usually lead to better
performance, a practical problem is how to leverage these
huge PTMs on special scenarios, such as low-capacity devices
and low-latency applications. Therefore, we can carefully de-
sign the speciﬁc model architecture and pre-training tasks for
downstream tasks or extract partial task-speciﬁc knowledge
from existing PTMs.
Instead of training task-oriented PTMs from scratch, we
can teach them with existing general-purpose PTMs by us-
ing techniques such as model compression (see Section 4.5).
Although model compression is widely studied for CNNs in
CV [ 246], compression for PTMs for NLP is just beginning.
The fully-connected structure of the Transformer also makes
model compression more challenging.
(4) Knowledge Transfer Beyond Fine-tuning Currently,
ﬁne-tuning is the dominant method to transfer PTMs’ knowl-
edge to downstream tasks, but one deﬁciency is its parameter
ineciency: every downstream task has its own ﬁne-tuned
parameters. An improved solution is to ﬁx the original pa-
rameters of PTMs and by adding small ﬁne-tunable adap-
tion modules for speciﬁc task [ 68,69]. Thus, we can use
a shared PTM to serve multiple downstream tasks. Indeed,
mining knowledge from PTMs can be more ﬂexible, such as
feature extraction, knowledge distillation [ 210], data augmen-
tation [ 247,248], using PTMs as external knowledge [ 129].
More e cient methods are expected.
(5) Interpretability and Reliability of PTMs Although
PTMs reach impressive performance, their deep non-linear
architecture makes the procedure of decision-making highly
non-transparent.
Recently, explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI) [ 249] has
become a hotspot in the general AI community. Unlike CNNs
for images, interpreting PTMs is harder due to the complex-
ities of both the Transformer-like architecture and language.
Extensive e orts (see Section 3.3) have been made to analyze
the linguistic and world knowledge included in PTMs, which
help us understand these PMTs with some degree of trans-
parency. However, much work on model analysis depends on
the attention mechanism, and the e ectiveness of attention for
interpretability is still controversial [250, 251].
Besides, PTMs are also vulnerable to adversarial attacks
(see Section 7.7). The reliability of PTMs is also becoming
an issue of great concern with the extensive use of PTMs in
production systems. The studies of adversarial attacks against
PTMs help us understand their capabilities by fully exposing
9) https: //www.microsoft.com /en-us /research /blog/turing-nlg-a-17-billion-parameter-language-model-by-microsoft /