QIU XP, et al. Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey March (2020) 15
language understanding tasks. Their methods usually contain
two steps: (a) Training the injected o -ramps (aka internal
classiﬁers), and (b) Designing an exiting strategy to decide
whether or not to exit.
Typically, the training objective is a weighted sum of the
cross-entropy losses at all o -ramps, i.e.
Learly-exit =MX
i=1wiLi; (6)
where Mis the number of o -ramps. FastBERT [ 112] adopted
the self-distillation loss that trains each o -ramp with the soft
target generated by the ﬁnal classiﬁer. Liao et al. [114] im-
proved the objective by considering both the past and the
future information. In particular, the o -ramps are trained
to aggregate the hidden states of the past layers, and also ap-
proximate the hidden states of the future layers. Moreover,
Sun et al. [115] developed a novel training objective from
the perspective of ensemble learning and mutual information,
by which the o -ramps are trained as an ensemble. Their
proposed objective not only optimizes the accuracy of each
o-ramp but also the diversity of the o -ramps.
During inference, an exiting strategy is required to decide
whether to exit early or continue to the next layer. Dee-
BERT [ 110], FastBERT [ 112], Liao et al. [114] adopt the
entropy of the prediction distribution as the exiting criterion.
Similarly, RightTool [ 111] use the maximum softmax score to
decide whether to exit. PABEE developed a patience-based
strategy that allows a sample to exit when the prediction is
unchanged for successive layers. Further, Sun et al. [115]
adopt a voting-based strategy to let all of the past o -ramps
take a vote to decide whether or not to exit. Besides, Li et al.
[116] proposed a window-based uncertainty as the exiting cri-
terion to achieve token-level early exit (TokEE) for sequence
labeling tasks.
5 Adapting PTMs to Downstream Tasks
Although PTMs capture the general language knowledge from
a large corpus, how e ectively adapting their knowledge to
the downstream task is still a key problem.
5.1 Transfer Learning
Transfer learning [ 188] is to adapt the knowledge from a
source task (or domain) to a target task (or domain). Fig-
ure 4 gives an illustration of transfer learning.
There are many types of transfer learning in NLP, such as
domain adaptation, cross-lingual learning, multi-task learning.
Adapting PTMs to downstream tasks is sequential transfer
learning task, in which tasks are learned sequentially and the
target task has labeled data.
Source Dataset Target DatasetSource Model Target ModelKnowledge
TransferFigure 4: Transfer Learning
5.2 How to Transfer?
To transfer the knowledge of a PTM to the downstream NLP
tasks, we need to consider the following issues:
5.2.1 Choosing appropriate pre-training task, model archi-
tecture and corpus
Dierent PTMs usually have di erent e ects on the same
downstream task, since these PTMs are trained with various
pre-training tasks, model architecture, and corpora.
(1) Currently, the language model is the most popular pre-
training task and can more e ciently solve a wide range of
NLP problems [ 58]. However, di erent pre-training tasks
have their own bias and give di erent e ects for di erent
tasks. For example, the NSP task [ 16] makes PTM understand
the relationship between two sentences. Thus, the PTM can
beneﬁt downstream tasks such as Question Answering (QA)
and Natural Language Inference (NLI).
(2) The architecture of PTM is also important for the down-
stream task. For example, although BERT helps with most
natural language understanding tasks, it is hard to generate
language.
(3) The data distribution of the downstream task should be
approximate to PTMs. Currently, there are a large number of
o-the-shelf PTMs, which can just as conveniently be used
for various domain-speciﬁc or language-speciﬁc downstream
tasks.
Therefore, given a target task, it is always a good solution
to choose the PTMs trained with appropriate pre-training task,
architecture, and corpus.
5.2.2 Choosing appropriate layers
Given a pre-trained deep model, di erent layers should cap-
ture di erent kinds of information, such as POS tagging, pars-
ing, long-term dependencies, semantic roles, coreference. For
RNN-based models, Belinkov et al. [189] and Melamud et al.
[34] showed that representations learned from di erent layers
in a multi-layer LSTM encoder beneﬁt di erent tasks (e.g.,
predicting POS tags and understanding word sense). For
transformer-based PTMs, Tenney et al. [122] found BERT
represents the steps of the traditional NLP pipeline: basic