QIU XP, et al. Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey March (2020) 17
Others Motivated by the success of widely-used ensemble
models, Xu et al. [196] improved the ﬁne-tuning of BERT with
two e ective mechanisms: self-ensemble andself-distillation ,
which can improve the performance of BERT on downstream
tasks without leveraging external resource or signiﬁcantly de-
creasing the training e ciency. They integrated ensemble and
distillation within a single training process. The teacher model
is an ensemble model by parameter-averaging several student
models in previous time steps.
Instead of ﬁne-tuning all the layers simultaneously, grad-
ual unfreezing [38] is also an e ective method that gradu-
ally unfreezes layers of PTMs starting from the top layer.
Chronopoulou et al. [197] proposed a simpler unfreezing
method, sequential unfreezing , which ﬁrst ﬁne-tunes only the
randomly-initialized task-speciﬁc layers, and then unfreezes
the hidden layers of PTM, and ﬁnally unfreezes the embedding
layer.
Li and Eisner [198] compressed ELMo embeddings us-
ing variational information bottleneck while keeping only the
information that helps the target task.
Generally, the above works show that the utility of PTMs
can be further stimulated by better ﬁne-tuning strategies.
5.3.1 Prompt-based Tuning
Narrowing the gap between pre-training and ﬁne-tuning can
further boost the performance of PTMs on downstream tasks.
An alternative approach is reformulating the downstream
tasks into a MLM task by designing appropriate prompts.
Prompt-based methods have shown great power in few-shot
setting [ 199,200,70,72], zero-shot setting [ 129,201], and
even fully-supervised setting [ 74,75]. Current prompt-based
methods can be categorized as two branches according to the
prompt is whether discrete or continuous.
Discrete prompts Discrete prompt is a sequence of words
to be inserted into the input text, which helps the PTM to bet-
ter model the downstream task. Sun et al. [202] constructed
an auxiliary sentence by transforming aspect-based sentiment
analysis (ABSA) task to a sentence pair classiﬁcation task, but
its model parameters still need to be ﬁne-tuned. GPT-3 [ 59]
proposed the in-context learning that concatenates the original
input with the task description and a few examples. By this,
GPT-3 can achieve competitive performance without tuning
the parameters. Besides, Petroni et al. [129] found that with
proper manual prompt, BERT can perform well on entity pre-
diction task (LAMA) without training. In addition to LAMA,
Schick and Sch ¨utze [200,70]proposed PET that designed
discrete prompts for various text classiﬁcation and entailment
tasks. However, the manually designed prompts can be sub-
optimal, as a result, many methods are developed to automatethe generation of prompts. LPAQA [ 201] uses two methods,
i.e., mining-based generation and paraphrasing-based gen-
eration, to ﬁnd the optimal patterns that express particular
relations. AutoPrompt [ 71] ﬁnds the optimal prompt with
gradient-guided search. LM-BFF [ 72] employs T5 [ 42] to
automatically generate prompts.
Continuous prompts Instead of ﬁnding the optimal con-
crete prompt, another alternative is to directly optimize the
prompt in continuous space, i.e. the prompt vectors are not
necessarily word type embeddings of the PTM. The opti-
mized continuous prompt is concatenated with word type
embeddings, which is then fed into the PTM. Qin and Eisner
[203] and Zhong et al. [204] found that the optimized con-
tinuous prompt can outperform concrete prompts (including
manual [ 129], mined (LPAQA [ 201]), and gradient-searched
(AutoPrompt [ 71]) prompts) on relational tasks. WARP [ 73]
inserts trainable continuous prompt tokens before, between,
and after the input sequence while keeping the parameters
of the PTM ﬁxed, resulting in considerable performance on
GLUE benchmark. Preﬁx-Tuning [ 74] inserts continuous
prompt as preﬁx of the input of GPT-2 for table-to-text gen-
eration and BART for summarization. Preﬁx-Tuning, as a
parameter-e cient tuning technique, achieved comparable per-
formance in fully-supervised setting and outperformed model
ﬁne-tuning in few-shot setting. Further, P-Tuning [ 75] showed
that, with continuous prompt, GPT can also achieve compa-
rable or even better performance to similar-sized BERT on
natural language understanding (NLU) tasks. Very recently,
Lester et al. [205] showed that prompt tuning becomes more
competitive with scale. When the PTM exceeds billions of
parameters, the gap between model ﬁne-tuning and prompt
tuning can be closed, which makes the prompt-based tuning
a very promising method for e cient serving of large-scale
PTMs.
6 Resources of PTMs
There are many related resources for PTMs available online.
Table 5 provides some popular repositories, including third-
party implementations, paper lists, visualization tools, and
other related resources of PTMs.
Besides, there are some other good survey papers on PTMs
for NLP [211, 212, 173].
7 Applications
In this section, we summarize some applications of PTMs in
several classic NLP tasks.