8 QIU XP, et al. Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey March (2020)
RTD is also an alternative solution for the mismatch prob-
lem. The network sees [MASK] during pre-training but not
when being ﬁne-tuned in downstream tasks.
Similarly, WKLM [ 57] replaces words on the entity-level
instead of token-level. Concretely, WKLM replaces entity
mentions with names of other entities of the same type and
train the models to distinguish whether the entity has been
replaced.
Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) Punctuations are the nat-
ural separators of text data. So, it is reasonable to construct
pre-training methods by utilizing them. Next Sentence Predic-
tion (NSP) [ 16] is just a great example of this. As its name
suggests, NSP trains the model to distinguish whether two
input sentences are continuous segments from the training cor-
pus. Speciﬁcally, when choosing the sentences pair for each
pre-training example, 50% of the time, the second sentence
is the actual next sentence of the ﬁrst one, and 50% of the
time, it is a random sentence from the corpus. By doing so, it
is capable to teach the model to understand the relationship
between two input sentences and thus beneﬁt downstream
tasks that are sensitive to this information, such as Question
Answering and Natural Language Inference.
However, the necessity of the NSP task has been questioned
by subsequent work [ 47,49,43,63]. Yang et al. [49] found
the impact of the NSP task unreliable, while Joshi et al. [47]
found that single-sentence training without the NSP loss is
superior to sentence-pair training with the NSP loss. More-
over, Liu et al. [43] conducted a further analysis for the NSP
task, which shows that when training with blocks of text from
a single document, removing the NSP loss matches or slightly
improves performance on downstream tasks.
Sentence Order Prediction (SOP) To better model inter-
sentence coherence, ALBERT [ 63] replaces the NSP loss with
a sentence order prediction (SOP) loss. As conjectured in
Lan et al. [63], NSP conﬂates topic prediction and coherence
prediction in a single task. Thus, the model is allowed to make
predictions merely rely on the easier task, topic prediction.
Dierent from NSP, SOP uses two consecutive segments from
the same document as positive examples, and the same two
consecutive segments but with their order swapped as negative
examples. As a result, ALBERT consistently outperforms
BERT on various downstream tasks.
StructBERT [ 48] and BERTje [ 88] also take SOP as their
self-supervised learning task.
3.1.6 Others
Apart from the above tasks, there are many other auxiliary
pre-training tasks designated to incorporate factual knowledge
(see Section 4.1), improve cross-lingual tasks (see Section 4.2),multi-modal applications (see Section 4.3), or other speciﬁc
tasks (see Section 4.4).
3.2 Taxonomy of PTMs
To clarify the relations of existing PTMs for NLP, we build the
taxonomy of PTMs, which categorizes existing PTMs from
four di erent perspectives:
1.Representation Type : According to the representation
used for downstream tasks, we can divide PTMs into
non-contextual and contextual models.
2.Architectures : The backbone network used by PTMs,
including LSTM, Transformer encoder, Transformer
decoder, and the full Transformer architecture. “Trans-
former” means the standard encoder-decoder architec-
ture. “Transformer encoder” and “Transformer decoder”
mean the encoder and decoder part of the standard
Transformer architecture, respectively. Their di erence
is that the decoder part uses masked self-attention with
a triangular matrix to prevent tokens from attending
their future (right) positions.
3.Pre-Training Task Types : The type of pre-training tasks
used by PTMs. We have discussed them in Section 3.1.
4.Extensions : PTMs designed for various scenarios, in-
cluding knowledge-enriched PTMs, multilingual or
language-speciﬁc PTMs, multi-model PTMs, domain-
speciﬁc PTMs and compressed PTMs. We will particu-
larly introduce these extensions in Section 4.
Figure 3 shows the taxonomy as well as some correspond-
ing representative PTMs. Besides, Table 2 distinguishes some
representative PTMs in more detail.
3.3 Model Analysis
Due to the great success of PTMs, it is important to understand
what kinds of knowledge are captured by them, and how to in-
duce knowledge from them. There is a wide range of literature
analyzing linguistic knowledge and world knowledge stored
in pre-trained non-contextual and contextual embeddings.
3.3.1 Non-Contextual Embeddings
Static word embeddings are ﬁrst probed for kinds of knowl-
edge. Mikolov et al. [117] found that word representa-
tions learned by neural network language models are able
to capture linguistic regularities in language, and the rela-
tionship between words can be characterized by a relation-
speciﬁc vector o set. Further analogy experiments [ 11]
demonstrated that word vectors produced by skip-gram model