4 QIU XP, et al. Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey March (2020)
language representations and help with the downstream
tasks.
2.Pre-training provides a better model initialization,
which usually leads to a better generalization perfor-
mance and speeds up convergence on the target task.
3.Pre-training can be regarded as a kind of regularization
to avoid overﬁtting on small data [27].
2.4 A Brief History of PTMs for NLP
Pre-training has always been an e ective strategy to learn the
parameters of deep neural networks, which are then ﬁne-tuned
on downstream tasks. As early as 2006, the breakthrough
of deep learning came with greedy layer-wise unsupervised
pre-training followed by supervised ﬁne-tuning [ 28]. In CV , it
has been in practice to pre-train models on the huge ImageNet
corpus, and then ﬁne-tune further on smaller data for di erent
tasks. This is much better than a random initialization because
the model learns general image features, which can then be
used in various vision tasks.
In NLP, PTMs on large corpus have also been proved to be
beneﬁcial for the downstream NLP tasks, from the shallow
word embedding to deep neural models.
2.4.1 First-Generation PTMs: Pre-trained Word Embeddings
Representing words as dense vectors has a long history [ 29].
The “modern” word embedding is introduced in pioneer work
of neural network language model (NNLM) [ 30]. Collobert
et al. [31] showed that the pre-trained word embedding on the
unlabelled data could signiﬁcantly improve many NLP tasks.
To address the computational complexity, they learned word
embeddings with pairwise ranking task instead of language
modeling. Their work is the ﬁrst attempt to obtain generic
word embeddings useful for other tasks from unlabeled data.
Mikolov et al. [11] showed that there is no need for deep
neural networks to build good word embeddings. They pro-
pose two shallow architectures: Continuous Bag-of-Words
(CBOW) and Skip-Gram (SG) models. Despite their sim-
plicity, they can still learn high-quality word embeddings to
capture the latent syntactic and semantic similarities among
words. Word2vec is one of the most popular implementations
of these models and makes the pre-trained word embeddings
accessible for di erent tasks in NLP. Besides, GloVe [ 12]
is also a widely-used model for obtaining pre-trained word
embeddings, which are computed by global word-word co-
occurrence statistics from a large corpus.
Although pre-trained word embeddings have been shown ef-
fective in NLP tasks, they are context-independent and mostly
trained by shallow models. When used on a downstream task,the rest of the whole model still needs to be learned from
scratch.
During the same time period, many researchers also try to
learn embeddings of paragraph, sentence or document, such
as paragraph vector [ 32], Skip-thought vectors [ 33], Con-
text2Vec [ 34]. Dierent from their modern successors, these
sentence embedding models try to encode input sentences
into a ﬁxed-dimensional vector representation, rather than the
contextual representation for each token.
2.4.2 Second-Generation PTMs: Pre-trained Contextual En-
coders
Since most NLP tasks are beyond word-level, it is natural to
pre-train the neural encoders on sentence-level or higher. The
output vectors of neural encoders are also called contextual
word embeddings since they represent the word semantics
depending on its context.
Dai and Le [35] proposed the ﬁrst successful instance of
PTM for NLP. They initialized LSTMs with a language model
(LM) or a sequence autoencoder, and found the pre-training
can improve the training and generalization of LSTMs in many
text classiﬁcation tasks. Liu et al. [5]pre-trained a shared
LSTM encoder with LM and ﬁne-tuned it under the multi-task
learning (MTL) framework. They found the pre-training and
ﬁne-tuning can further improve the performance of MTL for
several text classiﬁcation tasks. Ramachandran et al. [36]
found the Seq2Seq models can be signiﬁcantly improved by
unsupervised pre-training. The weights of both encoder and
decoder are initialized with pre-trained weights of two lan-
guage models and then ﬁne-tuned with labeled data. Besides
pre-training the contextual encoder with LM, McCann et al.
[13] pre-trained a deep LSTM encoder from an attentional
sequence-to-sequence model with machine translation (MT).
The context vectors (CoVe) output by the pre-trained encoder
can improve the performance of a wide variety of common
NLP tasks.
Since these precursor PTMs, the modern PTMs are usually
trained with larger scale corpora, more powerful or deeper
architectures (e.g., Transformer), and new pre-training tasks.
Peters et al. [14] pre-trained 2-layer LSTM encoder with
a bidirectional language model (BiLM), consisting of a for-
ward LM and a backward LM. The contextual representations
output by the pre-trained BiLM, ELMo (Embeddings from
Language Models), are shown to bring large improvements
on a broad range of NLP tasks. Akbik et al. [37] captured
word meaning with contextual string embeddings pre-trained
with character-level LM. However, these two PTMs are usu-
ally used as a feature extractor to produce the contextual
word embeddings, which are fed into the main model for
downstream tasks. Their parameters are ﬁxed, and the rest