20 QIU XP, et al. Pre-trained Models for Natural Language Processing: A Survey March (2020)
of dierent experiments for examining the best strategy to
utilize BERT on the encoder part of NMT models. They
achieved some improvement by using BERT as an initializa-
tion of the encoder. Also, they found that these models can get
better performance on the out-of-domain dataset. Imamura
and Sumita [233] proposed a two stages BERT ﬁne-tuning
method for NMT. At the ﬁrst stage, the encoder is initialized
by a pre-trained BERT model, and they only train the decoder
on the training set. At the second stage, the whole NMT
model is jointly ﬁne-tuned on the training set. By experiment,
they show this approach can surpass the one stage ﬁne-tuning
method, which directly ﬁne-tunes the whole model. Apart
from that, Zhu et al. [192] suggested using pre-trained BERT
as an extra memory to facilitate NMT models. Concretely,
they ﬁrst encode the input tokens by a pre-trained BERT and
use the output of the last layer as extra memory. Then, the
NMT model can access the memory via an extra attention mod-
ule in each layer of both encoder and decoder. And they show
a noticeable improvement in supervised, semi-supervised, and
unsupervised MT.
Instead of only pre-training the encoder, MASS (Masked
Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-Training) [ 41] utilizes Seq2Seq
MLM to pre-train the encoder and decoder jointly. In the
experiment, this approach can surpass the BERT-style pre-
training proposed by Conneau and Lample [46] both on un-
supervised MT and English-Romanian supervised MT. Dif-
ferent from MASS, mBART [ 61], a multilingual extension
of BART [ 50], pre-trains the encoder and decoder jointly
with Seq2Seq denoising auto-encoder (DAE) task on large-
scale monolingual corpora across 25 languages. Experiments
demonstrated that mBART could signiﬁcantly improve both
supervised and unsupervised machine translation at both the
sentence level and document level.
7.6 Summarization
Summarization, aiming at producing a shorter text which pre-
serves the most meaning of a longer text, has attracted the
attention of the NLP community in recent years. The task
has been improved signiﬁcantly since the widespread use of
PTM. Zhong et al. [191] introduced transferable knowledge
(e.g., BERT) for summarization and surpassed previous mod-
els. Zhang et al. [234] tries to pre-trained a document-level
model that predicts sentences instead of words, and then apply
it on downstream tasks such as summarization. More elabo-
rately, Zhang et al. [163] designed a Gap Sentence Generation
(GSG) task for pre-training, whose objective involves generat-
ing summary-like text from the input. Furthermore, Liu and
Lapata [235] proposed BERTSUM. BERTSUM included a
novel document-level encoder, and a general framework for
both extractive summarization and abstractive summarization.In the encoder frame, BERTSUM extends BERT by inserting
multiple [CLS] tokens to learn the sentence representations.
For extractive summarization, BERTSUM stacks several inter-
sentence Transformer layers. For abstractive summarization,
BERTSUM proposes a two-staged ﬁne-tuning approach using
a new ﬁne-tuning schedule. Zhong et al. [236] proposed a
novel summary-level framework MATCHSUM and conceptu-
alized extractive summarization as a semantic text matching
problem. They proposed a Siamese-BERT architecture to
compute the similarity between the source document and the
candidate summary and achieved a state-of-the-art result on
CNN /DailyMail (44.41 in ROUGE-1) by only using the base
version of BERT.
7.7 Adversarial Attacks and Defenses
The deep neural models are vulnerable to adversarial examples
that can mislead a model to produce a speciﬁc wrong predic-
tion with imperceptible perturbations from the original input.
In CV , adversarial attacks and defenses have been widely stud-
ied. However, it is still challenging for text due to the discrete
nature of languages. Generating of adversarial samples for
text needs to possess such qualities: (1) imperceptible to hu-
man judges yet misleading to neural models; (2) ﬂuent in
grammar and semantically consistent with original inputs. Jin
et al. [237] successfully attacked the ﬁne-tuned BERT on text
classiﬁcation and textual entailment with adversarial exam-
ples. Wallace et al. [238] deﬁned universal adversarial triggers
that can induce a model to produce a speciﬁc-purpose predic-
tion when concatenated to any input. Some triggers can even
cause the GPT-2 model to generate racist text. Sun et al. [239]
showed BERT is not robust on misspellings.
PTMs also have great potential to generate adversarial sam-
ples. Li et al. [240] proposed BERT-Attack , a BERT-based
high-quality and e ective attacker. They turned BERT against
another ﬁne-tuned BERT on downstream tasks and success-
fully misguided the target model to predict incorrectly, out-
performing state-of-the-art attack strategies in both success
rate and perturb percentage, while the generated adversarial
samples are ﬂuent and semantically preserved.
Besides, adversarial defenses for PTMs are also promis-
ing, which improve the robustness of PTMs and make them
immune against adversarial attack.
Adversarial training aims to improve the generalization
by minimizes the maximal risk for label-preserving perturba-
tions in embedding space. Recent work [ 241,242] showed
that adversarial pre-training or ﬁne-tuning can improve both
generalization and robustness of PTMs for NLP.