AliGraph : A Comprehensive Graph Neural Network
Platform
Rong Zhu, Kun Zhao, Hongxia Y ang, Wei Lin, Chang Zhou, Baole Ai, Y ong Li, Jingren Zhou
Alibaba Group
ABSTRACT
An increasing number of machine learning tasks require dealing
with large graph datasets, which capture rich and complex relation-
ship among potentially billions of elements. Graph Neural Network
(GNN) becomes an effective way to address the graph learning
problem by converting the graph data into a low dimensional space
while keeping both the structural and property information to the
maximum extent and constructing a neural network for training
and referencing. However, it is challenging to provide an efﬁcient
graph storage and computation capabilities to facilitate GNN train-
ing and enable development of new GNN algorithms. In this paper,
we present a comprehensive graph neural network system, namely
AliGraph , which consists of distributed graph storage, optimized
sampling operators and runtime to efﬁciently support not only exist-
ing popular GNNs but also a series of in-house developed ones for
different scenarios. The system is currently deployed at Alibaba to
support a variety of business scenarios, including product recommen-
dation and personalized search at Alibaba’s E-Commerce platform.
By conducting extensive experiments on a real-world dataset with
492.90 million vertices, 6.82 billion edges and rich attributes, Ali-
Graph performs an order of magnitude faster in terms of graph
building (5 minutes vs hours reported from the state-of-the-art Pow-
erGraph platform). At training, AliGraph runs 40%-50% faster with
the novel caching strategy and demonstrates around 12 times speed
up with the improved runtime. In addition, our in-house developed
GNN models all showcase their statistically signiﬁcant superiorities
in terms of both effectiveness and efﬁciency (e.g., 4.12%–17.19%
lift by F1 scores).
1. INTRODUCTION
As a sophisticated model, graph has been widely used to model
and manage data in a wide variety of real-world applications. Typi-
cal examples include social networks [21, 30], physical systems [1,
43], biological networks [14], knowledge graphs [19] and etc [28].
Graph analytics, which explore underlying insights hidden in graph
data, have drawn signiﬁcant research attention in the last decade.
They have been witnessed to play important roles in numerous areas,
i.e., node classiﬁcation [2], link prediction [35], graph clustering [4],
recommendation [51], among many others.
As conventional graph analytic tasks often suffer from high com-
putation and space costs [9, 21], a new paradigm, called graph
embedding (GE), paves an efﬁcient yet effective way to address
such problems. Speciﬁcally, GE converts the graph data into a low-
dimensional space such that the structural and content information
in the graph can be preserved to the maximum extent. After that,
the generated embeddings are fed as features into the downstream
machine learning tasks. Furthermore, by incorporating with deep
learning techniques, graph neural networks (GNN) are proposedby integrating GE with convolutional neural network (CNN) [30,
7, 24, 22]. In CNN, shared weights and multi-layered structure are
applied to enhance its learning power [31]. And graphs are the most
typical locally connected structures, with shared weights to reduce
the computational cost and the multi-layer structure being the key to
deal with hierarchical patterns while capturing features of various
sizes. GNNs ﬁnd such generalizations of CNNs to graphs. Thus,
GNN not only embraces the ﬂexibility of GE but also showcases
its superiority in terms of both effectiveness and robustness with
generalizations of CNNs.
Challenges. In the literature, considerable research efforts have
been devoted in developing GE and GNN algorithms. These works
mainly concentrate on simple graphs with no or little auxiliary in-
formation. However, the rising of big data and complex systems
reveal new insights in graph data. As a consensus [9, 21, 5, 17],
the vast majority of graph data related to real-world commercial
scenarios exhibits four properties, namely large-scale ,heteroge-
neous ,attributed anddynamic . For example, nowadays e-commerce
graphs often contain billions of vertices and edges with various types
and rich attributes, and quickly evolve over time. These properties
bring great challenges for embedding and representing graph data
as follows:
The core steps in GNN are particularly optimized for grid struc-
tures, such as images, but not feasible for graphs in irregular
Euclidean space. Thus, existing GNN methods can not scale on
real-world graphs with exceedingly large sizes. The ﬁrst prob-
lem is how to improve the time and space efﬁciencies of GNN
on large-scale graphs ?
Different types of objects characterize the data from multiple
perspectives. They provide richer information but increase the
difﬁculty to map the graph information into a singleton space.
Thus, the second problem is how to elegantly integrate the het-
erogeneous information to be an uniﬁed embedding result ?
The attribute information can further enhance the power of the
embedding results and make inductive GE possible [9, 21, 5, 17].
Without considering attribute information, the algorithms can
only consider the transductive settings and ignore the need for
predicting unseen instances. However, the topological structure
information and unstructured attribute information are usually
presented in two different spaces. Thus, the third problem is how
to unify them to deﬁne the information to be preserved ?
As GNN suffers from low efﬁciency, recomputing the embedding
results from scratch with respect to structural and contextual up-
dates are expensive. Thus, the fourth problem is how to design
efﬁcient incremental GNN methods on dynamic graphs ?
1arXiv:1902.08730v1  [cs.DC]  23 Feb 2019