3.2 Storage
In this subsection, we discuss how to store and organize the raw
data. Notice that, the space cost to store the real-world graphs is very
large. Common e-commerce graphs can contain tens of billions of
nodes and hundreds of billions of edges with storage cost over 10TB
easily. The large graph size brings great challenges for efﬁcient
graph access, especially in a distributed environment of clusters. To
well support the high-level operators and algorithms, we apply the
following three strategies in the storage layer of AliGraph .
Graph Partition. Our AliGraph platform is build on a distributed
environment, thus the whole graph is divided and separately stored
in different workers. The goal of graph partition is to minimize the
number of crossing edges whose endpoints are in different workers.
To this end, literature work has proposed a series of algorithms. In
our system, as recommended in [13], we implement four built-in
graph partition algorithms: 1) METIS [27]; 2) Vertex cut and edge
cut partitions [16]; 3) 2-D partition [3]; and 4) Streaming-style par-
tition strategy [45]. These four algorithms are suitable to different
circumstances. In short, the METIS method is specialized in pro-
cessing sparse graphs; the vertex and edge cut method performs
much better on dense graphs; 2-D partition is often used when the
number of workers is ﬁxed; and streaming-style partition method
are often applied on graphs with frequently edge updates. Users
can choose the best partition strategy based on their own needs,
moreover, they can also implement other graph partition algorithms
as plugins in the system.
In Algorithm 2, lines 1–4 present the interface of graph parti-
tion. For each edge e2E, the general function ASSIGN in line 4
computes which worker ewill be in based on its endpoints.
Separate Storage of Attributes. Notice that, for AHGs, we need
to store both the structural and attributes of the partitioned graphs
in each worker. The structural information of graph can be simply
stored by an adjacency table. That is, for each vertex v, we store
its neighbor set Nb(v). Whereas, for the attributes on both vertices
and edges, it is inadvisable to store them together in the adjacency
table. The reasons are two-fold: 1) Attributes often cost more
spaces. For example, the space cost to store a vertex id is at most
8bytes while the attributes on a vertex may range from 0:1KB to
1KB. 2) Attributes among different vertices or edges have largely
overlaps. For example, many vertices may have the same tag “man”
indicating its gender. Therefore, it is more reasonable to separately
store attributes.
In our system, we do so by building two indices IVandIEto
store the attributes on vertices and edges, respectively. Each entry in
IV(IEresp.) is a unique attribute associated on vertex (edge resp.).
As illustrated in Figure 4, in the adjacency table, for each vertex
u, we store the index of attribute AV(u)inIV, and for each edge
(u;v), we also store the index of attribute AE(u;v)inIE. LetND
andNLbe the average number of neighbors and average length of
attributes. Let NAbe the number of distinct attributes on vertices
and edges. Obviously, our separate storage strategy decreases the
space cost from O(nNDNL)toO(nND+NANL).
Undoubtedly, separate storage of the attributes will increase the
access time for retrieving the attributes. On average, each vertex
will need to access the index IEat mostNDtimes to collects the
attributes of all of its neighbors. To mitigate this, we add two cache
components to reside the frequently accessed items in IVandIE,
respectively. We adopt the least recently used (LRU) replacing
strategy [8] in each cache.
Caching Neighbors of Important Vertices. In each worker, we fur-
ther propose a method to locally cache the neighbors of some impor-
tant vertices to reduce the communication cost. The intuitive idea
Figure 4: Index structure of graph storage.
is that if a vertex vis frequently accessed by other vertices, we can
storev’s out-neighbors in each partition it occurs. By doing this,
the visiting cost of other vertices to their neighbors via vcan be
greatly reduced. However, if the number of neighbors of vis large,
storing multiple copies of v’s neighbors will also incur huge storage
cost. To make a better trade-off, we deﬁne a metric to evaluate the
importance of each vertex, which decides whether a vertex is worth
to cache or not.
LetD(k)
i(v)andD(k)
o(v)denote the number of k-hop in and
out-neighbors of the vertex v, respectively. Certainly, D(k)
i(v)
andD(k)
o(v)can measure the beneﬁt and cost of caching the out-
neighbors of v, respectively. Thus, the k-thimportance ofv, denoted
asImp(k)(v), is deﬁned as
Imp(k)(v) =D(k)
i(v)
D(k)
o(v): (1)
We only cache the out-neighbors of a vertex vif its importance value
Imp(k)(v)is sufﬁciently large. In Algorithm 2, lines 5–9 present
the process of caching neighbors of important vertices. Let hdenote
the maximum depth of neighbors we consider. For each vertex v, we
cache the 1tok-hop out-neighbors of vifImp(k)(v)k, where
kis a user-speciﬁed threshold. Notice that, setting hto a small
number, usually 2, is enough to support a series of practical GNN
algorithms. Practically, we ﬁnd that kis not a sensitive parameter.
By experimental evaluation, setting kto a small value around 0:2
can make the best trade-off between cache cost and beneﬁt.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the vertices to be cached is only a very
small part of the whole graph. As analyzed in [48], the direct in
and out-degree of vertices in real-world graphs, i.e., D(1)
i(v)and
D(1)
o(v), often obey the power-law distribution. That is, only a very
few vertices in the graph have large in and out-degree. Based on
this, we derive the following two theorems. The proof can be found
in the appendix.
THEOREM 1.If the in and out-degree distribution of the graph
obey the power-law distribution, for any k1, the number of
k-hop in and out-neighbors of the vertices in the graph also obey
the power-law distribution.
THEOREM 2.If the in and out-degree distribution of the graph
obey the power-law distribution, the importance value of the vertices
in the graph also obey the power-law distribution.
Theorem 2 indicates that only a very few vertices in the graph
have large importance values. That means, we only need to cache
a small number of important vertices to achieve a signiﬁcant cost
decrease of graph traversals.
4