Algorithm 2: Partition and Caching
Input: graphG, partition number p, cache depthh, threshold1;2;:::; h
Output:psubgraphs
1Initializepgraph servers
2foreach edgee= (u;v)2E do
3j=ASSIGN (u)
4 Send edgeeto thej-th partition
5foreach vertexv2Vdo
6 fork 1tohdo
7 ComputeD(k)
i(v)andD(k)
o(v)
8 ifD(k)
i(v)
D(k)
o(v)kthen
9 Cache the 1tok-hop out-neighbors of von each partition where
vexists
3.3 Sampling
Recall that, GNN algorithms rely on aggregating neighborhood
information to generate embeddings of each vertex. However, the
degree distribution of real-world graphs is often skewed [48], which
makes the convolution operation hard to operate. To tackle this,
existing GNNs usually adopt various sampling strategies to sample
a subset of neighbors with aligned sizes. Due to its importance, in
our system, we abstract a sampling layer speciﬁed to optimize the
sampling strategies.
Abstraction. Formally, the sampling function takes input a vertex
subsetVTand extracts a small subset VSVTsuch thatjVSj<<
jVTj. By taking a thorough overview of current GNN models,
we abstract three kinds of different samplers, namely TRAVERSE ,
NEIGHBORHOOD and N EGATIVE .
TRAVERSE : is used to sampling a batch of vertices or edges
from the whole partitioned subgraphs.
NEIGHBORHOOD : will generate the context for a vertex. The
context of this vertex may be one or multi hop neighbors,
which are used to encode this vertex.
NEGATIVE : is used to generate negative samples to accelerate
the convergence of the training process.
Implementation. In the literature, the sampling method plays an
important role to enhance the efﬁciency and accuracy of the GNN
algorithms [22, 21, 5, 17]. In our system, we treat all samplers as
plugins. Each of them can be implemented independently. The three
types of samplers can be implemented as follows.
ForTRAVERSE samplers, they get data from the local subgraphs.
ForNEIGHBORHOOD samplers, they can get one-hop neighbors
from local storage as well as multi-hop neighbors from local cache.
If the neighbors of a vertex are not cached, a call to remote graph
server is needed. When getting the context of a batch of vertices, we
ﬁrst partition the vertices into sub-batches, and the context of each
sub-batch will be stitched together after being returned from the
corresponding graph server. NEGATIVE samplers usually generate
samples from local graph server. For some special cases, negative
sampling from other graph server may be needed. Negative sampling
is ﬂexible in algorithm, and we do not need to call all graph servers
in a batch. In summary, a typical sampling stage can be achieved as
illustrated in Figure 5.
We can accelerate training by adopting several efﬁcient sampling
strategies with dynamic weights. We implement the update opera-
tion in a sampler’s backward computation, just like gradient back
propagation [26] of an operator. So when updating needed, what
we should do is to register a gradient function for the sampler. TheDefine a TRAVERSE sampler as s1
Define a NEIGHBORHOOD sampler as s2
Define a NEGATIVE sampler as s3
...
def sampling(s1, s2, s3, batch_size):
vertex = s1.sample(edge_type, batch_size)
# hop_nums contains neighbor count at each hop
context = s2.sample(edge_type, vertex, hop_nums)
neg = s3.sample(edge_type, vertex, neg_num)
return vertex, context, neg
Figure 5: Sampling stage using three kinds of samplers
updating mode, synchronous or asynchronous, is due to the training
algorithm.
Till now, both reading and updating will be operated on the graph
storage in memory, which may lead to weak performance. Accord-
ing to the neighborhood requirement, the graph is partitioned by
source vertices. Based on this, we split the vertices on a graph server
into groups. Each group will be related with a request-ﬂow bucket,
in which the operations, including reading and updating, are all
about the vertices in this group. The bucket is a lock-free queue.
As shown in Figure 6, we bind each bucket to a CPU core and then
each operation in the bucket will be processed sequentially without
locking, which will further enhance the efﬁciency of the system.
Figure 6: Lock-free graph operations
3.4 Operator
Abstraction. After sampling, the output data is aligned, and we can
process it easily. Upon samplers, we need some GNN-like operators
to consume them. In our system, we abstract two kinds of operators,
namely AGGREGATE andCOMBINE [30, 7, 24, 22]. Their roles are
as follows.
AGGREGATE : collects the information of each vertex’s neigh-
bors to produce a uniﬁed result. For example, the AGGRE -
GATE function in Algorithm 1 maps a series of vectors hu2
Rdto a single vector h0
v2Rd, whereubelongs to sampled
neighborhood nodes of v.h0
vis an intermediate result to
further generate h(k)
v. The AGGREGATE function acts as the
convolution operation since it collects the information from
its surrounding neighborhoods. In different GNN methods, a
variety of aggregating methods are applied, such as element-
wise mean, max-pooling neural network and long short-term
memory (LSTMs) [22, 21].
COMBINE : takes care of how to use neighbors of a vertex to
describe the vertex. In Algorithm 1, the COMBINE function
5