Table 6: Statistics of datasets used in experiments.
Dataset# of
vertices# of
edges# of
vertex type# of
edge type
Amazon 10,166 148,865 1 2
Taobao-small 156,988,021 666,197,671 2 4
approaches to extend the Node2Vec method, which are denoted as
PMNE-n ,PMNE-r andPMNE-c , respectively.
C4: GNN Based Methods. The comparison methods include Struc-
tural2Vec [42], GCN [30], Fast-GCN [7],AS-GCN [24], Graph-
SAGE [22] and HEP [56].
For fairness, all algorithms are implemented by applying the
optimized operators on our system. If a method cannot process
attributes and/or multiple types of vertices, we simply ignore these
information in the embedding. We generate the embedding for each
subgraph with the same type of edges and concatenate them together
to be the ﬁnal result for homogeneous based GNN. Notice that, in
our examination, we do not compare each of our proposed GNN
algorithms w.r.t. all competitors. This is because each algorithm
is designed with different focus. We will detail the competitors of
each GNN algorithm in reporting its experimental results.
Metrics. We evaluate both the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the
proposed methods. The efﬁciency can be simply measured by the
execution time of the algorithm. To measure effectiveness, follow-
ing previous work [5, 9, 21], we apply the algorithm on the widely
adopted link prediction task, which plays important roles in real-
world scenarios such as recommendation. We randomly extract a
portion of the data as the training data and reserve the remaining
part as test data. To measure the quality of the results, four com-
monly used metrics are applied, namely the area under ROC curve
(ROC-AUC ), the PR curve ( PR-AUC ), theF1-score and the hit
recall rate ( HR Rate ). Notably, each metric is averaged among
different types of edges.
Parameters. We setd, the dimension of embedding vectors, to be
200for all algorithms.
5.2.2 Experimental Results
We report the detailed experimental results of each proposed
GNN algorithm here.
AHEP Algorithm. The goal of the AHEP algorithm is to fast obtain
the embedding result while does not sacriﬁce too much accuracy. In
Table 7, we show the comparison results on result quality of AHEP
w.r.t. its competitors on the Taobao-small dataset. In Figure 10, we
illustrate time and space cost of different algorithms. Obviously,
we have the following observations: 1) On the large Taobao-small
dataset, HEP andAHEP are the only two algorithms that can pro-
duce results in reasonable time and space limits. However, AHEP is
about 2–3faster than HEP and uses much less memory than HEP .
2) In terms of the result quality, the ROC-AUC andF1-score of
AHEP is comparable to HEP . These verify that AHEP can produce
similar results of HEP by using much less time and space.
GATNE Algorithm. The goal of GATNE is designed to process
graphs with heterogeneous and attributed information on both ver-
tices and edges. We show the comparison results of the GATNE
algorithm w.r.t. its competitors in Table 8. Obviously we ﬁnd that
GATNE outperforms all existing methods in terms of all metrics.
For example, on the Taobao-small dataset, GATNE improves the
ROC-AUC ,PR-AUC andF1-score by4:6%,1:84% and5:08%,
respectively. This is simply due to that GATNE simultaneously
captures both the heterogenous information of vertices and edges
and the attributes information. Meanwhile, we ﬁnd that training
Figure 10: Average memory cost and running time of per batch.
indicates the algorithm can not terminate in reasonable time.
AHEP is 2–3 faster than HEP and uses much less memory on
Taobao-small .
Table 7: Effectiveness comparison of AHEP w.r.t. its competi-
tors. AHEP is close to HEP onTaobao-small .
Method ROC-AUC( %)F1-score( %)
Structural2Vec N.A. N.A.
GCN N.A. N.A.
FastGCN N.A. N.A.
GraphSAGE N.A. N.A.
AS-GCN O.O.M O.O.M
HEP 77.77 57.93
AHEP 75.51 50.97
“N.A.” indicates the algorithm can not terminate in reasonable time.
“O.O.M.” indicates that the algorithm terminates due to out of memory.
time of GATNE decreases almost linearly w.r.t. the number of work-
ers. The GATNE model converges in less than 2 hours with 150
distributed workers. The veriﬁes the high efﬁciency and scalability
of the GATNE method.
Mixture GNN .We compare our Mixture GNN method w.r.t. DAE
[49] and-VAE [33] methods. The hit recall rate of applying the
embedding results into the recommendation task is shown in Table 9.
Notice that, by applying our model, the hit recall rates have been
improved by around 2%. Similarly, this improvement also makes
signiﬁcant contributions in a large network.
Hierarchical GNN .We compare our Hierarchical GNN method
w.r.t. GraphSAGE . The results is shown in Table 10. The F1-score
is signiﬁcantly improved by around 7:5%. This indicates that our
Hierarchical GNN can generate more promising embedding results.
Evolving GNN .We compare our Evolving GNN method w.r.t.
other methods on the multi-class link prediction task. The com-
petitors include the representative algorithms DeepWalk ,DANE ,
DNE ,TNE andGraphSAGE . These competitor algorithms can not
handle dynamic graphs, thus we run the algorithm on each snapshot
of the dynamic graphs and report the average performance over all
timestamps. The comparison results on the Taobao-small dataset are
shown in Table 11. We easily ﬁnd that, Evolving GNN outperforms
all other methods in terms of all metrics. For example, with burst
change, Evolving GNN improves the micro and macro F1-score
by4:2%and3:6%. This is simply because our proposed method
can better capture the dynamic changes of real-world networks, thus
can produce more promising results.
Bayesian GNN .The goal of this model is to combine Bayesian
method with the traditional GNN model. We use GraphSAGE as
the baseline and compare the results with and without incorporating
the proposed Bayesian model. We present the hit recall rate of the
recommendation result in Table 12. Notice that, we considerthe
granularity of both item brands and categories. Obviously, when
applying our Bayesian model, the hit recall rates have been increased
by1%to3%respectively. Notice that, this improvement can bring
signiﬁcant beneﬁts on our network containing 9 million items.
6. RELATED WORK
9