Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for
Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Rafael Valle1Kevin Shih1Ryan Prenger1Bryan Catanzaro1
Abstract
In this paper we propose Flowtron: an autore-
gressive ﬂow-based generative network for text-
to-speech synthesis with control over speech vari-
ation and style transfer. Flowtron borrows in-
sights from IAF and revamps Tacotron in or-
der to provide high-quality and expressive mel-
spectrogram synthesis. Flowtron is optimized
by maximizing the likelihood of the training
data, which makes training simple and stable.
Flowtron learns an invertible mapping of data to
a latent space that can be manipulated to control
many aspects of speech synthesis (pitch, tone,
speech rate, cadence, accent). Our mean opin-
ion scores (MOS) show that Flowtron matches
state-of-the-art TTS models in terms of speech
quality. In addition, we provide results on con-
trol of speech variation, interpolation between
samples and style transfer between speakers seen
and unseen during training. Code and pre-
trained models will be made publicly available
at https://github.com/NVIDIA/ﬂowtron.
1. Introduction
Current speech synthesis methods do not give the user
enough control over how speech actually sounds. Auto-
matically converting text to audio that successfully commu-
nicates the text was achieved a long time ago (Umeda et al.,
1968; Badham et al., 1983). However, communicating only
the text information leaves out all of the acoustic properties
of the voice that convey much of the meaning and human
expressiveness. Nearly all the research into speech synthe-
sis since the 1960s has focused on adding that non-textual
information to synthesized speech. But in spite of this, the
typical speech synthesis problem is formulated as a text to
speech problem in which the user inputs only text.
Taming the non-textual information in speech is difﬁcult
1NVIDIA Applied Deep Learning Research (ADLR). Corre-
spondence to: Rafael Valle <rafaelvalle@nvidia.com >.because the non-textual is unlabeled. A voice actor may
speak the same text with different emphasis or emotion
based on context, but it is unclear how to label a particular
reading. Without labels for the non-textual information,
models have fallen back to unsupervised learning. Recent
models have achieved nearly human-level quality, despite
treating the non-textual information as a black box. The
model’s only goal is to match the patterns in the training
data (Shen et al., 2017; Arik et al., 2017b;a; Ping et al.,
2017). Despite these models’ excellent ability to recreate
the non-textual information in the training set, the user has
no insight into or control over the non-textual information.
It is possible to formulate an unsupervised learning problem
in such a way that the user can gain insights into the structure
of a data set. One way is to formulate the problem such that
the data is assumed to have a representation in some latent
space, and have the model learn that representation. This
latent space can then be investigated and manipulated to give
the user more control over the generative model’s output.
Such approaches have been popular in image generation
for some time now, allowing users to interpolate smoothly
between images and to identify portions of the latent space
that correlate with various features (Radford et al., 2015;
Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018).
In audio, however, approaches have focused on embeddings
that remove a large amount of information and are obtained
from assumptions about what is interesting. Recent ap-
proaches that utilize deep learning for expressive speech
synthesis combine text and a learned latent embedding for
prosody or global style (Wang et al., 2018; Skerry-Ryan
et al., 2018). A variation of this approach is proposed
by (Hsu et al., 2018), wherein a Gaussian mixture model
(GMM) encoding the audio is added to Tacotron to learn
a latent embedding. These approaches control the non-
textual information by learning a bank of embeddings or
by providing the target output as an input to the model and
compressing it. However, these approaches require making
assumptions about the dimensionality of the embeddings
before hand and are not guaranteed to contain all the non-
textual information it takes to reconstruct speech, includ-
ing the risk of having dummy dimensions or not enough
capacity, as the appendix sections in (Wang et al., 2018;arXiv:2005.05957v3  [cs.SD]  16 Jul 2020