Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018; Hsu et al., 2018) conﬁrm. They
also require ﬁnding an encoder and embedding that prevents
the model from simply learning a complex identity function
that ignores other inputs. Furthermore, these approaches
focus on ﬁxed-length embeddings under the assumption
that variable-length embeddings are not robust to text and
speaker perturbations. Finally, most of these approaches do
not give the user control over the degree of variability in the
synthesized speech.
In this paper we propose Flowtron: an autoregressive ﬂow-
based generative network for mel-spectrogram synthesis
with control over acoustics and speech. Flowtron learns
an invertible function that maps a distribution over mel-
spectrograms to a latent zspace parameterized by a spheri-
cal Gaussian. With this formalization, we can generate sam-
ples containing speciﬁc speech charateristics manifested in
mel-space by ﬁnding and sampling the corresponding region
inz-space. In the basic approach, we generate samples by
sampling a zero mean spherical Gaussian prior and control
the amount of variation by adjusting its variance. Despite its
simplicity, this approach offers more speech variation and
control than Tacotron.
In Flowtron, we can access speciﬁc regions of mel-
spectrogram space by sampling a posterior distribution con-
ditioned on prior evidence from existing samples (Kingma
& Dhariwal, 2018; Gambardella et al., 2019). This approach
allows us to make a monotonous speaker more expressive by
computing the region in z-space associated with expressive
speech as it is manifested in the prior evidence. Finally,
our formulation also allows us to impose a structure to the
z-space and parametrize it with a Gaussian mixture, for ex-
ample. In this approach related to (Hsu et al., 2018), speech
charateristics in mel-spectrogram space can be associated
with individual components. Hence, it is possible to gener-
ate samples with speciﬁc speech characteristics by selecting
a component or a mixture thereof1.
Although V AEs and GANs (Hsu et al., 2018; Bi ´nkowski
et al., 2019; Akuzawa et al., 2018) based models also
provide a latent prior that can be easily manipulated, in
Flowtron this comes at no cost in speech quality nor opti-
mization challenges.
We ﬁnd that Flowtron is able to generalize and produce sharp
mel-spectrograms by simply maximizing the likelihood of
the data while not requiring any additional Prenet or Postnet
layer (Wang et al., 2017), nor compound loss functions
required by most state of the art models like (Shen et al.,
2017; Arik et al., 2017b;a; Ping et al., 2017; Skerry-Ryan
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Bi ´nkowski et al., 2019).
Flowtron is optimized by maximizing the likelihood of the
training data, which makes training simple and stable. It
1What is relevant statistically might not be perceptually.learns an invertible mapping of the a latent space that can
be manipulated to control many aspects of speech synthe-
sis. Our mean opinion scores (MOS) show that Flowtron
matches state-of-the-art TTS models in terms of speech
quality. In addition, we provide results on control of speech
variation, interpolation between samples, and style transfer
between seen and unseen speakers with similar and different
sentences. To our knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to show
evidence that normalizing ﬂow models can also be used for
text-to-speech synthesis. We hope this will further stimulate
developments in normalizing ﬂows.
2. Related Work
Earlier approaches to text-to-speech synthesis that achieve
human like results focus on synthesizing acoustic features
from text, treating the non-textual information as a black
box. (Shen et al., 2017; Arik et al., 2017b;a; Ping et al.,
2017). Approaches like (Wang et al., 2017; Shen et al.,
2017) require adding a critical Prenet layer to help with
convergence and improve generalization (Wang et al., 2017).
Furthermore, such models require an additional Postnet
residual layer and modiﬁed loss to produce ” better resolved
harmonics and high frequency formant structures, which
reduces synthesis artifacts .”
One approach to dealing with this lack of labels for underly-
ing non-textual information is to look for hand engineered
statistics based on the audio that we believe are correlated
with this underlying information.
This is the approach taken by models like (Nishimura et al.,
2016; Lee et al., 2019), wherein utterances are conditioned
on audio statistics that can be calculated directly from the
training data such as F0(fundamental frequency). However,
in order to use such models, the statistics we hope to approx-
imate must be decided upon a-priori, and the target value of
these statistics must be determined before synthesis.
Another approach to dealing with the issue of unlabeled
non-textual information is to learn a latent embedding for
prosody or global style. This is the approach taken by
models like (Skerry-Ryan et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018),
wherein in a bank of embeddings or a latent embedding
space of prosody is learned from unlabelled data. While
these approaches have shown promise, manipulating such
latent variables only offers a coarse control over expressive
characteristics of speech.
A mixed approach consists of combining engineered statis-
tics with latent embeddings learned in an unsupervised fash-
ion. This is the approach taken by models like Mellotron
(Valle et al., 2019b). In Mellotron, utterances are condi-
tioned on both audio statistics and a latent embedding of
acoustic features derived from a reference acoustic represen-
tation. Despite its advantages, this approach still requires