Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Figure 1: Flowtron network. Text and speaker embeddings
are channel-wise concatenated. A 0-valued vector is con-
catenated with xin the time dimension.
3.3. Inference
Once the network is trained, doing inference is simply a
matter of randomly sampling zvalues from a spherical
Gaussian, or Gaussian Mixture, and running them through
the network, reverting the order of the input when necessary.
During training we used 2= 1. The parameters of the
Gaussian mixture are either ﬁxed or predicted by Flowtron.
In section 4.3 we explore the effects of different values for
2. In general, we found that sampling zvalues from a
Gaussian with a lower standard deviation from that assumed
during training resulted in mel-spectrograms that sounded
better, as found in (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), and earlier
work on likelihood-based generative models (Parmar et al.,
2018). During inference we sampled zvalues from a Gaus-
sian with2= 0:5, unless otherwise speciﬁed. The text and
speaker embeddings are included at each of the coupling
layers as before, but now the afﬁne transforms are inverted
in time, and these inverses are also guaranteed by the loss.
4. Experiments
This section describes our training setup and provides quan-
titative and qualitative results. Our quantitative results show
that Flowtron has mean opinion scores (MOS) that are com-
parable to that of state of the art models for text to mel-
spectrogram synthesis such as Tacotron 2. Our qualitative
results display many features that are not possible or not
efﬁcient with Tacotron and Tacotron 2 GST. These features
include control of the amount of variation in speech, inter-
polation between samples and style transfer between seen
and unseen speakers during training.
We decode all mel-spectrograms into waveforms by using a
single pre-trained WaveGlow (Prenger et al., 2019) model
trained on a single speaker and available on github (Valle
et al., 2019a). During inference we used 2= 0:7. In
consonance with (Valle et al., 2019b), our results suggests
that WaveGlow can be used as an universal decoder.Although we provide images to illustrate our results, they
can best be appreciated by listening. Hence, we ask the
readers to visit our website2to listen to Flowtron samples.
4.1. Training setup
We train our Flowtron, Tacotron 2 and Tacotron 2 GST
models using a dataset that combines the LJSpeech (LJS)
dataset (Ito et al., 2017) with two proprietary single speaker
datasets with 20 and 10 hours each (Sally and Helen). We
will refer to this combined dataset as LSH. We also train a
Flowtron model on the train-clean-100 subset of LibriTTS
(Zen et al., 2019) with 123 speakers and 25 minutes on
average per speaker. Speakers with less than 5 minutes of
data and ﬁles that are larger than 10 seconds are ﬁltered
out. For each dataset we use at least 180 randomly chosen
samples for the validation set and the remainder for the
training set.
The models are trained on uniformly sampled normalized
text and ARPAbet encodings obtained from the CMU Pro-
nouncing Dictionary (Weide, 1998). We do not perform
any data augmentation. We adapt the public Tacotron 2 and
Tacotron 2 GST repos to include speaker embeddings as
described in Section 3.
We use a sampling rate of 22050 Hz and mel-spectrograms
with 80 bins using librosa mel ﬁlter defaults. We apply
the STFT with a FFT size of 1024, window size of 1024
samples and hop size of 256 samples ( 12ms).
We use the ADAM (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer with
default parameters, 1e-4 learning rate and 1e-6 weight de-
cay for Flowtron and 1e-3 learning rate and 1e-5 weight
decay for the other models, following guidelines in (Wang
et al., 2017). We anneal the learning rate once the general-
ization error starts to plateau and stop training once the the
generalization error stops signiﬁcantly decreasing or starts
increasing. The Flowtron models with 2 steps of ﬂow were
trained on the LSH dataset for approximately 1000 epochs
and then ﬁne-tuned on LibriTTS for 500 epochs. Tacotron
2 and Tacotron 2 GST are trained for approximately 500
epochs. Each model is trained on a single NVIDIA DGX-1
with 8 GPUs.
We ﬁnd it faster to ﬁrst learn to attend on a Flowtron model
with a single step of ﬂow and large amounts of data than
multiple steps of ﬂow and less data. After the model has
learned to attend, we transfer its parameters to models with
more steps of ﬂow and speakers with less data. Thus, we
ﬁrst train Flowtron model with a single step of ﬂow on the
LSH dataset with many hours per speaker. Then we ﬁne
tune this model to Flowtron models with more steps of ﬂow.
Finally, these models are ﬁne tuned on LibriTTS with an
optional new speaker embedding.
2https://nv-adlr.github.io/Flowtron