Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
For each experiment, we use the Sally speaker and the sen-
tences “ Humans are walking on the street? ” and “ Surely
you are joking mister Feynman. ”, which do not exist in
RA VDESS nor in the audio samples from Richard Feyn-
man.
The samples generated with Tacotron 2 GST are not able to
emulate the surprised style from RA VDESS nor Feynman’s
prosody and acoustic characteristics. Flowtron, on the other
hand, is able to make Sally sound surprised, which is dras-
tically different from the monotonous baseline. Likewise,
Flowtron is able to pick up on the prosody and articulation
details particular to Feynman’s speaking style, and transfer
them to Sally.
4.5. Sampling the Gaussian Mixture
In this last section we showcase visualizations and samples
from Flowtron Gaussian Mixture (GM). First we investi-
gate how different mixture components and speakers are
correlated. Then we provide sound examples in which we
modulate speech characteristics by translating one of the the
dimensions of an individual component.
4.5.1. V ISUALIZING ASSIGNMENTS
For the ﬁrst experiment, we train a Flowtrom Gaussian
Mixture on LSH with 2 steps of ﬂow, speaker embeddings
and ﬁxed mean and covariance (Flowtron GM-A). We ob-
tain mixture component assignments per mel-spectrogram
by performing a forward pass and averaging the compo-
nent assignment over time and samples. Figure 6 shows
that whereas most speakers are equally assigned to all com-
ponents, component 7 is almost exclusively assigned to
Helen’s data.
Figure 6: Component assignments for Flowtron GM-A.
Unlike LJS and Sally, Helen is almost exclusively assigned
to component 7.
In the second experiment, we train a Flowtron Gaussian
Mixture on LibriTTS with 1 step of ﬂow, without speaker
embeddings and predicted mean and covariance (Flowtron
GM-B). Figure 7 shows that Flowtron GM assigns more
probability to component 7 when the speaker is male than
when it’s female. Conversely, the model assigns more proba-
bility to component 6 when the speaker is female than when
it’s male.
Figure 7: Component assignments for Flowtron GM-B.
Components 7 and 8 are assigned different probabilities
according to gender, suggesting that the information stored
in the components is gender dependent.
4.5.2. T RANSLATING DIMENSIONS
In this subsection, we use the model Flowtron GM-A de-
scribed previously. We focus on selecting a single mixture
component and translating one of its dimensions by adding
an offset.
The samples in our supplementary material show that we
are able to modulate speciﬁc speech characteristics like
pitch and word duration. Although the samples generated
by translating one the dimensions associated with pitch
height have different pitch contours, they have the same
duration. Similarly, our samples show that translating the
dimension associated with length of the ﬁrst word does not
modulate the pitch of the ﬁrst word. This provides evidence
that we can modulate these attributes by manipulating these
dimensions and that the model is able to learn a disentangled
representation of these speech attributes.
5. Discussion
In this paper we propose a new text to mel-spectrogram
synthesis model based on autoregressive ﬂows that is opti-
mized by maximizing the likelihood and allows for control
of speech variation and style transfer. Our results show that
samples generated with FlowTron achieve mean opinion
scores that are similar to samples generated with state-of-
the-art text-to-speech synthesis models. In addition, we
demonstrate that at no extra cost and without a compound
loss term, our model learns a latent space that stores non-
textual information. Our experiments show that FlowTron
gives the user the possibility to transfer charactersitics from
a source sample or speaker to a target speaker, for example
making a monotonic speaker sound more expressive.
Our results show that despite all the variability added by
increasing2, the samples synthesized with FlowTron
still produce high quality speech. Our results show that
FlowTron learns a latent space over non-textual features that
can be investigated and manipulated to give the user more
control over the generative models output. We provide many
examples that showcase this including increasing variation
in mel-spectrograms in a controllable manner, transferring