Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
the value used during training. Although we also provide
samples computed on values of p2[0;1]in our supplemen-
tal material, we do not include them in our results because
they are unintelligible.
In Figure 3 below we provide scatter plots from sample
duration in seconds. Our results show that whereas 2= 0
produces samples with no variation in duration, larger values
of2produces samples with more variation in duration.
Humans manipulate word and sentence length to express
themselves, hence this is valuable.
Figure 3: Sample duration in seconds given parameters 2
andp. These results show that Flowtron provides more
variation in sample duration than Tacotron 2.
In Figure 4 we provide scatter plots of F0contours extracted
with the YIN algorithm (De Cheveign ´e & Kawahara, 2002),
with minimum F0, maximumF0and harmonicity threshold
equal to 80 Hz, 400 Hz and 0.3 respectively. Our results
show a behavior similar to the previous sample duration
analysis. As expected, 2= 0provides no variation in F0
contour3, while increasing the value of 2will increase the
amount of variation in F0contours.
Our results in Figure 4 also show that the samples produced
with Flowtron are considerably less monotonous than the
samples produced with Tacotron 2. Whereas increasing 2
considerably increases variation in F0, modifying pbarely
produces any variation. This is valuable because expressive
speech is associated with non-monotonic F0contours.
4.3.2. I NTERPOLATION BETWEEN SAMPLES
With Flowtron we can perform interpolation in z-space to
achieve interpolation in mel-spectrogram space. For this
experiment we evaluate Flowtron models with and with-
out speaker embeddings. For the experiment with speaker
embeddings we choose the Sally speaker and the phrase
“It is well known that deep generative models have a rich
latent space. ”. We generate mel-spectrograms by sampling
zN(0;0:8)twice and interpolating between them over
100 steps.
3Variations in 2= 0are due to different zfor WaveGlow.
(a) Flowtron 2= 0
(b) Flowtron 2= 0:5
(c) Flowtron 2= 1
(d) Tacotron 2 p2 f0:45;0:5;0:55g
Figure 4:F0contours obtained from samples generated by
Flowtron and Tacotron 2 with different values for 2andp.
Flowtron provides more expressivity than Tacotron 2.
For the experiment without speaker embeddings we inter-
polate between Sally and Helen using the phrase “ We are
testing this model. ”. First, we perform inference by sam-
plingzN (0;0:5)until we ﬁnd two zvalues,zhand
zs, that produce mel-spectrograms with Helen’s and Sally’s
voice respectively. We then generate samples by performing
inference while linearly interpolating between zhandzs.
Our same speaker interpolation samples show that Flowtron
is able to interpolate between multiple samples while pro-
ducing correct alignment maps. In addition, our different
speaker interpolation samples show that Flowtron is able
to blurry the boundaries between two speakers, creating a
speaker that combines the characteristics of both.
4.4. Sampling the posterior
In this approach we generate samples with Flowtron by sam-
pling a posterior distribution conditioned on prior evidence
containing speech characteristics of interest, as described in
(Gambardella et al., 2019; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018). In
this experiment, we collect prior evidence zeby perform-
ing a forward pass with the speaker id to be used during