Flowtron: an Autoregressive Flow-based Generative Network for Text-to-Speech Synthesis
inference4, observed mel-spectrogram and text from a set
of samples with characteristics of interest. If necessary,
we time-concatenate each zewith itself to fulﬁll minimum
length requirements deﬁned according to the text length to
be said during inference.
Tacotron 2 GST (Wang et al., 2018) has an equivalent pos-
terior sampling approach, in which during inference the
model is conditioned on a weighted sum of global style
tokens (posterior) queried through an embedding of existing
audio samples (prior). For Tacotron 2 GST, we evaluate two
approaches: in one we use a single sample to query a style
token in the other we use an average style token computed
over multiple samples.
4.4.1. S EEN SPEAKER WITHOUT ALIGNMENTS
In this experiment we compare Sally samples from Flowtron
and Tacotron 2 GST generated by conditioning on the pos-
terior computed over 30 Helen samples with the highest
variance in fundamental frequency. The goal is to make a
monotonic speaker sound expressive. Our experiments show
that by sampling from the posterior or interpolating between
the posterior and a standard Gaussian prior, Flowtron is
able to make a monotonic speaker gradually sound more
expressive. On the other hand, Tacotron 2 GST is barely
able to alter characteristics of the monotonic speaker.
4.4.2. S EEN SPEAKER WITH ALIGNMENTS
We use a Flowtron model with speaker embeddings to illus-
trate Flowtron’s ability to learn and transfer acoustic char-
acteristics that are hard to express algorithmically but easy
to perceive acoustically, we select a female speaker from
LibriTTS with a distinguished nasal voice and oscillation
inF0as our source speaker and transfer her style to a male
speaker, also from LibriTTS, with acoustic characteristics
that sound different from the female speaker. Unlike the
previous experiment, this time the text and the alignment
maps are transferred from the female to the male speaker.
Figure 5 is an attempt to visualize the transfer of these
acoustic qualities we described. It shows that after the
transfer, the lower partials of the male speaker oscillate
more and become more similar to the female speaker.
4.4.3. U NSEEN SPEAKER STYLE
We compare samples generated with Flowtron and Tacotron
2 GST with speaker embeddings in which we modify a
speaker’s style by using data from the same speaker but from
a style not seen during training. Whereas Sally’s data used
during training consists of news article readings, the evalu-
ation samples contain Sally’s interpretation of the somber
and vampiresque novel Born of Darkness.
4To remove this speaker’s information from ze
(a) Female
(b) Transfer
(c) Male
Figure 5: Mel-spectrograms from a female speaker, male
speaker and a sample where we transfer the acoustic char-
acteristics from the female speaker to the male speaker. It
shows that the transferred sample is more similar to the
female speaker than the male speaker.
Our samples show that Tacotron 2 GST fails to emulate the
somber style from Born of Darkness’s data. We show that
Flowtron succeeds in transferring not only to the somber
style in the evaluation data, but also the long pauses associ-
ated with the narrative style.
4.4.4. U NSEEN SPEAKER
In this experiment we compare Flowtron and Tacotron 2
GST samples in which we transfer the speaking style of a
speaker not seen during training. Both models use speaker
embeddings.
For these experiments, we consider two speakers. The ﬁrst
comes from speaker ID 03 from RA VDESS, a dataset with
emotion labels. We focus on the label “surprised”. The
second speaker is Richard Feynman, using a set of 10 audio
samples collected from the web.