Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
For mobile and embedded usage, specialized neural network processors are becoming increasingly
popular as an efﬁcient hardware solution of inference. DianNao (Chen et al., 2014) is proposed
for fast inference of DNNs and it uses 16-bit ﬁxed-point multipliers for small silicon area and low-
energy. Later, ShiDianNao (Du et al., 2015) is introduced and it burns extremely low energy con-
sumption by putting all weights onto the SRAM to eliminate considerable DRAM accesses. Besides,
DeepBurning (Wang et al., 2016) simpliﬁes the design ﬂow of accelerator for different NN models.
Eyeriss (Chen et al., 2018) is also another representative of low-power accelerators. And it presents
a row-stationary (RS) dataﬂow to minimize data movement energy consumption on a spatial archi-
tecture. To further reduce computation overhead, EIE (Han et al., 2016) exploits the sparsity and
low-bit compression of the NNs and achieves better throughput, energy and area efﬁciency. These
typical edge neural network processors are accepting ﬁxed-point data input and using ﬁxed-point
processing elements to reduce the power and chip area overhead caused by ﬂoating-point arithmetic
components and memory. For the cloud scenarios, specialized architectures like TPU (Jouppi et al.,
2017) and FPGA-based accelerator cards are also replacing conventional GPGPU and CPU for high-
throughput inference tasks. Even for cloud-oriented inference architectures, ﬁxed-point processing
architectures like TPU are favored because they are able to deliver much higher throughput for the
given power budget and silicon area overhead.
However, for the ﬁxed-point or integer hardware targeted on neural network acceleration, quantiza-
tion is prerequisite to convert the ﬂoating-point network model into the ﬁxed-point format compati-
ble with the specialized hardware, and it is also a critical step to ensure the accuracy of the network
after conversion. Many prior quantization methods are intended to reduce the running overhead of
networks but ignore the architecture and working mechanism of integer neural network processors,
as illustrated in Table 1, and they sometimes face considerable accuracy losses, or performance
penalty or even fail to be supported on the realistic integer datapath due to the unconsciousness of
the underlying hardware. This problem becomes particularly important for the hardware that is de-
signed to run low bitwidth networks such as binary, ternary, and 2/4-bit models. For instance, Deep
compression and WQ are clustering-based quantization methods, and they still need high-precision
values to represent the weights, bias, and activations. As a result, they are not compatible with the
hardware that only supports low-precision computing. LQ-Nets uses non-linear quantization based
on the binary code and basis vector, and it can theoretically calculate the inner products between
quantized weights and activations by bitwise operations only. However, it requires intensive modiﬁ-
cations to the design of current processors by adding a lot of look-up tables in the datapath. Further,
bias and scaling factors are not quantized in PACT and WRPN, resulting in performance penalty
when employing additional high-precision or ﬂoat-point ALUs to deal with them. In contrast, our
LLSQ is designed to ease the model quantization ﬂow for the specialized integer neural network
processors by conforming to the constraints speciﬁed in Table 1. To validate the importance of
hardware-aware quantizer and software/hardware co-design, we also design a specialized CNN ac-
celerator for wearable applications. And the specialized accelerator supports 2/4/8 integer operation
and adopts the dataﬂow of low latency and energy design.
3 N ETWORKS WITH LEARNED LINEAR SYMMETRIC QUANTIZATION
In this section, we ﬁrstly give the overview of the proposed quantization scheme. Then we detail the
scheme including low-precision representation, quantized network training, and the deployment of
quantization model on our specialized integer-only CNN accelerator for fast inference.
3.1 O VERVIEW OF LLSQ
Many of the previous researches focus on the quantization-aware training in GPU, showing the po-
tential of low-bit quantization on CNNs. Han et al. (2016); Park et al. (2017); Zhang et al. (2018a)
propose non-linear quantization methods but lacks of a detailed description of the hardware feasibil-
ity. Krishnamoorthi (2018) provides a quantization scheme that quantizes weights and activations
into 8-bit integers and integer-arithmetic-only implementation on ARM CPUs. The method achieves
evident hardware acceleration effects, but does not fully exploit lower-precision quantization. Based
on the researches, we propose a quantization scheme for state-of-the-art specialized accelerators
operating on low-precision integers only. Figure 1 shows an overview of the proposed scheme.
4