Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Table 1: Comparison between different quantizers: All-Layer (AL) denotes quantizing all the pa-
rameters of all the operators in networks, including weights, bias, activations, and the scaling factor
for low-precision networks; BNdonates that the BN operation is only invoked in training but merged
into weights and induces no overhead in integer inference; Linear-Symmetric (LS) denotes linear
symmetric quantization; Activation Functions (AF) donates the support of Leaky ReLU and activa-
tion functions besides ReLU .Structure-Intact (SI) indicates the network structure is unmodiﬁed.
Method AL BN LS AFeSI
Deep Compression (Han et al., 2016)b3
WQ (Park et al., 2017)b3
LQ-Nets (Zhang et al., 2018a) 3
Min-Max Linear Quantizationa3 3
DoReFa (Zhou et al., 2016)c3 3
RQ (Louizos et al., 2019) 3 3 3
WRPN (Mishra et al., 2018) 3 3 3
PACT (Choi, 2018)d3 3 3
LLSQ(ours) 3 3 3 3 3
aNaive linear quantization, which ﬁnds min-max value at runtime.
bClustering-based approaches to quantize weights.
cDoReFa falls into linear asymmetric quantizer due to the need for offset.
dIn Choi (2018), they use PACT to quantize activations, and DoReFa to quantize weights.
eDoReFa, RQ, WRPN, and PACT are designed for ReLU , but they can be extended to support other
activation functions in theory.
Molchanov et al., 2017). Besides these techniques, quantizing high-precision ﬂoating-point net-
works to lower bitwidth representation can also drastically decrease both the static parameters and
the intermediate data generated during the network inference, resulting in reduced memory footprint
and also computational intensity. And this paper focuses on the quantization of neural networks.
Quantization technique is also closely related to the implementation of specialized hardware that
maps the procedure of network inference onto the energy-efﬁcient low-precision integer or ﬁxed-
point arithmetic circuits. In the hardware perspective, low-precision integer accelerators or proces-
sors are dominating the solutions targeted on neural network inference, especially for mobile and
embedded scenarios. Google’s Tensor Processing Unit 1.0 (TPU) (Jouppi et al., 2017), Uniﬁed Deep
Neural Network Accelerator (UNPU) (Lee et al., 2018), Eyeriss (Chen et al., 2018), Stripes (Judd
et al., 2016), Pragmatic(Albericio et al., 2017) and many other newly proposed hardware implemen-
tations are generally reliant on the effectiveness of the underlying quantization techniques, which are
especially crucial for the low-precision integer hardware designed to process binary, ternary, 4-bit or
8-bit networks. In other words, quantization is not only a method to reduce the memory footprint as
in traditional work, but also a mandatory step to make the network deployable on integer hardware.
Though there is a lot of prior work that investigates low-precision quantization, they mainly target
on reducing the memory overhead caused by ﬂoating or high precision data representation in the
networks, but not focus on specialized integer hardware for network inference. To enable the neural
network processors to work with low-precision integer operands and minimize the accuracy losses,
a good network quantizer must satisfy the constraints as enlisted in Table 1.
First , all the parameters, including weights, bias, activations, partial results that eventually accumu-
late to an activation, and even the scaling factors, which are indispensable for low-precision networks
like binary and ternary representation, must be quantized into low bitwidth integers as required by
the underlying specialized hardware. In some prior work (Zhou et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2018a; Mishra et al., 2018; Choi, 2018), they either leave bias and scaling factors unquantized
or keep the ﬁrst and last layer in full or high precision. Besides, some designs rely on high-precision
internal register or ALUs to support high-precision partial results that are generated during com-
putation before the ﬁnal output of activations or features. For example, Krishnamoorthi (2018),
which quantizes the weights and activations to 8-bit, directly use 32-bit accumulators to cache the
intermediate values or partial results to avoid overﬂows. However, for 4-bit and lower bitwidth, the
integer accelerators cannot afford high bitwidth accumulators, which indicates higher silicon area
and power cost. For integer-only-arithmetic, we quantize the bias to ﬁxed-point numbers by using
a straight-forward method. The value range of these numbers is wide, resulting in overﬂows of the
2