Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
low bitwidth accumulators. To overcome this problem, we quantize the bias to 8-bit and ﬁnetune the
bias of the model. As shown in Figure 1, the bitwidth of accumulators can be reduced to 16-bit.
Second , the BatchNorm (BN) layer does not necessarily need to be processed during inference for
the reduction of computation and memory cost. For most of the convolutional neural networks, BN
layers are often after the Conv orFClayers. In these situations, BNcan be merged into the weights
and biases of the corresponding Conv orFClayers. However, in Zhou et al. (2016); Zhang et al.
(2018a), they use asymmetric or non-linear quantization, causing barriers to BNfusion. There are
two ways to overcome this obstacle. One is “ BNfolded training”(Krishnamoorthi, 2018), which
adopts BNfusion before weights quantization in every training step; the other is to use symmetric
linear quantization. However, the ﬁrst method doubles the training time, while the second one has
no additional computational overhead, which will be introduced in Section 3.4.
Third , linear quantization is necessary for state-of-the-art accelerators. There are many non-linear
quantization methods which achieve excellent bitwidth reduction efﬁcacy and accuracy tradeoffs.
In these cases, it requires additional transformation to have correct arithmetic results after quantiz-
ing the value into non-linear distribution. For example, as in Han et al. (2016); Park et al. (2017),
it necessitates the operation of table lookup to have correct multiplication between quantized val-
ues. However, the linear quantization can make full use of the low-precision arithmetic compo-
nents in off-the-shelf accelerators. Further, linear quantization can be divided into symmetric mode
and asymmetric mode. Asymmetric quantization has one more parameter (e.g., zero-point (Kr-
ishnamoorthi, 2018)) than symmetric quantization, and it requires additional subtraction or linear-
operation before multiplication. As a result, the symmetrical mode is compatible with the main-
stream integer accelerator chip design and do not require the redesign of datapath in these hardware.
Fourth , different CNNs or applications usually use a variety of activation functions. For instance,
the object detection model Redmon et al. (2016) typically uses Leaky ReLU . And the bottleneck
of ResNet block does not use any activation function. The quantization methods are expected to
be adapted to these situations. However, Zhang et al. (2018a); Park et al. (2017) only focus on
the quantization of activations after ReLU . In this paper, we demonstrate our method is friendly to
different activation methods such as Leaky ReLU .
Some of the previous researches change the network structure for better quantization performance,
e.g., Mishra et al. (2018) double or even triple the convolutional ﬁlters to reduce accuracy degrada-
tion. For the energy-efﬁcient integer neural network chips, it needs to remap the changed network
architecture to hardware and adds to computational and memory access overhead due to the in-
creased ﬁlters and parameters. As a result, keeping the network structure intact is important.
Concerning all the factors above, in this paper, we present a learned linear symmetric quantiza-
tion (LLSQ) method and also evaluate it on a low-precision neural network accelerator through
hardware-software co-design. Speciﬁcally, our mainly contributions are:
Unlike most of other quantization methods, we quantize the whole network including the
ﬁrst and last layers. We also quantize bias and scaling factors, in support of the low bitwidth
integer arithmetic units and accumulators on the accelerator.
We adopt learned linear symmetric quantization schemes which are hardware friendly (such
as the convenience of BNfusion implementation) while achieving state-of-the-art predic-
tion accuracy.
We design a specialized low-precision CNN inference accelerator to validate the methodol-
ogy, which supports 2/4/8 integer operating and work with high efﬁciency. We then deploy
our quantization model on the accelerator to illustrate the efﬁcacy of the workﬂow.
2 M OTIVATION
Edge or embedded neural network accelerators generally have three primary design goals— small-
footprint, high-throughput/low-latency, and low-power. For different applications and scenarios, the
prior researches on specialized deep learning processors are often falling into different categories:
cloud-oriented hardware for warehouse machines, low power mobile processors and ultra-low power
accelerators for IoT or cyber-physical devices.
3