Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
LINEAR SYMMETRIC QUANTIZATION OF NEURAL
NETWORKS FOR LOW-PRECISION INTEGER HARD-
WARE
Xiandong Zhao1,2, Ying Wang1,3, Xuyi Cai1,2, Cheng Liu1, Lei Zhang1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences2
State Key Laboratory of Computer Architecture3
fzhaoxiandong,wangying2009,caixuyi18s,liucheng,zlei g@ict.ac.cn
ABSTRACT
With the proliferation of specialized neural network processors that operate on
low-precision integers, the performance of Deep Neural Network inference be-
comes increasingly dependent on the result of quantization. Despite plenty of
prior work on the quantization of weights or activations for neural networks, there
is still a wide gap between the software quantizers and the low-precision accel-
erator implementation, which degrades either the efﬁciency of networks or that
of the hardware for the lack of software and hardware coordination at design-
phase. In this paper, we propose a learned linear symmetric quantizer for integer
neural network processors, which not only quantizes neural parameters and acti-
vations to low-bit integer but also accelerates hardware inference by using batch
normalization fusion and low-precision accumulators (e.g., 16-bit) and multipli-
ers (e.g., 4-bit). We use a uniﬁed way to quantize weights and activations, and
the results outperform many previous approaches for various networks such as
AlexNet, ResNet, and lightweight models like MobileNet while keeping friendly
to the accelerator architecture. Additional, we also apply the method to object de-
tection models and witness high performance and accuracy in YOLO-v2. Finally,
we deploy the quantized models on our specialized integer-arithmetic-only DNN
accelerator to show the effectiveness of the proposed quantizer. We show that even
with linear symmetric quantization, the results can be better than asymmetric or
non-linear methods in 4-bit networks. In evaluation, the proposed quantizer in-
duces less than 0.4% accuracy drop in ResNet18, ResNet34, and AlexNet when
quantizing the whole network as required by the integer processors.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks have shown excellent performance on various computer vision and natural
language processing tasks, such as classiﬁcation (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015; He et al., 2016), object detection (Girshick, 2015; Redmon et al., 2016; He et al., 2017),
segmentation (Long et al., 2015; Noh et al., 2015), machine translation (Zhang et al., 2018b), speech
recognition (Nassif et al., 2019), etc. While the past few years witnessed the success of DNNs
on cloud and server-end computers, neural networks have been recently pushed to embedded and
mobile areas to enable edge intelligence. For these scenarios, the power provision and computational
strength on the edge computing devices are limited. As a result, it is essential to have more efﬁcient
network architectures and less expensive inference overhead. Therefore, there is increasing attention
from the research community to study the compression of modern deep neural networks that are
typically over-parameterized and computationally costly.
Several categories of approaches are proposed to decrease the computational overhead of neural net-
works, such as lightweight neural network architectures (Howard et al., 2017), neural architecture
search (NAS) (Elsken et al., 2018), and network pruning (Han et al., 2015; 2016; Wen et al., 2016;
Corresponding author
1