AGARWAL , KAKADE , LEE AND MAHAJAN
`1bounded errors, which is quite stringent, the notion of concentrability (originally due to (Munos,
2003, 2005)) permits sharper bounds in terms of average case function approximation error, provided
that the concentrability coefﬁcient is bounded (e.g. see Munos (2005); Szepesv ´ari and Munos
(2005); Antos et al. (2008); Lazaric et al. (2016)). Chen and Jiang (2019) provide a more detailed
discussion on this quantity. Based on this problem dependent constant being bounded, Munos (2005);
Szepesv ´ari and Munos (2005), Antos et al. (2008) and Lazaric et al. (2016) provide meaningful
sample size and error bounds for approximate dynamic programming methods, where there is a data
collection policy (under which value-function ﬁtting occurs) that induces a concentrability coefﬁcient.
In terms of the concentrability coefﬁcient C1and the “distribution mismatch coefﬁcient” D1in
Table 2 , we have that D1C1, as discussed in (Scherrer, 2014) (also see the table caption). Also,
as discussed in Chen and Jiang (2019), a ﬁnite concentrability coefﬁcient is a restriction on the MDP
dynamics itself, while a bounded D1does not require any restrictions on the MDP dynamics. The
more reﬁned quantities deﬁned by Farahmand et al. (2010) (for the approximate policy iteration
result) partially alleviate some of these concerns, but their assumptions still implicitly constrain the
MDP dynamics, like the ﬁniteness of the concentrability coefﬁcient.
Assuming bounded concentrability coefﬁcient, there are a notable set of provable average case
guarantees for the MD-MPI algorithm (Geist et al., 2019) (see also (Azar et al., 2012; Scherrer et al.,
2015)), which are stated in terms of various norms of function approximation error. MD-MPI is
a class of algorithms for approximate planning under regularized notions of optimality in MDPs.
Speciﬁcally, Geist et al. (2019) analyze a family of actor-critic style algorithms, where there are both
approximate value functions updates and approximate policy updates. As a consequence of utilizing
approximate value function updates for the critic, the guarantees of Geist et al. (2019) are stated with
dependencies on concentrability coefﬁcients.
When dealing with function approximation, computational and statistical complexities are
relevant because they determine the effectiveness of approximate updates with ﬁnite samples. With
regards to sample complexity, the work in Szepesv ´ari and Munos (2005); Antos et al. (2008)
provide ﬁnite sample rates (as discussed above), further generalized to actor-critic methods in Azar
et al. (2012); Scherrer et al. (2015). In our policy optimization approach, the analysis of both
computational and statistical complexities are straightforward, since we can leverage known statistical
and computational results from the stochastic approximation literature; in particular, we use the
stochastic projected gradient ascent to obtain a simple, linear time method for the critic estimation
step in the natural policy gradient algorithm.
In terms of the algorithmic updates for the function approximation setting, our development
of NPG bears similarity to the natural actor-critic algorithm Peters and Schaal (2008), for which
some asymptotic guarantees under ﬁnite concentrability coefﬁcients are obtained in Bhatnagar et al.
(2009). While both updates seek to minimize the compatible function approximation error, we
perform streaming updates based on stochastic optimization using Monte Carlo estimates for values.
In contrast Peters and Schaal (2008) utilize Least Squares Temporal Difference methods (Boyan,
1999) to minimize the loss. As a consequence, their updates additionally make linear approximations
to the value functions in order to estimate the advantages; our approach is ﬂexible in allowing for
wide family of smoothly differentiable policy classes (including neural policies).
Finally, we remark on some concurrent works. The work of Bhandari and Russo (2019) provides
gradient domination-like conditions under which there is (asymptotic) global convergence to the
optimal policy. Their results are applicable to the projected gradient ascent algorithm; they are not
applicable to gradient ascent with the softmax parameterization (see the discussion in Section 5
8