Journal of Machine Learning Research 22 (2021) 1-76 Submitted 9/19; Published 2/21
On the Theory of Policy Gradient Methods:
Optimality, Approximation, and Distribution Shift
Alekh Agarwal ALEKHA @MICROSOFT .COM
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052, USA
Sham M. Kakade SHAM @CS.WASHINGTON .EDU
University of Washington & Microsoft Research
Seattle, WA 98195, USA
Jason D. Lee JASONLEE @PRINCETON .EDU
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
Gaurav Mahajan GMAHAJAN @ENG.UCSD .EDU
University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
Editor: Csaba Szepesvari
Abstract
Policy gradient methods are among the most effective methods in challenging reinforcement learning
problems with large state and/or action spaces. However, little is known about even their most basic
theoretical convergence properties, including: if and how fast they converge to a globally optimal
solution or how they cope with approximation error due to using a restricted class of parametric
policies. This work provides provable characterizations of the computational, approximation, and
sample size properties of policy gradient methods in the context of discounted Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs). We focus on both: “tabular” policy parameterizations, where the optimal policy
is contained in the class and where we show global convergence to the optimal policy; and parametric
policy classes (considering both log-linear and neural policy classes), which may not contain the
optimal policy and where we provide agnostic learning results. One central contribution of this work
is in providing approximation guarantees that are average case — which avoid explicit worst-case
dependencies on the size of state space — by making a formal connection to supervised learning
under distribution shift . This characterization shows an important interplay between estimation
error, approximation error, and exploration (as characterized through a precisely deﬁned condition
number).
Keywords: Policy Gradient, Reinforcement Learning
1. Introduction
Policy gradient methods have a long history in the reinforcement learning (RL) literature (Williams,
1992; Sutton et al., 1999; Konda and Tsitsiklis, 2000; Kakade, 2001) and are an attractive class of
algorithms as they are applicable to any differentiable policy parameterization; admit easy extensions
to function approximation; easily incorporate structured state and action spaces; are easy to implement
in a simulation based, model-free manner. Owing to their ﬂexibility and generality, there has also
c
2021 Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, Jason Lee and Gaurav Mahajan.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . Attribution requirements are provided at
http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/19-736.html .