ON THE THEORY OF POLICY GRADIENT METHODS
introduced in Sutton et al. (1999). More generally, we quantify our function approximation results in
terms of a precisely quantiﬁed transfer error notion, based on approximation error under distribution
shift. Table 2 shows a special case of our convergence rates of NPG, which is governed by four
quantities:stat,approx ,, andD1.
Let us discuss the important special case of log-linear policies (i.e. policies that take the softmax
of linear functions in a given feature space) where the relevant quantities are as follows: statis
a bound on the excess risk (the estimation error) in ﬁtting linearly parameterized value functions,
which can be driven to 0with more samples (at the usual statistical rate of O(1=p
N)whereNis
the number of samples); approx is the usual notion of average squared approximation error where
the target function may not be perfectly representable by a linear function; can be upper bounded
with an inverse dependence on the minimal eigenvalue of the feature covariance matrix of the ﬁtting
measure (as such it can be viewed as a dimension dependent quantity but not necessarily state
dependent); and D1is as before.
For the realizable case, where all policies have values which are linear in the given features (such
as in linear MDP models of (Jin et al., 2019; Yang and Wang, 2019; Jiang et al., 2017)), we have
that the approximation error approx is0. Here, our guarantees yield a fully polynomial and sample
efﬁcient convergence guarantee, provided the condition number is bounded. Importantly, there
always exists a good (universal) initial measure that ensures is bounded by a quantity that is only
polynomial in the dimension of the features, d, as opposed to an explicit dependence on the size of
the (inﬁnite) state space (see Remark 22). Such a guarantee would not be implied by algorithms
which depend on the coefﬁcients C1orD1.1
Our results are also suggestive that a broader class of incremental algorithms — such as
CPI (Kakade and Langford, 2002), PSDP (Bagnell et al., 2004), and MD-MPI Geist et al. (2019)
which make small changes to the policy from one iteration to the next — may also permit a sharper
analysis, where the dependence of worst-case density ratios can be avoided through an appropriate
approximation/estimation decomposition; this is an interesting direction for future work (a point
which we return to in Section 7). One signiﬁcant advantage of NPG is that the explicit parametric
policy representation in NPG (and other policy gradient methods) leads to a succinct policy represen-
tation in comparison to CPI, PSDP, or related boosting-style methods (Scherrer and Geist, 2014),
where the representation complexity of the policy of the latter class of methods grows linearly in
the number of iterations (since these methods add one policy to the ensemble per iteration). This
representation complexity is likely why the latter class of algorithms are less widely used in practice.
1.BoundingC1would require a restriction on the dynamics of the MDP (see Chen and Jiang (2019) and Section 2).
BoundingD1would require an initial state distribution that is constructed using knowledge of ?, throughd?. In
contrast,can be made O(d), with an initial state distribution that only depends on the geometry of the features (and
does not depend on any other properties of the MDP). See Remark 22.
5