ON THE THEORY OF POLICY GRADIENT METHODS
With regards to function approximation, the guarantees herein are the ﬁrst provable results
that permit average case approximation errors, where the guarantees do not have explicit worst
case dependencies over the state space. These worst case dependencies are avoided by precisely
characterizing an approximation/estimation error decomposition, where the relevant approximation
error is under distribution shift to an optimal policies measure. Here, we see that successful
function approximation relies on two key aspects: good conditioning (related to exploration) and low
distribution-shifted, approximation error. In particular, these results identify the relevant measure of
the expressivity of a policy class, for the natural policy gradient.
With regards to sample size issues, we showed that simply using stochastic (projected) gradient
ascent sufﬁces for accurate policy optimization. However, in terms of improving sample efﬁciency
and polynomial dependencies, there are number of important questions for future research, including
variance reduction techniques along with data re-use.
There are number of compelling directions for further study. The ﬁrst is in understanding
how to remove the density ratio guarantees among prior algorithms; our results are suggestive
that the incremental policy optimization approaches, including CPI (Kakade and Langford, 2002),
PSDP (Bagnell et al., 2004), and MD-MPI Geist et al. (2019), may permit such an improved analysis.
The question of understanding what representations are robust to distribution shift is well-motivated
by the nature of our distribution-shifted, approximation error (the transfer error). Finally, we hope
that policy optimization approaches can be combined with exploration approaches, so that, provably,
these approaches can retain their robustness properties (in terms of their agnostic learning guarantees)
while mitigating the need for a well conditioned initial starting distribution.
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers who provided detailed and constructive feedback that helped us
signiﬁcantly improve the presentation and exposition. Sham Kakade and Alekh Agarwal gratefully
acknowledge numerous helpful discussions with Wen Sun with regards to the Q-NPG algorithm
and our notion of transfer error. We also acknowledge numerous helpful comments from Ching-An
Cheng and Andrea Zanette on an earlier draft of this work. We thank Nan Jiang, Bruno Scherrer, and
Matthieu Geist for their comments with regards to the relationship between concentrability coefﬁ-
cients, the condition number, and the transfer error; this discussion ultimately lead to Corollary 21.
Sham Kakade acknowledges funding from the Washington Research Foundation for Innovation in
Data-intensive Discovery, the ONR award N00014-18-1-2247, and the DARPA award FA8650-18-2-
7836. Jason D. Lee acknowledges support of the ARO under MURI Award W911NF-11-1-0303.
This is part of the collaboration between US DOD, UK MOD and UK Engineering and Physical
Research Council (EPSRC) under the Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative.
References
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Peter Bartlett, Kush Bhatia, Nevena Lazic, Csaba Szepesvari, and Gell ´ert
Weisz. POLITEX: Regret bounds for policy iteration using expert prediction. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3692–3702, 2019a.
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Nevena Lazic, Csaba Szepesvari, and Gellert Weisz. Exploration-enhanced
politex. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10479 , 2019b.
41