AGARWAL , KAKADE , LEE AND MAHAJAN
been a ﬂurry of improvements and reﬁnements to make these ideas work robustly with deep neural
network based approaches (see e.g. Schulman et al. (2015, 2017)).
Despite the large body of empirical work around these methods, their convergence properties
are only established at a relatively coarse level; in particular, the folklore guarantee is that these
methods converge to a stationary point of the objective, assuming adequate smoothness properties
hold and assuming either exact or unbiased estimates of a gradient can be obtained (with appropriate
regularity conditions on the variance). However, this local convergence viewpoint does not address
some of the most basic theoretical convergence questions, including: 1) if and how fast they converge
to a globally optimal solution (say with a sufﬁciently rich policy class); 2) how they cope with
approximation error due to using a restricted class of parametric policies; or 3) their ﬁnite sample
behavior. These questions are the focus of this work.
Overall, the results of this work place policy gradient methods under a solid theoretical footing,
analogous to the global convergence guarantees of iterative value function based algorithms.
1.1 Our Contributions
This work focuses on ﬁrst-order and quasi second-order policy gradient methods which directly work
in the space of some parameterized policy class (rather than value-based approaches). We characterize
the computational, approximation, and sample size properties of these methods in the context of
a discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP). We focus on: 1) tabular policy parameterizations ,
where there is one parameter per state-action pair so the policy class is complete in that it contains
the optimal policy, and 2) function approximation , where we have a restricted class or parametric
policies which may not contain the globally optimal policy. Note that policy gradient methods for
discrete action MDPs work in the space of stochastic policies, which permits the policy class to be
differentiable. We now discuss our contributions in the both of these contexts.
Tabular case: We consider three algorithms: two of which are ﬁrst order methods, projected
gradient ascent (on the simplex) and gradient ascent (with a softmax policy parameterization); and
the third algorithm, natural policy gradient ascent, can be viewed as a quasi second-order method (or
preconditioned ﬁrst-order method). Table 1 summarizes our main results in this case: upper bounds
on the number of iterations taken by these algorithms to ﬁnd an -optimal policy, when we have
access to exact policy gradients.
Arguably, the most natural starting point for an analysis of policy gradient methods is to consider
directly doing gradient ascent on the policy simplex itself and then to project back onto the simplex
if the constraint is violated after a gradient update; we refer to this algorithm as projected gradient
ascent on the simplex. Using a notion of gradient domination (Polyak, 1963), our results provably
show that any ﬁrst-order stationary point of the value function results in an approximately optimal
policy, under certain regularity assumptions; this allows for a global convergence analysis by directly
appealing to standard results in the non-convex optimization literature.
A more practical and commonly used parameterization is the softmax parameterization, where
the simplex constraint is explicitly enforced by the exponential parameterization, thus avoiding
projections. This work provides the ﬁrst global convergence guarantees using only ﬁrst-order gradient
information for the widely-used softmax parameterization. Our ﬁrst result for this parameterization
establishes the asymptotic convergence of the policy gradient algorithm; the analysis challenge here
is that the optimal policy (which is deterministic) is attained by sending the softmax parameters to
inﬁnity.
2