unlimited training data can be generated, such as any video game. All that one has to do is
obtain a dense sampling of the space of situations that needs to be covered, and associate
each situation with an appropriate action vector.
Adding ever more data to a local-generalization learning system is certainly a fair strat-
egy if one’s end goal is skill on the task considered, but it will not lead to generalization
beyond the data the system has seen (the resulting system is still very brittle, e.g. Deep
Learning models such as OpenAI Five), and crucially, developing such systems does not
teach us anything about achieving ﬂexibility and generality . “Solving” any given task with
beyond-human level performance by leveraging either unlimited priors or unlimited data
does not bring us any closer to broad AI or general AI, whether the task is chess, football,
or any e-sport.
Current evidence (e.g. [51, 46, 16, 59, 50]) points to the fact that contemporary Deep
Learning models are local-generalization systems, conceptually similar to a locality-sensitive
hashtable – they may be trained to achieve arbitrary levels of skill at any task, but do-
ing so requires a dense sampling of the input-cross-target space considered (as outlined in
[16]), which is impractical to obtain for high-value real-world applications, such as L5 self-
driving (e.g. [5] notes that 30 million training situations is not enough for a Deep Learning
model to learn to drive a car in a plain supervised setting). Hypothetically, it may be shown
in the future that methods derived from Deep Learning could be capable of stronger forms
of generalization, but demonstrating this cannot be done merely by achieving high skill,
such as beating humans at DotA2 or Starcraft given unlimited data or unlimited engineer-
ing; instead, one should seek to precisely establish and quantify the generalization strength
of such systems (e.g. by considering prior-efﬁciency and data-efﬁciency in skill acquisition,
as well as the developer-aware generalization difﬁculty of the tasks considered). A central
point of this document is to provide a formal framework for doing so (II.2 and II.3). Failing
to account for priors, experience, and generalization difﬁculty in our evaluation methods
will prevent our ﬁeld from climbing higher along the spectrum of generalization (I.3.2) and
from eventually reaching general AI.
In summary, the hallmark of broad abilities (including general intelligence, as per II.1.2)
is the power to adapt to change, acquire skills, and solve previously unseen problems – not
skill itself, which is merely the crystallized output of the process of intelligence. Testing
for skill at a task that is known in advance to system developers (as is the current trend
in general AI research) can be gamed without displaying intelligence, in two ways: 1)
unlimited prior knowledge, 2) unlimited training data. To actually assess broad abilities,
and thus make progress toward ﬂexible AI and eventually general AI, it is imperative that
we control for priors ,experience , and generalization difﬁculty in our evaluation methods,
in a rigorous and quantitative way.
II.1.2 The meaning of generality: grounding the g factor
It is a well-known fact of cognitive psychology that different individuals demonstrate dif-
ferent cognitive abilities to varying degrees, albeit results across all tests of intelligence
20