II.3.2 What to expect of an ideal intelligence benchmark
The recommendations below synthesizes the conclusions of this document with regard to
the properties that a candidate benchmark of human-like general intelligence should pos-
sess.
It should describe its scope of application and its own predictiveness with regard to
this scope (i.e. it should establish validity ). In practice, this would be achieved by
empirically determining the statistical relationship between success on the benchmark
and success on a range of real-world tasks.
It should be reliable (i.e. reproducible ). If an evaluation session includes stochastic
elements, sampling different values for these elements should not meaningfully af-
fect the results. Different researchers independently evaluating the same system or
approach using the benchmark should arrive at the same conclusions.
It should set out to measure broad abilities and developer-aware generalization:
–It should not be solely measuring skill or potential (maximum achievable skill).
–It should not feature in its evaluation set any tasks that are known in advance,
either to the test-taking system itself or to the developers of the system (cf.
developer-aware generalization as deﬁned in I.3.2).
–It should seek to quantify the generalization difﬁculty it measures (cf. formal
deﬁnition from II.2), or at least provide qualitative guidelines with regard to its
generalization difﬁculty: it should at least be made clear whether the benchmark
seeks to measure local generalization (robustness), broad generalization (ﬂexi-
bility), or extreme generalization (general intelligence), as deﬁned in I.3.2. Tak-
ing into account generalization difﬁculty minimizes the possibility that a given
benchmark could be “hacked” by solvers that take undesired shortcuts that by-
pass broad abilities (e.g. leveraging surface textures instead of semantic content
in image recognition).
It should control for the amount of experience leveraged by test-taking systems dur-
ing training. It should not be possible to “buy” performance on the benchmark by
sampling unlimited training data. The benchmark should avoid tasks for which new
data can be generated at will. It should be, in effect, a game for which it is not possible
to practice in advance of the evaluation session.
It should explicitly and exhaustively describe the set of priors it assumes. Any task
is going to involve priors, but in many tasks used for AI evaluation today, priors
stay implicit, and the existence of implicit hidden priors may often give an unfair
advantage to either humans or machines.
It should work for both humans and machines, fairly, by only assuming the same
priors as possessed by humans (e.g. Core Knowledge) and only requiring a human-
sized amount of practice time or training data.
These recommendations for general AI evaluation wouldn’t be complete without a con-
crete effort to implement them. In part III, we present our initial attempt.
45