ble skill) on average (probabilistic average over all applicable curricula), weighted by the
developer-aware generalization difﬁculty of the task considered (as well as the task value
!, which makes skill commensurable across tasks), averaged over all tasks in the scope.
Or, in plain English: intelligence is the rate at which a learner turns its experience and
priors into new skills at valuable tasks that involve uncertainty and adaptation.
Note that our deﬁnition is not the ﬁrst formal deﬁnition of intelligence based on Algorith-
mic Information Theory. We are aware of three other AIT-based deﬁnitions: the C-Test
[40], the AIXI model [43], and the “Universal Intelligence” model [54] (closely related to
AIXI). It should be immediately clear to a reader familiar with these deﬁnitions that our
own approach represents a very different perspective.
We bring the reader’s attention to a number of key observations about our formalism (see
also II.2.3):
A high-intelligence system is one that can generate high-skill solution programs for
high generalization difﬁculty tasks (i.e. tasks that feature high uncertainty about the
future) using little experience and priors, i.e. it is a system capable of making highly
efﬁcient use of all of the information it has at its disposition to cover as much ground
as possible in unknown parts of the situation space. Intelligence is, in a way, a con-
version rate between information about part of the situation space, and the ability
to perform well over a maximal area of future situation space, which will involve
novelty and uncertainty (ﬁgure 3).
The measure of intelligence is tied to a choice of scope (space of tasks and value
function over tasks). It can also optionally be tied to a choice of sufﬁcient skill levels
across the tasks in the scope (sufﬁcient case).
Skill is not possessed by an intelligent system, it is a property of the output artifact of
the process of intelligence (a skill program). High skill is not high intelligence: these
are different concepts altogether.
Intelligence must involve learning and adaptation, i.e. operationalizing information
extracted from experience in order to handle future uncertainty: a system that starts
out with the ability to perform well on evaluation situations for a task would have a
very low developer-aware generalization difﬁculty for this task, and thus would score
poorly on our intelligence metric.
Intelligence is not curve-ﬁtting: a system that merely produces the simplest possible
skill program consistent with known data points could only perform well on tasks that
feature zero generalization difﬁculty, by our deﬁnition. An intelligent system must
generate behavioral programs that account for future uncertainty.
The measure of intelligence is tied to curriculum optimization: a better curriculum
space will lead to greater realized skill (on average) and to greater expressed intelli-
gence (greater skill-acquisition efﬁciency).
40