a hierarchy of broad abilities leading up to a “general” factor at the top. And crucially, both
are still ultimately highly specialized (which should be unsurprising given the context of
their development): much like human bodies are unﬁt for the quasi-totality of the universe
by volume, human intellect is not adapted for the large majority of conceivable tasks.
This includes obvious categories of problems such as those requiring long-term plan-
ning beyond a few years, or requiring large working memory (e.g. multiplying 10-digit
numbers). This also includes problems for which our innate cognitive priors are unadapted;
for instance, humans can be highly efﬁcient in solving certain NP-hard problems of small
size when these problems present cognitive overlap with evolutionarily familiar tasks such
as navigation (e.g. the Euclidean Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) with low point count
can be solved by humans near-optimally in near-linear optimal time [58], using perceptual
strategies), but perform poorly – often no better than random search – for problem instances
of very large size or problems with less cognitive overlap with evolutionarily familiar tasks
(e.g. certain non-Euclidean problems). For instance, in the TSP, human performance de-
grades severely when inverting the goal from “ﬁnding the shortest path” to “ﬁnding the
longest path” [57] – humans perform even worse in this case than one of the simplest pos-
sible heuristic: farthest neighbor construction.6
A particularly marked human bias is dimensional bias: humans show excellent perfor-
mance on 2D navigation tasks and 2D shape-packing puzzles, and can still handle 3D cases
albeit with greatly reduced performance, but they are effectively unable to handle 4D and
higher. This fact is perhaps unsurprising given human reliance on perceptual strategies for
problem-solving – strategies which are backed by neural mechanisms speciﬁcally evolved
for 2D navigation (hippocampal systems of place cells and grid cells [64]).
Thus, a central point of this document is that “general intelligence” is not a binary
property which a system either possesses or lacks. It is a spectrum, tied to 1) a scope of
application, which may be more or less broad, and 2) the degree of efﬁciency with which the
system translate its priors and experience into new skills over the scope considered, 3) the
degree of generalization difﬁculty represented by different points in the scope considered
(see II.2). In addition, the “value” of one scope of application over another is entirely
subjective; we wouldn’t be interested in (and wouldn’t even perceive as intelligent) a system
whose scope of application had no intersection with our own.
As such, it is conceptually unsound to set “artiﬁcial general intelligence” in an absolute
sense (i.e. “universal intelligence”) as a goal. To set out to build broad abilities of any kind,
one must start from a target scope, and one must seek to achieve a well-deﬁned intelligence
threshold within this scope: AI is a deeply contextual and open-ended endeavour, not a sin-
gle one-time riddle to be solved. However, it may in theory be possible to create human-like
artiﬁcial intelligence: we may gradually build systems that extend across the same scope
of applicability as human intelligence, and we may gradually increase their generalization
power within this scope until it matches that of humans. We may even build systems with
higher generalization power (as there is no a priori reason to assume human cognitive ef-
6This does not necessarily mean that humanity as a collective is incapable of solving these problems; pooling
individual humans over time or augmenting human intellect via external resources leads to increased generality,
albeit this increase remains incremental, and still fundamentally differs from universality.
23