set given the test set, or the generalization difﬁculty of each task (considered inde-
pendently). We plan on conducting future work to empirically address this issue by
using human performance on a task (considered over many human subjects) to esti-
mate the generalization difﬁculty it represents. We would be particularly interested
in attempting to correlate human performance on a task with an approximation of
the AIT measure of generalization difﬁculty proposed in II.2 (such an approximation
should become available as we make progress on ARC solver programs). Finding
high correlation, or a lack of correlation, would provide a degree of validation or
invalidation of our formal measure.
Test validity is not established. Validity represents the predictiveness of test perfor-
mance with regard to performance on other non-test activities. The validity of ARC
should be investigated via large-sample size statistical studies on humans, following
the process established by psychometrics. Further, when AI ARC solvers become
a reality, we will also be able to study how well ARC performance translates into
real-world usefulness across a range of tasks.
Dataset size and diversity may be limited. ARC only features 1,000 tasks in total,
and there may be some amount of conceptual overlap across many tasks. This could
make ARC potentially vulnerable to shortcut strategies that could solve the tasks
without featuring intelligence. We plan on running public AI competitions (using the
private evaluation set) as a way to crowd-source attempts to produce such shortcuts (if
a shortcut exists, it should arise quickly in a competition setting). Further, to mitigate
potential vulnerability against such shortcuts, we intend to keep adding new tasks to
ARC in the future, possibly by crowd-sourcing them.
The evaluation format is overly close-ended and binary. The score of a test-taker
on an evaluation task is either 0 or 1, which lacks granularity. Further, real-world
problem-solving often takes the form of an interactive process where hypotheses are
formulated by the test-taker then empirically tested, iteratively. In ARC, this approach
is possible to an extent since the test-taker is allowed 3 trials for each test example
in a task. However, this format remains overly limiting. A better approach may be
let the test taker dynamically interact with an example generator for the task: the test
taker would be able to ask for a new test input at will, would propose a solution for
the test input, and would receive feedback on their solution, repeatedly, until the test-
taker is reliably able to produce the correct answer. The test-taker’s score on the task
would then be a measure of the amount of feedback it required until it became able
to reliably generate the correct solution for any new input. This represents a more
direct measure of intelligence as formally deﬁned in II.2, where the input generator
is in control of the curriculum.
Core Knowledge priors may not be well understood and may not be well cap-
tured in ARC. Central to ARC is the notion that it only relies on innate human prior
knowledge and does not feature signiﬁcant amounts of acquired knowledge. How-
ever, the exact nature of innate human prior knowledge is still an open problem, and
whether these priors are correctly captured in ARC is unclear.
54