energy efﬁciency, this is highly relevant to biological systems and natural evolution,
in which certain novelty-seeking behaviors that would lead to faster learning may
also be more dangerous.
In fact, one may note that information efﬁciency acts in many settings as a proxy for
energy efﬁciency and risk efﬁciency.
We expect that these alternative ways to quantify efﬁciency will become relevant in
specialized AI application contexts in the future, and we bring them to the reader’s attention
to encourage others to develop new formal deﬁnitions of intelligence incorporating them in
addition to information efﬁciency.
II.2.3 Practical implications
The deﬁnitions above provide a formal framework as well as quantitative tools to reason
about the intuitive notions we have been introducing so far, in particular the concepts of
“generalization difﬁculty”, “intelligence as skill-acquisition efﬁciency”, and what it means
to control for priors and experience when evaluating intelligence, as opposed to looking
purely at task-speciﬁc skill.
The main value of this framework is to provide an actionable perspective shift in how
we understand and evaluate ﬂexible or general artiﬁcial intelligence. We argue that this
perspective shift has the following practical consequences:
a. Consequences for research directions towards ﬂexible or general AI:
It clearly spells out that the process of creating an intelligent system can be ap-
proached as an optimization problem, where the objective function would be a com-
putable approximation of our quantitative intelligence formula. As pointed out in
II.2.2, this objective function could be further reﬁned by incorporating regularization
terms that would take into account alternative forms of efﬁciency.
It encourages a focus on developing broad or general-purpose abilities rather than
pursuing skill alone, by proposing a target metric that penalises excessive reliance on
experience or priors, and discounting tasks that feature low generalization difﬁculty.
It encourages interest in program synthesis, by suggesting that we stop thinking of
“agents” as monolithic black boxes that take in sensory input and produce behavior (a
vision inherited from Reinforcement Learning [88]): our formalism clearly separates
the part of the system that possesses intelligence (“intelligent system”, a program-
synthesis engine) from the part that achieves skill or implements behavior (“skill
program”, the non-intelligent output artifact of the process of intelligence), and places
focus to the former. As we point out throughout this paper, we believe that this
confusion between process and artifact has been an ongoing fundamental issue in the
conceptualization of AI.
It encourages interest in curriculum development, by leveraging the notion of an “op-
timal curriculum” and drawing attention to the fact that a better curriculum increases
the intelligence manifested by a learning system.
42