called ANALOGY capable of solving a geometric analogy task of the kind that may be
found in a pyschometric intelligence test. Newell suggested the idea again in 1973 [66] in
his seminal paper You can’t play 20 questions with Nature and win . It was proposed again
and reﬁned by Bringsjord et al. in the 2000s under the name “Psychometric AI” (PAI) [9].
However, it has since become apparent that it is possible for AI system developers to game
human intelligence tests, because the tasks used in these tests are available to the system
developers, and thus the developers can straightforwardly solve the abstract form of these
problems themselves and hard-code the solution in program form (see, for instance, [23, 80,
44]), much like Evans did with in the 1960s with the ANALOGY program. Effectively, in
this case, it is the system developers who are solving the test problems, rather than any AI.
The implicit assumptions that psychometric test designers make about human test-takers
turn out to be difﬁcult to enforce in the case of machines.
An alternative, more promising approach is to leverage what psychometrics can teach
us about ability assessment and test design to create new types of benchmarks targeted
speciﬁcally at evaluating broad abilities in AI systems. Along these lines, Hern ´andez-
Orallo et al. have proposed extending psychometric evaluation to any intelligent system,
including AI agents and animals, in “Universal Psychometrics” [39].
We argue that several important principles of psychometrics can inform intelligence
evaluation in AI in the context of the development of broad AI and general AI:
Measuring abilities (representative of broad generalization and skill-acquisition efﬁ-
ciency), not skills. Abilities are distinct from skills in that they induce broad general-
ization, i.e. they form the basis for skill across a broad range of tasks, including tasks
that were previously unknown to the ability-enabled system and its developers.
Doing so via batteries of tasks rather than any single task, that should be previously
unknown to both the test taking system and the system developers (this is necessary
to assess broad generalization as opposed to skill or local generalization).
Having explicit standards regarding reliability, validity, standardization , and freedom
from bias :
–Reliability implies that the test results for a given system should be reproducible
over time and across research groups.
–Validity implies that what the test assesses should be clearly understood; test
creators should be able to answer 1) what assumptions does the test make? 2)
what does the test predict, i.e. what broad abilities would a successful result
demonstrate, and how well does the test predict these abilities? (Which should
ideally be achieved via statistical quantiﬁcation.)
–Standardization implies adopting shared benchmarks across the subset of the
research community that pursues broad AI and general AI. Standard benchmarks
in computer vision and natural language processing have already shown to be
highly effective catalyzers of progress.
–Freedom from bias implies that the test should not be biased against groups of
test-takers in ways that run orthogonal to the abilities being assessed. For in-
15