is not easily scalable (although crowd-sourcing tasks may partially address this problem).
The diversity and scalablility points are especially critical given that we need a constant
supply of substantially new tasks in order to guarantee that the benchmark is measuring
developer-aware generalization.
A solution may be to instead programmatically generate new tasks. We noted in III.1.3
that programmatic generation from a static “master” program is not desirable, as it places a
ceiling on the diversity and complexity of the set of tasks that can be generated, and it offers
a potential avenue to “cheat” on the benchmark by reverse-engineering the master program.
We propose instead to generate tasks via an ever-learning program called a “teacher” pro-
gram, interacting in a loop with test-taking systems, called “student” programs (ﬁgure 12).
The teacher program would optimize task generation for novelty and interestingness for a
given student (tasks should be new and challenging, while still being solvable by the stu-
dent), while students would evolve to learn to solve increasingly difﬁcult tasks. This setup
is also favorable to curriculum optimization, as the teacher program may be conﬁgured to
seek to optimize the learning efﬁciency of its students. This idea is similar to the “anytime
intelligence test” proposed in [38] and to the POET system proposed in [96].
In order to make sure that the space of generated tasks retains sufﬁcient complexity and
novelty over time, the teacher program should draw information from an external source
(assumed to feature incompressible complexity), such as the real world. This external
source of complexity makes the setup truly open-ended. A teacher program that generates
novel tasks that partially emulate human-relevant tasks would have the added advantage
that it would guide the resulting student programs towards a form of intelligence that could
transfer to real-world human-relevant problems.
Figure 12: Teacher-student learning and evaluation system.
Taking stock
The study of general artiﬁcial intelligence is a ﬁeld still in its infancy, and we do not wish to
convey the impression that we have provided a deﬁnitive solution to the problem of charac-
terizing and measuring the intelligence held by an AI system. Rather, we have introduced
a new perspective on deﬁning and evaluating intelligence, structured around the following
ideas:
56