Deep Learning, a connectionist-inspired Tabula Rasa is increasingly becoming the domi-
nant philosophical framework in which AI research is taking place. Many researchers are
implicitly conceptualizing the mind via the metaphor of a “randomly initialized neural net-
work” that starts blank and that derives its skills from “training data” – a cognitive fallacy
that echoes early AI researchers a few decades prior who conceptualized the mind as a kind
of mainframe computer equipped with clever subroutines. We see the world through the
lens of the tools we are most familiar with.
Today, it is increasingly apparent that both of these views of the nature of human in-
telligence – either a collection of special-purpose programs or a general-purpose Tabula
Rasa – are likely incorrect, which we discuss in II.1.3, along with implications for artiﬁcial
intelligence.
I.3 AI evaluation: from measuring skills to measuring broad
abilities
These two conceptualizations of intelligence – along with many other intermediate views
combining elements from each side – have inﬂuenced a host of approaches for evaluating
intelligence in machines, in humans, and more rarely in both at the same time, which we
discuss below. Note that this document is not meant as an extensive survey of AI evaluation
methods – for such a survey, we recommend Hern ´andez-Orallo 2017 [37]. Other notable
previous surveys include Cohen and Howe 1988 [69] and Legg and Hutter 2007 [53].
I.3.1 Skill-based, narrow AI evaluation
In apparent accordance with Minsky’s goal for AI, the major successes of the ﬁeld have
been in building special-purpose systems capable of handling narrow, well-described tasks,
sometimes at above human-level performance. This success has been driven by perfor-
mance measures quantifying the skill of a system at a given task (e.g. how well an AI
plays chess, how well an image classiﬁer recognizes cats from dogs). There is no single,
formalized way to do skill-based evaluation. Historically successful approaches include:
Human review: having human judges observe the system’s input-output response
and score it. This is the idea behind the Turing test and its variants. This evaluation
mode is rarely used in practice, due to being expensive, impossible to automate, and
subjective. Some human-facing AI systems (in particular commercial chatbots) use
it as one of multiple evaluation mechanics.
White-box analysis: inspecting the implementation of the system to determine its
input-output response and score it. This is most relevant for algorithms solving a
fully-described task in a fully-described environment where all possible inputs can
be explicitly enumerated or described analytically (e.g. an algorithm that solves the
traveling salesman problem or that plays the game “Connect Four”), and would often
take the form of an optimality proof.
7