III.3 Possible alternatives
ARC is merely one attempt to create a human-like general intelligence benchmark that
embodies as many of the guidelines listed in II.3 as possible. While ARC stays very close
to the format of psychometric intelligence tests, many other possible approaches could be
explored. In this section, we offer some suggestions for alternatives.
III.3.1 Repurposing skill benchmarks to measure broad generalization
We noted in I.3.5 the ongoing fascination of the AI research community in developing
systems that surpass human skill at board games and video games. We propose repurposing
such tests of skills into tests of intelligence.
Consider an AI developer interested in solving game X. While the AI would be trained
on instances of X, an evaluation arbiter would create multiple variants of X(X1,X2,
Xn). These alternative games would be designed to represent a meaningful amount of
generalization difﬁculty over X(as deﬁned in II.2): the simplest game-playing program
that is optimal on instances of X(e.g. game levels of X) would not be optimal on Xi.
As such, these alternative games would not be mere “new levels” of X, but would feature
related-yet-novel gameplay, so as to measure broad generalization as opposed to local gen-
eralization. These alternative games would stay unknown to the AI developers, so as to
measure developer-aware generalization. This proposed setup is thus markedly different
from e.g. CoinRun [17] or Obstacle Tower [49], where the evaluation environments are not
alternative games, but only levels of the same game (local generalization, or generalization
to known unknowns), randomly sampled from a level generator which is known in advance
to the AI developers (no evaluation of developer-aware generalization).
The AI trained on X, once ready, would then be tasked with learning to solve X1,
Xn. Its evaluation score would then be a measure of the amount of experience it required
on each alternative game in order to reach a speciﬁc threshold of skill, modulated by the
amount of generalization difﬁculty represented by each alternative game. A measure of the
general intelligence of such an AI would then be an average of these evaluation scores over
a large number of different source games X.
For instance, consider the game DotA2: an AI trained on DotA2 may be evaluated by
measuring the efﬁciency with which it can learn to play new games from the same genre,
such as League of Legends or Heroes of the Storm. As an even simpler (but weaker)
alternative, an AI trained on 16 speciﬁc DotA2 characters may be evaluated by measuring
the efﬁciency with which it can learn to master a set of brand new characters it would not
have played before – for example, a strong human DotA2 player can play at a high level
with a new character upon ﬁrst try.
III.3.2 Open-ended adversarial or collaborative approaches
We have pointed out in III.2 some of the key limitations of having to craft evaluation tasks
manually: it is a labor-intensive process that makes it difﬁcult to formally control for gen-
eralization difﬁculty, that could potentially result in a low-diversity set of tasks, and that
55