progress towards human-like general AI. Here we argue how such intelligence comparisons
between systems entail speciﬁc requirements with regard to the target systems’ scope, po-
tential , and priors . We also detail how such comparisons should proceed given that these
requirements are met.
Scope and potential requirements. In II.1.2, we argued that intelligence is necessar-
ily tied to a scope of application, an idea also central to the formalism introduced in II.2.
As such, a comparison scale must be tied to a well-deﬁned scope of tasks that is shared by
the target systems (all target systems should be able to learn to perform the same tasks).
Further, we must consider that the target systems may have different potential (maxi-
mum achievable skill) over their shared scope. An intelligence comparison should focus
on skill-acquisition efﬁciency, but skill-acquisition efﬁciency cannot be meaningfully com-
pared between systems that arrive at vastly different levels of skills. As such, a comparison
scale must be tied to a ﬁxed threshold of skill over the scope of tasks considered . This skill
threshold should be achievable by all target systems.
For instance, comparing a generally-intelligent system to human intelligence would
only make sense if the scope of tasks that can be learned by the system is the same scope
of tasks that can be learned by a typical human, and the comparison should focus on the
efﬁciency with which the system achieves the same level of skill as a human expert. Com-
paring maximum realized skill does not constitute an intelligence comparison.
Prior knowledge requirements. Since the formalism of II.2 summarizes priors into
a single scalar score, which is homogeneous to the score used to quantify experience, it is
not strictly necessary for the two systems being compared to share the same priors. For
instance, if two systems achieve the same skill using the same amount of experience (the
exact nature of this experience, determined by the curriculum used, may differ), the system
that has the least amount of prior knowledge would be considered more intelligent.
However, it would be generally impractical to fully quantify prior knowledge. As such,
we recommend only comparing the intelligence of systems that assume a sufﬁciently similar
set of priors . This implies that any measure of intelligence should explicitly and exhaus-
tively list the priors it assumes, an idea we detail below, in II.3.2. Further, this implies that
systems that aim at implementing human-like general intelligence should leverage Core
Knowledge priors.
If the above conditions are met (shared scope, well-deﬁned skill threshold over scope,
and comparable knowledge priors), then a fair intelligence comparison would then consist
of contrasting the skill-acquisition efﬁciency proﬁle of the target systems. The more in-
telligent system would be the one that uses the least amount of experience to arrive at the
desired skill threshold in the average case. Alternatively, computation efﬁciency, energy
efﬁciency, and risk efﬁciency may also be considered, as per II.2.2.
44