On the Measure of Intelligence
Franc ¸ois Chollet
Google, Inc.
fchollet@google.com
November 5, 2019
Abstract
To make deliberate progress towards more intelligent and more human-like artiﬁcial
systems, we need to be following an appropriate feedback signal: we need to be able to
deﬁne and evaluate intelligence in a way that enables comparisons between two systems,
as well as comparisons with humans. Over the past hundred years, there has been an abun-
dance of attempts to deﬁne and measure intelligence, across both the ﬁelds of psychology
and AI. We summarize and critically assess these deﬁnitions and evaluation approaches,
while making apparent the two historical conceptions of intelligence that have implicitly
guided them. We note that in practice, the contemporary AI community still gravitates to-
wards benchmarking intelligence by comparing the skill exhibited by AIs and humans at
speciﬁc tasks, such as board games and video games. We argue that solely measuring skill
at any given task falls short of measuring intelligence, because skill is heavily modulated
by prior knowledge and experience: unlimited priors or unlimited training data allow ex-
perimenters to “buy” arbitrary levels of skills for a system, in a way that masks the system’s
own generalization power. We then articulate a new formal deﬁnition of intelligence based
on Algorithmic Information Theory, describing intelligence as skill-acquisition efﬁciency
and highlighting the concepts of scope ,generalization difﬁculty ,priors , and experience , as
critical pieces to be accounted for in characterizing intelligent systems. Using this deﬁ-
nition, we propose a set of guidelines for what a general AI benchmark should look like.
Finally, we present a new benchmark closely following these guidelines, the Abstraction
and Reasoning Corpus (ARC), built upon an explicit set of priors designed to be as close as
possible to innate human priors. We argue that ARC can be used to measure a human-like
form of general ﬂuid intelligence and that it enables fair general intelligence comparisons
between AI systems and humans.
I thank Jos ´e Hern ´andez-Orallo, Julian Togelius, Christian Szegedy, and Martin Wicke for their valuable com-
ments on the draft of this document.
1arXiv:1911.01547v2  [cs.AI]  25 Nov 2019