Intelligence is the efﬁciency with which a learning system turns experience and priors
into skill at previously unknown tasks.
As such, a measure of intelligence must account for priors, experience, and general-
ization difﬁculty.
All intelligence is relative to a scope of application. Two intelligent systems may only
be meaningfully compared within a shared scope and if they share similar priors.
As such, general AI should be benchmarked against human intelligence and should
be founded on a similar set of knowledge priors (e.g. Core Knowledge).
We also have provided a new formalism based on Algorithmic Information Theory (cf.
II.2) to rigorously and quantitatively reason about these ideas, as well as a set of concrete
guidelines to follow for developing a benchmark of general intelligence (cf. II.3.1 and
II.3.2).
Our deﬁnition, formal framework, and evaluation guidelines, which do notcapture all
facets of intelligence, were developed to be actionable, explanatory, and quantiﬁable, rather
than being descriptive, exhaustive, or consensual. They are not meant to invalidate other
perspectives on intelligence, rather, they are meant to serve as a useful objective function to
guide research on broad AI and general AI, as outlined in II.2.3. Our hope is for some part
of the AI community interested in general AI to break out of a longstanding and ongoing
trend of seeking to achieve raw skill at challenging tasks, given unlimited experience and
unlimited prior knowledge.
To ground our ideas and enable others to build upon them, we are also providing an
actual benchmark, the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus, or ARC:
ARC takes the position that intelligence testing should control for scope, priors, and
experience: every test task should be novel (measuring the ability to understand a
new task, rather than skill) and should assume an explicit set of priors shared by all
test-takers.
ARC explicitly assumes the same Core Knowledge priors innately possessed by hu-
mans.
ARC can be fully solved by humans, but cannot be meaningfully approached by
current machine learning techniques, including Deep Learning.
ARC may offer an interesting playground for AI researchers who are interested in
developing algorithms capable of human-like broad generalization. It could also offer
a way to compare human intelligence and machine intelligence, as we assume the
same priors.
Importantly, ARC is still a work in progress, with known weaknesses listed in III.2. We
plan on further reﬁning the dataset in the future, both as a playground for research and as a
joint benchmark for machine intelligence and human intelligence.
The measure of the success of our message will be its ability to divert the attention
of some part of the community interested in general AI, away from surpassing humans at
57