III A benchmark proposal: the ARC dataset
In this last part, we introduce the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC), a dataset
intended to serve as a benchmark for the kind of general intelligence deﬁned in II.2. ARC
is designed to incorporate as many of the recommendations of II.3 as possible.
III.1 Description and goals
III.1.1 What is ARC?
ARC can be seen as a general artiﬁcial intelligence benchmark, as a program synthesis
benchmark, or as a psychometric intelligence test. It is targeted at both humans and artiﬁ-
cially intelligent systems that aim at emulating a human-like form of general ﬂuid intelli-
gence. It is somewhat similar in format to Raven’s Progressive Matrices [47], a classic IQ
test format going back to the 1930s.
ARC has the following top-level goals:
Stay close in format to psychometric intelligence tests (while addressing issues found
in previous uses of such tests for AI evaluation, as detailed in III.1.3), so as to be
approachable by both humans and machines; in particular it should be solvable by
humans without any speciﬁc practice or training.
Focus on measuring developer-aware generalization, rather than task-speciﬁc skill, by
only featuring novel tasks in the evaluation set (assumed unknown to the developer
of a test-taker).
Focus on measuring a qualitatively “broad” form of generalization (cf. I.3.2), by
featuring highly abstract tasks that must be understood by a test-taker using very few
examples.
Quantitatively control for experience by only providing a ﬁxed amount of training
data for each task and only featuring tasks that do not lend themselves well to artiﬁ-
cially generating new data.
Explicitly describe the complete set of priors it assumes (listed in III.1.2), and en-
able a fair general intelligence comparison between humans and machines by only
requiring priors close to innate human prior knowledge (cf. II.3.2).
ARC comprises a training set and an evaluation set. The training set features 400 tasks,
while the evaluation set features 600 tasks. The evaluation set is further split into a public
evaluation set (400 tasks) and a private evaluation set (200 tasks). All tasks are unique, and
the set of test tasks and the set of training tasks are disjoint. The task data is available at
github.com/fchollet/ARC.
Each task consists of a small number of demonstration examples (3.3 on average), and
a small number of test examples (generally 1, although it may be 2 or 3 in rare cases). Each
example consists of an “input grid” and an “output grid”. Each “grid” is a literal grid of
46