We ﬁnd that in most cases it is more useful to consider sufﬁcient skill and sufﬁcient so-
lutions rather than optimal skill and optimal solutions – in application settings, we seek
to achieve sufﬁcient performance using as little resources as possible; it is rarer and less
practical to seek to achieve maximum possible performance using unlimited resources.
Quantifying generalization difﬁculty, experience, and priors using Algorith-
mic Information Theory
Algorithmic Information Theory (AIT) may be seen as a computer science extension of In-
formation Theory. AIT concerns itself with formalizing useful computer science intuitions
regarding complexity, randomness, information, and computation. Central to AIT is the
notion of Algorithmic Complexity. Algorithmic Complexity (also known as Kolmogorov
Complexity or Algorithmic Entropy) was independently investigated, in different contexts,
by R.J. Solomonoff, A.N. Kolmogorov and G.J. Chaitin in the 1960s. For an extensive
introduction, see [15, 14, 30, 55].
Much like the concept of Entropy in Information Theory, Algorithmic Complexity is a
measure of the “information content” of mathematical objects. For our own needs, we will
only consider the speciﬁc case of binary strings. Indeed, all objects we have introduced
so far have been either scalar values (score, potential), or binary strings (states, programs,
situations, and responses), since any program may be represented as a binary string.
The Algorithmic Complexity (noted H(s)) of a string sis the length of the shortest
description of the string in a ﬁxed universal language, i.e. the length of the shortest pro-
gram that outputs the string when running on a ﬁxed universal Turing machine. Since
any universal Turing machine can emulate any other universal Turing machine, H(s)is
machine-independent to a constant.
We can use Algorithmic Complexity to deﬁne the information content that a string s2
possesses about a string s1(called “Relative Algorithmic Complexity” and noted H(s1js2)),
as the length of the shortest program that, taking s2as input, produces s1. “To takes2as
input” means that s2is part of the description of the program, but the length of s2would
not be taken into account when counting the program’s length.
Because any program may be represented as a binary string, we can use Relative Al-
gorithmic Complexity to describe how closely related two programs are. Based on this
observation, we propose to deﬁne the intuitive notion of “Generalization Difﬁculty” of a
task as follows:
Consider:
A taskT,
Sol
T, the shortest of all possible solutions of Tof threshold (shortest skill program
that achieves at least skill during evaluation),
TrainSolopt
T;C, the shortest optimal training-time solution given a curriculum (shortest
skill program that achieves optimal training-time performance over the situations in
the curriculum).
34