differ from previously encountered situations” .
The notion of “previously encountered situation” is somewhat ambiguous, so we should
distinguish between two types of generalization:
System-centric generalization : this is the ability of a learning system to handle
situations it has not itself encountered before. The formal notion of generalization
error in statistical learning theory would belong here.
–For instance, if an engineer develops a machine learning classiﬁcation algorithm
and ﬁts it on a training set of Nsamples, the “generalization” of this learning al-
gorithm would refer to its classiﬁcation error over images not part of the training
set.
–Note that the generalization power of this algorithm may be in part due to prior
knowledge injected by the developer of the system. This prior knowledge is
ignored by this measure of generalization.
Developer-aware generalization : this is the ability of a system, either learning or
static, to handle situations that neither the system nor the developer of the system
have encountered before.
–For instance, if an engineer uses a “development set” of Nsamples to create a
static classiﬁcation algorithm that uses hard-coded heuristic rules, the “general-
ization” of this static algorithm would refer to its classiﬁcation error over images
not part of the “development set”.
–Note that “developer-aware generalization” is equivalent to “system-centric gen-
eralization” if we include the developer of the system as part of the system.
–Note that “developer-aware generalization” accounts for any prior knowledge
that the developer of the system has injected into it. “System-centric generaliza-
tion” does not.
In addition, we ﬁnd it useful to qualitatively deﬁne degrees of generalization for information-
processing systems:
Absence of generalization : The notion of generalization as we have informally de-
ﬁned above fundamentally relies on the related notions of novelty and uncertainty: a
system can only generalize to novel information that could not be known in advance
to either the system or its creator. AI systems in which there is no uncertainty do not
display generalization. For instance, a program that plays tic-tac-toe via exhaustive
iteration cannot be said to “generalize” to all board conﬁgurations. Likewise, a sort-
ing algorithm that is proven to be correct cannot be said to “generalize” to all lists of
integers, much like proven mathematical statements cannot be said to “generalize” to
all objects that match the assumptions of their proof3.
3This is a distinct deﬁnition from “generalization” in mathematics, where “to generalize” means to extend the
scope of application of a statement by weakening its assumptions.
10