Task and skill value function : We deﬁne a value function over task space (note that
task space may be inﬁnite), associating a scalar value to the combination of a task
and a threshold of skill for the task : TaskValue :Task;!!T;. Values
are assumed positive or zero, and TaskValue is assumed monotonous as a function
of(for a given task, higher skill always has higher value). This value function
captures the relative importance of skill at each task and deﬁnes the subjective frame
of reference of our intelligence deﬁnition (for instance, if we wish to evaluate human-
like intelligence, we would place high value on achieving high skill at human-relevant
tasks and place no value on tasks that are irrelevant to the human experience). The
value!T;of a skill level at a task is chosen so that the quantity !T;can be compared
fairly across different tasks (i.e. it should capture the value we place on achieving skill
at taskT). This enables us to homogeneously aggregate skill across different tasks
without worrying about the scale of the their respective scoring functions.
Task value , noted!T: This is the value of achieving sufﬁcient skill level at T, i.e.
!T=!T;T.
Optimal solution : Any skill program that can achieve optimal skill on a task. Like-
wise we deﬁne a training-time optimal solution as any skill program that can achieve
optimal training-time performance over a speciﬁc sequence of training situations.
Sufﬁcient solution : Any skill program that can achieve sufﬁcient skill Ton a task.
Curriculum : Sequence of interactions (situations, responses, and feedback) between
a task and an intelligent system over a training phase. For a given task and intelligent
system, there exists a space of curricula, parameterized by the stochastic components
of the underlying programs. A curriculum emerges from the interaction between the
system and a task: this can model both teaching and active learning.
Optimal curriculum : curriculum which leads an intelligent system to produce the best
(highest skill) skill program it can generate for this task. It is speciﬁc to a task and an
intelligent system. There may be more than one optimal curriculum.
Sufﬁcient curriculum : curriculum which leads an intelligent system to a sufﬁcient
solution. It is speciﬁc to a task and an intelligent system. There may be more than
one sufﬁcient curriculum.
Task-speciﬁc potential , notedmax
T;IS: Skill of the best possible skill program that can
be generated by a given intelligent system on a task (after an optimal curriculum). It
is a scalar value speciﬁc to a task and an intelligent system.
Intelligent system scope : Subspace of task space including all tasks for which task
value!Tis non-zero and for which the intelligent system is capable of producing a
sufﬁcient solution after a training phase. This space may be inﬁnite. “To be capable
of producing a sufﬁcient solution” means that there exists a sufﬁcient curriculum for
the intelligent system and task considered. A scope is a property of an intelligent
system.
Intelligent system potential : Set of task-speciﬁc potential values over all tasks in the
system’s scope. Potential is a property of an intelligent system.
33