We then deﬁne Generalization Difﬁculty as:
Generalization Difﬁculty of a task given a curriculum Cand a skill threshold , noted
GD
T;C: Fraction of the Algorithmic Complexity of solution Sol
Tthat is explained by the
shortest optimal training-time solution TrainSolopt
T;C(i.e. length of the shortest program
that, taking as input the shortest possible program that performs optimally over the situa-
tions in curriculum C, produces a program that performs at a skill level of at least during
evaluation, normalized by the length of that skill program). Note that this quantity is be-
tween 0 and 1 by construction.
GD
T;C=H(Sol
TjTrainSolopt
T;C)
H(Sol
T)
Thus, a task with high “generalization difﬁculty” is one where the evaluation-time behav-
ior needs to differ signiﬁcantly from the simplest possible optimal training-time behavior
in order to achieve sufﬁcient skill. Relative Algorithmic Complexity provides us with a
metric to quantify this difference: GD is a measure of how much the shortest training-time
solution program needs to be edited in order to become an appropriate evaluation-time so-
lution program. If the shortest skill program that performs optimally during training also
happens to perform at a sufﬁcient skill level during evaluation, the task has zero general-
ization difﬁculty (i.e. it does not involve uncertainty). A generalizable skill program is one
that “covers more ground” in situation space than the exact training situations it is familiar
with: a program that is capable of dealing with future uncertainty.
Note that this deﬁnition of generalization difﬁculty may seem counter-intuitive. Oc-
cam’s razor principle would seem to suggest that the simplest program that works on the
training situations should also be a program that generalizes well. However, generalization
describes the capability to deal with future uncertainty, not the capability to compress the
behavior that would have been optimal in the past – being prepared for future uncertainty
has a cost, which is antagonistic to policy compression9. By necessity, TrainSolopt
T;Cdoes
away with any information or capability that isn’t strictly necessary in order to produce
the correct response to training situations, and in doing so, it may discard information or
capabilities that would have been useful to process evaluation situations. If it is in fact the
case thatTrainSolopt
T;Cdoes not need to discard any such information (i.e. the simplest
behavior that was optimal in the past is still sufﬁcient in the future), this implies that the
evaluation features no need for adaptation (no non-trivial novelty or uncertainty), and thus
the task does not involve generalization, potentially given some starting point (such as the
solution of another task).
Another way to express the same idea is that generalization requires to reinterpret the
9As a philosophical aside: this is why the education of children involves practicing games and ingesting knowl-
edge of seemingly no relevance to their past or present decision-making needs, but which prepare them for future
situations (a process often driven by curiosity). A 10-year-old who has only learned the simplest behavioral pol-
icy that would have maximized their extrinsic rewards (e.g. candy intake) during ages 0-10 would not be well
educated, and would not generalize well in future situations.
35