It encourages interest in building systems based on human-like knowledge priors (e.g.
Core Knowledge) by drawing attention to the importance of priors in evaluating in-
telligence.
b. Consequences for evaluating ﬂexible or general AI systems:
By deﬁning and quantifying generalization difﬁculty, it offers a way to formally rea-
son about what it means to perform “local generalization”, “broad generalization”,
and “extreme generalization” (cf. the spectrum of generalization introduced in I.3.2),
and to weed out tests that feature zero generalization difﬁculty.
It suggests concrete guidelines for comparing AI and human intelligence: such a
comparison requires starting from a shared scope of tasks and shared priors, and
would seek to compare experience-efﬁciency in achieving speciﬁc levels of skill. We
detail this idea in II.3.1.
It shows the importance of taking into account generalization difﬁculty when devel-
oping a test set to evaluate a task. We detail this idea in II.3.2. This should hopefully
lead us to evaluation metrics that are able to discard solutions that rely on shortcuts
that do not generalize (e.g. reliance on local textures as opposed to global semantics
in computer vision).
It provides a set of practical questions to ask about any intelligent system to rigorously
characterize it:
–What is its scope?
–What is its “potential” over this scope (maximum achievable skill)?
–What priors does it possess?
–What is its skill-acquisition efﬁciency (intelligence)?
–What curricula would maximize its skill or skill-acquisition efﬁciency?
II.3 Evaluating intelligence in this light
Earlier in this document, we have detailed how measuring skill alone does not move us
forward when it comes to the development of broad abilities, we have suggested that AI
evaluation should learn from its more mature sister ﬁeld psychometrics (echoing the thesis
of Psychometric AI and Universal Psychometrics), and we have provided a new formalism
with practical implications for AI evaluation, pointing out the importance of the concept
of scope, potential, generalization difﬁculty, experience, and priors. The following section
summarizes key practical conclusions with respect to AI evaluation.
II.3.1 Fair comparisons between intelligent systems
We mentioned in II.2.3 that our formalism suggests concrete guidelines for comparing the
intelligence of systems of different nature, such as human intelligence and artiﬁcial in-
telligence. Being able to make such comparisons in a fair and rigorous way is essential to
43