II A new perspective
II.1 Critical assessment
II.1.1 Measuring the right thing: evaluating skill alone does not move us
forward
In 1973, psychologist and computer science pioneer Allen Newell, worried that recent ad-
vances in cognitive psychology were not bringing the ﬁeld any closer to a holistic theory
of cognition, published his seminal paper You can’t play 20 questions with nature and win
[66], which helped focus research efforts on cognitive architecture modelling, and provided
new impetus to the longstanding quest to build a chess-playing AI that would outperform
any human. Twenty-four years later, In 1997, IBM’s DeepBlue beat Gary Kasparov, the
best chess player in the world, bringing this quest to an end [12]. When the dust settled,
researchers were left with the realization that building an artiﬁcial chess champion had not
actually taught them much, if anything, about human cognition. They had learned how
to build a chess-playing AI, and neither this knowledge nor the AI they had built could
generalize to anything other than similar board games.
It may be obvious from a modern perspective that a static chess-playing program based
on minimax and tree search would not be informative about human intelligence, nor com-
petitive with humans in anything other than chess. But it was not obvious in the 1970s,
when chess-playing was thought by many to capture, and require, the entire scope of ratio-
nal human thought. Perhaps less obvious in 2019 is that efforts to “solve” complex video
games using modern machine learning methods still follow the same pattern. Newell wrote
[66]: “we know already from existing work [psychological studies on humans] that the
task [chess] involves forms of reasoning and search and complex perceptual and memorial
processes. For more general considerations we know that it also involves planning, eval-
uation, means-ends analysis and redeﬁnition of the situation, as well as several varieties
of learning – short-term, post-hoc analysis, preparatory analysis, study from books, etc. ” .
The assumption was that solving chess would require implementing these general abilities.
Chess does indeed involve these abilities – in humans. But while possessing these general
abilities makes it possible to solve chess (and many more problems), by going from the
general to the speciﬁc, inversely, there is no clear path from the speciﬁc to the general.
Chess does not require any of these abilities, and can be solved by taking radical shortcuts
that run orthogonal to human cognition.
Optimizing for single-purpose performance is useful and valid if one’s measure of suc-
cess can capture exactly what one seeks (as we outlined in I.3.1), e.g. if one’s end goal is
a chess-playing machine and nothing more. But from the moment the objective is settled,
the process of developing a solution will be prone to taking all shortcuts available to satisfy
the objective of choice – whether this process is gradient descent or human-driven research.
These shortcuts often come with undesirable side-effects when it comes to considerations
not incorporated the measure of performance. If the environment in which the system is
to operate is too unpredictable for an all-encompassing objective function to be deﬁned
beforehand (e.g. most real-world applications of robotics, where systems face unknown
18