Low-level priors about the structure of our own sensorimotor space, e.g. reﬂexes such
as the vestibulo-ocular reﬂex, the palmar grasp reﬂex, etc. These priors enable infants
(including prior to birth) to quickly take control of their senses and bodies, and may
even generate simple behaviors in a limited range of situations.
Meta-learning priors governing our learning strategies and capabilities for knowledge
acquisition. This may include, for instance, the assumption that information in the
universe follows a modular-hierarchical structure, as well as assumptions regarding
causality and spatio-temporal continuity.
High-level knowledge priors regarding objects and phenomena in our external envi-
ronment. This may include prior knowledge of visual objectness (what deﬁnes an
object), priors about orientation and navigation in 2D and 3D Euclidean spaces, goal-
directedness (expectation that our environment includes agents that behave according
to goals), innate notions about natural numbers, innate social intuition (e.g. theory of
mind), etc.
When it comes to creating artiﬁcial human-like intelligence, low-level sensorimotor pri-
ors are too speciﬁc to be of interest (unless one seeks to build an artiﬁcial human body).
While human meta-learning priors should be of the utmost interest (understanding the
strategies that the brain follows to turn experience into knowledge and skills is effectively
our end goal), these priors are not relevant to evaluating intelligence: they areintelligence,
rather than a third-party modulating factor to be controlled for. They are part of the black
box that we seek to characterize.
It is knowledge priors that should be accounted for when measuring a human-like form
of intelligence. A system that does not possess human innate knowledge priors would be at
a critical disadvantage compared to humans when it comes to efﬁciently turning a given ex-
perience curriculum into skill at a given human task. Inversely, a system that has access to
more extensive hard-coded knowledge about the task at hand could not be fairly compared
to human intelligence – as we noted in II.1.1, unlimited priors allow system developers to
“buy” unbounded performance on any given task, with no implications with regard to gen-
eralization abilities (what we are actually trying to achieve).
Therefore, we propose that an actionable test of human-like general intelligence should
be founded on innate human knowledge priors :
The priors should be made as close as possible to innate human knowledge priors
as we understand them. As our understanding of human knowledge priors improves
over time, so should the test evolve.
The test should assume that the system being measured possesses a speciﬁc set of
priors. AI systems with more extensive priors should not be benchmarked using such
a test. AI systems with fewer priors should be understood to be at a disadvantage.
learning priors and knowledge priors is subjective since knowledge facilitates skill acquisition: for instance, the
neural mechanism behind our capabilities to perform 2D navigation may be treated either as a specialized meta-
learning prior or as a knowledge prior about the external world.
25