unknowns), or if one aims at a general-purpose AI that could be applied to a wide range
of problems with no or little human engineering, then one must somehow optimize directly
for ﬂexibility and generality , rather than solely for performance on any speciﬁc task.
This is, perhaps, a widely-accepted view today when it comes to static programs that
hard-code a human-designed solution. When a human engineer implements a chatbot by
specifying answers for each possible query via if/else statements, we do not assume this
chatbot to be intelligent, and we do not expect it to generalize beyond the engineer’s speci-
ﬁcations. Likewise, if an engineer looks at a speciﬁc IQ test task, comes up with a solution,
and write down this solution in program form, we do not expect the program to general-
ize to new tasks, and we do not believe that the program displays intelligence – the only
intelligence at work here is the engineer’s. The program merely encodes the crystallized
output of the engineer’s thought process – it is this process, not its output, that implements
intelligence. Intelligence is not demonstrated by the performance of the output program
(a skill), but by the fact that the same process can be applied to a vast range of previously
unknown problems (a general-purpose ability): the engineer’s mind is capable of extreme
generalization. Since the resulting program is merely encoding the output of that process,
it is no more intelligent than the ink and paper used to write down the proof of a theorem.
However, what of a program that is not hard-coded by humans, but trained from data
to perform a task? A learning machine certainly may be intelligent: learning is a neces-
sary condition to adapt to new information and acquire new skills. But being programmed
through exposure to data is no guarantee of generalization or intelligence. Hard-coding
prior knowledge into an AI is not the only way to artiﬁcially “buy” performance on the
target task without inducing any generalization power. There is another way: adding more
training data, which can augment skill in a speciﬁc vertical or task without affecting gener-
alization whatsoever.
Information processing systems form a spectrum between two extremes: on one end,
static systems that consist entirely of hard-coded priors (such as DeepBlue or our if/else
chatbot example), and on the opposite end, systems that incorporate very few priors and
are almost entirely programmed via exposure to data (such as a hashtable or a densely-
connected neural network). Most intelligent systems, including humans and animals, com-
bine ample amounts of both priors and experience, as we point out in II.1.3. Crucially, the
ability to generalize is an axis that runs orthogonal to the prior/experience plane. Given a
learning system capable of achieving a certain level of generalization, modifying the sys-
tem by incorporating more priors or more training data about the task can lead to greater
task-speciﬁc performance without affecting generalization. In this case, both priors and
experience serve as a way to “game” any given test of skill without having to display the
sort of general-purpose abilities that humans would rely on to acquire the same skill.
This can be readily demonstrated with a simple example: consider a hashtable that uses
a locality-sensitive hash function (e.g. nearest neighbor) to map new inputs to previously
seen inputs. Such a system implements a learning algorithm capable of local generalization,
the extent of which is ﬁxed (independent of the amount of data seen), determined only
by the abstraction capabilities of the hash function. This system, despite only featuring
trace amounts of generalization power, is already sufﬁcient to “solve” any task for which
19