paradox, as pointed out by Hern ´andez-Orallo [36] in his 2017 survey: the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence has been very successful in developing artiﬁcial systems that perform these
tasks without featuring intelligence , a trend that continues to this day.
I.2.2 Intelligence as a general learning ability
Presumably the child brain is something like a
notebook as one buys it from the stationer’s.
Rather little mechanism, and lots of blank
sheets.
Alan Turing, 1950
In contrast, a number of researchers have taken the position that intelligence lies in the
general ability to acquire new skills through learning; an ability that could be directed to a
wide range of previously unknown problems – perhaps even any problem at all. Contrast
Minsky’s task-focused deﬁnition of AI with the following one, paraphrased from McCarthy
[60] by Hern ´andez-Orallo: “AI is the science and engineering of making machines do tasks
they have never seen and have not been prepared for beforehand” [36].
The notion that machines could acquire new skills through a learning process similar
to that of human children was initially laid out by Turing in his 1950 paper [91]. In 1958,
Friedberg noted astutely: “If we are ever to make a machine that will speak, understand
or translate human languages, solve mathematical problems with imagination, practice a
profession or direct an organization, either we must reduce these activities to a science so
exact that we can tell a machine precisely how to go about doing them or we must develop
a machine that can do things without being told precisely how” [26]. But although the
idea of generality through learning was given signiﬁcant consideration at the birth of the
ﬁeld, and has long been championed by pioneers like McCarthy and Papert, it lay largely
dormant until the resurgence of machine learning in the 1980s.
This view of intelligence echoes another long-standing conception of human nature
that has had a profound inﬂuence on the history of cognitive science, contrasting with the
evolutionary psychology perspective: Locke’s Tabula Rasa (blank slate), a vision of the
mind as a ﬂexible, adaptable, highly general process that turns experience into behavior,
knowledge, and skills. This conception of the human mind can be traced back to Aristotle
(De Anima , c. 350BC, perhaps the ﬁrst treatise of psychology [3]), was embraced and
popularized by Enlightenment thinkers such as Hobbes [42], Locke [56], and Rousseau
[78]. It has more recently found renewed vitality within cognitive psychology (e.g. [79])
and in AI via connectionism (e.g. [41]).
With the resurgence of machine learning in the 1980s, its rise to intellectual dominance
in the 2000s, and its peak as an intellectual quasi-monopoly in AI in the late 2010s via
6