The priors assumed by the test should be explicitly and exhaustively described. Im-
portantly, current psychometric intelligence tests make many assumptions about prior
knowledge held by the test-taker (either innate or acquired), but never explicitly de-
scribe these assumptions.
To make sure that humans test-takers do not bring further priors to the test, the test
tasks should not rely on any acquired human knowledge (i.e. any knowledge beyond
innate prior knowledge). For instance, they should not rely on language or learned
symbols (e.g. arrows), on acquired concepts such as “cat” or “dog”, or on tasks for
which humans may have trained before (e.g. chess).
This leads us to a central question: what is the exact list of knowledge priors that
humans are born with? This is the question that the developmental science theory of Core
Knowledge [85] seeks to answer. Core Knowledge identiﬁes four broad categories of innate
assumptions that form the foundations of human cognition, and which are largely shared
by our non-human relatives8:
Objectness and elementary physics: humans assume that their environment should
be parsed into “objects” characterized by principles of cohesion (objects move as
continuous, connected, bounded wholes), persistence (objects do not suddenly cease
to exist and do not suddenly materialize), and contact (objects do not act at a distance
and cannot interpenetrate).
Agentness and goal-directedness: humans assume that, while some objects in their
environment are inanimate, some other objects are “agents”, possessing intentions of
their own, acting so as to achieve goals (e.g. if we witness an object A following
another moving object B, we may infer that A is pursuing B and that B is ﬂeeing
A), and showing efﬁciency in their goal-directed actions. We expect that these agents
may act contingently and reciprocally.
Natural numbers and elementary arithmetic: humans possess innate, abstract number
representations for small numbers, which can be applied to entities observed through
any sensory modality. These number representations may be added or subtracted, and
may be compared to each other, or sorted.
Elementary geometry and topology: this core knowledge system captures notions
of distance, orientation, in/out relationships for objects in our environment and for
ourselves. It underlies humans’ innate facility for orienting themselves with respect
to their surroundings and navigating 2D and 3D environments.
8Core Knowledge has been written into our DNA by natural evolution. Natural evolution is an extremely
low-bandwidth, highly selective mechanism for transferring information from the surrounding environment to an
organism’s genetic code. It can only transfer information associated with evolutionary pressures, and it can only
write about aspects of the environment that are stable over sufﬁciently long timescales. As such, it would not
be reasonable to expect humans to possess vast amounts of human-speciﬁc prior knowledge; core knowledge is
evolutionarily ancient and largely shared across many species, in particular non-human primates.
26