Crucially, the history of AI has been one of slowly climbing up this spectrum, start-
ing with systems that largely did not display generalization (symbolic AI), and evolving
towards robust systems (machine learning) capable of local generalization. We are now
entering a new stage, where we seek to create ﬂexible systems capable of broad generaliza-
tion (e.g. hybrid symbolic and machine learning systems such as self-driving vehicles, AI
assistants, or cognitive developmental robots). Skill-focused task-speciﬁc evaluation has
been appropriate for close-ended systems that aim at robustness in environments that only
feature known unknowns, but developing systems that are capable of handling unknown
unknowns requires evaluating their abilities in a general sense.
Importantly, the spectrum of generalization outlined above seems to mirror the organi-
zation of humans cognitive abilities as laid out by theories of the structure of intelligence
in cognitive psychology. Major theories of the structure of human intelligence (CHC [62],
g-VPR [48]) all organize cognitive abilities in a hierarchical fashion (ﬁgure 1), with three
strata (in CHC): general intelligence (g factor) at the top, broad abilities in the middle, and
specialized skills or test tasks at the bottom (this extends to 4 strata for g-VPR, which splits
broad abilities into two layers), albeit the taxonomy of abilities differs between theories.
Here, “extreme generalization” corresponds to the g factor, “broad generalization” across a
given domain corresponds to a broad cognitive ability, and “local generalization” (as well
as the no-generalization case) corresponds to task-speciﬁc skill.
Measuring such broad abilities (and possibly generality itself) rather than speciﬁc skills
has historically been the problematic of the ﬁeld of psychometrics. Could psychometrics
inform the evaluation of abilities in AI systems?
Figure 1: Hierarchical model of cognitive abilities and its mapping to the spectrum of general-
ization.
Note that, in what follows:
We use “broad abilities” to refer to cognitive abilities that lead to broad or extreme
generalization. Developing such abilities should be the goal of any researcher inter-
12