Peer confrontation: having the system compete against either other AIs or humans.
This is the preferred mode of evaluation for player-versus-player games, such as
chess.
Benchmarks: having the system produce outputs for a “test set” of inputs (or envi-
ronments) for which the desired outcome is known, and score the response.
Benchmarks in particular have been a major driver of progress in AI, because they are
reproducible (the test set is ﬁxed), fair (the test set is the same for everyone), scalable (it
is inexpensive to run the evaluation many times), easy to set up, and ﬂexible enough to be
applicable to a wide range of possible tasks. Benchmarks have often been most impactful
in the context of a competition between different research teams, such as the ILSVRC chal-
lenge for large-scale image recognition (ImageNet) [22] or the DARPA Grand Challenge
for autonomous driving [11]. A number of private and community-led initiatives have been
started on the premise that such benchmark-based competitions speed up progress (e.g.
Kaggle (kaggle.com), as well as academic alternatives such as ChaLearn (chalearn.org),
the Hutter prize, etc.), while some government organizations use competitions to deliber-
ately trigger technological breakthroughs (e.g. DARPA, NIST).
These successes demonstrate the importance of setting clear goals and adopting objec-
tive measures of performance that are shared across the research community . However,
optimizing for a single metric or set of metrics often leads to tradeoffs and shortcuts when
it comes to everything that isn’t being measured and optimized for (a well-known effect
on Kaggle, where winning models are often overly specialized for the speciﬁc benchmark
they won and cannot be deployed on real-world versions of the underlying problem). In the
case of AI, the focus on achieving task-speciﬁc performance while placing no conditions
onhow the system arrives at this performance has led to systems that, despite performing
the target tasks well, largely do not feature the sort of human intelligence that the ﬁeld of
AI set out to build .
This has been interpreted by McCorduck as an “AI effect” where goalposts move every
time progress in AI is made: “every time somebody ﬁgured out how to make a computer
do somethingplay good checkers, solve simple but relatively informal problemsthere was
a chorus of critics to say, ‘that’s not thinking’ ” [61]. Similarly, Reed notes: “When we
know how a machine does something ‘intelligent’, it ceases to be regarded as intelligent.
If I beat the world’s chess champion, I’d be regarded as highly bright. ” [77]. This inter-
pretation arises from overly anthropocentric assumptions. As humans, we can only display
high skill at a speciﬁc task if we have the ability to efﬁciently acquire skills in general ,
which corresponds to intelligence as characterized in II. No one is born knowing chess, or
predisposed speciﬁcally for playing chess. Thus, if a human plays chess at a high level,
we can safely assume that this person is intelligent, because we implicitly know that they
had to use their general intelligence to acquire this speciﬁc skill over their lifetime, which
reﬂects their general ability to acquire many other possible skills in the same way. But the
same assumption does not apply to a non-human system that does not arrive at competence
the way humans do. If intelligence lies in the process of acquiring skills , then there is
no task X such that skill at X demonstrates intelligence , unless X is actually a meta-task
8