While cognitive developmental psychology has not yet determined with a high degree of
certainty the exact set of innate priors that humans possess, we consider the Core Knowl-
edge theory to offer a credible foundation suitable to the needs of a test of human-like
general intelligence. We therefore propose that an actionable test of general intelligence
that would be fair for both humans and machines should only feature tasks that assume the
four core knowledge systems listed above, and should not involve any acquired knowledge
outside of these priors. We also argue, in agreement with [51], that general AI systems
should hard-code as fundamental priors these core knowledge principles.
II.2 Deﬁning intelligence: a formal synthesis
II.2.1 Intelligence as skill-acquisition efﬁciency
So far, we have introduced the following informally-described intuitions:
Intelligence lies in broad or general-purpose abilities; it is marked by ﬂexibility and
adaptability (i.e. skill-acquisition and generalization), rather than skill itself. The
history of AI has been a slow climb along the spectrum of generalization.
A measure of intelligence should imperatively control for experience and priors, and
should seek to quantify generalization strength, since unlimited priors or experience
can produce systems with little-to-no generalization power (or intelligence) that ex-
hibit high skill at any number of tasks.
Intelligence and its measure are inherently tied to a scope of application. As such,
general AI should be benchmarked against human intelligence and should be founded
on a similar set of knowledge priors.
Let us now formalize these intuitions. In what follows, we provide a series of deﬁnitions
for key concepts necessary to ground a formal deﬁnition of intelligence and its measure.
We will leverage the tools of Algorithmic Information Theory. These deﬁnitions lead up to
a formal way of expressing the following central idea:
The intelligence of a system is a measure of its skill-acquisition efﬁciency over a scope
of tasks, with respect to priors, experience, and generalization difﬁculty.
Intuitively, if you consider two systems that start from a similar set of knowledge priors,
and that go through a similar amount of experience (e.g. practice time) with respect to a
set of tasks not known in advance, the system with higher intelligence is the one that ends
up with greater skills (i.e. the one that has turned its priors and experience into skill more
efﬁciently). This deﬁnition of intelligence encompasses meta-learning priors, memory, and
ﬂuid intelligence. It is distinct from skill itself: skill is merely the output of the process of
intelligence.
Before we start, let us emphasize that many possible deﬁnitions of intelligence may
be valid, across many different contexts, and we do not purport that the deﬁnition above
and the formalism below represent the “one true” deﬁnition. Nor is our deﬁnition meant
27