involving skill-acquisition across a broad range of tasks. The “AI effect” characterization
is confusing the process of intelligence (such as the intelligence displayed by researchers
creating a chess-playing program) with the artifact produced by this process (the resulting
chess-playing program), due to these two concepts being fundamentally intertwined in the
case of humans. We discuss this further in II.1.
Task-speciﬁc performance is a perfectly appropriate and effective measure of success if
and only if handling the task as initially speciﬁed is the end goal of the system – in other
words, if our measure of performance captures exactly what we expect of the system. How-
ever, it is deﬁcient if we need systems that can show autonomy in handling situations that
the system creator did not plan for, that can dynamically adapt to changes in the task – or in
the context of the task – without further human intervention, or that can be repurposed for
other tasks. Meanwhile, robustness and ﬂexibility are increasingly being perceived as im-
portant requirements for certain broader subﬁelds of AI, such as L5 self-driving, domestic
robotics, or personal assistants; there is even increasing interest in generality itself (e.g. de-
velopmental robotics [4], artiﬁcial general intelligence [28]). This points to a need to move
beyond skill-based evaluation for such endeavours, and to ﬁnd ways to evaluate robustness
and ﬂexibility, especially in a cross-task setting, up to generality. But what do we really
mean when we talk about robustness, ﬂexibility, and generality?
I.3.2 The spectrum of generalization: robustness, ﬂexibility, generality
Even though such machines might do some
things as well as we do them, or perhaps even
better, they would inevitably fail in others,
which would reveal they were acting not
through understanding, but only from the
disposition of their organs.
Ren´e Descartes, 1637
The resurgence of machine learning in the 1980s has led to an interest in formally
deﬁning, measuring, and maximizing generalization . Generalization is a concept that pre-
dates machine learning, originally developed to characterize how well a statistical model
performs on inputs that were not part of its training data. In recent years, the success of
Deep Learning [52], as well as increasingly frequent run-ins with its limitations (see e.g.
[51, 16, 59]), have triggered renewed interest in generalization theory in the context of
machine learning (see e.g. [102, 67, 45, 70, 17, 49]). The notion of generalization can be
formally deﬁned in various contexts (in particular, statistical learning theory [92] provides a
widely-used formal deﬁnition that is relevant for machine learning, and we provide a more
general formalization in II.2). We can informally deﬁne “generalization” or “generalization
power” for any AI system to broadly mean “the ability to handle situations (or tasks) that
9