I Context and history
I.1 Need for an actionable deﬁnition and measure of intelligence
The promise of the ﬁeld of AI, spelled out explicitly at its inception in the 1950s and re-
peated countless times since, is to develop machines that possess intelligence comparable
to that of humans. But AI has since been falling short of its ideal: although we are able to
engineer systems that perform extremely well on speciﬁc tasks, they have still stark limi-
tations, being brittle, data-hungry, unable to make sense of situations that deviate slightly
from their training data or the assumptions of their creators, and unable to repurpose them-
selves to deal with novel tasks without signiﬁcant involvement from human researchers.
If the only successes of AI have been in developing narrow, task-speciﬁc systems, it
is perhaps because only within a very narrow and grounded context have we been able
todeﬁne our goal sufﬁciently precisely, and to measure progress in an actionable way.
Goal deﬁnitions and evaluation benchmarks are among the most potent drivers of scientiﬁc
progress. To make progress towards the promise of our ﬁeld, we need precise, quantitative
deﬁnitions and measures of intelligence – in particular human-like general intelligence.
These would not be merely deﬁnitions and measures meant to describe or characterize
intelligence, but precise, explanatory deﬁnitions meant to serve as a North Star, an objective
function showing the way towards a clear target, capable of acting as a reliable measure of
our progress and as a way to identify and highlight worthwhile new approaches that may
not be immediately applicable, and would otherwise be discounted.
For instance, common-sense dictionary deﬁnitions of intelligence may be useful to
make sure we are talking about the same concepts, but they are not useful for our pur-
pose, as they are not actionable, explanatory, or measurable. Similarly, the Turing Test
[91] and its many variants (e.g. Total Turing Test and Loebner Prize [75]) are not useful
as a driver of progress (and have in fact served as a red herring1), since such tests com-
pletely opt out of objectively deﬁning and measuring intelligence, and instead outsource the
task to unreliable human judges who themselves do not have clear deﬁnitions or evaluation
protocols.
It is a testimony to the immaturity of our ﬁeld that the question of what we mean when
we talk about intelligence still doesn’t have a satisfying answer. What’s worse, very little
attention has been devoted to rigorously deﬁning it or benchmarking our progress towards
it. Legg and Hutter noted in a 2007 survey of intelligence deﬁnitions and evaluation meth-
ods [53]: “to the best of our knowledge, no general survey of tests and deﬁnitions has been
published” . A decade later, in 2017, Hern ´andez-Orallo released an extensive survey of
evaluation methods [36] as well as a comprehensive book on AI evaluation [37]. Results
and recommendations from both of these efforts have since been largely ignored by the
community.
We believe this lack of attention is a mistake, as the absence of widely-accepted ex-
1Turing’s imitation game was largely meant as an argumentative device in a philosophical discussion, not as a
literal test of intelligence. Mistaking it for a test representative of the goal of the ﬁeld of AI has been an ongoing
problem.
3