stance, a test of intelligence designed for both humans and AI should not lever-
age uniquely human acquired knowledge, or should not involve constraints un-
related to intelligence within which machines have unfair advantages (such as
fast reaction times), etc.
Simultaneously, we argue that certain other aspects of psychometrics may be discarded
in the development of new intelligence tests for AI:
The exact number and taxonomy of cognitive abilities considered, being a subject of
ongoing debate within cognitive psychology and being perhaps overly anthropocen-
tric, should not be used as a strict template for artiﬁcial cognitive architectures and
their evaluation. Existing taxonomies may at best serve as a source of inspiration.
A number of abilities being assessed by psychometric intelligence tests are crystal-
lized abilities (e.g. reading and writing), i.e. abilities that are acquired through expe-
rience, which are not clearly distinguishable from skills (they are effectively multi-
purpose skills). We argue that AI tests that seek to assess ﬂexibility and generality
should not consider crystallized abilities, but rather, should focus on abilities that
enable new skill acquisition . If a system possesses abilities that enable efﬁcient skill-
acquisition in a domain, the system should have no issue in developing corresponding
skills and crystallized abilities.
I.3.5 Current trends in broad AI evaluation
Despite a rising interest in building ﬂexible systems, or even in generality itself, for the
most part the AI community has not been paying much attention to psychometric evalua-
tion, Psychometric AI, or Universal Psychometrics. If we are to assess the contemporary
zeitgeist of broad AI evaluation, here is what we see.4
First, we note several positive developments. Since 2017, there is increasing awareness
that one should seek to establish some form of generalization in evaluating Reinforcement
Learning (RL) algorithms (e.g. [50, 70, 17, 49]), which was previously a stark problem
[76, 35, 101, 70], as RL agents have for a long time been tested on their training data.
Further, there is increasing interest in evaluating the data-efﬁciency of learning algorithms
(e.g. [10]), in particular in the context of RL for games such as Atari games or Minecraft
(e.g. [71, 33]). Lastly, as noted in I.3.3, there has been a trend towards leveraging multi-task
benchmarks as a way to assess robustness and ﬂexibility (e.g. [6, 71, 68, 95, 94]).
Unfortunately, we must also note several negatives. The robustness of the systems
being developed, in particular Deep Learning models, is often problematic (see e.g. [16,
59]). This is due in large part to the fact that most benchmarks do not pay much attention
to formally assessing robustness and quantifying generalization, and thus can be solved
via “shortcuts” that gradient descent is apt at exploiting (e.g. surface statistics such as
textures in the case of computer vision [46]). Likewise, the reproducibility (reliability) of
4Because broad AI research is currently largely dominated by Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches, many
of our observations here are speciﬁc to RL.
16