Start by developing a domain-speciﬁc language (DSL) capable of expressing all pos-
sible solution programs for any ARC task. Since the exact set of ARC tasks is pur-
posely not formally deﬁnable, this may be challenging (the space of tasks is deﬁned
asanything expressible in terms of ARC pairs that would only involve Core Knowl-
edge). It would require harding-coding the Core Knowledge priors from III.1.2 in a
sufﬁciently abstract and combinable program form, to serve as basis functions for a
kind of “human-like reasoning DSL”. We believe that solving this speciﬁc subprob-
lem is critical to general AI progress.
Given a task, use the DSL to generate a set of candidate programs that turn the in-
puts grids into the corresponding output grids. This step would reuse and recombine
subprograms that previously proved useful in other ARC tasks.
Select top candidates among these programs based on a criterion such as program
simplicity or program likelihood (such a criterion may be trained on solution pro-
grams previously generated using the ARC training set). Note that we do not expect
that merely selecting the simplest possible program that works on training pairs will
generalize well to test pairs (cf. our deﬁnition of generalization difﬁculty from II.2).
Use the top three candidates to generate output grids for the test examples.
We posit that the existence of a human-level ARC solver would represent the ability to
program an AI from demonstrations alone (only requiring a handful of demonstrations to
specify a complex task) to do a wide range of human-relatable tasks of a kind that would
normally require human-level, human-like ﬂuid intelligence. As supporting evidence, we
note that human performance on psychometric intelligence tests (which are similar to ARC)
is predictive of success across all human cognitive tasks. Further, we posit that, since an
ARC solver and human intelligence would both be founded on the same knowledge priors,
the scope of application of an ARC solver would be close to that of human cognition,
making such a solver both practically valuable (i.e. it could solve useful, human-relevant
problems) and easy to interact with (i.e. it would readily understand human demonstrations
and would produce behavior that is in line with human expectations).
Our claims are highly speculative and may well prove fully incorrect, much like Newell’s
1973 hopes that progress on chess playing would translate into meaningful progress on
achieving a range of broad cognitive abilities – especially if ARC turns out to feature un-
foreseen vulnerabilities to unintelligent shortcuts. We expect our claims to be validated or
invalidated in the near future once we make sufﬁcient progress on solving ARC.
III.2 Weaknesses and future reﬁnements
It is important to note that ARC is a work in progress, not a deﬁnitive solution; it does not
ﬁt all of the requirements listed in II.3.2, and it features a number of key weaknesses:
Generalization is not quantiﬁed. While ARC is explicitly designed to measure
“broad generalization” as opposed to “local generalization” or “extreme generaliza-
tion”, we do not offer a quantitative measure of the generalization of the evaluation
53