as cognitive abilities from psychometrics. Psychometrics approaches the quantiﬁcation of
abilities by using broad batteries of test tasks rather than any single task, and by analysing
test results via probabilistic models. Importantly, the tasks should be previously unknown
to the test-taker, i.e., we assume that test-takers do not practice for intelligence tests. This
approach is highly relevant to AI evaluation.
Remarkably, in a parallel to psychometrics, there has been recent and increasing inter-
est across the ﬁeld of AI in using broad batteries of test tasks to evaluate systems that aim
at greater ﬂexibility. Examples include the Arcade Learning Environment for Reinforce-
ment Learning agents [6], Project Malm ¨O [71], the Behavior Suite [68], or the GLUE [95]
and SuperGLUE [94] benchmarks for natural language processing. The underlying logic
of these efforts is to measure something more general than skill at one speciﬁc task by
broadening the set of target tasks. However, when it comes to assessing ﬂexibility, a crit-
ical defect of these multi-task benchmarks is that the set of tasks is still known in advance
to the developers of any test-taking system, and it is fully expected that test-taking systems
will be able to practice speciﬁcally for the target tasks, leverage task-speciﬁc built-in prior
knowledge inherited from the system developers, leverage external knowledge obtained via
pre-training, etc. As such, these benchmarks still appear to be highly gameable (see e.g.
II.1.1) – merely widening task-speciﬁc skill evaluation to more tasks does not produce a
qualitatively different kind of evaluation. Such benchmarks are still looking at skills, rather
than abilities, in contrast with the psychometrics approach (this is not to say that such
benchmarks are not useful; merely that such static multi-task benchmarks do not directly
assess ﬂexibility or generality).
In addition to these multi-task benchmarks, a number of more ambitious test suites
for cognitive abilities of AI have been proposed in the past but have not been imple-
mented in practice: the Newell test by Anderson and Lebiere ([2], named in reference to
[66]), the BICA “cognitive decathlon” targeted at developmental robotics [65], the Turing
Olympics [27], and the I-Athlon [1]. Lacking concrete implementations, it is difﬁcult to
assess whether these projects would have been able to address the ability evaluation prob-
lem they set out to solve. On the other hand, two similarly-spirited but more mature test
suite have emerged recently, focused on generalization capabilities as opposed to speciﬁc
tasks: the Animal-AI Olympics [7] (animalaiolympics.com) and the GVGAI competition
[72] (gvgai.net). Both take the position that AI agents should be evaluated on an unseen set
of tasks or games, in order to test learning or planning abilities rather than special-purpose
skill. Both feature a multi-game environment and an ongoing public competition.
I.3.4 Integrating AI evaluation and psychometrics
Besides efforts to broaden task-speciﬁc evaluation to batteries of multi-task tests, there
have been more direct and explicit attempts to integrate AI evaluation and psychometrics.
A ﬁrst approach is to reuse existing psychometric intelligence tests, initially developed for
humans, as a way to assess intelligence in AI systems – perhaps an obvious idea if we are to
take the term “artiﬁcial intelligence” literally. This idea was ﬁrst proposed by Green in 1964
[29], and was, around the same time, explored by Evans [24], who wrote a LISP program
14