research ﬁndings is often an issue [73], especially in Reinforcement Learning, although
some progress has been made on this front.
Most importantly, the evaluation of any ability that goes decisively beyond local gen-
eralization is still largely a green ﬁeld, and little effort has been devoted to investigate it.
Hern ´andez-Orallo noted in 2017 that “ability-oriented and general-purpose evaluation ap-
proaches [...] are still very incipient, and more research and discussion is needed” [36].
Recent attempts at broadening task-speciﬁc benchmarks by including multiple tasks do not
measure developer-aware generalization, as the tasks are all known in advance to system
developers (as noted in I.3.3). Attempts at assessing generalization by testing RL systems
on previously unseen game levels, like CoinRun [17] or Obstacle Tower [49], are still only
looking at task-speciﬁc local generalization, by evaluating a candidate system on new sam-
ples from a known distribution rather than using a substantially new task (as suggested in
III.3). In addition, the fact the level-generation programs used are available to the AI devel-
opers means it is possible to “cheat” on these benchmarks by sampling arbitrary amounts
of training data (cf. II.1.1).
Further, contemporary research “moonshots” that are publicly advertised as being steps
towards general intelligence appear to still be focusing on skill-based task-speciﬁc evalua-
tion for board games and video games (e.g. Go [82, 81] and StarCraft [93] for DeepMind,
DotA2 [89] for OpenAI) via highly-mediatized confrontations with top human players.
Despite claims of progress towards general AI in associated public communications5, such
evaluation does not involve any measure of generalization power, and has little-to-no over-
lap with the development of ﬂexibility and generality, as we outline in II.1. For example,
although OpenAI’s DotA2-playing AI “Five” was trained on 45,000 years of play and was
able to beat top human players [89], it has proven very brittle, as non-champion human
players were able to ﬁnd strategies to reliably beat it in a matter of days after the AI was
made available for the public to play against [90]. In addition, Five did not even generalize
to DotA2 in the ﬁrst place: it could only play a restricted version of the game, with 16
characters instead of over 100. Likewise, AlphaGo and its successor AlphaZero, developed
in 2016 and 2017, have not yet found any application outside of board games, to the best of
our knowledge.
We deplore this discrepancy between a focus on surpassing humans at tests of skill on
one hand (while entirely disregarding whether the methods through which skill is achieved
are generalizable), and a manifest interest in developing broad abilities on the other hand –
an endeavour entirely orthogonal to skill itself. We hypothesize that this discrepancy is due
to a lack of a clear conceptualization of intelligence, skill, and generalization, as well as a
lack of appropriate measures and benchmarks for broad cognitive abilities. In what follows,
we expose in more detail the issue with using task-speciﬁc “moonshots” (e.g. achieving
better-than-human performance in a video game or board game) as stepping stones towards
more general forms of AI, and we propose a formal deﬁnition of intelligence meant to be
actionable in the pursuit of ﬂexible AI and general AI.
5OpenAI public statement: “Five is a step towards advanced AI systems which can handle the complexity and
uncertainty of the real world”
17