symbols (each symbol is typically visualized via a unique color), as seen in ﬁgure 4. There
are 10 unique symbols (or colors). A grid can be any height or width between 1x1 and
30x30, inclusive (the median height is 9 and the median width is 10).
When solving an evaluation task, a test-taker has access to the training examples for the
task (both the input and output grids), as well as the input grid of the test examples for the
task. The test-taker must construct on its own the output grid corresponding to the input grid
of each test example. “Constructing the output grid” is done entirely from scratch, meaning
that the test-taker must decide what the height and width of the output grid should be, what
symbols it should place on the grid, and where. The task is successfully solved if the test-
taker can produce the exact correct answer on all test examples for the task (binary measure
of success). For each test example in a task, the test-taker (either human or machine) is
allowed 3 trials10. The only feedback received after a trial is binary (correct answer or
incorrect answer). The score of an intelligent system on ARC is the fraction of tasks in
the evaluation set that it can successfully solve. Crucially, it is assumed that neither the
test-taker nor its developer would have had any prior information about the tasks featured
in the evaluation set: ARC seeks to measure “developer aware generalization” as deﬁned
in I.3.2. The existence of a private evaluation set enables us to strictly enforce this in the
setting of a public competition.
A test-taker is also assumed to have access to the entirety of the training set, although
the training data isn’t strictly necessary in order to be successful on the validation set, as all
tasks are unique and do not assume any knowledge other than the priors described in III.1.2.
A typical human can solve most of the ARC evaluation set without any previous training.
As such, the purpose of the training set primarily to serve as a development validation set
for AI system developers, or as a mock test for human test-takers. It could also be used as
a way to familiarize an algorithm with the content of Core Knowledge priors. We do not
expect that practice on the training set would increase human performance on the test set
(albeit this hypothesis would need to be concretely tested).
III.1.2 Core Knowledge priors
Any test of intelligence is going to involve prior knowledge. ARC seeks to control for its
own assumptions by explicitly listing the priors it assumes, and by avoiding reliance on
any information that isn’t part of these priors (e.g. acquired knowledge such as language).
The ARC priors are designed to be as close as possible to Core Knowledge priors, so as
to provide a fair ground for comparing human intelligence and artiﬁcial intelligence, as per
our recommendations in II.3.1.
The Core Knowledge priors assumed by ARC are as follows:
10We consider 3 trials to be enough to account for cases in which the task may be slightly ambiguous or in which
the test-taker may commit mechanical errors when inputting an answer grid.
47