generalization difﬁculty. ”
We consider an intelligent system IS. We noteCurT
Tthe space of curricula that result in
ISgenerating a solution of sufﬁcient skill Tfor a taskT, andCuropt
Tthe space of cur-
ricula that result in ISgenerating its highest-skill solution (solution reaching the system’s
potentialmax
T;IS). Note that system’s potential may be lower than the optimal solution for
the task, as the system may not be able to learn to optimally solve the task.
To simplify notations, we will denote max
T;IS as. We noteAvg the averaging function
(used to average over task space). We note PCthe probability of a given curriculum C.
We then deﬁne the intelligence of I, tied to a scope of tasks scope , as:
Intelligence of system ISoverscope (sufﬁcient case):
IT
IS;scope =Avg
T2scope"
!TT
C2CurT
T
PCGDT
IS;T;C
PT
IS;T+ET
IS;T;C#
Intelligence of system ISoverscope (optimal case):
Iopt
IS;scope =Avg
T2scope"
!T; 
C2Curopt
T
PCGD
IS;T;C
P
IS;T+E
IS;T;C#
Note that:
PIS;T+EIS;T;C (priors plus experience) represents the total exposure of the sys-
tem to information about the problem, including the information it starts with at the
beginning of training.
The sum over a curriculum subspace, weighted by the probability of each curriculum,
represents the expected outcome for the system after training. Note that the sum is
over a subspace of curricula (curricula that lead to at least a certain skill level), and
thus the probabilities would sum to a total lower than one: as such, we are penalizing
learners that only reach sufﬁcient skill or optimal skill some of the time.
!TTrepresents the subjective value we place on achieving sufﬁcient skill at T,
and!T;represents the subjective value we place on achieving the skill level
corresponding to the system’s full potential max
T;IS atT.
Schematically, the contribution of each task is: Expectationh
skillgeneralization
priors +experiencei
,
which is further weighted by a value !which enables us to homogeneously compare
skill at different tasks independently of the scale of their respective scoring functions.
Thus, we equate the intelligence of a system to a measure of the information-efﬁciency
with which the system acquires its ﬁnal task-speciﬁc skill (sufﬁcient skill or highest possi-
39