ﬁciency is an upper bound), or systems with a broader scope of application. Such systems
would feature intelligence beyond that of humans.
In conclusion, we propose that research on developing broad in AI systems (up to “gen-
eral” AI, i.e. AI with a degree of generality comparable to human intelligence) should focus
ondeﬁning, measuring, and developing a speciﬁcally human-like form of intelligence, and
should benchmark progress speciﬁcally against human intelligence (which is itself highly
specialized). This isn’t because we believe that intelligence that greatly differs from our
own couldn’t exist or wouldn’t have value; rather, we recognize that characterizing and
measuring intelligence is a process that must be tied to a well-deﬁned scope of applica-
tion, and at this time, the space of human-relevant tasks is the only scope that we can
meaningfully approach and assess . We thus disagree with the perspective of Universal
Psychometrics [39] or Legg and Hutter’s Universal Intelligence [54], which reject anthro-
pocentrism altogether and seek to measure all intelligence against a single absolute scale.
An anthropocentric frame of reference is not only legitimate, it is necessary.
II.1.3 Separating the innate from the acquired: insights from developmental
psychology
Advances in developmental psychology teach us that neither of the two opposing views of
the nature of the mind described in I.2 are accurate (see e.g. [85]): the human mind is not
merely a collection of special-purpose programs hard-coded by evolution; it is capable of a
remarkable degree of generality and open-endedness, going far beyond the scope of envi-
ronments and tasks that guided its evolution. The large majority of the skills and knowledge
we possess are acquired during our lifetimes, rather than innate. Simultaneously, the mind
is not a single, general-purpose “blank slate” system capable of learning anything from ex-
perience. Our cognition is specialized, shaped by evolution in speciﬁc ways; we are born
with priors about ourselves, about the world, and about how to learn, which determine what
categories of skills we can acquire and what categories of problems we can solve.
These priors are not a limitation to our generalization capabilities; to the contrary, they
are their source, the reason why humans are capable of acquiring certain categories of skills
with remarkable efﬁciency. The central message of the No Free Lunch theorem [98] is that
to learn from data, one must make assumptions about it – the nature and structure of the
innate assumptions made by the human mind are precisely what confers to it its powerful
learning abilities.
We noted in II.1.1 that an actionable measure of intelligence should, crucially, con-
trol for priors andexperience . We proposed in II.1.2 that evaluating general intelligence
should leverage human intelligence as a necessary frame of reference. It follows that we
need a clear understanding of human cognitive priors in order to fairly evaluate general
intelligence between humans and machines.
Human cognitive priors come in multiple forms, in particular7:
7The boundaries between these categories may be ﬂuid; the distinction between low-level sensorimotor priors
and high-level knowledge priors is more one of degree than one of nature; likewise, the distinction between meta-
24