are correlated. This points to cognition being a multi-dimensional object, structured in a
hierarchical fashion (ﬁgure 1), with a single generality factor at the top, the g factor. But is
“general intelligence” the apex of the cognitive pyramid in an absolute sense (as is some-
times assumed by proponents of “Artiﬁcial General Intelligence”), or is it merely a broader
cognitive ability, one that would remain fairly specialized, and wouldn’t be qualitatively
distinct from other abilities lower down the hierarchy? How general is human intelligence?
The No Free Lunch theorem [98, 97] teaches us that any two optimization algorithms
(including human intelligence) are equivalent when their performance is averaged across
every possible problem , i.e. algorithms should be tailored to their target problem in order to
achieve better-than-random performance. However, what is meant in this context by “every
possible problem” refers to a uniform distribution over problem space; the distribution of
tasks that would be practically relevant to our universe (which, due to its choice of laws of
physics, is a specialized environment) would not ﬁt this deﬁnition. Thus we may ask: is the
human g factor universal? Would it generalize to every possible task in the universe?
This is a question that is largely irrelevant for psychometrics, because as a subﬁeld of
psychology, it makes the implicit assumption that it is concerned solely with humans and
the human experience. But this question is highly relevant when it comes to AI: if there
is such a thing as universal intelligence, and if human intelligence is an implementation
of it, then this algorithm of universal intelligence should be the end goal of our ﬁeld, and
reverse-engineering the human brain could be the shortest path to reach it. It would make
our ﬁeld close-ended: a riddle to be solved. If, on the other hand, human intelligence is
a broad but ad-hoc cognitive ability that generalizes to human-relevant tasks but not much
else, this implies that AI is an open-ended, fundamentally anthropocentric pursuit, tied to
a speciﬁc scope of applicability. This has implications for how we should measure it (by
using human intelligence and human tasks as a reference) and for the research strategies we
should follow to achieve it.
The g factor, by deﬁnition, represents the single cognitive ability common to success
across all intelligence tests, emerging from applying factor analysis to test results across a
diversity of tests and individuals. But intelligence tests, by construction, only encompass
tasks that humans can perform – tasks that are immediately recognizable and understand-
able by humans (anthropocentric bias), since including tasks that humans couldn’t perform
would be pointless. Further, psychometrics establishes measurement validity by demon-
strating predictiveness with regard to activities that humans value (e.g. scholastic success):
the very idea of a “valid” measure of intelligence only makes sense within the frame of
reference of human values.
In fact, the interpretation of what speciﬁc abilities make someone “intelligent” vary
from culture to culture [100, 86, 18]. More broadly, humans have historically had a poor
track record when it comes to attributing intelligence to complex information-processing
agents around them, whether looking at humans from other cultures or at animals (such
as octopuses, dolphins, great apes, etc.). We only reluctantly open up to the possibility
that systems different from ourselves may be “intelligent” if they display relatable human-
like behaviors that we associate with intelligence, such as language or tool use; behaviors
that have high intrinsic complexity and high adaptability but that are not directly relatable
21