Local generalization, or “robustness” : This is the ability of a system to handle new
points from a known distribution for a single task or a well-scoped set of known tasks,
given a sufﬁciently dense sampling of examples from the distribution (e.g. tolerance
to anticipated perturbations within a ﬁxed context). For instance, an image classiﬁer
that can distinguish previously unseen 150x150 RGB images containing cats from
those containing dogs, after being trained on many such labeled images, can be said
to perform local generalization. One could characterize it as “adaptation to known
unknowns within a single task or well-deﬁned set of tasks” . This is the form of
generalization that machine learning has been concerned with from the 1950s up to
this day.
Broad generalization, or “ﬂexibility” : This is the ability of a system to handle a
broad category of tasks and environments without further human intervention. This
includes the ability to handle situations that could not have been foreseen by the
creators of the system. This could be considered to reﬂect human-level ability in
a single broad activity domain (e.g. household tasks, driving in the real world), and
could be characterized as “adaptation to unknown unknowns across a broad category
of related tasks” . For instance, a L5 self-driving vehicle, or a domestic robot capable
of passing Wozniak’s coffee cup test (entering a random kitchen and making a cup of
coffee) [99] could be said to display broad generalization. Arguably, even the most
advanced AI systems today do not belong in this category, although there is increasing
research interest in achieving this level.
Extreme generalization : This describes open-ended systems with the ability to han-
dle entirely new tasks that only share abstract commonalities with previously encoun-
tered situations, applicable to any task and domain within a wide scope. This could
be characterized as “adaptation to unknown unknowns across an unknown range of
tasks and domains”. Biological forms of intelligence (humans and possibly other in-
telligent species) are the only example of such a system at this time. A version of
extreme generalization that is of particular interest to us throughout this document
ishuman-centric extreme generalization , which is the speciﬁc case where the scope
considered is the space of tasks and domains that ﬁt within the human experience. We
will refer to “human-centric extreme generalization” as “generality”. Importantly, as
we deliberately deﬁne generality here by using human cognition as a reference frame
(which we discuss in II.1.2), it is only “general” in a limited sense. Do note, however,
that humans display extreme generalization both in terms of system-centric gener-
alization (quick adaptability to highly novel situations from little experience) and
developer-aware generalization (ability of contemporary humans to handle situations
that previous humans have never experienced during their evolutionary history).
To this list, we could, theoretically, add one more entry: “universality” , which would
extend “generality” beyond the scope of task domains relevant to humans, to any task that
could be practically tackled within our universe (note that this is different from “any task at
all” as understood in the assumptions of the No Free Lunch theorem [98, 97]). We discuss
in II.1.2 why we do not consider universality to be a reasonable goal for AI.
11