(such as octopus camouﬂage) are not perceived as intelligent. This observation extends to
collective entities (e.g. markets, companies, Science as an institution) and natural processes
(e.g. biological evolution). Although they can be modeled as standalone systems whose
abilities and behavior match broadly accepted deﬁnitions of intelligence (achieving goals
across a wide range of environments, demonstrating ﬂexibility and adaptability, etc.), we do
not categorize these systems as intelligent, simply because they aren’t sufﬁciently human-
like.
To use a well-known cross-domain analogy [25]: much like “intelligence”, the notion
of “physical ﬁtness” (as it pertains to sports and other physical activities) is an intuitively-
understandable, informal, yet useful concept. Like intelligence, ﬁtness is not easily re-
ducible to any single factor (such as a person’s age or muscle mass), rather, it seems to
emerge from a constellation of interdependent factors. If we sought to rigorously mea-
sure physical ﬁtness in humans, we would come up with a set of diverse tests such as
running a 100m, running a marathon, swimming, doing sit-ups, doing basketball throws,
etc., not unlike IQ test suites. Across tests results, we would observe clusters of correla-
tions, corresponding to broad “physical abilities” strictly analogous to cognitive abilities
(e.g. lung capacity might be such an “ability” inducing correlations across tests). Much
like in the case of cognitive abilities, experts would probably disagree and debate as to the
exact taxonomy of these broad abilities (is being “tall and lean” an ability, or is “tallness” a
standalone factor?). And crucially, we should intuitively expect to ﬁnd that all tests results
would be correlated : we would observe a physical g factor, corresponding to the general
intuitive construct of “physical ﬁtness”.
But would this mean that human morphology and motor affordances are “general” in
an absolute sense, and that a very ﬁt person could handle any physical task at all? Certainly
not; we are not adapted for the large majority of environments that can be found in the uni-
verse – from the Earth’s oceans to the surface of Venus, from the atmosphere of Jupiter to
interstellar space. It is, however, striking and remarkable that human physical abilities gen-
eralize to a far greater range of environments and tasks than the limited set of environments
and activities that guided their evolution. To caricature, human bodies evolved for running
in the East-African savanna, yet they are capable of climbing mount Everest, swimming
across lakes, skydiving, playing basketball, etc. This is not a coincidence; by necessity,
evolution optimizes for adaptability, whether cognitive adaptability or sensorimotor adapt-
ability. Human physical capabilities can thus be said to be “general”, but only in a limited
sense; when taking a broader view, humans reveal themselves to be extremely specialized,
which is to be expected given the process through which they evolved.
We argue that human cognition follows strictly the same pattern as human physical
capabilities: both emerged as evolutionary solutions to speciﬁc problems in speciﬁc en-
vironments (commonly known as “the four Fs”). Both were, importantly, optimized for
adaptability, and as a result they turn out to be applicable for a surprisingly greater range
of tasks and environments beyond those that guided their evolution (e.g. piano-playing,
solving linear algebra problems, or swimming across the Channel) – a remarkable fact
that should be of the utmost interest to anyone interested in engineering broad or general-
purpose abilities of any kind. Both are multi-dimensional concepts that can be modeled as
22