plicit deﬁnitions has been substituted with implicit deﬁnitions and biases that stretch back
decades. Though invisible, these biases are still structuring many research efforts today, as
illustrated by our ﬁeld’s ongoing fascination with outperforming humans at board games or
video games (a trend we discuss in I.3.5 and II.1). The goal of this document is to point
out the implicit assumptions our ﬁeld has been working from, correct some of its most
salient biases, and provide an actionable formal deﬁnition and measurement benchmark for
human-like general intelligence, leveraging modern insight from developmental cognitive
psychology.
I.2 Deﬁning intelligence: two divergent visions
Looked at in one way, everyone knows what
intelligence is; looked at in another way, no
one does.
Robert J. Sternberg, 2000
Many formal and informal deﬁnitions of intelligence have been proposed over the past
few decades, although there is no existing scientiﬁc consensus around any single deﬁnition.
Sternberg & Detterman noted in 1986 [87] that when two dozen prominent psychologists
were asked to deﬁne intelligence, they all gave somewhat divergent answers. In the context
of AI research, Legg and Hutter [53] summarized in 2007 no fewer than 70 deﬁnitions from
the literature into a single statement: “Intelligence measures an agent’s ability to achieve
goals in a wide range of environments. ”
This summary points to two characterizations, which are nearly universally – but of-
ten separately – found in deﬁnitions of intelligence: one with an emphasis on task-speciﬁc
skill ( “achieving goals” ), and one focused on generality and adaptation ( “in a wide range
of environments” ). In this view, an intelligent agent would achieve high skill across many
different tasks (for instance, achieving high scores across many different video games). Im-
plicitly here, the tasks may not necessarily be known in advance: to truly achieve generality,
the agent would have to be able to learn to handle new tasks (skill acquisition).
These two characterizations map to Catell’s 1971 theory of ﬂuid and crystallized intel-
ligence (Gf-Gc) [13], which has become one of the pillars of the dominant theory of human
cognitive abilities, the Cattell-Horn-Caroll theory (CHC) [62]. They also relate closely to
two opposing views of the nature of the human mind that have been deeply inﬂuential in
cognitive science since the inception of the ﬁeld [85]: one view in which the mind is a
relatively static assembly of special-purpose mechanisms developed by evolution, only ca-
pable of learning what is it programmed to acquire, and another view in which the mind is
a general-purpose “blank slate” capable of turning arbitrary experience into knowledge and
skills, and that could be directed at any problem.
4