ested in ﬂexible AI or general AI. “Broad abilities” is often meant in opposition to
“local generalization”.
We use “generalization” to refer to the entire spectrum of generalization, starting with
local generalization.
Because human general intelligence (the g factor) is itself a very broad cognitive
ability (the top of the hierarchy of abilities), we use the term “intelligence” or “general
intelligence” to refer to extreme generalization as deﬁned above.
I.3.3 Measuring broad abilities and general intelligence: the psychometrics
perspective
It seems to us that in intelligence there is a
fundamental faculty, the alteration or the lack
of which, is of the utmost importance for
practical life. This faculty is [...] the faculty of
adapting one’s self to circumstances.
Alfred Binet, 1916
In the early days of the 20th century, Binet and Simon, looking for a formal way to
distinguish children with mental disabilities from those with behavior problems, developed
the Binet-Simon scale [8], the ﬁrst test of intelligence, founding the ﬁeld of psychometrics.
Immediately after, Spearman observed that individual results across different, seemingly
unrelated types of intelligence tests were correlated, and hypothesized the existence of a
single factor of general intelligence, the g factor [83, 84]. Today, psychometrics is a well-
established subﬁeld of psychology that has arrived at some of the most reproducible results
of the ﬁeld. Modern intelligence tests are developed by following strict standards regarding
reliability (low measurement error, a notion tied to reproducibility), validity (measuring
what one purports to be measuring, a notion tied to statistical consistency and predictive-
ness), standardization, and freedom from bias – see e.g. Classical Test Theory (CTT) [20]
and Item Response Theory (IRT) [34].
A fundamental notion in psychometrics is that intelligence tests evaluate broad cog-
nitive abilities as opposed to task-speciﬁc skills . Theories of the structure of intelligence
(such as CHC, g-VPR), which have co-evolved with psychometric testing (statistical phe-
nomena emerging from test results have informed these theories, and these theories have
informed test design) organize these abilities in a hierarchical fashion (ﬁgure 1), rather sim-
ilarly to the spectrum of generalization we presented earlier. Importantly, an ability is an
abstract construct (based on theory and statistical phenomena) as opposed to a directly mea-
surable, objective property of an individual mind, such as a score on a speciﬁc test. Broad
abilities in AI, which are also constructs, fall into the exact same evaluation problematics
13