A central point of this document is to make explicit and critically assess this dual deﬁ-
nition that has been implicitly at the foundation of how we have been conceptualizing and
evaluating intelligence in the context of AI research: crystallized skill on one hand, skill-
acquisition ability on the other. Understanding this intellectual context and its ongoing
inﬂuence is a necessary step before we can propose a formal deﬁnition of intelligence from
a modern perspective.
I.2.1 Intelligence as a collection of task-speciﬁc skills
In the distant future I see open ﬁelds for far
more important researches. Psychology will be
based on a new foundation, that of the
necessary acquirement of each mental power
and capacity by gradation.
Charles Darwin, 1859
The evolutionary psychology view of human nature is that much of the human cognitive
function is the result of special-purpose adaptations that arose to solve speciﬁc problems
encountered by humans throughout their evolution (see e.g. [19, 74]) – an idea which orig-
inated with Darwin [21] and that coalesced in the 1960s and 1970s. Around the same time
that these ideas were gaining prominence in cognitive psychology, early AI researchers,
perhaps seeing in electronic computers an analogue of the mind, mainly gravitated towards
a view of intelligence as a set of static program-like routines, heavily relying on logical
operators, and storing learned knowledge in a database-like memory.
This vision of the mind as a wide collection of vertical, relatively static programs that
collectively implement “intelligence”, was most prominently endorsed by inﬂuential AI
pioneer Marvin Minsky (see e.g. The Society of Mind , 1986 [63]). This view gave rise
to deﬁnitions of intelligence and evaluation protocols for intelligence that are focused on
task-speciﬁc performance. This is perhaps best illustrated by Minsky’s 1968 deﬁnition of
AI:“AI is the science of making machines capable of performing tasks that would require
intelligence if done by humans”2. It was then widely accepted within the AI community
that the “problem of intelligence” would be solved if only we could encode human skills
into formal rules and encode human knowledge into explicit databases.
This view of intelligence was once so dominant that “learning” (discounted as pure
memorization) was often not even mentioned at all in AI textbooks until the mid-1980s.
Even McCarthy, a rare advocate for generality in AI, believed that the key to achieving
generality was better knowledge bases [60]. This deﬁnition and evaluation philosophy
focused entirely on skill at narrow tasks normally handled by humans has led to a striking
2Note the lingering inﬂuence of the Turing Test.
5