Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 45 context to the retail and manufacturing industry. The examples given are the only representative in the 
respective areas.   
Application of AI in Value Creation 
Computer-based forecasting/demand planning is not ne w. It is based on a series of algorithms designed 
which takes various data sets like shipment data, product life cycle data, ordering pattern, manufacturing 
data, etc. over a period of time to forecast. In c ontrast, the AI enabled system knows the best possible 
combinations of algorithms and data sets to consider having an accurate prediction. More importantly, AI 
is helping businesses to a) get almost 100% accurate  projection and forecast the customer demand, b) 
optimizing their R&D, therefore, increase in manufacturing with lower cost and higher quality c) helping 
them in the promotion (identifying target customers, demography, defining the price, and designing the 
right message, etc. d) providing their customers a better experience. These four areas of value creation are 
extremely important for gaining competitive advantage. 
AI Helps to Forecast Demand and Optimization  
AI is been effectively used in projection and for ecasting. Organizations are always keen to balance 
both supply and demand. Therefore, a better forecast is  needed for its supply chain and manufacturing. As 
AI can process, analyze (automatically) and more  importantly, predict data, it provides accurate and 
reliable forecasting demand, which allows businesses to optimize their sourcing in terms of purchases and 
orders processing therefore reducing costs related to transportation, warehousing and supply chain 
administration, etc. In addition, as it discerns tre nds and patterns which help to design better retailing and 
manufacturing strategies. For example; businesses use th is tool in several ways, such as stock only the 
specific quantities (as accurate as each independent unit/product) of specific products they will sell and 
minimizing waste. Similarly; getting accurate sales trends they can order more soon-to-be-popular items. 
As these demand forecasts are so a ccurate they do not lose the sale because of product unavailability. 
National Grid in the United Kingdom uses the platform “DeepMind” developed by Google which predicts 
the best supply and demand variations accurately  even considering variables like weather-related 
exogenous inputs (Yao 2017). Machine learning approaches not only incorporate historical sales data and 
the setup of the supply chains but also rely on near-r eal-time data regarding variables such as advertising 
campaigns, prices, and local weather forecasts (Bughin et al 2017). Otto a German online retailer 
manages to reduce 90% of their inve ntory using such appli cation. The AI forecasts are so reliable that 
Otto building its inventory in anticipation of the orde rs, more interestingly totally relying on AI without 
any human intervention (Burgess, 2018). AI is also been used in R&D departments, to quickly assess 
whether a prototype would be likely to succeed or fail in the market—and if so why. More importantly, it 
delivers more efficient designs by eliminating waste in  the design process. By doing so AI has played an 
important role in smart manufacturing. (Kusiak A, 2018).  
AI Helps in the Production  
AI has played a significant role in  production because a) better optimization of assets and processes, b) 
designing best teams i.e. people and robots, c) improvement in quality and reliability i.e. error-free, and d) 
prevention of downtime for maintenance. Automation process has taken a big stride because of AI 
technologies. Robotics one of the advanced branches of  AI has taken a central role in the production (Bughin 
et al, 2017). Advances in technologies in object recognition and semantic segmentation has transformed the 
behavior of the robots, particularly in context to how they recognize the properties of the materials and objects 
they interact with. The new AI-enhan ced, camera-equipped robots are trained to recognize empty shelf space. 
This leads to a dramatic speed advantage over conventional methods in picking objects (Bughin et al, 2017, Martin C et al. 2017). Deep learning has also been us ed to correctly identify an object and its position. This 
enables robots to handle objects without requiring the objects to be in fixed, predefined positions. Ocado, the UK supermarket, use one of the AI platforms in its re tailer’s warehouse, where robots steer thousands of 
product-filled bins over a maze of co nveyor belts and deliver them to hum an packers just in time to fill