48 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 Tag Manager (GTM) and Perfect Price many busin esses can adjust the product price. Incompetiror, 
developed by Intelligence Node is  a retail product index that gives the user access to competitors’ 
catalogs and pricing, allowing the user to use those prices as a benchmark for their own pricing structure 
(De Jesus 2019). Moreover, based on the application’s product index, it allows businesses to view and 
compare their competitor’s products to  determine if theirs are overpr iced, about equal, or underpriced. 
Similarly, using this information E-commerce bus iness can know exactly which products shoppers want 
(De Jesus 2019). 
They could access rich market data down to individual SKUs, product attributes, categories, and 
brands and gain visibility into product catalogs. Th ere is another program “Wise Athena” which helps 
companies determine the best pricing for their produc ts and trade promotion decisions. Wise Athena also 
claims to have the ability to automatically select a product’s data attributes or specifications, and it 
computes for loss in sales volume, as well as the re venue or market share of a product when the same 
company launches a new product. It also computes for the potential change in the product’s demand when the price for other product changes, as well as comp etition, leading price, and total sales (De Jesus 2019). 
Wise Athena reports that their system updates its machine learning models monthly to maintain or 
increase prediction accuracy. Navette PricePoint controls, manages, and measures pricing (De Jesus 2019). It consists of modules that group similar produc ts, optimize local list prices from sales companies, 
dealers, and distributors, and takes into account in centives, discounts, and payment terms which help the 
businesses optimize prices. Business like Airbus, Tetra Pak, Olympus, Kia, and General Electric 
Healthcare are already using this program to design th e price (De Jesus 2019). However, the role of AI in 
pricing is in its infancy and it will grow exponentially in the future.  
 
AI Helps in the Delivery  
Recently more focus has been given to “user experi ence” i.e. creating richer, more tailored, and more 
convenient for the user. Today’s business is all about making every customer feel special and welcome, 
which is not an easy task. This used to be difficult and expensive and was often reserved for only the most 
lucrative clients. AI technologies like computer vi sion and machine learning has changed it completely. 
For example, a regular supermarket shopper puts a bunch of bananas in hi s cart, cameras or sensors could 
relay the information to an AI application that woul d have a good idea of what the shopper likes based on 
previous purchases. The app could then, via a video screen in the cart, suggest  that bananas would be 
delicious with a chocolate fondue, which the purch ase history suggests the shopper likes, and remind the 
shopper of where to find the right ingredients (Morti mer et al 2018, Bughin et al, 2017). Or a runner could 
download an app from an athletic shoe company,  which would monitor her exercise regimen and 
recommend footwear tailored to her routine and runn ing paths she may like. Amazon has built a retail 
outlet in Seattle that allows shoppe rs to take food off the shelves and walk directly out of the store 
without stopping at a checkout kiosk to pay (Metz 2018, Bughin et al, 2017). The store called Amazon 
Go, relies on computer vision to track shoppers after they swipe into the store and associate them with 
products taken from shelves. When shoppers leave, Am azon debits their accounts for the cost of the items 
in their bag and emails them a receipt (Metz 2018, Bughin et al, 2017). Delivery through drones is now a 
reality. Since Amazon successfully delivered a pilot deliv ery in rural England in 2016 there a surge in this 
area. Google partnered with Chipotle to deliver burr itos at Virginia Tech, Dominos Pizza with Flirtey 
completed a commercial delivery of pizzas in New Zeal and (Druehl et al 2018). UPS has partnered with 
drone company Zipline and governmental organizati ons in Africa to coordi nate emergency medical 
supplies delivery (such as blood) in Rwanda (Druehl et al 2018). Amazon now routinely gathering data 
from drones during home delivery to  target future purchases. From healthcare to education to 
transportation in every sector, AI is providing the ideal tools for operation management (Druehl et al 
2018).  
 
AI in Smart Retailing  
AI enables the retail and manufacturing businesses in  making smarter decisions, with more accurate and 
real-time forecasting, im proving supply management, defining impactful thematic promotions, and