44 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 INTRODUCTION 
Supply chain management (SCM) is one of the most  challenging fields which emphasizes interactions 
among different sectors, primarily marketing, logistics, and production. Therefore, success in SCM lies in 
the overall success of any business. However, with th e consistent changes in business practices like lean 
management and just-in-time philosophy both in produc tion and logistics, globalization, adverse events 
i.e. frequent natural disaster, political instability, etc. SCM always need to develop an adequate solution to 
mitigate such challenges. In recent years technol ogies like Artificial Intelligence (AI) is been proved 
immensely valuable to SCM. 
As the name suggests AI defined as the ability of a computer to independently solve problems that 
they have not been explicitly programmed to address. The field of AI came to existence in 1956, in a 
workshop organized by John McCarthy (McCarthy Et  al., 2006). In successive years the pioneering work 
of McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Nathaniel Rochester , and Claude Shannon, Arthur Samuel, Oliver 
Selfridge, Ray Solomonoff, Allen Newell, and Herbert Simon, etc. galvanized the field of “artificial 
intelligence” (Solomonoff, 1985). In his article “Computing Machinery and Intelligence” Alan Turing 
proposed the possibility of designing computers whic h can learn automatically (Turing, 1950). After 
“Shakey” a wheeled robot that was built at SRI, th e field of mobile robotics gained International 
attention1. However, in the late ’90s with the techno logical progress in designing computing power to 
store and process large dataset, the internet having the capacity to gather large amounts of data, and 
statistical techniques that, by design , can derive solutions from these data sets, allowed AI to emerge as 
one of the powerful technologies of the century (Kar  et al, 2018). In the last two decades Technologies 
like Cognitive Computing, Computer Vision, Cont ext-aware Computing, Natural Language Processing, 
Predictive Analytics, Machine Learning, Reinforcement Learning, Supervised Learning, Unsupervised 
Learning, and Deep Learning, etc. have enable d computer’s “thoughts” by providing a conceptual 
framework for processing input and making decisions based on that data (Kar et al, 2018). 
The modern machines enabled with AI platform  are capable to gather information from its 
surroundings; using logic and probability choose to act with the highest likelihood of success. These 
machines are made to learn, and act intelligently based on the big-data sets and recognize objects or 
sounds with considerable precision (Mnih et al, 2015, Esteva et al., 2017). With the technological 
advancement in mobile computing, storage of huge da ta on the Internet and cloud-based machine learning 
and information processing algorithms, etc. applicati ons and benefits of AI technologies are growing 
exponentially (Kar et al, 2018). Machines powered by AI performing many tasks—such as recognizing 
complex patterns, synthesizing information, drawin g conclusions, and forecasting—that not long ago 
were assumed to require human cognition (Zhang et al.,1999, Bughin et al 2017). The best example 
would be Netflix and Amazon. Both companies use AI to personalize recommendations to millions of 
subscribers worldwide. From self-driving cars to impl antable medical devices to electronic trading to a 
robot control of remote sensing are few other ex amples. Using deep learning algorithms, powered by 
advances in computation these machines have even ex ceeded human performance, particularly in visual 
tasks like playing Atari games (Perez et al., 2014), st rategic board games like Go (Silver D et al., 2016) 
and object recognition (Esteva et al., 2017). AI, which enables machines to exhibit human-like cognition, 
therefore wherever a process uses digital data, AI can be applied to use that data more effectively to 
improve the functioning of most digital operati ons, products, and services (Hall DW et al., 2017). 
Applications of AI has helped businesses gain a competitive advantage in a) getting almost 100% 
accurate projection and forecast the customer demand, b) optimizing their R&D, therefore, increase in 
manufacturing with lower cost and higher quality c) helping them in the promotion (identifying target 
customers, demography, defining the price, and designing the right message, etc. d) providing their 
customers a better experience (has been explained in great  detail in a later section). AI already in use in 
various business practices including medicine, law, finance, accounting, tax, audit, architecture, 
consulting, customer service, manufacturing, and trans port, etc. (Hall DW et al., 2017). In this article, we 
have highlighted the recent trends and applications of AI in supply chain management, particularly in