Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 49 optimizing assortment and pricing. AI also making operations more efficien t, because of robotics and process 
optimization which enhances productivity and reduces ma nual labor costs. Use of interactive Robots in the 
warehouse and store are well known. The advancement in enhanced vision is enabled by more powerful 
computers, new algorithmic models, and large training data sets. Within the field of computer vision, object 
recognition and semantic segmentation—that is, the abilit y to categorize object type, such as distinguishing a 
tool from a component—have recently advanced significa ntly in their performance (Wen et al 2018, Bughin 
et al, 2017). They allow robots to be have appropriately for the context in which they operate, for example by 
recognizing the properties of the materials and objects they interact with. They are flexible and autonomous and capable of safely interacting with the real world and humans (Bughin et al, 2017). Companies like 
Swisslog, DHL, etc. are using these techno logies efficiently (Wen et al 2018). 
However, there are many hurdles yet to be crossed be fore we get the full potential of AI. The first and 
foremost is to gain the confidence of the stakeholders  i.e. managers and employees, and those involved in the 
regulatory and policy-making boards. As  discussed earlier robots are gr adually being adapted to perform 
packaging and delivery. However; we still do not  know how to address technical difficulties. 
AI has enabled retailers to increase both the number of customers and the average amount they spend by 
creating personal and convenient shopping experiences . Retailers now know more about what their shoppers 
want— even before shoppers themselves (Deb et al 2018). AI forecasts from patterns and volumes of data i.e. previous transactions, weathe r forecasts, social media tren ds, shopping patterns, online  viewing history, facial 
expression analysis, seasonal shopping patterns, etc (F ildes et al 2018, Burgess A 2018). The best examples 
are Amazon, Hulu, Netflix etc. Similarly; a European retailer improved its earnings before interest and taxes 
(EBIT) by 1 to 2 the percent by using a machine lear ning algorithm to anticipate fruit and vegetable sales. 
The company automatically orders more products based on this forecast to maximize turnover and minimize 
waste. A German company i.e. Otto cut surplus stock by 20 percent and reduced product returns by more than two million items a year, using deep learning to analyze billions of transactions and predict what customers will buy before they place an order (Burgess A 2018). AI technologies help retailers predict future 
store performance when expanding their physical footprints. Now retailers optimize their storage space and 
location using AI. Another important aspect of The retail industry is merchandising. AI helping in merchandising, with opportunities to  improve assortment efficiency. Using geospatial and statistical 
modeling, they predict and minimize their stock. Amazon has embedded AI at the core of its operations. In the retailer’s warehouse at Seattle, machine learning algorithms steer thousands of products over a maze of 
conveyor belts and deliver them to humans just in tim e to fill shopping bags. Other robots whisk bags to 
delivery vans whose drivers are guided by an AI application that picks the best route based on weather and traffic conditions (Fildes et  al 2018, Burgess A 2018).  
 
AI in Smart Manufacturing  
Use of AI has transformed the manufacturing sector, from virtual assistants to advanced robotics, has 
enabled the manufacturing companies to produce more  with fewer errors to adept demand. Using AI 
helped them in rapid growth as they can shorten development cycles, improve engineering efficiency, 
prevent faults, increase safety by automating risky activities, reduce inventory costs with better supply 
and demand planning, and increase revenue with bette r sales lead identification and price optimization, 
etc. (Patel et al 2018, Bughin et  al, 2017). The new concept i.e. “I ntelligent manufacturing” is a smart 
approach for production where machines are linked to humans i.e. both machine and humans are working 
side-by-side with minimal guidance. The best exam ple of intelligent manufacturing is the manufacturing 
sector of Siemens
2. The employee manages and controls the production of programmable logic circuits 
through a virtual factory that replicates the fact ory floor. Via barcodes, products communicate with the 
machines that make them, and the machines comm unicate among themselves to replenish parts and 
identify problems (Bughin et al, 2017). As high as 75% of  the production process is fully automated, and 
99.99988% of the logic circuits are defect-free. Si milarly, AI and 3D printing have revolutionized 
customization in manufacturing. Intel has develo ped Predictive analytics using machine learning a 
powerful tool to reduce the time required to so lve design problems for semiconductor manufacturers 
(Burgess 2018). Motivo, an artificial intelligence star tup, managed to compress semiconductor design