46 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 shopping bags (Dale M., 2018). Similarly, other robots whisk the bags to delivery vans whose drivers are 
guided to customers’ homes by the best route based on traffic conditions and weather (Bughin et al, 2017). 
AI-enhanced logistics robots are also able to integrate disturbances in their movement routines via an 
unsupervised learning engine for dynamics. This capability leads to more precise makeovers and overall improved robustness of processes (Webster, C et al 20 19). Collaborative robots can increase productivity by 
up to 20 percent (Bughin et al, 2017, Martin C et al. 2017). AI enabled semiconductor chip-production process is a good example of how AI helps in production. The cycle times from the first processing of the wafer to the 
final chip are typically several weeks to months and include various intermediate quality- testing processes. 
Testing costs and yield losses in semiconductor production can constitute up to 30 percent of the total production cost. Semiconductor manufacturers are using AI engines to identify root causes of yield losses that 
can be avoided by changing production processes. Enhanced applications are designed to monitor and adjust 
subprocesses in real time (Bughin et al, 2017, Martin C et al. 2017). AI techniques help not only determining 
the optimized product operating conditions or process conditions but also to significantly reduce defects in manufacturing. Similarly; in asset-heavy businesses, where complex systems running with minimal downtime, AI provides the perfect solution. Utility companies use AI  for maintenance of their extensive electrical grids. 
Using data from sensors, drones, and other hardware, machine learning applications helps grid operators avoid 
decommissioning assets before their useful lives have ended, while simultaneously enabling them to perform 
more frequent remote inspections and maintenance to keep assets working well (Bughin et al, 2017). Using AI one European power distribution company reduced its cash costs as high as 30% over five years by replacing power transformers. AI is also enabling the “preventive maintenance” as well. Therefore, in a production unit 
where multiple machines are used, it will indicate the possible failure (Bughin et al, 2017, Martin C et al. 2017). 
AI helps in Pr
omotion and Pricing 
Digital content has already become the norm and bus inesses employ multiple channels to reach their 
customers. About 25 percent of today’s marketing budge ts are devoted to digital channels, and almost 80 
percent of marketing organizations  make technology-oriented capita l expenditures—typically hardware 
and software—according to a recent Gartner survey (Foo et al 2018, Sterne, 2018). AI-supported 
activities include digital advertising buys (progra mmatic buying), website operation and optimization, 
search engine optimization, A/B testing, outbound e-mail marketing, lead filtering and scoring, and many other marketing tasks (Sterne, 2018). 
AI tools like Wordsmith, Articolo and Quill are already being used by the Associated Press and 
Forbes to create news, which leads to clicks on their websites (Seligman 2018). These tools use, 
templates, fill-in-the-blanks to en ter data and keywords to create unique content which gives the readers 
the impression that a human has written it. AI is not only able to generate content; it can curate it. Content curation by AI not only connect the visitors with ce rtain websites but also make recommendations based 
on their personal choice. Personalized email mark eting campaigns based on preferences and user 
behaviors are well known (Sterne, 2018). 
The Machine learning applications analyze millions of data about the behavior of consumer i.e. best 
frequency, what catches their attention the most and best  times and days of the week to contact the user. 
A few of the AI-based applications like Boomtrain, Phrases, and Persado is already been shown their 
value. Phrases claims, the email it  creates surpasses those of a human  by over 95%. The cognitive content 
of Persado demonstrated to exceed what a human could do 100% of the time (Jaidka et al 2018, Gaggioli 2018). Similarly; Facebook, Amazon, and Google are we ll known for using AI enabled digital advertising 
(Deb et al 2018). The AI platform analyzes the info rmation including interests, demographics, and other 
aspects to learn and predict the best audience for th eir brand. Adext (AI platform) can automate the 
handling and optimization of a dvertisements on various platfo rms including Google AdWords and 
Facebook. More importantly, it detects the most likely bu yers and helps them to take the desired action or 
conversion. AI has revolutionized Internet searches and search engine optimization (SEO) (Deb et al 2018, Gaggioli 2018). AI devices like Amazon’s Echo, Google’s Home, Apple’s Siri, and Microsoft’s 
Cortana make it easy for their customers to perform searches by either saying a voice command or just pressing a button (Deb et al 2018). RankBrain devel oped by Google, can interpret the user’s voice