50 Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 processes from years to a few weeks, saving chip  makers the cost of iterations and testing3. Using 
machine learning, aerospace manufacturing industries h as developed productivity tools for engineering 
teams i.e. team travel norms, team composition, a nd supplier communication, etc. Machine learning has 
reduced its development costs by unleashing the speed, accuracy, and relevance of products. AI has 
allowed manufacturers to integrate production and clie nt feedback in real time to refine the product 
design. With suppliers, AI-based tools provide bette r accountability throughout the supply chain, which 
helps aerospace manufacturers as well. For example,  manufacturing a jet requires 1000s of parts and 
procurement of these parts from around the world is  a complex challenge. AI technologies like Virtual 
reality in manufacturing link thousands of different parts most importantly, it provides transparency on 
supplier machine availability, performance, and downtime, etc. It helps in balancing the supply chain and 
optimize inventories in real time (Kraus et al 2018). 
Using AI manufacturers are optimizing the key performance indicators and review it in real time. For 
example; tailoring of a model using virtual programs help  to better predict, identify, and prevent material 
and staffing bottlenecks and optimize energy consump tion. More importantly, it alerts the engineers 
before problems arise and recommend solutions. AI enabled manufacturing not only efficiently assembly 
line practices but also cut costs, reduce waste, and speed time to ma rket (O'Reilly et al 2019). Using 
machine learning algorithms, collaborative robots, and self-driving vehicles have been proved to improve 
warehouse costs and reduce inventory levels as well. Th e best example is when General Electrics turned 
to Kaggle, the platform for predictive modeling and an alytics competitions, and invited data scientists to 
design new routing and machine learning algorithms for flight planning that optimized fuel consumption 
by looking at variables such as weather patterns, wind, and airspace restraints. The winning routing 
algorithm showed a 12% improvement in efficiency over actual flight data (Henriques et al 2018). 
The key feature of AI enabled manufacturing is co llaborative agility, which is the ability to adapt 
almost instantly to changes in demand and the evol ution of regulation, input prices, technologies, and 
other parts of the industry landscape. Now smart Robots are working with humans collaboratively for 
mass production of products which is essential fo r customer-centric products. AI has helped 
manufacturing plants around the globe in supply chai ns, and value chains which are more interconnected 
and collaborative (Klumpp 2018). AI is also not far be hind in agriculture. The concept of “e-plants in a 
box” is a reality which is great for small-scale, low-ca pital-expenditure, mobile plants that can produce a 
limited range of products at a competitive cost. Huxl ey combines machine learning, computer vision, and 
an augmented reality interface to essentially allow an yone to be a master farmer. More importantly, these 
e-plants can be transported to markets where demand is temporarily strong and in remote markets where 
production must be the local and low cost (Bughin et al, 2017).  
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The technological advancement in mobile computing, artificial neural networks, robotics, storage of 
huge data on the internet, cloud-based machine lear ning, and information processing algorithms, etc. has 
propelled the use of AI in various business sectors. Many businesses are using AI in major parts of their 
value chain as AI delivers significant competitive adva ntages. Most importantly, AI technologies have 
helped them eliminating many levels of manual activities including promotions, assortments, and supply 
chain. The e-commerce business using AI to predict the trends, optimize warehousing and logistics set 
prices, and personalize promotions etc. Some even go one step ahead like anticipating orders and shipping 
goods without even waiting for purchase confirmation. Similarly, Smart Manufacturing is now a reality. However, there are many changes are needed to fully get the benefit of AI, more  importantly, the changes 
will compel many companies (retail and manufacture ri ng) to adopt new strategies i.e. plant designs, 
reshape their manufacturing footprints, and devise ne w supply chain models. Also, companies need to 
change the way they do business, as there will be a transition from human operators to AI enabled 
machines and robots. It is good to note that the trend in global industrial operation driven by AI is exponentially increasing, which suggests AI has either already or becoming a priority for many corporations around the world.