Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 47 searches and, provides them the best results based on th e user’s language and context (Sutton et al 2018). 
Therefore, that famous long-tail keywords will be history. Smart marketers will use creative words to 
replace with more conversational keywords, which will increase their traffic and customers. An AI 
platform like Grid has transformed the webpage designing, the best part  is it can customize the website 
for each customer and change the content of the website  based on the preference of the user. Many brands 
already have chatbot powered by AI on their website . They serve clients 24/7, more importantly, as 
they’re fast they solve the problems of the customer  faster than human. For example; Sephora uses an AI 
platform i.e. Visual Artist which identifies facial features and then uses augmented reality to analyze and 
suggest customized cosmetic products like lip sticks, eyeshadows, etc. (Kumar et al 2018). 
Yield management programs were considered as the best system and been used for pricing airline 
seats, hotel rooms, and other perishables for years. However, AI has changed it dramatically. Now every 
business interested to know what price is the cu stomer willing to pay? In a 24X7 connected world 
consumers continuously redefine value by compari ng prices online, even when browsing in a brick-and-
mortar store. The right price at the right time incr eases customer satisfaction and leads to more sales and 
higher profit (Khorram 2019). Defining the optimal pr ice for a product is complicated which is broadly 
depends on many factors including the day of the week , season, time of day, weather, channel and device, 
competitors’ prices, etc. AI is a good tool to determine the price elasticity for every item and automatically adjust prices according to the c hosen product strategy (Khorram 2019). In the retail 
industry, AI is been extensively used to optimize, update, and tailor it to each shopper in real time. AI 
program is been exploited which looked for clu es about what the shopper will like based on previous 
purchases, age, home address, web browsing habits, a nd mounds of other data. This kind of insights-
based selling, including personalized promotions, optim ized assortment, and tailored displays, increase 
sales substantially (Mathur 2019, Bughin et al, 2017) . Aerospace companies are using AI technologies to 
prioritize sales targets and optimize the price of services.  For years, they prioritized maintenance, repair, 
and overhaul (MRO) sales lead manually, a cumbersome , resource-heavy, and not always an efficient 
process. Using AI to improve the accuracy of for ecasting MRO work and focusing on the firm’s sales 
efforts on the most promising leads can have a significan t effect on profitability (Kraus et al 2019, Bughin 
et al, 2017). 
In recent years, artificial inte lligence has enabled pricing soluti ons to track buying trends and 
determine more competitive product prices (Paolanti et al 2018). AI-driven pricing software has been 
included in various sectors including consumer goods, fashion, hospitality, and transportation (Meng et al 
2018). In the future, businesses will progress from absolute  i.e. static pricing to dynamic pricing which 
will offer customers different prices based on external  factors and their individual buying habits. Dynamic 
pricing is based on aggregate available pricing da ta from various sources i.e. across the web, from 
competitors and prices are available in other regions. Dynamic pricing algorithms consider factors such as 
competitors’ pricing, consumer behavior, location, time of day, and seasonality to determine how much 
shoppers are willing to pay for a product or service. Ma ny machine learning programs have been designed 
to collect and analyzing data from a variety of sources like loyalty cards and postal codes, to predict what 
the customer is willing to pay and how responsive they might be to special offers. Most importantly, once the patterns are revealed, they can adjust and determine the best prices for new products that are appropriate for the customer (Kietzmann et al 2018). 
Though dynamic pricing now in its infancy but will grow expone ntially. Pace has developed a 
program that enables hotel management to design pr icing that will match with supply and demand. This 
allows hotels to maximize their profits by offering the best price that customers are willing to pay based on various parameter including demographics, time of y ear, spending pattern, etc. It will help the hotels to 
forecast the demand (De Jesus 2019). Similarly; Sharts is has developed a “Perfect price” program which 
enables companies, such as car rent al companies, to do dynamic pricing. Traditionally, car rental 
companies segment based on time of day, boosting morning prices to match business travelers who are assumed to be more willing to pay (De Jesus 2019). Perfect Price determines if a certain car shows higher demand in a specific area and at a specific time of day, resulting in surge pricing while not affecting other car classes. More importantly, the system needs mi nimal human oversight. In the future, using Google