Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability Vol. 14(3) 2019 43 Application of Artificial I ntelligence in Automation of 
Supply Chain Management 
Rupa Dash 
University of Pittsburgh 
Mark McMurtrey
 
University of Central Arkansas 
Carl Rebman 
University of San Diego 
Upendra K. Kar 
University of Pittsburgh 
A well-functioning supply chain is a key to suc cess for every business en tity. Having an accurate 
projection on inventory offers a substantial compe titive advantage. There are many internal factors like 
product introductions, distribution ne twork expansion; and external factors such as weather, extreme 
seasonality, and changes in customer perception or medi a coverage that affects the performance of the 
supply chain. In recent years Artificial Intelligence (AI) has been proved to become an extension of our 
brain, expanding our cognitive abilities to levels that we never thought would be possible. Though many 
believe AI will replace humans, it is not true, rather it wi ll help us to unleash our true strategic and creative 
potential. AI consists of a set of computational technologies developed to sense, learn, reason, and act 
appropriately. With the technological advancement in m obile computing, the capacity to store huge data 
on the internet, cloud-based machine learning and info rmation processing algorithms etc. AI has been 
integrated into many sectors of business and been proved to reduce costs, increase revenue, and enhance 
asset utilization. AI is helping businesses to get almo st 100% accurate projection and forecast the customer 
demand, optimizing their R&D and increase manufacturing with lower cost and higher quality, helping 
them in the promotion (identifying target custom ers, demography, defining the price, and designing the 
right message, etc.) and providing their customers a better experience. These four  areas of value creation 
are extremely important for gaining competitive advantage. Supply-chain leaders use AI-powered 
technologies to a) make efficient designs to eliminate waste b) real-time monitoring and error-free 
production and c) facilitate lower process cycle times . These processes are crucial in bringing Innovation 
faster to the market.