Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
buffer D. Figure 9 compares the baseline with an experiment without random starts and rollouts of
length 1000 onSeaquest which shows much worse results without random starts.
7 C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We presented SimPLe, a model-based reinforcement learning approach that operates directly on raw
pixel observations and learns effective policies to play games in the Atari Learning Environment. Our
experiments demonstrate that SimPLe learns to play many of the games with just 100K interactions
with the environment, corresponding to 2 hours of play time. In many cases, the number of samples
required for prior methods to learn to reach the same reward value is several times larger.
Our predictive model has stochastic latent variables so it can be applied in highly stochastic environ-
ments. Studying such environments is an exciting direction for future work, as is the study of other
ways in which the predictive neural network model could be used. Our approach uses the model as a
learned simulator and directly applies model-free policy learning to acquire the policy. However, we
could use the model for planning. Also, since our model is differentiable, the additional information
contained in its gradients could be incorporated into the reinforcement learning process. Finally,
the representation learned by the predictive model is likely be more meaningful by itself than the
raw pixel observations from the environment. Incorporating this representation into the policy could
further accelerate and improve the reinforcement learning process.
While SimPLe is able to learn more quickly than model-free methods, it does have limitations. First,
the final scores are on the whole lower than the best state-of-the-art model-free methods. This
can be improved with better dynamics models and, while generally common with model-based RL
algorithms, suggests an important direction for future work. Another, less obvious limitation is that
the performance of our method generally varied substantially between different runs on the same game.
The complex interactions between the model, policy, and data collection were likely responsible for
this. In future work, models that capture uncertainty via Bayesian parameter posteriors or ensembles
(Kurutach et al., 2018; Chua et al., 2018) may improve robustness. Finally, the computational and
time requirement of training inside world model are substantial (see Appendix C), which makes
developing lighter models an important research direction.
In this paper our focus was to demonstrate the capability and generality of SimPLe only across a
suite of Atari games, however, we believe similar methods can be applied to other environments and
tasks which is one of our main directions for future work. As a long-term challenge, we believe that
model-based reinforcement learning based on stochastic predictive models represents a promising and
highly efficient alternative to model-free RL. Applications of such approaches to both high-fidelity
simulated environments and real-world data represent an exciting direction for future work that can
enable highly efficient learning of behaviors from raw sensory inputs in domains such as robotics and
autonomous driving.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Marc Bellemare and Pablo Castro for their help with Rainbow and Dopamine. The work of
Konrad Czechowski, Piotr Kozakowski and Piotr Miło ´s was supported by the Polish National Science
Center grants UMO-2017/26/E/ST6/00622. The work of Henryk Michalewski was supported by the
Polish National Science Center grant UMO-2018/29/B/ST6/02959. We gratefully acknowledge Polish
high-performance computing infrastructure PLGrid (HPC Centers: ACK Cyfronet AGH, PCSS)
for providing computer facilities and support within computational grants no. PLG/2019/012497
and PLG/2019/012784. Some of the experiments were managed using https://neptune.ai .
We would like to thank the Neptune team for providing us access to the team version and technical
support.
REFERENCES
Stephan Alaniz. Deep reinforcement learning with model learning and monte carlo tree search in
minecraft. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08456 , 2018.
10