Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 1: Main loop of SimPLe. 1) the agent starts interacting with the real environment following the latest
policy (initialized to random). 2) the collected observations will be used to train (update) the current world
model. 3) the agent updates the policy by acting inside the world model. The new policy will be evaluated
to measure the performance of the agent as well as collecting more data (back to 1). Note that world model
training is self-supervised for the observed states and supervised for the reward.
2017, Chapter 8), capturing important details of the scene (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018), encouraging
exploration (Oh et al., 2015), creating intrinsic motivation (Schmidhuber, 2010) or counterfactual
reasoning (Buesing et al., 2019). One of the exciting benefits of model-based learning is the promise
to substantially improve sample efficiency of deep reinforcement learning (see Chapter 8 in Sutton &
Barto (2017)).
Our work advances the state-of-the-art in model-based reinforcement learning by introducing a
system that, to our knowledge, is the first to successfully handle a variety of challenging games in the
ALE benchmark. To that end, we experiment with several stochastic video prediction techniques,
including a novel model based on discrete latent variables. We present an approach, called Simulated
Policy Learning (SimPLe), that utilizes these video prediction techniques and trains a policy to
play the game within the learned model. With several iterations of dataset aggregation, where
the policy is deployed to collect more data in the original game, we learn a policy that, for many
games, successfully plays the game in the real environment (see videos on the project webpage
https://goo.gl/itykP8 ).
In our empirical evaluation, we find that SimPLe is significantly more sample-efficient than a highly
tuned version of the state-of-the-art Rainbow algorithm (Hessel et al., 2018) on almost all games. In
particular, in low data regime of 100k samples, on more than half of the games, our method achieves
a score which Rainbow requires at least twice as many samples. In the best case of Freeway , our
method is more than 10x more sample-efficient, see Figure 3. Since the publication of the first
preprint of this work, it has been shown in van Hasselt et al. (2019); Kielak (2020) that Rainbow can
be tuned to have better results in low data regime. The results are on a par with SimPLe – both of the
model-free methods are better in 13 games, while SimPLe is better in the other 13 out of the total 26
games tested (note that in Section 4.2 van Hasselt et al. (2019) compares with the results of our first
preprint, later improved).
2 R ELATED WORK
Atari games gained prominence as a benchmark for reinforcement learning with the introduction of
the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) Bellemare et al. (2015). The combination of reinforcement
learning and deep models then enabled RL algorithms to learn to play Atari games directly from
images of the game screen, using variants of the DQN algorithm (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015; Hessel
et al., 2018) and actor-critic algorithms (Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017; Babaeizadeh et al.,
2017b; Wu et al., 2017; Espeholt et al., 2018). The most successful methods in this domain remain
model-free algorithms (Hessel et al., 2018; Espeholt et al., 2018). Although the sample complexity of
these methods has substantially improved recently, it remains far higher than the amount of experience
required for human players to learn each game (Tsividis et al., 2017). In this work, we aim to learn
Atari games with a budget of just 100K agent steps (400K frames), corresponding to about two hours
2