Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Table 1: Summary of SimPLe ablations. For each game, a configuration was assigned a score being the mean
over 5experiments. The best and median scores were calculated per game. The table reports the number of
games a given configuration achieved the best score or at least the median score, respectively.
model best at least median
deterministic 0 7
det. recurrent 3 13
SD 8 16
SDγ= 0.9 1 14
default 10 21
SD100steps 0 14
SD25steps 4 19
All our code is available as part of the Tensor2Tensor library and it includes instructions on how
to run our experiments: https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor/tree/
master/tensor2tensor/rl .
A A BLATIONS
To evaluate the design of our method, we independently varied a number of the design decisions: the
choice of the model, the γparameter and the length of PPO rollouts. The results for 7experimental
configurations are summarized in the Table 1.
Models. To assess the model choice, we evaluated the following models: deterministic, determin-
istic recurrent, and stochastic discrete (see Section 4). Based on Table 1 it can be seen that our
proposed stochastic discrete model performs best. Figures 7a and 7b show the role of stochasticity
and recurrence.
Steps. See Figure 7d. As described in Section 5 every Nsteps we reinitialize the simulated
environment with ground-truth data. By default we use N= 50 , in some experiments we set N= 25
orN= 100 . It is clear from the table above and Figure 7d that 100is a bit worse than either 25or
50, likely due to compounding model errors, but this effect is much smaller than the effect of model
architecture.
Gamma. See Figure 8b. We used the discount factor γ= 0.99unless specified otherwise. We see
thatγ= 0.95is slightly better than other values, and we hypothesize that it is due to better tolerance
to model imperfections. But overall, all three values of γseem to perform comparably at the same
number of steps.
Model-based iterations. The iterative process of training the model, training the policy, and
collecting data is crucial for non-trivial tasks where simple random data collection is insufficient. In
the game-by-game analysis, we quantified the number of games where the best results were obtained
in later iterations of training. In some games, good policies could be learned very early. While this
might have been due simply to the high variability of training, it does suggest the possibility that
much faster training – in many fewer than 100k steps – could be obtained in future work with more
directed exploration policies. We leave this question to future work.
In Figure 9 we present the cumulative distribution plot for the (first) point during learning when the
maximum score for the run was achieved in the main training loop of Algorithm 1.
On Figure 7c we show results for experiments in which the number samples was fixed to be 100K but
the number of training loop varied. We conclude that 15is beneficial for training.
Long model training Our best results were obtained with much 5 times longer training of the
world models, see Figure 8a for comparison with shorter training. Due to our resources constraints
other ablations were made with the short model training setting.
15