Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 3: Comparison with Rainbow and PPO. Each bar illustrates the number of interactions with environment
required by Rainbow (left) or PPO (right) to achieve the same score as our method (SimPLe). The red line
indicates the 100K interactions threshold which is used by the our method.
qualitative analysis of performance on different games see Appendix B. The source code is available
as part of the Tensor2Tensor library and it includes instructions on how to run the experiments3.
6.1 S AMPLE EFFICIENCY
The primary evaluation in our experiments studies the sample efficiency of SimPLe, in comparison
with state-of-the-art model-free deep RL methods in the literature. To that end, we compare with
Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2018; Castro et al., 2018), which represents the state-of-the-art Q-learning
method for Atari games, and PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), a model-free policy gradient algorithm (see
Appendix E for details of tuning of Rainbow and PPO). The results of the comparison are presented
in Figure 3. For each game, we plot the number of time steps needed for either Rainbow or PPO to
reach the same score that our method reaches after 100K interaction steps. The red line indicates
100K steps: any bar larger than this indicates a game where the model-free method required more
steps. SimPLe outperforms the model-free algorithms in terms of learning speed on nearly all of the
games, and in the case of a few games, does so by over an order of magnitude. For some games, it
reaches the same performance that our PPO implementation reaches at 10M steps. This indicates
that model-based reinforcement learning provides an effective approach to learning Atari games, at a
fraction of the sample complexity.
The results in these figures are generated by averaging 5runs for each game. The model-based agent
is better than a random policy for all the games except Bank Heist . Interestingly, we observed
that the best of the 5runs was often significantly better. For 6of the games, it exceeds the average
human score (as reported in Table 3 of Pohlen et al. (2018)). This suggests that further stabilizing
SimPLe should improve its performance, indicating an important direction for future work. In some
cases during training we observed high variance of the results during each step of the loop. There are
a number of possible reasons, such as mutual interactions of the policy training and the supervised
training or domain mismatch between the model and the real environment. We present detailed
numerical results, including best scores and standard deviations, in Appendix D.
3https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor/tree/master/tensor2tensor/
rl
7