Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
6.3 E NVIRONMENT STOCHASTICITY
A crucial decision in the design of world models is the inclusion of stochasticity. Although Atari
is known to be a deterministic environment, it is stochastic given only a limited horizon of past
observed frames (in our case 4frames). The level of stochasticity is game dependent; however, it
can be observed in many Atari games. An example of such behavior can be observed in the game
Kung Fu Master – after eliminating the current set of opponents, the game screen always looks
the same (it contains only player’s character and the background). The game dispatches diverse sets
of new opponents, which cannot be inferred from the visual observation alone (without access to the
game’s internal state) and thus cannot be predicted by a deterministic model. Similar issues have
been reported in Babaeizadeh et al. (2017a), where the output of their baseline deterministic model
was a blurred superposition of possible random object movements. As can be seen in Figure 11 in
the Appendix, the stochastic model learns a reasonable behavior – samples potential opponents and
renders them sharply.
Figure 6: Impact of the environment stochasticity.
The graphs are in the same format as Figure 3:
each bar illustrates the number of interactions with
environment required by Rainbow to achieve the
same score as SimPLe (with stochastic discrete
world model) using 100k steps in an environment
with and without sticky actions.Given the stochasticity of the proposed model, Sim-
PLe can be used with truly stochastic environments.
To demonstrate this, we ran an experiment where the
full pipeline (both the world model and the policy)
was trained in the presence of sticky actions, as rec-
ommended in (Machado et al., 2018, Section 5). Our
world model learned to account for the stickiness of
actions and in most cases the end results were very
similar to the ones for the deterministic case even
without any tuning, see Figure 6.
6.4 A BLATIONS
To evaluate the design of our method, we indepen-
dently varied a number of the design decisions. Here
we present an overview; see Appendix A for detailed
results.
Model architecture and hyperparameters. We
evaluated a few choices for the world model and
our proposed stochastic discrete model performs best
by a significant margin. The second most important
parameter was the length of world model’s training.
We verified that a longer training would be beneficial,
however we had to restrict it in all other ablation stud-
ies due to a high cost of training on all games. As for
the length of rollouts from simulated env′, we use
N= 50 by default. We experimentally shown that
N= 25 performs roughly on par, while N= 100 is
slightly worse, likely due to compounding model errors. The discount factor was set to γ= 0.99
unless specified otherwise. We see that γ= 0.95is slightly better than other values, and we hypothe-
size that it is due to better tolerance to model imperfections. But overall, all three values of γperform
comparably.
Model-based iterations. The iterative process of training the model, training the policy, and collect-
ing data is crucial for non-trivial tasks where random data collection is insufficient. In a game-by-game
analysis, we quantified the number of games where the best results were obtained in later iterations of
training. In some games, good policies could be learned very early. While this might have been due
to the high variability of training, it does suggest the possibility of much faster training (i.e. in fewer
step than 100k) with more directed exploration policies. In Figure 9 in the Appendix we present the
cumulative distribution plot for the (first) point during learning when the maximum score for the run
was achieved in the main training loop of Algorithm 1.
Random starts. Using short rollouts is crucial to mitigate the compounding errors in the model. To
ensure exploration, SimPLe starts rollouts from randomly selected states taken from the real data
9