Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
MODEL BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
FOR ATARI
Łukasz Kaiser1,∗, Mohammad Babaeizadeh1,∗, Piotr Miłos2,3,∗, Bła ˙zej Osi ´nski2,4,∗
Roy H. Campbell5, Konrad Czechowski4, Dumitru Erhan1, Chelsea Finn1,6,
Piotr Kozakowski4, Sergey Levine1, Afroz Mohiuddin1, Ryan Sepassi1,
George Tucker1, Henryk Michalewski4
1Google Brain,2deepsense.ai,3Institute of Mathematics of the Polish Academy of Sciences,
4Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Mechanics, University of Warsaw,
5University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign,6Stanford University
ABSTRACT
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) can be used to learn effective policies
for complex tasks, such as Atari games, even from image observations. However,
this typically requires very large amounts of interaction – substantially more, in
fact, than a human would need to learn the same games. How can people learn so
quickly? Part of the answer may be that people can learn how the game works and
predict which actions will lead to desirable outcomes. In this paper, we explore how
video prediction models can similarly enable agents to solve Atari games with fewer
interactions than model-free methods. We describe Simulated Policy Learning
(SimPLe), a complete model-based deep RL algorithm based on video prediction
models and present a comparison of several model architectures, including a novel
architecture that yields the best results in our setting. Our experiments evaluate
SimPLe on a range of Atari games in low data regime of 100k interactions between
the agent and the environment, which corresponds to two hours of real-time play.
In most games SimPLe outperforms state-of-the-art model-free algorithms, in some
games by over an order of magnitude.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Human players can learn to play Atari games in minutes (Tsividis et al., 2017). However, some of
the best model-free reinforcement learning algorithms require tens or hundreds of millions of time
steps – the equivalent of several weeks of training in real time. How is it that humans can learn these
games so much faster? Perhaps part of the puzzle is that humans possess an intuitive understanding
of the physical processes that are represented in the game: we know that planes can fly, balls can roll,
and bullets can destroy aliens. We can therefore predict the outcomes of our actions. In this paper,
we explore how learned video models can enable learning in the Atari Learning Environment (ALE)
benchmark Bellemare et al. (2015); Machado et al. (2018) with a budget restricted to 100K time steps
– roughly to two hours of a play time.
Although prior works have proposed training predictive models for next-frame, future-frame, as well
as combined future-frame and reward predictions in Atari games (Oh et al. (2015); Chiappa et al.
(2017); Leibfried et al. (2016)), no prior work has successfully demonstrated model-based control via
predictive models that achieve competitive results with model-free RL. Indeed, in a recent survey
(Section 7.2 in Machado et al. (2018)) this was formulated as the following challenge: “ So far, there
has been no clear demonstration of successful planning with a learned model in the ALE ”.
Using models of environments, or informally giving the agent ability to predict its future, has
a fundamental appeal for reinforcement learning. The spectrum of possible applications is vast,
including learning policies from the model (Watter et al., 2015; Finn et al., 2016; Finn & Levine, 2017;
Ebert et al., 2017; Hafner et al., 2019; Piergiovanni et al., 2018; Rybkin et al., 2018; Sutton & Barto,
∗Equal contribution, authors listed in random order. BO performed the work partially during an internship at
Google Brain. Correspondence to: b.osinski@mimuw.edu.pl
1arXiv:1903.00374v5  [cs.LG]  3 Apr 2024