Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Random starts. Using short rollouts is crucial to mitigate the compounding errors under the model.
To ensure exploration SimPLe starts rollouts from randomly selected states taken from the real data
buffer D. In Figure 9 we present a comparison with an experiment without random starts and rollouts
of length 1000 onSeaquest . These data strongly indicate that ablating random starts substantially
deteriorate results.
B Q UALITATIVE ANALYSIS
This section provides a qualitative analysis and case studies of individual games. We emphasize that
we did not adjust the method nor hyperparameters individually for each game, but we provide specific
qualitative analysis to better understand the predictions from the model.4
Solved games. The primary goal of our paper was to use model-based methods to achieve good
performance within a modest budget of 100k interactions. For two games, Pong andFreeway , our
method, SimPLe, was able to achieve the maximum score.
Exploration. Freeway is a particularly interesting game. Though simple, it presents a sub-
stantial exploration challenge. The chicken, controlled by the agents, is quite slow to ascend
when exploring randomly as it constantly gets bumped down by the cars (see the left video
https://goo.gl/YHbKZ6 ). This makes it very unlikely to fully cross the road and obtain
a non-zero reward. Nevertheless, SimPLe is able to capture such rare events, internalize them into the
predictive model and then successfully learn a successful policy.
However, this good performance did not happen on every run. We conjecture the following scenario in
failing cases. If at early stages the entropy of the policy decayed too rapidly the collected experience
stayed limited leading to a poor world model, which was not powerful enough to support exploration
(e.g. the chicken disappears when moving to high). In one of our experiments, we observed that the
final policy was that the chicken moved up only to the second lane and stayed waiting to be hit by the
car and so on so forth.
Pixel-perfect games. In some cases (for Pong ,Freeway ,Breakout ) our models were able to
predict the future perfectly, down to every pixel. This property holds for rather short time intervals,
we observed episodes lasting up to 50 time-steps. Extending it to long sequences would be a very
exciting research direction. See videos https://goo.gl/uyfNnW .
Benign errors. Despite the aforementioned positive examples, accurate models are difficult to
acquire for some games, especially at early stages of learning. However, model-based RL should be
tolerant to modest model errors. Interestingly, in some cases our models differed from the original
games in a way that was harmless or only mildly harmful for policy training.
For example, in Bowling andPong , the ball sometimes splits into two. While nonphysical,
seemingly these errors did not distort much the objective of the game, see Figure 10 and also
https://goo.gl/JPi7rB .
InKung Fu Master our model’s predictions deviate from the real game by spawning a different
number of opponents, see Figure 11. In Crazy Climber we observed the bird appearing earlier
in the game. These cases are probably to be attributed to the stochasticity in the model. Though not
aligned with the true environment, the predicted behaviors are plausible, and the resulting policy can
still play the original game.
Failures on hard games. On some of the games, our models simply failed to produce useful
predictions. We believe that listing such errors may be helpful in designing better training protocols
and building better models. The most common failure was due to the presence of very small but
highly relevant objects. For example, in Atlantis andBattle Zone bullets are so small that
they tend to disappear. Interestingly, Battle Zone has pseudo-3D graphics, which may have
added to the difficulty. See videos https://goo.gl/uiccKU .
4We strongly encourage the reader to watch accompanying videos https://goo.gl/itykP8
16