Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
values before discretization and apply dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) on bits after discretization.
More details about the architecture is in Appendix C.
5 P OLICY TRAINING
We will now describe the details of SimPLe, outlined in Algorithm 1. In step 6 we use the proximal
policy optimization (PPO) algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017) with γ= 0.95. The algorithm generates
rollouts in the simulated environment env′and uses them to improve policy π. The fundamental
difficulty lays in imperfections of the model compounding over time. To mitigate this problem we use
short rollouts of env′. Typically every N= 50 steps we uniformly sample the starting state from the
ground-truth buffer Dand restart env′(for experiments with the value of γandNsee Section 6.4).
Using short rollouts may have a degrading effect as the PPO algorithm does not have a way to infer
effects longer than the rollout length. To ease this problem, in the last step of a rollout we add to
the reward the evaluation of the value function. Training with multiple iterations re-starting from
trajectories gathered in the real environment is new to our knowledge. It was inspired by the classical
Dyna-Q algorithm and, notably, in the Atari domain no comparable results have been achieved.
The main loop in Algorithm 1 is iterated 15times (cf. Section 6.4). The world model is trained for
45K steps in the first iteration and for 15K steps in each of the following ones. Shorter training in
later iterations does not degrade the performance because the world model after first iteration captures
already part of the game dynamics and only needs to be extended to novel situations.
In each of the iterations, the agent is trained inside the latest world model using PPO. In every PPO
epoch we used 16 parallel agents collecting 25, 50 or 100 steps from the simulated environment env′
(see Section 6.4 for ablations). The number of PPO epochs is z·1000 , where zequals to 1 in all
passes except last one (where z= 3) and two passes number 8 and 12 (where z= 2). This gives
800K·zinteractions with the simulated environment in each of the loop passes. In the process of
training the agent performs 15.2M interactions with the simulated environment env′.
6 E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate SimPLe on a suite of Atari games from Atari Learning Environment (ALE) benchmark.
In our experiments, the training loop is repeated for 15 iterations, with 6400 interactions with the
environment collected in each iteration. We apply a standard pre-processing for Atari games: a frame
skip equal to 4, that is every action is repeated 4 times. The frames are down-scaled by a factor of 2.
Because some data is collected before the first iteration of the loop, altogether 6400·16 = 102 ,400
interactions with the Atari environment are used during training. This is equivalent to 409,600frames
from the Atari game (114 minutes at 60 FPS). At every iteration, the latest policy trained under the
learned model is used to collect data in the real environment env. The data is also directly used to
train the policy with PPO. Due to vast difference between number of training data from simulated
environment and real environment (15M vs 100K) the impact of the latter on policy is negligible.
We evaluate our method on 26games selected on the basis of being solvable with existing state-of-
the-art model-free deep RL algorithms2, which in our comparisons are Rainbow Hessel et al. (2018)
and PPO Schulman et al. (2017). For Rainbow, we used the implementation from the Dopamine
package and spent considerable time tuning it for sample efficiency (see Appendix E).
For visualization of all experiments see https://goo.gl/itykP8 and for a summary see
Figure 3. It can be seen that our method is more sample-efficient than a highly tuned Rainbow
baseline on almost all games, requires less than half of the samples on more than half of the games
and, on Freeway , is more than 10x more sample-efficient. Our method outperforms PPO by an even
larger margin. We also compare our method with fixed score baselines (for different baselines) rather
than counting how many steps are required to match our score, see Figure 4 for the results. For the
2Specifically, for the final evaluation we selected games which achieved non-random results using our method
or the Rainbow algorithm using 100K interactions.
6