Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
4 W ORLD MODELS
In search for an effective world model we experimented with various architectures, both new and
modified versions of existing ones. This search resulted in a novel stochastic video prediction model
(visualized in Figure 2) which achieved superior results compared to other previously proposed
models. In this section, we describe the details of this architecture and the rationale behind our design
decisions. In Section 6 we compare the performance of these models.
Deterministic Model. Our basic architecture, presented as part of Figure 2, resembles the con-
volutional feedforward network from Oh et al. (2015). The input Xconsists of four consecutive
game frames and an action a. Stacked convolution layers process the visual input. The actions are
one-hot-encoded and embedded in a vector which is multiplied channel-wise with the output of the
convolutional layers. The network outputs the next frame of the game and the value of the reward.
In our experiments, we varied details of the architecture above. In most cases, we use a stack of four
convolutional layers with 64filters followed by three dense layers (the first two have 1024 neurons).
The dense layers are concatenated with 64dimensional vector with a learnable action embedding.
Next, three deconvolutional layers of 64filters follow. An additional deconvolutional layer outputs an
image of the original 105×80size. The number of filters is either 3or3×256. In the first case, the
output is a real-valued approximation of pixel’s RGB value. In the second case, filters are followed by
softmax producing a probability distribution on the color space. The reward is predicted by a softmax
attached to the last fully connected layer. We used dropout equal to 0.2and layer normalization.
Loss functions. The visual output of our networks is either one float per pixel/channel or the
categorical 256-dimensional softmax. In both cases, we used the clipped loss max( Loss, C )for a
constant C. We found that clipping was crucial for improving the models (measured with the correct
reward predictions per sequence metric and successful training using Algorithm 1). We conjecture
that clipping substantially decreases the magnitude of gradients stemming from fine-tuning of big
areas of background consequently letting the optimization process concentrate on small but important
areas (e.g. the ball in Pong). In our experiments, we set C= 10 forL2loss on pixel values and to
C= 0.03for softmax loss. Note that this means that when the level of confidence about the correct
pixel value exceeds 97% (as−ln(0.97)≈0.03) we get no gradients from that pixel any longer.
Scheduled sampling. The model env′consumes its own predictions from previous steps and due to
compounding errors, the model may drift out of the area of its applicability. Following Bengio et al.
(2015); Venkatraman et al. (2016), we mitigate this problem by randomly replacing in training some
frames of the input Xby the prediction from the previous step while linearly increasing the mixing
probability to 100% around the middle of the first iteration of the training loop.
Stochastic Models. A stochastic model can be used to deal with limited horizon of past observed
frames as well as sprites occlusion and flickering which results to higher quality predictions. Inspired
by Babaeizadeh et al. (2017a), we tried a variational autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2014) to
model the stochasticity of the environment. In this model, an additional network receives the input
frames as well as the future target frame as input and approximates the distribution of the posterior.
At each timestep, a latent value ztis sampled from this distribution and passed as input to the original
predictive model. At test time, the latent values are sampled from an assumed prior N(0,I). To
match the assumed prior and the approximate, we use the Kullback–Leibler divergence term as an
additional loss term (Babaeizadeh et al., 2017a).
We noticed two major issues with the above model. First, the weight of the KL divergence loss
term is game dependent, which is not practical if one wants to deal with a broad portfolio of Atari
games. Second, this weight is usually a very small number in the range of [10−3,10−5]which means
that the approximated posterior can diverge significantly from the assumed prior. This can result
in previously unseen latent values at inference time that lead to poor predictions. We address these
issues by utilizing a discrete latent variable similar to Kaiser & Bengio (2018).
As visualized in Figure 2, the proposed stochastic model with discrete latent variables discretizes
the latent values into bits (zeros and ones) while training an auxiliary LSTM-based Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber (1997) recurrent network to predict these bits autoregressively. At inference time, the
latent bits will be generated by this auxiliary network in contrast to sampling from a prior. To make
the predictive model more robust to unseen latent bits, we add uniform noise to approximated latent
5