base classiers. We use two approaches for rotation of feature subspace i.e., principal component
analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA).
The proposed double random forest with PCA (DRaF-PCA) is given in Algorithm 6. At each
non-leaf node, rotation or transformation is applied on the bootstrapped samples reaching a given
node with random feature subspace.
The algorithm of the proposed double random forest with LDA (DRaF-LDA) varies from Algo-
rithm 6 at step ( ii) and (iii). In DRaF-LDA model, instead of calculating total scatter matrix Sdat
each node, within class scatter matrix Sw
dand between class scatter matrix Sb
dare calculated. Then,
generalized eigenvectors of ( Sw
d;Sb
d) are calculated ( Sb
d=Sw
d, whereis the generalized
eigenvector corresponding to the generalized eigenvalue ).
Algorithm 6 Double Random Forest with PCA
Training Phase:
Given:
D:=Nnbe the training set with Nnumber of samples with feature size n.
Di:=Ninibe the training samples reaching to a node i, withNinumber of samples with feature
sizeni.
Y:=N1 be the target labels.
L: is number of base learners.
\mtry" : number of candidate features to be evaluated at each non-leaf node.
\nodesize" or\minleaf" : maximum number of data samples to be placed in an impure node.
For each decision tree, Tifori= 1;2;:::;L
1. Use training data D.
2. Generate the decision tree Tiwith randomly chosen subset of features and randomised
bootstrap instance using D:
For a given node dwith dataDd:
(i) ifNd>N0:1
Generate bootstrap sample D
dfromDd.
else
D
d=Dd
(i) Choose \mtry" =pnnumber of features from the given feature space of D
d
(ii) Calculate total scatter matrix SdusingD
d.
(iii) Calculate all the eigenvectors of Sd, denoted by V.
(iv) Calculate the data transformation using all the eigenvectors Vas,D
PCA =D
dV:
(v) In the PCA space, search the best feature split.
(iii) With the optimal split feature and the cutpoint, split the data Ddinto the child
nodes.
Repeat steps (i)-(iii), until the stopping criteria is met.
Classication Phase:
For a test sample xi, generate labels via decision trees of the forest. At every non-terminal node, the
test data sample is rotated with the same matrix Vgenerated in the training stage. The predicted
class of the test data point is given by the majority voting of decision trees of an ensemble.
4. Comparison of the proposed oblique and rotation based double random forest mod-
els with the existing baseline models
The main dierences of the proposed models with respect to the existing models are given as
follows:
1. MPDRaF-T, P, N are the oblique double random forest variants which employ bagging at
each non leaf node to allow the generation of bigger trees. Unlike standard variants like RaF,
MPRaF-T, MPRaF-P and MPRaF-N, the proposed models use the training bags which have
more unique instances of the samples which results in generation of bigger trees. Moreover,
MPDRaF-T,P,N capture the geometric properties of the data which is ignored by the standard
RaF and double RaF models.
10