Figure 4: Centroid of Kappa error diagrams on dierent datasets.
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 4 plots the kappa error diagram for some datasets. Figure 1 ;2;3 and 4 of the sup-
plementary le shows the kappa error diagram for the semeion, oocytes trisopterus nucleus 2f,
oocytes merluccius nucleus 4d and statlog-vehicle datasets. The ensemble size is 50, hence, 1225
dots in each plot. Figure 1( a) to Figure 1( l) of the supplementary le show the kappa error dia-
grams of the classication models on dierent datasets. All the classication models are trained
on the training data samples and -error diagrams are plotted based on the performance of the
classication models on the testing samples (in some diagrams the axis are adjusted for better
view).
Figure 4 represents the centroid of the scatter points for each classication model corresponding
to the semeion, oocytes merluccius nucleus 4d, oocytes trisopterus nucleus 2f and statlog-vehicle
datasets. From the given plots, dierent models of the random forest possess dierent charac-
teristics. Figure 4a plot shows that MPRaF-N is the most diverse classier (least mean value of
kappa) and DRaF is the most accurate classier (least mean value of error). However, DRaF-LDA
ensemble classiers possess the best overall generalization performance on this dataset. From the
plot, one can see that the proposed DRaF-LDA have the better combination of diversity and error.
Similarly in other datasets, the models with better combination results in better performance.
7. Analysis of computational Complexity
Here, we evaluate the computational complexity of the classiers. Without assuming any struc-
ture of decision trees, we focus on the complexity involved at a given node. Let a given node receives
mnumber of samples with nnumber of features. In axis parallel splits, the optimum threshold
is chosen based on some impurity criteria via ranking of each feature. Despite the complexity of
the gini impurity, the complexity of the search involved in optimal split is O(nm log m ) [59]. For
MPSVM based oblique decision trees, the computational complexity of generalized problem is O(n3)
[40]. In decision trees wherein the feature transformations (PCA and LDA) are used for projecting
the input features, additional computational time is involved for calculating the projection matrix.
The complexity of the PCA is O(mnmin(m;n) +n3) [77] while as for LDA the complexity is
O(mn2) [78]. MPSVM based decision tree ensembles are faster as compared to the standard en-
semble models. The reason is that in most of the cases, particularly for the nodes near the root,
MPSVM method is faster compared to the exhaustive search. The training time of the proposed
DRaF-PCA and DRaF-LDA is more as compared to the RaF-PCA and RaF-LDA, respectively,
due to the reason that the bootstrapping at each non-leaf node of the proposed DRaF-PCA and
DRaF-LDA leads to more number of unique samples to be sent down the tree resulting in more
deeper decision trees. The average training time of each classication model is given in Table 4. The
28