uses combine strategy to aggregate the outputs of base learners such that the generalization of the
ensemble model is superior in comparison with the individual learners.
To analyze how the ensemble learning performs better compared to individual models, studies
like reduction in variance among the base learners [1, 8, 9] have been putforth. With the bias and
variance reduction theory [1, 10], the error in classication is given in terms of bias and variance.
Bias measure gives how far is the average guess of each base learner from the target class over the
perturbed training sets generated from a given training set and variance measure is how much the
base learners guess 
uctuates with the perturbations of the given training set.
Decision tree algorithm is a commonly used classication model due to its simplicity and better
interpretability. Decision tree uses divide and conquer approach to recursively partition the data.
The recursive partition of the tree is sensitive to perturbation of the input data, and results in an
unstable classier. Hence, it is said to have high variance and low bias. The ensemble methodology
can be used in unstable classiers to further improve the classication performance.
Random forest [11] and rotation forest [12] are the well-known classication models, widely used
in the literature. Both these models are based on the ensemble methodology and use decision tree
as the base classier. Due to the better generalization performance, random forest proved to be
one of the best classication models among 179 classiers evaluated on 121 datasets [13].
An ensemble of decision trees, Random forest, uses bagging [14] and random subspace [15] strat-
egy. These two approaches induce diversity among the base learners, here decision trees, for better
generalization. Bagging, also known as bootstrap aggregation, generates multiple bags of a given
training set such that each decision tree is trained on a given bag of the data. Each tree uses a bag
of training data whose distribution is akin to the whole population and hence, each classier shows
good generalization performance. Within each decision tree, random subspace approach is used in
each non-terminal node to further boost the diversity among the base models. Random forest has
been successfully applied for analysis of gene expression data [16], EEG classication [17], spectral
data classication [18], recognition of objects, image segmentation [15, 19] and chimera identica-
tion [20]. Other applications include selection of features [18], analysis of sample proximities [21]
and so on. Random forest have also been adapted to Spark based distributed and scalable environ-
ments [22, 23]. With the growing of privacy concerns, Random forest models have been improved
to meet the privacy expectations. Dierential privacy [24] has been widely adopted in Random
Forest [25, 26, 27, 28].
To obtain the better generalization performance, various hyperparameters of the random forest
need to be chosen optimally. These hyperparameters include number of base learners (here, decision
trees) in a forest (ntree), number of candidate features for evaluation at a given non-leaf node
(mtry), and number of samples in an impure node (nodesize or minleaf) (we will use minleaf and
nodesize interchangeably). To get these parameters optimally, dierent studies have been proposed.
Analysis of tuning process [29, 30], sensitivity of the parameters [31], eect of number of trees in an
ensemble [32, 33, 34] provide insight how these parameters aect the model performance. To obtain
the optimal number of candidate features, dierent methods [35, 36] have been proposed. Analysis
of optimal sample size in bagging [37] and estimation of tree size via combination of random forest
with adaptive nearest neighbours [38] result in the better choice of the hyperparameters.
Broadly speaking, there are two approaches, namely, univariate decision trees [32] and multi-
variate decision trees [39] for generating the decision trees. Univariate decision trees, also known
as axis parallel or orthogonal decision trees, use some impurity criteria to optimize best univariate
split feature among the set of randomly chosen subspace of features. Multivariate decision trees,
also known as oblique decision trees, perform the node splitting using all or a part of the features.
In general, decision boundary of an oblique decision tree can be approximated by a large number
of stair-like decision boundaries of the univariate decision trees.
Random forest is a univariate model and builds hyperplane at each non-terminal node such
that splitting at the children nodes is easier in a given decision tree. At a given non-leaf node, the
splitting hyperplane may not be a good classier [40]. Dierent criteria like entropy measure, Gini
index measure and twoing rule are involved in most of the decision tree based models for choosing
the best split among the set of splits such that the best split results in lowest impurity score. At
each non-leaf node, impurity criteria measures skewness of the distribution of the dierent category
samples. Nearly uniform distribution is assigned low impurity score while as high impurity score
is given to a distribution wherein the samples of a particular class dominate the other classes. In
2