Table 1: Nomenclature
ABBREVIATION DEFINITION
PCA Principal component analysis
LDA Linear discriminant analysis
SVM Support vector machines
RaF Standard Random Forest
DRaF Standard double Random Forest
MPSVM Multisurface proximal support vector machines
RaF-PCA Principal component analysis based ensemble of decision trees
RaF-LDA Linear discriminant analysis based ensemble of decision trees
MPRaF-T MPSVM based oblique decision tree ensemble with Tikhonov regularisation
MPRaF-P MPSVM based oblique decision tree ensemble with axis parallel regularisation
MPRaF-N MPSVM based oblique decision tree ensemble with NULL space regularisation
DRaF-PCA Rotation based double random forest with principal component analysis
DRaF-LDA Rotation based double random forest with linear discriminant analysis
MPDRaF-T Oblique double random forest with MPSVM via Tikhonov regularisation
MPDRaF-P Oblique double random forest with MPSVM via axis parallel regularisation
MPDRaF-N Oblique double random forest with MPSVM via NULL space regularisation
discriminant analysis and principal component analysis. Using transformations at each non-leaf
node on dierent randomly chosen feature subspaces improves diversity among the base models
and leads to better generalization performance.
The main highlights of this paper are:
•We use dierent rotations (principal component analysis and linear discriminant analysis)
at each non-leaf node to generate diverse double random forest ensembles (DRaF-PCA and
DRaF-LDA).
•The proposed oblique double random forest (MPDRaF-T, MPDRaF-P and MPDRaF-N)
variants use MPSVM for obtaining the optimal separating hyperplanes at each non-terminal
node of the decision tree ensembles.
•The proposed ensemble of double Random forest generate larger trees compared to the variants
of standard Random forest.
•Statistical analysis reveals that the average rank of the proposed double random forest models
is superior than the standard random forest. Moreover, the average accuracy of the proposed
DRaF-LDA, DRaF-PCA, and MPDRaF-P is superior than the standard random forest and
standard double random forest models. Also, the average rank of the proposed DRaF-LDA,
MPDRaF-P and DRaF-PCA is better compared to the standard double Random forest.
2. Related work
In this section, we brie
y review the related work of the ensemble of decision trees.
2.1. Handling multiclass problems
MPSVM is a binary classication model and nding the optimal separating hyperplanes at each
non-terminal node of a decision tree may be a multiclass problem. To handle the multiclass problem
via binary class approach, dierent methods like one-versus-all [66], one-versus-one [67], decision
directed acyclic graph [68], error correcting output codes [69] and so on have been proposed. Data
partitioning rule of the decision trees at each non-leaf node proves handy over other binary clas-
sication models [59]. Separating the classes with majority samples as one class and rest samples
as another class results in an inecient model as it fails to capture the geometric structure of the
data samples [40]. To incorporate the geometric structure, the authors in [59] decomposed the
multiclass problem into a binary one by using class separability information. The authors used
Bhattacharyya distance for decomposition. In statistics, Bhattacharyya distance gives the measure
4