Oblique and rotation double random forest
M.A. Ganaiea, M. Tanveera,, P.N. Suganthanb,c,, V. Snaseld
aDepartment of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Simrol, Indore, 453552, India
bSchool of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
cKINDI Center for Computing Research, College of Engineering, Qatar University, Qatar
dDepartment of Computer Science, V SB - Technical University of Ostrava, Czech Republic
Abstract
Random Forest is an ensemble of decision trees based on the bagging and random subspace concepts.
As suggested by Breiman, the strength of unstable learners and the diversity among them are
the ensemble models' core strength. In this paper, we propose two approaches known as oblique
and rotation double random forests. In the rst approach, we propose rotation based double
random forest. In rotation based double random forests, transformation or rotation of the feature
space is generated at each node. At each node dierent random feature subspace is chosen for
evaluation, hence the transformation at each node is dierent. Dierent transformations result
in better diversity among the base learners and hence, better generalization performance. With
the double random forest as base learner, the data at each node is transformed via two dierent
transformations namely, principal component analysis and linear discriminant analysis. In the
second approach, we propose oblique double random forest. Decision trees in random forest and
double random forest are univariate, and this results in the generation of axis parallel split which
fails to capture the geometric structure of the data. Also, the standard random forest may not
grow suciently large decision trees resulting in suboptimal performance. To capture the geometric
properties and to grow the decision trees of sucient depth, we propose oblique double random
forest. The oblique double random forest models are multivariate decision trees. At each non-
leaf node, multisurface proximal support vector machine generates the optimal plane for better
generalization performance. Also, dierent regularization techniques (Tikhonov regularisation, axis-
parallel split regularisation, Null space regularisation) are employed for tackling the small sample
size problems in the decision trees of oblique double random forest. The proposed ensembles of
decision trees produce trees with bigger size compared to the standard ensembles of decision trees as
bagging is used at eah which results in improved performance. The evaluation of the baseline models
and the proposed oblique and rotation double random forest models is performed on benchmark
121 UCI datasets and real-world sheries datasets. Both statistical analysis and the experimental
results demonstrate the ecacy of the proposed oblique and rotation double random forest models
compared to the baseline models on the benchmark datasets.
Keywords: Double random forest, Oblique random forest, Support vector machine, Bias,
Ensemble, Oblique, Orthogonal, Classication, Classiers, Ensemble learning, Random forest,
Bootstrap, Decision tree.
1. Introduction
Perturb and combine approach [1] is the core of the ensemble strategy [2] and hence, it has been
used across dierent domains like machine learning [3], computer vision tasks [4] for recognition of
patterns, mining big data [5] and biomedical domain [6]. Both theoretical and empirical aspects of
the ensemble learning have been explored in the literature. Multiple classier systems [7] or ensemble
learning perturbs the input data to induce diversity among the base learners of an ensemble and
Corresponding author
Email addresses: phd1901141006@iiti.ac.in (M.A. Ganaie), mtanveer@iiti.ac.in (M. Tanveer),
epnsugan@ntu.edu.sg (P.N. Suganthan), vaclav.snasel@vsb.cz (V. Snasel)
Preprint submitted to Neural Networks, Elsevier August 11, 2022arXiv:2111.02010v3  [cs.LG]  9 Aug 2022