number is added along the diagonal elements to regularize the data matrix (say, H) i.e., if data
matrixHis rank decient, then regularize Has :
H=H+I; (10)
whereis a small positive number and Iis appropriate dimensional identity matrix. In axis-parallel
split regularization, if the data matrix (say, H) is rank decient at a given node then we follow axis
parallel approach to complete the growth of decision tree. Thus, heterogeneous test functions are
used for growing the decision trees. i.e., till the current node MPSVM is used for generating the
optimal splits and now onwards axis parallel approach is followed for growing the decision tree. In
order to handle the sampling issues, Manwani and Sastry [40] proposed the Null space approach
(given in Algorithm 4) for regularizing the matrices. For the proposed MPDRaF-N, we follow the
Algorithm 4 for regularizing the matrices.
Algorithm 5 summarises the oblique double random forest with MPSVM.
Algorithm 5 Oblique Double Random Forest with MPSVM
Training Phase:
Given:
D:=Nnbe the training set with Nnumber of samples with feature size n.
Di:=Ninibe the training samples reaching to a node i, withNinumber of samples with feature
sizeni.
Y:=N1 be the target labels.
L: is number of base learners.
\mtry" : number of candidate features to be evaluated at each non-leaf node.
\nodesize" or\minleaf" : maximum number of data samples to be placed in an impure
node.
For each decision tree, Tifori= 1;2;:::;L
1. Use training data D.
2. Generate the decision tree Tiwith randomly chosen subset of features and randomised
bootstrap instance using D:
For a given node dwith dataDd:
(i) ifNd>N0:1
Generate bootstrap sample D
dfromDd.
else
D
d=Dd
(i) Choose \mtry" =pnnumber of features from the given feature space of D
d
(ii) Using Algorithm 1 group the dataset D
dintoCpandCn.
(iii) Use MPSVM (with dierent regularization's) for generating the optimal split with Cp
andCnas input, and split the data Ddinto child nodes.
Repeat steps (i)-(iii), until the stopping criteria is one of the conditions is met:
•Node reaches to purest form.
•Samples reaching a given node are lesser or equal than minleaf
Classication Phase:
For a test data point xi, use the decision trees of the forest to generate the label of the test sample.
The predicted class of the test data point is given by the majority voting of the decision trees of an
ensemble.
3.2. Double random forest with PCA/LDA
For generating the diverse learners in an ensemble, we propose rotation based double random
forest ensemble models. Rotation or transformation on dierent random feature subspaces results in
dierent projections leading to better generalization performance. In this method, the objective is
to rotate or transform the data for better diversity among the base learners. At each non-leaf node,
the rotation is applied on random feature subspace which results in improved diversity among the
9