Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 21 of 30
ment learning learn from images? If yes, should the images have high quality to be helpful
for the learning process? These questions, and many more issues, are tackled in [65,66].
The control used in [ 66] aimed to achieve a precise autonomous driving of a UAV
while performing landing on a platform. The landing area is marked with special visual
markers, and perception through camera images is used in this process. The images can
have low quality, and the DRL algorithm used in this control process is Deep Q-Learning
Networks (DQNs). This UAV’s mission is divided into two subtasks: detection of the
marks indicating the landing area and execution of the vertical landing. Each task has its
independently-designed DQN. However, these networks can have internal communication
related to the mission. After analysis, the researcher has used double DQN architecture
better to ﬁt the system’s nature and complexity. The process suffered from unreliable
rewards due to Markov Decision Processes’ dependence, which makes the reward sparse.
To solve this problem, “partitioned buffer replay” is used, which is a method used in
categorizing the experience data to facilitate the decision-making process.
Although the Deep Q-Networks method looks promising in solving control problems
related to driving the unmanned aerial vehicle, several limitations prevent it from being
applied in more advanced vehicle control tasks depending on image processing. As
proposed in [ 65], deep reinforcement learning was used in controlling a UAV with the
mission of capturing images of the front view of a person, especially his face. The drone
should adjust its height and position autonomously to capture high-quality images using
the onboard camera. The desired control was designed to be continuous, making the
DQNs method unsatisfactory in usage because it is not suitable or robust for continuous
problems with signiﬁcant learning and testing datasets of raw pixel data. The DRL was
used to enable performance and face tracking even under low-resolution input images
due to environmental conditions. Under that scenario, Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(DDPG) was applied with an actor-critic framework. Experimentation was done for the
selected algorithm, and the results showed the superiority of such technique to classical
control methods, represented in proportional-integral-derivative (PID) control and well-
known 2D face recognition algorithms. The reward selection plays a crucial role in the
speed of learning and applying and the accuracy of the tracking process. Accordingly, the
reward was selected based on the control error in achieving a precise positioning to take
the facial shots. Finally, the proposed method in [ 65] has proved to work well even under
discrete control commands, like the one in the simulation environment.
After discussing several methods used for controlling the vehicle to a desired position
and orientation to perform a speciﬁc task, larger missions and more challenging tasks are
also used in the control of UAVs. More precisely, the outer loop control, which includes
vehicle-to-vehicle communications, is a crucial topic in UAVs’ real applications. Given the
complexity of the task, the high speed of operation needed, and the precision that should
be guaranteed, deep reinforcement learning is used for controlling a swarm of drones.
Several approaches are used, with research still being ongoing in this area.
For example, in [ 67], the deep convolutional neural network control policy (DCNNP)
is used to control ﬁve UAVs. The swarm’s missions were to arrange themselves in a
speciﬁc shape autonomously and defend an area from attackers. Driven by the necessity
of cooperative behavior, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) was used to solve
the lack of information about all state variables for all UAVs in the swarm. In this control
problem, centralized learning and centralized execution approaches were used in the
DCNNP algorithm. This approach permits only a single UAV , named as an agent, to learn
the model, plan behaviors for all the other UAVs, and communicate with them about their
tasks. The system has a single output, as inherited from the CNN algorithm. The behavior
of the DCNNP control was compared with the behavior of random policy, represented by
moving the UAVs randomly untill achieving the mission, and of perfect/perimeter policy,
represented in moving the UAVs equally and in the same direction. The results showed
that the DCNNP vastly outperformed the random policy in both tasks; slight differences in
performance when compared to the perimeter approach in the base defense were observed,