Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 2 of 30
tainment. UAVs’ initial spread started by their use in aerial photography applications,
offering a new level of creativity in either pictures or videos. They help in monitoring
some commercial and safety needs [ 3,4]. Expanding into new scopes, UAVs are used in
conjunction with terrestrial sensors to gather data in places with no infrastructure net-
works, as they provide direct connectivity to the internet; UAVs play a role in monitoring
hostage when dangerous locations such as in mining and energy production systems are
visited [3] . Moreover, UAVs can perform initial assessment analyses for disaster areas and
work as ﬁrst-aid devices. Once a survivor is detected, the crew responsible for the mission
tries to contact him to rescue him as fast as possible; in such cases, UAVs help detect
surviving individuals and initialize communication between both sides [ 5]. Despite all of
these successful applications for UAVs in real life, their beneﬁts on the commercial level
and its autonomous mode of operation were not sufﬁcient to allow free-provided legality;
some permissions are necessary to operate in such ways. Some regulations prohibit UAV
operation beyond the line of visual sight or over speciﬁc announced altitude limits.
The emergence of UAVs is associated with the usage of radio signals that allow remote
control of the vehicle. These vehicles were slow and incapable of ﬂying for long distances,
such as the Kettering Bug ﬁrst ﬂight that was done in 1918 with a speed of 80 k/h and for
120 km. Advances in the UAV technologies and mass production were made during world
war II, which signiﬁes a prominent step in developing unmanned aerial vehicles. After
that, UAVs began to grasp the public’s attention, and the industry started to develop for
non-military purposes, and with greater capabilities [6].
Nowadays, unmanned aerial vehicles are different from the early models of UAVs, in
being smaller and less expensive [ 7]. Moreover, they are designed to follow some standards
that ensure the safety of their operations. For example, studies are now concerned with
fail-safe operation, analysis of the exposure, analysis of hazard threshold, risk analysis,
assessment, control, and management [ 8–11]. Exposures are the individuals or components
affected by the event taken by the vehicle, while the hazard threshold is the limit after
which hazardous effects begin to appear throughout the whole operating [12].
UAVs have been categorized according to many important aspects such as top-level
conﬁguration, limiting altitude, mean Take-off weight, autonomy level, and even owner-
ship. First to be discussed is the classiﬁcation of UAVs according to top-level conﬁguration
into ﬁxed-wing, rotary-wing, and hybrid wing. Fixed-wing UAV type has a rigid wing
with an airfoil that works by lifting the forward airspeed to ﬂy, like regular human planes.
This conﬁguration supports longer endurance ﬂights and loitering, provides high-speed
motion, and maintains high payloads relative to the second conﬁguration with rotary
wings. Some of the issues associated with this conﬁguration are its need for a runway to
take-off/land as it relies on the forward airspeed, as mentioned before, and hovering tasks
are not performed, as it must keep continuous ﬂying until landing at the end of any trip.
Second is the rotary-wing conﬁguration type that presents maneuverability advantages
using the rotary plates. Its rotary blades can produce aerodynamic thrust forces enough to
ﬂy without the need to airspeed relative velocities. Such characteristics allow this type of
UAVs to handle vertical take-off/landing, ﬂy in low altitudes such as in complex urban
environments, perform hovering tasks. However, it cannot preserve the same payload
maintained by ﬁxed-wing conﬁguration. Technically, this conﬁguration is further divided
into subcategories according to the number of rotors included; it includes single-rotor (i.e.,
helicopters) and multi-rotor (i.e., tri-rotor drones, quadcopters, etc.). Single-rotors present
mechanical complexity and high cost as they can take-off or land vertically, maintain a
relatively high payload, while the multi-rotor is much faster and able to hover or move
around a target in a highly smooth way. The third is the hybrid conﬁguration that has
been raised as a particular type of aerial platform that sums the advantages of both known
conﬁgurations, classiﬁed into Convertiplanes and Tail-sitters.
The second classiﬁcation for UAVs takes into account the altitude they can dive in.
The ﬁrst level is Very Low Altitude, and it operates in altitudes less than 400–500 ft with the
pilot always in visual contact with the vehicle. The second level is the Very Low Altitude