Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 15 of 30
The continuous action space learning also depends on obtaining the maximum reward
value through different algorithms such as Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO),
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG), Actor–Critic using Kronecker–Factored
Trust Region (ACKTR), and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). In the proposed model,
the continuous action space uses the U-Net-based segmentation combined with a policy
gradient algorithm to solve manual data labeling as the RL training process replaces the
labeling. The proposed combination used two learning processes: a segmentation map
generated by the visual scene and Actor–Critic RL to control the UAV .
This study’s experiment was designed to compare the training results and processes
for the algorithms used in continuous and discrete action spaces. The comparison also
included the results from the human piloting with various skills. The comparison between
algorithms was performed in three different environments: woodland, block world, and
an arena world. Regarding the discrete action space, the D3QN showed outstanding
performance compared to the other used algorithms. As for the continuous action space,
the ACKTR algorithm achieved smooth and stable continuous trajectories. The comparison
between the algorithms and the human piloting was made by recruiting different pilots
with various experience levels. The comparison relies on the RL performance and the
human pilots in the three different virtual worlds. It showed that the expert pilot was the
fastest in the woodland, while in the block world, the expert pilot and the ACKTR achieved
almost similar results. ACKTR was the fastest to reach the arena world’s goal, and the
expert pilot came in second place.
Another application for RL was studied in [ 51] as the algorithms were used to achieve
the optimum drone delivery. The study deﬁned drone delivery as the path the drone
takes to reach the destination while avoiding the different obstacles. Due to the outdoor
applications for drones such as surveillance and delivery tasks, accurate navigation can
not be achieved through a global navigation satellite system (GNSS) [ 52]. The outdoor
tasks require the drone to avoid the changing obstacles, which can be achieved through
the implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence techniques [ 34]. The study focuses on using
different DRL algorithms that make the drone able to reach the target through an optimal
decision-making system based on the reward value [ 53]. In this study, DRL algorithms
are presented in theoretical manners and their application to the current delivery issue.
The paper also presents new architectures to solve the problems in the current solution.
The RL in this study represents the decision-maker as the agent and the surroundings as
the environment. The interaction between the agent and the environment is performed in
discrete steps, and each step represents a state in the state-space model.
The ﬁrst proposed algorithm is the DQN, a combination between the Q-network and
neural network algorithms [ 54]. The DQN mainly uses CNN to reach optimal action-value.
The algorithm’s idea was to use a periodic update to adjust the action-value towards
the target-value, which reduces the correlation factor. Another proposed idea was to
use experience replay, which a biologically inspired mechanism [ 55], and it is based on
randomizing the data and removing the correlation in the different states. The Double DQN
algorithm was also proposed within this study to produce positive bias through decoupling
action. This study’s experiment was done using a virtual environment, which is more like a
realistic one to consider safety procedures. The state-space representation consisted of three
different states and a neural network for each state. The three networks were the original
convolutional neural network (CNN), the 2-dimensional version of Joint Neural Network
(JNN-2D), and the modiﬁed JNN-3D to cover the drone’s vertical movement. The three
models’ training took nearly 40 h for each; the authors aimed to improve training efﬁciency
by using checkpoints. At the end of each training, two stored values are returned; the
one for the network’s weight and the other is the checkpoint representing the best reward
value reached through the training. After completing the CNN training with and without
applying the checkpoints, the results showed that the existence of checkpoints increased
the number of successful action episodes while decreasing the number of unsuccessful
ones. As for the JNN results, reaching the number of successful episodes took nearly half