Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 19 of 30
despite the disturbances and the different initial conditions and achieve the desired ﬂying
speed, roll, and pitch angles. The PPO algorithm was based on the Actor–Critic concept,
and it enjoys a low computation time, which makes it a good candidate for a variety of tasks
in the UAV controlling context. The actor-critic concept is based on using two separate
networks. The actor-network estimates the optimal behavior, while the critic network
estimates the reward of the behavior and uses rewards to train the actor. For the attitude
control proposal made in [ 29], the reward function depends on the distance between the
current state and the desired one. Another contribution of this research was to provide the
neural networks with a normalized set of data to decrease the network’s computation time
to do the scaling itself. However, all the successful promising results of this work were
done in simulations, which still raise concerns about the reliability of the proposal’s real
application, as mentioned in the paper.
Another attitude control problem was tackled in [ 37], where all Deep Deterministic
Gradient Policy (DDGP), Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO), Proximal Policy Op-
timization (PPO), Proportional-Integral–Derivative controller (PID) are used, and their
performances are compared. The interaction between the DRL agents and the environment
was deﬁned using Markov decision processes (MDP). Under this deﬁnition, a new state’s
probability is determined based on the current state and action. The results reveal that
the PPO algorithm was the best-applied controller design than all other tested options,
although the PPO algorithm and TRPO algorithm are known to have some similarities,
as they are examples of policy-based gradient-based algorithms with better performance
than natural gradient policy. To add to its advantages, PPO outperforms TRPO and has
a more straightforward approach in implementing and tuning this task. Results were
obtained from simulations and compared using deﬁnite metrics such as rise time, peak,
error, stability, etc. The results were obtained from episodic discrete tasks; however, the
research shows the method’s availability to be used in continuous tasks.
Both [ 29,37] used PPO for the attitude control problem, even though the former
applied it on ﬁxed-wing UAV and the latter applied it on a quadcopter. This marks the
suitability of the PPO algorithm for this control task, which falls under the umbrella of
the UAV ﬂying system’s inner loop control. One great thing about research in this area of
UAV control is that attitude control and all lateral and longitudinal controls are crucial to
all UAV systems, with all the varying tasks they can perform and all the ﬂying conditions
under which they can achieve the tasks.
Moving to a more challenging control scheme, hybrid UAVs control has been studied
by different researchers. Moreover, with the widespread use of deep reinforcement learning
methods, such a learning approach was applied to hybrid UAVs, which are a particular type
of UAVs combining the rotor concept with the ﬁxed-wing concept to take advantages of
their different characteristics, such as vertical landing and take-off (VTOL), long-endurance,
energy efﬁciency, and so on. In [ 63], the hybrid ﬂying system consists of 13 state variables;
four of these state variables are convolutional integral error terms that are required to raise
the accuracy of linear velocity and yaw angle. The use of deep reinforcement learning
in this control problem to drive the vehicle was essential to enable real-time learning of
the environment and collision avoidance practices that ensure the system’s safety. In this
context, the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm was again used for longitudinal
and lateral control of that complex coupled system under the disturbances and noises
presented in its operation. The paper’s contribution was in using a generalized control
scheme that can be used to multiple UAVs and can operate under a wide range of dynamics
and conditions.
Moreover, the state variables are chosen carefully to include the mentioned four in-
tegral terms, which account for real application in an actual hybrid UAV . In other words,
such a controller can be applied directly without additional terms or tuning to real UAV
and succeed in its operation, similar to applying the controller to a stimulating environ-
ment. As known in DRL, a reward function is used to critique the available actions to
determine the best next action. The choice of reward function depends on the controller