Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 4 of 30
An Agent, in the context of reinforcement learning, is the entity that is asked to take
any action in the environment, given the current state and the past experiences. The
main objective of any reinforcement learning algorithm is to let the agent learn quickly
the optimal policy, which is represented by the symbol p, that achieves the targeted task
accurately, and thus results in the highest reward value [ 20]. The interaction between the
agent and the environment is shown in Figure 1, in which the agent (the drone plus the
learning algorithm) decides to take action at2Afrom the pool of available actions (for
example, move forward) at time t, and executes it in the environment (e.g., the drone moves
forward). The result of that action is a change in the state st2Sthat makes the agent closer
or not to its target (e.g., it ﬂies to a given location). The reward rt2Rquantiﬁes the good
reward if the agent is closer or the bad reward if it is further away.
Agent
EnvironmentAction
atAReward
rtRState
stS
rt+1
st+1
Figure 1. The interaction between agent and environment in RL.
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is a subﬁeld of machine learning, which uses deep
learning (DL) concepts with RL to provide an optimal solution based on experience. This
experience is based on the iterations and evaluating a reward function in determining the
best behavior for an agent.
Approaches in deep reinforcement learning can fall into three main categories, namely
the value-based approach, policy-based approach, and model-based approach. In value-
based reinforcement learning, the agent has the objective of ﬁnding the policy that maxi-
mizes a value function in the long run over a sequence of actions. Then, in policy-based
reinforcement learning, the agent has to ﬁnd the policy, leading to the optimum value for
the objective function. This category is further divided into deterministic and stochastic
approaches. The former policy applies the same action in any state, while the latter includes
variations in actions based on probabilistic evaluations. Finally, model-based reinforcement
learning depends on providing a model for the environment to the agent or asking the
agent to learn a model of the environment to perform the tasks in that speciﬁc environment.
It is not easy to directly compare the model-based and model-free reinforcement learners.
Poole and Mackworth claim in their book [ 21] that model-based learners are typically much
more efﬁcient in terms of experience; many fewer experiences are needed to learn well
model-free methods often useless computation time. In learning the environment model
on its own, the agent will face some inaccuracies and imprecision that can further affect
its policy and the required tasks. Thus, many approaches were proposed to integrate the
model-free approaches with the model-based ones [22].
Reinforcement learning algorithms are classiﬁed from different perspectives, includ-
ing model-based and model-free methods, value-based and policy-based methods (or
combination of the two), Monte Carlo (MC) methods and temporal-difference methods
(TD), on-policy and off-policy methods, which are presented in Figure 2 [23].
Despite the differences implemented in the three approaches, they share some impor-
tant characteristics inherited from the concepts of deep reinforcement learning. The control
implemented by reinforcement learning acts like a closed-loop one, while the reward
represents the system’s feedback. This reward is delayed, while many algorithms try to