Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 16 of 30
the sample number that by CNN training. The reward value reached by JNN was higher
compared to CNN with faster stabilization.
Most of the researches on UAVs focuses on implementing the training and optimiza-
tion algorithms on a simulation platform. So, in [ 56], the authors focused on implementing
RL algorithms on real hardware to make it follow an optimum path in an unknown envi-
ronment. The paper started with addressing the main problem: making the UAV follow an
optimum path by taking the desired action. Assuming that the current state of the UAV is
Sk, the next state is Sk+1, and the thrust force is t. The desired position is taken as the input
to the position controller; then the controller will send signals to the motors to generate
the thrust force that drives the UAV to the desired position. Figure 6 shows the block
diagram for the controller addressed in this study. Most of the researches on UAVs focuses
on implementing the training and optimization algorithms on a simulation platform. So,
in [56], the authors focused on implementing RL algorithms on real hardware to make it
follow an optimum path in an unknown environment. The paper started with addressing
the main problem: making the UAV follow an optimum path by taking the desired action.
Assuming that the current state of the UAV is Sk, the next state is Sk+1, and the thrust
force is t. The desired position is taken as the input to the position controller; then the
controller will send signals to the motors to generate the thrust force that drives the UAV
to the desired position. Figure 6 shows the block diagram for the controller addressed in
this study.
U(t)
Sk+1Position Controller Propellers Controller
Learning Experience The UA V
Sk
Figure 6. The proposed RL model.
The proposed design was to implement a standard PID controller to ensure stable
navigation. The controller takes different learning parameters as inputs, along with the
values of the three gains. The controller observes the current state of the UAV and updates
the next state based on the accumulating reward equation. The controller’s derivative
component is mainly responsible for decreasing the settling time and the overshoot, and
the integral component decreases the steady-state error, yet it can cause overshoot [ 57]. The
tuning process took place to reach the optimum values for the three components, and the
steadiest trajectory for the UAV was achieved when eliminating the integral component. To
ensure the achievement of the desired output from the proposed algorithm, two steps were
taken. First, a simulation was done on MATLAB by setting a bounded area for the drone.
The UAV should travel from a certain point to another through the shortest path while
avoiding obstacles. The training process took around 39 episodes to reach the optimum
sequence of actions while increasing the reward and decreasing the penalty. The second
step was implementing a quadrotor Parrot AR Drone 2.0 and the Motion Capture System
software. Controlling the drone and implementing the proposed PID algorithm made
the learning process computational expensive, and it took more time than the batteries
can stand. To solve this issue and make the learning process easier and more reliable, the
authors created a GUI on MATLAB that saves the data from each episode and shows the
current states of the drone in real-time. Saving the UAV information along with the taken
steps allows the learning process to continue where it stopped in case of any failure in the
hardware. The experiment in real-time was performed using identical parameters to the
ones used in the simulation, and the drone was not introduced into the environment before
the experiment. The UAV followed the same behavior to simulation as it took 38 episodes