Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 10 of 30
Algorithm 3: Pseudocode for Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG).
Initialize the critic network Q(s)and the actor network m(s)randomly with
weights qQandqm, respectively;
Initialize the target networks Q0andm0with weights qQ0andqm0, respectively;
Initialize the replay buffer R;
forepisode = 1 to M do
Use a random procedure N to explore actions and determine the system state
s1;
fort = 1 to T do
Use Equation (10) to get action;
Implement the action and ﬁnd the corresponding reward rtand state
condition st+1;
Save the initial state condition, new state condition, reward and action in R;
Sample a random N transitions from R;
Use Equation (11) to ﬁnd the variable yi;
Minimize the loss function L using Equation (12) and use it to update the
critic network;
Find the gradient using Equation (13) and update the actor network;
Update the target networks weights qQ0andqm0by using Equations (14)
and (15);
end
end
When the deep reinforcement learning methods are applied in practical, real-life
problems, some challenges appear that affect the accuracy and performance. As mentioned
in [22], some limitations prevent us from applying the agent to the natural environment, so
we apply it to a simulating environment due to cost or safety concerns. These circumstances
lead to the dilemma of possibly having inaccuracies in the simulation and/or being unable
to obtain new observations to boost the learning process. Although being tricky, these
problems can be controlled through thoughtful design of the simulating environment
and the model to allow its generalization. Another challenge discussed in [ 20,22] is the
balance between exploitation and exploration to maximize the algorithm’s efﬁciency. One
approach is to use a signiﬁcant probability to describe the ratio of exploration to survey the
environment, then decrease its value with time to focus more on exploitation. In addition
to the challenges that come from using reinforcement learning, some other challenges are
related to the ﬂying and controlling of UAVs themselves, such as the trade-off between
payload and travel time, the weather conditions, and the limitations of the sensors used [ 33].
However, even these problems can be controlled through deep reinforcement learning that
corrects the behavior in the presence of disturbances and optimizes the solution to get the
maximum reward from the trade-off.
To better understand the different algorithms in deep reinforcement learning and
evaluate their performances, the actual implementation is needed. In this paper, the
implementation of DRL in UAV systems is analyzed. Because UAV control areas are vast
and include different DRL problems, they are divided into three sections. The ﬁrst one is
about UAV Path Planning, the second is about UAV Navigation, and the third is about UAV
control in terms of lateral and longitudinal movement and between-UAVs communications.