Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 18 of 30
predict obstacle direction and speed to calculate the required drifting without forgetting
about the main target; this needs real-time computation.
Considering the idea of decoupling and cutting the problem into sub-problems, the
paper raised in 2020 discussing the consideration of high dynamic obstacles while reaching
the target through an optimal path [ 34]. This research contributed in three main parts:
ﬁrst, a distributed DRL framework with two sub-networks, the Avoid Network and The
Acquire Network, The avoid network job is to predict obstacle motion and steer away
seeking collision-free trip while Acquire Network job is to reach the target through an
optimal path. Both networks have shown more efﬁcient results as each network has a
denser rewarding at the very start by solving system confusion between the two jobs. The
second contribution was integrating the results of both networks and choose a speciﬁc
action to be ﬁnally implemented in real-time [ 34]. The third contribution was necessary
to test the proposed approach; the authors constructed a simulation platform to prove
the efﬁciency and robustness of the solution considering different obstacles with different
speeds mimicking humans, birds, and cars. All obstacles are given random drifting values
through the trip of UAV . UAV uses all of its sensors, cameras to explore the unknown
environment, detect obstacles and probability of collision, deciding to move through the
planned path or drift away according to the upcoming obstacle. This approach boosted the
situation of UAV navigation in the previous years.
5. Reinforcement Learning for UA V Control
The area of controlling the UAV or a swarm of UAVs to perform a particular task faced
in UAVs applications is very complex. This mission’s complexity lies in its nature of facing
changing operational and environmental conditions, its complex dynamics, its need to be
energetically efﬁcient, and its vulnerability to disturbances, sensor noises, and unmodelled
dynamics. Nevertheless, there are many tasks and applications with noticeable variations
in which a stable and accurate UAV control is needed. Classical control was ﬁrst used;
however, its performance was not satisfying. The main reason for such low performance
lies in the dependence of this control scheme on linear dynamics. Thus, the controller can
operate well on the UAV over a small set of conditions, taking into account its nonlinear
dynamics. Then, machine learning with ofﬂine training was introduced. This also marks
the onset of using reinforcement learning (RL). Although RL gives promising results when
applied in a UAV controller, the need for higher accuracy and better robustness led to the
design of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) control methods. Therefore, DRL opens the
door for new control tasks that were unachievable with the previous RL algorithms.
Controlling the UAV , apart from navigation and path planning tasks, is still a broad
concept that includes many different tasks and approaches. In this context, this section
is dedicated to discussing signiﬁcant contributions in UAV control from different points
of view, ranging from attitude control of a single UAV to controlling the communication
channels between multiple UAVs. In this context, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is
helpful because it allows online real-time learning and a model-free platform for control.
It is essential to highlight that, to this aim, DRL must include several well-known policy-
based model-free methods such as deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG), trust region
policy optimization (TRPO), proximal policy optimization (PPO), and so on. As expected,
every algorithm has its beneﬁts and drawbacks that make it suitable for some applications
and not others.
It is worth mentioning that ﬂying an autonomous UAV generally requires two control
loops. The inner one is specialized in actuating the maneuvers by controlling the attitude,
speed, and so on, while the outer one is for trajectory plans and communication needs.
This outer loop can also be used in swarm managing. To start with single UAV controlling,
the problem of attitude control is analyzed. In [ 29], DRL was used to control a ﬁxed-wing
UAV , especially to account for the nonlinearities of the dynamics and the coupling of lateral
and longitudinal control, which cannot be ignored in such a UAV model. Proximal policy
optimization (PPO) algorithm was used in the controller design to provide a stable ﬂight