Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 6 of 30
UAV model is complicated to ﬁnd, to account for nonlinearities in the system, to learn
online actively how to achieve the target without being explicitly trained to do so and to
work in environments unknown to the UAV . Figure 3 shows the taxonomy of different
tasks encountered during UAV control and shows the suggested algorithm(s) for each
problem. DRL opens the door for new challenging tasks in the UAV control area, such as
controlling hybrid UAV safely and controlling a swarm of UAVs to achieve a speciﬁc task
with minimum resources (i.e., minimum moves, time, energy, etc.).
Figure 3. Taxonomy of Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithms for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Tasks.
There are some well-known algorithms in the ﬁeld of deep reinforcement learning.
Often, they are used as they are, or some researchers use them as the base algorithm
on which some modiﬁcations are done to optimize the behavior. This optimization can
decrease the computational time, make the system more energetically efﬁcient, improve
performance, etc. To start, the Deep Q-Network algorithm (DQN) has shown outstanding
performance in solving complex problems. Using DQN in UAV control systems, such as
path planning, navigation, and attitude control, is based mainly on knowing the current
state space of the system (S), the reward value (R), the transition probability (P), and the
utility function (V) [ 25]. Equation (1)expresses the Q-function in terms of those parameters.
Qp(s,a) =R(s,a) +tå
s02SPss0Vp(s0), (1)
where pis the policy value, sis the state, ais the action taken, and tis the discount
factor. The simulation is divided into time steps t, and at each step, a new reward value is
calculated until reaching the ﬁnal step T.
After obtaining the current Q-function, a sequence of steps is taken, as shown in Algorithm 1 ,
to reach the optimal Q-function and policy value. Afterward, the maximum Q-function
and the cumulative discount function are calculated from Equations (2)and (3)respectively.
As illustrated in Algorithm 1, the ﬁrst four steps are the initialization of the parameters
in the DQN. To ensure a stable learning process, the target of the DQN is introduced in a
speciﬁc structure; then, the action is derived based on the current state of the UAV [26].
Qp(s,a) =R(s,a) +tå
s02SPss0Vp(s0) =E[r+tmax(Qp(s0,a0)js,a)] (2)
Vp(s) =max a2A[Qp(s,a)] (3)