Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 11 of 30
Algorithm 4: Pseudocode for a single Advantage Actor Critic Agent.
Initialize randomly the global parameters wandq;
Initialize the counter, T, with value 1;
while T<Tmaxdo
Synchronize the local parameters, w0andq0with the global ones wandq;
while t<tmaxor s0is not terminal do
Do the action, a=pq(a,s), and ﬁnd the corresponding state s0and reward
rt;
ifs0is terminal then
The variable R is equal to rt;
else
The variable R is updated according to Equation (16);
end
Use Equations (17) and (18) to update the policy gradient and value
gradient, respectively;
Make the state sequal to the new state s0and increment the variable twith
1;
end
Update global w and qusing dw0and dq0;
Increment the t variable with 1;
end
3. Reinforcement Learning for UA V Path Planning
Path planning is a very important research topic to be considered as it correlates
with the level of autonomy of the vehicle. It is correlated with autonomy level, but it
also impacts built-on components, guidance, functionality, and endurance. Path planning
is an effective umbrella term that includes time control for a trip, object avoidance, and
many other vehicle challenges. Several researches have been conducted, presenting various
techniques that use reinforcement learning doing the path planning task or covering part of
its sub-challenges. UAVs are most commonly placed for missions in unknown or partially
observable environments where no exact mathematical model can be deﬁned. Therefore,
reinforcement learning and deep learning are combined and used to allow vehicles to learn
their paths autonomously. The application of advanced learning algorithms allows the
UAV to go through changing environments without the risk of collisions [34].
In fact, reinforcement learning algorithms have been widely used in different areas
of research related to UAV applications. For instance, [ 35] introduced an RL algorithm
that enables the UAV to have direct and continuous interaction with the surrounding
environment. The paper proposed a combination of DRL and an LSTM network to converge
the speed of the used learning algorithm. Another one designed in [ 36] is used in object
avoidance and target tracking via the usage of a reward function and penalty action to
achieve a smoother trajectory. Additional research was led by Koch et al. uses the RL
algorithm to obtain accurate attitude control [37].
Seeking smoother ﬂight path, RL has been used with a variety of optimizers such
as Grey Wolf Optimizer (GWO) in which the algorithm mimics the behavior of a pack
of wolves while hunting [ 38]. The GWO is an advancing metaheuristic algorithm that
simulates the hierarchy of leadership in the grey wolf pack and the process of surrounding
and attacking their prey. The algorithm has a bionic structure that can be ﬂexibly imple-
mented. In [ 39] a novel UAV path planning algorithm is introduced to generate a reﬁned
and optimal path for the UAV . The proposed technique combined the advantages of RL
and GWO to promote the four processes: exploration, geometric adjustment, exploitation,
and optimal vehicle adjustment.
With a large amount of captured data that needs processing, there are gold-standard
approaches for avoiding obstacles that use computational techniques such as Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) and Structure from Motion (SFM) [ 40]. SLAM algorithm