Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 13 of 30
realization of the upcoming state is probabilistic, conﬁrming that navigation by obstacle
avoidance is a sequential decision-making problem.
The model can be described by seven variables (S, A, P , R, W, O,d), where S is a set
of environment states or state-space; it represents a collective descriptive property of the
environment. A is the set of possible actions, action space. P is a probability function
modeling the evolution of each state based on current and previous actions. R is the reward
function that serves feedback to UAV for the action chosen; for example, if an action leads
to correct navigation avoiding a faced object, it will receive a positive value for reward
function while it will be negative if the action is taken results in collision between the UAV
and the object. Wis a set of real observations, which is the percentage of the true state, s. O
is the conditional probability distribution on observations and dis the discount factor [ 44].
This model translates the problem to maximize the expected sum of discounted rewards.
It uses a deep recurrent Q-network with temporal attention, utilized by reinforcement
learning for effective object avoidance in unseen environments. Q-learning uses an action-
value function to know how to maximize a reward value for a speciﬁc action. In other
words, the agent will work under the policy formed, and the optimal one will be conﬁgured
by choosing actions with the highest reward values [5].
A similar model of reinforcement learning has been used in [ 34] on a position con-
troller in a trial of enhancing UAV behavior [ 34]. It relies on the vehicle’s current position
and learning model to decide the following action to perform for the upcoming state.
The generated position will be input to position controller that gives the action for pro-
pellers controller to, then, form thrust force enough to drive the vehicle to required new
position [34].
Another research has tried to combine the sub-challenge of object avoidance with
another task, arriving at the end target through the shortest path and minimum time
interval—learning of the ﬂight path conducted using Q-learning algorithm such as in
previously discussed research. This main challenge of this research is the computation ca-
pability required to plan the path while avoiding any random obstacle; a calculation speed
guarantee is a must. Accordingly, a separate unit is required to perform all computations
and calculations, and the ﬁnal learned results are reﬂected in UAV after that [ 5]. Simulation
for a simple indoor environment is constructed under this research containing four main
elements: walls, obstacle, start position, and target position, each with reasonable reward
value. Then, four different maps are generated with different sizing, obstacle numbers, and
elements, placing [5].
A novel method has been proposed in [ 46] that discusses different sub-challenges
that UAV has to face. It discusses an interference-aware path planning scheme that allows
minimization interference with a ground map and wireless transmission latency caused
while sharing online mission-related data [46].
The problem is represented as a dynamic noncooperative game given the UAV plays
the user’s main role. A deep reinforcement learning algorithm relying on echo state network
(ESN) cells is used as it guarantees to reach a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE)
when converges. The main contribution is this reinforcement learning framework used for
optimizing the trajectories of the online-connected UAVs. Each UAV is required to learn its
path with respect to the ground network and other moving UAVs. This technique allows
UAV , the user, to decide the next step of the plan, including location and transmission
power level. The main features of this method are adaptation and generalization. UAVs
do not need to watch the environment to decide the next action. Instead, it can take the
decision based on a reward from the previous state.
Recently, the use of deep reinforcement learning in UAV path planning challenges
becomes familiar to some extent. This opened a way for researchers to perform more
complex situations moving toward real-time path-planning, especially in dynamic environ-
ments. In 2019, Chao et al. proposed a deep reinforcement learning approach for real-time
path planning based on information gathered about the global situation. This is more
challenging due to the consideration of potential enemy threats with the main planning