Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 3 of 30
that operates in the same range as the ﬁrst level with allowance for the aircraft to disappear
behind the pilot vision. The third level is Medium Altitude that operates from Class A to
Class E airspace, and the last is Very High Altitude that operates above FL600 and in Class
E airspace. Another classiﬁcation is made according to Mean Take-Off Weight (MTOW)
and Ground Impact Risk [ 13,14]. It is satisfying enough as it correlates the kinetic energy
imparted at impact, which is consequently considered the primary factor for safety, as
discussed by Weibel and Hansman (2004) and Dalamagkidis et al. (2012) in [14,15].
Although previous classiﬁcations were helpful, others were conducted to group UAVs
based on their autonomy. In 2005, Autonomous Control Levels (ACL) were introduced
to measure the level of autonomy or the level of independence from human piloting
involvement. Each level relies on three aspects: level of independence, mission complexity,
and environment conﬁgurational level [16]. The ﬁrst one is remotely piloted. This level is
fully controlled by a certiﬁed expert getting visual feedback or sensory data. The second
is remotely operated, named semi-autonomous. This level allows the vehicle to drive
itself based on the decisions coming from observing the pilot. Last is a fully-autonomous
level. At this level, the vehicle is provided with general tasks to perform, and it becomes
capable of doing self-maintenance once a fault occurs. At this level, the owner only informs
the vehicle about what to do without specifying how to do that task. Although the fully-
autonomous level seems interesting, it may cause issues when performing prohibited or
prohibited behavior to solve the task [ 17,18]. Further classiﬁcations regard the Ownership;
either the UAV is owned by a public entity, like federal agencies, or by law enforcement,
like industry and private individuals [ 19]. The international American Helicopter Society
presents classiﬁcations, conﬁgurations, and propulsion concepts of UAVs (AHS) (American
Helicopter Society (AHS) International: The Vertical Flight Technical Society https://vtol.
org/store/index.cfm?killnav=1).
This paper covers the main three challenges facing UAVs: (i.) path planning, (ii.)
navigation, and (iii.) control. Each of these elements includes many sub-challenges that
need a high level of control to function as desired. Reinforcement learning algorithms
are used to help navigation through unknown environments that have no mathematical
model that is suitable to describe them. The article is organized as follows: The upcoming
section discusses several reinforcement learning algorithms related to UAV and its learning
behavior. Then, Sections 3–5 discuss path planning of drones, navigation, and control,
with the help of the reinforcement learning approaches mentioned. Future work and
recommendations of research directions are then presented in Section 7. The last section is
a summarized conclusion of the main approach and ﬁndings of this research.
2. Overview of Deep Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) is learning what to do—how to map situations to actions—to
maximize a numerical reward signal. RL features an interactive intelligent agent with an
explicit goal to achieve. Policy, reward, value, and environment model are the essential
elements of RL. The policy deﬁnes the agent’s plan of action (i.e., how the agent reacts to
different environmental situations and how it translates the states to actions). Rewards are
the numerical values given by the environment to the agent in response to a state-action
pair. These reward values describe the immediate, intrinsic desirability of environmental
states. The value function is the long-term version of a reward function, calculating dis-
counted return starting from a speciﬁc state following a particular policy. The environment
model represents the environment behavior that helps boost the algorithm performance
by understanding the surrounding environment. For example, while DeepMind AlphaGo
imitated human strategies and applied Monte Carlo tree search using three convolutional
policy networks in a supervised manner, AlphaGo Zero did not imitate human behavior
and did not see data from human games; instead, it played many games against itself to
learn and thus developed strategies to win the game that is not known to humans, thanks
to reinforcement learning.