Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 14 of 30
task [ 47]. This has a very important political application in anti-terrorist tasks. In the
scope of this research, the threat is enemy radar detection of the vehicle when it is within
a speciﬁc range, and surface-to-air missiles can affect a vehicle’s probability of survival.
Therefore, UAV must solve its task while ensuring self-safety at the same time [47].
The model environment is developed, including enemy entities using a software tool
named STAGE Scenario. This tool has a rich database, including battleﬁeld entities such as
radars and missiles [ 20]. Necessary attributes such as UAV , target, and enemy locations are
selected [ 47]. The situation assessment model is then constructed with the main collected
data of vehicles’ position and enemy unit position; the enemy unit consists of the radar and
surface-to-air missile. Once the UAV is detected inside the radar range, calculations relating
the distance between enemy and vehicle and a maximum radius of the killing zone are
done, and the missile is projected to destroy the UAV . A Dueling Double Deep Q-Networks
(D3QN) algorithm is used to train the vehicle for the main task of path planning.
At the ﬁrst of each training episode, initial network parameters are set, and the UAV
is set to its initial position in the STAGE Scenario. Second, the situation map is generated
according to the proposed situation assessment model as the currently active state. An
action is selected according to the policy and executed. Once the action is executed, a new
situation map is updated based on newly-obtained situation data, and immediate reward
value is observed. According to memory, these new data are saved, replacing the oldest
version saved [48].
4. Reinforcement Learning for UA V Navigation
Seeking the most stable control for a UAV , recent researchers have focused on using
deep learning algorithms to achieve that. In [ 49], an experimental study is done on a UAV
using different reinforcement learning and aims to divide those different algorithms into
two main categories: discreet action space and continuous action space. The study started
with an intensive comparison between the various methods used in drone navigation, such
as supervised learning, unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning, and mentioning
the advantages and the limitations for each of them. Reinforcement learning is based on
the agent being trained to navigate and avoid obstacles through trials and errors. This
characteristic is helpful as the agent will start learning by itself as soon as the training
environment is ready.
The paper started using RL by deriving the equations for the sequential decision
making in which the agent interacts with the surrounding visual environment by dividing
it into discrete time steps. The equations illustrate how the time steps are interpreted to
actions that the agent has to follow in order to send a reverse reward signal. The aim is to
maximize this reward signal in RL through the discrete action space and the continuous
action space. In discrete action space, the proposed agent decides to follow a policy in the
form of greedy learning through choosing the optimum action based on a given state value.
This value can be calculated in high-dimensional data, such as images, using a deep Q
network (DQN). Given the issues that faced DQN, the paper proposed a new algorithm to
solve those issues. The proposed algorithm combines the Double DQN and the Dueling
DQN and calls it Double Dueling DQN (D3QN). The algorithm proved during experiments
a robust ability in removing correlation and optimizing the quality of the states. Using the
discrete action space, the study used a simulation platform called Airsim that generates
its graphics from the Unreal Engine to help create a realistic simulation environment.
Although the simulation provides perfect woodland, it does not provide complex paths
for the UAV as all the trees within the simulation are planted on plain ground [ 50]. To
solve this issue, the study created a new environment that includes different obstacles
like solid objects in cubes and spheres, etc. In order to generate the optimum path for the
drone, RGB and depth sensors were used along with CNN as inputs to the RL network. All
the previously-mentioned DQN algorithms were used to generate the optimum behavior
based on the following ﬁve moves: forward, left, right, down, and up.