Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 12 of 30
utilizes data from one or more sensors to build a map for the surrounding environment.
At the same time, it uses this data to update the UAV position and path plan. Another
approach for obstacle avoidance is introduced that uses a depth camera to localize the
attributes of an object. The data in the research is trained through a novel developed
algorithm that uses DRL and imitation learning [41].
In urban environments, planning the optimum path for a UAV requires a large set of
data collected from distributed nodes such as sensors and other changing parameters like
the number and locations of these nodes. In [ 42], a learning algorithm is developed that
creates a network architecture base on Internet of Things (IoT) devices. A DDQN network
is trained while taking into consideration parameters such as allowable ﬂying time for
the autonomous drone, sensor positions and numbers. The proposed network enables the
UAV to adjust its behavior and to make movement decisions in changing scenarios.
Regarding SFM, it uses optical ﬂow sensors to generate a depth map and 3D structure
for the surrounding environment. Both methods require a preﬁxed path for the UAV
to follow; accordingly, UAV is required to hover while computing the environment and
planning the path and follow this path thereafter [ 43]. It means that those methods cannot
be used for real-time applications of obstacle avoidance. Although some enhancements
have been done to use the SLAM technique on the ﬂy [ 44], they neither include non-
stationary obstacles with unpredicted motion nor detecting un-textured walls that usually
exist in indoor environments [40,44].
For obstacle avoidance, Ref. [ 45] proposed a self-trained UAV that can avoid moving
and static objects in a 3D urban environment. The research used a learning algorithm based
on Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) to help the vehicle reach the target with
zero collisions. The algorithm uses a reward function that minimizes the distance between
the UAV and its ﬁnal distention, along with a penalty for each collision with an object.
Another technique designs the obstacle avoidance challenge as a model-free reinforce-
ment learning problem as in this case, the environment is not fully known in advance [ 44].
A deep reinforcement learning approach is used for indoor environments by training
UAVs for navigation based on 3D hallway environments. Many images for such environ-
ments are collected with various lighting levels, furniture placements, and wall textures.
A massive data set is generated, and the deep Q-network learns UAV motion on these
photos. Although many images are included in the training dataset, it is not enough to
satisfy basic levels of accuracy. Moreover, this method is not preferred as it does not mimic
human learning behavior for obstacle avoidance, which means that there is a better method
to follow.
Despite the partial failure of such a method, it inspired researchers for the usual way of
the success of mimicking nature and human behaviors for solving problems. So, researches
focused on human behavior in avoiding obstacles until it is clariﬁed as follows. Human
does not have full access to the environment, but it can solve challenging problems. It relies
on human memory that stores all relative information and recalls it to decide the following
suitable action for each scenario. UAVs have a similar problem of partial observability that
requires a notion of memory to enhance position planning at each instant [ 44]. For instance,
a UAV moving toward a corner will gather the information that there is much space in
front of it, although it is not the case for all sides. Without the past gathered information
about sides and previous navigation, the UAV will proceed until it crashes with the walls.
So it becomes an aim to design an algorithm capable of combining information collected
over some time in order to enhance real-time navigation decisions [44].
A method is proposed to safely navigate an indoor environment dealing with sta-
tionary and dynamic obstacles in unstructured and unknown environments. It uses a
monocular camera to provide an RGB image instantly as an input and uses the conditional
generative adversarial network (cGAN) to predict the desired depth information required
for UAV to take action. The UAV is required to take any action at every instant t, which
will affect future states and even future decisions for UAV navigation. In other words, the