Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 17 of 30
to reach the optimum sequence of actions. The learning process decreased the number of
steps needed to reach the target from 100 steps to 8 steps in the last episode.
Another emerging application for UAVs is Search and Rescue (SAR) missions, where
the UAV is required to navigate through an unknown environment and surrounded by
hazardous risks and obstacles [ 58]. UAV usage in this ﬁeld saved the human rescuers
from entering dangerous environments and minimized the catastrophic effects caused by
sending humans to perform missions in those environments [ 59]. Ref. [ 60] conducted
experimental research to implement RL with a function approximation algorithm on a UAV
to perform a SAR mission. The paper provided a detailed explanation for the problem
and the implementation steps that include the mathematical model, the simulation, and
the hardware implementation. The proposed experiment in this study considers a UAV
performing a SAR operation, locating an immobile human in an unknown bounded
environment. The study assumes a static location for the human, and a quadcopter UAV
with an Ultra-Wide Band (UWB) is used for the mission.
By assuming that the UAV can localize itself with the environment and measure
the distance to the surrounding obstacles using onboard radar, the RL algorithm can be
trained using the system sensors’ data. The algorithm of training the RL is the Q-learning,
which is based on maximizing the reward signal. In this study, Q-learning helps the agent
calculate the optimal value for the reward signal and then take the best-related action. The
values related to each state of the system are recorded in a Q-table. The system’s states are
represented with the UAV position within the map; the authors used a ﬁxed altitude for the
UAV and divided the map into a discrete grid. To ensure the convergence of the Q-table, all
the states and actions must be updated continuously. The continuous update of the Q-table
values could lead the size of the table to grow in a way that will make it hard to implement
the algorithm in reality due to hardware memory size and battery limitation [61].
To overcome this issue, the Q-table size has to be reduced yet still represents each
state’s values. This guarantee is achieved using one of the function approximation tech-
niques called Fixed Sparse Representation (FSR). After implementing the algorithm on
the data generating process, a PID controller was designed to ensure stable hovering and
navigation towards the target. The design process started with the controller’s three main
components, and then the derivative gain was increased while eliminating the integral gain
as it caused overshooting. The implementation was done using MATLAB for applying the
original Q-learning and the approximated Q-learning. The simulation results showed that
it took about 160 episodes using the original Q-learning to train the UAV to ﬁnd the optimal
route to the human target. Using the approximated Q-learning took only 75 episodes for
the UAV to reach the human without any collisions. The realistic implementation was done
using a quadrotor Parrot AR Drone 2.0, and a combined PID and approximated Q-learning
was applied to the controller to manipulate the linear and angular speeds. The experiment
took place in a closed room with no prior knowledge of the drone about the obstacles. The
testing showed similar results to the simulation as the drone took the exact number of
episodes to reach the optimum sequence of actions to reach the target.
Research by 2020 started considering dynamic obstacles that may face UAV while
navigating, especially in realistic outdoor environments. All real obstacles, such as humans,
cars, birds, and even other drones, are moving and have different speeds. Tai and Liu’s
studies ﬁrst developed a model-free Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithm based
on a convolutional neural network [ 62]. This model allows a car to navigate an enclosed
room with some static obstacles and some sparse dynamic obstacles. Although the consid-
eration of dynamic obstacles succeeded, it had several limits as it only performs in simple
indoor rooms, which is previously known, and obstacles have very limiting characteristics
which are never guaranteed in a real environment.
Some main points were then highlighted to describe the research gap best not to deal
with dynamic obstacles. First, the frequent collisions at the very start of training collect
many penalties making the reward very small, which blocks neural network convergence
and limits agent exploration capabilities. Second, a pure enhancement was required to