Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 27 of 30
ing new ones, but also because they are applied to vast areas of applications and were
used to handle control problems that were nearly impossible to do before. In [ 65,66], the
learning process in the DRL algorithm was based on information extracted from images.
Thus, the advances in single and multi UAVs control using different communication and
perception methods open the doors for vast real implementation of these mechanisms in
many tasks like surveillance, ﬁrst responders in catastrophes, transportation, agriculture,
etc. It is apparent in all these researches and many more that the choice of reward function
is as important as the DRL algorithm choice. Each research shows a new reward function
based on the research objective and the mission of the control algorithm. This means that a
thorough analysis of reward functions is needed, and a trial of different reward functions
under the same control algorithm can be promising and lead to higher efﬁciency control
implementation.
Future work in UAV control should be concerned with more experimental trials
of the control methods, especially in the open air under uncertainties and unpredicted
disturbances, to better test the models’ validity. Moreover, research towards energy-efﬁcient
control should be addressed in more research, especially for quadrotors. After all, currently,
their ﬂight time is greatly limited because they consume a lot of energy. In the area of
control of multiple UAVs, the idea of cooperation of multiple UAVs with one or more mobile
robots for better exploration of sites should be researched well, and the appropriate control
algorithms for such cooperation should be tested validated. For example, compliance
with air space regulations, separation management in case of multiple drones, route
planning and rerouting, sequencing and spacing, dynamic geofencing, terrain avoidance,
contingency management, congestion management, and severe-weather redirection are
identiﬁed by McKinsey in [ 76] as challenging aspects of using drones in last-mile delivery
services. McKinsey highlighted the need for sophisticated unmanned-trafﬁc-management
(UTM) systems that properly control and manage drone ﬂights.
In a nutshell, deep reinforcement learning in path planning, navigation, and control
of UAVs has made revolutions in the ﬁeld. Fortunately, improvements to the DRL control
algorithms and the mechanical design of UAVs are continuously made and tested. Thus,
this marks the birth of new challenging missions and applications for different categories
of UAVs.
8. Conclusions
UAVs have been categorized according to various aspects such as top-level conﬁg-
uration, altitude, take-off weight, level of autonomy, and ownership. UAV’s autonomy
addresses a UAV’s ability to take off, execute a mission, and return it to its base without
any signiﬁcant human intervention. The autonomy level is crucial for the successful de-
ployment of UAVs in various challenging application domains and under various harsh
environmental conditions. A UAV can be considered fully autonomous if it can make deci-
sions and react to unexpected events in real-time without humans’ direct intervention. To
achieve this level of autonomy, many technological and algorithmic developments are still
needed. Recently, there have been attempts to incorporate Artiﬁcial intelligence techniques
such as DRL to safely enable a UAV to navigate in an unknown environment. In this review
paper, deep reinforcement learning techniques for path planning, navigation, and UAVs
control are reviewed. More experimental trials are required in an outdoor environment
and under various environmental conditions.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.T.A., A.K., methodology, A.T.A., A.K., N.A.M., H.A.I.,
Z.F.I., M.K., A.A., B.B., A.M. K.,I.A.H. and G.C.; software, M.K., A.M.K. and A.A.; validation, A.T.A.,
A.K., A.M.K., I.A.H., G.C.; formal analysis, I.K.I., A.T.A.; Investigation, N.A.M., H.A.I., Z.F.I., A.A.,
B.B., A.M.K., I.A.H. and G.C.; resources, N.A.M., H.A.I., Z.F. I., M.K., A.A., B.B., A.M.K., I.A.H. and
G.C.; Data Curation, A.M.K., B.B., I.A.H., G.C.; writing—original draft preparation A.T.A., A.K.,
N.A.M., H.A.I., Z.F.I., M.K.; writing—review and editing A.T.A., A.K., N.A.M., H.A.I., Z.F.I., M.K.,
A.A., B.B., A.M.K., I.A.H. and G.C.; visualization, N.A.M., H.A.I., Z.F.I., M.K., A.A., B.B., A.M.K.;
Supervision, A.T.A., and A.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.