Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 20 of 30
designer and should reﬂect the system objectives. So, in [ 63], the reward was based on
the energy efﬁciency, stability of ﬂight, integral error, velocity tracking error, and ﬁnally,
orientation error.
Although it includes complicated advanced modeling and control, hybrid UAVs are
not the most challenging UAV in autonomous ﬂying. The ﬂapping wing UAV , a kind
of a broader class, called morphing UAVs, imposes real challenges and difﬁculties in its
control. The morphing UAV is inspired by the idea of birds changing their shapes and the
orientation of their wings to reach the most efﬁcient way of ﬂying according to the ﬂying
modes, such as ﬂying speed and heading, and to the ﬂying conditions such as weather and
winds. This system’s operation depends not only on the innovative materials and actuators
incorporated into the body design but also on the intelligent control system. Therefore,
such a system’s autonomous control is so delicate and requires an exact computation to
determine the best ﬂight mode under the current conditions, adjust it continuously, and
command the motors to execute the maneuver based on the position or/and velocity
trajectory proﬁles.
Researches efforts have been shown in [ 31] in providing a deep reinforcement learning-
based control system for that UAV . Because of the difﬁculties of the control situation,
continuity in action and state spaces is needed, making the model-free Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm a good candidate for this task actor-critic policy. In
categorizing the control into inner and outer loops, the deformation control is a part of
inner loop control, and it is achieved by controlling the steering gears ﬁxed on the airfoil.
This algorithm is policy-based because it selects the next action based on the current state
of the system. Under the umbrella of policies, it is worth mentioning that actors and critics
have different policies; the former is a random policy made mainly for exploration. The
latter is a deterministic policy made mainly for the evaluation of actions based on the
deﬁned reward function. The reward function is based on the angular orientation as well
as linear position tracking.
The ﬁeld of reinforcement learning is as fast-developing as innovative methods and
improvements to the current methods. This long quest for high precision in achieving
the control task and higher complexity in the tasks themselves will always bring miracles
to the fast-evolving control ﬁeld. Accordingly, a famous DRL method, which is DDPG,
was manipulated and improved in research, shown in [ 64], to make a robust deep deter-
ministic policy gradient (Robust-DDPG). The newly proposed method had shown better
performances than the well-known algorithm for DDGP in terms of convergence rate,
stability, and convergence efﬁciency of the UAV . The improvements to the control model
were achieved using three modiﬁcations. The ﬁrst improvement was the “delayed learning
trick.” It is achieved by delaying the update of the actor and critic networks. Rather than
being updated after each iteration, both networks will be updated after each episode ﬁn-
ishes. This improvement is to have stable learning under dynamic changes in the uncertain
environment chosen for this task. The second improvement was the “adversarial attack
trick.” It is achieved by ﬁltering the data used in the learning process by removing noisy
states and actions from the sample. The reason behind this improvement is to have robust
control in an uncertain environment. The third and last improvement was the “mixed
exploration trick.” It is achieved by a ﬁne sampling of learning data based on Gaussian
and rough sampling of that data based on a greedy approach. This ﬁne-tuning of the
model enables a high-speed convergence rate. The control variables for this model are
the roll angle and the linear speed. Again, the reward function is formulated so that the
goal is achieved for this particular task. Thus, the reward discussed in [ 64] depends on
choosing the shortest path to the goal, approaching the goal with high speed, approaching
the target in all movement rather than going away ﬁnally avoiding collisions well before
encountering or hitting them.
Here, questions arise about the nature of the data on which the learning procedure in
the deep reinforcement learning is done. Can the control system based on deep reinforce-