Electronics 2021 ,10, 999 5 of 30
decrease this delay. Moreover, the algorithms implemented in DRL feature a sequential
decision-making behavior, with long-term rewards depending on the actions’ sequence. A
concept called credit assignment problem describes the DRL implementation’s dependence
on time as some actions show their consequences after some time and many intermediate
states undertaken by the system [20].
Figure 2. Taxonomy of Reinforcement Learning Algorithms. DP (Dynamic Programming), TD (Temporal Difference), MC
(Monte Carlos), I2A (Imagination-Augmented Agent), DQN (Deep Q-Network), TRPO (Trust Region Policy Optimization),
ACKTR (Actor Critic using Kronecker-Factored Trust Region), AC (Actor-Critic), A2C (Advantage Actor Critic), A3C
(Asynchronous Advantage Actor Critic), DDPG (Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient), TD3 (Twin Delayed DDPG), SAC
(Soft Actor-Critic).
Another classiﬁcation for deep reinforcement learning is the categorization of tech-
niques as positive and negative. The positive ones use favorable stimulation of the system
to attract the agent for optimizing its behavior. On the other hand, the negative ones use
undesirable stimulation to repel the agent from speciﬁc actions. As the whole system of
a UAV is based on the interaction between the agent and the environment, achieving the
optimal strategy requires high dimensional inputs and an accurate representation of the
environment. Applying the RL algorithm to a UAV system can be considered a customized
representation of Markov decision processes (MDPs) as the process requires four main
elements: a policy, a reward signal, a utility function, and an environment [ 24]. Relying
only on the conventional RL algorithms requires high quality and multi-dimensional inputs
to generate an accurate description of the past state on the UAV . Those requirements form
a gap due to the capabilities of the conventional RL. Integration between the deep neural
network and the RL algorithms is developed to ﬁll this gap.
The application of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) in unmanned aerial vehicle
control was introduced to face speciﬁc challenges that were encountered in that ﬁeld.
DRL helps in the task of UAV control to work with model-free algorithms when the