Page 3 of 16
 Laghrissi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:65 
 
network. The system is used to detect attacks in a controller area network (CAN) bus. 
The model loads the over pre-training belief (DBN) an enhancement in the detection 
accuracy. Chkirbene [8], proposed two models for intrusion detection and classification, 
Trust-based Intrusion Detection and Classification System (TIDCS) which reduces the 
number of features in the input data based on a new algorithm for feature selection and 
TIDCS-A which is a dynamic algorithm to compute the exact time for nodes cleansing 
states and restricts the exposure window of the nodes, this method is tested on NSLKDD 
and UNSW dataset. Erfani [9] combined a DBN (Deep belief Network) and SVM. The 
first layer of the proposed architecture used DBN to extract features, while the second 
SVM layer was trained on the features extracted by the DBN network. The results were 
powerful and fitting high-dimensional domains. Dong [10] proposed a deep learning-
based intrusion detection model, AEAlexJNet, which uses Auto-Encoder AlexNet neu -
ral network. The experimental results of the intrusion detection data set KDD99 show 
that the accuracy of the AE-AlexNet model is 94.32%. Dutt [11] imitates the adaptive 
immune system by taking into consideration the activation of the T-cells and the B-cells. 
It captures relevant features from header and payload portions for effective detection 
of intrusion. Experiments have been conducted on both the real-time network traffic 
and the standard datasets KDD99 and UNSW-NB15 for intrusion detection. The SMAD 
model yields is 96.04% true positive rate and around 97% true positive rate using real-
time traffic and standard data sets. Hanselmann [12] used a neural network architecture 
for detecting intrusions on the controller area network (CAN), and introduced an unsu -
pervised learning approach called CANet, evaluated on real and synthetic CAN data. A 
comparison with previous machine learning based methods shows that CANet outper -
forms them by a significant margin. CNN (Convolutional Neural Network), most com -
monly applied to analyzing visual imagery, was also used in intrusion detection. Khan 
[13] introduced an improved CNN on KDD99 dataset. The results showed that CNN can 
greatly improve the accuracy. Another deep learning algorithm was used by Javaid [14] 
to construct an NIDS called Self-taught Learning (STL). Experimental results were very 
encouraging and revealed that this architecture is as good as the previous models. Vijay -
anand [15] proposed a wrapper-based approach using the modified whale optimization 
algorithm (WOA) and used a method in which the genetic algorithm operators were 
combined with the WOA. Using a support vector machine (SVM), then, the authors 
identified the types of intrusions based on the selected features. Sydney [16] proposes 
a Feed-Forward Deep Neural Network (FFDNN) wireless IDS system using a Wrapper 
Based Feature Extraction Unit (WFEU) and compare it to standard machine learning 
(ML) algorithms that include Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), 
Naive Bayes (NB), Decision Tree (DT) and k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN). The experimen -
tal studies include binary and multiclass types of attacks. The solution was tested on 
UNSW-NB15 and the AWID dataset with 87.10% and 77.16% accuracy for the binary 
and multiclass classification. Shapoorifard [17] used an improved version of K-Nearest 
Neighbors (KNN) classifier. The author combines K-MEANS clustering and KNN clas -
sification and claims that engaging the farthest neighbor enhances the accuracy rate and 
detection rate and reduces false alarm rate. Tama [18] designed an anomaly-based IDS, 
with two-step classifier. The TSE-IDS model select features using a hybrid method and 
collect specific feature representations. The results on the NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15