Page 7 of 16
 Laghrissi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:65 
 
Our approach
This section includes the dataset description, data preprocessing, calculation of the 
PCA variance, calculation of Mutual information scores, implementation and param -
eters of the proposed model.
The KDD99 dataset
Although KDD99 dataset [25] is more than 19 years old, it is still widely used in aca -
demic research. The raw training data were processed into about five million connec -
tion records. A connection is a sequence of TCP packets starting and ending at some 
well-defined times. The dataset contains 53 features, and falls into 4 attacks categories 
(DoS, Probe, U2R, and R2L) divided into 22 different attacks (Table 1 ):
• Denial of service attack (DoS): is an attack meant to shut down a machine or net -
work, making it inaccessible to its intended users. DoS attacks typically function by 
overwhelming or flooding a targeted machine with requests until normal traffic is 
unable to be processed.
• User to root attack (U2R): is an attack where hackers exploit some vulnerabilities to 
gain root access to the system, providing him unauthorized access to the local supe -
ruser.
• Remote to local attack (R2L): occurs when the attacker finds vulnerable points in a 
computer or network security software to gain access to the machine or the system. 
The main goal of this attack is to explore or steal data illegally, introduce viruses or 
cause damage to the victim. Probing Attack: Also called Scanning/Discovery, which 
is the first step of an attack; probing is made to gather information on the targeted 
system. The network is scanned for known vulnerabilities in infrastructure software, 
as well as unknown vulnerabilities in the custom code developed for the specific tar -
get application.
To improve the quality of raw data, data preprocessing and filtering are required 
which increase data efficiency. Therefore, KD99 was imported as a Panda Data Frame, 
then, we collected statistical information about each attack type instance. As we can 
see (Table  2), the number of attack records is much bigger than normal records. This 
unbalanced data can lead our model to fail in the classification task. To overcome this 
problem, we used some sampling techniques that we describe in the next section.
Table 1 Categories of attacks of KDD99
Classification of attacks Attack name
Probe Portsweep, IPsweep, Nmap, Satan
DoS Neptune, Smurf, Pod, Teardrop, Land, back
U2R Bufferoverflow, LoadModule, Perl, Rootkit
R2L Guesspassword, Ftpwrite, Imap, Phf, Multi-
hop, Warezmaster, Warezclient