Page 11 of 16
 Laghrissi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:65 
 
Thus, we tested our model with 04 and 10 features scores. Concurrently, we tested 
with the same number of features for multiclass classification.
Implementation and evaluation metrics
We have implemented our model on Google Colab, using Keras library (Which is an open-
source neural network library written in Python). In Google Colab, we split the preproc -
essed Dataset into 60% for training Data, 20% for validation and 20% for testing purposes.
On the other hand, our LSTM model (Fig.  7) was configured with the parameters shown 
in the Table 5 .
To determine the performance of the proposed algorithm, a confusion matrix was plot -
ted. Each row of the matrix represents the instances in a predicted class while each column 
represents the instances in an actual class. Therefore, confusion Table matrix allows us to 
calculate the true positives, true negatives, false positives and false negatives such as:
True positive (TP) is when the model classifies an attack as an attack.
True negative (TN) is When the model classifies a normal entry as normal.
False positive (FP) is when the model classifies a normal entry as an attack.
False negative (FN) is When the model classifies an attack as a normal entry.
Usually, intrusion detection systems try to reduce the false positive and false negative 
rate, knowing that the latter (FN) have severe consequences on information systems.
In our research, we used multiple metrics namely: Accuracy, Sensitivity (or Recall), preci -
sion and F1 Score. These metrics are calculated as:
Accuracy =(TP+TN)/AllPredictions
Sensitivity(Recall )=TP/(FN+TP)
Precision =TP/(TP+FP)
F1Score=2∗(Precision ∗Sensitivity)/(Precision +Sensitivity)
Fig. 7 The proposed LSTM architecture
Table 5 Table of parameters of the proposed model
Parameter Binary Multiclass
Activation function Sigmoid Softmax
Loss function Binary crossentropy Sparse 
categorical 
crossentropy
Optimizer Adam Adam
Learning rate 0.002 0.002
Epsilon 1e-08 1e-08
Schedule decay 0.004 0.004
Epochs 50 50
Dropout 0.1 0.1