Page 2 of 16 Laghrissi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:65 
extracted data are unimportant and noisy, which leads to the presence of irrelevant fea -
tures that will deteriorate the performance of the classifier. Hence, dimensionality reduc -
tion algorithms, such as PCA (Principal component analysis) and Mutual information 
are crucial, to select informative data.
In this research, our contribution consists of implementing three models, namely: 
LSTM, LSTM-PCA, and LSTM-MI (Mutual Information). As shown in Fig.  1, after 
preprocessing the well-known dataset KDD99, we applied three different approaches, 
based on Long short-term memory classifier. LSTM without any dimensionality reduc -
tion (using all KDD99 features), applying Principal Component Analysis and employing 
Mutual Information. These approaches were tested on binary and multiclass classifica -
tion, and the result showed that models based on PCA obtained the best results.
Related works
From the first intrusion detection system introduced by Denning [2], studies applied 
multiple intrusion detection algorithms. Since traditional classification algorithm need 
to manually extract features, deep learning techniques proved their effectiveness in this 
type of problem. Therefore, many researchers have focused their efforts on deep learning 
techniques to create powerful IDSs.
Anand [3] used an improved genetic K-means++ algorithm and IGKM, on a subset 
of the KDD99 dataset to create an intrusion detection system. IGKM gave a better accu -
racy than K-means++. Ma [4] used a Deep Neural Network (DNN) to classify attack 
type and Spectral Clustering as a feature extractor. The DNN network had a better accu -
racy than SVM (support-vector machine), BPNN (back propagation neural network) and 
RF (Random Forest). Nikolov [5], proposed a recurrent neural network classifier namely 
long-short term memory (LSTM), the authors tested the solution on the NGID-DS data -
set for binary classification (Only HTTP Attack). Jayaprakash [6], introduced an anom -
aly based detection mechanism that implements Role based Access control (RBAC). 
A new data structure called Octraplet is used for storing the SQL queries. This system 
uses the Naive Bayes Classifier which is a supervised Machine Learning method for 
Detecting anomalous queries. Kang [7] proposed an effective IDS on for the in-vehicle 
Fig. 1 Models compared in this research