Page 6 of 16 Laghrissi et al. J Big Data            (2021) 8:65 
Therefore, many algorithms of dimensionality reduction and features selection are used 
on the original dataset to reduce the number of input features. This enables the machine 
learning algorithm to train faster, reduce the complexity of a model and make it easier to 
interpret.
In our research, we use two algorithms to reduce the dataset dimensionality, namely Prin -
cipal Component Analysis (PCA) and Mutual Information (MI).
Principal component analysis (PCA)
Large datasets are increasingly common and are often difficult to interpret. Principal com -
ponent analysis (PCA) is a technique for reducing the dimensionality of such datasets, by 
creating new uncorrelated variables that successively maximize variance. Using PCA, we 
can reduce the computational costs and the error of parameter estimation by reducing the 
number of dimensions of the feature space by extracting a subspace that describes the data 
best.
Technically, after standardizing the data, PCA extracts the eigenvectors and eigenvalues 
from the covariance matrix (CM):
where x′ is the mean vector x′=(1
n)/summationtextk=1
n (xi) . and the covariance between two features:
The eigenvalues are then arranged in descending order, and k eigenvectors correspond -
ing to k eigenvalues are chosen, where k is the number of dimensions of the new feature 
subspace ( K<d ). Next, PCA builds the projection matrix W from the selected k eigen -
vectors. And finally, it transforms the original dataset X via W to obtain a k-dimensional 
feature subspace Y=X∗W .
Mutual information (MI)
Unlike PCA, Mutual information calculates the statistical dependence between two vari -
ables. It measures how much information is communicated, on average, in one random 
variable about another and assigns a score for each feature. High MI score between two var -
iables indicates a large reduction in uncertainty; low mutual information indicates a small 
reduction while zero mutual information score means the variables are independent.
Therefore, the mutual information between two discrete variables X | AND Y | denoted 
I(X; Y), is defined by Cover and Thomas [24] as:
Here PX(x) and PY(y) are the marginals: PX(x)=/summationtext
yPXY(x ,y).CM=1
n−1((X−x′)T(X−x′))
Cvjk=/parenleftbigg1
n−1/parenrightbiggi=1/summationdisplay
n(xij−x′
j)(xik−x′
k)
I(X;Y)=/summationdisplay
x,yPXY(x ,y)logPXY(x ,y)
PX(x)PY(y)=EPXYlogPXY
PXPY