- 9
Khairy et al. [30] and Wauters et al. [31] apply PPO to
QAOA. Khairy et al. study the Farhi’s QAOA on MaxCut, and
show their approach allows for training on small instances that
is often transferable to larger cases. More broadly, Wauters et
al. show that a PPO approach learns the optimal policy for
finding the ground state of the transverse field Ising model
using small neural networks. They emphasize that the ability
to transfer policies from small samples to larger systems is
useful insofar as the larger models can be implemented as a
special-purpose experiment but solved using a noisier general-
purpose quantum computer.
In both cases there is future work to be done extending the
approaches to more problems and comparing reinforcement
learning algorithms on QAOA specific tasks. In fact, the liter-
ature seems so focused on PPO algorithms that a comparison
may be in order. Also, how implementation-level details within
the PPO algorithm affect QAOA performance remains unclear.
Altogether, we expect the intersection of RL and QAOA to
have plenty of room for research in both directions.
C. Genetic Algorithms
Genetic algorithms, introduced by Holland [65], draw in-
spiration from genetics to find global optima in complex
search spaces. The idea is to generate populations of feasible
solutions, subject them to something like natural selection,
crossover candidates reproductively, then mutate the results.
Repeating this process draws the population into maxima
while reserving the possibility to jump out of local traps [66].
In this way genetic algorithms have similar advantages as
reinforcement learning in QAOA, but find more interesting
applications in the compilation of quantum circuits.
In a similar vein as the QCC-ACO of Section IV-A, Rasconi
and Oddi use genetic algorithms to compile quantum circuits
with minimum makespan, optimizing for the limitations of
NISQ devices [33]. Their algorithm relies on an encoding
whereby candidates’ individual genes select quantum gates to
be added to the circuit. They test their results on QAOA in-
stances for the MaxCut problem and find encouraging results,
beating benchmark values in many cases. In the future, this
approach ought to be tested on more problems.
A similar approach was taken by Arufe et al., who also
benchmarked their decomposition-based genetic algorithm
with QAOA [32]. Their algorithm “outperformed the best
current method on the largest instances and provided new
best solutions to most of them”, supporting genetic algorithms
as a path forward for reliable near-term quantum circuit
compilation. Future genetic algorithms could push this field
further, perhaps for problems with multiple objectives.
D. Simulated Annealing
Simulated annealing, a metallurgy-inspired method for com-
binatorial optimization, proceeds by first “melting” a popula-
tion of solutions, then “cooling” until it “freezes” [67]. These
“high” temperatures allow for larger changes in the candidate
state, and as the temperature goes down only smaller changes
are allowed. Then the “freezing” is achieved by satisfying
some convergence criterion, completing the process.This method has been compared with quantum annealing,
which can be viewed as a variant of the same technique. Quan-
tum annealing, proposed by Kadowaki and Nishimori [68],
replaces the thermal effect-driven transitions of simulated
annealing with quantum tunneling. They show that quantum
annealing converges to the optimal solution of the transverse
Ising model obeying the time-dependent Schr ¨odinger equation
with higher probability than simulated annealing. Similarly,
Farhi et al. [69] give examples both of combinatorial opti-
mization problems where the techniques perform similarly and
where quantum annealing works better.
More recently, quantum annealing has been compared to
simulated annealing in the contexts of wireless network
scheduling [70]. This work should be compared with the
application of QAOA by Choi et al. [12] since QAOA is itself
an approximation of quantum annealing. Putting the pieces
together, therefore, QAOA is closely related to simulated
annealing. Borle et al. [71] show that simulated annealing
sometimes beats QAOA for a small number of angles, although
QAOA may gain an advantage in the limit as the number of
angles goes to infinity. This may point to problems on NISQ
devices, calling for more investigation.
E. Summary: QAOA and Computational Intelligence
How QAOA fits into the overall landscape of computational
intelligence is a topic that requires more research. As a
distant relative of simulated annealing, it connects with these
techniques in various ways. We have seen that computational
intelligence can be used to simplify the search space for
QAOA instances [62], and to compile the QAOA circuits
themselves [32], [33], [63]. They can also be used to train
an optimization algorithm for the QAOA VQA [30], [31].
But QAOA is also a competitor to these classical ap-
proaches, and is designed to deal with large, constrained,
and non-convex search spaces. QAOA may be more efficient
than the classical approaches for problems with search space
containing many local minima [13], although care must be
taken to protect the classical optimization loop of the VQA
from the impact of local minima. QAOA is a very robust
metaheuristic for discrete problems, whereas approaches such
as ACO work best when the solution space has a certain
structure (i.e., for the ants to traverse). However, QAOA
becomes more complicated for continuous problems.
Also, QAOA may yet achieve approximations outperform-
ing classical approaches. With more reliable quantum com-
puters coming in the medium term as qubits become more
robust and error-correcting improves, QAOA will be able to
operate with a larger number pof layers. This may lead us
to closer approximation values to the optimal, as the ansatz
has a theoretical convergence to a correct solution in the limit
of large p. However, even in the cases where QAOA has no
theoretical guarantee, it may be used as a heuristic to find
better solutions than classical heuristics. The hope is that, in
some cases, the resulting solutions may be provably better than
that obtained by classical counterparts. For example, Farhi et
al. proved a lower bound of 0.6924 for the approximation ratio
of MaxCut instances on 3-regular graphs for Farhi’s QAOA