- 8
Classical parameter space
Problem encodings [42]
Binary One-hot QuditOptimization algorithms
Qiskit optimizers [52] Basin hopping [46]
Interpolation-based StandardMonte Carlo [46] Analytic [6]Number of angles
ma-QAOA [48] QAOA+ [51] QAOA [6]
Fig. 6. An overview of the classical parameter space with references to works studying various specific choices for the parameters. The usual QAOA ansatz
has a parameter pfor the number of angles while QAOA+ and ma-QAOA add more variational angles. The study of optimization algorithm choice is mostly
numerical, while problem encodings are more important to the expression of an analytic formulation for a particular combinatorial optimization problem.
state preparation. B ¨artschi et al. also worked on constrained
optimization, where they study the superposition of Hamming
weight one states called Dicke states [46], [47]. They gave a
linear depth circuit for Dicke state preparation and applied it
to the max k-vertex cover problem. Their approach may work
well for other Hamming weight constrained problems, but that
requires more study to qualify. Combining these results yields
a mixer for Hamming weight constrained problems.
Other work focuses on rigorously proving facts about
QAOA. For example, Farhi and Harrow demonstrated
how sampling QAOA circuits can demonstrate quantum
supremacy [54]. More broadly, Hadfield et al. developed
an analytic framework for analyzing QAOA and used it to
demonstrate that QAOA always beats random guessing [55].
Of course there are many more modifications and applica-
tions than we can reasonably discuss in this article, and more
appear every week. We hope that these examples reasonably
exemplify the state of the art in QAOA research, and provide
helpful entry points for researchers interested in the field as a
whole. In the next section we will focus more specifically on
topics relevant to computational intelligence.
IV. C ONNECTIONS TO COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
In this section, we first discuss how well-known computa-
tional intelligence techniques such as ant colony optimization
and genetic algorithms can be used to improve QAOA. In
the same vein, we then also discuss how QAOA, viewed
as a computational intelligence technique, can substitute and
complement these well-known metaheuristics.
Ant colony optimization is used to simplify problems for
QAOA and to reliably compile quantum circuits. Genetic al-
gorithms do a better job of this compilation, and reinforcement
learning can be used to train transferable QAOA policies.
Also, due to their robustness compared to classical gradient
descent, these and other computational intelligence techniques
can be used to avoid barren plateaus–a pathology characteristic
to VQAs where vanishing gradients traps the optimizer in a
suboptimal region of the search space [56]. This is a topic
meriting further research attention due to the importance of
variational quantum algorithms.
The main advantage of QAOA over these classical methods
is the potential for guaranteed convergence to theoretically
optimal solutions, although that behaviour corresponds to the
limit as the number of angles goes to infinity. Therefore this
guarantee may not be feasibly exploitable on NISQ devices,
and a more careful comparison of optimization methods iswarranted for each particular problem. Even when the QAOA
may not converge, it can still serve as a useful heuristic for
finding near-optimal solutions.
A. Ant Colony Optimization
Introduced by Dorigo et al., ant colony optimization (ACO)
is a metaheuristic based on the swarm intelligence of ants [57].
Its most intuitive application is to the traveling salesperson
problem and its generalizations, with simulated ants ‘explor-
ing’ the problem graph. Some applications and history of the
algorithm is given in the survey by Dorigo et al. [58]
Some recent developments in ACO have centered on appli-
cations to multi-objective and continuous optimization [59],
[60], and improvements via parallelization [61]. In parallel
multi-colony optimization, threads run their own ant colonies
and exchange pheromone information based on an overarch-
ing inter-colony exchange policy . This technique appears in
emerging work on the application of ACO to QAOA.
Ghimire et al. approach the traveling salesperson problem
(TSP) on NISQ devices with QAOA, using parallel ACO to
break the graph into small enough pieces for noisy qubits to
work on [62]. They find encouraging results, usually staying
within 1% of benchmark values for medium size graphs ( n≤
150) and 16 threads. This hybrid technique should be studied
more generally, as it may to other classes of problems.
Furthermore, parallelization of quantum TSP is not the
only possible application of ACO to QAOA. Baioletti et al.
introduce an ACO algorithm (QCC-ACO) for efficient and
scalable compilation of quantum circuits [63]. This approach
should be tested on QAOA circuits due to the close association
between these algorithms, and QAOA’s role in near-term
quantum computing as a recognized benchmark [64].
B. Reinforcement Learning
Policy gradient methods (PGMs) for reinforcement learning
(RL) are current approaches for intelligent agents to find
optimal policies for decision-making. These approaches are
effective in combination with QAOA since they help avoid
getting trapped in local minima by reserving some probability
of jumping out of such traps. The OpenAI proximal policy
optimization (PPO) algorithm, introduced by Schulman et
al., is a strong contender within this space which perform
“multiple epochs of minibatch updates” per sample [30].
Benchmarked against existing PGMs with single updates, PPO
generally outperforms and runs more smoothly.