- 2
techniques such as genetic algorithms, ant colony optimiza-
tion, and particle swarm optimization. Conversely, techniques
such as genetic algorithms and reinforcement learning can be
applied to QAOA itself, in large part because they help avoid
suboptimal local optima in complex search spaces. We will
discuss comparisons to and connections with these topics, and
present potential future work in such directions.
The advantages of these techniques come when problems
have complicated solution spaces: for example, when these
spaces are constrained or not convex. In these situations simple
methods like classical gradient descent can get stuck in local
minima, or exponentially slowed down at saddle points [13].
QAOA has a theoretical guarantee to converge to an optimal
solution provided a reliable quantum computer, long runtimes,
and properly chosen parameters, suggesting the potential for
advantage. Each of these areas is a current topic of research;
for example, Wang et al. [14] provides an analytic expression
for optimal level-1 QAOA parameters. In practice the parame-
ters are numerically optimized (e.g. by gradient descent), and
the convergence is not always realized. Therefore, the practical
benefits of QAOA should come from heuristically leveraging
superpositions of solutions to find good approximate solutions
more quickly than classically possible.
In Section II, we introduce critical background informa-
tion: formalisms for combinatorial optimization problems and
quantum computing. We introduce two models, adiabatic
computing and the unitary gate model, which are relevant to
our subject. A discussion of variational quantum algorithms
follows, then some remarks on combinatorial metaheuristics.
In Section III we describe three algorithms. First, we look at
the quantum adiabatic algorithm (QAA) to exactly solve com-
binatorial optimization problems on quantum annealers, which
is then adapted as an approximation algorithm for general-
purpose quantum computers called the quantum approximate
optimization algorithm (Farhi’s QAOA). Then we discuss the
generalization of Farhi’s QAOA to a robust metaheuristic
called the quantum alternating operator ansatz (QAOA). We
look at recent directions and extensions of this ansatz: modi-
fied QAOA ans ¨atze, empirical studies, and analytic results.
Section IV connects QAOA to computational intelligence
more broadly, in particular to ant colony optimization, genetic
algorithms, simulated annealing and reinforcement learning.
These techniques can be applied to QAOA, and conversely
QAOA can be applied to them. This suggests future work in
both directions with other CI techniques.
Section V explores the process of QAOA algorithm design.
We discuss the mapping of QAOA parameters to the maxi-
mum cut problem and the asymmetric traveling salesperson
problem, showing implementations of crucial components in
Qiskit [15]. We modify the maximum cut instance to deal with
the constrained subspace search problem known as maximum
bisection. This section provides useful examples to practition-
ers looking to design QAOA instances for their own problems.
Section VI concludes with a high-level review of the paper
and discussion of further ideas for work in these directions.II. B ACKGROUND
Before getting into the details of the quantum algorithms,
we explain fundamental background topics: combinatorial
optimization problems, models for quantum computing, and
a formalism for variational quantum algorithms.
A. Combinatorial Optimization
Optimization problems are generally divided into two
groups: those with continuous variables and those with discrete
variables [16]. Some problems, such as some with sigmoid
utility, can be considered to have both types of variables [17],
although they are usually treated as continuous. In this paper
we focus on problems with purely discrete variables, which
we call ‘combinatorial’. Combinatorial optimization problems
can be formalized in different ways, and here we present a
formalism that is convenient for constructing our algorithms.
Definition. Aninstance for or model of a combinatorial
optimization problem is a pair (S, f)such that
•Sis a finite set of n-bit strings called the feasible solution
space orsearch space for the problem.
•fis a function S→Rcalled the cost function , with
respect to which we are to optimize.
A solution to such an instance (S, f)is a bitstring z∈S
such that z= max Sf. Of course, a minimization problem for
the same situation can be constructed by taking −fas the cost
function instead. In this sense, we say that maximization and
minimization are dual to one another. Also, we say a problem
isunconstrained ifS=2nandconstrained otherwise.
Combinatorial optimization problems are important in com-
puter science, where they provide fundamental examples of
NP-hard problems such as the traveling salesperson problem
and maximum satisfiability. In general, the decision versions
of NP-hard problems belong to the NP-complete class. Many
examples are collected in the classic book “Computers and
Intractability” by Garey and Johnson [18].
B. Linear Algebraic Concepts
In the rest of this section, we assume a basic familiarity
with linear algebra and quantum computing (for a refresher, we
suggest Chapters 1-4 of Nielsen and Chuang [19] and Abhijith
et al. [20]). However, we recall the most important concepts
here to keep this work relatively self-contained. We note that
the mathematical details in what follows are presented for
completeness; an exact understanding is not necessary for
understanding the overall concept(s).
Definition. Ann-qubit quantum state |ψ⟩is a nonzero
element of the vector space V=C2nwith the equivalence
relation ∼that for |ψ⟩,|ϕ⟩ ∈V,|ψ⟩ ∼ |ϕ⟩iff|ϕ⟩=λ|ψ⟩for
some nonzero scalar λ∈C. For simplicity we take normalized
vectors as class representatives. Briefly then, a state is an
element of CP2n−1, the complex projective space of C2n.
For a one-qubit system, we take the standard basis vectors
|0⟩and|1⟩as primitives, and write vectors using the Dirac bra-
ket notation that vectors (α
β)∈Varekets|v⟩=α|0⟩+β|1⟩