- 1
Quantum Approximate Optimization: A
Computational Intelligence Perspective
Christo Meriwether Keller, New Mexico State University, USA
Satyajayant Misra, New Mexico State University, USA
Andreas B ¨artschi, Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA
Stephan Eidenbenz, Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA
Abstract —Quantum computing is an emerging field on the
multidisciplinary interface between physics, engineering, and
computer science with the potential to make a large impact
on computational intelligence (CI). The aim of this paper is to
introduce quantum approximate optimization methods to the CI
community because of direct relevance to solving combinatorial
problems. We introduce quantum computing and variational
quantum algorithms (VQAs). VQAs are an effective method for
the near-term implementation of quantum solutions on noisy
intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices with less reliable
qubits and early-stage error correction. Then, we explain Farhi
et al.’s quantum approximate optimization algorithm (Farhi’s
QAOA, to prevent confusion). This VQA is generalized by
Hadfield et al. to the quantum alternating operator ansatz
(QAOA), which is a nature-inspired (particularly, adiabatic)
quantum metaheuristic for approximately solving combinatorial
optimization problems on gate-based quantum computers. We
discuss connections of QAOA to relevant domains, such as
computational learning theory and genetic algorithms, discussing
current techniques and known results regarding hybrid quantum-
classical intelligence systems. We present a schematic of how
QAOA is constructed, and also discuss how CI techniques
can be used to improve QAOA. We conclude with QAOA
implementations for the well-known maximum cut, maximum
bisection, and traveling salesperson problems, which can serve
as templates for CI practitioners interested in using QAOA.
Index Terms —Combinatorial optimization, variational quan-
tum algorithm, metaheuristic, quantum approximation algo-
rithm.
I. I NTRODUCTION
QUANTUM COMPUTING is an emerging technology
promising to disrupt various fields of industry. For
example, Shor’s polynomial-time quantum algorithm for the
factoring problem has spurred an ongoing search for robust
‘post-quantum’ cryptosystems. However, present-day quantum
computers are noisy and their performance tends to de-
crease sharply with increases in scale. General purpose ‘noisy
intermediate-scale quantum’ (NISQ) computers are unable to
reliably factor semiprimes as small as 35 = 5 ×7with Shor’s
algorithm, only succeeding around 14% of the time [1].
Shor’s algorithm can be implemented on universal gate-
based quantum computers with as few as O(ln(N))qubits [2].
Thus breaking current versions of RSA would take far more
reliable qubits than we currently have, laying out of reach
of NISQ devices—this is generally true for the use of most
promising quantum algorithms. This status quo has generatedinterest in variational quantum algorithms (VQAs), which
have emerged as the ‘leading proposal for achieving quantum
advantage on near-term quantum computers’ [3]. For example,
the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) has been used
for quantum chemical simulations of molecules on NISQ
devices [4], [5]. These hybrid quantum-classical algorithms
take a learning-based approach, parameterizing a quantum
‘ansatz’ and classically training it to give better results.
Thus error-prone quantum overhead is offloaded into classical
computation and better results achieved without giving up the
potential for quantum advantanges.
The quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA),
proposed by Farhi et al. [6], is a promising VQA metaheuristic
for combinatorial optimization. To clarify their derivation of
QAOA, we first describe the quantum adiabatic algorithm
(QAA) [7], a strategy comparable to simulated annealing but
forquantum annealers (or, hypothetically, adiabatic quantum
computers). Discretization of QAA results in QAOA, a heuris-
tic approximate unconstrained optimization VQA suitable for
general purpose quantum computers. QAOA was further gen-
eralized by Hadfield et al. [8] into a broader framework for
both constrained and unconstrained optimization on near-term
quantum computers, resulting in what they termed the quan-
tum alternating operator ansatz (with the same abbreviation,
QAOA). That is, Farhi’s QAOA algorithm inspired Hadfield’s
framework, which it is a special case of. The term QAOA
is ambiguous, with QAOA referring to both Farhi’s original
algorithm and Hadfield’s framework in the quantum computing
literature. In the rest of this paper, QAOA refers to Hadfield’s
framework. To refer to the original algorithm, we use the term
Farhi’s QAOA.
This ansatz is nature-inspired in the sense that it is compa-
rable to simulated annealing, and adiabatic in how it approxi-
mates the adiabatic evolution of a physical system. QAOA has
been applied to many important real-world problems. It has
promising applications to decision problems in quantitative
finance, for instance to discrete portfolio optimization [9]
and constrained transaction settlement [10]. Also, it has been
applied to more traditional engineering problems such as
vehicle routing [11] and wireless network scheduling [12].
Moreover, in its full generality, QAOA can be applied to
nearly any combinatorial optimization problem. This makes it
a metaheuristic comparable to other computational intelligencearXiv:2407.07202v1  [quant-ph]  9 Jul 2024