- 6
Algorithm 1 Algorithm 2
US
UP(γi) UM(βi)Optimize
piterations
QAOA pansatzβ,γ Cby
Fig. 4. A process diagram for the entire QAOA VQA (Algorithm 2). The red outer box represents the QAOA ansatz (Algorithm 1) as a whole while the inner
orange box represents the alternating operator approximation (Trotterization) of the QAA adiabatic process. This ansatz is fed into an overarching classical
optimization loop, which runs until some convergence criterion is met, or for a specified maximum number of iterations in the case that it fails to halt.
quantum alternating operator ansatz (QAOA) [8]. This ansatz
generalizes on the form of Farhi’s QAOA, focusing on three
quantum parameters , which we will briefly describe:
1) The phase separator operators UP(γ), generalize the
problem separators e−iγHC. These should be diagonal in
the computational basis, and efficient to produce. Also,
good solutions should have relatively large eigenvalues
separated by a spectral gap from bad solutions.
2) The mixing operators UM(β)generalize the transverse
field mixer e−iβHB. The search space Smust be invari-
ant under this family, and all feasible states x, y∈S
must satisfy the transition condition
|⟨x|Ur
M(β)|y⟩|>0 (3)
for some positive integer rand parameter value β.
Interpreting the Dirac bra-ket notation, this expression
means that there is a nonzero probability that measur-
ingUr
M(β)|t⟩yields |s⟩. These conditions explain the
intuitive notion this operator “mixes” the search space.
We ideally want to be able to efficiently build this gate,
and do not want it to commute with UP(γ)in general.
3) The initial state operator USproduces the initial state
|z0⟩. This state is usually chosen to represent the search
space or some subset of it. For example, in Farhi’s
QAOA, USproduces the superposition of S=2n, the
entire unconstrained search space. Any such operator
USshould be trivial in that it should be a small constant
depth circuit w.r.t. n. In particular, Hadfield et al. caution
that relaxations of this triviality condition much beyond
logarithmic “would obviate the usefulness of the ansatz
... and should be considered hybrid algorithms, with an
initialization part and a QAOA part” [8]. However, such
hybrid algorithms may still be of independent interest.
It is clear that the quantum approximate optimization al-
gorithm satisfies these conditions. First, the phase separator
UP(γj) = exp( −iγjHC)is diagonal since HCis diagonal.
Next, the mixer UM(βj) = exp( −iβjHB)sends |x⟩to|y⟩with some probability (for βj̸= 0 ) since HBdoes with
probability 1/2n. Thus we can take r= 1 for the transition
condition, equation 3 above. Finally, US=H⊗nproduces the
state|z0⟩=|+⟩⊗ninO(1)with respect to n.
It’s desirable for operators to be exponents of the form
exp(−iαP
jajHj), for commutative Hj, allowing for imple-
mentation using unitary gates with the form exp(−iαajHj).
In any event, these parameters form the QAOA pansatz
UM(βp)UP(γp)···UM(β1)UP(γ1)US
by analogy with the quantum approximate optimization algo-
rithm. See Fig. 3 for a schematic diagram of this quantum
circuit, and Algorithm 1 for a pseudocode implementation.
Other critical design choices go into this algorithm, which
we call classical parameters and summarize below:
•The number of angles 2p. This somewhat innocuous
choice conceals a design paradox: the algorithm should
theoretically run better with larger p; however larger p
increases the circuit depth, exposing the computation to
a higher risk for NISQ device quantum errors.
•The optimization algorithm used for the classical part
of the VQA can critically affect the performance. This
includes a convergence criterion to stop the algorithm
after a certain point. In the case a theoretical optimum x
is not known, you can wait for the result to converge to
some small error. Also, a maximum number of iteration
max itershould be included to ensure the program halts.
•The problem encoding affects the choices for all other
parameters. For example, toy optimization problems with
just two feasible solutions can be encoded as one bit with
thebinary encoding {0,1}or as two bits with the one-hot
encoding {10,01}. For more discussion see [42].
Choosing an optimization algorithm allows us to construct
the variational part of the algorithm, given in Algorithm 2.
Taking all these choices together gives us the entire QAOA
VQA, depicted by a process diagram in Fig. 4.