9 Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank everyone who has contributed their datasets to CLUE. We are also grateful
to the annotators and engineers who have spent much of their time and effort helping with the creation
of the CLUE benchmark. Special thanks to the following companies and organizations: OneConnect
Financial Technology Co., Ltd, OpenBayes Co., Ltd, AI-Indeed.com, Alibaba Cloud Computing, Joint
Laboratory of HIT and iFLYTEK Research (HFL). Research supported with Cloud TPUs from Google’s
TensorFlow Research Cloud (TFRC).
References
Mart ´ın Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S Corrado, Andy
Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, et al. 2016. Tensorﬂow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous
distributed systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467 .
Alexis Conneau and Douwe Kiela. 2018. SentEval: An evaluation toolkit for universal sentence representations.
InProceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018) .
Alexis Conneau, Ruty Rinott, Guillaume Lample, Adina Williams, Samuel R. Bowman, Holger Schwenk, and
Veselin Stoyanov. 2018. XNLI: Evaluating cross-lingual sentence representations. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yiming Cui, Ting Liu, Wanxiang Che, Li Xiao, Zhipeng Chen, Wentao Ma, Shijin Wang, and Guoping Hu. 2019.
A span-extraction dataset for Chinese machine reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5886–5891, Hong Kong, China, November. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yiming Cui, Wanxiang Che, Ting Liu, Bing Qin, Shijin Wang, and Guoping Hu. 2020. Revisiting pre-trained
models for chinese natural language processing. In Findings of EMNLP . Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
tional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Hai Hu, Kyle Richardson, Xu Liang, Li Lu, Sandra K ¨ubler, and Larry Moss. 2020. OCNLI: Original Chinese
natural language inference. In Findings of Empirical Methods for Natural Language Processing (Findings of
EMNLP) .
LTD. IFLYTEK CO. 2019. Iﬂytek: a multiple categories chinese text classiﬁer. competition ofﬁcial website,
http://challenge.xfyun.cn/2019/gamelist .
Ryan Kiros, Yukun Zhu, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Richard Zemel, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja
Fidler. 2015. Skip-thought vectors. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 3294–3302.
Taku Kudo and John Richardson. 2018. SentencePiece: A simple and language independent subword tokenizer
and detokenizer for neural text processing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 66–71.
Guokun Lai, Qizhe Xie, Hanxiao Liu, Yiming Yang, and Eduard Hovy. 2017. RACE: Large-scale ReAding
Comprehension Dataset From Examinations. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing , pages 785–794.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut. 2019.
ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-supervised Learning of Language Representations. In International Conference
on Learning Representations .
Hector Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgenstern. 2012. The winograd schema challenge. In Thirteenth
International Conference on the Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning .
Junyi Li, Hai Hu, Xuanwei Zhang, Minglei Li, Lu Li, and Liang Xu. 2020. Light pre-trained Chinese language
model for nlp tasks. In Xiaodan Zhu, Min Zhang, Yu Hong, and Ruifang He, editors, Natural Language
Processing and Chinese Computing , pages 567–578. Springer International Publishing.