TNEWSsentence: 如果我的世界下架了，你会玩迷你世界吗？
sentence (en): If Minecraft is gone, will you play miniworld?
label: 116(news game)iFLYTEKsentence: 《钢铁英雄》是一款角色扮演类游戏。游戏拥有......带领他们逃出去。修复部分小错误，提升整
体稳定性。
sentence (en): ”Heroes of Steel” is a role-playing game. The game has ...... all four heroes are imprisoned and you
will lead them out. repair part small Errors to improve overall stability.
label: 22(Strategy)CLUEWSCtext:这时候放在床上枕头旁边的手机响了，我感到奇怪，因为欠费已被停机两个月，现在它突然响了。
text (en): At this moment, the cellphone on the bed next to the pillow rang. I feel this is quite strange because the
cellphone plan was terminated two months ago since I did not pay the bill. Now it was ringing all of a sudden.
label: trueAFQMCsentence1: 本月花呗还不上怎么办sentence2: 花呗超时怎么办
sentence1 (en): What to do if Ant Credit Pay is not available yet this month sentence2 (en): How to deal with Ant
Credit Pay overtime
label: 0(different)CSLabst:不同阶段电子数据的操作都会留下表现各异的轨迹 .从操作系统、计算机应用系统......分析审计电子数
据轨迹在计算机系统中表现形式 ,可以为审计人员提供有效的审计方法
keyword: [“计算机审计”, “数据轨迹 ”, “日志文件”]
abst (en): The operation of electronic data in different stages will leave different traces. From operating system,
computer application system ...... provide effective audit methods for auditors by analyzing the expression of audit
electronic data trace in computer system.
keyword (en): [“computer audit”, “data trace”, “log ﬁle”]
label: 0(false)OCNLIpremise:但是不光是中国,日本,整个东亚文化都有这个特点就是被权力影响很深hypothesis: 有超过两个东
亚国家有这个特点
premise (en): But not only China and Japan, the entire East Asian culture has this feature, that is it is deeply inﬂuenced
by the power. hypothesis (en): More than two East Asian countries have this feature.
label: entailmentCMRC 2018context: 萤火虫工作室是一家总部设在英国伦敦和康涅狄格州坎顿......目前，他们正在开发PC和Xbox360 上
的次时代游戏。
question: 萤火虫工作室的总部设在哪里？answer:英国伦敦和康涅狄格州坎顿
context (en): Fireﬂy Studios is a video game developer based in London, UK and Canton, Connecticut, with a quality
department in Aberdeen, Scotland ...... Currently, they are developing next-generation games on PC and Xbox 360.
question (en): Where is Fireﬂy Studios headquartered? answer (en): London, UK and Canton, ConnecticutChIDcontent: 中国青年报：篮协改革联赛切莫#idiom# ......
candidates: [“急功近利”, “画蛇添足”, “本末倒置”(answer)]
content (en): China Youth Daily: Chinese Basketball Association should not #idiom# when reforming the league ......
candidates (en): [“seeking instant beneﬁt”, “to overdo it”, “take the branch for the root ”(answer)]C3document: 男：我们坐在第七排，应该能看清楚字幕吧?女：肯定可以，对了，我们得把手机设成振动。
question: 他们最可能在哪儿?
candidates: [“图书馆”, “体育馆”,“电影院”(answer),“ 火车站”]
document (en): Man: Our seats are in the seventh row. We should be able to see the subtitles clearly, right? Woman:
Absolutely. By the way, we should set the phone to vibrate.
question (en) :Where does the conversation most probably take place?
candidates (en): [“In a library”, “In a stadium”,“In a cinema ”(answer),“At a train station”]
Table 5: Development set examples from the tasks in CLUE. Bold text represents part of the example
format for each task. Chinese text is part of the model input, and the corresponding text in italics is
the English version translated from that. Underlined text is specially marked in the input. Text in a
monospaced font represents the expected model output.