Predictions Accuracy
# Premise Hypothesis
goldBE RO XL BE RO XL
Anaphora 48马丽和她的母亲李琴一起住在
这里。
Ma Li and her mother Li Qin live
here together.马丽是李琴的母亲。
Ma Li is Li Qin’s mother.C E E E 47.9 58.3 47.9
Argument
structure50小白看见小红在打游戏。
Xiao Bai saw Xiao Hong playing
video games.小红在打太极拳。
Xiao Hong is doing Tai Chi.C C C C 60.0 60.0 54.0
Common sense 50小明没有工作。
Xiaoming doesn’t have a job.小明没有住房。
Xiaoming doesn’t have a place to
live.N N N C 44.0 58.0 48.0
Comparative 50这筐桔子比那筐多。
This basket has more oranges than
that one.这筐桔子比那筐多了不少。
This basket has much more or-
anges than that one.N E E E 36.0 56.0 46.0
Double nega-
tion24你别不把小病小痛当一回事。
Don’t take minor illness as noth-
ing.你应该重视小病小痛。
You should pay attention to minor
illness.E E E E 54.2 62.5 62.5
Lexical seman-
tics100小红很难过。
Xiaohong is sad.小红很难看。
Xiaohong is ugly.N E N E 62.0 70.0 64.0
Monotonicity 60有些学生喜欢在公共澡堂里唱
歌。
Some students like to sing in the
shower room.有些女生喜欢在公共澡堂里唱
歌。
Some female students like to sing
in the shower room.N N N N 41.7 43.3 43.3
Negation 78女生宿舍，男生勿入。
Girls dormitory, no entering for
boys.女生宿舍只能女生进出。
Only girls can go in and out of the
girls dormitory.E E C C 62.8 64.1 60.3
Time of event 54记者去年采访企业家了。
The reporter interviewed the en-
trepreneur last year.记者经常采访企业家。
The reporter interviews the en-
trepreneur very often.N N N N 61.1 74.1 59.3
Total 53.5 61.5 54.7
Table 4: The CLUE diagnostics: Example test items in 9 linguistic categories, with their gold labels and
model predictions, as well as model accuracy. E = entailment, N = neutral, C = contradiction. BE =
BERT-base, RO = RoBERTa-wwm-ext-large, XL = XLNet-mid.
A breakdown of results is presented in the last few columns of Table 4. Monotonicity is the hardest,
similar to GLUE diagnostics (Wang et al., 2018). It seems that BERT also has a hard time dealing
with comparatives. An interesting case is the example of lexical semantics in Table 4, where the two
two-character words “sad” ( 难过hard-pass ) and “ugly” ( 难看hard-look ) in Chinese have the same ﬁrst
character ( 难hard ). Thus the premise and hypothesis only differ in the last character, which two out of
three models have decided to ignore. One possible explanation is that these models in Chinese are also
using the simple lexical overlap heuristic, as illustrated in McCoy et al. (2019) for English.
8 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we present a Chinese Language Understanding Evaluation (CLUE) benchmark, which
consists of 9 natural language understanding tasks and a linguistically motivated diagnostic dataset, along
with an online leaderboard for model evaluation. In addition, we release a large clean crawled raw text
corpus that can be directly used for pre-training Chinese models. To the best of our knowledge, CLUE is
the ﬁrst comprehensive language understanding benchmark developed for Chinese. We evaluate several
latest language representation models on CLUE and analyze their results. An analysis is conducted on
the diagnostic dataset created by Chinese linguists, which illustrates the limited ability of state-of-the-art
models to handle some Chinese linguistic phenomena.
In contrast to the English benchmarks such as GLUE and SuperGLUE, where model performance is
already at human performance, we can see that Chinese NLU still has considerable room for improvement
(i.e., models are 10% below our estimates of human performance), meaning that we expect that our
benchmark will facilitate building better models in the short-term. Once models have reached human
performance, however, we believe that extending our benchmark to newer tasks, or newer forms of
evaluation (e.g., taking into account performance as a function of model size as in (Li et al., 2020)), could
be a step forward. In this sense, we view CLUE, which is an entirely community-driven project, to be
open-ended in that our current set of tasks serve as a ﬁrst step in more comprehensively evaluating Chinese
NLU.