trained on different and relatively small corpora. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to improve model performance
and compare them across model architectures. This difﬁculty motivates us to construct and release a
standard CLUE pre-training dataset: a corpus with over 214GB raw text and roughly 76billion Chinese
words. We also introduce a diagnostic dataset hand-crafted by linguists. Similar to GLUE, this dataset is
designed to highlight linguistic and common knowledge and logical operators that we expect models to
handle well.
Overall, we present in this paper: (1) A Chinese natural language understanding benchmark that
covers a variety of sentence classiﬁcation and machine reading comprehension tasks, at different levels
of difﬁculty, in different sizes and forms. (2) A large-scale raw corpus for general-purpose pre-training
in Chinese so that the comparisons across different model architectures are as meaningful as possible.
(3) A diagnostic evaluation dataset developed by linguists containing multiple linguistic phenomena,
some of which are unique to Chinese. (4) A user-friendly toolkit, as well as an online leaderboard with
an auto-evaluation system, supporting all our evaluation tasks and models, with which researchers can
reproduce experimental results and compare the performance of different submitted models easily.
2 Related Work
It has been a common practice to evaluate language representations on different intrinsic and downstream
NLP tasks. For example, Mikolov et al. (2013) measure word embeddings through a semantic analogy
task and a syntactic analogy task. Pennington et al. (2014) further expands the testing set to include
other word similarity and named entity recognition tasks. Similar evaluation procedures are also used for
sentence representations (Kiros et al., 2015). However, as different researchers use different evaluation
pipelines on different datasets, results reported in the papers are not always fully comparable, especially
in the case where the datasets are small, where a minor change in evaluation can lead to big differences in
outcomes.
SentEval (Conneau and Kiela, 2018) addresses the above problem by introducing a standard evaluation
pipeline using a set of popular sentence embedding evaluation datasets. GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) and
SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019) further improve SentEval by providing benchmarks for natural language
understanding tasks, ensuring that results from different models are consistent and comparable. They
introduce a set of more difﬁcult datasets and a model-agnostic evaluation pipeline. Along with other
reading comprehension tasks like SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) and RACE (Lai et al., 2017), GLUE and
SuperGLUE have become standard testing benchmarks for pre-training methods such as BERT (Devlin et
al., 2019) and ALBERT (Lan et al., 2019).
We believe a similar problem exists in Chinese language understanding evaluation. Although more and
more Chinese linguistic tasks (Liu et al., 2018; Cui et al., 2019) have been proposed, there is still a need
for a standard evaluation pipeline and an evaluation benchmark with a set of diverse and difﬁcult language
understanding tasks.
3 CLUE Overview
CLUE consists of 1) nine language understanding tasks in Chinese, 2) a large-scale raw dataset for
pre-training and a small hand-crafted diagnostic dataset for linguistic analysis, and 3) a ranking system, a
leaderboard and a toolkit.
3.1 Task Selection
For this benchmark, we selected nine different tasks, to ensure that the benchmark tests different aspects
of pre-trained models. To ensure the quality and coverage of the language understanding tasks, we select
tasks using the following criteria:
Diversity The tasks in CLUE should vary in terms of the task, the size of the text, the type of under-
standing required, the number of training examples.
Well-deﬁned and easy-to-process We select tasks that are well-deﬁned, and we pre-process them for
our users so that they can focus on modeling.