Next, we want to highlight the results from ALBERT-tiny, which has only about 1/20 of the parameters
in BERT-base model. Our results suggest that for single-sentence or sentence-pair tasks, the performance
drop compared with BERT-base can range from almost 0 (for CLUEWSC2020) to roughly 12 percentage
points (IFLYTEK). However, for tasks involving more global understanding, small models have more
serious limitations, as illustrated by ALBERT-tiny’s low accuracy in all three machine reading tasks, with
a performance drop of up to 40 percentage compared with BERT-base (ChID).
Finally, XLNet-mid, a model based on a common unsupervised tokenizer in English called Sentence-
Piece (Kudo and Richardson, 2018), performs poorly in token level Chinese tasks like span-extraction
based MRC (CMRC 2018). This highlights the need for our Chinese-speciﬁc benchmark which provides
empirical results as to whether successful techniques in English can be readily applied or transferred to a
very different language such as Chinese, where no word boundaries are present in running texts.
Analysis of Tasks It seems that what is easy for human may not be so for machine. For instance,
humans are very accurate in multiple-choice reading comprehension (C3), whereas machines struggle in it
(ALBERT-tiny has a very low accuracy of about 32%, probably due to the small size of the model). The
situation is similar for CLUEWSC2020, where the best score of models is far behind human performance
(about 17 percentage points). Note that in SuperGLUE, RoBERTa did very well on the English WSC
(89% against 100% for humans), whereas in our case, the performance of variants of RoBERTa is still
much lower than the average human performance, though it is better than other models.
On the other hand, tasks such as CSL and ChID seem to be of equal difﬁculty for humans and machines,
with accuracies in the 80’s for both. For humans, the keyword judgment task (CSL) is hard because
the fake keywords all come from the abstract of the journal article, which has many technical terms.
Annotators are unlikely to perform well when working with unfamiliar jargon.
Surprisingly, the hardest dataset for both humans and machines is a single sentence task: TNEWS.
One possible reason is that news titles can potentially fall under multiple categories (e.g., ﬁnance and
technology) at the same time, while there is only one gold label in TNEWS.
The best result from machines remains far below human performance, with roughly 11 points lower
than human performance on average. This leaves much room for further improvement of models and
methods, which we hope will drive the Chinese NLP community forward.
7 Diagnostic Dataset for CLUE
Dataset Creation In order to examine whether the trained models can master linguistically important
and meaningful phenomena, we follow GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) to provide a diagnostic dataset, setting
up as a natural language inference task and predicting whether a hypothesis is entailed by,contradicts
to or is neutral to a given premise. Crucially, we did not translate the English diagnostics into Chinese,
as the items in their dataset may be speciﬁc to English language or American/Western culture. Instead,
we have several Chinese linguists hand-crafting 514 sentence pairs in idiomatic Chinese from scratch.
These pairs cover 9 linguistic phenomena and are manually labeled by the same group of linguists. We
ensured that the labels are balanced (majority baseline is 35.1%). Examples are shown in Table 4. Some
of the categories directly address the unique linguistic properties of Chinese. For instance, items in the
“Time of event” category test models on their ability to handle aspect markers such as 着(imperfective
marker),了(perfective marker), 过(experiential marker), which convey information about the time of
event, whether it is happening now or has already happened in the past. We believe that for a model
to make robust inferences, it needs to understand such unique Chinese phenomena, and also has other
important linguistic abilities, such as handling anaphora resolution (Webster et al., 2018) and monotonicity
reasoning (Yanaka et al., 2019; Richardson et al., 2020).
Evaluation and Error Analysis We evaluate three representative models on the diagnostic dataset:
BERT-base, XLNet-mid, RoBERTa-wwm-ext-large. Each model is ﬁne-tuned on OCNLI, and then tested
on our diagnostic dataset. As illustrated in Table 4, the highest accuracy is only about 61%, which
indicates that models have a hard time solving these linguistically challenging problems. We believe that
both models and inference datasets suggest room for improvement.