CLUE: A Chinese Language Understanding Evaluation Benchmark
Liang Xu, Hai Hu, Xuanwei Zhang, Lu Li, Chenjie Cao, Yudong Li, Yechen Xu, Kai Sun,
Dian Yu, Cong Yu, Yin Tian, Qianqian Dong, Weitang Liu, Bo Shi, Yiming Cui, Junyi Li,
Jun Zeng, Rongzhao Wang, Weijian Xie, Yanting Li, Yina Patterson, Zuoyu Tian,
Yiwen Zhang, He Zhou, Shaoweihua Liu, Zhe Zhao, Qipeng Zhao, Cong Yue,
Xinrui Zhang, Zhengliang Yang, Kyle Richardson and Zhenzhong Lan
CLUE team
CLUE@CLUEbenchmarks.com
Abstract
The advent of natural language understanding (NLU) benchmarks for English, such as GLUE
and SuperGLUE allows new NLU models to be evaluated across a diverse set of tasks. These
comprehensive benchmarks have facilitated a broad range of research and applications in natural
language processing (NLP). The problem, however, is that most such benchmarks are limited
to English, which has made it difﬁcult to replicate many of the successes in English NLU for
other languages. To help remedy this issue, we introduce the ﬁrst large-scale Chinese Language
Understanding Evaluation (CLUE) benchmark. CLUE is an open-ended, community-driven
project that brings together 9 tasks spanning several well-established single-sentence/sentence-pair
classiﬁcation tasks, as well as machine reading comprehension, all on original Chinese text. To
establish results on these tasks, we report scores using an exhaustive set of current state-of-the-art
pre-trained Chinese models (9 in total). We also introduce a number of supplementary datasets
and additional tools to help facilitate further progress on Chinese NLU. Our benchmark is released
athttps://www.CLUEbenchmarks.com
1 Introduction
Full-network pre-training methods such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and their improved versions
(Yang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2019) have led to signiﬁcant performance boosts across
many natural language understanding (NLU) tasks. One key driving force behind such improvements
and rapid iterations of models is the general use of evaluation benchmarks. These benchmarks use a
single metric to evaluate the performance of models across a wide range of tasks. However, existing
language evaluation benchmarks are mostly in English, e.g., GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) and SuperGLUE
(Wang et al., 2019). To the best of our knowledge, there is no general language understanding evaluation
benchmark for Chinese, whose speakers account for one-fourth of the world’s population. Also, Chinese
is linguistically very different from English and other Indo-European languages, which necessitates an
evaluation benchmark speciﬁcally designed for Chinese. Without such a benchmark, it would be difﬁcult
for researchers in the ﬁeld to check how good their Chinese language understanding models are.
To address this problem and facilitate studies in Chinese language, we introduce a comprehensive
Chinese Language Understanding Evaluation (CLUE) benchmark that contains a collection of nine
different natural language understanding tasks (two of which are created by us), including semantic
similarity, natural language inference, short text classiﬁcation, long text classiﬁcation with large number of
classes, and different types of machine reading comprehension tasks. To better understand the challenges
posed by these tasks, we evaluate them using several popular pre-trained language understanding models
for Chinese. Overall, we ﬁnd that these tasks display different levels of difﬁculty, manifest in different
accuracies across models, as well as the comparison between human and machine performance.
The size and quality of unlabeled corpora play an essential role in language model pre-training (Devlin
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2019). There are already popular pre-training
corpora such as Wikipedia and the Toronto Book Corpus (Zhu et al., 2015) in English. However, we are
not aware of any large-scale open-source pre-training dataset in Chinese. Also Chinese models are mainly
 Corresponding author. E-mail: lanzhenzhong@westlake.edu.cnarXiv:2004.05986v3  [cs.CL]  5 Nov 2020