Moderate difﬁculty: challenging but solvable To be included in CLUE, a task should not be too
simple or already solved so as to encourage researchers to design better models (e.g., multiple-choice
machine reading comprehension task).
Representative and useful Our tasks should be representative of common language understanding
tasks, easily applicable to real-world situations (e.g., classiﬁcation task with many labels, or semantic
similarity task).
Tailor to Chinese-speciﬁc characteristics Ideally, tasks should measure the ability of models to handle
Chinese-speciﬁc linguistic phenomena (e.g., four-character idioms).
Although Chinese is not a low-resource language, it is still non-trivial to ﬁnd and collect NLU tasks
in Chinese, given a lack of diverse publicly available NLP datasets relative to English. Therefore apart
from scrutinizing existing literature, we also sent out a call-for-tasks to the Chinese NLP community
from which we received proposals or suggestions for several new datasets.1In addition, to help overcome
the lack of publicly-available NLU-oriented sentence-/sentence-pair classiﬁcation tasks for Chinese, we
created two new tasks for our benchmark (CLUEWSC2020 and CSL, see section 4 for details). Based
on the above standards, we gathered a total of nine tasks in the end, seven of them selected from our
collected datasets plus two newly created by us. These tasks cover a broad range of text genres, linguistic
phenomena and task-formats.
3.2 Large-scale Pre-Training Dataset
We collect data from the internet and preprocess them to make a large pre-training dataset for Chinese
language processing researchers. In the end, a total of 214GB raw corpus with around 76billion Chinese
words are collected in our pre-training corpus (see Section 5 for details).
3.3 Diagnostic Dataset
In order to measure how well models are doing on speciﬁc language understanding phenomena, we
handcraft a diagnostic dataset that contains nine linguistic and logic phenomena (details in Section 7).
3.4 Leaderboard
We also provide a leaderboard for users to submit their own results on CLUE. The evaluation system will
give ﬁnal scores for each task when users submit their predicted results. To encourage reproducibility, we
mark the score of a model as “certiﬁed” if it is open-source, and we can reproduce the results.
3.5 Toolkit
To make it easier for using the CLUE benchmark, we also offer a toolkit named PyCLUE implemented in
TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016). PyCLUE supports mainstream pre-training models and a wide range
of target tasks. Different from existing pre-training model toolkits (Wolf et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019),
PyCLUE is designed with a goal of quick model performance validations on the CLUE benchmark.
4 Tasks
CLUE has nine Chinese NLU tasks, covering single sentence classiﬁcation, sentence pair classiﬁcation,
and machine reading comprehension. Descriptions of these tasks are shown in Table 1, and examples of
these are shown in Table 5 in the Appendix.
4.1 Single Sentence Tasks
TNEWS TouTiao Text Classiﬁcation for News Titles2consists of Chinese news published by TouTiao
before May 2018, with a total of 73,360 titles. Each title is labeled with one of 15news categories (ﬁnance,
technology, sports, etc.) and the task is to predict which category the title belongs to. To make the dataset
1We only accepted some of them because other tasks were either not well-deﬁned, or are normally not counted as NLU tasks
(e.g., named-entity recognition).
2https://github.com/fatecbf/toutiao-text-classﬁcation-dataset/