Sinkhorn AutoEncoders
Giorgio Patrini⇤•
UvA Bosch Delta Lab
Samarth Bhargav
University of AmsterdamRianne van den Berg⇤†
University of Amsterdam
Max Welling
University of Amsterdam
CIFARPatrick Forr´ e
University of Amsterdam
Tim Genewein ‡
Bosch Center for
Artiﬁcial IntelligenceMarcello Carioni
KFU Graz
Frank Nielsen
´Ecole Polytechnique
Sony CSL
Abstract
Optimal transport o↵ers an alternative to
maximum likelihood for learning generative
autoencoding models. We show that mini-
mizing the p-Wasserstein distance between
the generator and the true data distribution
is equivalent to the unconstrained min-min
optimization of the p-Wasserstein distance
between the encoder aggregated posterior
and the prior in latent space, plus a recon-
struction error. We also identify the role of
its trade-o↵ hyperparameter as the capac-
ity of the generator: its Lipschitz constant.
Moreover, we prove that optimizing the en-
coder over any class of universal approxima-
tors, such as deterministic neural networks,
is enough to come arbitrarily close to the
optimum. We therefore advertise this frame-
work, which holds for any metric space and
prior, as a sweet-spot of current generative
autoencoding objectives.
We then introduce the Sinkhorn auto-
encoder (SAE), which approximates and
minimizes the p-Wasserstein distance in la-
tent space via backprogation through the
Sinkhorn algorithm. SAE directly works
on samples, i.e. it models the aggregated
posterior as an implicit distribution, with
no need for a reparameterization trick for
gradients estimations. SAE is thus able to
work with di↵erent metric spaces and priors
with minimal adaptations.
We demonstrate the ﬂexibility of SAE on
latent spaces with di↵erent geometries and
priors and compare with other methods on
benchmark data sets.
⇤Equal contributions.•Now at Deeptrace. †Now at
Google Brain. ‡Now at DeepMind.1I N T R O D U C T I O N
Unsupervised learning aims at ﬁnding the underlying
rules that govern a given data distribution PX. It can
be approached by learning to mimic the data genera-
tion process, or by ﬁnding an adequate representation
of the data. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014) belong to the former class,
by learning to transform noise into an implicit dis-
tribution that matches the given one. AutoEncoders
(AE) (Hinton and Salakhutdinov, 2006) are of the
latter type, by learning a representation that maxi-
mizes the mutual information between the data and
its reconstruction, subject to an information bottle-
neck. Variational AutoEncoders (VAE) (Kingma and
Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014), provide both a
generative model — i.e. a prior distribution PZon
the latent space with a decoder G(X|Z) that models
the conditional likelihood — and an encoder Q(Z|X)
— approximating the posterior distribution of the
generative model. Optimizing the exact marginal
likelihood is intractable in latent variable models
such as VAE’s. Instead one maximizes the Evidence
Lower BOund (ELBO) as a surrogate. This objec-
tive trades o↵ a reconstruction error of the input
distribution PXand a regularization term that aims
at minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
from the approximate posterior Q(Z|X) to the prior
PZ.
An alternative principle for learning generative au-
toencoders comes from the theory of Optimal Trans-
port (OT) (Villani, 2008), where the usual KL-
divergence KL( PX,PG) is replaced by OT-cost diver-
gences Wc(PX,PG), among which the p-Wasserstein
distances Wpare proper metrics. In the papers
Tolstikhin et al. (2018); Bousquet et al. (2017) it
was shown that the objective Wc(PX,PG) can be
re-written as the minimization of the reconstruction
error of the input PXover all probabilistic encoders