E. Detection and Monitoring of ML systems
Currently, ML environments are illegible to security analysts
as they have no operational insights. There has been insightful
working pointing to the brittleness of current adversarial de-
tection mechanisms [46] and how to make them better [19]. In
addition, we propose that detection methods are written so that
they are easily shared among security analysts. For instance,
in traditional software security, detection logic is written in
a common format, the most popular of which is Sigma [55].
Where MITRE ATT&CK provides a great repository of insight
in techniques used by adversaries, Sigma can turn one analyst’s
insights into defensive action for many, by providing a way
to self-documented concrete logic for detecting an attacker’s
techniques.
V. G APS WHEN PREPARING FOR DEPLOYMENT OF ML
SYSTEM
A. Automating Tools in Deployment Pipeline
In a typical traditional software setting, after a developer
as the developer completes small chunks of the assigned
task, the following sequence of steps generally follow: ﬁrst,
the code is committed to source control and Continuous
Integration triggers application build and unit tests; once these
are passed, Continuous Deployment triggers an automated
deployment into testing and then production wherein it reaches
the customer. At each step of the “build”, security tools are
integrated.
We hope that dynamic analysis tools built for adversarial
ML are integrated into the continuous integration / continuous
delivery pipeline. Automating the adversarial ML testing,
will help ﬁx issues and without overloading engineers with
too many tools or alien processes outside of their everyday
engineering experience.
B. Red Teaming ML Systems
Informally, the risk of an attack to an organization depends
on two factors: the impact it has on the business and the
likelihood of the attack occurring. Threat modeling of ML
Systems [56], performed by the ML developers, address the
impact factor. Red teaming, the deliberate process of exploiting
the system through any means possible conducted by an inde-
pendent security team, helps to assess the likelihood factor. For
critical security applications, red teaming is industry standard
and a requirement for providing software to US governments
[57]. With Facebook being the ﬁrst industry to start an AI Red
Team [58] and is unexplored area in the adversarial ML ﬁeld
for others.
C. Transparency Centers
In traditional security, large organizations such as Kaspersky
[59], Huawei [60] have provided “transparency centers” where
participants visit a secure facility to conduct deep levels
of source code inspection and analysis. Participants would
have access to source code and an environment for in-depth
inspection with diagnostic tools to verify the security aspectsof different products such as SSL and TCP/IP implementation
or pseudorandom number generators.
In adversarial ML context, future transparency centers may
need to attest over 3 modalities: that the ML platform is
implemented in a secure fashion; that the MLaaS is imple-
mented meeting basic security objectives and ﬁnally, that the
ML model embedded in an edge device (such as models on
mobile phones, for instance) meets basic security objectives.
An interesting direction for future research is to providing
tools/test harnesses to advance security assurance of products
building on top of formal veriﬁcation such as [61], [62] to
extend to large scale ML models used in industry.
VI. G APS WHEN AN ML S YSTEM IS UNDER ATTACK
A. Tracking and Scoring ML Vulnerabilities
In traditional software security, when a researcher ﬁnds a
vulnerability in a system, it is ﬁrst assigned a unique identi-
ﬁcation number and registered in a database called Common
Vulnerabilities and Exposure [63]. Accompanying these vul-
nerabilities are severity ratings calculated by using Common
Vulnerability Scoring System [64]. For instance, in the recent
zero day found against Internet Explorer that allowed for
remote code execution [65] the vulnerability was referred to
as ”CVE-2020-0674” and had assigned a base CVSS score 7.5
out of 10 [66], roughly indicating the seriousness of the bug.
This enables the entire industry to refer to the problem using
the same tongue.
In an ML context, we ask the adversarial ML research com-
munity to register vulnerabilities (especially affecting large
groups of consumers) in a trackable system like CVE to ensure
that industry manufacturers are alerted. It is not clear how
ML vulnerabilities should be scored accounting for risk and
impact. Finally, When a security analyst sees news about an
attack, the bottom line is mostly “Is my organization affected
by the attack?” and today, organizations lack the ability to
scan an ML environment for known adversarial ML speciﬁc
vulnerabilities.
B. Incident Response
When a security engineer receives a notiﬁcation that an ML
system is under attack, and triages that the attack is relevant
to the business, there are two important steps – ascertaining
blast radius and preparing for containment. For instance, in
the case of ransomware, a traditional software attack, the blast
radius would be to determine other machines connected to the
infected machine, and containment would be to remove the
machines from the network for forensic analysis.
Both steps are difﬁcult, because ML systems are highly
integrated in a production setting where a failure of one can
lead to unintended consequences [67]. One interesting line of
research is to identify whether, if it is possible to “container-
ize” ML systems so as to quarantine uncompromised ML
systems from the impact of a compromised ML system, just
as anti virus systems would quarantine an infected ﬁle.