Fig. 1. Security Engineering aspects of Machine Learning
protean [46]. Perhaps one direction, would be to enumer-
ate guidance based on “security consequence”. Viewing the
world through SDL allows for imperfect solutions to exist.
For instance, in traditional software security, the outdated
cryptgenradnom [47] function should not be used to generate
random seeds for secret sharing protocols which are of higher
security consequence), but can be used to generate process
IDs in an operating system (which is of lower security
consequence). Instead of thinking of secure coding practice as
underwriting a strong security guarantee, a good start would be
to provide examples of security-compliant and non-compliant
code examples.
C. Static Analysis and Dynamic Analysis of ML Systems
In traditional software security, static analysis tools help
detect potential bugs in the code without the need for execution
and to detect violations in coding practices. The source code
is generally converted into an abstract syntax tree, which is
then used to create a control ﬂow graph. Coding practices
and checks, which are turned into logic, are searched over the
control ﬂow graph, and are raised as errors when inconsitent
with logic. In traditional software for instance, in Python tools
like Pyt [48] detect traditional software security vulnerabilities.
Dynamic analysis, on the other hand, involves searching for
vulnerabilities on executing a certain code path.
On the ML front, tools like cleverhans [45], secml [49],
and the adversarial robustness toolkit [50] providing a certain
degree of white-box style and blackbox style dynamic testing.
A future area of research is how to extend the analysis to
model stealing, model inversion and membership inference
style attacks. Out of the box static analysis for adversarialML is less explored. One promising angle is work like
Code2graph [51] that generates call graphs in ML platform
and in conjunction with symbolic execution may provide the
ﬁrst step towards a static analysis tool. We hope that the static
analysis tools ultimately integrate with IDE (integrated de-
velopment environment) to provide analytical insight into the
syntax, semantics, so as to prevent the introduction of security
vulnerabilities before the application code is committed to the
code repository.
D. Auditing and Logging in ML Systems
To use a traditional software example, important security
events in the operating system like process creation are logged
in the host, which is then forwarded to Security Information
and Event Management (SIEM) systems. This later enables,
security responders to run anomaly detection [52], [53] to
detect if an anomalous process (which is an indication of
malware) was executed on the machine.
Auditing in ML systems was initially pointed by Papernot
[54] with solution sketches to instrument ML environments
to capture telemetry. As done in traditional software security,
we recommend that developers of ML systems, identify “high
impact activities” in their system. We recommend executing
the list of attacks that are considered harmful to the organiza-
tion and ensuring that the events manifesting in the telemetry
can be traced back to the attack. Finally, these events must
be exportable to traditional Security Information and Event
Management systems, so that analysts can keep an audit trail
for future investigations.