Adversarial Machine Learning - Industry
Perspectives
Ram Shankar Siva Kumar, Magnus Nystr ¨om,John Lambert, Andrew Marshall, Mario Goertzel,
Andi Comissoneru, Matt Swann and Sharon Xia
Microsoft
Redmond,USA
Email:atml@microsoft.com
Abstract —Based on interviews with 28 organizations, we found
that industry practitioners are not equipped with tactical and
strategic tools to protect, detect and respond to attacks on their
Machine Learning (ML) systems. We leverage the insights from
the interviews and enumerate the gaps in securing machine learn-
ing systems when viewed in the context of traditional software
security development. We write this paper from the perspective
of two personas: developers/ML engineers and security incident
responders. The goal of this paper is to layout the research agenda
to amend the Security Development Lifecycle for industrial-grade
software in the adversarial ML era.
Index Terms —adversarial machine learning, software security,
engineering
I. I NTRODUCTION
Adversarial Machine Learning is now having a moment in
the software industry - For instance, Google [1], Microsoft [2]
and IBM [3] have signaled, separate from their commitment to
securing their traditional software systems, initiatives to secure
ML systems. In Feb 2019, Gartner, the leading industry market
research ﬁrm, published its ﬁrst report on adversarial machine
learning [4] advising that “ Application leaders must anticipate
and prepare to mitigate potential risks of data corruption,
model theft, and adversarial samples. ” The motivation for this
paper is to understand the extent to which organizations across
different industries are protecting their ML systems from
attacks, detecting adversarial manipulation and to responding
to attacks on their ML systems.
There are many reasons why organizations may already be
ahead of the curve in systematically securing their ML assets.
Firstly, in the last three years, companies heavily investing in
machine learning themselves - Google , Amazon , Microsoft
, Tesla – faced some degree of adversarial attacks [5]–[8];
a bellwether of the rise of adversarial machine learning.
Secondly, standards organizations like ISO [9] are forming
certiﬁcation rubrics to assess security of ML systems and
whose endorsements have been historically sought after in
the industry [10]. Also, governments are showing signs that
industry will have to build ML systems securely, with the
European Union even releasing a complete checklist to assess
trustworthiness of ML systems [11] Finally, ML is rapidly
becoming core to organizations’ value proposition (with a
projected Annual Growth Rate of 39% for machine learning
investments in 2020 [12]) and it is only natural that organiza-
tions invest in protecting their “crown jewels”.We make two contributions in this paper:
1) Despite the compelling reasons to secure ML systems,
over a survey spanning 28 different organizations, we
found that most industry practitioners are yet to come
to terms with adversarial machine learning. 25 out of
the 28 organizations indicated that they don’t have the
right tools in place to secure their ML systems and are
explicitly looking for guidance.
2) We enumerate the security engineering aspects of build-
ing ML systems using Security development Lifecycle
(SDL) frame work, the de facto software building pro-
cess in industry.
This paper is a compendium of pain points and gaps in
securing machine learning systems as encountered by typical
software organizations. We hope to appeal to the research
community to help solve the problem faced by two personas
- software developers/ML engineers and security incident
responders - when securing machine learning systems. The
goal of this paper is to engage ML researchers to revise and
amend Security Development Lifecycle for industrial-grade
software in the adversarial ML era.
The paper is organized thus: the ﬁrst part outlines the survey
methodology and ﬁndings. The second part comprises gaps in
securing machine learning in three phases: when ML systems
are designed and developed; when the said system is prepped
for deployment and it is under attack.
II. I NDUSTRY SURVEY ABOUT ADVERSARIAL ML
We interviewed 28 organizations spanning Fortune 500,
small-and-medium businesses, non-proﬁts, and government
organizations to understand how they secure their machine
learning systems from adversarial attacks (See Table I and
Table II).
TABLE I
ORGANIZATION SIZE
Organization size Count
Large Organizations ( >1000 employees) 18
Small-and-Medium Size Businesses 10
22 out of the 28, were in “security sensitive” ﬁelds such
as ﬁnance, consulting, cybersecurity, healthcare, government.arXiv:2002.05646v3  [cs.CY]  19 Mar 2021