The other 6 organizations represented social media analytics,
publishing, agriculture, urban planning, food processing and
translation services (See Table II for distribution).
TABLE II
ORGANIZATION TYPES
Organization Count
Cybersecurity 10
Healthcare 5
Government 4
Consulting 2
Banking 2
Social Media Analytics 1
Publishing 1
Agriculture 1
Urban Planning 1
Food Processing 1
Translation 1
At each organization, we interviewed two personas: the
developer in charge of building machine models in the or-
ganization, and the security personnel who was on point for
securing the organization’s infrastructure. Depending on the
size of the organization, these two personas were either in
different teams, the same team or even the same person. All
organizations we spoke to were familiar with the Security
Development Lifecycle as pertaining to traditional software
engineering, though the degree to which they executed varied
– larger corporations that had a more formal, documented
process than small and medium sized corporations. We also
limited to organizations had relatively mature machine learn-
ing investments, with a few of them centering their business
around “AI”.
These organizations executed on their ML strategy in a
variety of ways: most of them used ML toolkits such a
Keras, TensorFlow or PyTorch to build ML models; 10 or-
ganizations relied on Machine Learning as a Service such as
Microsoft’s Cognitive API [13], Amazon AI Services [14],
Google CloudAI [15]; Only 2 organizations built ML systems
from scratch and not relying on either existing toolkits/ML
platforms (See Table III)
TABLE III
ML S TRATEGY
How do you build ML Systems Count
Using ML Frameworks 16
Using ML as a Service 10
Building ML Systems from scratch 2
Limitations of Study : Our sample size of 28 may not
represent the entire population industries employing machine
learning. For instance, the study does not include startups and
has a pre-ponderance of security-sensitive organizations. We
also do not account for geographic distribution – most of
the organizations operate and head quartered in the United
States or Europe. We limited ourselves to failures that are
caused by a malicious attacker in the system and did not
investigate broader safety failures such as common corruption[16], reward hacking [17], distributional shifts [18] or naturally
occurring adversarial examples [19].
A. Findings:
1) Though, all 28 organizations indicated that security of
AI system is important to their business productivity, the
emphasis is still on traditional security. As one security
analyst put it, “ Our top threat vector is spearphishing
and malware on the box. This [adversarial ML] looks
futuristic ”. While there is great interest in adversarial
machine learning, only 6 organizations (all of whom are
large organizations or government) are ready to assign
head-count to solve the problem
2) Lack of adversarial ML know-how: Organizations seem
lack the tactical knowledge to secure machine learning
systems in production. As one of them put it, “ Tradi-
tional software attacks are a known unknown. Attacks on
our ML models are unknown unknown ”. 22 out of the 25
(3 government organizations abstained from answering
this question satisfactorily) organizations said that they
don’t have the right tools in place to secure their ML
systems and are explicitly looking for guidance. Also,
security engineers mostly do not have the ability to
detect and respond to attacks on ML systems (See Table
IV)
TABLE IV
STATE OF ADVERSARIAL ML
Do you secure your ML systems today Count
Yes 3
No 22
3) We walked through the list of attacks as outlined in [20]
and asked them to pick the top attack that would affect
their businesses(See Table V). Note: respondents were
allowed to pick only one threat as opposed to stack rank
them all. The result were as follows:
TABLE V
TOPATTACK
Which attack would affect your org the most? Distribution
Poisoning (e.g: [21]) 10
Model Stealing (e.g: [22]) 6
Model Inversion (e.g: [23]) 4
Backdoored ML (e.g: [24]) 4
Membership Inference (e.g: [25]) 3
Adversarial Examples (e.g: [26]) 2
Reprogramming ML System (e.g: [27]) 0
Adversarial Example in Physical Domain (e.g: [5]) 0
Malicious ML provider recovering training data (e.g: [28]) 0
Attacking the ML supply chain (e.g: [24]) 0
Exploit Software Dependencies (e.g: [29]) 0
Data poisoning has caught the attention of enter-
prises, perhaps because of the cultural signiﬁcance
of Tay. A medium sized ﬁnancial tech put it thus,
“We use ML systems to suggest tips and ﬁnancial