products for our users. The integrity of our ML
system matters a lot. Worried about inappropriate
recommendation like attack on Tay”
Organizations care most about attacks that can lead
to potential breach of privacy. As one of the banks
put it, “Want to protect client info, employee info
used in ML models but we don’t know have a plan
in place”
Model Stealing that can lead to loss of Intellectual
property is another concern. A large retail organiza-
tion said, “We run a proprietary algorithm to solve
our problem and it would be worrisome if someone
can reverse engineer it”
Adversarial Examples in the physical domain, res-
onated with the respondents, but did not rank high
on the list. One reason may be that the organizations
we spoke to did not have physical component like
cars or drones.
4) For security analysts, there is a mismatch between ex-
pectations and reality when it comes to adversarial ML.
Many security analysts expect that algorithms available
in platforms such as Keras, TensorFlow or PyTorch
are inherently secure against adversarial manipulations
and have already been battle tested against adversarial
ML attacks. This is perhaps, because security analysts
who have mostly been exposed to traditional software,
assume that libraries put out by large organizations
such as Facebook or Google would have been already
been security stress tested. Similarly, organizations seem
to push the security responsibility upstream to service
providers as one of the respondents said, “We use
Machine Learning as a Service and expect them to
provide these robust algorithms and platforms”
5) Finally, security analysts and developers do not know
what to expect when systems get attacked. As one of
the ML engineers put it, “ I don’t expect any system to
be immune from spooﬁng, but I need to know conﬁdence
levels and expected performance; as well as potential
failure modes. If system is spoofed, what is the worst
possible outcome? ”
In the following sections of the paper, summarized in Fig.1
, we elaborate the gaps in current SDL process when building
ML systems, as they are prepped for deployment and when the
ML system is under attack. For each gap, we outline existing
methods in traditional software development and sketch future
research agenda.
III. A BOUT SDL
In July 2001, Microsoft was affected by CodeRed, a com-
puter worm that affected Internet Information Server (IIS) 4.0
and 5.0 [30]. This happened because of a single line error in
code running by default in IIS4 and IIS5 systems, enabling a
buffer overﬂow attack. In Jan 2002, Microsoft halted develop-
ing any new software for 2 months to ﬁx all known security
bugs in its system, pairing security experts with developers.
Out of this close interaction, a systematic process of providingsecurity guidance evolved, helping engineers look for software
defects and implementation ﬂaws. This set of practices has
now come to be called the Secure Development Lifecycle
(SDL). While SDL does not eliminate all software bugs, they
do help to catch software vulnerabilities that could later be
exploited, before it reaches the hands of a customer. For
instance, after SDL was introduced in Microsoft, the number
of reported vulnerabilities between Windows XP and Windows
Vista, reduced by 45%, and number of vulnerabilities between
SQL Server 2000 and SQL Server 2005, reduced by 91% [31].
Currently SDL, in some form, is a de-facto process in industry-
grade software development adopted by 122 organizations
[32], including Google [33], IBM [34], Facebook [35] and
Netﬂix [36].
The primary inquiry is amending and revising the SDL
process used in securing traditional software, to secure ML
systems against adversarial attacks.
IV. G APS DURING DEVELOPMENT OF ML S OLUTION
A. Curated repository of attacks
In traditional software security, attacks are decomposed
into shareable “tactics and procedures” and are collectively
organized in the MITRE ATT&CK framework [37]. This
provides a search-able attack repository comprising, attacks
by researchers as well as nation state attackers. For every
attack, there is a description of the technique, which advanced
persistent threat is known to use it, detection ideas as well as
reference to publications with further context.
In adversarial ML, the scholarship is booming [38] but the
awareness is low among developers and security analysts –
only 5 out of 28 organizations stated that they had working
knowledge of adversarial ML. We propose that a similar cu-
rated repository of attacks be created, preferably by extending
the widely used existing MITRE Framework. For instance,
when adversarial ML researchers publish a new type of attack,
we ask them to register their attacks in the MITRE framework,
so that security analysts have a uniﬁed view of traditional and
adversarial ML attacks.
B. Adversarial ML speciﬁc secure coding practices:
In traditional software setting, secure coding practice en-
ables engineers to reduce exploitable vulnerabilities in their
programs and enables auditing of source code by other en-
gineers. For instance Python [39], Java, C and C++ [40]
have well deﬁned secure coding practice against traditional
software bugs like memory corruption. In machine learning
setting, adversarial ML speciﬁc security guidance is sparse.
Most toolkits provide best practices (TensorFlow [41] , Pytorch
[42], Keras [43]) but TensorFlow is the only framework that
provides consolidated guidance around traditional software
attacks [44] and links to tools for testing against adversarial
attacks [45].
We think future work in adversarial ML should focus
on providing best practices to eliminate undeﬁned program
behaviors and exploitable vulnerabilities. We acknowledge it
is difﬁcult to provide concrete guidance because the ﬁeld is