uses a weighted sum as a combination function and element-wise mean as an aggregate. The weight are then
trained using an unsupervised loss similar to random walks based methods, and for SSL [85], a classiﬁer is
trained on top of the node embeddings ( i.e., the ﬁnal hidden state) to predict the class labels for the labeled
nodes, which can then applied on the unlabeled nodes for node classiﬁcation.
8 Self-Supervision for SSL
Self-supervised learning [163, 76] is a form of unsupervised learning, where the model is trained using a
standard supervised loss, but on a pretext task where the supervision comes from the data itself. The
objective, in this case, is not to maximize ﬁnal performance on the pretext task, but rather to learn rich
and transferable features for downstream tasks. A variety of pretext tasks were proposed, where the model
is ﬁrst trained on one or multiple tasks with unlabeled examples, the resulting model is either used for
generating representations for the raw data, which are utilized for training a shallow classiﬁer on Dl, or
directly ﬁne-tuned for a downstream task with labeled images. Examples of such pretext tasks for computer
vision are:
Exemplar-CNN [40]. For a given image, a set of Npatches are generated using diﬀerent transfor-
mations, all these patches are then considered as a separate class, and the model is trained to predict
the correct class for a given input patch.
Rotation [53]. Agivenrotationoutoffourpossiblerotationsofmultipleof 90,i.e.,[0;90;180;270],
is applied to the input image, and the model is trained to predict the correct rotation that was applied.
Patches [37]. A ﬁrst patch is randomly extracted from the input image, this patch is considered as the
center, and eight diﬀerent neighboring and non-overlapping patches are extracted with small jitters at
the eight neighboring locations, the model is then trained to predict the position of one of the second
patches with regard to the ﬁrst one. Other versions of this pretext task were proposed, such as jigsaw
puzzle [111] where a random permutation of the nine patches are fed into the model, and the objective
is to predict the correct permutation that was applied to get the correct ordering of the patches.
Colorization [179]. The input image is ﬁrst transformed from RGB to Lab color space, an input with
only the luminance information contained within the L component or the color information with ab
components is fed into the model, and the objective is to predict the rest of the information, i.e., either
the luminance or the coloring of the image. The task can either be considered as a regression problem
or a classiﬁcation problem by quantizing the Lab color space.
Contrastive Predictive Coding [114]. Using a contrastive loss based on Noise Contrastive Esti-
mation [60] and its recent versions such as Momentum Contrast [66] and SimCLR [22], the model
is trained to diﬀerentiate between positive and negative samples, the positives can be a given input
image and its transformed versions, or a given patch and its neighboring patches, while the negatives
are randomly sampled images or patches.
Such pretext tasks can easily be utilized for SSL, where the model is trained on the whole dataset on the
pretext task with self-supervision, and then adapted to the labeled set Dlusing the standard cross-entropy
loss, either simultaneously as demonstrated by [175, 12] with rotation as the pretext task, or iteratively, by
ﬁrst training the model using self-supervision and then ﬁne tuning it on Dlas demonstrated by [22, 23] using
contrastive learning.
35