where the targets are generated using a teacher model f0which is an EMA of f:
f(Mix(xi;xj))Mix(f0(xi);f0(xj)) (2.17)
The unsupervised objective is to have similar values between the student model’s prediction given a
mixed input of two unlabeled data points, and the mixed outputs of the teacher model.
Lu=w1
jDujX
xi;xj2DudMSE(f(Mix(xi;xj));Mix(f0(xi);f0(xj)) (2.18)
The beneﬁt of ICT compared to random perturbations can be analyzed by considering the mixup oper-
ation as a perturbation applied to a given unlabeled example: xi+= Mix(xi;xj), for a large number of
classes and with a similar distribution of examples per class, it is likely that the pair of points (xi;xj)lie in
diﬀerent clusters and belong to diﬀerent classes. If one of these two data points lies in a low-density region,
applying an interpolation toward xjpoints to a low-density region, which is a good direction to move the
decision boundary toward.
2.10 Unsupervised Data Augmentation
Unsupervised Data Augmentation [169] uses advanced data augmentation methods, such as AutoAugment
[29], RandAugment [30] and Back Translation [43, 139], as perturbations for consistency training based SSL.
Similar to supervised learning, advanced data augmentation methods can also provide extra advantages over
simple augmentations and random noise injection in consistency training, given that; (1) it generates realistic
augmented examples, making it safe to encourage the consistency between predictions on the original and
augmented examples, (2) it can generate a diverse set of examples improving the sample eﬃciency, and (3)
it is capable of providing the missing inductive biases for diﬀerent tasks.
Motivated by these points, Xie et al. [169] propose to apply the following augmentations to generate
transformed versions of the unlabeled inputs:
RandAugment for Image Classiﬁcation. Consists of uniformly sampling from the same set of
possible transformations in Python Imaging Library (PIL), without requiring any labeled data to
search for a good augmentation strategy.
Back-translation for Text Classiﬁcation. Consists of translating an existing example in language
A into another language B, and then translating it back into A to obtain an augmented example.
Afterdeﬁningtheaugmentationstobeappliedduringtraining, thetrainingprocedure(ﬁg.10)isstraight-
forward. The objective is to have the correct predictions over the labeled set and consistent predictions on
the original and augmented examples from the unlabeled set.
3 Entropy Minimization
In the previous section, in a setting where the cluster assumption is maintained, we enforce consistency of
predictions to push the decision boundary into low-density regions to avoid classifying samples from the same
cluster with distinct classes, which is a violation of the cluster assumption. Another way to enforce this is to
encourage the network to make conﬁdent ( i.e., low-entropy) predictions on unlabeled data regardless of the
predicted class, discouraging the decision boundary from passing near data points where it would otherwise
be forced to produce low-conﬁdence predictions. This is done by adding a loss term which minimizes the
15