-Model Pseudo-Labeling VAT Entropy Minimization Supervised
Class A Class B UnlabeledFigure 1: SSL toy example. The decision boundaries obtained on two-moons dataset, with a supervised
anddiﬀerentSSLapproachesusing6labeledexamples, 3foreachclass, andtherestofthepointsasunlabeled
data.
“Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is halfway between supervised and unsupervised learning. In
addition to unlabeled data, the algorithm is provided with some supervision information – but
not necessarily for all examples. Often, this information will be the targets associated with some
of the examples. In this case, the data set X= (xi);i2[n]can be divided into two parts:
the pointsXl:= (x1;:::;xl), for which labels Yl:= (y1;:::;yl)are provided, and the points
Xu:= (xl+1;:::;xl+u), the labels of which are not known.” – Chapelle et al. [20].
As stated in the deﬁnition above, in SSL, we are provided with a dataset containing both labeled and
unlabeled examples. The portion of labeled examples is usually quite small compared to the unlabeled
example ( e.g., 1 to 10% of the total number of examples). So with a dataset Dcontaining a labeled subset
Dland an unlabeled subset Du, the objective, or rather hope, is to leverage the unlabeled examples to train
a better performing model than what can be obtained using only the labeled portion. And hopefully, get
closer to the desired optimal performance, in which all of the dataset Dis labeled.
More formally, the goal of SSL is to leverage the unlabeled data Duto produce a prediction function
fwith trainable parameters , that is more accurate than what would have been obtained by only using
the labeled data Dl. For instance,Dumight provide us with additional information about the structure
of the data distribution p(x)to better estimate the decision boundary between the diﬀerent classes. For
example, as shown in ﬁg. 1, where the data points with distinct labels are separated with a low-density
region, leveraging unlabeled data with a SSL approach can provide us with additional information about
the shape of the decision boundary between two classes, and reduce the ambiguity present in the supervised
case.
SSL ﬁrst appeared in the form of self-training [20], which is also known as self-labeling or self-teaching.
A model is ﬁrst trained on labeled data. Then, iteratively, a portion of the unlabeled data is annotated using
the trained model and added to the training set for the next training iteration. SSL took oﬀ in the 1970s
after its success with iterative algorithms such as the expectation-maximization algorithm [109], in which
the labeled and unlabeled data are jointly used to maximize the likelihood of the model.
1.2 SSL Methods
There have been many SSL methods and approaches that have been introduced over the years. These
algorithms can be broadly divided into the following categories:
Consistency Regularization (a.k.a Consistency Training). Based on the assumption that if
a realistic perturbation was applied to the unlabeled data points, the prediction should not change
signiﬁcantly. The model can then be trained to have a consistent prediction on a given unlabeled
example and its perturbed version.
2