case, we can restrict our model to have consistent predictions on the unlabeled data over some small
perturbations pushing its decision boundary to low-density regions.
The Manifold Assumption. The (high-dimensional) data lie (roughly) on a low-dimensional man-
ifold[20]. In high dimensional spaces, where the volume grows exponentially with the number of
dimensions, it can be quite hard to estimate the true data distribution for generative tasks. For dis-
criminative tasks, the distances are similar regardless of the class type, making classiﬁcation quite
challenging. However, if our input data lies on some lower-dimensional manifold, we can try to ﬁnd
a low dimensional representation using the unlabeled data and then use the labeled data to solve the
simpliﬁed task.
1.4 Related Problems
Active Learning In active learning [140, 63], the learning algorithm is provided with a large pool of
unlabeled data points, with the ability to request the labeling of any given examples from the unlabeled
set in an interactive manner. As opposed to classical passive learning, in which the examples to be labeled
are chosen randomly from the unlabeled pool, active learning aims to carefully choose the examples to be
labeled to achieve a higher accuracy while using as few requests as possible, thereby minimizing the cost of
obtaining labeled data. This is of particular interest in problems where data may be abundant, but labels
are scarce or expensive to obtain.
Although it is not possible to obtain a universally good active learning strategy [33], there exist many
heuristics [140], which have been proven to be eﬀective in practice. The two widely used selection criteria are
informativeness andrepresentativeness [72, 188]. Informativeness measures how well an unlabeled instance
helps reduce the uncertainty of a statistical model, while representativeness measures how well an instance
helps represent the structure of input patterns.
Active learning and SSL are naturally related, since both aim to use a limited amount of data to improve
a learner. Several works considered combining SSL and AL in diﬀerent tasks. [41] demonstrates a signiﬁcant
error reduction with limited labeled data for speech understanding, [129] proposes an active semi-supervised
learning system for pedestrian detection, [192] combines AL and SSL using Gaussian ﬁelds applied to syn-
thetic datasets, and [51] exploits both labeled and unlabeled data using SSL to distill information from
unlabeled data that improves representation learning and sample selection.
Transfer Learning and Domain Adaptation Transfer learning [116, 162] is used to improve a learner
on one domain, called the target domain, by transferring the knowledge learned from a related domain,
referred to as the source domain. For instance, we may wish to train the model on a synthetic, cheap-to-
generate data, with the goal of using it on real data. In this case, the source domain used to train the model
is related but diﬀerent from the target domain used to test the model. When the source and target diﬀer
but are related, then transfer learning can be applied to obtain higher accuracy on the target data.
One popular type of transfer learning is domain adaptation [122, 118, 166]. Domain adaptation is a type
of transductive transfer learning, where the target task remains the same as the source, but the domain
diﬀers. The objective of domain adaptation is to train a learner capable of generalizing across diﬀerent
domains of diﬀerent distributions in which the labeled data are available for the source domain. As for the
target domain, we refer to the case where no labeled data is available on target as unsupervised domain
adaptation, while semi-supervised and supervised domain adaptation refers to situations where we have a
limited or a fully labeled target domain receptively [10].
SSL and unsupervised domain adaptation are closely related; in both cases, we are provided with la-
beled and unlabeled data, with the objective of learning a function capable of generalizing to the unlabeled
4