distribution parameter for MixUp. Producing a batch of augmented labeled examples and a batch of
augmented unlabeled examples with their proxy labels. These augmented examples can then be used to
compute the losses and train the model. Precisely, MixMatch consists of the following steps:
Step 1: Data Augmentation. Using a given transformation, a labeled example x2Dlfrom the
labeled batch is transformed, producing its augmented versions ~x. For an unlabeled example x2Du,
the augmentation function is applied Ktimes, resulting in Kaugmented versions of the unlabeled
examples ~x1, ..., ~xK.
Step 2: Label Guessing. The second step consists of producing proxy labels for the unlabeled
examples. First, we generate the predictions for the Kaugmented versions of each unlabeled example
using the predictions function f. TheKpredictions are then averaged together, obtaining a proxy
or a pseudo label ^y= 1=KPK
k=1(^yk)for each one of the augmentations of the unlabeled example x:
(~x1;^y), ..., ( ~xK;^y).
Step 3: Sharpening. To push the model to produce conﬁdent predictions and minimize the entropy
oftheoutputdistribution, thegeneratedproxylabels ^yinstep2intheformofaprobabilitydistribution
overCclasses are sharpened by adjusting the temperature of the categorical distribution, computed
as follows where (^yu)krefers to the probability of class kout ofCclasses:
(^y)k= (^y)1
T
k=CX
k=1(^y)1
T
k(5.1)
Step 4 MixUp. The previous steps resulted in two new augmented batches, a batch Lof augmented
labeled examples and their target, and a batch Uof augmented unlabeled examples and their sharpened
proxy labels. Note that the size of UisKtimes larger than the original batch given that each example
x2Duis replaced by its Kaugmented versions. In the last step, we mix these two batches. First,
a new batch merging both batches is created W=Shuﬄe (Concat (L;U)).Wis then divided into two
batches:W1of the same size as LandW2of the same size as L. Using the Mixup operation that is
slightly adjusted so that the mixed example is closer the labeled examples, the ﬁnal step is to create
new labeled and unlabeled batches by mixing the produced batches together using Mixup as follows:
L0= MixUp(L;W1) (5.2)
U0= MixUp(U;W2) (5.3)
After creating two augmented batches L0andU0using MixMatch, we can then train the model using
the standard SSL losses by computing the CE loss for the supervised loss, and the consistency loss for the
unsupervised loss using the augmented batches as follows:
L=Ls+wLu=1
jL0jX
x;y2L0H(y;f(x))) +w1
jU0jX
x;^y2U0dMSE(^y;f(x)) (5.4)
5.2 ReMixMatch
Berthelot et al. [12] propose to improve MixMatch by introducing two new techniques: distribution
alignment andaugmentation anchoring . Distribution alignment encourages the marginal distribution of
predictions on unlabeled data to be close to the marginal distribution of ground-truth labels. Augmentation
anchoring feeds multiple strongly augmented versions of the input into the model, encouraging each output
to be close to the prediction for a weakly-augmented version of the same input.
21