6.1 Variational Autoencoders for SSL
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [83, 36] have emerged as one of the most popular approaches to unsuper-
vised learning of complicated distributions. A standard VAE is an autoencoder trained with a reconstruction
objective between the inputs and their reconstructed versions, in addition to a variational objective term
that attempts to learn a latent space that roughly follows a unit Gaussian distribution, this objective is
implemented as the KL-divergence between the latent space and the standard Gaussian. With an input x,
the conditional distribution q(zjx)modeled by an encoder, the standard Gaussian distribution p(z)and the
reconstructed input ^xgenerated using a decoder p(xjz). The parameters andare trained to minimize
the following objective:
L=dMSE(x;^x) +dKL(q(zjx);p(z)) (6.1)
6.1.1 Variational Autoencoder
Kingmaet al. [84] expanded the work on variational generative techniques [83, 128] for SSL, that exploit
generative descriptions of the data to improve upon the classiﬁcation performance that would be obtained
using the labeled data alone.
Standard VAEs for SSL (M1 Model) The ﬁrst model consists of an unsupervised pretraining stage,
in which the VAE is trained using the labeled and unlabeled examples. Using a fully trained VAE, the
observed labeled data x2Dlare transformed into the latent space deﬁned by z, the standard supervised
task can then be solved using (z;y)whereyare the labels of x. With this approach, the classiﬁcation can
be performed in a lower dimensional space since the dimensionality of the latent variables zis much less
than that of the observations. These low dimensional embeddings are more easily separable since the latent
space is formed by independent Gaussian posteriors parameterized by an encoder, built by a sequence of
non-linear transformations of the inputs.
Extending VAEs for SSL (M2 Model) In the M1 model, the labels of Dlwere ignored when training
the VAE. With the second model, the labels are also used during training. If the class labels are not available,
yis treated as a latent variable in addition to the latent variable z. The network in this case contains three
components, q(yjx)modeled by a classiﬁcation network, q(zjy;x)modeled by an encoder, and p(xjy;z)
modeled by a decoder, with parameters and. The training is similar to a standard VAE with the addition
of the posterior on yand loss terms to train q(yjx)if the labels are available. The distribution q(yjx)can
then be used at test time to get the predictions on unseen data.
Stacked VAEs (M1+M2 Model) The two previous models can be concatenated to form a joint model.
In this case, the model M1 is ﬁrst trained to obtain the latent variables z1, the model M2 then uses the
latent variables z1from model M1 as new representations of the data as opposed to raw values x. The ﬁnal
model can be described as follows:
p(x;y;z 1;z2) =p(y)p(z2)p(z1jy;z2)p(xjz1) (6.2)
6.1.2 Variational Auxiliary Autoencoder
Variational Auxiliary Autoencoder [102, 124] extends the variational distribution with auxiliary variables a:
q(a;zjx) =q(zja;x)q(ajx), such that the marginal distribution q(zjx)can ﬁt more complicated posteriors
p(zjx)while improving the ﬂexibility of inference. In order to have an unchanged generative model p(xjz),
24