Figure 14: ReMixMatch. Left.Distribution alignment adjusts the guessed labels distributions to match
the ground-truth class distribution divided by the average model predictions on Du.Right.Augmentation
anchoring uses the prediction obtained using a weakly augmented image as targets for a strongly augmented
version of the same image. Image Source: [12].
Distribution alignment. In order to force that the aggregate of predictions on unlabeled data matches
the distribution of the provided labeled data. Over the course of training, a running average ~yof the model’s
predictionsonunlabeleddataismaintainedoverthelast128batches. Forthemarginalclassdistribution p(y),
it is estimated based on the labeled examples seen during training. Given a prediction f(x)on the unlabeled
examplex, the output probability distribution is aligned as follows: f(x) =Normalize (f(x)p(y)=~y).
Augmentation Anchoring. MixMatch uses a simple ﬂip-and-crop augmentation strategy, ReMixMatch
replaces the weak augmentations with strong augmentations learned using a control theory based augmen-
tation strategy following AutoAugment. With such augmentations, the model’s prediction for a weakly
augmented unlabeled image is used as a proxy label for many strongly augmented versions of the same
image in a standard cross-entropy loss.
For training, MixMatch is applied to the unlabeled and labeled batches, with the application of dis-
tribution alignment and replacing the Kweakly augmented example with a strongly augmented example,
in addition to using the weakly augmented examples for predicting proxy labels for the unlabeled strongly
augmented examples. With two augmented batches L0andU0, the supervised and unsupervised losses are
computed both using the cross-entropy loss as follows:
L=Ls+wLu=1
jL0jX
x;y2L0H(y;f(x))) +w1
jU0jX
x;^y2U0H(^y;f(x))) (5.5)
In addition to these losses, the authors add a self-supervised loss. First, a new unlabeled batch ^U0of
examples is created by rotating all of the examples with an angle rf0;90;180;270g. The rotated examples
are then used to compute a self-supervised loss, where the classiﬁcation layer on top of the model predicts
the correct applied rotation, in addition to the cross-entropy loss over the rotated examples:
LSL=w01
j^U0jX
x;^y2^U0H(^y;f(x))) +1
j^U0jX
x2^U0H(r;f(x))) (5.6)
5.3 FixMatch
FixMatch [143] proposes a simple SSL algorithm that combines consistency regularization and pseudo-
labeling. In FixMatch (ﬁg. 15), both the supervised and unsupervised losses are computed using a cross-
entropy loss. For labeled examples, the provided targets are used. For unlabeled examples x2Du, a weakly
augmented version is ﬁrst computed using weak augmentation function Aw. As in self-training, the predicted
22