example, Qiao et al. [121] used adversarial perturbations to produce new views for deep co-training for image
classiﬁcation, where the models are encouraged to have the same predictions on Dlbut make diﬀerent errors
when they are exposed to adversarial attacks.
Democratic Co-training [187]. An extension of Co-training, consists of replacing the diﬀerent views of
the input data with a number of models with diﬀerent architectures and learning algorithms, which are ﬁrst
trained on the labeled examples. The trained models are then used to label a given example xif a majority
of models conﬁdently agree on its label.
4.2.2 Tri-Training
Tri-training [189] tries to overcome the lack of data with multiple views and reduce the bias of the predictions
on unlabeled data produced with self-training by utilizing the agreement of three independently trained
models instead of a single model. First, the labeled data Dlis used to train three prediction functions: f1,
f2andf3. An unlabeled data point x2Duis then added to the supervised training set of the function fi
if the other two models agree on its predicted label. The training stops if no data points are being added
to any of the models’ training sets. Tri-training requires neither the existence of multiple views nor unique
learning algorithms, making it more generally applicable. Using Tri-training with neural networks can be
very expensive, requiring predictions for each one of the three models on all the unlabeled data. Ruder et
al. [133] propose to sample a limited number of unlabeled data points at each training epoch, the candidate
pool size is increased as the training progresses and the models become more accurate.
Multi-task tri-training [133] can also be used to reduce the time and sample complexity, where all three
models share the same feature-extractor with model-speciﬁc classiﬁcation layers. This way, the models are
trained jointly with an additional orthogonality constraint on two of the three classiﬁcation layers to be
added to loss term, to avoid learning similar models and falling back to the standard case of self-training.
Tri-Net [39] also falls in this category, with a shared module for joint learning and three output modules for
tri-training, in addition to utilizing output smearing [17] to initialize these modules. After the proxy labeling
iteration, a ﬁne-tuning stage is conducted on the labeled data to augment diversity and eliminate unstable
and suspicious pseudo-labeled data.
Cross-View Training In self-training, the model plays a dual role of a teacher and a student, producing
the predictions it is being trained on, resulting in very moderate performance gains. As a solution, and
taking inspiration from multi-view learning and consistency training, Clark et al. [27] propose Cross-View
Training, where the model is trained to produce consistent predictions across diﬀerent views of the inputs.
Instead of using a single model as a teacher and a student, they propose to use a shared encoder, and then
add auxiliary prediction modules that transform the encoder representations into predictions, these modules
are then divided into auxiliary student modules and a primary teacher module. The input to each student
prediction module is a subset of the model’s intermediate representations corresponding to a restricted view
of the input, such as feeding one of the student only the forward LSTM from a given Bi-LSTM layer, so it
makes predictions without seeing any tokens to the right of the current one (ﬁg. 12). The primary teacher
module in trained only on labeled examples, and is responsible of generating the pseudo-labels taking as
input the full view of the unlabeled inputs, the students are trained to have consistent predictions with the
teacher module. Given an encoder e, a teacher module tandKstudent modules siwithi2[0;K], where
each student receives a limited view of the input, the training objective is written as follows:
L=Lu+Ls=1
jDujX
x2DuKX
i=1dMSE(t(e(x));si(e(x))) +1
jDljX
x;y2DlH(t(e(x));y) (4.1)
19