Generator
Latent spaceDiscriminatorReal samples 
Generated
samples"real"
or
"fake"Figure 16: GAN framework. During training, the discriminator Dalternates between receiving real
samplesfromthedatadistribution p(x), withthegoalofcorrectlyclassifyingthemasreal, i.e.,D(x) = 1, and
generated samples G(z)with the aim of correctly classifying them as fake, i.e.,D(G(z)) = 0, while competing
with the generator, trying to generate real-looking samples to fool the discriminator, i.e.,D(G(z)) = 1.
it is required that the joint mode p(x;z;a )gives back the original p(x;z)under marginalization over a, thus
p(x;z;a ) =p(ajx;z)p(x;z), withp(ajx;z)6=p(a)to avoid falling back to the original VAE model.
In SSL, to incorporate the class information, an additional latent variable yis introduced, the generative
model become p(y)p(z)p(ajz;y;x )p(xjy;z), witha,y,zas the auxiliary variable, class label, and latent
features respectively. In this case, the auxiliary unit aintroduces a latent feature extractor to the inference
modelgivingarichermappingbetween xandy. Theresultingmodelisparametrizedby5neuralnetworks: 1)
an auxiliary inference model q(ajx), 2) a latent inference model q(zja;y;x ), 3) a classiﬁcation model q(yja;x),
4) a generative model p(aj:), and 5) a generative model p(xj:), which are trained on both a generative and
discriminative tasks simultaneously.
6.1.3 Inﬁnite Variational Autoencoder
Another variation of VAEs for SSL is Inﬁnite Variational Autoencoder [44], to overcome the limitation of
VAEs of having a ﬁxed dimension of the latent space and a ﬁxed number of parameters in the generative
model in advance, in which the capacity of the model must be chosen a priori with some foreknowledge of
the training data characteristics. Inﬁnite VAE solves this by producing an inﬁnite mixture of autoencoders
capable of growing with the complexity of the data to best capture its intrinsic structure. After training the
generative model using unlabeled data, this model can then be combined with the available labeled data to
train a discriminative model, which is also a mixture of experts, for classiﬁcation. For a given test example
x, each discriminative expert produces a tentative output that is then weighted by the generative model. As
such, each discriminative expert learns to perform better with instances that are more structurally similar
from the generative model’s perspective. With a higher modeling capability, the inﬁnite VAE is able to
capture the distribution of the unlabeled data more accurately. Therefore, it provides a generative model
that allows the discriminative model, which is trained based on its output, to be more eﬀectively learned
using a small number of samples.
6.2 Generative Adversarial Networks for SSL
A Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [55] (ﬁg. 16) consists of a generator network Gand a discriminator
networkD. The generator receives a latent variable zp(z)sampled from the prior distribution p(z)and
maps to the input space. The discriminator takes an input, either coming from the real data p(x)or
generated by Gand outputs the probability of the input being from either Gor the real data distribution
p(x), represented with an empirical distribution D. The standard training procedure of GANs minimizes
25