2.7 Virtual Adversarial Training
The previous approaches focused on applying random perturbations to each input to generate artiﬁcial input
points, encouraging the model to assign similar outputs to the unlabeled data points and their perturbed
versions. This way, we push for a smoother output distribution. As a result, the generalization performance
of the model can be improved. However, such random noise and random data augmentation often leaves
the predictor particularly vulnerable to small perturbations in a speciﬁc direction, that is, the adversarial
direction, which is the direction in the input space in which the label probability p(yjx)of the model is most
sensitive.
To overcome this, and inspired by adversarial training [56] that trains the model to assign to each input
data a label that is similar to the labels of its neighbors in the adversarial direction. Miyato et al. [108]
propose Virtual Adversarial Training (VAT), a regularization technique that enhances the model’s robustness
around each input data point against random and local perturbations, the term virtualcomes from the fact
that the adversarial perturbation is approximated without any label information, and is hence applicable to
SSL to smooth the output distribution.
Concretely, VAT trains the output distribution to be identically smooth around each data point, by
selectively smoothing the model in its most adversarial direction. For a given data point x, we would like
to compute the adversarial perturbation radvthat will alter the model’s predictions the most. We start by
sampling a Gaussian noise rof the same dimensions as the input x, we then compute its gradients gradr
with respect the loss between the two predictions, with and without the injections of the noise r(i.e., KL-
divergence is used as a distance measure d(:;:)).radvcan then be obtained by normalizing and scaling gradr
by a hyperparameter . The computation can be summarized in the following steps:
1.rN(0;p
dim(x)I)
2.gradr=rrdKL(f(x);f(x+r))
3.radv=gradr
kgradrk
Note that the computation above is a single iteration of the approximation of radv, for a more accurate
estimate, we consider radv=rand recompute radvfollowing the last two steps. But in general, given how
computationallyexpensivethiscomputationis, requiringanadditionalforwardandbackwardpasses, weonly
apply a single power iteration for computing the adversarial perturbation. With the optimal perturbation
radv, we can then compute the unsupervised loss as the MSE between the two predictions of the model, with
and without the injection of radv:
Lu=w1
jDujX
x2DudMSE(f(x);f(x+radv)) (2.13)
For a more stable training, a Mean Teacher can be used to generate stable targets by replacing f(x)
withf0(x), wheref0is an EMA of the student f.
2.8 Adversarial Dropout
Instead of using an additive adversarial noise as VAT, Park et al. [117] propose adversarial dropout (AdD),
a.k.a, element-wise adversarial dropout (EAdD), in which dropout masks are adversarially optimized to alter
the model’s predictions. With this type of perturbations, we induce a sparse structure of the neural network,
while the other forms of additive noise does not make changes to the structure of the neural network directly.
12