Proxy-label Methods. Such methods leverage a trained model on the labeled set to produce addi-
tional training examples by labeling instances of the unlabeled set based on some heuristics. These
approaches can also be referred to as bootstrapping [14] algorithms. We follow Ruder et al. [133] and
refer to them as proxy-label methods. Some examples of such methods are Self-training ,Co-training
andMulti-View Learning .
Generative Models. Similar to the supervised setting, where the learned features on one task can
be transferred to other downstream tasks. Generative models that are able to generate images from
the data distribution p(x)must learn transferable features to a supervised task p(yjx)for a given task
with targets y.
Graph-Based Methods. The labeled and unlabeled data points can be considered as nodes of a
graph, and the objective is to propagate the labels from the labeled nodes to the unlabeled ones by
utilizing the similarity of two nodes xiandxj, which is reﬂected by how strong the edge eijbetween
the two nodes.
In addition to these main categories, there is also some SSL work on entropy minimization , where we
force the model to make conﬁdent predictions by minimizing the entropy of the predictions. Consistency
training can also be considered a proxy-label method, with a subtle diﬀerence, instead of considering the
predictions as ground-truths and compute the cross-entropy loss, we enforce consistency of predictions by
minimizing a given distance between the outputs.
SSL methods can also be categorized based on two dominant learning paradigms, transductive learn-
ingandinductive learning . Transductive learning aims to apply the trained classiﬁer on the unlabeled
instances observed at training time; in this case, it does not generalize to unobserved instances. This type of
algorithm is mainly used on graphs, such as random walks for node embedding [119, 59], where the objective
is to label the unlabeled nodes of the graph that are present at training time. The more popular paradigm,
inductive learning, aims to learn a classiﬁer capable of generalizing to unobserved instances at test time.
1.3 Main Assumptions in SSL
The ﬁrst question we need to answer is under what assumptions can we apply SSL algorithms? SSL al-
gorithms only work under some assumptions about the structure of the data need to hold. Without such
assumptions, it would not be possible to generalize from a ﬁnite training set to a set of possibly inﬁnitely
many unseen test cases. The main assumptions in SSL are:
The Smoothness Assumption. If two points x1,x2reside in a high-density region are close, then
so should be their corresponding outputs y1,y2[20]. Meaning that if two inputs are of the same
class and belong to the same cluster, which is a high-density region of the input space, then their
corresponding outputs need to be close. The inverse also holds true; if the two points are separated
by a low-density region, the outputs must be distant from each other. This assumption can be quite
helpful in a classiﬁcation task, but not so much for regression.
The Cluster Assumption. If points are in the same cluster, they are likely to be of the same class
[20]. In this particular case of the smoothness assumption, we suppose that input data points form
clusters, and each cluster corresponds to one of the output classes. The cluster assumption can also
be seen as the low-density separation assumption: The decision boundary should lie in the low-density
regions. The relation between the two assumptions is easy to see, if a given decision boundary lies in
a high-density region, it will likely cut a cluster into two diﬀerent classes, resulting in samples from
diﬀerent classes belonging to the same cluster, which is a violation of the cluster assumption. In this
3