Figure 15: FixMatch. The model prediction on a weakly augmented input is considered as target if the
maximum output class probability is above threshold, this target can then be used to train the model on a
strongly augmented version of the same input using standard cross-entropy loss. Image Source: [12].
label is then considered as a proxy label if the highest class probability is greater than a threshold . With
a proxy label, Kstrongly augmented examples are generated using a strong augmentation function As. We
then assign to these augmented versions the proxy label obtained with the weakly labeled version. The
unsupervised loss can be written as follows:
Lu=w1
KjDujX
x2DuKX
i=11(max(f(Aw(x))))H(f(Aw(x));f(As(x))) (5.7)
Augmentations. Weak augmentations consist of a standard ﬂip-and-shift augmentation strategy. Speciﬁ-
cally, the images are ﬂipped horizontally with a probability of 50% on all datasets except SVHN, in addition
to randomly translating images by up to 12.5% vertically and horizontally. For the strong augmentations,
RandAugment and CTAugment [12] are used where a given transformation ( e.g., color inversion, translation,
contrast adjustment, etc.) is randomly selected for each sample in a batch of training examples, and the
amplitude of the transformation is a hyperparameter that is optimized during training.
OtherimportantfactorsintheFixMatcharetheusageofAdamoptimizer[82],weightdecayregularization
and the learning rate schedule, where the authors propose to use a cosine learning rate decay with a decay
ofcos(7t
16T), whereis the initial learning rate, tis the current training step, and Tis the total number of
training iterations.
6 Generative Models
In unsupervised learning, we are provided with samples xdrawn i.i.d. from an unknown data distribution
with density p(x), and the objective is to estimate this density. Supervised learning, on the other hand,
consists of estimating a functional relationship between the inputs xand the labels ywith the goal of
minimizing the functional of the joint distribution p(x;y)[20]. Classiﬁcation can be treated as a special
case of estimating p(x;y), where we are only interested in the conditional distributions p(yjx), without the
need to estimate the input distribution p(x)sincexwill always be given at prediction time. Semi-supervised
learning with generative models can be viewed as either an extension of supervised learning, classiﬁcation in
addition to information about p(x)provided byDu, or as an extension of unsupervised learning, clustering
in addition to the provided labels from Dl. In this section, we explore some generative approaches for deep
SSL.
23