Meta Pseudo Labels Given how important the heuristics used to select which the proxy labels to add
to the training set, where a proper method could lead to a sizable gain. Pham et al. [120] propose to use
the student-teacher setting, where the teacher model is responsible for producing the proxy labels based
on an eﬃcient meta-learning algorithm called Meta Pseudo Labels (MPL), which encourages the teacher to
adjust the target distributions of training examples in a manner that improves the learning of the student
model. The teacher is updated by policy gradients computed by evaluating the student model on a held-out
validation set.
A given training step of MPL consists of two phases (ﬁg. 11):
Phase 1: The Student learns from the Teacher. In this phase, given a single input example x2Dl,
the teacher f0produces a target class-distribution to train the student f, where the pair (x;f0(x))
is shown to the student to update its parameters by back-propagating from the cross-entropy loss.
Phase 2: The Teacher learns from the Student’s Validation Loss. After the student updates its
parameters in ﬁrst step, its new parameter (t+ 1)are evaluated on an example (xval;yval)from the
held-out validation dataset using the cross-entropy loss. Since the validation loss depends on 0via
the ﬁrst step, this validation cross-entropy loss is also a function of the teacher’s weights 0. This
dependency allows us to compute the gradients of the validation loss with respect to the teacher’s
weights, and then update 0to minimize the validation loss using policy gradients.
While the student’s performance allows the teacher to adjust and adapt to the student’s learning state,
this signal alone is not suﬃcient to train the teacher since when the teacher has observed enough evidence
to produce meaningful target distributions to teach the student, the student might have already entered a
bad region of parameters. To overcome this, the teacher is also trained using the pair of labeled data points
from the held-out validation set.
4.2 Multi-view training
Multi-viewtraining(MVL)[89,182]utilizesmulti-viewdatathatareverycommoninreal-worldapplications,
where diﬀerent views can be collected by diﬀerent measuring methods ( e.g., color information and texture
information for images) or by creating limited views of the original data. In such a setting, MVL aims to
learn a distinct prediction function fito model a given view vi(x)of a data point x, and jointly optimize all
the functions to improve the generalization performance. Ideally, the possible views complement each other
so that the produced models can collaborate in improving each other’s performance.
4.2.1 Co-training
Co-training [16] requires that each data point xcan be represented using two conditionally independent
viewsv1(x)andv2(x), and that each view is suﬃcient to train a good model. After training two prediction
functionsf1andf2on a speciﬁc view on the labeled set Dl. We start the proxy labeling procedure. At
each iteration, an unlabeled data point is added to the training set of the model fiif the other model fj
outputs a conﬁdent prediction with a probability higher than a threshold . This way, one of the models
provides newly labeled examples where the other model is uncertain. Co-training has been combined with
deep learning for some applications, such as object recognition [24] by utilizing RGB-D data, with RGB and
depth as the two views used to train the two models, or for combining multi-modal data [3] ( i.e., image
and text) by training each model on a given modality and use it to provide pseudo-labels for other models.
However, in many cases, the data have only one view rather than two, in this instance, diﬀerent learning
algorithms or diﬀerent parameter conﬁgurations to learn two diﬀerent classiﬁers can be employed. The two
viewsv1(x)andv2(x)can also be generated by injecting noise or by applying diﬀerent augmentations, for
18