2
related to the software repositories. MSABot [6] leverages
Rasa NLU to assist practitioners in developing and main-
taining microservices. Given that no study has investigated
which NLU performs best in the SE domain, chatbot devel-
opers can not make an informed decision on which NLU to
use when developing SE-based chatbots.
Hence, in this paper, we provide the ﬁrst study to assess
the performance of widely-used NLUs to support SE tasks.
We evaluate NLUs on queries related to two important
SE tasks: 1) Repository: Exploring projects’ repository data
(e.g.,“What is the most buggy ﬁle in my repository?”), and 2)
Stack Overﬂow: Technical questions developers frequently
ask and answer from Q&A websites (e.g., “How to convert
XElement object into a dataset or datatable?”).
Using the two SE tasks, we evaluate four widely-used
NLUs: IBM Watson [28], Google Dialogﬂow [29], Rasa [30],
and Microsoft LUIS [27] under three aspects: 1) the NLUs’
performance in correctly identifying the purpose of the user
query (i.e., intents classiﬁcation); 2) the conﬁdence yielded
by the NLUs when correctly classifying and misclassifying
queries (i.e., conﬁdence score); and 3) the performance of
the NLUs in identifying the correct subjects from queries
(i.e., entity extraction).
Our results show that, overall (considering NLUs’ per-
formance in intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence score, and en-
tity extraction), IBM Watson is the best performing NLU for
the studied SE tasks. However, the ﬁndings from evaluating
the NLUs on individual aspects show that the best perform-
ing NLU can vary. IBM Watson outperforms other NLUs
when classifying intents for both tasks (F1-measure >84%).
Also, we ﬁnd that all NLUs (except for Dialogﬂow in one
task) report high conﬁdence scores for correctly classiﬁed
intents. Moreover, Rasa proves to be the most trustable NLU
with a median conﬁdence score >0.91. When extracting
entities from SE tasks, no single NLU outperforms the
others in both tasks. LUIS performs the best in extracting
entities from the Repository task (F1-measure 93.7%), while
IBM Watson comes on top in the Stack Overﬂow task (F1-
measure 68.5%).
Given that each NLU has its own strengths in the dif-
ferent SE tasks (i.e., performs best in intent classiﬁcation vs.
entity extraction), we provide an in-depth analysis of the
performance of the different NLU’s features, which are the
list feature, where the NLU extracts entities using an exact
match from a list of synonyms; and the prediction feature,
where the NLU predicts entities that it might not have been
trained on before. Also, we analyze the characteristics of the
intents in each task to better understand the intents that tend
to be harder to classify by all of the evaluated NLUs.
The paper makes the following contributions:
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work
to evaluate NLUs on two representative tasks (i.e.,
software repositories data and Stack Overﬂow posts)
from the SE domain.
We evaluate the NLUs using different features for
extracting entities (i.e., list and prediction features).
We explore the impact of selecting different conﬁ-
dence score thresholds on the NLUs’ intent classiﬁ-
cation performance.We provide a set of actionable recommendations,
based on our ﬁndings and experience in conducting
this study, for chatbot practitioners to improve their
NLU’s performance.
We make our labelled dataset publicly available to
enable replication and help advance future research
in the ﬁeld [31].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides an overview about chatbots and explains related
concepts used throughout this paper. Section 3 describes
the case study setup used to evaluate the performance of
the NLUs. We report the evaluation results in Section 4.
Section 5 discusses our ﬁndings and provides a set of
recommendations to achieve better classiﬁcations results.
Section 6 presents the related work to our study. Section 7
discusses the threats to validity, and section 8 concludes the
paper.
2 B ACKGROUND
Before diving into the NLUs’ evaluation, we explain in this
section the chatbot-related terminology used throughout the
paper. We also present an overview of how chatbots and
NLUs work together to perform certain actions.
2.1 Deﬁnitions
Software chatbots are the conduit between their users and
automated services [24]. Through natural language, users
ask the chatbot to perform speciﬁc tasks or inquire about a
piece of information. Internally, a chatbot then uses the NLU
to analyze the posed query and act on the users’ request.
The main goal of an NLU is to extract structured data
from unstructured language input. In particular, it extracts
intents and entities from users’ queries: intents represent
the user intention/purpose of the question, while entities
represent important pieces of information in the query. For
example, take a chatbot like the MSRBot [3], that replies to
user queries about software repositories. In the query “How
many commits happened in the last month of the project?”,
the intent is to know the number of commits that happened
in a speciﬁc period ( CountCommitsByDate ), and the entity
‘last month’ of type DateTime determines the parameter for
the query. The chatbot uses both the intent and entities
to perform the action that answers the user’s question. In
this example, the chatbot searches in the repository for the
number of commits issued in the last month.
Most NLUs come with a set of built-in entities (e.g.,
currencies and date-time), which are pre-trained on general
domain queries. To use an NLU on a specialized domain,
developers should deﬁne a set of custom intents and enti-
ties. For each custom intent, the NLU needs to be trained on
a set of queries that represents different ways a user could
express that intent. Again, taking the former example, “How
many commits happened in the last month?”, this query can
be asked in multiple different ways. For instance, “show
me the number of commits between 1-03-2020 and 31-03-
2020” is an example of a query with the same semantics but
different syntax. Both queries can and should be used to
train the NLU on how to identify the CountCommitsByDate
intent. Similarly to custom intents, NLUs need to be trained