1
A Comparison of Natural Language
Understanding Platforms for Chatbots in
Software Engineering
Ahmad Abdellatif, Khaled Badran, Diego Elias Costa, and Emad Shihab, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Chatbots are envisioned to dramatically change the future of Software Engineering, allowing practitioners to chat and
inquire about their software projects and interact with different services using natural language. At the heart of every chatbot is a
Natural Language Understanding (NLU) component that enables the chatbot to understand natural language input. Recently, many
NLU platforms were provided to serve as an off-the-shelf NLU component for chatbots, however, selecting the best NLU for Software
Engineering chatbots remains an open challenge.
Therefore, in this paper, we evaluate four of the most commonly used NLUs, namely IBM Watson, Google Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and
Microsoft LUIS to shed light on which NLU should be used in Software Engineering based chatbots. Speciﬁcally, we examine the
NLUs’ performance in classifying intents, conﬁdence scores stability, and extracting entities. To evaluate the NLUs, we use two
datasets that reﬂect two common tasks performed by Software Engineering practitioners, 1) the task of chatting with the chatbot to ask
questions about software repositories 2) the task of asking development questions on Q&A forums (e.g., Stack Overﬂow). According to
our ﬁndings, IBM Watson is the best performing NLU when considering the three aspects (intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence scores, and
entity extraction). However, the results from each individual aspect show that, in intents classiﬁcation, IBM Watson performs the best
with an F1-measure >84%, but in conﬁdence scores, Rasa comes on top with a median conﬁdence score higher than 0.91. Our results
also show that all NLUs, except for Dialogﬂow, generally provide trustable conﬁdence scores. For entity extraction, Microsoft LUIS and
IBM Watson outperform other NLUs in the two SE tasks. Our results provide guidance to software engineering practitioners when
deciding which NLU to use in their chatbots.
Index Terms —Software Chatbots, Natural Language Understanding Platforms, Empirical Software Engineering.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
SOFTWARE chatbots are increasingly used in the Software
Engineering (SE) domain since they allow users to inter-
act with platforms using natural language, automate tedious
tasks, and save time/effort [1]. This increase in attention is
clearly visible in the increase of number of bots related pub-
lications [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], conferences [7], and workshops [8].
A recent study showed that one in every four OSS projects
(26%) on GitHub are using software bots for different tasks
[9]. This is supported by the fact that bots help developers
perform their daily tasks more efﬁciently[1], such as deploy
builds [10], update dependencies [11], and even generate
ﬁxing patches [12].
At the core of all chatbots lie the Natural Language Un-
derstanding platforms—referred hereafter simply as NLU.
NLUs are essential for the chatbot’s ability to understand
and act on the user’s input [13, 14]. The NLU uses machine-
learning and natural language processing (NLP) techniques
to extract structured information (the intent of the user’s
query and related entities) from unstructured user’s input
(textual information). As developing an NLU from scratch
is very difﬁcult because it requires NLP expertise, chatbot
Ahmad Abdellatif, Khaled Badran, Diego Elias Costa, and Emad Shi-
hab are with the Data-driven Analysis of Software (DAS) Lab at the
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia
University, Montr´ eal, Canada.
E-mail: a bdella, k badran, d damasc, eshihab@encs.concordia.cadevelopers resort to a handful of widely-used NLUs that
they leverage in their chatbots [3, 15, 16, 17, 18].
As a consequence of the diversity of widely-used NLUs,
developers are faced with selecting the best NLU for their
particular domain. This is a non-trivial task and has been
discussed heavily in prior work (especially since NLUs
vary in performance in different contexts) [14, 19, 20]. For
instance, in the context of the weather domain, Canonico
and De Russis [19] showed that IBM Watson outperformed
other NLUs, while Gregori [20] evaluated NLUs using fre-
quently asked questions by university students and found
that Dialogﬂow performed best. In fact, there is no shortage
of discussions on Stack Overﬂow about the best NLU to
use in chatbot implementation [21, 22, 23] as choosing an
unsuitable platform for a particular domain deeply impacts
the user satisfaction with the chatbot [24, 25, 26].
An important domain that lacks any investigation over
different NLUs’ performance is SE. Software Engineering is
a specialized domain with very speciﬁc terminology that is
used in a particular way. For example, in the SE domain,
the word ‘ticket’ refers to an issue in a bug tracking system
(e.g., Jira), while in other domains it is related to a movie
(e.g., TicketMaster bot) or ﬂight ticket. Moreover, there is
no consensus amongst SE chatbot developers on the best
NLU to use for the SE domain. For instance, TaskBot [18]
uses Microsoft Language Understanding Intelligent Service
(LUIS) [27] to help practitioners manage their tasks. MSR-
Bot [3] uses Google Dialogﬂow NLU to answer questionsarXiv:2012.02640v2  [cs.SE]  22 Jul 2021