13
Table 10: Recommendations for ﬁne-tuning the NLUs when developing Chatbots.
Problem Recommendation
Low accuracy on intents classiﬁcationR1. Train NLUs with multiple queries per intent
R2. Merge intents with similar words and disambiguate with a follow-up action
R3. Combine extra factors (e.g. regex, entity type) to aid to the conﬁdence score
Low accuracy on entity extractionR4. Use different entity features (list feature vs prediction feature) according to the entity type
R5. When using entity prediction, focus on including entities in different query positions
their time [1]. They outlined ﬁve roles for bots in the soft-
ware development process; coding, testing, DevOps, sup-
port and documentation. For example, BugBot [69], a code
bot that allows developers to create bugs easily through
Slack. Moreover, there are bots that help in code refac-
toring [52], recommend reviewers for pull-requests [70],
and generate bug ﬁxes [71]. Chatbots are a sub-category of
software bots [72, 73] where they are getting more attention
from the practitioners in the SE domain [3, 12, 18, 24, 74,
75, 76, 77]. For example, Toxtli et al. [18] developed TaskBot
using LUIS, which helps developers within teams to man-
age their tasks by initiating them and tracking reminders.
Abdellatif et al. [3] leveraged Dialogﬂow to implement the
MSRBot to help answer developers’ questions related to
their software projects. Bradley et al. [74] developed Divy
using Amazon Alexa to assist developers in their daily
development tasks. Moreover, chatbots are used to resolve
code conﬂicts [76] and answer development questions using
Stack Overﬂow [2, 17, 78].
The mentioned studies help motivate our work; to
guide developers and researches to select an NLU for
their chatbots based on their needs and the context of
usage in the SE domain. However, our work differs in that
we evaluate different NLUs and we do not propose new
chatbots.
6.2 Evaluating and Comparing NLUs
Recently, many researchers compared different NLUs from
different perspectives [19, 79, 80]. For example, Canonico
and De Russis [19] assessed the different aspects/features
of NLUs, such as usability, supported programming lan-
guages, and the ability to integrate with third parties. Also,
the authors tested different NLUs using a dataset from
the weather domain. The results show that IBM Watson
outperforms other NLUs in terms of classifying the correct
intents. Also, Angara [79] compared different attributes
of NLUs such as security to help users select a suitable
NLU based on the attributes of the chatbot. Gregori [20]
evaluated different NLUs using frequently asked questions
on a students admission corpus. The results show that
LUIS outperforms other NLUs. The work closest to ours
is the work by Braun et al. [14], which evaluated different
NLUs using public transport connections, Ubuntu platform,
and web applications corpora. The results showed that
LUIS achieved the best compared to other NLUs across all
datasets. The main difference between the work by Braun
et al. and ours is that we evaluate the NLUs using different
features (i.e., list and prediction features) on SE tasks rather
than technical support tasks (e.g., setup printers).Our work differs and complements the prior work in
two ways. First, our work uses data from two common
tasks that are highly relevant to the SE domain, as we
focus on providing insights to developers of SE chatbots.
Second, our performance evaluation covers different NLU
features (e.g., list feature) and pinpoint the impact of some
characteristics of entities in the performance of NLUs, which
are not previously studied by prior work. Overall, our work
complements the studies evaluating NLUs and contributes
to that body of research by providing a thorough evaluation
of NLUs in the SE domain.
7 T HREATS TO VALIDITY
In this section, we discuss the threats to internal, construct,
replicability, veriﬁability, conclusion, and external validity
of our study.
7.1 Internal Validity
Concerns confounding factors that could have inﬂuenced
our results. The Stack Overﬂow tasks used to evaluate the
NLUs’ performance were manually labelled which might
introduce human bias. To mitigate this threat, we had
multiple annotators to label the tasks and used the discus-
sion and voting to resolve all disagreements between the
annotators. Another threat to internal validity is that we
use the default conﬁgurations for all NLUs in our study,
which could impact their performance. For example, we
use the default NLU conﬁdence score threshold to present
our results in Section 4, but mitigate this threat by studying
the impact of conﬁdence score threshold on the NLUs’ per-
formance in Section 5.1. Other parameters could be tuned
to enhance the NLUs’ performance (spell-correction and
training validation [81]). We purposely decided to evaluate
the NLUs under their default conﬁgurations, to evaluate
the performance of an average user would encounter when
deploying the NLUs in a chatbot. Also, the only common
conﬁguration across all NLUs is the conﬁdence score thresh-
old. In other words, some NLUs have conﬁgurations that
could be tuned, which are not available in the other NLUs or
have been implicitly deﬁned in the NLU (since their internal
implementation is closed source). Hence, modifying these
conﬁgurations in one NLU might lead to different results
and conclusions.
7.2 Construct Validity
Considers the relationship between theory and observation,
in case the measured variables do not measure the actual
factors. To evaluate the NLUs’ performance in the Repos-
itory task, we use the MSRBot corpus that was created