3
to recognize custom entities. To do that, developers label the
entity types and their values in the queries. For example,
in the following query “what is the ﬁxing commit for bug
HHH-8501?”, the entity ‘HHH-8501’ is labelled as a JiraTicket
type.
The misclassiﬁcation of intents and entities negatively
impacts the user experience, although each in its own way.
When an NLU misclassiﬁes an intent, the chatbot fails to
understand the query in a fundamental manner, leading
the chatbot to reply to a different query or performing
the wrong task. Misclassifying entities, on the other hand,
causes the chatbot to reply about a wrong piece of informa-
tion. For example, in the query “How to convert xml to json
ﬁle in java” there are three entities: ‘XML’, ‘Json’ and ‘Java’.
If the NLU fails to extract the ‘Java’ entity, the chatbot loses
the context of the question and might reply with an answer
for converting XML to Json with code example from any
other programming language (e.g., Python).
The last piece in the picture is the conﬁdence score,
which represents how conﬁdent the NLU is in classifying
the intent [32, 33, 34, 35]. The conﬁdence score is given on
a scale from 0 (i.e., not conﬁdent) to 1 (i.e., fully conﬁdent),
which corresponds to the classiﬁed intent by the NLU. Chat-
bot developers use the conﬁdence score to choose their next
action, either by answering the user’s question/request or
triggering a fallback intent. The fallback intent is a response
issued by the chatbot to give the user a chance to rephrase
or clarify their initial query. Typically, the fallback intent
is triggered when the returned conﬁdence score is lower
than a certain threshold. Choosing a suitable threshold for
a chatbot is not an easy task, as a low value would make a
chatbot answer to unclear questions more often (too conﬁ-
dent), and a high threshold would trigger the fallback intent
too often (insecure chatbot), annoying the user by asking it
to rephrase the question frequently.
In our study, we want to investigate the NLUs’ per-
formance with regards to intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence
score, and entity extractions. All three aspects are critical to
ensure that chatbots return correct and complete responses
to the user.
2.2 Explanatory Example
To demonstrate how chatbots utilize NLUs to answer a
user’s query, we showcase an example of a user asking
a repository related question to a chatbot as shown in
Figure 1. In this example, we use a simpliﬁed architecture
of the chatbot [3] for illustration purposes. The NLU is
trained on the queries (intents) related to mining software
repositories and is trained to extract repository entities from
users’ questions, such as a JiraTicket (e.g., HHH-8593). In this
example, after the costumary greeting from the chatbot, the
user asks the chatbot “Fix ticket 8983?” which is forwarded
to the NLU where it classiﬁes the user’s question as having
aGetMaintainers intent with a conﬁdence score of 0.06. The
low conﬁdence score (lower than a predetermined thresh-
old) triggers the fallback intent, thus, the chatbot asks the
user to rephrase the question in a more understandable way
(i.e., “Sorry, I did not understand your question, could you
please rephrase the question?”). After the user rephrases the
question “Which commit ﬁxed the bug ticket 8983?”, theNLU extracts the entity ‘ticket 8983’ of type JiraTicket and
classiﬁes the intent of the query as GetFixingCommits with
a conﬁdence score of 0.85. Finally, the chatbot performs the
necessary action, querying the database to answer the posed
question (“The bug ticket 8983 was ﬁxed by the commit with
hash 26f55f9baa8f4f34”).
3 C ASESTUDY SETUP
Since the main goal of this paper is to evaluate the perfor-
mance of different NLUs using SE tasks, we need to select
the candidate NLUs that we want to examine and the SE
tasks’ data corpus to train and test those NLUs. In this
section, we detail our selection of the NLUs, SE tasks used
in the evaluation, and our experiment design.
3.1 Evaluated NLUs
There exists several widely-used NLUs that are easily in-
tegrated with third-party applications. To make our study
comprehensive, we choose to examine the performance of
four NLUs, namely IBM Watson, Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and
LUIS. We select these NLUs since they are popular and
widely used by both researchers and practitioners [15, 18],
and have been studied by prior NLU comparison work in
other domains [14, 20, 36]. Moreover, all selected NLUs can
be trained by importing the data through their user interface
or API calls, which facilitates the training process. In the
following, we provide a description of those NLUs.
Watson Conversation (IBM Watson): An NLU pro-
vided by IBM [28]. IBM Watson has prebuilt models
for different domains (e.g. banking) and a visual
dialog editor to simplify building the dialog by non-
programmers.
Dialogﬂow: An NLU developed by Google [29].
Dialogﬂow supports more than 20 spoken languages
and can be integrated with many chatting platforms
such as Slack [29].
Rasa: The only open-source NLU in our study,
owned by Rasa Technologies [30]. Rasa allows de-
velopers to conﬁgure, deploy, and run the NLU on
local servers. Thus, increasing the processing speed
by saving the network time compared to cloud-based
platforms. In our evaluation, we use Rasa-nlu v0.14,
which was the latest version when conducting the
experiment.
Language Understanding Intelligent Service
(LUIS): An NLU cloud platform from Microsoft
[27]. LUIS has several prebuilt domains such as
music and weather, and supports ﬁve programming
languages: C#, Go, Java, Node.js, and Python.
3.2 SE Tasks and Data Corpora
To evaluate the performance of the NLUs in the Repository
and Stack Overﬂow tasks, we select two representative
data corpora, one for each task 1) Repository corpus [3] used
for the Repository task and includes questions posed to
a chatbot by practitioners looking for information related
to their projects’ software repositories 2) Stack Overﬂow
corpus [37] used for the Stack Overﬂow task and contains