10
Table 6: Entity extraction performance as F1-measure per
entity of the four NLUs.
Task Entity TypeF1- measure
IBM Watson Dialogﬂow Rasa LUIS Avg.RepositoryCommitHash 100.0 100.0 88.9 100.0 97.2
JiraTicket 100.0 91.7 90.0 100.0 95.4
DateTime 86.2 56.3 100.0 98.1 85.2
FileName 15.9 79.2 71.4 80.0 61.6Stack
OverﬂowProgLanguage 92.0 93.7 91.4 86.8 91.0
Platform 67.4 55.9 75.1 43.6 60.5
Framework 65.4 56.0 56.1 54.4 58.0
Standards 54.1 56.9 14.9 17.5 35.9
API 43.3 42.8 29.9 23.5 34.9
in DOM” is a unique entity as it occurs only once in the
Stack Overﬂow task. This entity was not extracted by any of
the evaluated NLUs. Consequently, NLUs tend to perform
well when extracting entities which appear frequently in the
training set (i.e., not unique).
Overall, NLUs perform differently in the two evaluated
tasks, with LUIS and Rasa outperforming others when
using the list feature (Repository task) for entity extrac-
tion, while IBM Watson and Dialogﬂow perform better
when the entities need to be predicted (Stack Overﬂow
task).
4.4 Concluding Remarks
In the previous three sections, we compare the NLUs’ per-
formance in terms of three aspects (intents classiﬁcation,
conﬁdence scores, and entity extraction). We ﬁnd that the
performance of each NLU can vary from one aspect to
another, and between the two tasks. In other words, there is
no NLU that outperforms all others in every aspect. Hence,
in this section, we set up to rank the NLUs on their overall
performance (considering the results from all aspects stud-
ied in the previous sections) in order to ﬁnd the best NLU
for chatbots in the SE domain. Having an overall measure is
challenging since we have different tasks (Repository and
Stack Overﬂow) and are using different entity extraction
features (i.e., list vs. prediction features). Therefore, we use
an approach that has been used in prior work [62] to rank
techniques evaluated against different datasets. In particu-
lar, we use F1-measures of each task for intents classiﬁcation
(Section 4.1) and entity extraction (Section 4.3) aspects. For
the conﬁdence score aspect, we rank the NLUs using the
median conﬁdence scores for the correctly classiﬁed intents
of each task as shown in Section 4.2. To rank the NLUs, we
compute the NLUs’ average rank using their ranks in all
aspects and tasks. The NLU with the lowest average rank is
the best performing NLU.
Table 7 presents the NLUs’ ranks in the different aspects
on both tasks and their overall ranks. We ﬁnd that IBM
Watson is the best performing NLU when considering all
aspects in both tasks, followed by Rasa, Dialogﬂow, and
LUIS. That said, chatbot practitioners need to consider the
most important aspect (i.e., intents classiﬁcation or entity
extraction) and tasks performed by their chatbot when
selecting the NLUs they want to use.5 D ISCUSSION
In this section, we dive into the evaluation results to gain
more insights on the NLUs’ conﬁdence score sensibility as
well as quantifying their abilities to extract unique entities.
Finally, we provide a set of actionable recommendations to
chatbot developers and researchers to achieve better intents
classiﬁcation and entity extraction results.
5.1 Examining the Impact of the Conﬁdence Score
Threshold on NLU Performance
One important impacting factor of the results from these
NLUs is the conﬁdence score threshold, i.e., at what conﬁ-
dence score value would an NLU be conﬁdent in classifying
the returned intent as correct. In some cases, NLUs return
high conﬁdence scores for the incorrectly classiﬁed intents
as shown in Section 4.2. Hence, deﬁning the appropriate
threshold to accept the classiﬁed intent or trigger the fall-
back action is still a challenge for chatbot developers. In
essence, developers have to arbitrarily determine which
conﬁdence score value they will use to determine a correct
classiﬁcation. Given that the conﬁdence score threshold
impacts the NLUs’ performance, an important question is,
how does the conﬁdence score threshold impact the perfor-
mance?
To maintain consistency with the results presented in
Section 4, we use the same experimental settings. We vary
the conﬁdence score used by each NLU to determine the
correct intent and plot its F1-measure performance.
Figure 5 shows the NLUs’ F1-measures at varying con-
ﬁdence score thresholds. We perform this analysis for both
tasks. For the Repository task, our results show that Rasa is
the most robust, achieving consistently high performance
for threshold values between 0-0.7. On the other hand,
IBM Watson and Dialogﬂow start to see a reduction in
performance for threshold values higher than 0.3. LUIS
seems to generally follow a downward trend with higher
conﬁdence score thresholds. In the case of the Stack Over-
ﬂow task, we again observe stable performance by Rasa
for conﬁdence score thresholds between 0-0.8, while IBM
Watson, Dialogﬂow, and LUIS decrease in performance as
the conﬁdence score threshold increases.
From the results obtained, we observe that 1) the NLU’s
performance varies based on the task at hand and 2) that
using lower conﬁdence score threshold values tends to
achieve better performance. This is because the selected
threshold changes the NLU’s performance only when it
surpasses some of the conﬁdence scores returned by that
NLU. For example, Rasa has a high conﬁdence score me-
dian (0.91), and hence, it will only be affected when the
threshold increases signiﬁcantly (threshold >0.7). That said,
one needs to be careful since using a low conﬁdence score
may also lead to the chatbot providing the wrong answer
to the question being asked. Overall, we recommend that
developers should investigate and carefully choose a proper
conﬁdence score threshold since such thresholds can have a
signiﬁcant impact on the chatbot’s performance.
5.2 Unique Entities
The performance of the NLUs in extracting entities from
the Stack Overﬂow task was affected by unique entities, as