8
Repository Stack Overflow0.00.20.40.60.81.0Confidence Score
IBM Watson
Repository Stack Overflow
Dialogflow
Repository Stack Overflow0.00.20.40.60.81.0Confidence Score
Rasa
Repository Stack Overflow
LUISClassification
Correct
Incorrect
Figure 3: Conﬁdence score distribution for all NLUs and tasks.
trust these conﬁdence scores. Also, the contrary is true, if an
NLU provides high conﬁdence scores to wrongly classiﬁed
intents, then one would lose trust in the NLUs’ produced
conﬁdence scores.
To compare the performance of the NLUs in terms of
conﬁdence scores, we queried each NLU with questions
from the two tasks - Repository and Stack Overﬂow. For
each query, we considered the highest conﬁdence score to
map to a speciﬁc intent. For example, for the query above
(“What is the number of commits between 1-July-2020 to
1-August-2020?”), an NLU may return a conﬁdence score
of 0.98 for the intent CountCommitsByDate , and a conﬁ-
dence score of 0.80 for the intent BuggyCommitsByDate . If
the correct intent is CountCommitsByDate , then we would
consider this as a correctly classiﬁed instance and record
the conﬁdence score. In cases where the top conﬁdence
score does not indicate the correct intent, we record this
an incorrect classiﬁcation and record the intent conﬁdence
score.
We present the distributions of the conﬁdence scores
and compare these distributions for correctly and incor-
rectly classiﬁed intents. Ideally, NLUs should have high
conﬁdence scores for correctly classiﬁed intents (and vice
versa). In addition, having clearly disjoint distributions of
the conﬁdence scores between the correctly and incorrectly
extracted intents indicates that practitioners can rely on the
conﬁdence score of the NLU.
Results. Figure 3 shows the distributions of conﬁdence
scores returned by IBM Watson, Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and LUISin the Repository and Stack Overﬂow tasks. From Figure 3,
we observe that all NLUs return higher median conﬁdence
scores for the correctly classiﬁed intents compared to the in-
correctly classiﬁed intents, for both tasks. The sole exception
is Dialogﬂow, which has a higher median conﬁdence score
for incorrectly classiﬁed intents for the Repository task.
Among the evaluated NLUs, Rasa stands out as being
the NLU with the highest corresponding conﬁdence scores
medians (higher than 0.91) in both the Repository and
Stack Overﬂow tasks, for the correctly classiﬁed intents.
Furthermore, Rasa has the most compact distribution of
conﬁdence scores among other NLUs and the least overlap-
ping conﬁdence scores between the correctly classiﬁed and
misclassiﬁed intents. This means that when Rasa returns a
high conﬁdence score, it is highly likely to be correct.
To ensure that the difference in the conﬁdence scores
between the correctly and incorrectly classiﬁed intents
across NLUs is statistically signiﬁcant, we perform the non-
parametric unpaired Mann-Whitney U test on each NLU
results. We ﬁnd that the differences are statistically signif-
icant (i.e., p-value <0:05) in all cases and for both, the
Repository and Stack Overﬂow tasks, except for the results
of Dialogﬂow in the Repository task. Generally, our results
show that developers can trust the conﬁdence score yielded
by NLUs to assess if the NLUs have correctly classiﬁed the
intent, or the chatbot needs to trigger the fallback action, an
action that is used when an NLU cannot determine a correct
intent.
As mentioned earlier, the only outlier in our evaluation