14
to evaluate the MSRBot. The MSRBot dataset might have
some limitations, such as having questions (intents) that
might be less popular than others in real settings. However,
we argue that the questions that MSRBot supports were
derived via a semi-structured process that collected the most
common questions asked by software practitioners from
previous studies [82, 83, 84]. On the other hand, the MSRBot
evaluation participants were free to word their questions to
the chatbot. Finally, the list of questions used to train the
MSRBot was not revealed to the participants.
7.3 Replicability Validity
Concerns the possibility of replicating the study [85]. In our
study, we used three of the most popular NLUs that are
closed source (except for Rasa). The NLU internal imple-
mentation might change without any prior notice to the
users. Therefore, replicating the study might lead to differ-
ent results. We mitigate this issue by providing the scripts
and datasets used in each task and the version used for
Rasa (open-source). We encourage the scientiﬁc community
to replicate the study through our replication package [31]
after a certain time (e.g., 6 months) to examine if there is a
change in the NLUs performance. We believe that our study
presents a snapshot of the NLUs’ performance comparison
in the SE domain. Moreover, our results serve as a starting
point for the chatbot practitioners when selecting the NLUs
to use.
7.4 Veriﬁability Validity
Concerns the veriﬁability of the study results [86]. In our
study, we compared the performance of different NLUs
using two common SE tasks (i.e., Repository and Stack
Overﬂow tasks). Using different NLUs or different tasks
might lead to different conclusions. To mitigate this threat,
we selected NLUs that are used in prior work [14, 20, 36] as
a ﬁrst step to benchmark the NLUs in the SE domain. Also,
we described our case study setup in Section 3, studied each
task characteristics and detailed our analysis and results in
Section 4. Finally, we shared the dataset used to train/test
NLUs, NLUs’ responses [31], and the used scripts [31]
with the community to allow for further investigation and
accelerate the future research in the ﬁeld.
7.5 Conclusion Validity
Concerns the relationship between the treatment and the
outcome. In Section 4.4, we compute the overall NLUs’
performance in both tasks by ranking the NLUs on each
task based on their F1-measure then compute their average
ranks in all tasks. The NLU’s performance differs based
on its intended usage (i.e., intents classiﬁcation and entity
extraction) and task (i.e., Repository and Stack Overﬂow).
The main goal behind this analysis is to ﬁnd the NLU that
could be the best to use in the initial implementation of the
SE chatbots. Moreover, this analysis has been used in similar
studies [62] to obtain an overall performance for the NLUs.
Finally, our results show consistency in the NLUs’ ranks in
all usages (except for entity extraction) for both tasks.7.6 External Validity
Concerns the generalization of our ﬁndings. While we use
four of the most commonly used NLUs to evaluate their
performance in the SE domain, there exist other NLUs
which are not included in our study. Since our goal is to ﬁnd
the best performing NLU in the SE domain, in our study
we only select the NLUs that have been widely used by
researchers and practitioners and they can be trained using
their API calls and/or user interface.
Our study may be impacted by the fact that we evaluate
the NLUs using the Repository and Stack Overﬂow tasks;
hence our results may not generalize to other tasks in the
SE domain. However, we believe that they cover very com-
mon tasks in SE, which could be improved with chatbots.
That said, we encourage other researchers to conduct more
similar studies that consider other NLUs and more SE tasks.
8 C ONCLUSION & F UTURE WORK
Software chatbots are becoming popular in the SE commu-
nity due to their beneﬁts in saving development time and
resources. An NLU lies at the heart of each chatbot to enable
the understanding of the user’s input. Selecting the best
NLU to use for a chatbot that operates in the SE domain is a
challenging task. In this paper, we evaluate the performance
of four widely-used NLUs, namely IBM Watson, Google
Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and Microsoft LUIS. We assess the NLUs’
performance in intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence score, and
entity extraction using two different tasks designed from a
Repository and Stack Overﬂow contexts.
When considering all three aspects (intents classiﬁcation,
conﬁdence scores, and entity extraction), we ﬁnd that IBM
Watson is the best performing NLU for the studied SE
tasks. For each individual aspect, in intents classiﬁcation,
IBM Watson outperforms other NLUs for both tasks. On the
other hand, when it comes to conﬁdence scores, all NLUs
(except for Dialogﬂow) return high conﬁdence scores for
the correctly classiﬁed intents. Also, we ﬁnd that Rasa is
the most trustworthy NLU in terms of conﬁdence score.
Finally, LUIS and IBM Watson achieve the best results in
extracting entities from the Repository and Stack Overﬂow
tasks, respectively. Moreover, our results shed light on the
characteristics that affect the NLUs’ performance in intents
classiﬁcation (e.g., # Training Samples) and entity extraction
(e.g., unique entities). Therefore, we encourage researchers
to develop techniques and methods that enhance the NLUs’
performance for tasks with different characteristics. We be-
lieve that our work guides chatbot practitioners to select the
NLU that best ﬁts the SE task performed by their chatbots.
Our study paves the way for future work in this area.
First, our results show that NLUs tend to perform well when
they are trained on more examples. Therefore, we plan to
examine different dataset augmentation techniques to gen-
erate more training examples for the NLUs to enhance their
performance. Also, we believe that there is a need for more
studies that compare different NLUs using more datasets to
benchmark NLUs in the SE context. We contribute towards
this effort by making our dataset publicly available [31].