12
Table 9: Precision, Recall, and F1-measure of extracting
unique entities in the Stack Overﬂow task.
NLU Precision Recall F1-measure
IBM Watson 51.4% 28% 31.6%
Dialogﬂow 0% 0% 0%
Rasa 12% 1.3% 2.1%
LUIS 25.3% 5.3% 7.7%
5.3 Recommendations
Based on our ﬁndings and experience in conducting this
study, we provide a set of actionable recommendations to
help chatbot practitioners to improve the performance of
the used NLU. Table 10 summarizes our recommendations
to improve the NLUs’ performance in intents classiﬁcations
and entity extraction. While our results are based on SE
tasks, some of the guidelines can be used to improve the
NLU performance regardless of the domain. We discuss the
recommendations in details in the following.
R1. Train NLUs with multiple queries per intent. Our
results show that the NLUs perform better when classifying
queries with intents that have more training examples.
While more data is typically better in any machine-learning
task, the focus on crafting a good training set needs to
be put in the diversity of queries per intent. In fact, some
NLUs recommend that each intent has 10 training examples
or more [48] that represent different ways of querying
that intent (e.g., having different sentence lengths [63]).
NLUs like Dialogﬂow and LUIS provide an interactive
GUI [64] to allow the chatbot developers to edit and add
training examples using the questions users pose to the
chatbot. Chatbot developers should leverage this feature,
especially at the early stages of the chatbot development,
as a part of the debugging process of the NLU and as a
way of ﬁne-tuning the initial training set of the chatbot.
We plan (and encourage others) to explore semi-supervised
learning [65] and weak supervision [66] approaches to
automate the NLU’s retraining process.
R2. Merge intents with similar words and disambiguate
with a follow-up action. The results show that NLUs better
classify intents that contain exclusive words and distinct
entity types, not shared with other intents. Hence, it is
worth exploring the possibility of merging similar intents
that share many common words and entity types into a
single intent, as the NLUs can misclassify these intents.
The merge of intents can be done in two ways: 1) during
training, combining queries of similar intents into one
intent, or 2) after the intents classiﬁcation as a chatbot
post-processing phase. Option 1 is only recommended
when frequently misclassiﬁed intents have fewer training
examples, as the merging can help boost the initial training
dataset. Otherwise, option 2 is a more generally applicable
solution as it does not introduce any noise by modifying
the training dataset. Once the NLU classiﬁes the merged
intent, chatbot developers can employ some strategies to
disambiguate the merged intent. The disambiguation can
be done using entity extraction, regular expressions, or
even relying on follow-up chatbot questions to help extract
the target intent. For example, if there is a chatbot thatdoes code refactoring, then the intents ‘refactor class’ and
‘refactor method’ have very similar training examples. In
this case, the chatbot developers can merge both intents
into one intent (e.g., ‘refactor’). Then, to identify the target
intent (class or method), the chatbot could ask the user
about the type of refactoring to perform.
R3. Combine multiple factors to aid the conﬁdence
score. While most of the NLUs return high conﬁdence
scores when correctly classifying intents, as we discussed
in Section 4.3, we recommend the chatbot developers to
use other measures to ensure the intent was classiﬁed
correctly. For example, chatbot developers can combine
the conﬁdence scores with regular expressions to check if
speciﬁc keywords appear in the question. Another example
is an intent that has a distinct entity type where developers
can check whether an entity of that type exists in the query
and use that information to make sure that the intent was
correctly classiﬁed (e.g., only queries of ‘ BuggyCommit ’
intent have ‘ JiraTicket ’ entities).
R4. Use different entity features according to the entity
type. Developers should resort to different entity features
(either list feature or prediction feature) together in the
same chatbot, depending on the entities of their domain.
Entities that are enumerable (e.g., months of the year)
and have known ﬁnite values are better identiﬁed with
the features containing all known synonyms. We observe
this when evaluating the entity extraction performance in
the Repository task, where NLUs extracted entities more
accurately. However, in most cases, an entity could be
expressed in various (and unknown) ways and developers
need to resort to the prediction feature (e.g., Framework
entities).
R5. When using the entity prediction feature, focus on in-
cluding entities in different positions within the queries.
When it comes to extracting entities using the prediction
feature, developers need to diversify their queries so that
they include entities in different positions (i.e., beginning,
middle, and end of the query) in order to improve the
NLU’s ability to extract the entities in different contexts
[67, 68]. Also, developers should expose the NLU with
different variants of the entity (e.g., ‘issues’ and ‘bugs’) [68].
Finally, we believe that there is a need for a benchmark that
contains SE terms (i.e., SE thesaurus) and their variations
(e.g., ‘commit’ and ‘change’) as this helps the developers
of SE chatbots to train the NLUs on SE entities and their
synonyms.
6 R ELATED WORK
Since the goal of this paper is to examine the different NLUs
for SE chatbots, we discuss the related work in two areas:
work that studies chatbots in the SE domain and work that
focuses on evaluating NLUs.
6.1 Using Chatbots to Assist Developers
Storey and Zagalsky deﬁned bots as tools that perform
tedious tasks to increase developer’ productivity and save