9
is the experiment from Dialogﬂow on the Repository task.
Dialogﬂow returns a higher conﬁdence score median for the
misclassiﬁed intents (1.0) compared to the correctly classi-
ﬁed intents (0.73), in the Repository task (see Figure 3). We
searched the online documentation and forums to see if oth-
ers have faced similar situations. We found multiple posts
where developers raise issues with Dialogﬂow’s high con-
ﬁdence scores for incorrectly classiﬁed intents [58, 59]. This
indicates that our results are not an outlier and there might
be an issue with Dialogﬂow that needs to be addressed.
The developers reported that they rely on workarounds to
overcome such issues, such as combining the conﬁdence
score with other measures (e.g., regular expression) [59].
Overall, NLUs yield higher conﬁdence scores for cor-
rectly classiﬁed intents. IBM Watson, Rasa, and LUIS
provide higher median conﬁdence scores, ranging be-
tween 0.68 - 0.96, for correctly classiﬁed intents.
4.3 Entity Extraction
To correctly answers users’ queries, chatbots need to also
correctly extract the relevant entities. We consider the ex-
tracted entity to be correct only if its type and value exactly
match the type and value of expected entity for that query in
the oracle. The reason behind our criteria is that extracting
entities that are only partially correct (i.e., have only correct
values or correct types), causes the chatbot to incorrectly
reply to the user’s query. Since there can exist a varying
number and types of entities in each query, we need a
mechanism to ensure that our evaluation accounts for such
variance. To mitigate this issue, we calculate the precision,
recall, and weighted F1-measure based on the number of
entities in each entity type, for the entity extraction results.
Results. Figure 4 presents the entity extraction results for
the two tasks. To better interpret the results, we reiterate
that extracting entities in the Repository and Stack Overﬂow
tasks require different NLU features. For the Repository
task, we conﬁgure the NLUs to extract entities using the
list feature (i.e., list of synonyms) and entities are extracted
as an exact match. In the Stack Overﬂow task, however,
we conﬁgure the NLUs to use the prediction feature as
discussed in Section 3.2, that is, requesting the NLUs to
predict the correct entity. Given their differences, we discuss
the results of each task separately, ﬁrst describing the results
for the Repository task and then the Stack Overﬂow task.
Repository. According to Figure 4, LUIS is the best perform-
ing NLU with an average F1-measure of 93.7%, followed
by Rasa (90.3%). Both IBM Watson and Dialogﬂow perform
similarly (70.7%) when extracting entities in the Repository
task.
To better understand the factors inﬂuencing the perfor-
mance, we examine the F1-measure of the NLUs in light
of the different entity types. Table 6 shows the NLU’s
performance per entity type. We highlight, in bold, the best
performing NLU for each entity type. Our results conﬁrm
that LUIS is the best performing NLU when extracting the
CommitHash ,JiraTicket , and FileName entity types from the
Repository task. IBM Watson also performs well in the
CommitHash and JiraTicket entity types, but it falls shortwhen extracting FileName entities (F1-measure of 15.9%).
This is due to IBM Watson’s inability to differentiate be-
tween the normal words (e.g., ‘To’ and ‘A’) and entities of
type FileName (e.g., ‘To.java’ and ‘A.java’). In other words, it
extracts entities based on their exact match with the training
set without considering the entities’ context when using the
list feature [60]. For DateTime entities, Rasa performs best
in extracting all the dates correctly (F1-measure of 100%)
from the given queries. Rasa uses a probabilistic context-
free grammar through their pipeline (Duckling) to extract
the dates from the posed queries [61]. For other NLUs, we
notice two reasons behind the incorrect extraction of the
DateTime entities: 1) the misspelling of the date from the
users (e.g., “what are the commits I submit on 27/5/2018 
31/5/2018”) 2) vague date formats in queries (e.g., “Tell me
about the commits from 05-27 to 05-31 in 2018”).
Repository Stack Overflow020406080100F1-measure70.768.570.7
65.890.3
59.993.7
55.1 IBM Watson
Dialogflow
Rasa
LUIS
Figure 4: Entity extraction performance as avg. F1-measure
of the four NLUs.
Stack Overﬂow. We observe in Figure 4 that IBM Watson
yields the best results (F1-measure of 68.5%), followed by
Dialogﬂow (65.8%), Rasa (59.9%), and LUIS (55.1%). Note
that the performance of the NLUs on the Stack Overﬂow
task is expectedly lower than the performance obtained in
the Repository task, given that NLUs have to predict entities
in a query.
Similar to the case of the Repository task, we also ex-
amine the performance of the NLUs when extracting the
different entity types in the Stack Overﬂow task. Table 6
shows that the performance of the NLUs varies from one
entity type to the other, and that no NLU outperforms
the rest in extracting the majority of entity types. Table 6
shows that, in the Stack Overﬂow task, both IBM Watson
and Dialogﬂow outperform other NLUs in extracting two
different entity types. Furthermore, we observe that some
entity types are more difﬁcult to extract than others. In
particular, entities of type Framework ,Standards , and API
are difﬁcult to extract (i.e., the four NLUs achieve an F1-
measure <60%). Upon closer investigation of the results,
we ﬁnd that more than 60% of the most difﬁcult entities
appear only once in the task, that is, they are unique entities.
For example, the entity ‘DOM’ of type Standards in the
query “How to tell if an element is before another element