6
Table 4: List of the Stack Overﬂow task intents.
Intent Description Total (%)
LookingForCodeSample Looking for information related to implementation. This includes looking for code snippets, the
functionality of a method, or information speciﬁc to the user’s needs.132 (61.3%)
UsingMethodImproperly A method or a framework is being used improperly causing an unexpected or unwanted behaviour
of the program in hand. This can be related to code bugs or to performance issues.51 (23.7%)
LookingForBestPractice Looking for the recommended (best) practice, approach or solution for a problem. 12 (5.6%)
FacingError Facing an error or a failure in a program, mostly in the form of an error message or a build failure. 10 (4.7%)
PassingData Passing data between different frameworks or method calls. 10 (4.7%)
example, ProgLanguage entity type has a set of different pro-
gramming languages such as Python and JavaScript. Such
entities can be used by code-centric chatbots [6, 52], such as
chatbots that extract ﬁles that call a particular method in the
code [6].
3.3 Performance Evaluation of NLUs
We use the corpora from the Repository and Stack Overﬂow
tasks to train IBM Watson, Dialogﬂow, Rasa, and LUIS
and evaluate their performance. As each task has speciﬁc
characteristics, we detail in the following how we train and
test the NLUs for each task.
To evaluate the NLUs on the Repository task, we use
the same training set from the Repository corpus, which
includes 10 intents with their queries and entities with their
lists of synonyms. To set up the NLUs, we conﬁgure the
NLUs to use the list feature for all entities, that is, the
NLU will not attempt to extract any entities that are not
present in the training set. This is thematically in-line with
the nature of the Repository task where a chatbot answers
questions about software repositories. In this context, an
entity that does not exist in the repository (e.g., wrong Jira
ticket number) is not useful for the chatbot and cannot be
used to extract any information for the user. Then, using
the NLUs’ API, we deﬁne the entity types that exist in the
Repository corpus, namely 1) CommitHash 2) JiraTicket 3)
FileName, and use a fourth built-in entity type (DateTime).
In contrast to the Repository task, there is no original
split in the Stack Overﬂow corpus, as this corpus was not
originally intended to be used as training sets for chatbots.
In fact, we augmented the dataset by manually labeling the
intents in all queries, as discussed in Section 3.2. Therefore,
to evaluate the NLUs’ performance on the Stack Overﬂow
task, we use a stratiﬁed tenfold cross validation [53]. The
cross validation randomly divides the corpus into ten equal
folds where nine folds are used for training and one fold
for testing. Since we used the stratiﬁed version, the method
maintains a consistent distribution of intents across all folds.
It is important to note that we use the same process to
train and test all the NLUs, hence, the queries remain
consistent across the NLUs in each run of the tenfold cross
validation. Moreover, we do not use the list feature to train
the NLUs on all entities in the Stack Overﬂow task. Instead,
we train the NLUs to extract the entities using the prediction
feature. This allows us to evaluate the NLUs’ ability to
extract entities that they have not been trained on before,
which better emulates real-life scenarios where practitioners
cannot expect to train their chatbots in all possible entities.
We train Dialogﬂow, LUIS, and Rasa using their APIs,
and train IBM Watson using its user interface. After thetraining process, we send each query in the test set through
all NLU APIs and analyze their response, which includes
the classiﬁed intent, the intent’s conﬁdence score, and the
extracted entities. This response is then compared against
the oracle to evaluate the performance of the NLU. To enable
the replicability of our study, we make the scripts used
to evaluate the NLUs performance and datasets publicly
available [31].
To evaluate the performance of the NLUs in each task,
we calculate the standard classiﬁcation accuracy measures
that have been used in similar work (e.g., [14]) - precision,
recall, and F1-measure. In our study, precision for a class
(i.e., intent or entity) is the percentage of the correctly
classiﬁed queries to the total number of classiﬁed queries
for that class (i.e., Precision =TP
TP+FP). The recall for a
class is the percentage of the correctly classiﬁed queries to
the total number of queries for that class that exist in the
oracle (i.e., Recall =TP
TP+FN). Finally, to present the overall
performance of each NLU, we use the weighted F1-measure.
In particular, we compute the F1-measure (i.e., F1-measure =
2Precision Recall
Precision +Recall) for each class and aggregate all classes
F1-measure using weighted average, with the class’ support
as weights. This approach of calculating the F1-measure has
been used in similar work [54, 55]. While we evaluate all
three metrics, we only showcase the weighted F1-measure
in the paper, whereas the precision, recall, and F1-measure
for each intent and entity are presented in the Appendix.
4 C ASESTUDY RESULTS
In this section, we present the comparison of the NLUs’
performance in terms of intents classiﬁcation, conﬁdence
score, and entity extraction on the Repository and Stack
Overﬂow tasks.
4.1 Intents Classiﬁcation
To evaluate the NLUs in intents classiﬁcation, we train and
test each of the NLUs using the corpus from each of the two
SE tasks. When testing the NLUs, we only consider the top
scoring intent as the classiﬁed intent for two reasons. First,
to emulate real life use-cases where chatbots use the intent
with the highest corresponding score, as it is the intent
with the highest probability of being correct [32, 33, 34, 35].
Second, to ensure that the evaluation of all NLUs is
consistent, as Dialogﬂow only returns one intent with the
corresponding conﬁdence score in its response for a single
query.
Results. Figure 2 shows the F1-measure for intent clas-
siﬁcation. The Figure presents the performance for each