5
Table 3: List of the Stack Overﬂow task entities.
Entity Deﬁnition Total
ProgLanguage Types of programming languages (e.g.,
Java) [37].96
Framework Tools/frameworks that developers use
(e.g., Maven) [37].85
Standards “Refers to data formats (e.g., JSON), de-
sign patterns (e.g.,Abstract Factory), pro-
tocols (e.g., HTTP), technology acronyms
(e.g., Ajax)” [37].20
API An API of a library (e.g., ArrayList) [37]. 67
Platform Software/Hardware platforms (e.g., IOS)
[37].13
questions with the same semantic, indicating the different
ways a user could ask the same query. Those intents have
questions related to code repository (e.g., “List me the
changes done in ClassA.java” from the FileCommits intent),
issue tracker (e.g., “Who has the most bug assignments?”
from the OverloadedDev intent), or a combination of both
code and issue tracker (e.g., “Which commits ﬁxed HHH-
10956?” a query from the FixCommit intent). The corpus
includes explicitly deﬁned training and test sets that are
labelled by the developers of the MSRBot. The training set
includes the questions used to train the chatbot, acquired
and curated by three developers involved in the project,
while the test set is composed of questions posed by 12
software developers to test the MSRBot on a speciﬁed set of
10 different tasks. We use the training and test set as deﬁned
by the MSRBot authors in this experiment.
Each entity in the Repository corpus contains a so-called
list feature [40, 41, 42, 43], a list of equivalent synonyms used
by the NLU to recognize entities. With the list feature, the
NLUs are limited to extract the exact match of the entities,
but can use the speciﬁed synonyms in the extraction process.
For instance, the entity ‘HHH-7325’ of type JiraTicket has
a list of synonyms containing ‘bug7325’, ‘issue7325’, and
‘HHH7325’, hence, any of these words can be used by the
NLU to recognize the entity ‘HHH-7325’. The Repository
corpus contains four entity types using the list feature as
shown in Table 2, covering the main artifacts in a repository,
such as ﬁles ( FileName ), commits ( CommitHash ), and tickets
from the JIRA bug-tracker ( JiraTicket ).
Stack Overﬂow Corpus. Stack Overﬂow is a popular Q&A
website among developers and plays an important role in
the software development life cycle [39]. Given its impor-
tance, data from Stack Overﬂow has already been used in
prior work to train chatbots [2]. The titles of the questions
in Stack Overﬂow represent a request for information by
software practitioners (e.g., “How to create an JS object from
scratch using a HTML button?”). Recently, Ye et al. [37]
developed a machine learning approach to extract software
entities (e.g., the programming language name) from Q&A
websites like Stack Overﬂow, and manually labelled entities
from 297 Stack Overﬂow posts as shown in Table 3. We use
the same corpus [37] and extract the title of each post with
its labelled entities. Unlike the Repository corpus, entities in
the Stack Overﬂow corpus do not have a list feature, (list
of entity synonyms), and need to be predicted by the NLUs
(i.e., prediction feature). In other words, we train the NLUsonly on the entities included in the training set. This allows
us to evaluate the NLUs’ ability to extract entities that they
have not been trained on before, which emulates real-life
scenarios where it is difﬁcult for the practitioners to train
the NLUs on all SE entities.
While the original Stack Overﬂow corpus contains man-
ually labelled entities, it lacks the intent behind the posed
questions. Hence, we need to manually label the intents of
the queries before we can use the corpus for the Stack Over-
ﬂow task. To achieve that, the ﬁrst author used thematic
analysis [44] to categorize those queries (titles) according to
their intents. Thematic analysis [45] is a technique to extract
common themes within a corpus via inspection, which was
done manually in our case. This method is frequently used
in qualitative research to identify patterns within collected
data and has been used in prior work in the SE domain
[46, 47]. Initially, the ﬁrst author categorized the queries into
19 intents. Then, we merged the categories that have a small
number of examples (less than 10) but have a very similar
rationale. This is because some NLUs recommend a training
set of at least 10 queries for each intent [48]. For example, the
queries of FacingException and FacingError intents are quite
similar in their goal as developers are looking for a solution
to ﬁx the crash and error.
To validate the manually extracted intents, we asked
two additional annotators - the second author and one
other Ph.D. student - to independently label the queries
using the extracted intents. For each question, we asked the
annotators to evaluate whether the query has a clear intent
or not using the multiple choice (‘Yes’, ‘May be’, and ‘No’).
If the annotators answer the previous question with ‘Yes’ or
‘May be’, then they classify the title using one of the deﬁned
intents shown in Table 4. After both annotators ﬁnished the
labelling process, we merged the labelled queries into one
set to be used in the NLUs evaluation. We then use the
Cohen’s Kappa coefﬁcient to evaluate the level of agreement
between the two authors [49]. The Cohen’s Kappa coefﬁcient
is a well-known statistic that evaluates the inter-rater agree-
ment level for categorical scales. The resulting coefﬁcient is
a scale that ranges between -1.0 and +1.0, where a negative
value means poorer than chance agreement, zero indicates
agreement by chance, and a positive value indicates better
than chance agreement. We ﬁnd that the level of agreement
between the two annotators on the occurrence of intent (i.e.,
whether a title has an intent or not) is +0.74, and the agree-
ment on the intents classiﬁcation is +0.71. Both agreements
are considered to be substantial inter-rater agreements [50].
All three annotators discussed the disagreements and voted
to the best ﬁtting intent. After the merge, we discarded
queries with unclear intent (total of 82), such as “JConsole
Web Application”. The ﬁnal set includes 215 queries [31],
Tables 3 and 4 show the number of entities and intents
included in our evaluation, respectively.
Our manual classiﬁcation led to the creation of 5 in-
tents shown in Table 4 with their deﬁnitions. The intents
in the Stack Overﬂow Corpus represent different types
of questions posted on Stack Overﬂow. For example, the
FacingError intent contains questions asking for a solution
for an encountered error: “PHP mysqli query returns empty
error message” [51]. Table 3 shows entities used in the Stack
Overﬂow corpus that are very speciﬁc to the SE domain. For