NISTIR 8269  (DRAFT) A TAXONOMY AND TERMINOLOGY OF  
ADVERSARIAL MACHINE LEARNING  
ii Reports on Computer  Systems Technology  74 
The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and 75 
Technology (NIST) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical 76 
leaders hip for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test 77 
methods, reference data, proof of concept implementations, and technical analyses to advance the 78 
development and productive use of information technology. ITL’s respons ibilities include the 79 
development of management, administrative, technical, and physical standards and guidelines for 80 
the cost -effective security and privacy of other than national s ecurity -related information in f ederal 81 
informa tion systems.  82 
Abstract  83 
This NIST Interagency/Internal Report (NISTIR) is intended as a step toward securing 84 
applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI), especially against adversarial manipulations of 85 
Machine Learning (ML), by developing a taxonomy and terminology of Adversarial Machine 86 
Learning (AML).  Although AI also includes various knowledge-based systems, the data-driven 87 
approach of ML introduces additional security challenges in training and testing (inference) 88 
phases of system operations. AML is concerned with the design of ML algorithms that can resist 89 
security challenges, the study of the capabilities of attackers, and the understanding of attack 90 
consequences. 91 
This document develops a taxonomy of concepts and defines terminology in the field of AML. 92 
The taxonomy, built on and integrating previous AML survey works, is arranged in a conceptual 93 
hierarchy that includes key types of attacks, defenses, and consequences. The terminology, 94 
arranged in an alphabetical glossary, defines key terms associated with the security of ML 95 
components of an AI system. Taken together, the terminology and taxonomy are intended to 96 
inform future standards and best practices for assessing and managing the security of ML 97 
components, by establishing a common language and understanding of the rapidly developing 98 
AML landscape.  99 
Keywords  100 
adversarial; artificial intelligence; attack; cybersecurity; defense; evasion; information 101 
technology; machine learning; oracle; poisoning. 102