4 Zhi-Hua Zhou
learnersmaybeabetterchoice.Thesecondreasonisthat,thesearchprocessesofthelearningalgorithmsmightbeimperfect.
For example, even if there exists a unique best hypothesis, it might be difﬁcult to achieve since running the algorithms
result in sub-optimal hypotheses. Thus, ensembles can compensate for such imperfect search processes. The third reason is
that, the hypothesis space being searched might not contain the true target function, while ensembles can give some good
approximation. For example, it is well-known that the classiﬁcation boundaries of decision trees are linear segments parallel
to coordinate axes. If the target classiﬁcation boundary is a smooth diagonal line, using a single decision tree cannot lead to
a good result yet a good approximation can be achieved by combining a set of decision trees. Note that those are intuitive
insteadof rigorous theoretical explanations.
There are many theoretical studies on famous ensemble methods such as Boosting and Bagging, yet it is far from a clear
understandingoftheunderlyingmechanismofthesemethods.Forexample,empiricalobservationsshowthatBoostingoften
doesnotsuffer from overﬁtting even after a large number of rounds, and sometimes it is even able to reduce the general-
izationerror after the training error has already reached zero. Although many researchers have studied this phenomenon,
theoreticalexplanationsare still in arguing.
Thebias-variancedecomposition isoftenusedinstudyingtheperformanceofensemblemethods[ 9,12].Itisknownthat
Baggingcansigniﬁcantlyreducethevariance,andthereforeitisbettertobeappliedtolearnerssufferedfromlargevariance,
e.g., unstable learners such as decision trees or neural networks. Boosting can signiﬁcantly reduce the bias in addition to
reducingthe variance,and therefore, on weak learners such as decision stumps, Boosting is usually more effective.
Applications
Ensemble learning has already been used in diverse applications such as optical character recognition, text categorization,
face recognition, computer-aided medical diagnosis, gene expression analysis, etc. Actually, ensemble learning can be used
wherevermachine learning techniques can be used.
Summary
Ensemble learning is a powerful machine learning paradigm which has exhibited apparent advantages in many applications.
By using multiple learners, the generalization ability of an ensemble can be much better than that of a single learner. A
serious deﬁciency of current ensemble methods is the lack of comprehensibility, i.e., the knowledge learned by ensembles is
not understandable to the user. Improving the comprehensibility of ensembles [ 15] is an important yet largely understudied
direction. Another important issue is that currently no diversity measures is satisfying [ 4] although it is known that diversity
playsanimportantroleinensembles.Ifthoseissuescanbeaddressedwell,ensemblelearningwillbeabletocontributemore
tomore applications.
RelatedEntries
Boosting,Classiﬁer design, Machine learning, Multiple classiﬁer systems, Multiple experts.
References
1.Hansen, L.K., Salamon, P.: Neural network ensembles. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 12(10)
(1990) 993–1001
2.Schapire, R.E.: The strength of weak learnability. Machine Learning 5(2) (1990) 197–227
3.Krogh,A.,Vedelsby,J.: Neuralnetworkensembles,crossvalidation,andactivelearning. InTesauro,G.,Touretzky,D.S.,Leen,T.K.,
eds.: Advancesin Neural Information Processing Systems 7. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (1995) 231–238
4.Kuncheva, L.I., Whitaker, C.J.: Measures of diversity in classiﬁer ensembles and their relationship with the ensemble accuracy.
Machine Learning 51(2) (2003) 181–207
5.Freund,Y.,Schapire,R.E.: Adecision-theoreticgeneralizationofon-linelearningandanapplicationtoBoosting. JournalofComputer
and System Sciences 55(1) (1997) 119–139
6.Breiman, L.: Bagging predictors. Machine Learning 24(2)(1996) 123–140
7.Wolpert,D.H.: Stackedgeneralization. Neural Networks 5(2) (1992) 241–260
8.Breiman, L.: Random forests. Machine Learning 45(1)(2001) 5–32