EnsembleLearning
Zhi-HuaZhou
NationalKeyLaboratory for NovelSoftwareTechnology,Nanjing University,Nanjing 210093, China
zhouzh@nju.edu.cn
Synonyms
Committee-basedlearning; Multiple classiﬁer systems; Classiﬁer combination
Deﬁnition
Ensemblelearningisamachinelearningparadigmwheremultiplelearnersaretrainedtosolvethesameproblem.Incontrast
to ordinary machine learning approaches which try to learn onehypothesis from training data, ensemble methods try to
constructa setof hypothesesand combine them to use.
MainBody Text
Introduction
Anensemblecontainsanumberoflearnerswhichareusuallycalled baselearners .Thegeneralization abilityofanensemble
is usually much stronger than that of base learners. Actually, ensemble learning is appealing because that it is able to boost
weak learners which are slightly better than random guess to strong learners which can make very accurate predictions. So,
“base learners” are also referred as “weak learners”. It is noteworthy, however, that although most theoretical analyses work
on weak learners, base learners used in practice are not necessarily weak since using not-so-weak base learners often results
inbetter performance.
Base learners are usually generated from training data by a base learning algorithm which can be decision tree, neural
network or other kinds of machine learning algorithms. Most ensemble methods use a single base learning algorithm to
producehomogeneous base learners, but there are also some methods which use multiple learning algorithms to produce
heterogeneous learners. In the latter case there is no single base learning algorithm and thus, some people prefer calling the
learnersindividuallearners orcomponentlearners to“baselearners”,whilethenames“individuallearners”and“component
learners” can also be used for homogeneous base learners.
It is difﬁcult to trace the starting point of the history of ensemble methods since the basic idea of deploying multiple
modelshasbeeninuseforalongtime,yetitisclearthatthehotwaveofresearchonensemblelearningsincethe1990sowes
much to two works. The ﬁrst is an applied research conducted by Hansen and Salamon [ 1] at the end of 1980s, where they
found that predictions made by the combination of a set of classiﬁers are often more accurate than predictions made by the
best single classiﬁer. The second is a theoretical research conducted in 1989, where Schapire [ 2] proved that weak learners
canbe boosted to stronglearners ,and the proof resulted in Boosting, one of the most inﬂuential ensemble methods.
ConstructingEnsembles
Typically, an ensemble is constructed in two steps. First, a number of base learners are produced, which can be generated in
aparallelstyle or in a sequential style where the generation of a base learner has inﬂuence on the generation of subsequent