System # Human
LanguagesProgramming
LanguageRaw Text
ProcessingFully
NeuralPretrained
ModelsState-of-the-art
Performance
CoreNLP 6 Java ! !
FLAIR 12 Python ! ! !
spaCy 10 Python ! !
UDPipe 61 C++ ! ! !
Sta n z a 66 Python ! ! ! !
Table 1: Feature comparisons of Sta n z a against other popular natural language processing toolkits.
ing 66 languages, by training the pipeline on
the Universal Dependencies (UD) treebanks
and other multilingual corpora.
State-of-the-art performance. We evaluate
Sta n z a on a total of 112 datasets, and ﬁnd its
neural pipeline adapts well to text of different
genres, achieving state-of-the-art or competi-
tive performance at each step of the pipeline.
Additionally, Sta n z a features a Python interface
to the widely used Java CoreNLP package, allow-
ing access to additional tools such as coreference
resolution and relation extraction.
Sta n z a is fully open source and we make pre-
trained models for all supported languages and
datasets available for public download. We hope Sta
n z acan facilitate multilingual NLP research and ap-
plications, and drive future research that produces
insights from human languages.
2 System Design and Architecture
At the top level, Sta n z a consists of two individual
components: (1) a fully neural multilingual NLP
pipeline; (2) a Python client interface to the Java
Stanford CoreNLP software. In this section we
introduce their designs.
2.1 Neural Multilingual NLP Pipeline
Sta n z a ’s neural pipeline consists of models that
range from tokenizing raw text to performing syn-
tactic analysis on entire sentences (see Figure 1).
All components are designed with processing many
human languages in mind, with high-level design
choices capturing common phenomena in many
languages and data-driven models that learn the dif-
ference between these languages from data. More-
over, the implementation of Sta n z a components is
highly modular, and reuses basic model architec-
tures when possible for compactness. We highlight
the important design choices here, and refer the
reader to Qi et al. (2018) for modeling details.(fr) L’Association desHôtels
(en) The Association of Hotels
(fr) Il y a deshôtels en bas de la rue
(en) There are hotels down the street
Figure 2: An example of multi-word tokens in French.
Thedesin the ﬁrst sentence corresponds to two syntac-
tic words, deandles; the second desis a single word.
Tokenization and Sentence Splitting. When
presented raw text, Sta n z a tokenizes it and groups
tokens into sentences as the ﬁrst step of processing.
Unlike most existing toolkits, Sta n z a combines tok-
enization and sentence segmentation from raw text
into a single module. This is modeled as a tagging
problem over character sequences, where the model
predicts whether a given character is the end of a
token, end of a sentence, or end of a multi-word
token (MWT, see Figure 2).3We choose to predict
MWTs jointly with tokenization because this task
is context-sensitive in some languages.
Multi-word Token Expansion. Once MWTs
are identiﬁed by the tokenizer, they are expanded
into the underlying syntactic words as the basis
of downstream processing. This is achieved with
an ensemble of a frequency lexicon and a neural
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model, to ensure
that frequently observed expansions in the training
set are always robustly expanded while maintaining
ﬂexibility to model unseen words statistically.
POS and Morphological Feature Tagging. For
each word in a sentence, Sta n z a assigns it a part-
of-speech (POS), and analyzes its universal mor-
phological features (UFeats, e.g., singular/plural,
1st/2nd/3rdperson, etc.). To predict POS and UFeats,
we adopt a bidirectional long short-term mem-
ory network (Bi-LSTM) as the basic architecture.
For consistency among universal POS (UPOS),
3Following Universal Dependencies (Nivre et al., 2020),
we make a distinction between tokens (contiguous spans of
characters in the input text) and syntactic words . These are
interchangeable aside from the cases of MWTs, where one
token can correspond to multiple words.