References
Alan Akbik, Tanja Bergmann, Duncan Blythe, Kashif
Rasul, Stefan Schweter, and Roland V ollgraf. 2019.
FLAIR: An easy-to-use framework for state-of-the-
art NLP. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Demonstrations) . Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Alan Akbik, Duncan Blythe, and Roland V ollgraf.
2018. Contextual string embeddings for sequence
labeling. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics . Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Loïc Barrault, Ond ˇrej Bojar, Marta R. Costa-jussà,
Christian Federmann, Mark Fishel, Yvette Gra-
ham, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn,
Shervin Malmasi, Christof Monz, Mathias Müller,
Santanu Pal, Matt Post, and Marcos Zampieri. 2019.
Findings of the 2019 conference on machine transla-
tion (WMT19). In Proceedings of the Fourth Con-
ference on Machine Translation (Volume 2: Shared
Task Papers, Day 1) . Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Darina Benikova, Chris Biemann, and Marc Reznicek.
2014. NoSta-D named entity annotation for Ger-
man: Guidelines and dataset. In Proceedings of
the Ninth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC’14) .
Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2017. Enriching word vectors with
subword information. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics , 5.
Ciprian Chelba, Tomas Mikolov, Mike Schuster, Qi Ge,
Thorsten Brants, Phillipp Koehn, and Tony Robin-
son. 2013. One billion word benchmark for measur-
ing progress in statistical language modeling. Tech-
nical report, Google.
Timothy Dozat and Christopher D. Manning. 2017.
Deep biafﬁne attention for neural dependency pars-
ing. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR) .
Christopher D. Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven J. Bethard, and David Mc-
Closky. 2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural lan-
guage processing toolkit. In Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL) System Demonstrations .
Behrang Mohit, Nathan Schneider, Rishav Bhowmick,
Kemal Oﬂazer, and Noah A Smith. 2012. Recall-
oriented learning of named entities in Arabic
Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics . Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Gin-
ter, Jan Haji ˇc, Christopher D. Manning, Sampo
Pyysalo, Sebastian Schuster, Francis Tyers, andDaniel Zeman. 2020. Universal dependencies v2:
An evergrowing multilingual treebank collection. In
Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC’20) .
Joel Nothman, Nicky Ringland, Will Radford, Tara
Murphy, and James R Curran. 2013. Learning mul-
tilingual named entity recognition from Wikipedia.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 194:151–175.
Peng Qi, Timothy Dozat, Yuhao Zhang, and Christo-
pher D. Manning. 2018. Universal dependency pars-
ing from scratch. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2018
Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to
Universal Dependencies . Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Milan Straka. 2018. UDPipe 2.0 prototype at CoNLL
2018 UD shared task. In Proceedings of the CoNLL
2018 Shared Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw
Text to Universal Dependencies . Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Mariona Taulé, M. Antònia Martí, and Marta Recasens.
2008. AnCora: Multilevel annotated corpora for
Catalan and Spanish. In Proceedings of the Sixth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’08) . European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).
Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang. 2002. Introduction to the
CoNLL-2002 shared task: Language-independent
named entity recognition. In COLING-02: The
6th Conference on Natural Language Learning 2002
(CoNLL-2002) .
Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder.
2003. Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 shared task:
Language-independent named entity recognition. In
Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Natural
Language Learning at HLT-NAACL 2003 .
Ralph Weischedel, Martha Palmer, Mitchell Marcus,
Eduard Hovy, Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, Ni-
anwen Xue, Ann Taylor, Jeff Kaufman, Michelle
Franchini, et al. 2013. OntoNotes release 5.0. Lin-
guistic Data Consortium .
Daniel Zeman, Jan Haji ˇc, Martin Popel, Martin Pot-
thast, Milan Straka, Filip Ginter, Joakim Nivre, and
Slav Petrov. 2018. CoNLL 2018 shared task: Mul-
tilingual parsing from raw text to universal depen-
dencies. In Proceedings of the CoNLL 2018 Shared
Task: Multilingual Parsing from Raw Text to Univer-
sal Dependencies . Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Daniel Zeman, Joakim Nivre, Mitchell Abrams, Noëmi
Aepli, Željko Agi ´c, Lars Ahrenberg, Gabriel ˙e Alek-
sandravi ˇci¯ut˙e, Lene Antonsen, Katya Aplonova,
Maria Jesus Aranzabe, Gashaw Arutie, Masayuki
Asahara, Luma Ateyah, Mohammed Attia, Aitz-
iber Atutxa, Liesbeth Augustinus, Elena Badmaeva,
Miguel Ballesteros, Esha Banerjee, Sebastian Bank,
Verginica Barbu Mititelu, Victoria Basmov, Colin