Figure 2. The whole network structure. An input image will be input to the backbone (a) MHSA-Darknet, which integrates transformerlayer into CSP Darknet, where the MHSA-Dark block and the CSPDark block are described in Figure 3.The feature maps further reﬁnewith (b) BiFPN, which aggregates features from different backbone levels for different detector levels. Finally, (c) YOLO detection headis employed to predict boxes at 5 different scales.3. Proposed MethodThe proposed network architecture is a hybrid modelViT-YOLO that uses both convolution and self-attention,which is mainly based on the YOLOv4-P7 [1]. The struc-ture of ViT-YOLO is presented in Figure 2, which is dividedinto 3 parts. For the ﬁrst part, we use MHSA-Darknet asthe backbone which integrates multi-head self-attention intooriginal CSP-Darknet to extract more differentiated fea-tures. The details of MHSA-Darknet is described in Section3.1. The second processing component BiFPN in substi-tution for PANet aims to aggregate features from differentbackbone levels for different detector levels, which is dis-cussed in Section 3.2. For the third part, the general YOLOdetection heads are employed for predicting boxes at 5 dif-ferent scales.Furthermore, other effective techniques are adopted toachieve better accuracy and robustness, including Test-Time Augmentation (TTA) and Weighted Boxes Fusion(WBF). TTA is an application of data augmentation to thetest dataset. And WBF utilizes conﬁdence scores of all pro-posed bounding boxes to construct the averaged boxes sothat it works better when used for model fusion.3.1. MHSA-DarknetFor drone captured images with large scale and complexscene, to improve the semantic discriminability and allevi-ate category confusion, collecting and associating scene in-formation from a large neighborhood can be useful in learn-ing relationships across objects. But for convolutional net-works, the locality of the convolution operation limits itscapacity for capturing global context information.In con-trast, transformers are capable of globally focusing on de-pendencies between image feature patches and retain suf-ﬁcient spatial information for object detection via multi-head self-attention. On the other hand, viewpoint variationis one of the biggest challenges in images captured fromdrones, which requests that the detector should have an en-hanced domain adaptation capability and dynamic recep-tive ﬁelds. The study in the literature [22] has indicatedthat vision transformers are much more highly robust to
2801