YOLOv4-P7 typically has 7 stages (or block groups) com-monly referred to as[P1,P2,P3,P4,P5,P6,P7]withstrides[2,4,8,16,32,64,128]relative to the input image,respectively. Stacks[P1,P2,P3,P4,P5,P6,P7]con-sist of multiple CSPDark blocks with Cross Stage Partial(CSP) connections. (i.e. CSP-Darknet in YOLOv4-P7 has[1,3,15,15,7,7,7]CSPDark blocks).Notably, when the network is relatively shallow and thefeature map is relatively larger, the transformer layer is usedprematurely to enforce regression boundaries which canlose some meaningful context information. Hence, in theMHSA-Darknet, the transformer layer is only applied ontheP7, rather thanP3,P4,P5, andP6. Besides, consid-ering that self-attention when performed globally acrossnentities requiresO(n2d)memory and computation[32], webelieve that the simplest setting that adheres to the abovefactors would be to incorporate self-attention at the lowestresolution feature maps in the backbone, ie, the CSPDarkblocks in theP7stack. TheP7stack in the Darknet back-bone typically uses 7 CSP bottleneck blocks with one spa-tial1⇥1convolution and one spatial3⇥3convolution ineach. Replacing them with MHSA layers forms the basis ofthe MHSA-Darknet architecture.
Figure 3. Left: A CSPDark Block Right: A MHSA-Dark Block.The only difference is in P7 where the Multi-Head Self-attention(MHSA) withnlayers replacenCSP Bottlenecks, each of whichconsist of one3⇥3spatial convolution and one1⇥1spatialconvolution. The structure of self-attention layer is described inFigure 4.To handle 2D images, we ﬂatten the spatial dimensionsof the 2D feature mapx2RH⇥W⇥dinto a sequencexp2R(H⇤W)⇥d,where(H,W)is the resolution of theoriginal feature map,dis the number of channels, andH⇤Wserves as the effective input sequence length forthe transformer layer. In order to make the attention oper-ation position aware, Transformer based architectures typi-cally make use of a position encoding[32]. We use standardlearnable 1D position embeddings with a linear layer to re-tain positional information. The MHSA layer is presentedin Figure 4.
Figure 4. Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) layer used in theMHSA-Dark block. While we use 4 heads, we do not show themon the ﬁgure for simplicity. A standard learnable 1D position em-beddings with a linear layer are employed to retain positional in-formation.The attention logits areqkTwhereq,krepresent query,key.LandNrepresent element wise sum and matrix multiplica-tion respectively, while1⇥1represents a pointwise convolution.3.2. BiFPNObjects from the drone captured images vary a lot insizes while the feature map from a single layer of the con-volutional neural network has limited capacity of represen-tation, so its crucial to effectively represent and processmulti-scale features. Conventional top-down FPN [16] isinherently limited by the one-way information ﬂow. To ad-dress this issue, PANet [19] adds an extra bottom-up pathaggregation network, as shown in Figure 5(a). Cross-scaleconnections are further studied in [13, 12, 34]. In this work,the simple yet highly effective weighted bidirectional fea-ture pyramid network (BiFPN), as shown in Figure 5(b),implements two optimizations for cross-scale connections.First, BiFPN adds an extra edge from original input to out-put node if they are at the same level, in order to fuse morefeatures without adding much cost.Second, while combining low-level and high-level fea-tures, BiFPN introduces learnable weights to learn the im-portance of different input features instead of simply sum-ming up or concatenating, which may cause feature mis-match and performance degradation. Formally, given a listof multi-scale features~Pin=(Pinl1,Pinl2,. . .), wherePinlipresents the feature at levelli. The list of intermediate fea-ture on the pathway is represented as~Ptd=(Ptdl1,Ptdl2,. . .).Our goal is to ﬁnd a transformationfthat can effectivelyaggregate different features and output a list of new fea-tures:~Pout=f(~Pin). Figure 5(a) shows the conven-
2803