31 more elaborate ones. Particularly adversarial training  (Section 3.2.1), cutoff  (Section 3.2.1), interpolation  (Section 3.1.3.2  
and 3.2.2), and some gen erative methods  (Section 3.1.4.2 ) have shown  significant improvements with large pre -trained 
language models. While replacement methods based on embeddings  (Section 3.1.2.3 ) and especially language models (c -
BERT)  (Section 3.1.2.4 ) can also gain improvements in combination with those pre -trained models, several studies [44], 
[64], [78], [111]  have shown  that the previously mentioned methods can , in most cases, achieve improved results .  
The described performance differences become  apparent when approaching the challenge highlighted by Longpre et 
al. [4] from an intuitive perspective. Large language models map data to a latent space with representations nearly 
invariant to some transformations. For example, synonym replacement methods only replace words that are by 
definition very close to the representation space, leading to instances that are almost identical [61]. As Longpre et al. [4] 
hypothesize, data augmentation methods can only be helpful , if they are able to introduce new linguistic patterns. In 
such instances, using the mentioned methods and generative methods , in particular, might  be sensible, as they are based 
on other large language models that can introduce a high novelty. However, the challenge proposed by Longpre et al. 
[4] does not have to be universally true . For example, the SUB² method by Shi et al. [91] only interpolates phrases from  
the training data and thus does not include unseen linguistic patterns but achieves high gains with a pre -trained model.  
Another interesting aspect concerns  the experiments conducted by Yoo et al . [114] , with which they demonstra te that 
their GPT -3-based generative augmentation method actually improves as the size of the pre -trained classifier increases. 
The authors hypothesize that larger classifiers have more capacity to better incorporate the GPT3Mix samples . 
4.2 Improving  Existing  Data Augmentation Approaches  
In general, most promising data augmentation methods have limits and challenges that may be overcome with further 
research. Generative  models  or their output needs to be conditional  on the specific class . Otherwise,  the created 
instances might not preserve the label. This conditioning is oftentimes reached by training a model, which in turn 
requires enough data to be consistent. Bayer et al. [46] have shown  that the conditional model can best replicate the data 
class , if the problem definition and task data is relatively narrow. Tasks with a broad variety of topics in the data seem 
less suitable. This problem might be mitigated by adop ting new conditioning methods. Currently , most approaches are 
extended by filter mechanism s. Existing  mechanisms,  as detailed in Section 3.5, have some drawbacks whi ch might be 
reduced in the future. Another obstacle concerns  generative models  themselves , which  can require many resources and 
time to create new instances [46]. Therefore , lightweight alternatives need to be tested in this  setting, thus potentially 
preventing  a high dependency  on resources, which  is referred to by Bayer et al. [46] as the high resource wall problem . 
Similarly, m ethods like round -trip translation  are limited by the underlying model. For example, Marivate and Sefara 
[64] hypothesize that round -trip translation might not be appropriate for social media data, where translation errors  
increase. This problem will be addressed  in the future , as machine translation models improve their translatio n 
capabilities for such difficult instances.   
For adversarial examples , Liu et al.  [129] , hypothesize that good generalizability performance stems from the 
perturbation of the embed ding space , rather than  the input space. However, data space adversarial training methods 
should not be disregarded too quickly , as Ebrahimi et al. [21] show that their data space method achieves better results 
than the virtual adversarial training by Miyato et al.  [40]. A general challenge for adversarial training is that it can 
disturb the true label space in the training data. For example, adversarial example generators often rely on the belief that 
close input data points tend to have the same labels  [121] . Concerning the data space methods,  this is often not true for 
natural language tasks, where few words or even characters determine the class affiliation (e.g., sentiment classification: 
“I can't believe I like the movie ” →small_transformation → “I can' believe I  like the movie ”). Whether th is applies to the