11 Also to be emphasized is  the more sophisticated integration into the learning process, as described by  Jungiewicz  and 
Pohl [66]. The authors replace words with synonyms  only if the replacement with the chosen synonym maximize s the 
loss of the current state of the classifier model. Apart from this, there are approaches that adapt the general idea of 
thesauri -based replacements to perform augmentation on specific tasks, for example, in Kashefi and Hwa [48] and Feng 
et al. [39].  
3.1.2.3  Embedding Replacement  
Comparable to synonym substitution, embedding  replacement methods search  for words  that fit as good as possible into 
the textual context and additionally do not alter the basic substance of the text. To achieve this, the words of the instances 
are translated into a latent representation space, where words of similar contexts are closer together. Accordingly , these 
latent spaces are based on the distributional hypothesis  of distributional semantics [69], [70] , which is currently mostly  
implemented  in the form of embedding models.  The selection of  words that correspond to  this hypothesis and are, thus, 
near in the representation space, implies that the newly created instances main tain a grammatic coherence , as displayed 
in Figure 2. Besides this advantage, Rizos et al. [50] argue that the “method encourages the downstream task to place 
lower emphasis on associating single words with a label and instead place higher emphasis on captur ing similar 
sequential patterns, i.e., the context of hate speech”. Benefits of this data augmentation technique in comparison to the 
synonym  substitution  method are that techniques based on the distributional hypothesis are more comprehensive  and 
the cont ext of texts is considered . This means that substitutions are not limited by a database, like WordNet, and that 
grammatically more correct sentences can be generated [71]. Furthermore, the general form of this  approach can be 
beneficial for languages which have no  access to a  large thesauri but a lot of general text resources, on the basis of which 
the self-supervised  embedding mode ls can be easily trained [9].  
 
 
Figure 2: Example of a sentence with predicted words that can be used to replace a word in the sentence  [1].