34 works have challenged  this perspective , by demonstrating  that even existing patterns can be beneficial for performance 
[91]. In this context, it is interesting to note that the augmentation method of Yoo et al . [114]  provides better results 
when the size of the pre -trained language model increases.  
4.5 Fostering  the Usability  of Data Augmentation Application  
Most data augmentation methods are still research -based in their  incremental  development progress and therefore not 
suitable for every practi tioner. A simple way to improve the usability is to publish code and , in the best -case, develop 
libraries that can be used out of the box for augmenting a text dataset.  Dhole et al.  [158]  propose a first large framework 
to include many text data augmentation methods and filtering mechanisms.  The library by  Papakipos et al. [159]  is not 
as big for textual data augmentation methods, but  can be used for multiple modalities (audio, image, text, & video).  While 
these are very useful librar ies, the amalgamation of many procedures comes with abstraction  problem s. For example,  
only individual data instances can be transformed and the augmentation procedure does not have access to the entire 
dataset, so that, for example, no interpolation procedures are implemented.  In addition to creating libraries, it might be 
useful to explor e augmentations with a good learning process integration. This can be considered  as a criterion to 
simplify  embedding the procedure in the general learning process. Resource  utilization, speed , and general continuity in 
the learning process  are crucial for  this process.   The first two criteria are becoming increasingly relevant as they are 
related to the current trend of data augmentation, i.e. the use of large underlying models that create a high resource and 
time execution overhead.  As described above, th is might be countered with  utilizing  more lightweight models. A low  
continuity in the learning process refers to the circumstance that a text data augmentation method is detached from the 
actual training process ; or in the worst case , the learning procedur e needs to be split into two halves . The former, also 
described as offline data augmentation by  [37], means that the original data is augmented independently from the model 
trainin g. A data augmentation technique is called online , if it is embedded into the learning process so that the artificial 
instances are stochastically included  by the learning algorithm , which is, e.g., implemented in the work of Bonthu et al. 
[145] . The second form occurs , for example, when a feature space  method needs to separate the normal network 
structure, in order to detach  the encoder or embedding layer from the rest of the network. This results in a continuity 
problem of learning, so that, e.g., the encoder or embedding level cannot  be trained furthe r. 
5 CONCLUSION  
This survey provides  an overview over data augmentation approaches suited for the textual domain. Data augmentation 
is helpful to reach  many goals, including regularization, minimizing label effort, lowering the usage of real -world data 
parti cularly in privacy -sensitive domains, balancing unbalanced datasets, and increasing robustness against adversarial 
attacks (see Section 2). On a high level, data augm entation methods are differentiated into methods applied in the feature 
and in the data space. These methods are then subdivided into more fine -grained groups, from noise induction to the 
generation of completely new instances. In addition, we propose seve ral promising research directions that are relevant 
for future work. Especially in this regard, a holistic view on the current state of the art is necessary. For example, the 
increasing usage of transfer learning methods makes  some data augmentation method s obsolete , as they follow similar 
goals. Hence, there is a need for more sophisticated approaches that are capable of introducing new linguistic patterns 
not seen during pre -training, as suggested by Longpre et al. [4].  
While data augmentation is increasingly being researched and seems very promising, it also has several limitations. 
For instance, many data augmentation methods can only create high quality augmented data , if the original amount of 
data is large enough. Furthermore, as Shorten and Khoshgoftaar [5] describe, data augmentation is not capable of