26 3.2.2.2  Mixup Interpolation  
Mixup by Zhang et al. [137]  is an interpolation  method similar to SMOTE. In the simplest adoption, the convex 
interpolation is implemented with the following formulas:  
𝑥̃=𝜆𝑥𝑖+(1−𝜆)𝑥𝑗,       whereas  𝑥𝑖,𝑥𝑗 are input  vectors  
 𝑦̃=𝜆𝑦𝑖+(1−𝜆)𝑦𝑗,       whereas  𝑦𝑖,𝑦𝑗 are one-hot-coded labels  
(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) and (𝑥𝑗,𝑦𝑗) are sampled  from the training data and 𝜆 is either fixed in [0,1] or 𝜆∼Beta (α,α),for α ∈ (0,∞).  
Mixup is a general technique that can be applied to all kinds of equal dimensional data. However, text cannot  trivially 
be represented in equal dimensions [138] . As a very general method, Verma et al. [134]  propose the idea of applying 
mixup within a randomly selected hidden layer of a neural network. Despite the fact that the authors only p erform the 
tests on image datasets, this approach paves the way for  the application of  mixup in many textual related tasks. The 
results are very promising, and for textual evaluations we advise the reader to look at the methods described below  
(Table 8), which oftentimes can be seen as specializations of the approach by Verma et al. [134]  for textual data. Marivate 
and Sefara [64] state that they use mixup on representations of bag of word models, TF.IDF models, wor d embeddings, 
and language models. Unfortunately, the authors do not explicitly describe how the interpolation is performed . This 
raises questions about how to interpolate instances of different sizes, when, for example,  word  embedding vectors are 
used. Ma rivate and Sefara [64] report about 0.2, 0.4, and 0 points gain for the AG News, Sentiment 140, and Hate Speech 
detection task. In contrast , Qu et al. [78] describe the internal implementation  of their interpolation. For the in terpolation, 
they draw two instances from a mini -batch and linearly combine their input embedding matrices in the way described 
above. They improve the baseline on the MNLI -m task by an additional 0.6% in terms of  accuracy. Guo et al. [139]  
propose two variants, wordM ixup and senMixup, where the interpolation is applied in the word embedding space and 
on the final hidden layer of the neural network before it is passed to a softmax layer. For wordMixup the sequences have 
to be zero padded so that the dimensions are the same. For senMixup this is not necessary, as the hidden embeddings 
generated are of the same length each. The improvement results of both methods with regard to the CNN model with 
pretrained GloVe embeddings (trainable), which is the best baseline, is presented in Table 8. Guo [140]  further advances 
the wordMixup approach by using a nonlinear interpolation policy. The policy is constructed to mix each dimension of 
the individual  word embeddings in a given sentence  separately . Furthermore, the labels are also interpolated  nonlinearly,  
while they are learned  adaptively  based on the mixed embeddings . This way, a much larger variety of generated example s 
can be created. While this procedure outperforms the other two variants in most tasks, it can also have a negative effect 
on the classification quality, as shown in Table 8. Similar to the senMixup method, Sun et al. [138]  apply mixup to the 
output of transformer models. Furthermore, they only activate mixup in the last half of the training epochs to learn good 
representations  first. The improvements on the GLUE benchmark are listed in Table 8. In a very similar way, Chen et al. 
[97] propose TMix, wh ich is also able to interpolate the hidden representations of an encoder. Indeed, TMix is able to 
interpolate at every layer of the encoder, similar to Verma et al. [134] . Based on the work of Jawahar et al. [141] , who 
analyzed the types of information learned in different layers of BERT, the authors narrowed down  their approach and 
opted for 7, 9, and 12 as interpolation layers as they contain the syntactic and semantic information. The improvements 
of TMix are also shown in Table 8. 
Table 8: Overview of different approaches of the replacement method " mixup interpolation" . 
Method  Technique for textual application  Model  Datasets  Improvements  
mixup by Marivate 
and Sefara [64] Not stated  DNN  AG News  
Sentiment 140  
Hate Speech  +0.2 (Acc.)  
+0.4 
+0