13 [43] Not stated  Cosine 
similarity  Random Forest, 
Naïve Bayes, 
SVM  Vietnamese 
comments  W2V Vietnamese  Results only in 
combination  
[22] Random 
sampling with 
probabilities 
proportional to 
the neighbors 
each word has 
within the 
counter -fitted 
embedding space 
+ exclu sion of  
common articles 
and prepositions . 1. K-nearest -
neighbors with 
Euclidean 
distance + 
counter -fitting 
method .  
2. Google LM to 
filter out 
words . 
3. Selection of 
the word that 
will maximize 
the target label 
prediction 
probability . LSTM  IMDB  GloVe  Adversarial 
training: No 
improvements 
but safer model  
[73] Only  for multi -
piece words. 
Random 
probability for 
replacement . Random 
embedding of 
the k -nearest -
neighbor  Small transformer 
model  Various 
GLUE tasks  GloVe  No 
augmentation 
baseline 
comparisons  
[74] No stop  words or 
symbolic and 
numerical data  Cosine 
similarity 
threshold of 
0.97 Manhattan LSTM 
model  Thai text 
similarity 
task Thai2fit (Thai language)  +1.71  
A major factor for poor  results is that the embedding replacement does not necessarily guarantee the preservation of  
the contextual  meaning of the instances . This, in turn , could lead to distortions of the label ; e.g., “the movie was fantastic” 
and “the movie was horrible” are valid transformations but the sentiment is the opposite. A way to address this issue is 
the use of the counte r-fitting method of Mrkšić et al. [75] for synonym embedding substitution, as carried out  by Li et 
al. [41]. Counter -fitting is an approach that depicts word embeddings on the basis of a target function in a way that 
similarities between synonyms are rewarded and similarities between antonyms are sanctioned [75]. Li et al. [41] extend 
this approach by selecting the most fitting words with a higher possibility for t he replacement. This is done by leveraging 
a language model that can give an indication on how well a given word fits into a sequence. However, the authors 
achieve rather  mixed results with this method. The counter -fitting method offers considerably  less replacement 
possibilities , since  embeddings have to be trained on the downstream task, leading to  a smaller coverage of their corpora 
words. Alzantot et al. [22] use this method in combination with  a language model filtering in their adversarial example 
generator. They extend the approach by only  incorporating the words that are maximizing the target label prediction 
probability (label preservation) of an already trained classifier. The authors report no improvements in terms  of the task 
testing set, but they show that the model is safer regarding  adversarial attacks. Embedding replacement methods are 
moreover used in specific task -dependent ways, such as  by Kashefi and Hwa [48]. 
3.1.2.4  Replacement by Language Mode ls 
Language models represent language by predicting subsequent  or missing words on the basis of  the previous or 
surrounding context (classical and respectively masked language modelling). In this way, the models can, for example,