7 Feng et al. [39] randomly delete, swap, and insert characters of texts (the prompt portion) that are used for fine -tuning 
text genera tors. For this, they moreover  ignore the first and last character of a word. To measure the suitab ility for text 
generators, they intrinsically measure the diversity, fluency, semantic context preservation, and sentiment consistency. 
The applied  method is better than  the baseline in every respect.  These augmentations are also usable in the text 
classification domain.  Ebrahimi  et al. [21] used an existing model, trained with the initial dataset, to generate adversarial 
examples. They used the direct input data to flip a letter if the change increase d the loss of the existing model. If a new 
model  is trained with the additional data once again, the error rate is improved and the su ccess of adversarial attacks is 
significantly  mitigated. Furthermore, they compared their approach with the adversarial method from the previously 
mentioned work of Belinkov and Bisk [38] and the feature space method from Miyato et al. [40] (see Section 3.2.1). Based 
on a CharCNN -LSTM on the AG News dataset, they achieve the best improvement in accuracy by obtaining  an additional  
0.62%. While the method of Miyato et al. [40] improved the score by only 0.24 points , it is intere sting to see that the 
method of Belinkov and Bisk [38] even decreased the accuracy by 0.33  points. Coulombe [9] describes the induction  of 
weak textual sounds through  the afore mentioned change, deletion, and addition of letters in words and, in addition,  the 
alteration of upper and lower  case and the modification of punctuation. The highest  absolute  accuracy  improvement by 
2.5% can be seen  in comparison  to the best functioning  baseline . However, t he evaluation was performed with basic 
architectures and no embeddings, wherefore further stu dies are needed  to validate the usefulness in a current settin g. 
Natural noise, as defined by Belinkov and Bisk [38], covers spelling mistakes that are common  in the respective 
language , using spelling mistake databases. Each word associated with a common mistake is replaced with the misspelled 
word , and if there is more than one , the mistake is randomly sampled. Belinkov and Bisk [38] receive varying BLEU 
scores with thei r artificial and natural noise methods; most noise operations made the model more robust against attacks 
with similar operations. Most importantly, natural noise almost consistently worsens a translation model regard ing the 
baseline. Analogous to the natur al noise defined by Belinkov and Bisk [38], Coulombe [9] also adds common spelling 
mistakes in the textual data and achieves good improvements when added to classifiers. The best baseline (XGBoost) 
was improved by an additional  1.5%. With such transformations, learners  are better able to deal  with spelling mi stakes 
in prospective texts, even if mistakes are not present in the original training dataset.  This variant of data augmentation 
can for example be of interest when dealing with texts originating from social networks . 
3.1.1.2  Rule-based Transformations  
Coulombe [9] implements rule -based transformations through  the use of regular expressions. According to him, such 
rules are not easy to establish , since  many surface -level transformations require  deeper changes to preserve  the 
grammar , and other transformations depend on the language. Valid transformations are, amongst others , the insertion  
of spelling mistakes, data alterations, entity names, and abbreviations. Coulombe  concretely implements the 
transformation of v erbal short forms to their long forms and vice versa (“I am” ↔ “I’m”). In the English  language , this 
is semantically invariant if ambiguities are preserved [9]. With t his form of data augmentation Coulombe  achieves very 
good results [9]. The best baseline model (XGBoost) additionally gained 0.5% in terms of  accuracy.  
3.1.2  Word Level  
3.1.2.1  Noise Induction  
Noise induction can also be applied on the word level. For example, the m ethod of  Xie et al.  [35] encompasses two noise 
patterns. With “unigram noising”, words  in the input data are replaced by another word with a certain probability. By