33 Interpolation  [138]  Interpo lation after last layer of the transformer   -0.01 Acc. – +2.68 Corr. (BERT -l) 
[97] Interpolation of a random  BERT layer  +0.0 – +4.6 Acc. (BERT -b)* 
[142]  Interpolating neighbors  and reordered versions  +0.53 – +1.57  F1 (BERT -b)* 
*Results contain tests on low data regime datasets  
4.3 Establishing more Comprehensive Evaluation Criteria and Standards for Method Comparison  
A general problem in data augmentation research concerns  that mostly only improvements with regard to the prediction 
performance on specific datasets are presented. While this metric is likely  the most important one, other metrics, such 
as time and resource usage, language variety, or configurability, are also important for practitioners as well as for 
researchers. For example, the generative approaches based on GPT -2 seem very promising when considering prediction 
performance gain. Nevertheless,  language variety is narrowed down, as the model is primarily  trained on English data. 
Furthermore, only few authors discuss the time required for the application of their data augmentation methods. The 
GPT-2 based method of Bayer et al. [46] takes up to 30 seconds for generating one example, leading to several computing 
days for a 10 -times augmentation of a small dataset. For instance, in the context of crisis informatics t his might take too 
long, as classifiers have to be created quickly for immediate  incident management  [155] . We therefore  urge scientists 
developing data augmentation techniques to consistently describe the limitations of their approaches.  For further data 
augmentation research, flexible  standards should be established in order for  methods to be compared more reliably , 
similar to  other machine learning research fields , e.g. few -shot learning [156]  or natural language generation  [157] . It 
seems unrealisti c that one or few general datasets can capture all peculiarities of data augmentation methods , especially 
not of those  that one tailored to a specific problem. Nevertheless, a small benchmark that can be included in evaluations 
of upcoming data augmentatio n methods would be desirable.  In the best -case, such a benchmark would address different 
data augmentation goals , consisting  of two or more datasets, from which one replicates  a few -shot learning setting and 
the other a normal learning setting.  With the gr owing usage of generative models, it might also be sensible to consider 
using datasets that are not part of current training datasets for language models , as an incorporation of testing data 
would lead to wrong conclusions. T he benchmark should not be too large, in order to ensure specific evaluations can 
still be carried out . Researchers that try to develop such a benchmark, could also consider to specify how much data 
augmentation should be performed  and what models should be used.  When determining which model should be used , it 
might be useful to create an updatable benchmark, as proposed by Gehrmann et al [157] , which can be modified 
according to more recent state -of-the-art models.  
4.4 Enhancing the Understanding  of Text  Data Augmentation   
Shorten and  Khoshgoftaar  [5] highlight that  while  for some image data augmentation techniques it is easy to understand 
how they might improve the dataset and derived classifiers , however , for other techniques  this improvement has not 
been  explainable  yet. This also applies to the text regime, where for example, data augmentation methods  that 
paraphrase text without changing the meaning are naturally sensible, while methods applied in the feature space are 
much  more complex to capture.  Already  the visualization of the data of feature  space augmentations created by, for 
example, adversarial examples or interpolation methods , is much more complicated than in the image domain.  As 
previously elaborated , existing  approaches try to convert representations back into the data space by using encoder -
decoder architectures [130], [131] . Resulting  data space representations could then be investigated and used to better 
understand underlyin g data augmentation methods. Furthermore, a more in -depth understanding  of why and when data 
augmentation works needs to be established. With the rise of large language models the question  emerges whether  data 
augmentation methods paraphrasing input instances without incorporating new patterns may be obsolete [4]. Certain