5 Data augmentation exists in different types and areas of application . A taxonomy of the types in the textual domain 
can be seen in  Figure 1. The augmentation methods can be divided into the transformation of raw data (data space) and 
processed representations of data (feature s pace) [5]. These  representations are transformed types of data, for example, 
activation vectors of a neuronal network, the  encoding of an Encoder Decoder Network, or LSTM hidden states, 
respectively embeddings of data. Abstracting from the textual realm, in many cases, data augmentation depends  on the 
underlying problem (text classification, image recognition, etc.); and is therefore  applied in different ways  in different  
areas. Procedures  generic enough to be used across different areas are for the most part limited to the feature space.  
The most substantial research on data augmentation exists in the field of computer vision. This is due to the intuitive 
construction of simple label preserving transformations. Data augmentation methods in computer vision are, among 
other, geometric transf ormations [7], [24] , neural style transfers [31]–[33], interpolation of images [34], random partial 
deletions [35], and generative adversarial network  (GAN)  data genera tion [21]. Sophisticated te chniques can additively 
improve the accuracy baseline for different problems  by around 10 to 15 percent [35]. Another area of application for 
data augmentation is speech processing. R esearchers  have  successfully used acoustic transformations of the input data. 
Ko et al. [36] have achieved up to  4.3 points  better accuracy values  by modifying speed.  Furthermore, interfering  with 
vocal tract length [35] or adding  noise [34] may also enhance the quality of classifiers. The application of data 
augmentation in the textual realm is consider ed a difficult task , since textual transformations preserving the label are 
difficult to define [1], [2] . Nevertheless, several simple and sophisticated methods have been developed in this and 
adjacent research areas.  
3 TEXTUAL DATA AUGMENTATION METH ODS  
In the following, different data augmentation methods for textual data are summarized, explained, and subdivided in 
different groupings. Mainly methods focus ing on the application of text classification are included, although 
augmentation  methods for other tasks in the textual realm  are also mentioned  if they fit into the group . In this survey , 
text classification is considered  a problem of the field of NLP, wher e units such as sentences, paragraphs , or documents 
are categorized into class labels [17]. For example, g enerative or sequence -tagging tasks , where either tex t has to be 
generated or the words of the units have to be  tagged individually,  are not regarded as tasks in this sense.  This means 
that augmentation methods for tasks such as  topic classification, sentiment analysis, or spam identification are focused, 
described, and analyzed in detail . Other t asks, on the other hand,  like generative question answering, part of speech 
tagging, or machine translation are only mentioned in a non -comprehensive way.  Therefore , in the context of text 
classification , our paper provides a comprehensive overview containing  the necessary details for researchers and 
practitioners.  For a more general perspective on NLP  augmentations  (including sequence -tagging, parsing, text 
generation, etc.) , we recommend  the reader to have a look at the work of Feng et al. [37], which is not as detailed in text 
classification as our work but presents  a broader task view.  In contrast  to this task -driven view  by Feng et al. [37], we 
are taking a method -oriented perspective while conducting a data -structure -driven , high-level categorization  (see Figure 
1). Contrary  to other surveys in the field of data augmentation, we focus on setting the augmentation methods into 
context by comparing the conception and performance, with regard to the underlying models and application context. 
In this way , the listed augmentation groups contain an explanation with details on the differences within the group and 
a comprehensive overview of how the method s differ  and which result s they produce.  This allows t he reader to gain 
insights into which data augmentation technique might be most promising for the own use -case and what specifics need 
to be considered, while it is also possible to follow the data -structure based taxonomy.  In the end, we discuss important 
future research directions  by setting all methods into context , which  can help accelerate developments in this field .