A Survey  on Data Augmentation for Text Classification1 
Markus  Bayer2 
PEASEC ², Technical University of Darmstadt , bayer @peasec.tu -darmstadt.de  
Marc -André  Kaufhold  
PEASEC ², Technical University of Darmstadt , kaufhold @peasec.tu -darmstadt.de  
Christian  Reuter  
PEASEC ², Technical University of Darmstadt , reuter @peasec.tu -darmstadt.de  
Data augmentation, the artificial creation of training data for machine learning by transformations, is a widely studied rese arch field 
across  machine learning disciplines. While it is useful for increasing  a model’s  generalization capabilities, it can also address many 
other challenges and problems, from overcoming a limited amount of training data , to regularizing the objective , to limiting the amount 
data used to protect privacy. Based on a precise description of the goals and applications of data augmentation and a taxonom y for 
existing works, this survey is concerned with data augmentation methods for textual classification an d aims to provide  a concise and 
comprehensive overview for researchers and practitioners. Derived from the taxonomy, we divide more than 100 methods into 12 
different groupings and give state -of-the-art references expounding which methods are highly promis ing by relating them to each 
other . Finally, research perspectives that may constitute a building block for future work are provided . 
• Computing methodologies  ~ Machine learning  ~ Machine learning algorithms  ~ Regularization  • Computing methodologies  ~ Machine 
learning  ~ Machine learning approaches  ~ Neural networks  • Computing methodologies  ~ Artificial intelligence  ~ Natural 
language processing  
Additional Keywords and Phrases:  Data Augmentation, Low Data  Regimes, Small Data Analytics  
1 INTRODUCTION  
An increase in training data does not necessarily  result in a solution for the learning problem. Nevertheless, the quantity 
of data remains decisive for the quality of a supervised classifier. Originating from the field of computer vision, many 
different methods to artificially create such data  exist , which are referred to as data augmentation . For images, 
transformations such as rotations or changes of the RGB channel are useful, as  the resulting model should be invariant  
for these.  Similar to computer vision, speech recognition uses procedures that change  sound  or speed. In contrast, 
research on d ata augmentation in Natural Language Processing (NLP) faces the difficult task  of establishing such 
universal rules for textual data transformations which, when  executed automatically , maintain  labeling quality [1], [2] . 
 
1 This work has been co -funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) in the project CYWARN (13N15407), by the LOEWE 
initiative (Hesse, Germany) within the emergenCITY center, as well as the German Federal Ministry of Education and R esearch and the Hessian Ministry 
of Higher Education, Research, Science and the Arts within their joint support of the National Research Center for Applied Cy bersecurity ATHENE. The 
calculations for this research were conducted on the Lichtenberg high perf ormance computer of the TU Darmstadt.  
2 Science and Technology for Peace and Security  | Pankratiusstraße 2, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany