15 3.1.3  Phrase  and Sentence  Level  
3.1.3.1  Structure -based Transformation  
Structure -based approaches of data augmentation may utilize certain features or components of a structure to generate 
modified texts. Such structures can be based on grammatical formali ties, for example, dependency and constituent 
grammars or POS -tags. Such approaches  are therefore  more limited to certain languages or tasks.  Şahin and Steedman 
[83] are, for example, concerned with the augmentation of datasets from low resource languages for POS -tagging. By 
the method of  “cropping”, sentences are shortened by putting the focus on subjects and objects. With the “rotation” 
technique, fle xible fragments are moved . The authors state that this method is dependent on  certain grammatical 
sentence structures  in different  language s and probably  only generate s noise in the English language. Both methods are 
well suited for a multitude of low resource languages. They were  also tested by Vania et al. [84] for the augmentation of  
training data for dependency parsers for low -resource data.  
Feng et al. [85] propose a method for changing the semantics of a text while trying to preserve the fluency and 
sentiment. Given a set of phrases (replacement entities) to every instance, the so-called Semantic Text Exchange method 
first identifies phrases in  the original text that can be replaced by a replacement entity based on the constituents. Then 
phrases  similar  to the identified phrases are replaced by a masked token. Subsequently, t his is filled by an attention -
based language model so that the similar words better suit the replacement entity. Feng et al. [39] adapt this approach 
by automatically selecting  the 150  of the 200 most frequent nouns from the Semantic Text Exchange training set as 
replacement entity candidates and splitting their Yelp Revie w dataset into windows, as the method is only suit able for 
short texts. In an analysis with this dataset Feng et al. [39] report ed that the Semantic Text Exchange method decreases 
fluency, diversity, and semantic content preservation.  
An important work was proposed by Min et al. [86] who show that inversion (swapping the subject and object part) 
and passivation result in a higher generalization capability  in natural language inference. In fact, considering  their work 
in comparison  with preliminary work [87]–[89] suggests that BERT is able to extract the relevant syntactic information 
from the instances but is unable to use this information in the task, as there are too few examples in the MNLI dataset 
demonstrating the necessity of syntax. Here, e ven a limited utiliz ation  of Min et al.’s  [86] data augmentation methods 
already helps to mitigate this problem.  
3.1.3.2  Interpolation  
In numerical analysis, interpolation is a procedure to construct new data points from existing points [90]. While the 
formal interpolation versions are found in the feature space section, a sensible definition of interpolation in the data 
space of text is difficult to construct. However, the substructure substitution  (SUB² ) method by Shi et al. [91] is considered  
as such in this context  due to its resemblance to the feature space methods. SUB² substitutes substructures (dependents, 
constituents, or POS -tag sequences) of the training examples if they have the same tagged label (for example,  “a [DT] 
cake [NN]” in an instance can be replaced with “a [DT] dog [NN]” of another instance). The variant adapted  for 
classification views all text spans of an instance as structures and is constrained by replacement rules that can be 
combined or complet ely left out. The replacement rules are only replacing (1) same lengths spans, (2) phrases with 
phrases, (3) phrases of the same constituency label, and (4) spans that come from instances with the same class label. 
The authors show that their methods outpe rform the baseline when applied to low resource tasks. Their classification 
variant nearly double s the accuracy on a subsample of the SST -2 and AG News datasets. Furthermore, t hey achieve 
better results than the language model augmentation c -BERT (Section 3.1.2.4 ). Similarly, Kim et al . [92] propose a data 
augmentation method based on lexicalized probabilistic context -free grammars that extrac ts grammar trees from an