4 application scenarios where there is not enough data to produce high quality classifiers. For example,  Srivastava et al. 
[18] have also demonstrated  that deep neural network s in general  are particularly powerful but enc ompass a tendency 
to overfit; faced with unseen instances, they might generalize badly. This observation can be illustrated with help of the 
bias variance dilemma. On the one hand, deep learning algorithms are, due to their deep and non -linear layers, very  
strong models with a lower bias -error. On the other hand, they show a high variance for different subsets of training 
data [19]. This problem can be solved by arranging the algorithm to prefer simple solutions or by providing a bigger 
amount of training data. The first option is aimed at methods of regularization, such as dropout or the addition of a L2 
norm via the model’s parame ters in the loss -function. The second option is frequently realized by means of data 
augmentation and could , in this context , also be considered as a type of regularization. According to Hernandez -Garcia 
and König [20], data augmentation is a preferred  regularization  method , as it achieves generalization witho ut degrading 
the models’ representational capacity and without re-tuning other hyperparameters. While other methods reduce the 
bias error, data augmentation’s objective is to keep  it constant  and is used to solve the problem at the root [5]. 
Nonetheless, data augmentation still depends  on the underlying classification problem  and can therefore not  be 
effectively applied in all circumstances.  
In the context of deep learning models, so called adversarial examples/attacks are generated more and more 
frequently. These small  changes in the inpu t data, which ar e almost unrecognizable to humans, mislead the algorithms 
to make  wrong predictions [21]. Table 1 shows two different genuine examples in which the smallest changes in the 
texts alter the classification prediction. Alzantot et al. [22] further  present an algorithm that generates semantically and 
syntactically similar instances of training data, successfully outwitting sentiment anal ysis and entailment models. With 
the help of adversarial training, these automatic adversarial example generators can be used as data augmentation 
methods, as done, for example, in [23], [7], [24] , or [25], in order for  models to be  less susceptible to such easy alterations.  
If the amount of data is taken into consideration, it stands out that certain classification problems are often heavily 
unbalanced, for instance , only a small amount is relevant (positive ) while the irr elevant (negative ) data is prevalent [26]. 
For example, in an entire corpus for topic classification or crisis identification, only few data actually relate  to the topics 
or the crisis in question.  Zhong et al.  [27] term a dataset as unbalanced , if the distribu tion of classes within it is not 
approximately equally balanced. Data augmentation may help to enhance the amount of data for a certain class in order 
for balanced class distribution s to be present and thus for a classifier to be able to  be modelled more r obustly [28], [29] .  
Data augmentation can also be helpful in sensitive domains. Dealing with confidential or privacy -related data, one 
can decrease  the usage of real -world data by crafting artificial data. It is even possible to only train the algor ithm on the 
newly created data , in order to prevent drawing any conclusions  on non -artificial training data  from a deployed model. 
For example, Carlini et al. [30] have demonstrated  a method for extracting training data from large language models 
that could contain private information. For training such a privacy ensuring model, special data augmentation techniques 
that are able to anonymize the data have to be used.  
Table 1. Examples for Adversarial Attacks adapted from Ebrahimi et al. [21]. 
Original text  Altered text  
South Africa’s historic Soweto township  marks its 100th birthday 
on Tuesday in a mood of optimism.  
57% World  South Africa’s historic Soweto township  marks its 100th birthday 
on Tuesday in a moo P of optimism.  
95% Sci/Tech  
Chancellor Gordon Brown has sought to quell speculation over 
who should run the Labour Party and turned the attack on the 
opposition Conservatives.  
75% World  Chancellor Gordon Brown has sought to quell speculation over 
who should run the Labour Party and turned the attack on the 
oBposition Conservatives.  
94% Business