3 2 BACKGROUND: FOUNDATIONS, GOALS, AND APPLICATIONS OF DATA AUGMENTATION  
In many machine learning scenarios, not enough data is available to train a high -quality classifier. To a ddress this 
problem, data augmentation can be used. It artificially enlarges the amount of available training data by means of 
transformations [7]. In the well-known LeNet by LeCun et al. [8], early versions of data augmentation have already been 
observed . The notion of data augmentation comprises various research in different sub -areas of machine learning. Many 
scientific works merely relate data augmentation to deep learning, yet it is frequently applied in the entire context of 
machine learning. Therefore, this paper a dopts the notion of data augmentation as a broad concept, encompassing any 
method that enables the transformation of training data. However, following common understanding in research, semi -
supervised learning is not regarded as a form of data augmentation  and is only thematized if sensible in this survey.  
An important term relating to  data augmentation is label preservation, which describes transformations of training 
data that preserve class information [9]. For exa mple, i n sentiment analysis, an entity replacement within a sentence is 
often sufficient for label preservation , but randomly adding  words may alter the sentiment (e.g., an additional “not” 
could invert the meaning of a sentence). In many research works, l abel preservation is adapted to also cover 
transformations changing the class information , if the label is adjusted correctly. Additionally, many transformations do 
not maintain the correct  class  in every case , but with a high probability. Shorten and Khoshgoftaar [5] define this 
probability as the safety of a data augmentation method. When this uncertainty is known, it could be directly integrated 
in the label. Otherwise, methods like label sm oothing [10] can model a general uncertai nty. 
The goals  of data augmentation are manifold and encompass different aspects. As mentioned above, training data is 
essential for the quality of a supervised machine learning process. Banko and Brill [11] show that only the creation of 
additional data can improve the quality of a solution in the confusion set disambiguation problem, while the choice of 
the classifier does not lead to a significant cha nge. The model  selection and development  will remain a crucial aspect of 
machine learning. Yet, scholars suggest that in some situations , the choice for higher investments in algorithm -choice 
and -development instead of corpus -development should be careful ly considered  [11]. Closely connected to this is the 
big data wall problem, which Coulombe [9] mentions in his work on data augmentation. It describes that big companies 
benefit from the special advantage of having access to a large  amount of training data. Consequently , the already large 
GAFAM-Companies (Google /Alphabet , Amazon, Facebook/ Meta , Apple, and Microsoft) expand their predominance over 
smaller businesses due to their data superiority. An ideal data augmentation method could approach these points and 
decrease the dependency of training data even though full elimination is not likely.  
Additionally,  creating  training data for various classification problems is accompanied by high labeling  costs. In many 
instances, assessment and labeling  by experts are necessary to prevent incorrect training examples . These aspects  can, 
for example, be especially str essed concerning  the field of crisis informatics  [12], [13] . Creating relevant  classifiers for 
emergency services and responders  is only possible during  crises and requires resources and time  from personnel needed 
elsewhere to, e.g., act as first responders, therefore in the worst -case costing lives  [14]. Similarly , training data for 
medical image p rocessing is very valuable. Due to the rareness of certain diseases, the privacy of patients, and the 
requirement of medical experts, it is  particularly  challenging to provide medical datasets  [5]. In a related sense, many 
domains, such as cybersecurity, have a time -critical factor that requires training  data to be collected  as quickly as possible 
so that, in terms of the cybersecurity domain example, threats can be responded to quickly  [15], [16] . With regard to 
such  classification problems, data augmentation could help minimize the required amount of data needed  to be labeled  
and to solve interlinked problems.   
Data augmentation is particularly significant for the field of deep learning.  Work such as that by  Minaee et al. [17] 
has already extensively investigated the quality of deep learn ing algorithms in text classification, but there are many