19 Rizos et al. [50] create an RNN that, dependi ng on a specific class, learns language modelling to generate training 
data thereafter. The class specific RNN for augmentation is primed with a random start word from the class specific 
training data. However, the authors state that this method produces t he poorest  results compared to embedding 
substitution and noise generation. In a similar sense, Ollagnier and Williams [68] perform text generation using a 
language mode l (LSTM -CNN).  In contrast, they split each document in a minibatch into sentences, then generate new 
sentences for 30% of them and utili ze 30% of the beginning of a given sentence as prompt . 
Sun and He [51] use the seqGAN architecture [106]  to generate  artificial data on basis of a GAN. Comparable to 
compu ter vision, seqGAN consists of a generator network creating texts and a discriminator network examining the 
authenticity of the generated texts next to the real instances. As the discriminator network can only prove the 
authenticity after a sequence of words and thus gives delayed feedback to the generator, the generator network is trained 
as a reinforcement learning agent. Utilizing the method as a data augmentation technique, the authors only receive 
minor improvements of classification quality.  Partially  inspired by SeqGAN , Li et al. [107]  propose CS -GAN, which 
consists of a  GAN, RNN , and reinforcement learning component for sentence generation. The model receives the 
information about the label as a prior for the generator, which is implemented with by the RNN and RL components, 
which is then required by the discriminator to generate meaningful sentences. Subsequently, a  classifier forces the output 
of sentences to fit the label. The results are listed in Table 6. 
Wang and Lillis [108], Anaby -Tavor et al. [44], Abonizio and Junior [109] , Bayer et al. [46], Claveau et al. [110] , and 
Liu et al. [111]  use the GPT -2 model of Radford et al.  [112] , which achieves very good  results in text generation, to create 
new complete instances. Concerning the adoption of th e method, Wang and Lillis [108]  only describe that they use rare 
instances  as dependent examples for the generation. Anaby -Tavor et al. [44], on the other hand, develop a method that 
increases the safety with regard to label preservation. In a first step , they further train the GPT -2 model with training 
data of a certain task (fine -tuning). In the process, they concatenate the respective label to every instance in order to 
facilitate the generation of new data for the respective class. Finally, a classifier determines which  generated instances 
can actually be assigned to the class stated. The authors manage to achieve significant improvements in the classification 
of sentences. They show that their method outperforms conditional VAEs (unfortunately no sampling technique is 
described) and even EDA ( Section 3.1.1.1 ) and c-BERT ( Section 3.1.2.4 ) when applied to a severe low data regime. The 
results of their LAMBADA approach and CVEA implementation are given in  Table 6. Abonizio and Junior [109]  try to 
improve this approach by concatenating three random samples as a promp t for the generation. Furthermore, they are 
using DistilGPT2 by Sanh et al. [113] , which is substantially faster and smaller. As can be  seen in  Table 6, the method 
consistently outperforms the baseline. While LAMBADA and PREDATOR are only applicable to short texts  as instances, 
Bayer et al. [46] design a GPT -2 based approach to augment short as well as long text tasks. In this way,  very high label 
preservation and diversity is to be  achieved by fine -tuning the language model on the class specific data, generating data 
prompted  with specialized training data tokens , and a  filtering method  based on document embedding s. They can achieve 
high improvements for constructed and real -world l ow data regimes. However, they also discuss limitations of  their 
method and useful  applications in terms of specific  datasets and tasks. The results can also be seen in  Table 6. Similarly, 
Claveau et al . [110]  fine-tune the GPT -2 model using the class -specific data and input a random word from the original 
texts  for generation . Afterwards a classifier is applied to filter the generated data instances. They evaluate their approach 
using  English and French dataset s (see Table 6). Liu et al. [111]  use a reinforcement learning component after the softmax 
prediction of the GPT -2 model to predict  the tokens depending on the class for which  the instance is to be generated. 
The authors tested their method with various model architectures. It consistently improved all of them in all tasks, 
especially the larger pre -trained models, like BERT and XLNet. The results for XLNet are shown in  Table 6. Yoo et al.