2 Research  in this area was therefore  much more limited  before 2019, despite existing  extensive areas of application [3]. 
Nowadays, this challenge remains , but is being addressed by many scientists from  different research fields as more 
possibilities and complex mechanisms open up . Within these fields,  researchers strive to meet  various goals, e.g. , 
generating more data for low -data regimes, balancing imbalanced dataset classes or securing  against adversarial 
examples. Thus, textual data augmentation comes in many contrasting forms that will be grouped and explained in this 
survey. We will provide  an in-depth analysis and also relate the methods to the state -of-the-art, as they now  face another 
challenge due to the advent  of transfer learning. For example, Longpre et al. [4] demonstrate  that many data 
augmentation methods cannot  achieve gains when using large pre -trained language models, a s they already are invariant 
to various transformations . They hypothesize that data augmentation methods can only be beneficial , if they create  new 
linguistic patterns that have not been seen before. Keeping this in mind, the survey is closed with a meta -perspective on 
the methods. This survey  is therefore intended to contribute to data augmentation  and general text classification by 
highlighting the following aspects : 
• Goals and applications  (C1). We highlight the goals and applications of data augmentation  that we derive from 
the comprehensive review. These have only been presented to a limited and incomplete extent in previous 
research papers.  
• Comprehensive  survey on data augmentation in text classification (C2). Our survey provides  a holistic overview 
of the data augmentation field  in text classification . While methods for other NLP disciplines are mentioned, the 
listing is  not complete , nor are the methods set in relation to each other  as the text classification  data augmentation 
methods  are. 
• Data -structure -driven taxonomy and method -oriented categorization  (C3). The text classification data 
augmentation methods are clustered according to a data-structure -based, high-level taxonomy and then 
subdivided into more fine -grained method groups . This is also present in the surveys from Shorten and 
Khoshgoftaar [5] and Wen et al. [6] and is adapted for the text classification domain.  
• Method -driven o verview and in -depth details  (C4). The textual data augmentation methods are explained clearly 
and concisely while including necessary details for delimitation and comparison.  Contrasting to other works, our 
extensive study contains 12 groups with more than 100 different approaches . 
• State -of-the-art review (C 5): Within the literature survey we examine latest state -of-the-art considerations, for 
example, the limited benefit of textual data augmentation methods with large pre -trained models that are often 
neglected in current works.  
• Relating  methods (C6). Throughout this survey, the methods are set in relation to conception and performance 
comparisons, while taking the underlying models and application contexts into account.  
• Future research perspectives  (C7). We identify future research oppo rtunities that are either necessary for a state -
of-the-art comparison or sensible to look into because of current challenges  and promising directions  for textual  
data augmentation.  
The survey paper is structured as follows: The paper introduces the foundations of data augmentation in Section 2. 
This section is then broadened by the consideration of the goals and applications. Section 3 is subdivided into the various 
data augmentation  groups and contains the explanations , as well as tabular overviews of the methods. In Section 4, an 
analysis of the data augmentation methods from a more global perspective is given and various future research directions 
are discussed. Section 5 outlines the limitations of data augmentation and provides a conclusion for this survey.