23 perturbations, where the perturbations are chosen to maximize the KL divergence . While the  virtual  adversarial training 
method is suitable for semi -supervised learning, we are particularly interested in the supervised setting. Their method 
improves the supervised DBpedia topic classification task  baseline classifier  by 0.11 points of accuracy , leading to a + 
0.03 increase in accuracy in comparison to the conventional adversarial  training method. Jiang et al. [127]  propose the 
adversarial method SMART , which relies on the virtual adversarial training regularization. They introduce the utilization 
of the Bregman proximal point opt imization  with momentum  to solve the virtual adversarial training loss , which 
prevents the model from aggressive updates [40]. The authors show in their experiments that the method significantly 
improves the baseline and is also able to achieve better results than the other methods discussed in this paragraph ( for 
an overview, see Table 7). Furthermore, they demonstrate robustness enhancement and domain adaption capabilities in 
several evaluation applications.   
Wang et al. [128]  and Liu et al. [129]  developed method s for enhancing the  pre-training of language models  with 
adversarial training . Wang et al.  [128]  simply generate adversarial examples on the output e mbeddings in the softmax 
function of the language models. Thereby they  manage to reduce the perplexity of the AWD -LSTM and QRNN model s 
on different datasets , which leads,  for example, to a reduction of 2.29 points with respect to  the Penn Treebank dataset 
with the AWD -LSTM model. However, it is not clear how the training of bigger pre -trained language models like BERT 
and RoBERTa would have been influenced by th is method. This is addressed in the work of Liu et al.  [129]  with their 
method called  Adversarial  training for large neural Language Models  (ALUM ), which  introduces noise to the input 
embeddings. The authors build their system based on the virtual adversarial training by Miyato et al. [40], as they noticed 
that it is superior to conventional adversarial training for self -supervision. Furthermore, t hey found out that they can 
omit the Bregman proximate point me thod and the adversarial training  proposed by Jiang et al. [127]  and Shafahi et al.  
[124]  when they are using curriculum learning, where the model is first trained wit h the standard objective and then 
with virtual adversarial training. They  report promising generalization and robustness improvements with the largest 
transformer models. For example, RoBERTa models can be improved with the ALUM continual pretraining by + 0.7 on 
the MNLI task, while standard continual pretraining does not introduce further gains. The results on the GLUE dataset 
are given in Table 7. The authors  also tested the robustness of the models with three different adversarial datasets , where  
ALUM achieves significant improvements  in all tasks . In another evaluation setting they combine adversarial pretraining 
with adversarial fine -tuning. ALUM improves a ll evaluation scores of the standard pretrained models. This model 
reaches the best performances and significantly outperforms the other models in all  tested  tasks, e.g. , with an increased 
accuracy of + 0.4 more than without tuning the SNLI dataset.  The im provement on the MNLI task is given in Table 7. 
With regard to the generative adversarial training methods of the feature space, it is also of interest to investigate 
how the newly created examples  can be transformed into  the data space to enable their inspection. This is done in the 
works of Liu et al. and Wan et al. [130], [131] . Wan et al. attempt to improve the classification behavior of a grammatical 
error correction system by training with adversarial example s. Such an example,  extracted from the appli cation of loss-
increasing noise in the hidden representation of a transformer encoder, is mapped to the data space by a transformer 
encoder that was trained autoregressively. Then they use a similarity discrimina tor based on the model to filter instances 
that are not similar to their initial counterparts. Liu et al. [130]  also use a transformer autoencoder architecture to 
generate data space instances. In contrast to the work of Wan et al.  [131] , they generate the noisy instances from the 
input embeddings, subsequently filter instances based on unigram word overlap , and try to improve machine question 
generation and question answering tasks. Both methods significantly improve the baselines and other methods.   
Given the constraint that adversarial training can be computat ionally expensive, Shen et al. [101]  propose three 
simple and efficient data augmentation methods of the feature space  (see Figure 4). Token cutoff sets the entire