25 models. Possible explanations for the success of interpolation methods  may stem from the balancing of  classes, the 
smoothening of the decision border (regularization) [133] , and the improve ment of the representations [134] .  
For example, the  Synthetic Minority Over -sampling Technique  (SMOTE ) approach in its original context was 
developed for the purpose of  oversampl ing the minority class, which, as described in the background section, inherently  
leads to better classification performances. In fact, a balancing of a class can easily be achieved by simply copying the 
minority class. However, Chawla et al. [133]  show that simple oversampling leads to more specific decision boundaries 
than applying SMOTE  in the balancing of classes. Interpolation methods can smoothen the boundary , as shown in Figure 
5. Smoothened and more general decision borders signify that an algorithm ca n generalize better and, in relation to 
training data, is accompanied by less overfitting. In this context , when applying interpolation methods to representations 
of the input data, Verma et al. [134]  empirically and theoretically prove that representations are flattened with regard to 
the number of directions with significant variance. This is desirable  since data representations capture less space, 
meaning that a classifier is more uncertain for randomly sampled representations and a form of compression is achieved 
which leads to generalization [134] –[136] . 
3.2.2.1  SMOTE Interpolation  
SMOTE is a n interpolation method of feature space representations of input data. With SMOTE, various neighbors  close 
to a specific instance are searched within the feature space in order to be interpolated with the following formula:  
𝑥̃=𝑥𝑖+ 𝜆 ∗ 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 (𝑥𝑖, 𝑥𝑗), 
where (𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) is the source instance and (𝑥𝑗,𝑦𝑖) is a close neighbor  with the same class label . 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 (𝑎,𝑏) is a distance 
measure and 𝜆∈[0,1]. Unlike mixup, only instances of the same class get interpolated. The  rationale behind the  
calculation of neighbors  with the same class labels is that the interpolations tend to b e class preserving, leading to a 
higher safety  of the technique. However, this leads to a limited  novelty and diversity of the created instances .  
SMOTE is rudimentar ily illustrated in  Figure 5. In the illustration, a binary classification problem is shown,  in which 
a learning algorithm has learned the specific decision border. To achieve a balanced class distribution, a new instance is 
added to the blue class by utilizing SMOTE. This addition achieves, apart from a balancing of the dataset, an adjustment 
of the decision boundary. The new boundary is less specific and thus contributes to more general decisions. SMOTE in 
combination with textual data augmentation is applied, for instance, in the work of Wang  and Lillis [108] . Unfortunately, 
the authors do not describe how and at which point of the network the method is applied.  
 
 
Figure 5: Illustration of the interpolation method SMOTE .