29 3.4 Training Strategies  
While semi -supervision is not considered as data augmentation in this work, it can still be sensibly combined through 
consistency training. In its origin, consistency training is used to make predic tions of classifiers invariant to noise [52]. 
This can be enforced by minimizing the divergences between the output distributions of real and noised instance s. 
Additionally, as only output distributions are included in the process, this consistency can be trained with unlabeled 
data. Several authors analyze how consistency training behaves when data augmentation methods are used for noise. 
This process can be illustrated by taking an instance whose label is unknown, applying a label -preserving data 
augmentation method, and then learning the model to predict the same label for both instances. In this way, the model 
can learn the invariances and is able to genera lize better. Xie et al. [52] show that they achieve very good results by 
employing consistency training with round -trip translation and a TF -IDF-based replac ement method, with an absolute 
improvement of 22.79% in accuracy on an artificially created low -data regime based on the Amazon -2 dataset with BERT 
base. They are also able to outperform the state of the art in the IMDb dataset with only 20 supervised inst ances. Chen 
et al. [97] even extend this approach within their MixText (TMix) system. First, they generate new instances with round -
trip translation. Then, they guess the label of the original and augmented instances by taking a weighted average of the 
predictions of all of them. In  the training, they randomly sample two instances and mix them together with TMix. If one 
of the two instances is from the original data, they are using the normal supervised loss, but if both instances are from 
the unlabeled or augmented data, they use th e consistency loss, like Xie et al. [52]. Consistency training can also be 
applied in a supervised fashion as an additional term in the training objective to  enforce identical predictions. This is, 
for example, used in the cutoff method by Shen et al. [101] . They show in their ablation studies that this consistency 
term improves the accuracy results additively by 0.15%.  
Qu et al. [78] combine supervised consistency training with contrastive learning. The contrastive learning scheme 
should bring the original and augmented ins tances closer together and the other instances further apart in the 
representation space. Contrastive learning can be applied in the pretraining phase of a language model so that 
meaningful representations are learned directly. Wu et al. [49] show that training a language model from scratch with 
this objective can lead to increased performances for downstream tasks. As augmentation methods the authors use word 
deletion, span del etion, random reordering and synonym substitution, as well as combinations in sets of two. The 
evaluation of several tasks shows that there is no clear best augmentation method. Fang et al. [99] and Yan et al. [146]  
show that contrastive learning can also result in better sentence representations when using an already pretrained model 
and further training the masked lan guage modeling task with contrastive learning. While the work of Fang et al. [99] 
uses round -trip translation, Yan et al. [146]  experiment with adversarial training, token mixing, cutoff and dropout. Qu 
et al. [78] and Choi et al. [53] even include contrastive learning into the supervised setting. As augmentation strategies, 
Qu et al. [78] use adversarial training combined with round -trip translation and Choi et al. [53] use counterfactuals based 
on language model  substitution. Combined with consistency training, Qu et al. [78] achieve even further improvements . 
A comparing overview can be found in Table 9  of the supplementary material  (online) . 
Other training strategies in which the order of how the training examples are presented to the learning algorithm is 
altered are for ex ample employed by Liu et al. [129] , Yang et al. [147] , and Claveau et al. [110] . Liu et al. [129]  adopt a 
curriculum learning approach, where the algorithm first learns less difficult instances. Transferred to the data 
augmentation topic, the mode l is first trained with the original data and then with the augmented data. Yang et al. [147]  
reverse this step and first train the model with the augmented data and then with the original data. This way, the m odel 
can correct unfavorable behavior that it learned through noisy augmented data. They also tried an importance -weight 
loss in which the weights of the synthetic instances are lower but find that the other training method performs better.