18 [102]  MarianMT  en → fr, de, 
es → en  
Chained:  
en →  es → 
fr → en  Word sense 
disambiguation : Retaining 
of those in which  the target 
word occurs exactly once 
(in both original and 
augmented instance) . MT-DNN  SemEval -2013 + 
SemEval -2015 + 
Senseval -2 + 
Senseval -3 No baseline 
comparisons  
* Trained with  consistency training  
** Trained with contrastive learning  
3.1.4.2  Generative Methods  
Generative methods are becoming increasingly  interesting in recent data augmentation research. As the capabilities 
of language generation increased significantly, the  current  mode ls are able to create very diverse texts and can thus 
incorporate new information. Here , Qiu et al. [42] introduce  a variational autoencoder (VAE) based  on a method that is 
used for text generation in their system . VAEs are probabilistic neural network structures that consist of an encoder 
network, which transforms input data into a latent representation, and of a decoder -network, which transforms the 
latent r epresentations back.  The authors  differentiate between unconditional and conditional VAEs. With unconditional 
VAEs, separate text generation models are trained for all classes, whereas with conditional VAEs, label information is 
fed into the model as an ad ditional input. Furthermore, they distinguish between sampling from the prior distribution, 
which leads to greatly diverse instances, and the posterior distribution, which produces  text that is semantically closer 
to the training data. With the uncondition al VAE and sampling from the prior distribution, they achieve the highest 
improvements of up to 2 F1 -points  (see Table 6). Malandrakis et al. [103]  make similar efforts by evaluating VAEs for 
augmentation. While their objective is more narrowed, as they are interested in natural language understanding with 
limited resources, they analy ze a broader variety of VAE augmentation variants. They also propose augmentation by 
conditional and unconditional VAEs with sampling from the posterior or prior distribution. Furthermore, they test two 
different learning objectives, where in the first the  VAEs are used  to reconstruct the input and in the second the VAEs 
take an instance of a particular  class and try to construct another instance from that class. They also experiment with 
the addition of a discriminator network to the VAE that predicts the respective class from which an output appears to 
be. In intrinsic and extrinsic  evaluations, the conditional VAEs with the reconstruction task are best performing. The 
discriminator variant achieves poor results, which stem from the little amount of availa ble training data for the many 
different classes. Contrary to the improvements of Qiu et al. [42], the CVAEs outperform the VAE generation. An excerpt 
of the extrinsic evaluation is given in  Table 6. However, it must be considered  that the task at hand is very specific.  
VEAs are also a main component of the NeuralEditor proposed by Guu et al. [104]  that generates new texts based on 
edition vectors. For the training of the generative model, they take pairs of instances x’ and x  in the training data that 
are lexically similar , encode the differences of them and noise into an edition vector z , and try to generate x based on x’ 
and z. It should be noted that the lexical similarity is just a rough approximation of semantic similarit y. This represents 
a potential source of error, as , e. g., instances  could be negated which in turn weakens the label preservation capabilities. 
However, t his suffices the purposes of the authors, as they only use the method for language modeling. Specific ally, in 
this domain, they report improvements  in terms of  generation quality and perplexity. Raille et al. [105]  propose Edit -
transformer, which is an adaptation of the NeuralEditor with the additional ability to function cross -domain, so that the 
learned edits of a large dataset can be transferre d to a small er dataset. Besides the improvements in speed and language 
modeling, they also apply their method on three different classification  tasks. The results are shown in  Table 6.