Data Augmentation for Deep Graph Learning:
A Survey
Kaize Ding1, Zhe Xu2, Hanghang Tong2, Huan Liu1
1Arizona State University
2University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
kaize.ding@asu.edu, zhexu3@illinois.edu, htong@illinois.edu, huanliu@asu.edu
ABSTRACT
Graph neural networks, a powerful deep learning tool to
model graph-structured data, have demonstrated remark-
able performance on numerous graph learning tasks. To ad-
dress the data noise and data scarcity issues in deep graph
learning, the research on graph data augmentation has in-
tensied lately. However, conventional data augmentation
methods can hardly handle graph-structured data which is
dened in non-Euclidean space with multi-modality. In this
survey, we formally formulate the problem of graph data
augmentation and further review the representative tech-
niques and their applications in dierent deep graph learn-
ing problems. Specically, we rst propose a taxonomy for
graph data augmentation techniques and then provide a
structured review by categorizing the related work based on
the augmented information modalities. Moreover, we sum-
marize the applications of graph data augmentation in two
representative problems in data-centric deep graph learn-
ing: (1) reliable graph learning which focuses on enhancing
the utility of input graph as well as the model capacity via
graph data augmentation; and (2) low-resource graph learn-
ing which targets on enlarging the labeled training data scale
through graph data augmentation. For each problem, we
also provide a hierarchical problem taxonomy and review
the existing literature related to graph data augmentation.
Finally, we point out promising research directions and the
challenges in future research.
1. INTRODUCTION
Graphs have been widely used for modeling a plethora of
structured or relational systems, such as social networks,
knowledge graphs, and academic graphs, where nodes repre-
sent the entities and edges denote the relations between en-
tities. As a powerful deep learning tool to distill the knowl-
edge behind graph-structured data, graph neural networks
(GNNs) which generally follow a recursive message-passing
scheme, have drawn a surge of research interest lately. Ow-
ing to its state-of-the-art performance, deep graph learning
(DGL) nowadays has achieved remarkable success in a wide
spectrum of graph analytical tasks [20; 102; 22].
Despite the superb power of GNNs, their eectiveness in
DGL largely depends on high-quality input training graph(s)
and ground-truth labels. The performance of GNNs tends to
be delicate on real-world graphs, mainly because of their in-
capability of handling the following challenges: (1) On theone hand, prevailing DGL models are predominantly de-
signed for the supervised or semi-supervised setting where
sucient ground-truth labels are available [23; 21]. Con-
sidering the fact that data labeling on graphs is always
time-consuming, labor-intensive, and rarely complete, the
overreliance on labeled data poses great challenges to DGL
models in real-world scenarios. Meanwhile, there are in-
creasingly more tasks and domain-specic applications that
are low-resource, having a paucity of labeled training exam-
ples. When ground-truth labels are extremely scarce, DGL
models may easily overt and be hard to generalize, losing
their ecacy in solving various downstream DGL tasks [90;
21]. (2) On the other hand, real-world graphs are usually ex-
tracted from complex interaction systems which inevitably
contain redundant, erroneous, or missing features and con-
nections. In addition, the noxious manipulations from ad-
versaries as well as the inherent limitations of GNNs such as
the oversmoothing issue [67] also bring additional challenges
to the success of reliable DGL. Directly training GNN-based
models on such inferior graphs that are not clean and con-
sistent with the properties of GNNs might lead to serious
performance degradation [18].
To improve the suciency and quality of training data, data
augmentation is proposed as an eective tool to augment
the given input data by either slightly modifying existing
data instances or generating synthetic instances from exist-
ing ones. The importance of data augmentation has been
well recognized in the computer vision [89] and natural lan-
guage processing domains [145] in the past few years. More
recently, data augmentation techniques have also been ex-
plored in the graph domain to push forward the performance
boundary of DGL and demonstrated promising results [145;
84]. Apart from conventional image or text data, graph-
structured data is known to be far more complicated with
heterogeneous information modalities and complex graph
properties, yielding a broader design space as well as the ad-
ditional challenges for graph data augmentation (GraphDA).
Though this line of research has been actively conducted
lately, the problem of GraphDA has not been well formu-
lated and researchers commonly adopt GraphDA techniques
(e.g., edge perturbation, feature masking) arbitrarily with-
out clear preference. Hence, it poses great challenge for re-
searchers to grasp the design principles behind and further
leverage them to solve specic DGL problems. Therefore, a
timely and systematic review of GraphDA is of great benet
to be aware of existing research in this eld and what the
challenges are for conducting future research.
Contributions. In this work, we present a forward-looking
1arXiv:2202.08235v3  [cs.LG]  21 Nov 2022