and up-to-date survey for GraphDA and its applications in
solving data-centric DGL problems. In summary, our major
contributions are as follows:
To the best of our knowledge, this is the rst survey
for GraphDA. We provide a formal formulation for this
emerging research area and review the related recent ad-
vances, which can facilitate the understanding of impor-
tant issues to promote future research.
We present a comprehensive taxonomy of GraphDA which
categorizes the existing techniques in terms of the target
augmentation modality (i.e., feature-oriented, structure-
oriented, and label-oriented) and provides a clear design
space for developing and customizing new GraphDA meth-
ods for dierent DGL problems.
We discuss the applications of GraphDA in solving two
major research problems in data-centric DGL, i.e., opti-
mal graph learning and low-resource graph learning, and
review the prevalent learning paradigms for solving spe-
cic sub-problems. We also outline the open issues and
promising future directions in this area.
Connection to Existing Surveys. Although there are
a few survey papers [72; 113; 119] have related content
to GraphDA, those surveys predominately focus on a sin-
gle DGL problem such as graph self-supervised learning or
graph adversarial defense. Other data-centric DGL prob-
lems related to GraphDA are largely overlooked and the
corresponding GraphDA techniques are rarely discussed. In
contrast, our survey includes a detailed and systematic re-
view of GraphDA techniques and their corresponding ap-
plications for solving two most representative data-centric
DGL problems. Meanwhile, we also discuss a list of under-
explored directions in GraphDA, which can shed great light
on future DGL research.
Structure Overview. This survey is structured as follows.
Section 2 rst gives background on graph neural networks
(GNNs) and deep graph learning. Then in Section 3 we
provide a comprehensive taxonomy of GraphDA techniques
based on the focused augmentation modality of the input
graph(s). In the following two sections, we describe the
applications of GraphDA techniques for solving two data-
centric DGL problems, i.e., Low-resource Graph Learning
(Section 4) and Reliable Graph Learning (Section 5). Specif-
ically, Section 4 includes the techniques based on GraphDA
for solving graph self-supervised learning and graph semi-
supervised learning. Section 5 covers the content of improv-
ing the robustness, expressiveness, and scalability of DGL
models from the data augmentation perspective. Within
each subsection, we introduce the methods grouped by their
related GraphDA techniques. Finally, Section 6 discusses
challenges and future directions in GraphDA.
2. PRELIMINARIES
2.1 Notations and Deﬁnitions
We brie
y introduce the main symbols and notations used
throughout this paper. We use bold uppercase letters for
matrices (e.g., X), bold lowercase letters for vectors (e.g.,
v), lowercase and uppercase letters for scalars (e.g., d,n),
and calligraphic letters for sets (e.g., N). We use X[i;j] to
represent the entry of matrix Xat thei-th row and the j-th
column, X[i;:] to represent the i-th row of matrix X, and
X[:;j] to represent the j-th column of matrix X. Similarly,v[i] denotes the i-th entry of vector v.
For the general purpose, we focus on undirected attributed
graphs in this survey. A graph can be represented as G=
fV;EgwhereVdenotes the node set fvign
i=1andEdenotes
the edge setfeigm
i=1. In matrix form, it can also be repre-
sented asG= (A;X), where A2Rnndenotes the adja-
cency matrix and X2Rnddenotes the node feature ma-
trix. Here nis the number of nodes, mis the number of
edges, anddis the feature dimension. For supervised tasks,
a part of the node labels y2Rn, the edge labels Y2Rnn,
and the graph label yare provided. For tasks with multiple
graphs (e.g., graph-level tasks), we appropriately use sub-
scripts to describe graphs and corresponding components.
For example, Aidenotes the adjacency matrix of the i-th
graphGi.
2.2 Graph Neural Networks
Graph neural networks (GNNs) [116][139] are the extension
of the neural network models [3] onto graph data. They
show great 
exibility and strong expressiveness to extract
representations of various graph components and are be-
coming the core modules of broad graph learning tasks. In
this subsection, we will brie
y introduce the general mes-
sage passing formulas [33] of the mainstream GNNs as they
are widely adopted by the works remaining of this paper.
The message passing framework of GNNs can be mathemat-
ically presented as follows:
mt+1
i=X
j2N(i)Message (ht
i;ht
j); (1a)
ht+1
i=Update (ht
i;mt+1
i); (1b)
where ht
idenotes the representation of the node iatt-th
layer and mt+1
idenotes the message aggregates on the node
iat the (t+ 1)-th layer. The initial node representation
is the node feature (i.e., h0
i=X[i]) and the node neigh-
borhood can be represented by the adjacency matrix (i.e.,
A[i;j] = 1 is equivalent to j2N(i)). For graph-level tasks,
graph representation hGcan be obtained through a Readout
function as follows:
hG=Readout (H); (2)
where Hcan be the node representations from the nal layer
or any intermediate layer.
2.3 Deep Graph Learning Tasks
In this subsection, we introduce several mainstream DGL
tasks on which GraphDA techniques are widely used. We
categorize tasks according to their objective graph compo-
nents (i.e., node, edge, and graph).
Node-level DGL Tasks. Node-level DGL tasks aim to
nd a mapping pfrom the given graphs to node properties
by minimizing a utility loss Lutilas follows:
= arg min
Lutil
p(G);y
;
whose typical example is semi-supervised node classication .
Given the labels of partial nodes for training, the goal is to
predict the labels of (a part of) unlabelled nodes. A classic
implementation of a node classier is a node encoder (e.g.,
GNNs) working with a multi-class classier (e.g., an MLP).
Edge-level DGL Tasks. Edge-level DGL tasks focus on
nding a mapping pfrom the given graphs to edge proper-
2