GraphSAINT [132] is another sampling-based method that
applies various sampling methods (e.g., based on random
walk) to improve the scalability of training rather than mod-
ifying the vanilla GCN model [59]. Similar to sampling
methods, graph partition is also eective to lower the mem-
ory requirement. For example, Cluster-GCN [17] partitions
the given graph into clusters and conducts convolution op-
eration within every cluster to avoid heavy neighborhood
search and sampling.
Another line of GraphDA research on scaling the training
of GNNs adopts a decoupled design that trains MLP on
the augmented graphs via graph diusion [12; 110; 60;
86]. Given the above model design, the graph diusion
matrix can be pre-computed, which makes the training of
MLP more ecient. A set of representative works adopt
PageRank [80] and its variant (e.g., personalized PageR-
ank [49]) to infer the diusion matrix such as SGC [110]
and APPNP [60]. Similarly, PPRGo [6] adopts the For-
ward Push algorithm [2] to approximate the personalized
PageRank matrix for eciency. GBP [14] revisits the core
idea of PPRGo and further speeds up the computation of
the generalized PageRank matrix by the Bidirectional Prop-
agation algorithm. In addition, a very recent work named
GRAND+ [29] also approximates the graph diusion matrix
to scale the training of graph random neural networks [30]
in the consistency training context.
In addition, works on \graph condensation" and \graph
coarsening" try to shrink the given graph Gbygraph gen-
eration so that the generated graph ~Gcan be handled by
GNNs [46]. Their core idea is to minimize a `quantity of in-
terest' between the input graph Gand augmented graph ~G.
For example, Jin et al. [56] propose to minimize the spec-
tral distance between Gand ~G. GOREN [8] aims to keep
Laplace operators from Gand ~Gcomparable. GCOND [55]
and DosCond [54] minimize the dierence of training gradi-
ents onGand ~G.
6. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
GraphDA is an emerging and fast-developing eld. Although
substantial progress has been achieved, many challenges re-
main under-explored. In this section, we discuss some promis-
ing research directions as follows.
Data Augmentation beyond Simple Graphs. Most
of the aforementioned works develop augmentation strate-
gies on homophilic (i.e., assortative) graphs where edges
tend to connect nodes with the same properties (e.g., la-
bels, features). However, heterophily (i.e., disassortativity)
also exists commonly in networks such as heterosexual dat-
ing networks. Many existing augmentation approaches [92]
on heterophilic graphs focus on improving the assortativity
of the given graphs or dropping/deweighting the existing
disassortative edges [125]. The augmentation of node fea-
tures, labels, and non-existing edges of heterophilic graphs
remains understudied. Besides, existing GraphDA eorts
are mainly developed for either plain or attributed graphs,
while principled augmentation approaches for other types of
graphs (e.g., heterogeneous graphs, hypergraphs, multiplex
graphs, dynamic graphs) remain largely unexplored. Those
complex graphs provide broader design space for augmenta-
tion but also challenge the eectiveness of existing GraphDA
methods greatly, which is vital to explore in the future.
Automated and Generalizable Graph Data Augmen-tation. In general, the eectiveness of DGL problems hinges
on adhoc graph data augmentations, which have to be manu-
ally picked per dataset, by either rules of thumb or trial-and-
errors. For example, researchers observe that dierent data
augmentations aect downstream tasks dierently across
datasets, which suggests that searching over augmentation
functions is crucial for graph self-supervised learning [127].
Nevertheless, evaluating representations derived from multi-
ple augmentation functions without direct access to ground
truth labels makes this problem challenging. Hence, it is
necessary to develop automated data augmentation solu-
tions to adaptively customize augmentation strategies for
each graph dataset [76]. Meanwhile, considering that dier-
ent graphs usually have distinct graph properties, developing
generalizable data augmentation methods without learning
from scratch for each domain is also a promising direction
to improve the practical usage of GraphDA methods.
Semantic-Preserving Graph Data Augmentation. De-
signing eective data augmentation for graphs is challeng-
ing due to their non-Euclidean nature and the dependen-
cies between data samples. Most graph data augmenta-
tion methods adopt arbitrary augmentations on the input
graph, which may unexpectedly change both structural and
semantic patterns of the graph [81]. For example, drop-
ping a carbon atom from the phenyl ring of aspirin breaks
the aromatic system and results in a alkene chain, which is
an entirely dierent chemical compound. Hence, proposing
a label-consistent/semantic-preserving GraphDA method is
of necessity. To this end, recent studies [64; 117; 130] per-
form data augmentation on the latent space to avoid the
perturbation on the semantics.
Graph Data Augmentation for Trustworthy DGL.
Despite the success of DGL, how to ensure various DGL al-
gorithms behave in a socially responsible manner and meet
regulatory compliance requirements becomes an emerging
problem, especially in risk-sensitive applications. In fact,
GraphDA can be an eective tool to achieve Trustworthy
GML, especially on fairness, causality, explainability of DGL
algorithms. For example, counterfactural graph data aug-
mentation [74; 144] has been used to explain the behavior of
GNNs in the literature. Moreover, data augmentation itself
is typically performed in an adhoc manner with little under-
standing of the underlying theoretical principles. Existing
work on GraphDA is mainly surface-level, and rarely investi-
gates the theoretical underpinnings and principles. Overall,
there indeed appears to be a lack of research on interpret
why exactly GraphDA works.
7. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a forward-looking and structured
survey of graph data augmentation (GraphDA). To inspect
the nature of GraphDA, we give a formal formulation and
a taxonomy to facilitate the understanding of this emerging
research problem. Specically, we frame GraphDA meth-
ods into three categories according to the target augmenta-
tion modalities, i.e., feature-wise, structure-wise, and label-
wise augmentations. We further review the application of
GraphDA methods to address two data-centric DGL prob-
lems (i.e., low-resource graph learning and reliable graph
learning) and discuss the prevailing GraphDA-based algo-
rithms. Finally, we outline current challenges as well as
opportunities for future research in this eld.
12