ties which can be presented as below:
= arg min
Lutil
p(G);Y
:
Taking link prediction as an example, its goal is to discrim-
inate if there is an edge between specied node pair. A
common implementation is a binary GNN classier whose
input is the edge embeddings (e.g., the aggregation of node
embeddings of the head and tail nodes).
Graph-level DGL Tasks. A graph-level task considers
every graph as a data sample and infers the property of
graph(s) by a mapping p. Its mathematical formulation is
as follows:
= arg min
Lutil
fp(Gi)g;fyig
:
For instance, in the graph classication task, some labeled
graphs are provided and the goal is to predict the labels
of graphs of interest. A general solution is to aggregate
the node embeddings into a graph embedding via a readout
function and feed the graph embeddings into a classier.
3. TECHNIQUES OF GRAPH DATA AUG-
MENTATION
The goal of graph data augmentation (GraphDA) is to nd
a transformation function f() :G! ~Gto generate aug-
mented graph(s)f~Gi= (~Ai;~Xi)gthat can enrich or enhance
the preserved information from the given graph(s). In terms
of whether the parameter can be updated or not during the
learning process, most, if not all, of the GraphDA methods
can be classied to: non-learnable and learnable methods.
If the augmentation method is non-learnable , we can simply
omit the parameter for brevity.
In general, as the ultimate goal of GraphDA is to improve
the GNN model performance on downstream learning tasks,
we need to consider them together during the learning pro-
cess. We denote the augmentation loss as Laugwhose goal
is to regularize the augmented graph(s) to be close to the
given graph(s), and denote the utility loss that measures the
GNN performance on specic downstream tasks as Lutility .
In terms of training strategies, most, if not all, of the learn-
ableGraphDA methods can be divided into three categories:
(1) decoupled training, (2) joint training, and (3) bi-level
optimization. The work
ow of each scheme is shown in Fig-
ure 1 and the details can be found as follows:
Decoupled Training (DT). In this training scheme, the
augmenterfand the predictor pare independently trained
in a two-stage paradigm. Specically, the augmenter is rst
learned with augmentation loss Laug. After that, the predic-
tion model pis trained on the augmented graph under the
supervision of specic downstream tasks (i.e., Lutil). The
learning process can be formulated as:
= arg min
Laug
fGig;ff(Gi)g
;
= arg min
Lutil
p;ff(Gi)g
:(3)
Joint Training (JT). In the joint training scheme, the aug-
menterfand the predictor pare jointly trained with the
augmentation loss Laugand utility loss Lutil. This learning
process can be also considered as multi-task learning, which
Augmenter𝑓𝜽Predictor𝑝𝝓Input Graph𝒢Augmented Graph𝒢$Augmentation Loss𝐿!"#Augmented Graph𝒢$Prediction Loss𝐿"$%&(1)(2)(a) Decoupled Training (DT)
Augmenter𝑓𝜽Input GraphAugmentation Loss 𝐿!"#𝒢Augmented Graph𝒢#Prediction Loss𝐿"$%&Predictor𝑝𝝓
(b) Joint Training (JT)
Augmenter𝑓𝜽Input Graph𝒢Augmented Graph𝒢#Prediction Loss𝐿!"#$Predictor𝑝𝝓(1)Augmentation Loss𝐿%!&(2)
(c) Bi-level Optimization (BO)
Figure 1: Learnable GraphDA training paradigms.
can be expressed as follows:
;= arg min
;Laug
fGig;ff(Gi)g
+Lutil
p;ff(Gi)g
:(4)
Bi-level Optimization (BO). Another training scheme of
GraphDA for DGL is bi-level optimization. Dierent from
joint training, the augmenter fand the predictor pare
alternatively updated with the augmentation loss Laugand
utility loss Lutil. As shown in Figure 1 (c), the update of
the augmenter is based on the optimal updated predictor,
which implies a bi-level optimization problem with as the
upper-level variable and as the lower-level variable:
= arg min
Laug
fGig;ff(Gi)g;p()
;
s:t: () = arg min
Lutil
p;ff(Gi)g
:(5)
In the following subsections, we provide a systematic tax-
onomy to cover mainstream GraphDA techniques. Since
graphs commonly consist of multiple information modalities,
GraphDA techniques can be naturally divided into three
categories based on the augmentation modality, including:
feature-oriented ,structure-oriented , and label-oriented tech-
niques. Specically, we summarize the commonly used tech-
niques in terms of each augmentation modality and clearly
illustrate their augmentation strategies. Figure 2 (left) sum-
marizes our proposed taxonomy for GraphDA techniques.
3.1 Structure-oriented Augmentations
3