Figure 4: 1-WL test fails to distinguish the decalin graph
(left) and the bicyclopentyl graph (right).
supervision signals from downstream tasks can implicitly re-

ect the uncontaminated topology and feature distribution.
For instance, Gasoline [121] calibrates the given graph based
on the evaluation performance (e.g., classication loss) of
the validation nodes. GIB-N [114] adopts the information
bottleneck objective [97] which maximizes the mutual infor-
mation between node labels and node embeddings and uses
this objective function to guide the graph rewiring .
It is worth noting that an established defense strategy named
adversarial training [34] is grafted onto the graph data. Ex-
amples include a family of graph (virtual) adversarial train-
ing [63; 27; 19; 105]. Their core idea is to adversarially con-
duct edge perturbation andfeature corruption to gener-
ate various challenging graph data samples which maximize
the classication loss. Then those samples are included in
the training of downstream GNN models which can improve
the robustness of GNNs against adversarial attacks.
Boosting GNN Expressive Power. Studies about the
expressiveness of GNNs show that various mainstream GNNs
cannot be more powerful than the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL)
isomorphism test to distinguish graphs and subgraphs [79;
120]. E.g., Figure 4 shows a pair of common examples that
cannot be distinguished by the 1-WL test due to the com-
mon rooted trees. In addition, due to the power-law distri-
bution of node degree, many nodes with few neighbors are
hard to be represented properly. To break such an inher-
ent limitation of GNNs, augmenting the given graphs is a
feasible solution. One line of research adopts the feature
addition technique to augment the original node/edge fea-
tures. For example, Distance Encoding [66] augments the
given node features with distance measures between node
pairs (or aggregated distance measures) to yield stronger
expressiveness than 1-WL test-based GNNs. A recent study
from Sato et al. [88] reveals that adding random features
into the existing node features can boost the expressiveness
of o-the-shelf GNNs (e.g., discriminate triangle structure).
GSN [7] and a variant of ID-GNN [126] take a step further
and augment the node features with the count of various
motifs (e.g., cycles). Recently, LAGNN [70] adopts feature
addition by a trained feature generator from which nodes
with few neighbors can benet greatly.
Another line of work argues that the limitation of the 1-WL
test (and 1-WL test-based GNNs) is related to the struc-
ture of rooted trees. Based on that, graph sampling tech-
nique can enhance the GNN expressiveness. Specically,
NGNN [138] claims that node representations from sam-
pled rooted subgraphs are more expressive than those from
rooted trees. Interestingly, ID-GNN [126] shares a similar
insight with NGNN [138] and also samples an ego network
for every node for computing the node embedding.
As the node representations are obtained through the ag-
gregation of node features within the receptive elds, to
enhance the propagation of messages for long distance, astraightforward way is to apply node insertion by insert-
ing virtual nodes (i.e., super nodes or master nodes) [33;
65; 48; 83] into the graphs which are connected with all the
existing nodes.
Alleviating Over-Smoothing/Squashing of GNNs. Due
to the inherent design limit of GNNs, as the depth of the
model increases, the representations of dierent nodes in
the graph eventually become indistinguishable with itera-
tive message passing. The so-called over-smoothing phe-
nomenon generally leads to failure in the graph learning
tasks [67]. To counter the over-smoothing issue, GraphDA,
especially graph rewiring methods have been shown as an
eective solution. For example, DropEdge [85] randomly
removes graph edges during message passing to alleviate
over-smoothing. TADropEdge [32] exploits graph structural
information to compute edge weights for edge dropping,
such that the augmented subgraphs can avoid the arbitrary
data augmentation issue in DropEdge. AdaEdge [9] itera-
tively adds or removes edges to the graph topology based on
the classication results (from a GNNs-based classier) and
trains GNN classiers on the updated graphs to overcome
the over-smoothing issue. SHADOW-GNN [131] samples in-
formative subgraphs centered on each node and then builds
a deep GNN operating on subgraphs instead of the whole
graph to decouple the depth and scope of GNNs.
Note that over-smoothing is mostly demonstrated in tasks
that depend mostly on short-range information, while GNNs
are also ineective for capturing long-range node interac-
tions. A recent study [1] points out that the distortion of
information 
owing from distant nodes (i.e., over-squashing)
is the main factor limiting the eciency of message pass-
ing for tasks relying on long-distance interactions. As the
layer depth increases, the number of nodes in each node's
receptive eld grows exponentially and leads to the over-
squashing issue. To overcome over-squashing, graph diu-
sion andgraph rewiring are two eective choices. Graph
Diusion Convolution (GDC) [61] constructs a new graph
based on a generalized form of graph diusion, which can be
further used to enlarge a larger neighborhood for message-
passing. Adaptive Diusion Convolution (ADC) [142] sup-
ports learning the optimal neighborhood from the data au-
tomatically to eliminate the manual search process of the op-
timal propagation neighborhood in GDC. Alon & Yahav [1]
propose to rewire the graph to build a fully-adjacent GNN
layer for reducing the bottleneck. Similarly, Stochastic Dis-
crete Ricci Flow (SDRF) [98] is a curvature-based method
for graph rewiring to mitigate the over-squashing issue.
Scalable Graph Training. Scalability is always a cru-
cial challenge for GNNs which hinders the applicability of
a broad class of GNN models over large real-world graphs.
GraphDA techniques, such as graph sampling ,graph dif-
fusion , and graph generation play an important role to
speed up the training and inferring of GNNs.
Based on the idea of graph sampling , GraphSAGE [36]
uniformly samples the neighbors of the target nodes to en-
able GNN inductive learning on large graphs. FastGCN [11]
shares a similar idea with GraphSAGE but follows the idea
of importance sampling to sample vertices in every layer.
To overcome the redundant sampling and sparse connec-
tion problem brought by the GraphSAGE [36] and Fast-
GCN [11] respectively, Zou et al. [150] propose LADIES
which is a layer-dependent sampling strategy. In addition,
11