due to the cascading eect of graph data, even simply adding
an edge into a graph can dramatically change the graph se-
mantic meanings. To circumvent those challenges, Mani-
fold Mixup [100] has been applied to graph data interpola-
tion. Specically, GraphMix [101] trains a fully connected
network (FCN) jointly with the GNN via parameter shar-
ing, and the FCN is learned based on Manifold Mixup and
pseudo-labeling , which can eectively train GNNs for semi-
supervised node classication. Similarly, Wang et al. [107]
also follow the idea of Manifold Mixup and interpolate the
input features of both nodes and graphs in the embedding
space. Those methods leverage a simple way to avoid dealing
with the arbitrary structure in the input space for mixing a
node or graph pair, through mixing the graph representation
learned from GNNs.
For the input-level graph data interpolation, ifMixup [35]
targets the Manifold Intrusion issue (mixing graph pairs may
naturally create graphs with identical structure but with
con
ict labels) and rst interpolates both the node features
and the edges of the input pair based on feature mixing
andgraph generation . Graph Transplant [82] is another
input-level graph interpolation method that leverages graph
rewiring to mix two dissimilar-structured graphs by re-
placing the destination subgraph with the source subgraph
while preserving the local structure. G-Mixup [37] rst es-
timates the graphon of each class and then mixup between
the graphons and perform graph generation to generate in-
terpolated graphs, which improves the generalizability and
robustness of GNNs for semi-supervised graph classication.
Graph Imbalanced Training. The class distribution of
graph data is inherently imbalanced which follows the power-
law distribution. As an example, on the benchmark Pubmed
dataset, nodes are labeled into three classes while the mi-
nority class only contains 5 :25% of the total nodes. Such
highly imbalanced data will lead to the suboptimal per-
formance of downstream tasks especially classication tasks
and one of the eective solutions is to augment the minor-
ity to alleviate the imbalance. To counter this problem,
node insertion has been proven as an eective solution
to augment the minority class. Meanwhile, feature mix-
ingandgraph rewiring are also needed for enable graph
imbalanced training. For instance, GraphSMOTE [146] aug-
ments the minority class by mixing up the minority nodes
and leverages an edge generator to predict neighbor informa-
tion for those synthetic nodes. GraphMixup [112] rst per-
forms interpolation on a node from one target minority class
with its nearest neighbors, then adopts an edge prediction
module to predict the connections between generated nodes
and existing nodes. Following this idea, GATSMOTE [73]
and GNN-CL [69] adopts an attention mechanism to gener-
ate the edges between the synthetic nodes and the original
nodes. On the label level, DPGNN [106] conducts pseudo
labeling via label propagation to enrich the training samples
from the minority class. However, many challenges in this
topic are still under-explored. For example, if the amount
of labeled minority nodes is extremely small, such as few-
shot or even one-shot per class, how to transfer knowledge
from the majority classes to augment the minority classes is
worth studying.
5. GRAPH DATA AUGMENTATION FOR
RELIABLE GRAPH LEARNINGOne main goal of GraphDA is to achieve Reliable Graph
Learning in the real-world scenarios by augmenting the in-
put graph(s). Specically, in this work we focus on improv-
ing the robustness, expressiveness, and scalability of DGL
models via GraphDA for dierent challenging learning sce-
narios. We summarize the representative works in Table 3.
Graph Structure Learning. Due to various reasons such
as fake connections [42], over-personalized users [13] and
construction heuristics, the given graph structure is not op-
timal for downstream graph learning tasks. Graph structure
learning is proposed as a solution for the above challenge.
From a general sense, the core technique used for structure
learning is graph rewiring .
A series of methods rewire the given graphs following var-
ious node similarity metrics. In most cases, such metrics
are learned from the given graph topology. For example,
GAUG [145] and IDGL [16] train edge predictors based on
learned node embeddings. Besides, from the optimization
perspective, it is feasible to directly incorporate the graph
data (e.g., adjacency matrix) itself as a part of the opti-
mization variables. Based on that, the graph rewiring
process is essentially guided by the optimization objective.
TO-GNN [122] is a representative work whose loss functions
include smoothness-related regularizations and the update
of graphs is gradient descent-based. In addition, instead of
optimizing the graph itself, an interesting idea is to optimize
the graph-related distributions (e.g., graph generation distri-
butions and edge dropping distributions). After that, graph
rewiring can be conducted by sampling from those distri-
butions. A representative work is LDS [31] which assumes
that every edge is sampled from an independent Bernoulli
distribution. Other representative works in this line include
Bayesian-GCNN [141], GEN [103], NeuralSparse [147], and
PTDNet [75].
Graph Feature Denoising. Compared to structure de-
noising, the research on graph feature denoising has received
less attention. In general, most of the work is developed
based on feature rewriting . For instance, AirGNN [71]
regularizes the l21norm between the input node features and
convoluted node features such that the model is more toler-
ant against abnormal features. To handle missing node fea-
tures, a special case of suboptimal initial node features, fea-
ture propagation [87] diuses the features from observed
nodes to neighbors whose features are missing based on the
heat diusion equation; in other words, it imputes the miss-
ing node features with aggregated features from the neigh-
borhood of the target nodes. GCNMF [94] explicitly formu-
late the missing node features by Gaussian mixture models
whose parameters are inferred from the downstream tasks.
An eort named SAT [15] reconstructs the missing features
through the feature distribution, which is inferred from the
topology distribution. To handle missing features on het-
erogeneous information networks, HGNN-AC [51] imputes
missing features from neighbor nodes' topology-based node
embedding, while HGCA [41] designs a feature augmenter
which is trained by maximizing the agreement between the
augmented node embedding and the actual node embedding.
Graph Adversarial Defense. Aside from the noise intro-
duced in the data collection phase, GNNs are fragile against
adversarial attacks on graph structure and features [91].
Naturally, conducting GraphDA to recover and enhance (a
part of) the poisoned graphs is eective to alleviate the per-
9