data2vec: A General Framework for Self-supervised Learning in Speech, Vision and Language
6. Discussion
Modality-specific Feature Extractors and Masking.
Our primary goal is to design a single learning mechanism
for different modalities. Despite the unified learning regime,
we still use modality-specific feature extractors and mask-
ing strategies. This makes sense given the vastly different
nature of the input data: for example, in speech we learn
from a very high resolution input (16 kHz waveform) which
contains hundreds of thousands of samples for typical utter-
ances. To process this, we apply a multilayer convolutional
neural network to obtain a 50 Hz feature sequence. For
NLP, word input sequences have vastly lower resolution
which can be directly embedded in distributional space via a
lookup table. The type of data also impacts how we should
mask the input to create a challenging learning task: re-
moving individual words provides a sufficiently challenging
task but for speech it is necessary to mask spans since ad-
jacent audio samples are highly correlated with each other.
Relatedly, there has been recent work on a Transformer
architecture that can directly operate on the raw data of
different modalities without modality-specific feature en-
coders (Jaegle et al., 2021b;a). Their work is focused on
supervised learning for classification tasks and we believe
that our work is complementary.
Structured and Contextualized Targets. One of the
main differences of data2vec to most other masked pre-
diction work (Devlin et al., 2019; Baevski et al., 2020b;
Ling et al., 2020; Bao et al., 2021; He et al., 2021; Wei
et al., 2021) is that the features of the training targets are
contextualized since the features are built with self-attention
over the entire unmasked input in teacher mode. And while
BYOL (Grill et al., 2020) and DINO (Caron et al., 2021)
also use latent target representations based on the entire
input, their focus is on learning transformation-invariant
representations instead of structural information within a
sample.
One exception is HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021) which builds a
fixed set of discrete target units by clustering Transformer
layer representations. In comparison, data2vec has no limi-
tation on the number of target units. Instead of representing
each instance of particular discrete target unit with the same
set of features, data2vec can build target features that are
specific to the current sequence.
For NLP, we believe data2vec is the first work that does not
rely on pre-defined target units. Most other work uses either
words, sub-words (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019),
characters (Tay et al., 2021) or even bytes (Xue et al., 2021).
Aside, defining word boundaries is not straightforward for
some Asian languages. Contextualized targets enable inte-
grating features from the entire sequence into the training
target which provides a richer self-supervised task. Further-more, the representation of each instance of a particular unit
(word/sub-word/character/byte) can differ for the masked
prediction task. This enables to associate a different mean-
ing to a particular depending on the context it occurs in. It
also relieves the model from the need to learn a single set of
features for a target unit that fits all instances of this unit.
Representation Collapse. A common failure mode when
learning targets is for similar representations for targets to be
produced resulting in a trivial task (Jing et al., 2021). To deal
with this, contrastive models such as wav2vec 2.0 (Baevski
et al., 2020b) use the same target representation both as a
positive and a negative example. BYOL (Grill et al., 2020)
do not optimize the teacher parameters to minimize the
loss and VicReg (Bardes et al., 2021) adds an explicit loss
encouraging variance among different representations.
We found that collapse is most likely to happen in the fol-
lowing scenarios: First, the learning rate is too large or the
learning rate warmup is too short which can often be solved
by tuning the respective hyperparameters. Second, τis too
low which leads to student model collapse and is then prop-
agated to the teacher. This can be addressed by tuning τ0,
τeandτn. Third, we found collapse to be more likely for
modalities where adjacent targets are very correlated and
where longer spans need to be masked, e.g., speech. We
address this by promoting variance through normalizing tar-
get representations over the sequence or batch (Grill et al.,
2020). For models where targets are less correlated, such as
vision and NLP, momentum tracking is sufficient.
7. Conclusion
Recent work showed that uniform model architectures can
be effective for multiple modalities (Jaegle et al., 2021b).
Whereas we show that a single self-supervised learning
regime can be effective for vision, speech and language.
The key idea is to regress contextualized representations
based on a partial input view. data2vec outperforms prior
self-supervised work on ImageNet-1K for ViT-B and ViT-L
single models, it improves over prior work on speech recog-
nition for the low-resource Libri-light setups, and it outper-
forms RoBERTa on GLUE in the original BERT setup.
A single learning method for multiple modalities will make
it easier to learn across modalities and future work may
investigate tasks such as audio-visual speech recognition or
cross-modal retrieval. Our approach still uses modality-
specific input encoders and we adopt modality-specific
masking strategies which future work may unify.
Acknowledgements
We thank Brenden Lake, Dhruv Batra, Marco Baroni and
Laurens van der Maaten for helpful discussions.