data2vec: A General Framework for Self-supervised Learning in Speech, Vision and Language
methods therefore predict word or sub-word units for pre-
training. There is also work on knowledge distillation to
obtain smaller BERT-style models, both for pre-training and
fine-tuning (Jiao et al., 2020).
Compared to prior NLP algorithms, data2vec does not pre-
dict discrete linguistic tokens such as words, sub-words or
bytes but rather a continuous and contextualized representa-
tion. This has two advantages: first, the targets themselves
are not predefined, nor is their number limited. This enables
the model to adapt to a particular input example. Second,
targets are contextualized , taking context information into
account. This is unlike BERT-style models which learn
a single embedding for each target which needs to fit all
instances of a particular target in the data.
Self-supervised Learning in Speech. Work in self-
supervised learning for speech includes autoregressive mod-
els (van den Oord et al., 2018; Schneider et al., 2019;
Baevski et al., 2020a; Chung et al., 2019) as well as bi-
directional models (Baevski et al., 2020b; Hsu et al., 2021;
Ao et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021a). Two prominent mod-
els, wav2vec 2.0 and HuBERT are based on predicting
discrete units of speech, either learned jointly during pre-
training (Baevski et al., 2020b), or in an iterative pipeline
approach (Hsu et al., 2021) where pre-training and cluster-
ing alternate.2Another line of work directly reconstructs
the input features (Eloff et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021).
In comparison to wav2vec 2.0, data2vec directly predicts
contextualized latent representations without quantization.
HuBERT discretizes representations from different layers
across iterations and predicts these discretized units whereas
data2vec predicts the average over multiple layers. Similar
to other modalities, there is work on distilling larger self-
supervised models into smaller models but primarily for the
purpose of efficiency (Chang et al., 2021).
Multimodal Pre-training. There has been a considerable
body of research on learning representations of multiple
modalities simultaneously often using paired data (Aytar
et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2021b; Wang et al., 2021; Singh
et al., 2021) with the aim to produce cross-modal representa-
tions which can perform well on multi-modal tasks and with
modalities benefiting from each other through joint train-
ing (Alayrac et al., 2020; Akbari et al., 2021) with recent
methods exploring few-shot learning (Tsimpoukelli et al.,
2021). Our work does not perform multimodal training
but aims to unifiy the learning objective for self-supervised
learning in different modalities. We hope that this will en-
able better multimodal representations in the future.
2Quantization is optional for wav2vec 2.0 (Baevski et al.,
2020b; Zhang et al., 2020) but helpful for noisy speech (Chung
et al., 2021).3. Method
data2vec is trained by predicting the model representations
of the full input data given a partial view of the input (Fig-
ure 1). We first encode a masked version of the training
sample (model in student mode ) and then construct training
targets by encoding the unmasked version of the input with
the same model but when parameterized as an exponentially
moving average of the model weights (model in teacher
mode ; Grill et al. 2020; Caron et al. 2021). The target rep-
resentations encode all of the information in the training
sample and the learning task is for the student to predict
these representations given a partial view of the input.
3.1. Model Architecture
We use the standard Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017) with a modality-specific encoding of the input data
borrowed from prior work:3for computer vision, we use the
ViT-strategy of encoding an image as a sequence of patches,
each spanning 16x16 pixels, input to a linear transforma-
tion (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Bao et al., 2021). Speech
data is encoded using a multi-layer 1-D convolutional neural
network that maps 16 kHz waveform to 50 Hz representa-
tions (Baevski et al., 2020b). Text is pre-processed to obtain
sub-word units (Sennrich et al., 2016; Devlin et al., 2019),
which are then embedded in distributional space via learned
embedding vectors. We detail these methods below (§4).
3.2. Masking
After the input sample has been embedded as a sequence
of tokens, we mask part of these units by replacing them
with a learned MASK embedding token and feed the se-
quence to the Transformer network. For computer vision,
we follow the block-wise masking strategy of Bao et al.
(2021), for speech we mask spans of latent speech represen-
tations (Baevski et al., 2020b) and for language we mask
tokens (Devlin et al., 2019); §4 details each strategy.
3.3. Training Targets
The model is trained to predict the model representations of
the original unmasked training sample based on an encoding
of the masked sample. We predict model representations
only for time-steps which are masked. The representations
we predict are contextualized representations , encoding the
particular time-step but also other information from the
sample due to the use of self-attention in the Transformer
network.4This is an important difference to BERT (De-
3While we used Transformer networks, alternative architectures
may be equally applicable.
4In preliminary experiments, we found that additional context
information for the targets was helpful since masking some of the
time-steps when in teacher mode resulted in lower accuracy.