data2vec: A General Framework for Self-supervised Learning in Speech, Vision
and Language
Alexei Baevski1Wei-Ning Hsu1Qiantong Xu2Arun Babu1Jiatao Gu1Michael Auli1
Abstract
While the general idea of self-supervised learn-
ing is identical across modalities, the actual al-
gorithms and objectives differ widely because
they were developed with a single modality in
mind. To get us closer to general self-supervised
learning, we present data2vec, a framework that
uses the same learning method for either speech,
NLP or computer vision. The core idea is to pre-
dict latent representations of the full input data
based on a masked view of the input in a self-
distillation setup using a standard Transformer ar-
chitecture. Instead of predicting modality-specific
targets such as words, visual tokens or units of
human speech which are local in nature, data2vec
predicts contextualized latent representations that
contain information from the entire input. Ex-
periments on the major benchmarks of speech
recognition, image classification, and natural lan-
guage understanding demonstrate a new state of
the art or competitive performance to predom-
inant approaches. Models and code are avail-
able at www.github.com/pytorch/fairseq/
tree/master/examples/data2vec .
1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning builds representations of data with-
out human annotated labels which led to significant ad-
vances in natural language processing (NLP; Peters et al.
2018; Radford et al. 2018; Devlin et al. 2019; Brown et al.
2020), speech processing (van den Oord et al., 2018; Schnei-
der et al., 2019; Baevski et al., 2020b) as well as computer
vision (Chen et al., 2020; 2021b; Caron et al., 2021; Bao
et al., 2021; He et al., 2021). Self-supervised representa-
tions have even enabled completely unsupervised learning
1Meta AI2SambaNova, work done while at Meta AI. Corre-
spondence to: Alexei Baevski <abaevski@fb.com >, Michael Auli
<michaelauli@fb.com >.
Proceedings of the 39thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copy-
right 2022 by the author(s).in tasks such as machine translation (Lample et al., 2018)
and speech recognition (Baevski et al., 2021).
Research in self-supervised algorithms has focused on in-
dividual modalities which results in specific designs and
learning biases. For example, in speech processing, there
is no vocabulary of speech units over which we can define
a self-supervised learning task such as words in NLP1and
therefore several prominent models are equipped with mech-
anisms to learn an inventory of speech units (Baevski et al.,
2020b; Hsu et al., 2021). A similar problem exists for com-
puter vision, where researchers either learn discrete visual
tokens (Radford et al., 2021a; Bao et al., 2021), regress
the input (He et al., 2021) or learn representations invariant
to data augmentation (Chen et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020;
Caron et al., 2021).
While learning biases are certainly helpful, it is often un-
clear whether they will generalize to other modalities. More-
over, leading theories on the biology of learning (Friston &
Kiebel, 2009; Friston, 2010) imply that humans likely use
similar learning processes to understand the visual world as
they do for language. Relatedly, general neural network ar-
chitectures have been shown to perform very well compared
to modality-specific counterparts (Jaegle et al., 2021b).
In an effort to get closer to machines that learn in gen-
eral ways about the environment, we designed data2vec, a
framework for general self-supervised learning that works
for images, speech and text where the learning objective
is identical in each modality. The present work unifies the
learning algorithm but still learns representations individu-
ally for each modality. We hope that a single algorithm will
make future multi-modal learning simpler, more effective
and lead to models that understand the world better through
multiple modalities.
Our method combines masked prediction (Devlin et al.,
2019; Baevski et al., 2020b; Bao et al., 2021) with the learn-
ing of latent target representations (Grill et al., 2020; Caron
et al., 2021) but generalizes the latter by using multiple net-
work layers as targets and shows that this approach works
across several modalities. Specifically, we train an off-the-
1This is true for many languages but not for certain Asian
languages.