A Survey of Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation 51:21
istosplitthetrainingdataintoasmallertrainingsetandavalidationset.Afterrepeatedlyaltering
thehyperparameters,retrainingthemodel,andtestingonthisvalidationsetforeachsetofhyper-
parameters, the model yielding the highest validation set accuracy is selected. Another option is
cross-validation. However, in unsupervised domain adaptation, there are now two domains, and
the data for the target domain may not include any labels. When evaluating domain adaptation
approaches on common datasets, generally the target data does contain labels, so work by some
groups [22,27,124,200,219,244,249] do use some labeled target data (or all of it [ 149,216]) for
hyperparameter tuning, which can be interpreted as an upper bound on how well the method
could perform [ 244]. For example, some [ 27,150] tuned for Office on one Wlabeled example per
class on the A→W task, while others [ 200,249] tuned with a validation set of 1000 randomly
sampledtargetexamples.Usinganylabeledtargetdataisnotidealbecausereal-worldtestingwill
notincludelabelsfortuning(unlessitissemi-supervised,inwhichcasesemi-supervisedlearning
isrecommended in Section 6).
Onetuningmethodnotrequiringlabeledtargetdatais reversevalidation [74],whichisavariant
ofreverse cross validation [285]. For a set of hyperparameters, the reverse validation risk can be
estimatedbyfirstsplittingsource(labeled)andtarget(unlabeled)dataintotrainingandvalidation
sets.Then,thelabeledsourceandunlabeledtargetdataareusedtolearnaclassifier(asisnormally
done). Next, this forward classifier is used to label the target data and a new reverse classifier is
learned(withthesamealgorithm)usingthepseudo-labeledtargetdata(as“source”)andunlabeled
sourcedata(as“target”,i.e.,ignoringtheknownlabels).Thisreverseclassifierisevaluatedonthe
source validation data to measure the reverse validation risk. Ganin et al. [ 74] found this method
works better if the reverse classifier is initialized with the weights of the forward classifier and
if using early stopping on the source validation set and a pseudo-labeled target validation set.
Finally, hyperparameters are selected (e.g., grid search, random search, Bayesian optimization, or
othergradient-freeoptimizationmethods)thatminimize thisreversevalidation risk.
Alternatively, given some domain knowledge, one may devise relevant measures of similarity
between the domains and tune parameters to increase the similarity. For example, French et al.
[69]wereabletoimproveperformanceonthechallengingproblemofMNIST →SVHNbytuning
data augmentation hyperparameters for MNIST to match pixel intensities apparent in the SVHN
dataset.By doingthis,they wereableto improve thestate-of-the-artto97.0%(Table 2).
5 RESULTS
Tables2through5summarize the results of evaluating many of these methods on datasets used
for image classification as well as sentiment analysis. Care must be taken in the extent to which
conclusions are drawn from comparing published numbers in different papers since the provided
accuraciesarefordifferentnetworkarchitectures,hyperparameters,amountofdataaugmentation,
random initializations (or averages over a number of them), etc. and the methods may perform
differently in other application areas. However, interestingly, at least one method in each of the
categoriessurveyedgives promisingresultson atleastone ofthedatasets.
With domain-invariant feature learning with the contrastive domain discrepancy, CAN [ 114]
hasthehighestperformanceontheOfficedataset(Table 3).Byusingadversarialdomain-invariant
featurelearning,WDGRLgenerallyoutperformstheothermethodsontheAmazonreviewdataset
(Table4)andGeneratetoAdaptissecondhighestofthemethodsevaluatedontheOfficedataset.
Byusingadversarialpixel-leveldomainmapping,SBADA-GAN[ 200]obtainsthehighestaccuracy
on MNIST→MNIST-M (Table 2). AutoDIAL [ 27], a normalization statistics method, does on-par
with CAN and Generate to Adapt in two of Office adaptation tasks. The self-ensembling method
by French et al. [ 69] outperforms all other methods on the datasets in Table 2, and Co-DA [ 124]
comes close using an ensemble (of size two) of adversarial domain-invariant feature networks.
ACM Transactions onIntelligentSystems and Technology,Vol. 11,No. 5,Article51.Publicationdate:July 2020.