A Survey of Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation 51:3
cheap-to-generate traffic sign dataset [ 168] with the goal of using it to classify real traffic signs
(e.g., GTSRB [ 223]). In these examples, the source dataset used to train the model is related but
differentfromthetargetdatasetusedtotestthemodel—botharedigitsandsignsrespectively,but
each dataset looks significantly different. When the source and target differ but are related, then
transferlearningcan beappliedtoobtainhigheraccuracyonthetargetdata.
2.1.1 Categorizing Methods. In a transfer learning survey paper, Pan et al. [ 180]d e fi n e dt w o
termstohelpclassifyvarioustransferlearningtechniques:“domain”and“task.”Adomainconsists
of a feature space and a marginal probability distribution (i.e., the features of the data and the
distribution of those features in the dataset). A task consists of a label space and an objective
predictivefunction(i.e.,thesetoflabelsandapredictivefunctionthatislearnedfromthetraining
data). Thus, a transfer learning problem might be either transferring knowledge from a source
domain to a different target domain or transferring knowledge from a source task to a different
targettask(or acombinationof thetwo)[ 62,180,251].
By this definition, a change in domain may result from either a change in feature space or a
change in the marginal probability distribution. When classifying documents using text mining,
a change in the feature space may result from a change in language (e.g., English to Spanish),
whereas a change in the marginal probability distribution may result from a change in document
topics (e.g., computer science to English literature) [ 180]. Similarly, a change in task may result
fromeitherachangeinthelabelspaceorachangeintheobjectivepredictivefunction.Inthecase
of document classification, a change in the label space may result from a change in the number
of classes (e.g., from a set of 10 topic labels to a set of 100 topic labels). Similarly, a change in the
objectivepredictivefunctionmayresultfromasubstantialchangeinthedistributionofthelabels
(e.g., the source domain has 100 instances of class A and 10,000 of class B, whereas the target has
10,000instancesof Aand 100of B)[ 180].
To classify transfer learning algorithms based on whether the task or domain differs between
source and target, Pan and Yang [ 180] introduced three terms: “inductive,” “transductive,” and
“unsupervised” transfer learning. In inductive transfer learning, the target and source tasks are
different, the domains may or may not differ, and some labeled target data are required. In trans-
ductive transfer learning, the tasks remain the same while the domains are different, and both
labeledsourcedataandunlabeledtargetdataarerequired.Finally,inunsupervisedtransferlearn-
ing, the tasks differ as in the inductive case, but there is no requirement of labeled data in either
thesourcedomain orthetargetdomain.
2.1.2 Domain Adaptation. One popular type of transfer learning is domain adaptation ,w h i c h
will be the focus of our survey. Domain adaptation is a type of transductive transfer learning.
Here,thetargettaskremainsthesameasthesource,butthedomaindiffers[ 56,180,182].Homo-
geneousdomainadaptationisthecasewherethedomainfeaturespacealsoremainsthesame,and
heterogeneousdomain adaptationis thecasewherethefeaturespacesdiffer [ 182].
In addition to the previous terminology, machine learning techniques are often categorized
based on whether or not labeled training data are available. Supervised learning assumes labeled
data are available, semi-supervised learning uses both labeled data and unlabeled data, and un-
supervised learning uses only unlabeled data. However, domain adaptation assumes data comes
from both a source domain and a target domain. Thus, prepending one of these three terms to
“domain adaptation” is ambiguous since it may refer to labeled data being available in the source
ortarget domains.
Authorsapplythesetermsinvariouswaystodomainadaptation[ 55,111,180,203,251].Inthis
article,wewillreferto“unsupervised”domainadaptationasthecaseinwhichbothlabeledsource
data and unlabeled target data are available, “semi-supervised” domain adaptation as the case in
ACM Transactions onIntelligentSystems and Technology,Vol. 11,No. 5,Article51.Publicationdate:July 2020.