A Survey of Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation 51:15
domain-invariant features like DANN (Section 3.1), typically the data fed to the feature extractor
is either source or target data. However, Wei and Hsu [ 249] propose to alternate this with feed-
ing generated (fake) images and appending a “fake” label to the task classifier, thus repurposing
the task classifier as a GAN discriminator. They found this to have the effect of moving the deci-
sion boundaries in the target domain into areas of lower density with a GAN, promoting target-
discriminativefeaturesasa result.
Saito et al. [ 204] propose adversarial dropout regularization. Since dropout is stochastic, when
they create two instances of the task classifier containing dropout, the resulting networks may
produce different predictions. The difference between these predictions can be viewed as a dis-
criminator. Using this discriminator to adversarially train the feature extractor has the effect of
producingtargetdiscriminativefeatures.Leeetal.[ 134]alteradversarialdropouttobetterhandle
convolutionallayers bydroppingchannel-wiseratherthanelement-wise.
3.6 Combinations
In recent work, researchers have proposed various combinations of the above methods. Domain
mapping has been combined with domain-invariant feature learning methods either trained sep-
arately (in GraspGAN [ 20]) or jointly (in CyCADA [ 97]). Following AdaBN, many researchers
started employing domain-specific batch normalization [ 20,69,114,124,136]. Kumar et al.
[124] propose co-regularized alignment (Co-DA), an approach in which two separate adver-
sarial domain-invariant feature networks are learned with different feature spaces, drawing on
ensemble-based methods. Kang et al. [ 115] combine domain mapping with aligning the models’
attention by minimizing an attention-based discrepancy. Deng et al. [ 59] combine target discrim-
inativemethodswithself-ensembling.Leeetal.[ 132]combinetargetdiscriminativemethodsand
domain-invariant featurelearningwitha slicedWassersteinmetric.
Multi-adversarialdomainadaptation(MADA)[ 183]combinesadversarialdomain-invariantfea-
turelearningwithensemblemethodsforthepurposeofbetterhandlingmulti-modaldata.Thisis
accomplished by incorporating a separate discriminator for each class and using the task classi-
fier’ssoftmaxprobabilitytoweightthelossfromeachdiscriminatorforunlabeledtargetsamples.
Saito et al. [ 205] combine elements of adversarial domain-invariant feature learning, ensem-
ble methods, and target discriminative features in their maximum classifier discrepancy (MCD)
method. They propose using a shared feature extractor followed by an ensemble (of size two) of
task-specificclassifiers,wherethediscrepancybetweenpredictionsmeasureshowfaroutsidethe
support of the source domain the target samples lie. The discriminator in this setup is the com-
bination of the two classifiers. The feature extractor is trained to minimize the discrepancy (i.e.,
fool the classifiers that the samples are from the source domain) while the classifiers are trained
tomaximize thediscrepancyonthetarget samples.
4 COMPONENTS
Table1summarizes the neural network-based domain adaptation methods we discuss showing
components each method uses including what type of adaptation, which loss functions, whether
the method uses a generator, and which weights are shared. Below we discuss each of these as-
pects followed by how the networks are trained, what types of networks can be used, multi-level
adaptationtechniques,andhow totunethehyperparametersofthesemethods.
4.1 Losses
4.1.1 Distance. Distance functions play a variety of roles in domain adaptation losses. A dis-
tancelosscanbeusedtoaligntwodistributionsbyminimizingadistancefunction(e.g.,MMD)as
explainedinSection 3.1.Ifusinganensemble,minimizingadistancefunctioncanaligntheoutputs
ACM Transactions onIntelligentSystems and Technology,Vol. 11,No. 5,Article51.Publicationdate:July 2020.