A Survey of Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation 51:11
methodisCycleGAN[ 289],whichisbasedonpix2pix,ormethodssimilartoCycleGANincluding
DualGAN [ 263]and DiscoGAN[ 118].
Numerous modifications to these approaches have been proposed: one that is multi-modal is
MUNIT,amulti-modalunsupervisedimage-to-imagetranslator[ 105].Byassumingadecomposi-
tion into style (domain-specific) and content (domain-invariant) codes, MUNIT can generate di-
verse outputs for a given input image (e.g., multiple possible output images corresponding to the
same input image). A modification to CycleGAN explored by Li et al. [ 136] uses separate batch
normalization for each domain (an idea similar to AdaBN discussed in Section 3.3). Mejjati et al.
[3] and Chen et al. [ 38] improve results with attention, learning which areas of the images on
whichtofocus.Shangetal.[ 214]improveresultsbyfeedingthemappedimagesintoadenoising
autoencoder.WhileCycleGANandsimilarapproachesusetwogenerators,oneforeachmapping
direction, Benaim et al. [ 14] developed a method for one-sided mapping that maintains distances
between pairs of samples when mapped from the source to the target domain rather than (or in
addition to) using a cycle consistency loss, and Fu et al. [ 70] developed an alternative one-sided
mapping using a geometric constraint (e.g., vertical flipping or 90 degree rotation). Royer et al.
[196] propose XGAN, a dual adversarial autoencoder capable of handling large domain shifts,
where possibly an image in the source domain may correspond to multiple images in the target
domainorviceversa.Theytestedmappinghumanfacestocartoonfaces,whichwasashiftlarger
thanCycleGANcouldadequatelyhandle.Choietal.[ 41]proposeStarGAN,amethodforhandling
multiple domains with a single GAN. Approaches like CycleGAN need a separate generator (or
two, one for each direction) for each pair of domains, which is not a scalable solution to many
domains. StarGAN, on the other hand, only needs a single generator. This has the added benefit
of allowing the generator to learn using all the available data rather than only the data in a spe-
cificpairofdomains.Duringtrainingtheyrandomlypickatargetdomainateachiterationsothe
generator learns to generate images in all the domains. Anoosheh et al. [ 4] propose an approach
designedfor thesame purposeasStarGAN butusingonegeneratorperdomain.
3.2.2 Image-to-ImageTranslationforDomainAdaptation. Whiletheaboveapproachesmapim-
ages from one domain to another without the explicit purpose of performing domain adaptation,
theycanalsobeusedfordomainadaptation.Forexample,theoriginalCycleGANpaperwasappli-
cationagnostic,butothershaveexperimentedwithapplyingCycleGANtodomainadaptation[ 14,
70,97]. It is important to note though that these image-to-image translation approaches assume
thatthedomain differencesareprimarilylow-level [ 20,21,240].
If unsupervised domain adaptation is performed for classification, adaptation can be accom-
plished by training an image-to-image translation GAN to map data from source to target, train-
ingaclassifieronthemappedsourceimageswithknownlabels,andthensubsequentlytestingby
feeding unlabeled target through this target-domain classifier [ 20,138,218], as done in SimGAN
[218] and illustrated in Figure 5(a). Alternatively, rather than learning a mapping from source to
target,theoppositecouldbedone:learnamappingfromtargettosource,trainaclassifieronthe
source images with known labels, and test by feeding target images to the image-to-image trans-
lationmodel(tomakethemlooklikesourceimages)followedbythesource-domainclassifier[ 32],
asillustratedin Figure 5(b).
In either of these approaches, if the mapping and the classification models are learned inde-
pendently, the class assignments may not be preserved. For instance, class 1 may end up being
“renamed” to class 2 after the mapping since the mapping was learned ignoring the class labels.
Thisissuecanberesolvedbyincorporatingasemanticconsistencyloss(seeSection 4.1)andtrain-
ingthemappingandclassificationmodelsjointly [ 22,97],asdone inPixelDA [ 21].
ACM Transactions onIntelligentSystems and Technology,Vol. 11,No. 5,Article51.Publicationdate:July 2020.