51
A Survey of Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation
GARRETTWILSON and DIANEJ.COOK, WashingtonState UniversityPullman, Washington
Deep learning has produced state-of-the-art results for a variety of tasks. While such approaches for super-
vised learning have performed well, they assume that training and testing data are drawn from the same
distribution, which may not always be the case. As a complement to this challenge, single-source unsuper-
vised domain adaptation can handle situations where a network is trained on labeled data from a source
domain and unlabeled data from a related but different target domain with the goal of performing well at
test-time on the target domain. Many single-source and typically homogeneous unsupervised deep domain
adaptationapproacheshavethusbeendeveloped,combiningthepowerful,hierarchicalrepresentationsfrom
deeplearningwithdomainadaptationtoreducerelianceonpotentiallycostlytargetdatalabels.Thissurvey
willcomparetheseapproachesbyexaminingalternativemethods,theuniqueandcommonelements,results,
andtheoretical insights.We followthiswith a lookat application areas andopen research directions.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference →Surveys and overviews ;•Computing methodologies →
Transferlearning ;Unsupervisedlearning ;Neuralnetworks ;Adversariallearning ;
Additional KeyWords and Phrases:Domain adaptation, deep learning,generative adversarial networks
ACM Reference format:
Garrett Wilson and Diane J. Cook. 2020. A Survey of Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation. ACM Trans.
Intell.Syst.Technol. 11,5, Article 51(July2020), 46 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3400066
1 INTRODUCTION
Supervised learning is arguably the most prevalent type of machine learning and has enjoyed
muchsuccessacrossdiverseapplicationareas.However,manysupervisedlearningmethodsmake
acommonassumption:thetrainingandtestingdataaredrawnfromthesamedistribution.When
this constraint is violated, a classifier trained on the source domain will likely experience a drop
in performance when tested on the target domain due to the differences between domains [ 182].
Single-source domain adaptation refers to the goal of learning a concept from labeled data in a
source domain that performs well on a different but related target domain [ 74,81,180].Unsuper-
viseddomain adaptation specifically addresses the situation where there are labeled source data
and only unlabeledtargetdataavailable for useduringtraining[ 74,147].
Because of its ability to adapt labeled data for use in a new application, domain adaptation can
reducetheneedforcostlylabeleddatainthetargetdomain.Asanexample,considertheproblemof
semanticallysegmentingimages.EachrealimageintheCityscapesdatasetrequiredapproximately
This materialis basedupon work supported bythe NationalScience Foundation under GrantNos. 1543656and1734558.
Authors’addresses:G.WilsonandD.J.Cook,WashingtonStateUniversity,SchoolofElectricalEngineeringandComputer
Science, Pullman,WA, 99164;emails:{garrett.wilson,djcook}@wsu.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2020Association forComputingMachinery.
2157-6904/2020/07-ART51$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3400066
ACM Transactions onIntelligentSystems and Technology,Vol. 11,No. 5,Article51.Publicationdate:July 2020.