A Survey of Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation 51:5
Fig.1. RealisticbutentirelysyntheticimagesofhumanfacesgeneratedbyaGANtrainedontheCelebA-HQ
dataset [116].
been applied to synthetic image generation, but recently researchers have been exploring other
novelusecasessuchas domain adaptation.
GANs are a type of deep generative model [ 82]. For synthetic image generation, a training
dataset of images must be available. Popular datasets include human faces (CelebA [ 146]), hand-
written digits (MNIST [ 130]), bedrooms (LSUN [ 267]), and sets of other objects (CIFAR-10 [ 123]
and ImageNet [ 57,199]). After training, the generative model will be able to generate synthetic
imagesthatresemblethoseinthetrainingdata.Forexample,ageneratortrainedwithCelebAwill
generate images of human faces that look realistic but are not images of real people, as shown in
Figure1.Tolearntodothis,GANsutilizetwoneuralnetworkscompetingagainsteachother[ 82].
Onenetworkrepresentsagenerator.Thegeneratoracceptsanoisevectorasinput,whichcontains
randomvaluesdrawnfromsomedistributionsuchasnormaloruniform.Thegoalofthegenerator
network is to output a vector that is indistinguishable from the real training data. The other net-
workrepresentsadiscriminator,whichacceptsasinputeitherarealsamplefromthetrainingdata
orafakesamplefromthegenerator.Thegoalofthediscriminatoristodeterminetheprobability
that the input sample is real. During training, these two networks play a minimax game, where
thegeneratortriestofoolthediscriminatorandthediscriminatorattemptstonot befooled.
Using the notation from Goodfellow et al. [ 82], we define a value function V(G,D)employed
by theminimax game betweenthetwo networks:
min
Gmax
DV(D,G)=Ex∼pdata(x)[logD(x)]+Ez∼pz(z)[log(1−D(G(z)))] (1)
Here,x∼pdata(x)draws a sample from the real data distribution, z∼pz(z)draws a sample
from the input noise, D(x;θd)is the discriminator, and G(z;θд)is the generator. As shown in
the equation, the goal is to find the parameters θdthat maximize the log probability of correctly
discriminating between real ( x) and fake ( G(z)) samples while at the same time finding the pa-
rameters θдthat minimize the log probability of 1 −D(G(z)). The term, D(G(z)),represents the
probability that generated data G(z)is real. If the discriminator correctly classifies a fake input,
thenD(G(z))=0.Equation( 1)minimizesthequantity1 −D(G(z)).Thisoccurswhen D(G(z))=1,
orwhenthediscriminatormisclassifiesthegenerator’soutputasarealsample.Thus,thediscrim-
inator’s mission is to learn to correctly classify the input as real or fake while the generator tries
to fool the discriminator into thinking that its generated output is real. This process is illustrated
in Figure 2.
ACM Transactions onIntelligentSystems and Technology,Vol. 11,No. 5,Article51.Publicationdate:July 2020.