A Survey of Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation 51:9
Another divergence measure arises from graph matching: the problem of finding an optimal
correspondence between graphs [ 259]. A feature extractor’s output on a batch of samples can be
viewedasanundirectedgraph(intheformofanadjacencymatrix),wheresimilarsamplesinthe
batchareconnected.Giventhegraphfromabatchofsourcedatafedthroughthefeatureextractor
and similarly a graph from a batch of target data, then the cost of aligning these graphs can be
usedasa divergence,asproposedbyDas etal.[ 52–54].
3.1.2 Reconstruction. Rather than minimizing a divergence, Ghifary et al. [ 77] and Bousmalis
etal.[22]hypothesizethatalignmentcanbeaccomplishedbylearningarepresentationthatboth
classifies the labeled source domain data well and can be used to reconstruct either the target
domain data (Ghifary et al.) or both the source and target domain data (Bousmalis et al.). The
alignment component in these setups is a reconstruction network – the opposite of the feature
extractor network – that takes the feature extractor output and recreates the feature extractor’s
input (in this case, an image). Ghifary et al. [ 77] propose deep reconstruction-classification net-
works(DRCN),usingapair-wisesquaredreconstructionloss.Bousmalisetal.[ 22]proposedomain
separationnetworks(DSN),usingascale-invariantmean squarederrorreconstructionloss.
3.1.3 Adversarial. Several varieties of feature-level adversarial domain adaptation methods
have been introduced in the literature. In most, the alignment component consists of a domain
classifier.In one article, this component is instead representedby a network learning an approxi-
mate Wassersteindistance,and in anotherarticlethecomponentisa GAN.
A domain classifier is a classifier that outputs whether the feature representation was gener-
ated from source or target data. Recall that GANs include a discriminator that tries to accurately
predict whether a sample is from the real data distribution or from the generator. In other words,
the discriminator differentiates between two distributions, one real and one fake. A discrimina-
torcouldsimilarlybedesignedtodifferentiatetwodistributionswhichinsteadrepresentasource
distribution and a target distribution, as is done with a domain classifier. Note though that an
adversarial domain classifier is used for adaptation, whereas a GAN is used for data generation.
Thedomainclassifieristrainedtocorrectlyclassifythedomain(sourceortarget).Inthisscenario,
the feature extractor is trained such that the domain classifier is unable to classify from which
domainthefeaturerepresentationoriginated.Thisisatypeofzero-sumtwo-playergame[ 279]as
inaGAN(Section 2.2).Typically,thesenetworksareadversariallytrainedbyalternatingbetween
thesetwosteps.Thefeatureextractorcanbetrainedtomakethedomainclassifierperformpoorly
by negating the gradient from the domain classifier with a gradient reversal layer [73] when per-
forming back propagation to update the feature extractor weights (e.g., in DANN [ 1,73,74]a n d
VRADA[ 189]),maximallyconfusingthedomainclassifier(whenitoutputsauniformdistribution
over binary labels [ 239]), or inverting the labels (in ADDA [ 240]). Because data distributions are
oftenmulti-modal,resultsmaybeimprovedbyconditioningthedomainclassifieronamultilinear
mapofthefeaturerepresentationandthetaskclassifierpredictions,whichtakesintoaccountthe
multi-modal natureof thedistributions[ 148].
Shen et al. [ 216] created WDGRL, a modification of DANN, by replacing the domain classifier
withanetworkthatlearnsanapproximateWassersteindistance.Thisdistanceisthenminimized
between source and target domains, which they found to yield an improvement. This method is
similartothedivergencemethodsexceptherethedivergenceislearnedwithanetworkratherthan
computed based on statistics (e.g., using mean in MMD or covariance in CORAL). This method
outperformstheothermethodson theAmazon review datasetas showninTable 4.
Sankaranarayanan et al. [ 207] propose Generate to Adapt that uses a GAN as the alignment
component. The feature extractor output is both fed to a classifier trained to predict the label (if
the input is from the source domain) and also to a GAN trained to generate source-like images
ACM Transactions onIntelligentSystems and Technology,Vol. 11,No. 5,Article51.Publicationdate:July 2020.