A Survey of Unsupervised Deep Domain Adaptation 51:19
segmentation,Chenetal.[ 40]developadistillationlossinadditiontoperforminglocation-aware
alignment(e.g.,“road”isusuallyatthebottomofeachimage),Hoffmanetal.[ 98]developaclass-
aware constrained multiple instance loss, Zhang et al. [ 275] develop a curriculum where after
learning some high-level properties on easy tasks the segmentation network is forced to follow
those properties (interpretations include student-teacher setup or posterior regularization), and
Perone et al. [ 185] apply the self-ensembling method [ 69] replacing the cross-entropy loss with
a consistency loss. For object detection, Chen et al. [ 39] use two domain classifiers (one on an
image-level representation and the other on an instance-level representation) with a consistency
regularizationbetweenthem.Foradaptationfromsyntheticimageswhereitisknownwhichpixels
are foreground in the source images, Bousmalis et al. [ 21] and Bak et al. [ 11] mask certain losses
toonlypenalizeforegroundpixeldifferences.Forpersonre-identification,Weietal.[ 250]include
a personidentity-keepingconstraintintheirdomain mappingGAN.
4.2 Low-Confidence or Low-Relevance Rejection
Givenameasureofconfidence,performancemayincreaseifwecanrejectdatapointsfortraining
the target classifier that are not of sufficient confidence. This, of course, assumes our confidence
measurementisaccurateenough.Saitoetal.[ 203]usedthelabelagreementofanensemblecom-
binedwiththesoftmaxdistributionoutput(uniformisnotconfident,oneprobabilitymuchhigher
thantherestisconfident).Seneretal.[ 213]usedthelabelagreementofthe knearestsourcedata
points. If the confidence is too low, then the example is rejected and not used in training until,
when it is re-evaluated in subsequent iterations, it is determined to be sufficiently confident. In-
oue et al. [ 107] used an object detector’s prediction probability as a measure of confidence, only
using high-confidence detections for fine-tuning an object detection network. Similarly, a rejec-
tionapproachcouldbeusedifwehaveameasureofrelevance.Fortextclassification,Zhangetal.
[274] weighed examples by their relevance to their target aspect based on a small set of positive
and negativekeywords(a formof weaksupervision).
4.3 Weight Sharing
Methods employ different amounts of sharing network weights between domains or regularizing
theweightstobesimilar.Mostmethodscompletelyshareweightsbetweenthefeatureextractors
used on the source and target domains (as shown in Table 1). However, some techniques do not.
Sincedeepnetworksconsistofmanylayers,allowingthemtorepresenthierarchicalfeatures,Long
et al. [147] propose copying the lower layers from a network trained on the source domain and
adapting higher layers to the target domain with MK-MMD since higher layers do not transfer
well between domains. In CoGAN, Liu et al. [ 143] share the first few layers of the generators and
the last few layers of the discriminators, making the assumption that the domains share high-
level representations. In AdaBN, Li et al. [ 141] assume domain knowledge is stored in the batch
norm statistics, so they share all weights except for the batch norm statistics. French et al. [ 69]
define the teacher network as an exponential moving average of the student network’s weights
(atypeofensemble).Insteadofsharingweights,Rozantsevetal.[ 197,198]proposetwovariants:
regularizingweightstobesimilarbutnotpenalizinglineartransformationsandtransformingthe
weights from the source network to the target network with small residual networks. Bousmalis
etal.[22]proposedomainseparationnetworks(DSN):learningsource-specific,target-specific,and
shared features where the “shared” source domain encoder and “shared” target domain encoder
do share weights, but the “private” source domain encoder and “private” target domain encoders
do not.Othershavesimilarly exploredthisideaof sharedvs.specificfeatures[ 25,144,193].
ACM Transactions onIntelligentSystems and Technology,Vol. 11,No. 5,Article51.Publicationdate:July 2020.