Within the Australian AI ethics principles [ 2], the Privacy
Protection and Security principle covers seemingly closely
related topics. However, in practice the two notions of secu rity
and privacy are distinct, and can be treated as two separate
principles in the proposed design notes in order to better
match developers’ understanding and practice. Security in
this context typically means security at the software and
deployment level, where best practices in software enginee ring
and deployment can be used. Privacy protection in the contex t
of AI systems involves the careful treatment of sensitive da ta,
where approaches speciﬁc to AI need to be used. This includes
approaches such as federated machine learning, deidentiﬁc a-
tion, and differential privacy. Using these approaches may
affect the utility (e.g., accuracy and reliability) of AI sy stems,
and hence must be carefully considered and weighed against
the degree of required privacy protection.
A related compounding problem exists in the Transparency
and Explainability principle, where the two components have
distinct meanings. Yet from the developers’ perspective, t he
two components were often observed to be interchangeable
and interpreted often to mean Explainability , resulting in
theTransparency component being de-emphasised. In order
to address this downside, the Transparency component can
be separated into a separate stand-alone principle within t he
proposed design notes. While it may be tempting to join
Transparency with the related Contestability principle, from
developers’ perspective these two principles are distinct tasks
and hence require separate solutions. In a similar vein, the
Reliability and Safety principle covers two related yet distinct
issues, which may be better treated separately.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this interview study, the unique requirements, constrai nts
and objectives of the diverse range of projects that partic-
ipants have been involved in provide valuable insights into
the complexities of designing and developing responsible, or
ethical, AI systems. Using high-level AI principles propos ed
by the Australian Government provided a structure for the
analysis and discussions, which in turn yielded insight int o
how the ethics principles were interpreted in the context of
the professional experience of the participants.
A notable challenge that emerged was balancing the ten-
sions and trade-offs that were inherent to using the princip les1.
Tensions were highlighted between the practical approache s
used for implementing privacy and security, transparency a nd
explainability, as well as accuracy. For example, techniqu es
may be used to develop an AI system that provides highly
accurate outputs with the caveat that those outputs are not
explicitly explainable. Similarly, the development of a hi ghly
explainable AI system may be vulnerable to privacy risks. In
these cases, a choice can be made to prioritise one set of valu es
over another [ 73].
1In follow-up work we have examined in more detail various tra de-offs and
frameworks for resolving them [ 57], [58].Weighing the risks and beneﬁts of such decisions requires
the implementation of supportive mechanisms and should not
fall to the designers and developers of AI systems alone [ 62].
The ability to assess risk was also presented as critical acr oss
the interviews as a way to gauge the degree of oversight,
accountability, reliability and explainability required for an AI
system.
We note that the existence of the principles alone does
not guarantee ethical AI [ 45]. Further infrastructure, beyond
the organisational level, may be required to build the capa-
bility and capacity of AI developers and designers to create
responsible AI [ 62]. High-level support and governance of
AI development to support the practice of implementing
principles is required. Such support could be in the form
of professional codes and regulatory frameworks, as well as
legal and professional accountability mechanisms to uphol d
professional standards and provide users with redress for
negligent behaviour [ 45].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank our colleagues (Andreas Duenser,
Liming Zhu, Ross Darnell, Dan Gladish) for reviewing drafts
of this work. We would also like to thank the anonymous
reviewers for comments and suggestions that led to the im-
provements of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] M. J. Asher, B. F. W. Croke, A. J. Jakeman, and L. J. M. Peete rs.
A review of surrogate models and their application to ground water
modeling. Water Resources Research , 51(8):5957–5973, 2015.
[2] Australian Government Dept. Industry, Science and Reso urces.
Australia’s Artiﬁcial Intelligence Ethics Framework, 201 9.
Online. URL: https://industry.gov.au/publications/aus tralias-artiﬁcial-
intelligence-ethics-framework (accessed: 12 Apr 2023).
[3] Australian Research Data Commons. Data management plan s, 2022.
Online. URL: https://ardc.edu.au/resources/aboutdata/ data-management-
plans (accessed: 21 Sep 2022).
[4] A. Barredo Arrieta, N. D´ ıaz-Rodr´ ıguez, J. Del Ser, A. B ennetot,
S. Tabik, A. Barbado, S. Garcia, S. Gil-Lopez, D. Molina, R. B enjamins,
R. Chatila, and F. Herrera. Explainable artiﬁcial intellig ence (XAI):
Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges towar d responsible
AI.Information Fusion , 58:82–115, 2020.
[5] R. K. E. Bellamy, K. Dey, M. Hind, S. C. Hoffman, S. Houde, e t al.
AI Fairness 360: An extensible toolkit for detecting, under standing, and
mitigating unwanted algorithmic bias. arXiv:1810.01943 , 2018.
[6] C. M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning . Springer,
2006.
[7] A. Bolt, C. Sanderson, J. J. Dabrowski, C. Huston, and P. K uhnert.
A neural emulator for uncertainty estimation of ﬁre propaga tion.
Procedia Computer Science , 222:367–376, 2023.
[8] V . Braun and V . Clarke. Using thematic analysis in psycho logy.
Qualitative Research in Psychology , 3(2):77–101, 2006.
[9] V . Braun, V . Clarke, N. Hayﬁeld, and G. Terry. Thematic An alysis.
InHandbook of Research Methods in Health Social Sciences , pages
843–860. Springer, 2019.
[10] J. Buolamwini and T. Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectio nal accuracy
disparities in commercial gender classiﬁcation. In Conference on
Fairness, Accountability and Transparency , pages 77–91, 2018.
[11] C. Cath. Governing artiﬁcial intelligence: ethical, l egal and techni-
cal opportunities and challenges. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sc iences ,
376(2133):20180080, 2018.