F . Accountability
The participants interpreted this principle as accountabi lity
for the methods and data used by an AI system, as well as
the outputs of the system.
Accountability relates to transparency and explainabilit y;
giving an explanation for an AI system was seen as a re-
quirement for being accountable for it. Evaluating the syst em
through test data is important for accountability. There is no
consensus on who is accountable for the outcomes of decision s
made based on the system’s recommendations. Accountabilit y
is also associated with reliability and safety, and is seen a s
important for the acceptance of autonomous systems. For in-
digenous collaborators and co-creators, accountability e xtends
beyond the outputs of the system itself to the beneﬁts of the
larger process that the AI system is embedded within.
A possible complicating factor in accountability is that so me
AI systems may continue to learn post-deployment, using,
for example, data provided by users. If there are issues with
the new data, the accountability boundary is blurred betwee n
the original developers of such systems and the users of the
systems.
Accountability is expected to be role-level and associated
with traceability and reproducibility. AI systems may prov ide
end users a method to track their historical use of the system
(e.g., to discover faults through an immutable log) and allo w
them to provide feedback. Handover points in the developmen t
process may be identiﬁed to ensure traceability and account -
ability, as handover points are where traceability may be lo st.
If a method developed by design works for a particular
client for a speciﬁc dataset, it is challenging to maintain
reproducibility. In current practice, project leaders hav e to
describe why they want to use data, how they are going to
use it, what they are going to do with the data, what are the
risks, what is the consent, who is going to have access to that
data, for how long you are going to keep it, and what happens
to the data at the end of the project. This current practice ma y
be augmented by introducing a reproducibility checklist that
provides the information necessary to reproduce the output of
an AI system. This checklist may include:
•how the data was pre-processed
•how the data was scaled or normalised
•the approaches used to mitigate biases (see Section V-D)
•how hyperparameters were conﬁgured in the model
•the algorithms chosen for use in the system
•the choice of prediction variables
•the numerical representation of categorical data
•how correlation between variables was handled
Domain knowledge needs to be reﬂected within the AI
system. There may be various versions of domain knowledge
frameworks that may be useful to employ in AI systems that
operate in specialised domains.
Collaboration and co-creation of AI projects with groups
who are end-users or signiﬁcantly affected by the system’soutput is a powerful means of making these systems ac-
countable to them. Techniques from participatory design, c o-
design (collaborative design) and citizen-led projects ma y be
useful to consider for AI projects with signiﬁcant communit y
impacts [ 66], [68], [71].
G. Human-Centred Values
Human values within projects are rarely stated explicitly,
and may not be apparent within projects where the AI system
does not interact with human users. Principles such as Fairness
and Privacy can be useful for ensuring that AI systems
are aligned with human values. AI projects co-created with
Indigenous people should reﬂect Indigenous worldviews and
knowledge practices.
Human values have been well studied within software
engineering [ 70], [33], [72], where Schwartz’s well-evidenced
set of universal values are used [ 59], [60]. The resulting
approaches can be adapted to address human values and
concerns in AI systems. Human-centred values may also be
partially addressed by fostering diversity within develop ment
teams, as a wide range of perspectives can identify potentia l
concerns about how the system may affect people’s rights.
Indigenous cultural and intellectual property rights know l-
edge sharing protocols and practices need to be respected
and protected. As such, Indigenous people should co-design
AI projects to ensure the incorporation of Indigenous knowl -
edge systems and governance systems. The CARE principles
(Collective Beneﬁt, Authority to Control, Responsibility and
Ethics) for Indigenous data governance [ 54], and the Our
Knowledge Our Way best practice guidelines [ 76] can enable
the combination of Indigenous knowledge, science and AI
system design to be woven together, in order to empower
Indigenous people and decision-making. Examples of how to
translate CARE principles into AI system design are given
in [55]. In turn, this may help with the implementation of
other principles, such as Privacy Protection and Security , and
Accountability .
It may be necessary to perform due diligence into potential
reputational risks for an organisation by working with par-
ticular business partners in controversial applications o f AI
systems, such as dual-use and defence applications.
H. Human, Social and Environmental (HSE) Well-being
Existing and potential future applications of AI were men-
tioned as a risk for human well-being. Privacy was mentioned
as an aspect of human well-being. Uncertainty about the
social impact of new technologies was also mentioned. En-
vironmental well-being was seen as a motivation for project s
that use environmental data, and was seen as important to
clients. Social well-being was an important aspect of proje cts
that involve Indigenous people. The effects of deploying an
AI system may be recorded to better understand the beneﬁts
gained and burdens imposed by introducing the system.