P19). The access restrictions attached to sensitive data ma y
prevent projects from proceeding: “sometimes early meetin gs
with potential customers [...], we’ll raise that quite earl y as
saying, what data do you have and what’s the access like to
that data? Because sometimes that’s the gatekeeper for con-
tinuing the project or not” (P17). Concerns were raised abou t
provision of data to third parties without explicit agreeme nt:
“I gave you data and I consent for a particular application
and that’s it. If somebody else wants my data they should ask
me” (P11).
One interviewee suggested that access to sensitive data
can be partial and conditional: “[y]ou can [allow] certain
applications to access certain areas of your genome. So if it ’s
a research project [...] you might enable them to see the whol e
data at the same time” (P03). Furthermore, in the context of
genomics, the data would be encrypted and “you as the patient
own the [decryption] key” (P03).
Privacy concerns differ from project to project (P10). Acci -
dental collection of sensitive data was mentioned as an issu e
for autonomous systems (P12, P13). Projects that involve
Indigenous data need to respect the cultural context of that
data: “[s]o when we talk to Indigenous people about where
data is and who owns it and who can beneﬁt from it, it gets
affected by things like whose country it is, whose knowledge
is going to be part of that, is it gendered spaces, is it sacred
spaces that we are looking at?” (P14).
B. Reliability and Safety
Participants often mentioned that the quality and amount
of training data is very important. One interview noted that
“if you’re training a model with not a lot of data and you
come across an edge case, you can actually get some really
weird results” (P09). Obtaining a sufﬁcient number of sampl es
can be challenging, as obtaining one sample can be high
in terms of both ﬁnancial cost and time cost in domains
such as genomics (P03). Furthermore, awareness of potentia l
mismatches between training data and data used during de-
ployment is necessary to prevent the trained model from bein g
unsuitable for its intended purpose (P04, P18). During syst em
development, it is also important to consider how to respond
to incomplete data: “[D]o we just operate in its absence or do
we assume it’s true or assume it’s false or make some other
determination?” (P16). Hidden variables that aren’t captu red
within the data are a signiﬁcant problem (P02).
Prior information can be used to reduce the need for large
amounts of training data. “So, if you have a weather model,
climate model, and some chemistry process, built inside, th en
you probably need the less of this data” (P02). However, usin g
prior information can be difﬁcult within machine learning
models. “[Y]ou can say it’s a prior model, [...] but it’s
drawn from [...] scientiﬁc literature, or based on the exper t
knowledge, but it’s really hard to see that [it’s] some nice
distribution that you can easily put into the model” (P02).
One interviewee pointed out that there might be multiple AI
algorithms suitable for a task, and developers need to asses spotential candidates according to several categories (P09 ).
Instead of focusing only on accuracy, there are “trade-offs in
terms of data complexity versus accuracy” (P09). Furthermo re,
robustness can be adversely affected: “the push for accurac y is
not always beneﬁcial, because it can include complexity and
perturbation effects, [...] and then you have these situati ons
that basically explode because of their complexity” (P09).
Within the ﬁeld of autonomous systems, it was noted that
although machine learning is a trend and works well for many
types of applications (e.g., recognition), it is important to
ﬁnd the right mix of traditional proven technology and newer
machine learning technology (P12).
Bugs in the implementation of AI systems can produce
“erroneous results, erroneous inferences, [and] could hav e led
to dangerous decisions downstream” (P16). Failing safely i s
deemed to be of prime importance and is considered “as you’re
building the system” (P16). However, “there’s only so much
you can think ahead, about what those failure modes might
be” (P16).
As degradation of system performance may occur during
deployment, AI systems may need recalibrated on new data.
“If you build a model on 10 year old data, then you’re not
representing the current state of risks for certain disease . [...] as
a minimum, [recalibration] on new data would probably be [.. .]
more meaningful” (P18). Furthermore, the systems may need
to be completely rebuilt to properly take advantage of newer
and/or more comprehensive data which was not considered
during the initial deployment (P18).
AI systems were also noted as being difﬁcult to verify:
“you can always have a pure statistics approach and build the
system and let it run in the environment. But when do you
have a complete assessment really? Especially with systems
that change over time and based on sensory input [...] it’s
very difﬁcult” (P12). How AI models may be veriﬁed will
depend on their context. Where ML models are being used
to emulate existing processes, expert judgement is necessa ry
to determine how close the model’s predictions are to the
modelled process (P04).
The element of safety also extends to the physical context
within which an AI system will be used. As one participant
explained, “it’s not just the AI data that has to be safe, it’s
actually its application and use [...] reliability and safe ty,
throughout its whole life cycle and its application into the
real world become really critical questions” (P14). Expert s in
all associated disciplines (hardware engineers, software engi-
neers, end users, and other stakeholders) should be involve d
in the design (P12). AI developers rely on domain experts to
ascertain whether the AI system is correctly following exis ting
legal rules in the application domain (P06).
Tracking the use of an AI system has been suggested
as useful for building user trust in the reliability of the
system (P15). Furthermore, in conjunction with the ability
to override the system’s suggestions, usage tracking would
allow users to note the differences in outcomes: “[the syste m]