suggestions to enhance associated support mechanisms at
organisational and design levels. Concluding statements a re
given in Section VII.
II. R ELATED WORK
The development and deployment of responsible AI requires
users to adopt a largely implicit set of high-level ethics pr inci-
ples into explicit practices. High-level principles such a s trans-
parency and explainability may require various approaches to
implement within an AI system depending on its purpose and
the user requirements [ 4]. However, the availability of useful
ethical design speciﬁcations for AI designers and develope rs
is currently lacking [ 48], with a recent review highlighting
various limitations [ 47]. These limitations include the lack
of methods that support the proactive design of transparent ,
explainable and accountable systems, in contrast to the les s
useful post-hoc explanations of system outputs. Existing m eth-
ods overemphasised AI ‘explicability’ (which is necessary but
not sufﬁcient for transparency and explainability), and sk ewed
to assessing the impact of an AI system on individuals rather
than on society or groups. Finally, the examined methods wer e
found to be difﬁcult to implement and typically positioned a s
discourse aids to document design decisions [ 47].
The limited support for tools available for designers and
developers demonstrates a gap in what is available and
what is useful for adopting responsible, or ethical, design
approaches [ 43], [48]. The implementation of ethics principles
in practice requires an improved understanding of the pract ices
of designers and developers of AI systems, and how they relat e
to high-level ethics principles. By building this understa nding,
organisations can better position themselves to develop th e
support required to produce and use AI systems responsibly.
A recent interview study involving high-level organisatio nal
leaders (such as CEOs) provides empirical evidence that a
promising approach to operationalise AI ethics principles is
via four sets of practices [ 61], [62]: (i) governance, (ii) AI
design and development, (iii) competence and knowledge
development, (iv) stakeholder communication.
The operationalisation of AI ethics can be also framed
as a design process rather than an end goal [ 16], [46].
Fostering an understanding of the complexities and challen ges
of implementing responsible AI provides the foundation for
iterative and adaptive approaches rather than as the comple tion
of activity checklists. The implementation of responsible , or
ethical, design has been characterised across three compli men-
tary design approaches [ 18], summarised below.
•Ethics inDesign , which requires designers and developers
to consider the purpose of the AI system under develop-
ment, and the likely consequences of its use [ 18]. Part of this
involves considering the values (or motivating principles )
reﬂected in the design and purpose of the AI system [ 24].
This has parallels with efforts to incorporate human values
in software engineering [ 70], [72]. Anticipating the negativeeffects of failing to account for an ethical principle may
also highlight potential issues that might otherwise be
overlooked [ 43], [78].
•Ethics byDesign , which concerns the behaviour of AI
systems in deployment. The functions of systems should
reﬂect ethical principles, such as minimising harm. This
also covers constraints imposed on permissible actions and
decisions the AI system may make [ 18]. This is particularly
signiﬁcant for autonomous systems that may come into
contact with humans or animals during their operation, and
for AI systems that may be used to recommend decisions
that affect people’s lives.
•Ethics forDesigners , which refers to the ethics that mo-
tivate and govern the developers of AI systems, and may
include professional codes of conduct, ethical principles ,
and regulatory requirements [ 18]. These design approaches
characterise the complex and dynamic task of developing
responsible AI. In turn, the infrastructure required from
organisations and governing bodies to effectively support
responsible AI must be responsive to those complexities
and the evolving nature of the ﬁeld.
III. M ETHODS
The interview participants were CSIRO scientists and en-
gineers who design, develop, or implement systems with
AI components (such as ML). An initial set of participants
was sought via calls for participation circulated within th e
organisation, where the main selection criterion was self-
reported involvement with research and/or development wor k
that notably included the use of AI methods and/or tech-
nologies. The initial phase was followed by a snowballing
technique where additional participants were recruited th rough
suggestions by preceding participants. The number of parti c-
ipants increased until a saturation point of perspectives w as
deemed to have been reached [ 15], [31]. In total, 21 interviews
were conducted.
The participants represented a cross-section of experienc e
and responsibility; the positions of the interviewees incl uded:
team leader (8), group leader (4), principal research scien -
tist (2), principal research engineer (1), senior research sci-
entist (4), research scientist (1), postgraduate student ( 1). The
gender division was approximately 24% female and 76% male.
Each participant was provided with a summarised version
of the Australian AI ethics principles (see Table I), prior to
their interview. The interview protocol aimed to ﬁrst evoke 3
to 4 principles that were most pertinent to each participant as
encountered in their work. Each of the principles chosen by t he
participant was then examined through the following prompt s:
(i)how did the principle express itself in their work, (ii)how
was the principle addressed, (iii)what tools/processes would
be useful for addressing the principle. Subsequent questio ns
aimed to cover relevant overlaps with the following areas:
software development, machine learning, and ethics in AI.
Participants were then asked to consider other ethical fact ors