useful to understand the sensitivities and the uncertainty in
decision making if there are resources to do so. Accuracy
(e.g., sensitivity and speciﬁcity) on training and testing data
should also be documented.
A simpliﬁed model can be helpful for explaining how a
complex model works by giving an idea of the criteria affect-
ing the complex model’s decision making. More speciﬁcally,
improvements in explainability may be obtained through the
use of model approximation techniques (including surrogat e
modelling and model emulation), where simpliﬁed ML models
are used to represent more complex models [ 1], [7]. Here
the aim is to produce a less complex model and/or more
explainable model, while preserving as much ﬁdelity of the
more complex model as possible. One team developed al-
gorithms/tools to simplify the complexity of solutions by
providing compact representation to ﬁnd the most important
components, e.g., ﬁnd a smaller decision tree that performs
almost as well as the more complex one. Furthermore, Shapely
values and Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanatio ns
are two model agnostic techniques that can be used to aid
explainability [ 50].
D. Fairness
This principle addresses widespread concerns about the
potential for AI systems to reﬂect (and potentially reinfor ce)
existing inequalities within society. This covers both the
accessibility of AI systems to users with diverse abilities and
cultural backgrounds, and how decisions made based on the
recommendations of these systems may disproportionately a f-
fect disadvantaged groups. Decisions made with the assista nce
of AI systems also need to comply with anti-discrimination
laws [ 2].
Concerns about fairness cover both biases embedded within
the data used to train ML models, and biases embedded
in AI systems themselves [ 17]. These biases may be pre-
existing individual and societal biases of those developin g
the system, technical biases resulting from how the system
is implemented, or emergent biases resulting from the conte xt
within which the system is used [ 27].
In the interviews, fairness was understood as decisions mad e
on unbiased data, as non-discrimination, and equal distrib ution
of beneﬁts and burdens of the output of AI systems.
There are multiple deﬁnitions and measures of fairness, and
choosing between them is both a technical problem and a
question of values [ 74]. Algorithms cannot satisfy multiple
deﬁnitions of fairness at the same time [ 74]. The appropriate
deﬁnition and measure of fairness for an AI project should be
discussed between the project team, clients, and stakehold ers
at the start of the project.
Adjustments to ML models to promote fairness may occur
in the input data for the model (pre-processing), in the
processing performed by the model, or in the output of the
model (post-processing) [ 50]. Software libraries that imple-
ment bias mitigation methods should be considered if they ar e
appropriate for the methods, tools, and goals of AI projects [5].A record should be kept of the methods used for pre-
processing (or cleaning) data that is then used as inputs the ML
model [ 28]. This includes data used for training the model, as
well as data used during deployment of the model [ 44]. The
methods include approaches for inferring missing values (o r
how missing values in data are handled), which components
(ﬁelds) of data are explicitly omitted, which components of
data are explicitly used, and the speciﬁc approaches employ ed
for mitigation of various biases (e.g., placing weights on d ata
during training and deployment). See also the discussion on
theAccountability principle in Section V-F, which proposes a
related reproducibility checklist concept.
If the data used for training and/or deployment of ML
models comes from a third-party source, the data should not b e
used blindly. The source should be queried about any known
biases and potential biases within the data, and how the data
was collected. Knowledge of the biases in the data can help
with the design and application of bias mitigation approach es.
E. Contestability
Contestability can be considered as critical for building t rust
in AI. Those affected by either the output of an AI system
or by decisions made based on the output of these systems
should have the opportunity to question these outcomes and
correct them if they are in error. In particular, vulnerable
groups should be considered during the development and use
of AI systems.
Contestability may be implemented by allowing users to
override the recommendations and decisions of AI systems. I t
may be difﬁcult to revise the initial assumptions and design
decisions in the system if they are contested by those affect ed.
The explanation of the AI system’s decision process may also
be too complex for users to understand (cf. Transparency and
Explainability principle), or the relationships in the data may
not be well understood. Contestability was also understood as
interpretability.
The explainability of an AI system is important for speciﬁc
aspects of how it produced the output to be contested. In
addition to satisfying explainability requirements to tho se
affected by the AI system (e.g., descriptions of the system
and underlying algorithms), information on how to contest
the system’s output should also be provided. The means of
obtaining this information and how to contest this output ma y
be included with the description of the output provided to
those affected by it.
The ability to opt-in or opt-out of AI systems should be
provided to users if possible. More speciﬁcally, an explici t
option may be provided to the user to disagree with decisions
given by an AI system.
Where the output of the AI system is to augment an expert’s
decision making, it may be necessary to conﬁrm whether
regulatory approval is necessary for such decision support .
This may be the case if the system is assisting decisions that
are diagnostic or therapeutic in nature.