TABLE I
An adapted summary of the voluntary high-level ethics princ iples for AI, as promulgated by the Australian Government [ 2].
Principle Summary
Privacy Protection and Security AI systems should respect a nd uphold privacy rights and data protection, and
ensure the security of data.
Reliability and Safety AI systems should reliably operate i n the context of their intended purpose
throughout their lifecycle.
Transparency and Explainability There should be transpare ncy and responsible disclosure to ensure people
know when they are being signiﬁcantly impacted by an AI syste m, and can
ﬁnd out when an AI system is engaging with them. Explainabili ty includes
what the AI system is doing and why, and may include the system ’s processes
and input data.
Fairness AI systems should be inclusive and accessible, and should not involve or
result in unfair discrimination against individuals or gro ups.
Contestability When an AI system signiﬁcantly impacts a per son, group or environment,
there should be a timely process to allow people to challenge the use or
output of the system.
Accountability Those responsible for the various phases of the AI system lifecycle should
be identiﬁable and accountable for the outcomes of the syste m, and human
oversight of AI systems should be enabled.
Human-centred Values AI systems should respect human right s, diversity, and the autonomy of
individuals.
Human, Social and Environmental (HSE) Well-
beingAI systems should beneﬁt individuals, society, and the envi ronment.
not covered by the high-level principles but encountered an d
potentially addressed in their work.
The interviews were conducted in a conversational setting
by three interviewers that had signiﬁcantly different rese arch
backgrounds and experience. The interviews ranged in lengt h
from 22 to 59 minutes, with a median length of 37 minutes.
All the interviews were done from February to April 2021.
A. Thematic Analysis
The transcripts of the interviews were analysed using
methods from the ‘codebook’ school of thematic analysis,
where themes are understood as ‘domain summaries’ and
given before starting analysis, and the codes developed dur ing
the analysis are assigned to these themes [ 9]. The high-level
principles (see Table I) were used as the domain summaries.
Concepts in the text were given a broad theme and a more
speciﬁc subtheme (if necessary), and were attached to the mo st
relevant high-level principle.
The analysis was accomplished at a semantic level, which
focused on describing and interpreting patterns identiﬁed in
the interview transcripts, instead of looking for underlyi ng
assumptions or concepts in the transcripts [ 8]. The thematic
analyses derived from the interview transcripts were inde-
pendently cross-checked by the three interviewers to ensur e
consensus on themes and inter-rater reliability.B. Ethics Approval and Consent
This study was approved by CSIRO’s Social and Inter-
disciplinary Science Human Research Ethics Committee, in
accordance with the National Statement on Ethical Conduct
in Human Research [ 49]. The approval included the scope of
the study, the selection and contact of potential participa nts,
the interview protocol, and the de-identiﬁcation requirem ents
for the transcripts. Informed consent was sought and obtain ed
from each participant prior to their interview.
C. Limitations
The interview participants were selected via solicitation
emails and peer suggestions, which may pose a threat to inter -
nal validity. The selection and availability of interviewe es may
have constrained the span and nature of perspectives and hen ce
outcomes of this study. Although selection bias is possible
when the participants are not randomly selected, the threat
to internal validity is partially alleviated as the intervi ewers
had no contact with the interviewees beforehand. To reduce
the risk of missing information and interviewer subjectivi ty,
each interview included three interviewers with signiﬁcan t
differences in their research backgrounds and experience. The
interviewers worked jointly to pose questions, which aids i n
increasing the depth and range of inquiry, as well as reducin g
the likelihood of subjective bias.