suggested doing one scenario, we chose to do another, this is
the result we got [...] did we do the job that we expected? Or
did we do the job that the system expected?” (P15).
The need for large amounts of data to improve accuracy is
in tension with the goal of minimising data collection and us e
to protect privacy (P02). In tension with the Fairness principle,
in certain scenarios (such as medical applications), devel opers
may have to restrict the scope of data as much as possible
(e.g., use data only from people within an ethnic group), in
order to make it easier to build an AI solution that works as
intended (P11).
A concern raised by interviewees is the usage of AI systems
after their development (i.e., during deployment). One not ed
an instance where their AI system was designed to provide rec -
ommendations according to criteria agreed with a client, an d
yet these recommendations were ignored in decision making
by the client as other criteria were used in practice (P08).
Another participant noted that nuances about the collected
data and the assumptions made in analysing the data used
to train an ML model are likely to be lost when the model is
used in practice: “you can put all those cautions in place but
they won’t necessarily be respected in practice and you’ve g ot
very little control over that” (P01). Due to the lack of contr ol
over the use of AI technologies after their development, som e
researchers and/or developers may disclaim accountabilit y:
“whether the [system] works in 10 years, it’s not under our
control [...] and we shouldn’t really care about it” (P11).
In the context of autonomous systems, the operations of
drones are regulated but AI technology embedded in drones
is currently not regulated (P12). The regulations include t hat
“autonomous ﬂight is prohibited [...] in the sense that the ﬂ ight
is not managed by [a remote] human pilot” (P12). However,
this raises a question of reliability: “if [there is] a [targ et
following] mode enabled in [the] system [...] you have to
have a human pilot monitoring this system and disengaging
that system at any time [...] so now the question is [...] what
happens if [the] remote pilot is really there, ﬂicks the [dis able]
switch and the system doesn’t react? The remote pilot is
not always in full control of [the UA V] because of technical
reasons” (P12).
Reliability and safety are signiﬁcant concerns for au-
tonomous systems: “how dependable is the autonomy?” (P12).
Where AI is used in robotic systems, the quality of the
hardware used in the system is an important safety consid-
eration (P12). The hardware underneath needs to be certiﬁed
or qualiﬁed to industry standards (P12).
C. Transparency and Explainability
In discussing this principle, the majority of participants
focused on the explainability of decisions made by AI system s.
One participant observed: “Whenever you provide estimates
or outputs from an algorithm, they need to be explained in
some way, and so you need to be very open and transparent
about what you’ve done, how you’ve pre-processed your data,how you’ve applied the algorithms, even some of the ﬁne-
tuning of the algorithms [and] the hyperparameters” (P09).
Transparency and explainability were also seen as importan t
for accountability to clients and users: “[...] it’s essent ial,
because when you give a prediction, or when the prediction
is wrong [...], then you have to give people some sort of
explanation” (P02).
The degree of possible explainability depends on the form
of AI used. Symbolic AI uses deﬁned rules to process data,
and allows for the chain of reasoning used to produce an out-
put to be identiﬁed. In contrast, statistical (or non-symbo lic)
AI, such as that used in machine learning, develops rules
from the data used to train it [ 35], [6]. Statistical AI methods
were generally thought to be less transparent and explainab le
than symbolic AI. One participant noted: “the AI I use are
equations – we can’t solve these equations easily; we develo p
an algorithm for solving these equations, but we know what’s
happening. We know what these algorithms are doing. It’s not
a black box. The issue is the solution then is quite complex
to understand so that’s where explainability of a solution a nd
explainability of AI is a very important topic for us” (P08).
The factors and data used to make a particular recommenda-
tion may also be presented to the user: “it gives them a way to
[...] trace back to the actual patient record [...] to see why the
system thought what it did” (P19). The level of explainabili ty
may also depend on the intended audience (P17).
Explainability may weigh more than performance regarding
trust in AI. Fine-grained interpretability is needed in AI s ys-
tems to be clear which part of the outcomes are substantiated
and which parts are uncertain (P03). Showing the current ste p
in the decision-making process is helpful to improve user tr ust
in ML models (P11). The output of the model is often not that
useful to assist users to make decisions, unless the system
shows the indicators and factors for why that prediction was
given (P17). One participant pointed out when the team had
initial stakeholder meeting, no one asked about the predict ive
performance of the algorithm, but wanted to have a look at
risk proﬁles behind the risk score (P18).
Participants also noted that trade-offs between accuracy a nd
explainability may be necessary. There are algorithms whic h
provide good results but cannot explain how they arrived
at that results (P19). “You may end up choosing possibly
a suboptimal method that is transparent and explainable,
as opposed to the optimal method that [...] is [a] black
box” (P17). Another participant stated that “there have bee n
instances where we’ve chosen an explainable model which has
slightly [lower] performance [than] a non-explainable mod el
which has higher performance but would be harder to convey
the reasoning behind the prediction” (P18).
Transparency was often linked to the norms of scientiﬁc
publications and access to scientiﬁc data to allow reproduc ibil-
ity of results. “Transparency has to do with an open science,
you want people to be able to reproduce your results” (P11).
Releasing the source code for AI applications was also