the model. This iterative learning process is repeated unti l the
model has sufﬁcient ﬁdelity and/or reaching a cost threshol d.
In designing of AI systems, it may be useful to explicitly
consider unintended operation due to faulty implementatio n
(including software bugs), and erroneous/incomplete data (in-
cluding training data and data used during deployment). In
both cases the system should be able to fail safely by design
(also known as fail-safe ). This may include designing the
system to refuse to provide an output (e.g., recommendation )
or explicitly marking the output as potentially unreliable . The
system should provide reasoning for the refusal and unrelia ble
output, such as incomplete input data, or a large mismatch
between training data and given data.
The choice of the underlying algorithms should take into
account at least three aspects and the trade-offs between th em:
accuracy, robustness, and explainability. The system shou ld
provide reliable outputs across a range of operating condit ions
(i.e., robustness) expected during operation, and not simp ly
the best possible accuracy in a very narrow range (e.g., on
a limited test dataset). For example, maximising accuracy
in well controlled settings may have detrimental impact on
accuracy within less controlled settings in actual deploy-
ment [ 75], including situations with missing, incomplete, or
erroneous data. Hence focusing only on accuracy in a narrow
range of conditions increases risk of unreliable operation in
a wider range of conditions. In application contexts where
explainability is desired or required, lower model complex ity
may be preferred, at the possible cost of reduction in accura cy.
To achieve reliable functionality, the range of operating
conditions may need to be explicitly limited, possibly in
tension with the Fairness principle. Training data may only be
available for a set of operating conditions or speciﬁc subse ts
of people (e.g., limited in age range, limited in ethnicity) .
Operation beyond the training data may result in unreliable or
erroneous outputs, and in turn may result in loss of trust in
the AI system.
For building trust in the reliability of an AI system, it may
be useful to keep track of usage, noting the suggestions made
by the system and which suggestions are followed by the user
(cf.Contestability principle). This can be used to determine
where the system works as designed, and where the system
needs to be improved. This can also be used as an aid to
improve the design of the system, by taking into account new
data and/or speciﬁcations that were initially not used.
To address performance degradation over time, regularly
scheduled recalibration and/or retraining of AI models can
be useful, in order to take into account changes and/or im-
provements to the available data [ 36]. Furthermore, automatic
measurement of the nature and quality of input data (e.g.,
missing values, intermittent availability, increase/dec rease in
rate of data) can be used to automatically issue alerts that a n
AI system may not be performing as designed.
Implementation of this principle may involve adopting
safety measures that are proportionate to the magnitude of
potential risks [ 2]. AI systems may need to be veriﬁed,validated and monitored on a continual basis to ensure they
maintain their operation for the intended purpose. Continu al
risk management should be used to address any identiﬁed
problems. Responsibility for safety measures, monitoring , test-
ing, and risk management should be clearly and appropriatel y
identiﬁed.
C. Transparency and Explainability
While the principle is deﬁned with the Transparency and
Explainability components having distinct meanings (see Ta-
bleI), the two components were often observed to be inter-
changeable from the interviewees’ perspective, and interp reted
often to mean only Explainability .
Interpretability and explainability can treated as distin ct
requirements for AI systems. An explanation of a model
result is a description of how a model produces an outcome.
This explanation may need to be placed in terms that are
understandable by the target audience; there may be more tha n
one target audience. For example, deep neural networks can b e
completely explainable in terms of relatively straightfor ward
mathematics, but the sheer amount of parameters is such
networks makes them difﬁcult to interpret [ 4]. An interpretable
model should provide users with a description of what a
stimulus, such as a data point or model output, means in
context. The degree of required explainability should be a
consideration in deciding which algorithms should be used.
Interpretability is critical to building human trust in AI.
To improve interpretability, decision outcomes can be mark ed
with a probability indicator (e.g., 60% accuracy estimate) . To
improve trust, explainable interfaces can be designed to sh ow
graphical representation of the decision making process an d
indicators of why a speciﬁc decision was made. Explaining
decisions with useful scenarios and the potential impact of
various inputs is helpful to improving trust in the system. I n
other contexts, explainability may be a temporary requirem ent
until users understand how the model works. Once users
understand how it works, transparency and explainability m ay
still be needed for veriﬁcation and troubleshooting.
Model outputs and explanations should be presented in
ways that relate to the users’ background, culture and pref-
erences. The granularity of the explanation should also be
considered when explaining decisions. High-level explana tions
may be sufﬁcient for some users and contexts, while others
may require more detailed explanations of the AI system’s
decision.
Thorough documentation is needed for explainability. Re-
producibility checklists that are already used by some venu es
for scientiﬁc publishing overlap with the documentation re -
quirements for explainability. For example, one project te am
used a simple clustering algorithm and recorded the decisio ns
including the choice of clustering algorithm, the choice of
predictor variables, how to represent categorical data nu-
merically, how to handle correlations between variables, a nd
how to normalise or scale data. Sensitivity analysis is also