used by the AI system in making decisions is important for
reviewing the system’s output (P04). Accountability is imp or-
tant for the adoption of autonomous systems: “I think with
ML, we’ve seen examples [...], especially in the autonomous
car industry, where there’s research being done into accide nts
and [...] if you can dig into detail what happened, why that
happened, I think that brings a lot more security and safety,
[...] both commercially and to the customers as well” (P13).
For Indigenous end-users and collaborators, accountabili ty
extended beyond the outputs of the AI system to the larger
process of applying an AI system itself: “The other part of
that accountability though was that [Indigenous collabora tors
and co-creators] said we have to beneﬁt from the process,
not just the outcome” (P14). AI projects were accountable
to indigenous collaborators and co-creators for the capaci ty-
building with digital technologies that the projects enabl ed
with their indigenous partners (P14).
G. Human-Centred Values
Participants noted the difﬁculty in clearly noting the pres -
ence of human-centred values in their projects: “Values are
often implicit. They’re not stated explicitly in things” (P 1).
It was also observed that human-centred values were less
applicable to applications that did not involve direct huma n
contact with the AI system (P12).
Human-centred values were mentioned largely in relation
to projects co-created with Indigenous groups that are buil t
on Indigenous knowledge. The cross-cultural context where
the AI system is used needs to considered: “The problem is
that sometimes when we design AI, we don’t take that care to
think about which system it’s going to be put into. We just do
it as a prototype to then to be deployed everywhere” (P14).
Indigenous knowledge, rights and practices should also be
incorporated into the design and deployment of AI systems,
including how and why data is collected where data will be
physically stored (P14). AI systems for Indigenous groups
should also reﬂect their ethics and worldviews: “I think it w as
really interesting to actually push that a bit further and sa y
actually, let’s make really explicit biases in [an Indigeno us-
focused project] that actually [make] sense to Indigenous
people. So we didn’t just do it on (...) human-centred [value s],
we really pushed it to say how do we make [the AI] learn so
that it actually is really biased to an Indigenous group” (P1 4).
H. Human, Social and Environmental (HSE) Well-being
Human well-being was mentioned in relation to privacy
(P13). It was also described as a motivation for AI appli-
cations in controlling invasive species that are human dise ase
vectors (P04). The potential of harmful future application s of
AI were mentioned as issues for human well-being (P20, P21).
Two participants mentioned concerns about applications of
AI systems that they regarded as having contested impacts on
human and social well-being, such as facial recognition [ 10],
[52] and dual-use applications (P11, P12). “[T]here is aspectrum of stuff where everybody has a comfort line [...].
It has nothing to do with privacy, fairness, and all those
issues [mentioned in the principles]. It’s a completely dif ferent
topic” (P11).
Uncertainty over the social impact of new technologies was
also mentioned: “[t]he difﬁcult thing really is to understa nd
[...] how the technology really affects society. It’s not an easy
thing to see” (P12). Concerns were also raised about data
analyses and recommendations that may have uneven beneﬁts
and reinforce disadvantage in society (P01).
Environmental well-being was mentioned as a motivation
for AI projects that use environmental data (P04, P09). It wa s
also identiﬁed as being signiﬁcant for clients: “environme ntal
well-being was a big concern for them, not only because
they are very environmentally concerned, but also because t hat
imposes requirements that some other customers [of the clie nt]
have” (P07).
AI projects may also contribute to environmental well-bein g
by supporting environmental decision making: “the hope is
that [...] in some cases we would be involved in helping
people making decisions when it matters the most [...] for a
threatened species or ecosystem” (P08). However, this impa ct
depends on the client following the recommendations of the
AI system (P08).
Social well-being was identiﬁed as an important issue for
projects that involve Indigenous communities. The informa tion
made available by AI systems helped Indigenous people to
collect information about dangerous areas in their land, an d as
a means of allowing them to maintain a connection to country
even if they physically remote from it (P14).
V. D ISCUSSION AND SUGGESTIONS
In this section we discuss the observations and insights
gained from the interviews and place them in wider con-
text, with the aim of providing suggestions and caveats for
consideration when implementing the high-level AI ethics
principles. In the same vein as the preceding results sectio n,
the discussion is organised into subsections, covering eac h of
the high-level principles.
A. Privacy Protection and Security
This principle was largely interpreted as the protection of
sensitive data and privacy across the lifespan of a system,
both during the development and deployment. Sensitive data
in this context may include data indicating racial or ethnic
origin, political and religious beliefs, genetic and biome tric
data, health-related data (including mental health), sexu al
orientation, ﬁnancial data, as well as criminal offences an d
convictions [ 22]. Participants noted the importance of appro-
priate security methods to protect both the data and the AI
system using the data.
Trust with collaborators and data providers is an important
motivation for ensuring privacy and data protection. Colla b-
orators and data providers must have trust in the team and