mentioned as a means of transparency, especially as part of
publishing research (P11). However, practical concerns of ten
prevent this from occurring: “often it doesn’t happen becau se
it costs money to do, you have to spend time to clean it up,
to maintain it, to publish it and so on. Second, you decrease
the commercial value of it usually” (P11). Another particip ant
noted that it would be useful to have ofﬁcial guidance about
the requirements for publishing AI source code as open sourc e
as part of research publications (P09).
One hurdle for transparency is the use of proprietary data
in the training of AI models. The use of non-releasable
proprietary data makes reproducibility difﬁcult for resea rchers
outside of the original project team (P13). Clients may also
require any research publications about an AI application t o be
approved by them before submission (P09). This is part of a
broader tension between openness and commercial incentive s:
“Where it becomes a little bit challenging is where there’s
commercial in conﬁdence [information] or the commercial
sensitivities around what you’re doing, and you may not be
wanting to disclose exactly what you’ve done” (P09). This
tension may be resolved in initial client negotiations: “[o ur
clients] understand we are a research organisation and one o f
our KPIs is publications as well. So this was all put on the
table and discussed in the negotiation phase” (P13).
One response to making AI research reproducible is to use
public datasets (P11). A further alternative was to use synt hetic
data: “you can have synthetic data sets that carry the [...] t he
same sort of statistical properties so that you can then run
your algorithms and so you can make them open source and
[...] people can test algorithms and do a bunch of independen t
review and checking [...] without using the actual data” (P0 1).
It was also noted that clients needed to be transparent in
their claims of how AI applications are (or are not) being
used: “we want to make sure we deliver the tool and then it’s
up to the stakeholder decision maker to follow or not follow
our recommendations - but I want them to not misrepresent
the way they’re making their recommendation” (P08).
One participant argued that an understanding of risk was
more important than explainability: “[o]nce I know that it
works most of the time I don’t need explainability, I don’t
need transparency. It’s just temporary to establish the ris k
proﬁle” (P11). Another participant noted that transparenc y is
only a concern if something goes wrong, and drew a parallel
with relying on air travel without understanding how aircra ft
operate (P02).
Traditionally, in statistics, people have used simpler lin ear
models and assign meaning to the parameters. In machine
learning, developers often only think around the predic-
tions (P21). The meanings connected to parameters are less
well understood in machine learning techniques as opposed t o
more classical statistical techniques although they are re ally
the same thing in a certain sense (P21).D. Fairness
Participants interpreted fairness in various ways. P03 un-
derstood fairness as training ML models on diverse data,
and discussed several methods of addressing bias within the
data used to train the AI system. Omitting data from over-
represented groups so that groups are more equally represen ted
in the data was one method, although there is the risk that
the data removed will reﬂect the researchers’ own cognitive
biases (P03).
Downsampling populations that are over-represented in the
data was another method of addressing bias, although it was
described as “a very crude approach [to] the problem because
you’re getting rid of samples that you think are going to be
identical. If they are then that’s probably ﬁne. But in the va st
majority of the complex applications that we have, there is
probably still a subtle variation in there that might be the
crucial thing for the machine learning methods to pick up. Yo u
don’t know from the beginning” (P03). Placing judiciously
selected weights on data was suggested as a method of
maintaining variation in the data while also countering ove r-
representation in the data (P03). However, manually adjust ing
the weights has its own problems: “you’re going in with
an assumption that you know how to tune this thing, which
basically goes against machine learning as such, [...] wher e it’s
purely data driven” (P03). Even though mitigation approach es
may address some problems, biases in the data were still seen
as an inevitability (P03, P09).
Incomplete data was identiﬁed as a problem for ensuring
fairness. “Sometimes you can be limited in what data [you
have] available to use in the ﬁrst place” (P01). As one
participant noted, “you can only tweak the data that you
have” (P03). The cost of obtaining data was also noted as
a problem (P03).
Due to the potential impact of biases within the training
data affecting the recommendations of the AI system, user
judgement in accepting results (or a ‘human-in-the-loop’) was
suggested as a potential response (P03). User judgement may
be supported by indicating whether the sample being tested
has a close resemblance to the data used to train the ML
model (P03). Another participant noted that it is important
for users to understand the context of the system so that the
representations of people made by that system are judged
fairly (P10).
For historical clinical data, discriminatory language was
noted as a potential problem for fairness (P16). “[A]ll the
clinical concepts [...] have a preferred label associated w ith
them and a set of synonyms. Of course, over time, the social
acceptability of certain terms changes. So, we’ve provided
feedback to ensure that, where we’ve come across those terms ,
that they get updated in the reference data” (P16).
Some participants noted the differences in interpreting fa ir-
ness as ‘non-discrimination’ and as the opposite to ‘unfair
discrimination’. The removal of identifying information f rom
data was mentioned as a method of ensuring fairness (P07).