This is fairness as non-discrimination. However, discrimi na-
tion (in the form of exclusion criteria) was mentioned as a
necessity for research using medical data: “[y]ou want to
remove as much variance as possible to ﬁnd out the signal
that you want, and it comes only later to see if that signal
is applicable to other groups” (P11). This discrimination
would not necessarily be ‘unfair discrimination’. The same
participant also noted that “there are applications where y ou
absolutely want it to be fair for everybody the same way. For
example if you do a loan application, a loan application if yo u
have an [AI system], you know that for this particular one it
has to be the same no matter what is the population” (P11)
Fairness in the distribution of beneﬁts and burdens from
using the AI system was also mentioned: “the people [bearing
the] costs should be the ones also getting the beneﬁts out of
it in the end” (P07). The beneﬁts of AI systems trained on
biased data may be unevenly distributed (P02).
Another participant questioned whether fairness is necess ar-
ily linked with transparency: “[w]hat’s interesting about that
fairness principle is it assumes that openness and transpar ency
is going to be our only pathway for an ethical outcome” (P14).
Maintaining the ownership of data may conﬂict with the goal
of making the data accessible to others (P14). However, whil e
the data used by the AI system may not be open and accessible
to others, the methods developed to analyse and present the
data can be made open and accessible (P14).
The role of fairness was unclear in contexts where the AI
system is not used to make decisions that directly impact
individuals, communities, or groups (P08).
E. Contestability
Where the AI system is used for decision support, con-
testability is implemented by allowing the user to overrule
the recommended decision (P18). This was explained with
an example of a system used in clinical contexts: “there was
actually a deﬁned process where if a patient was not ﬂagged
as being high risk, [...] clinicians were still allowed to in clude
the patient into the next step clinical review” (P18).
One issue identiﬁed with contestability is the difﬁculty of
revising the initial assumptions and design choices made in
collecting and analysing the data used by the AI system: “if
your results or the product is somehow sensitive to initial
assumptions or choices made [...], it’s not like you’re goin g
to be able [...] to run things again with different assumptio ns
and choices” (P01).
Another problem for contestability is the complexity of the
explanation of the AI system’s decision making (P03). This
complexity may prevent clients and users from contesting
the system’s output: “it’s just another layer of complexity
that I don’t think they’ll be interested in or in a position
to understand it. But I don’t know whether they would be
able to critically evaluate or contest, as you say, what has
come out of it” (P20). Another aspect of this was data where
the relationships were not well understood. Genomic datawas given as an example: “basically, there is no one-on-one
relationship between typically higher blood counts, say, a nd
these other negative outcomes. For genomic [data] it could b e
the whole range. So therefore this interpretability is real ly not
as clear-cut” (P03).
Contestability was also interpreted as interpretability o f
an AI system’s decisions, and overlapping with the princi-
ple of transparency and explainability (P03). One example
mentioned was the logging and time stamping data collected
by autonomous systems: “if someone says [...] you took
data [...] there where you were not allowed to do this and
whatever. I mean we can say this is what happened. So it’s
all logged” (P12).
One interviewee pointed out it is hard to get people to trust
an AI system that is just telling them to do something but
doesn’t give them the choice to disagree with the system (P15 ).
F . Accountability
Transparency and explainability were seen as important for
accountability: “if you want some accountability, you need
to ﬁnd [an] explanation. So, the model [needs] to support
the interpretability” (P02). Transparency assists accoun tability
by allowing domain experts to identify anomalies in the
data (P18). The reproducibility of published results is an
important form of accountability for academic researchers .
“For us, the only bad thing is we publish a paper and then
people try to reproduce it, and nobody can” (P11).
Testing the AI system was identiﬁed as important for
accountability. Test data may be developed in collaboratio n
with the client to evaluate the system (P18). The system may
also be evaluated empirically: “that’ll be done in terms of
having some unseen set of data, which is human labelled,
has some ground truth, and that we evaluate the system on
that” (P17). Accountability for the data used to train the ML
model was attributed to the provider (P16).
There were differences in opinion over accountability for
the outcomes of decisions based on an AI system’s recommen-
dations. One researcher noted that “the creator of technolo gy is
as responsible for what happens to the technology as the peo-
ple who make the decision how to use the technology” (P12).
Similarly, another observed that “at some stage, your predi c-
tion is wrong and there’s some loss, then who is responsible
for this? I believe the problem exists now, but, when you
deploy a model, the problem can be more complicated. [...]
[S]ome sort of framework should be established for who
actually responsible for this” (P02). However, another arg ued
that this form of accountability did not apply to projects th at
are still within the research and development stage (P13). T he
lack of control over the use of AI technologies after their
development was also noted as a justiﬁcation for disclaimin g
accountability by developers: “Whether the [system] works in
10 years, it’s not under our control” (P11).
Accountability is also important for ensuring the reliabil ity
and safety of AI systems. Logging and recording of metadata