arXiv:2112.07467v8  [cs.CY]  6 Sep 2024
∗Published in: IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society, V ol. 4, No. 2, p p. 171–187, 2023. DOI: 10.1109/TTS.2023.3257303AI Ethics Principles in Practice:
Perspectives of Designers and Developers
Conrad Sanderson, David Douglas, Qinghua Lu, Emma Schleige r, Jon Whittle,
Justine Lacey, Glenn Newnham, Stefan Hajkowicz, Cathy Robi nson, David Hansen
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisat ion (CSIRO), Australia
Abstract —As consensus across the various published AI ethics
principles is approached, a gap remains between high-level
principles and practical techniques that can be readily ado pted
to design and develop responsible AI systems. We examine the
practices and experiences of researchers and engineers fro m
Australia’s national scientiﬁc research agency (CSIRO), w ho are
involved in designing and developing AI systems for many app li-
cation areas. Semi-structured interviews were used to exam ine
how the practices of the participants relate to and align wit h a
set of high-level AI ethics principles proposed by the Austr alian
Government. The principles comprise: (1) privacy protecti on
and security, (2) reliability and safety, (3) transparency and
explainability, (4) fairness, (5) contestability, (6) acc ountability,
(7) human-centred values, (8) human, social and environmen tal
well-being. Discussions on the gained insights from the int erviews
include various tensions and trade-offs between the princi ples,
and provide suggestions for implementing each high-level p rin-
ciple. We also present suggestions aiming to enhance associ ated
support mechanisms.
Index Terms —AI ethics, ethics principles, responsible AI,
responsible design, system design, artiﬁcial intelligenc e, machine
learning, automation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The rapidly increasing use of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI),
which includes machine learning (ML), throughout society
has already produced signiﬁcant beneﬁts across a variety of
ﬁelds, and promises to deliver more in the future [ 30], [35],
[38]. As AI becomes more ubiquitous there are rising concerns
regarding its use and development [ 13], [56]. AI may be used
in applications that reinforce existing biases and histori cal
disadvantage in society (e.g., involving gender, race, soc io-
economic background), infringe individual privacy, and ma ke
opaque decisions that affect people’s lives (e.g., automat ed
assessment of job applications) [ 14], [20], [51]. Responses to
these concerns are well underway in many countries. A recent
review of international principles and guidelines for AI et hics
included 84 such documents [ 34]. Out of the numerous ethics
frameworks and guidelines produced by governments and
organisations, a broad consensus is emerging around what th e
major principles of AI ethics should be [ 25].
Governments and organisations are beginning to develop
mechanisms to make high-level AI ethics frameworks more
actionable in practice. Governance, regulation, and legal
frameworks concerning the development and use of AI sys-
tems and associated technologies are emerging in many coun-tries [ 11], [69]. The European Union has recently proposed a
legal framework for AI for its member states [ 21]. A recent
report by the Australian Human Rights Commission has
recommended introducing legal accountability for both gov -
ernment and public sector uses of AI, as well as establishing
an independent AI Safety Commissioner [ 23].
However, there is still a large gap between high-level AI
principles and practical techniques that can be readily use d in
the design and development of responsible AI systems [ 45],
[48]. More speciﬁcally, current high-level principles appear
more focused on end users and people affected by AI technolo-
gies, rather than developers of AI systems. Furthermore, et hics
principles are just one of a range of governance mechanisms
and policy tools necessary to promote the ethical developme nt
and use of AI technologies.
In this work semi-structured interviews are used to better
understand the existing practices and perspectives of scie ntists
and engineers that develop and/or use AI/ML technologies
across a broad range of projects and application domains.
The insights and challenges gleaned from the interviews are
analysed within a wider context, aiming to provide suggesti ons
and caveats which may be helpful when placing the high-level
AI ethics principles into practice.
The interview participants are from the Commonwealth Sci-
entiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), whic h
is Australia’s national science agency. The organisation i s re-
sponsible for conducting scientiﬁc research in many indust rial
application areas, including biosecurity, health, agricu lture,
and environment. Recent efforts include increasing the upt ake
of AI/ML across these areas. The Australian Government’s
voluntary high-level AI ethics principles [ 2] are used as a
framing structure for the interviews, as well as the subsequ ent
analysis. This set of principles is treated as a representat ive
of the many similar principles proposed by other government s
and organisations [ 25], [34].
We continue the paper as follows. Section IIoverviews
related work. Section IIIdescribes the methods used to
conduct the interviews and the subsequent thematic analyse s.
Section IVpresents the salient results from the interviews, in
terms of observations, practices and challenges for each of the
high-level ethics principles. Section Vprovides a discussion of
the insights from the interviews and provides suggestions f or
implementing each high-level principle. Section VIprovides