While this study aims to include Indigenous viewpoints,
no information was sought about the interviewees’ ethnic
background and none of the interviewees provided such
information. This may have affected the interpretation and
expression of Indigenous viewpoints.
This study was undertaken in one organisation, which may
pose a threat to external validity; the opinions provided by the
interviewees may not be representative of the larger AI deve l-
opment community. To reduce this threat, we ensured that the
interviewees had various roles and degrees of expertise, an d
worked on a variety of research areas and projects (for both
internal and external customers). While having interviewe es
from more organisations would be desirable, we believe our
study can be relevant to many AI/ML researchers and system
development teams; the observations and comments given by
our interviewees provide insights into the challenges deve lop-
ers are facing in dealing with AI ethics issues during resear ch,
development and deployment.
IV. R ESULTS
In this section we present the salient points resulting from
the thematic analysis of the interviews, covering practice s,
challenges and insights relating to each of the high-level
principles shown in Table I. The occurrence of themes related
to the principles across the interviews is shown in Table II.
Quotations and paraphrased sentences are ascribed to inter -
view participants via markers in the shorthand form of P##,
where ## is a two-digit participant identiﬁer (01 to 21).
A. Privacy Protection and Security
For addressing this principle, participants suggested met h-
ods such as federated machine learning [ 37], [77], aggregation
of data, removing personally identiﬁable information, and
differential privacy [ 19], [26]. As an example, partitioning
data across distributed machines was mentioned as a method
of protecting privacy for genomic data: “[various] researc h
institutions from around the world can collaborate, becaus e
TABLE II
Occurrence of themes related to AI ethics principles within
the 21 interviews.
Principle Occurrence
Privacy Protection and Security 17 / 21 (81%)
Reliability and Safety 19 / 21 (90%)
Transparency and Explainability 18 / 21 (86%)
Fairness 10 / 21 (48%)
Contestability 8 / 21 (38%)
Accountability 13 / 21 (62%)
Human-Centred Values 3 / 21 (14%)
HSE Well-being 11 / 21 (52%)they don’t have to give up their data. They don’t have to share
their data in the clear” (P03). There are also strong practic al
reasons for doing so: “[t]he machine learning methods that a re
running on those, they are split across multiple nodes anywa y,
[...] with the idea that they only ever use a portion of the
genome. Not because it’s safer, but because it’s more efﬁcie nt.
It’s faster [...], that’s the reason why it’s possible to ana lyse
the whole genome at the same time” (P03).
The impact on ML models trained using altered data
(with personally identiﬁable information removed) is unce r-
tain (P19). Differential privacy may also have a negative
impact of the utility of ML models (P05). The concerns about
the impact of differential privacy methods and removing PII
are examples of the tension between protecting privacy and
producing accurate ML models: “that’s the real challenge th at
we are always dealing with, this privacy and utility trade-
off” (P05). There are also possible trade-offs between priv acy
and other principles, such as Reliability ,Accountability , as
well as Transparency and Explainability (P01, P07, P09). For
example, to determine the accountability for failure in a pr o-
cess may involve using sensitive information that stakehol ders
are not willing to share due to their stated requirement for
privacy (P07).
Privacy concerns were mentioned as a reason to avoid using
sensitive data: “we have deliberately worked on data that
doesn’t have any privacy concerns, because of the difﬁculty of
working with data that does” (P09). Synthetic data and stan-
dard machine learning datasets were mentioned as alternati ves
to using sensitive data (P05). Minimising the amount of data
needed was also mentioned as a design goal (P02).
Gaining and maintaining the trust of collaborators and data
providers was identiﬁed as an important motivation for priv acy
and data protection. “Whether their concern is correct or
not, that doesn’t even matter here. If I don’t get that trust,
they’re not collaborating” (P07). Similarly, another part icipant
observed that in their practice “you build the trust with the data
providers [...] so more people can give you data and increase
your data representability” (P02).
Approval from the human research ethics committee was
mentioned as important for conﬁrming the requirements for
working with sensitive data (P11, P17, P19). Privacy impact
assessments were also mentioned as another process for iden -
tifying potential privacy issues (P10), in order to underst and
privacy concerns, build provisions to enable privacy contr ols,
and allow people to highlight things that they did not want
to make visible in the platform. These assessments may
highlight issues that require consultation with external c lients:
“we’ve had to manage [...] our client’s expectations around
[the] additional effort needed in the privacy [...] side of
things” (P10).
External collaborators may impose access restrictions on
their data (P01, P17). Clients may also require that data
remains within their network environment, which requires
researchers to perform their work on the client’s servers (P 17,