organisation to not abuse the data and disclose their privat e
information.
Privacy impact assessments and human research ethics
committee reviews are important tools for identifying priv acy
risks and consequences, as well as resolving potential issu es,
which may include recommendations on software engineering
best practices. However, it must be noted that the applicabi lity
of human research ethics committees is necessarily limited
in scope, as such committees typically only review research
projects which directly involve humans. It is possible that a
given project may not perform research involving humans, an d
still have privacy concerns.
Software engineering best practices may include the use of
open algorithms and open systems with a good security track
record. This may include proactive public disclosure and co r-
rection/patching of security vulnerabilities, as opposed to the
practice of security through obscurity , where the algorithms
and systems are kept secret/proprietary. The efﬁcacy of the
latter practice has been questioned in the literature [ 32], [42].
Methods for protecting sensitive data in ML model training
data may negatively affect the usefulness of the model. In
general, the richer the data is, more accurate and/or reliab le
ML models can be built [ 6], [29]. On the other hand, privacy
risks are likely to be reduced when less data is made availabl e
or used. To fulﬁl privacy requirements, developers may need
to aggregate the data so that the risk of uniquely identifyin g
individuals is reduced. However, this has to be carefully
weighed against the utility (accuracy and reliability) of t he
ML models.
Privacy concerns differ from project to project, where col-
laborators and clients may impose restrictions on data acce ss
by researchers. Access restrictions on sensitive data may p re-
vent projects from proceeding, and in some cases alternativ es
to sensitive data may be available. Data requirements need
to be associated with speciﬁc kinds of privacy measures the
customers/collaborators want to have in place. For example ,
a customer/collaborator might be willing to share only coar se
information about the outcome of a process, excluding any
ﬁner details about the process (such as the steps of the proce ss
or data used within the process).
Much effort has been put into technologies that reduce the
need to have complete access to training data. For example,
federated learning [ 37], [77] is a privacy preserving technique
and can be considered as an architectural design pattern to
deal with the trade-off between privacy and reliability, as well
as various requirements/restrictions placed by data provi ders.
Software architecture decisions are needed to ensure data
privacy and security; for example, which components read th e
data and which components share data outside the system.
Differential privacy [ 19], [26] is a type of privacy-
preserving method that is intended to be robust against mem-
bership inference attacks and attribute inference attacks which
are speciﬁc for AI systems. Membership inference can be used
to deduce whether a certain individual’s data is used as part of
the model training. Attribute inference aims to infer missi ngparts of data for a given individual by using partial data fro m
the individual’s record in conjunction with the output of an
AI algorithm. Differential privacy means the learned model
should not depend too much on any individual’s data. The
standard way to achieve the differential privacy property i s to
inject “noise” in the computation. Differential privacy ca n be
treated as an architectural design pattern for privacy; exa mples
include deliberate perturbation or random alteration of in put
data, model parameters, and/or output data.
More restricted access control should be applied to sensiti ve
data (e.g., genomics data), including only using a portion o f
data, never locating the data at the same space in the same
time, only sharing the insights of the data, encrypting the d ata
while letting only the data owner own the decryption key.
Implementation of this principle may involve proper gov-
ernance and management for all data used and generated by
AI systems [ 2]. Furthermore, appropriate security measures
should be used for both the data and the AI system using the
data. This may include identiﬁcation of potential security vul-
nerabilities within the underlying hardware and/or softwa re;
open-source software may be preferable due to not relying on
the questionable security through obscurity approach. Security
measures should also include appropriate mitigation measu res
for unintended applications of AI systems, and/or potentia l
abuse of AI systems. Robustness to adversarial attacks shou ld
also be taken into account, where deliberately corrupted da ta is
given to AI systems with the aim of confusing the systems to
produce unintended or adverse outcomes [ 12], [67], potentially
reducing privacy and/or leaking sensitive data.
B. Reliability and Safety
Participants interpreted this principle as meaning that th e AI
system should produce accurate and reproducible recommen-
dations. The ability to produce reliable AI systems is often
largely dependent on the volume and quality of training data
that is available [ 6], [29]. AI systems may be unreliable if
they are used in a context that differs from the one they
are developed for. AI systems are difﬁcult to verify, and
may require expert assessment if they are used to replace an
existing process or model. Reliability and safety are criti cal
for autonomous systems.
For situations where obtaining sufﬁcient samples can be
costly (in terms of time, effort, and/or ﬁnancial cost), active
learning [63] may be beneﬁcial and can be considered as a
design pattern. The overall goal in active learning is to ﬁnd the
most informative training samples so that AI models can be
successfully built from a relatively small number of traini ng
samples. As an example of active learning, initial limited
data (samples) is used to build an initial model that has the
ability to indicate where (i.e., areas of sample space) it is most
uncertain; the locations with the highest uncertainty are t hen
used to guide (either automatically or manually) the select ion
of new samples to be obtained, which are then used to reﬁne