Respect for culture is important in AI projects, where
there may be race- or group-speciﬁc aspects to data, model
outputs or decisions. Cultural concerns may be incorporate d
into both functional and data requirements for AI projects. For
Indigenous projects, Indigenous people need to be involved in
environmental decision-making. For example, critical env iron-
mental decisions can take into account Indigenous knowledg e.
VI. S UPPORT MECHANISMS
Based on the insights primarily synthesised from our in-
terview study, below we provide two sets of suggestions that
may help with the implementation of the high-level ethical
principles into practice. The ﬁrst set covers organisation al
support, while the second set suggests the use of design note s
as a companion to high-level ethics principles.
A. Organisational Support
For organisations that want to be ethical with AI, devising
an implementation process of AI ethics principles is a step
towards building capacity and capability for being ethical with
AI. The potential beneﬁts may include gained trust leading
to competitive advantage, retention of highly-skilled sta ff,
avoidance of reputational damage, as well as responsivenes s
and readiness for regulatory requirements.
Adoption of responsible AI as a fundamental aspect of an
organisation’s digital strategy may be beneﬁcial for long t erm
development and growth. Within organisations or departmen ts
devoted to scientiﬁc research, a digital strategy can inclu de
investment in the responsible development and use of AI to
accelerate scientiﬁc discovery through the use of current a nd
future digital technologies (e.g., digital assistants, au tomation
and robotics).
It may be useful to provide organisation-wide training and
processes to increase awareness and understanding of high-
level AI principles followed by organisation-wide adoptio n
and implementation of such principles. This can be accom-
plished through a set of seminars, and/or recommended onlin e
learning modules. The chosen principles can be the gener-
ally accepted AI ethics principles [ 34], or a speciﬁc set of
principles such as the Australian AI ethics principles [ 2], as
summarised in Table I.
Several interviewees noted that the high-level principles do
not provide guidance as to where AI should and should not be
used (e.g., in projects with dual-use applications and/or n on-
civilian focus). As such, it may be useful to deﬁne a speciﬁc
organisational policy on the permissible uses of AI systems .
Analysis of existing software, systems, and/or projects th at
use AI technologies may yield areas where consideration
and/or implementation of the AI ethics principles can be ad-
vantageous and/or prudent. In addition to looking at intern ally
produced software and systems, liaison with external softw are
producers/providers (which includes closed-source/prop rietary
software as well as open-source software) to ensure softwar e
used within an organisation adheres to AI ethics principles .
This may have a useful and far-reaching side effect in that th ehigh-level AI ethics principles operationalised in extern ally
produced software can positively affect the functioning of
many other organisations (on a global scale) which also use
the same software.
It may be beneﬁcial to start each project with a Data Planner
(RDP) [ 3], where the need and/or use of AI technologies
can be identiﬁed. This allows the identiﬁcation of applicab le
high-level AI ethics principles within the context of each
project, which in turn spurs the formulation of plans for
addressing/implementing each applicable principle. The R DP
may be helpful in providing links to useful material that rai ses
awareness of the principles; it may also be helpful for build ing
a vignette to facilitate addressing applicable principles . As a
useful side effect, use of the RDP may lead to an increase in
the organisational knowledge of the AI ethics principles, a s
well as an increase in the pool of methods and approaches for
operationalising each principle.
Related to RDP, the application of dataset datasheets [28] is
encouraged whenever a dataset is created and/or an existing
dataset used for AI models, projects and/or products. Such
datasheets cover characteristics of given datasets, such a s
their motivation, composition, collection/acquisition m ethods,
applied cleaning/pre-processing, added labels, recommen ded
uses, etc. Given that datasets are an integral part of the dev el-
opment and use of AI systems, the use of dataset datasheets
can increase accountability and transparency. In the same v ein,
use of model cards [44] is also encouraged in order to describe
the characteristics of AI models, such as their type, versio n,
intended use, performance (error rates and associated metr ics),
as well as the names and versions of associated datasets used
for training and evaluation of the models.
B. Design Notes for Developers
Current high-level principles, such as the Australian AI
ethics principles [ 2], appear more focused on end users and
people affected by AI technologies, rather than developers
of AI systems. This results in a mismatch between the
underlying intent of the principles and how the principles a re
to be implemented. To address this mismatch, the high-level
principles can be extended with a mapping between the presen t
principles and a set of design notes aimed at developers, such
as suggestions and speciﬁc attributes to keep in mind while
designing and implementing AI systems.
Examples of suggestions that can be part of the design
notes are given in the discussion in Section V. We note that
the listed approaches reﬂect the content of the interviews
and the surrounding discussions for each principle, and are
hence not exhaustive. As such, including recommendations
and suggestions from relevant literature [ 41], [53], [62], [64],
[65] may yield a richer picture.
The proposed design notes may also include reusable design
methods, where the design and implementation of system
components, as well as their integration, follows known pro -
cess/design patterns that are aligned with high-level AI et hics
principles [ 39], [40].