mented with different pooling methods, i.e., sum-pooling,
max-pooling and average-pooling. Gis the spatio-temporal
local region around point (x,y,z,t). Note that, because
space and time are orthogonal and independent of each
other, we can split the region Ginto a sequence of spatial
areas, which is deﬁned by a spatial radius rsand a temporal
radiusrt.
Because displacements in grid data are discrete and reg-
ular, traditional convolutions can directly learn a kernel for
all displacements within a region. However, point coordi-
nates are continuous and irregular, and the number of poten-
tial displacements is inﬁnite. Therefore, we propose to indi-
rectly generate a kernel by a function h, instead of directly
learning the kernel. Speciﬁcally, ζ:R1×4→RC′×Cis a
parameterized function of (δx,δy,δz,δt)to generate kernels
based on input displacements:
ζ/parenleftbig
δx,δy,δz,δt)·f=/parenleftbig
Wd·(δx,δy,δz,δt)T/parenrightbig
⊙/parenleftbig
Wf·f/parenrightbig
,(2)
wheref=F(x+δx,y+δy,z+δz)
t+δtis the point feature, Wd∈
RC′×4is to transform 4D displacements, Wf∈RC′×C
aims to increase point feature dimension to improve the
feature representation ability, and ⊙is an element-wise
operator, e.g., addition or product. In this fashion,
ζ/parenleftbig
δx,δy,δz,δt)can generate kernels for all potential dis-
placements. When Ftis not available, the function is im-
plemented as ζ/parenleftbig
δx,δy,δz,δt) =Wd·(δx,δy,δz,δt)T. We
can also append a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to Eq. ( 2) to
enhance the modeling.
Grid based convolutions can be easily performed on reg-
ular conventional videos by sliding on grids. However, be-
cause point cloud videos are spatially irregular as well as
unordered and points emerge inconsistently across different
frames, it is challenging to perform convolution on them.
Moreover, in contrast to grid based convolutions, which are
performed on all areas, our point based convolution should
avoid empty regions. To this end, we use a method sim-
ilar to [ 15] to generate spatio-temporal local areas before
performing point 4D convolution. Speciﬁcally, as shown
in Fig. 2(a), we ﬁrst select some frames based on the tem-
poral stride st. Second, we use the farthest point sampling
(FPS) [ 43] to subsample N′=N/sspoints in each selected
frame, where ssis the spatial subsampling rate. These sub-
sampled points are then transferred to the rtnearest frames.
The original and transferred subsampled points form the
central axis of a spatio-temporal local area. Finally, spatial
neighbors are searched based on spatial radius rsfor each
subsampled point in the selected or rtnearest frames.
3.2. Transformer
3.2.1 4D Coordinate and Local Feature Embedding
After point 4D convolution, the spatio-temporal local ar-
eas of the t-th frame are encoded to representations F′
t.Because similar local regions share similar representations,
we can merge related areas based on their similarities in-
stead of explicit tracking. Moreover, because point posi-
tions also reﬂect the relationship among local regions, we
can exploit them to enhance representations for performing
self-attention. Therefore, we combine anchor coordinates,
i.e.,(x,y,z,t), and local area features as the input to our
transformer,
I(x,y,z,t)=Wi·(x,y,z,t)T+F′(x,y,z)
t, (3)
whereWi∈RC′×4is the weight to convert 4D coordinates
andI∈RC′×L′N′is the self-attention input.
3.2.2 Self-Attention
GivenI, we aim to merge related local areas based on their
similarities so that each point has a larger receptive ﬁeld to
perceive what happens around it. To this end, we perform
self-attention [ 53] onI. Speciﬁcally, the self-attention can
be described as mapping a query and a set of key-value pairs
to an output, where the queries, keys and values are gen-
erated by the input itself and the output is computed as a
weighted sum of the values:
Q=Wq·I,K=Wk·I,V=Wv·I,
attention( Q,K) = softmax(QT·K√
Ck),
O=V·attention( Q,K),(4)
whereWq,Wk∈RCk×C′,Wv∈RCv×C′andCk
andCvare the dimension of key and value, respectively.
First, we generate queries Q∈RCk×L′N′, keysK∈
RCk×L′N′and values V∈RCv×L′N′based on the in-
putI. Then, we compute the dot products of the query
with all keys and apply a softmax function to obtain the
weightsattention( Q,K)∈RL′N′×L′N′. Given a lo-
cal area, related or similar areas will have larger attention
weights than others. Finally, the output O∈RCv×L′N′
is computed as a weighted sum of the values V. Specif-
ically, for a point (x,y,z,t), its new feature is computed
asO(x,y,z,t)=/summationtextattention( Q,K)(x,y,z,t),(x′,y′,z′,t′)×
V(x′,y′,z′,t′), where(x′,y′,z′,t′)belongs to the set of I’s
4D coordinates.
Note that, given a query, the softmax function is per-
formed on the entire video, which is referred to as video-
level self-attention is this paper. Another option is the so-
called frame-level self-attention, which applies softmax to
each frame individually, so that the sum of weights in each
frame is 1. This option assumes that each query point ap-
pears in all frames. However, points may ﬂow in and out
across frames, especially for long point cloud videos. Such
an assumption is not reasonable. Therefore, we employ the
video-level self-attention, which performs softmax on all
L′N′points.
14207