Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 6 of 22
one half used to build a predictive model and the other half for testing. The DBN-MAO
algorithm is then used to optimize the classiﬁcation of the data. Finally, the accuracy of the
predicted data is conﬁrmed through independent validation, demonstrating the method’s
superiority over its competitors.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 24 
 
the voxel frequency components of the volumes of interest, and (iii) the ranking of the raw 
features using a seven-feature ranking techni que. The most distinguishing feature be-
tween HC and AD groups is the vector size that produces the smallest classi ﬁcation error. 
A classi ﬁcation is made using a SVM in (iv). Ex tensive research has demonstrated that 
incorporating a data fusion technique into fe ature ranking approaches enhances their abil-
ity to classify input data correctly. The accu racy of the developed framework for diagnos-
ing AD was 92.48 per cent when trained on the ADNI dataset. 
3. Proposed System 
A block diagram depicting the proposed DB N-MOA has been given in Figure 1 be-
low. The ﬁgure elucidates the data collection and pr e-processing steps in detail. In order 
to test hypotheses and assess results, data collection entails amassing and measuring rel-
evant information on relevant variables in a predetermined, systematic manner. It is a de-
cisive in the research process because it supports the researcher in making sense of the 
available data and determine that how it can help in progression of the project forward. 
The term “data pre-processing” refers to any action taken on raw data before it undergoes 
further processing. It is a crucial ﬁrst step in data mining and has been for a long time. 
The pre-processed data is then fused and split; data fusion is the process of combin-
ing information from di ﬀerent sources to create accurate, complete, and consistent data 
about a single entity, and data spli tting is the reverse of that procedure. Feature-level, 
Low-level, and decision-level data fusion are the three main types. Separating a dataset 
into two subsets, or “splits,” is common in cross-validation analyses. The data is split in two, with one half used to build a predictive model and the other half for testing. The 
DBN-MAO algorithm is then used to optimize the classi ﬁcation of the data. Finally, the 
accuracy of the predicted data is con ﬁrmed through independent validation, demonstrat-
ing the method’s superiority over its competitors. 
 
Figure 1. Proposed diagram of DBN-MOA. 
3.1. Dataset Collection 
We sourced all of our information from the ADNI dataset [46]. ADNI is an invaluable 
resource for researchers [47]. A total of 416 people were included in this cross-sectional 
Figure 1. Proposed diagram of DBN-MOA.
3.1. Dataset Collection
We sourced all of our information from the ADNI dataset [ 46]. ADNI is an invaluable
resource for researchers [ 47]. A total of 416 people were included in this cross-sectional
dataset. The ages of these participants range from 18 to 96 years. Three or four independent
T1-weighted MRI scans are acquired in a single session for each subject. The sample images
from the ADNI dataset have been presented in Figure 2.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 24 
 
dataset. The ages of these participants range from 18 to 96 years. Three or four independ-
ent T1-weighted MRI scans are acquired in a single session for each subject. The sample 
images from the ADNI dataset have been presented in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Sample pictures of an AD pa tient from the ADNI dataset. 
Both sexes are represented, and everyone is dominantly right-handed. From very 
mild to moderate AD, 100 of the 416 subjects  aged 60+ have been diagnosed. A reliability 
data set, with images from the follow-up appo intment within 90 days, is also included for 
20 people without dementia. 
3.2. Data Pre-Processing 
The relationship between cognitive tests, me dication, and mental health is depicted 
graphically in Figure 3. We have investigated the utility of multimodal time-series data in 
making prognoses about the course of AD. 
 
Figure 3. Before and After Denoising. 
Each patient is represented by four rows in  each of the four time-series representa-
tions, with each row containing information from a single visit. The ADNI compiles at-
tendance statistics once every six months. Re searchers on the ADNI project gathered mas-
sive amounts of information over th e course of more than a decade. 
We have used T1-weighted MRI images acquired from a cohort of 100 patients diag-
nosed with AD and 100 age-ma tched healthy controls. The MR I images having a resolu-
tion of 1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm and dimensions of 256 × 256 × 160. The intensity values of 
each pixel in the MRI images ranged from 0 to 255. 
Before training the May ﬂy optimization algorithm, the MRI images were pre-pro-
cessed by applying skull stripping, intensity normalization, and spatial normalization us-
ing the SPM12 toolbox. The images segmented into grey ma tter, white ma tter, and cere-
brospinal ﬂuid using the FSL software. 
Figure 2. Sample pictures of an AD patient from the ADNI dataset.
Both sexes are represented, and everyone is dominantly right-handed. From very
mild to moderate AD, 100 of the 416 subjects aged 60+ have been diagnosed. A reliability
data set, with images from the follow-up appointment within 90 days, is also included for
20 people without dementia.