Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 13 of 22
The algorithm then iterates through a series of steps where the positions and velocities
of male and female mayﬂies are updated using a set of equations. The ﬁtness of each female
mayﬂy is evaluated again, and the female mayﬂies are ranked based on their ﬁtness. Pairs
of female mayﬂies are selected for mating using a tournament selection approach, and
offspring are generated using a set of equations. The ﬁtness of each offspring is evaluated,
and they are randomly assigned to be either male or female mayﬂies. The worst female
mayﬂies are replaced with the best offspring, and the personal and global best solutions
are updated accordingly.
The algorithm continues to iterate until a stopping criterion is met, and the best solu-
tion found is returned as the position of the female mayﬂy with the highest ﬁtness. The
Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm has been shown to be effective in solving optimization
problems in various domains, including image processing, feature selection, and classiﬁca-
tion. Figure 5 presents a Flowchart of MOA algorithm. We rewrote the updating equations
for mayﬂy swarms to enhance the MOA algorithm. The upgraded MOA algorithm out-
performed the baseline algorithm in every simulation experiment. We found that good
optimization results are possible for a subset of the non-symmetric benchmark functions.
The non-symmetric benchmark functions simulated in this paper showed that even with
the MOA algorithm’s enhancements, they were not signiﬁcantly better than the originals.
The MOA algorithm was modified and tailored for AD detection and classification by
carefully defining the objective function, establishing the initial population of mayflies, updat-
ing and evaluating the algorithm, and comparing the results to other state-of-the-art methods.
Algorithm 2 presents the modified MOA algorithm for AD Detection and Classification.
To deﬁne the objective function, we considered a set of features that are relevant for
AD detection and classiﬁcation, such as cortical thickness, hippocampal volume, and white
matter hyper intensities. Based on these features, we then designed a ﬁtness function that
maximized the separation between healthy and diseased individuals. To establish the
initial population of mayﬂies, we randomly generated a set of solutions for each feature
in the objective function. We then assigned these solutions to a set of male and female
mayﬂies with baseline velocities and evaluated their ﬁtness using the objective function.
To update and evaluate the algorithm, we updated the velocities and solutions of the
male and female mayﬂies, ranked the mayﬂies based on their ﬁtness, mated the mayﬂies to
generate offspring, evaluated the offspring’s ﬁtness, separated the offspring randomly into
male and female mayﬂies, and replaced the worst solutions with the best new ones. We
also compared the results of our algorithm to other approaches, such as random forests
and SVM, using metrics such as accuracy, sensitivity, and speciﬁcity.
By providing a more detailed explanation of how the Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm
was adapted for AD detection and classiﬁcation, we can demonstrate the modiﬁcations
and tailoring that were necessary to make the algorithm effective for this speciﬁc task. It
can help readers understand the strengths and limitations of the algorithm and how it
compares to other methods in the ﬁeld.
The proposed Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm for AD Detection and Classiﬁcation is
designed to identify the best set of features from brain MRI images that can be used to accu-
rately classify patients with Alzheimer’s disease. The algorithm begins by pre-processing
the MRI images and randomly selecting a subset of features to use for classiﬁcation. It then
initializes a population of female mayﬂies with random positions and velocities for the
selected subset of features, as well as a population of male mayﬂies with random velocities
for the same subset of features.
The algorithm then evaluates the classiﬁcation performance of each female mayﬂy
using a classiﬁer and cross-validation on the selected subset of features, and sets the global
best solution (gbest) to be the female mayﬂy with the highest classiﬁcation performance. In
the following iterations, the algorithm updates the subset of features used for classiﬁcation
by selecting features based on the positions of the male mayﬂies. It then evaluates the
classiﬁcation performance of each female mayﬂy using the updated subset of features and