Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 3 of 22
the records [ 21]. IoT-enabled portable MR imaging device captures real-time patient MR
images and identiﬁes anomalies in MRI scans for detecting and classifying AD [22].
The more recent algorithm is known as mayﬂy optimization (MOA.) This algorithm
could be used to identify male and female mayﬂies in a group. Each one of them updates in
its own special way. If a person’s current position was extremely far from the best contender
or the historically best trajectories, their progress toward the best position slowed in the
MO algorithm’s initial iteration. It is easy to see how such actions could immediately slow
the rate of convergence. To boost the efﬁciency of MOA algorithms, we suggest rewriting
the updating equations that have been applied throughout this paper.
In this paper, we make signiﬁcant advancements over previous work in both the
accuracy with which DBN can classify the status of a patient and its ability to deal with
voice features. DBN use many processing layers to model higher-level abstractions in
complex data structures. Weighted connections link the processing layers together, but the
layers themselves are isolated. It allows us to view it as a generative graphical model with
many hidden nested units, similar to the structure of a tree. These networks can only learn
as much as their trainers allow when given supervised and unsupervised training.
The current survey’s contributions are summarized as follows:
1. Evaluate how well the current model can foresee the development of AD using the
ADNI database.
2. In addition, we proposed a framework for AD/non-AD classiﬁcation of dementia
subjects using longitudinal brain MRI features and DBN with an MOA.
3. In contrast to the current literature, our DBN-MOA models are optimized by consid-
ering a wide range of low-cost time-series features, such as patients’ comorbidities,
cognitive scores, medication histories, and demographics.
The following topics make up the study’s subsections: In Section 2, we provided a
review of the recent related works. Part III, look at the fundamentals of DBN and proposed a
DBN- MOA approach for Alzheimer detection with detailed algorithms. Section 4 discusses
the proposed model and compared the output results with the similar approaches provided
in other studies. The paper’s ﬁnal Section 5 discusses the proposed model’s implications
and directions for future research.
2. Literature Survey
Cao et al. [ 23] created a new optimization strategy to enhance the mixed-norm regu-
larised formulation. When tested on the ADNI datasets, cognitive measurements using
multimodality or single MRI modality data showed enhanced classiﬁcation performance
and a condensed set of AD biomarkers was produced. The use of full 3D image data for
differential diagnosis may call for larger training sets. Artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms
that have been trained on large datasets may be more useful than CAD when applied to
medical images. Because of this, the current state of AI-based medical image analysis is
limited. When presented with novel images captured under extremely diverse conditions,
artiﬁcial intelligence techniques quickly degrade from their stellar performance in a lab
setting with uniform imaging protocols.
Nawaz et al. [ 24] compared three models to determine which one was the most
accurate. The ﬁrst model involves preparing an image for classiﬁcation using SVM, KNN,
or Random Forest by applying manually created features. The second model employs a
convolutional neural network (CNN) deep learning model with cleaned and prepped data.
AlexNet is used to extract deep features in SVM, k-nearest neighbor, and Random Forest.
SVM classiﬁers performed best for the deep features-based model. K-nearest neighbor
algorithms have an accuracy of 57.32 per cent, whereas SVM have an accuracy of 95.21 per
cent, and random forest algorithms have an accuracy of 93.9 per cent.
Feng et al. [ 25] suggested a new deep learning architecture that combines 3D-enhanced
CNN with stacked bidirectional RNN (SBi-RNN CNNs). Extraction of deep feature de-
piction from MRI and PET images is the focus of this paper, which argues for the use of a
simple 3D-CNN framework. Using SBi-RNN enhanced the functionality of locally deep