Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 7 of 22
3.2. Data Pre-Processing
The relationship between cognitive tests, medication, and mental health is depicted
graphically in Figure 3. We have investigated the utility of multimodal time-series data in
making prognoses about the course of AD.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 24 
 
dataset. The ages of these participants range from 18 to 96 years. Three or four independ-
ent T1-weighted MRI scans are acquired in a single session for each subject. The sample 
images from the ADNI dataset have been presented in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Sample pictures of an AD pa tient from the ADNI dataset. 
Both sexes are represented, and everyone is dominantly right-handed. From very 
mild to moderate AD, 100 of the 416 subjects  aged 60+ have been diagnosed. A reliability 
data set, with images from the follow-up appo intment within 90 days, is also included for 
20 people without dementia. 
3.2. Data Pre-Processing 
The relationship between cognitive tests, me dication, and mental health is depicted 
graphically in Figure 3. We have investigated the utility of multimodal time-series data in 
making prognoses about the course of AD. 
 
Figure 3. Before and After Denoising. 
Each patient is represented by four rows in  each of the four time-series representa-
tions, with each row containing information from a single visit. The ADNI compiles at-
tendance statistics once every six months. Re searchers on the ADNI project gathered mas-
sive amounts of information over th e course of more than a decade. 
We have used T1-weighted MRI images acquired from a cohort of 100 patients diag-
nosed with AD and 100 age-ma tched healthy controls. The MR I images having a resolu-
tion of 1 mm × 1 mm × 1 mm and dimensions of 256 × 256 × 160. The intensity values of 
each pixel in the MRI images ranged from 0 to 255. 
Before training the May ﬂy optimization algorithm, the MRI images were pre-pro-
cessed by applying skull stripping, intensity normalization, and spatial normalization us-
ing the SPM12 toolbox. The images segmented into grey ma tter, white ma tter, and cere-
brospinal ﬂuid using the FSL software. 
Figure 3. Before and After Denoising.
Each patient is represented by four rows in each of the four time-series representations,
with each row containing information from a single visit. The ADNI compiles attendance
statistics once every six months. Researchers on the ADNI project gathered massive
amounts of information over the course of more than a decade.
We have used T1-weighted MRI images acquired from a cohort of 100 patients diag-
nosed with AD and 100 age-matched healthy controls. The MRI images having a resolution
of 1 mm1 mm1 mm and dimensions of 256 256160. The intensity values of each
pixel in the MRI images ranged from 0 to 255.
Before training the Mayﬂy optimization algorithm, the MRI images were pre-processed
by applying skull stripping, intensity normalization, and spatial normalization using the
SPM12 toolbox. The images segmented into grey matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal
ﬂuid using the FSL software.
To train the algorithm, leave-one-out cross-validation approach has been used where
one patient was left out for testing, and the remaining 199 patients for training. The input
to the algorithm consisted of the segmented grey matter images, which were resized to
12812880 to reduce the computational burden.
By providing this level of detail about the input data, the authors can help readers
better understand the characteristics of the MRI images used in the study and how they may
have inﬂuenced the results. This information can also be useful for other researchers who
want to reproduce the study or compare it with other studies that use similar input data.
Data Labelling
Our sample size was also set after we ﬁnished pre-processing and labelled our data
for binary classiﬁcation. Since we are engaging in binary classiﬁcation, each record in
the dataset has been either given a zero or a one for the Clinical Dementia Ratio (CDR).
Keep in mind that a CDR of 0 denotes perfect health (i.e., no signs of dementia), and a
CDR of 1 indicates severe Alzheimer’s (i.e., demented). To date, 28 patients have been
diagnosed with CDR 1. We used a total of 28 patients with AD and 28 controls to make our
classiﬁcations. We have two pictures of each patient. We then randomly split the dataset