Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 2 of 22
examination is necessary for a deﬁnitive diagnosis [ 3]. The role of instrumental tests in
clinical diagnosis such as detecting cerebral atrophy on a brain scan or measuring the
concentration of speciﬁc proteins in a patient’s blood has grown over time. Quantitative
evaluation is intrinsically linked to the creation of novel neuroimaging techniques.
Dementia can be detected in its earliest stages with the help of neuroimaging tech-
niques developed by the ADNI. Recent advances in neuroimaging techniques, such as MRI,
have allowed researchers to identify and present novel molecular and structural biomarkers
for AD. Clinical trials have demonstrated that the diagnostic accuracy of neuroimaging
techniques like MRI is improved. It has been speculated that MRI can detect abnormalities
in brain morphology related to mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and thus accurately
predict the progression from MCI to AD. The aim is to identify structural and molecular
hallmarks of AD. Clinical studies have demonstrated increased diagnostic accuracy of
neuroimaging modalities like MRI [ 4]. It has been hypothesized that MRI can reliably
predict whether or not a person with MCI will develop AD by detecting the abnormalities
in brain morphology that are characteristic of MCI.
There has also been a call for research into “multimodal biological markers,” which
may aid in the initial diagnosis of AD [ 5]. Electroencephalogram (EEG) data, neuropsycho-
logical data, demographic data, APOE4 genotype data, and MRI information were used to
train the ML classiﬁer by Gaubert et al. [ 6]. The model is educated to recognize the onset of
AD and its telltale signs, including amyloid plaques and neuronal degeneration. After ﬁve
years, EEG can predict neurodegenerative diseases, just as amyloid accumulation and pro-
dromal diseases can be predicted with psychographic and MRI data. This study conﬁrmed
previous ﬁndings that used ML techniques to predict AD onset successfully. Being able to
form opinions rapidly is the end result [ 7]. Several supervised Ensemble methods were
compared and analyzed for their potential use in the classiﬁcation of AD [ 8]. Some claims
of improved classiﬁcation accuracy and speciﬁcity have been made for boosting models [ 9],
like the generalized boosting model and the gradient boosting machines (GBM).
Using ML expertise and the patient’s medical records, dementia can also be predicted.
Dementia onset prediction using AD patient records over two years using a gradient
boosting model (light GBM) was also proposed [ 10]. In the end, we got an accuracy rate
of 87%. The use of recurrent neural networks (RNN) to simulate the development of AD
was also proposed [ 11]. Data assertion and regression methods were used to evaluate it
against an alternative RNN model. As a result, when training on unlabeled data, accuracy
reached 74%. The inter-data relationship between MRI demographic data and AD can also
be learned. Studies have shown that random forest (RF) models perform better than other
models, including support vector machine (SVM) models, when using this technique [ 12].
Deep learning models can forecast the advancement from MCI to AD [ 13]. Since deep
learning models beneﬁt from more information, pre-processing unlabeled data is a good
idea [ 14]. Several studies [ 15] have shown promise in using deep learning to diagnose AD
and detect symptoms. With the help of a deep learning model that is both precise and
thorough in identifying the ﬁrst signs of AD, the disease could be diagnosed and treated
much sooner.
Discretizing MRI data and handling outliers effectively can improve ML classiﬁcation
accuracy. Reportedly, people with dementia can be accurately categorized using supervised
models in conjunction with feature selection [ 16]. In another investigation [ 17], multifactor
afﬁliation analysis was used to categorize patients according to the interrelationships of
features. This method excels beyond classiﬁcation trees and generic distribution zones in
classifying patients and efﬁciency. These methods failed to show how crucial it is to use
data-centric ML techniques and embrace model-boosting knowledge to turn inefﬁcient
learners into efﬁcient ones and enhance model performance [ 18]. IoT applications are
spreading throughout the medical industry [ 19]. IoT can be used to sense real-time patient
data and other environmental detail and can be sent for further processing [ 20]. It helps
in fast data processing, relief from manual work and avoiding mistakes while digitizing