Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 7833 14 of 22
the classiﬁer and updates the positions and velocities of male and female mayﬂies based
on the updated subset of features.
Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 24 
 
 Equation (6): offspring_velocity = rand() * (female1_velocity − female2_velocity) + 
female2_velocity 
The May ﬂy Optimization Algorithm is a metaheuristic optimization algorithm that 
is inspired by the mating behavior of may ﬂies. The algorithm begins with an initialization 
step where a population of female and male may ﬂies are randomly generated with initial 
positions and velocities. The ﬁtness of each female may ﬂy is evaluated using an objective 
function, and the global best solution is set as the female may ﬂy with the highest ﬁtness. 
The algorithm then iterates through a series of steps where the positions and veloci-
ties of male and female may ﬂies are updated using a set of equations. The ﬁtness of each 
female may ﬂy is evaluated again, and the female may ﬂies are ranked based on their ﬁt-
ness. Pairs of female may ﬂies are selected for mating using a tournament selection ap-
proach, and o ﬀspring are generated using a set of equations. The ﬁtness of each o ﬀspring 
is evaluated, and they are randomly assigned to be either male or female may ﬂies. The 
worst female may ﬂies are replaced with the best o ﬀspring, and the personal and global 
best solutions are updated accordingly. 
The algorithm continues to iterate until a stopping criterion is met, and the best so-
lution found is returned as the position of the female may ﬂy with the highest ﬁtness. The 
Mayﬂy Optimization Algorithm has been shown to be e ﬀective in solving optimization 
problems in various domains, including image processing, feature selection, and classi ﬁ-
cation. Figure 5 presents a Flowchart of MO A algorithm. We rewrote the updating equa-
tions for may ﬂy swarms to enhance the MOA algorithm. The upgraded MOA algorithm 
outperformed the baseline algorithm in every simulation experiment. We found that good 
optimization results are possible for a subset  of the non-symmetric benchmark functions. 
The non-symmetric benchmark functions simulate d in this paper showed that even with 
the MOA algorithm’s enhancements, they were not signi ﬁcantly be tter than the originals. 
 
Figure 5. Flowchart of MOA algorithm.
Finally, the mayﬂies are ranked based on their classiﬁcation performance, and the best
new solutions are used to replace the worst solutions. The algorithm stops when the maxi-
mum number of iterations is reached or when a predetermined accuracy threshold is met.
The proposed algorithm also includes visualizations of feature importance and/or saliency
maps to help understand which parts of the brain are most important for classiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation performance metrics such as accuracy and F1-score.