3
Fig. 2.Network architecture.
A. Feature Design
From Equation (3), it is intuitive to use the channels G,hr
andhdas the input. However, such a simple approach turns
out to be ineffective and problematic.
To see this, let us deﬁne r/definesGΘhr+hd, then the i-th
element of rcan be written as
ri=N/summationdisplay
n=1gi,nhrnθn+hdi, i= 1,...,M, (12)
which explicitly shows the product structure of Gandhr.
Hence, instead of simply choosing G,hr, a more appropriate
feature is to use the product of the elements of Gand
hr. In addition, the real and imaginary parts are treated as
separate features. As such, the ﬁnal feature vector is denot ed
byF∈C2(NM+M)×1. It is worth pointing out that the
above feature design not only reduces the dimension of input ,
but also exploits the inherent structural information, the refore
substantially improves the training efﬁciency and network
performance.
B. Loss Function
The loss function is deﬁned as
Loss=−1
KK/summationdisplay
k=1/vextenddouble/vextenddoubleGkΘkhk
r+hk
d/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2, (13)
whereKis the number of training samples in a mini batch.
Please note, unlike the commonly used mean square error in
supervised learning systems, the loss function is set to be
the negative of the objective function in P1, which reﬂects
the unsupervised nature of the proposed approach. Besides,
the following Lambda layer is implemented to convert the
predicted real phase shift vector ppred to its complex form
θpred for loss computation [10]
θpred=ej·ppred= cos(ppred)+j·sin(ppred). (14)
C. Network Architecture and training
Fig. 2 illustrates the adopted architecture of the neural
network, which is termed as “RISBFNN”. In particular, RIS-
BFNN is made up of 5 fully-connected (FC) layers with
32N,16N,8N,4NandNneurons respectively. The idea
of setting the number of neurons being proportional to Nis
to ensure adequate learning ability when the system scales. For
activation function, the ﬁrst four FC layers adopt the recti ﬁed
linear unit (ReLu), while FC5 uses a Linear unit to output the
phase shift prediction.To train the network, adam optimizer with initial learning
rate 0.001 is used. Also, the number of maximal epoch is
set to 1000, and early stopping with patience 30 is applied
to improve the training efﬁciency. In addition, to expedite
the convergence, the learning rate decays by a factor of
0.33 whenever the validation loss does not decrease for a
consecutive 15 epochs.
During network training, it turns out that BatchNormaliza-
tion (BN) layer [18] and batch size are two key hyperpa-
rameters to make RISBFNN work effectively. An exemplary
training process is illustrated in Fig. 3 where M= 8,N= 64 .
As can be readily observed, without BN layer and sufﬁciently
large batch size, both the training and validation loss cann ot
decrease. Through extensive experiments, we found that a BN
layer after each FC layer and a batch size of 5000 work well
under various settings.
Fig. 3.Impact of BN and batch size on loss.
The impact of the number of training samples is illustrated
in Fig. 4. As can be observed, the performance settles when th e
number of training samples is sufﬁciently large. If the numb er
of training samples is small, then overﬁtting occurs which
substantially degrades the system performance. In additio n, the
minimum required sample number is conﬁguration dependent,
for instance, when M= 4,N= 8 , 150000 samples are
sufﬁcient, while for the case M= 4,N= 32 , 350000
samples are required. It is also worth highlighting that, si nce
unsupervised learning is adopted, no labels are required, w hich
signiﬁcantly reduces the cost of obtaining training sample s.
Taking training efﬁciency, testing performance and stabil ity
into consideration, we generate 800000, 200000 and 10000
samples for training, validation and testing respectively . It is
also worth mentioning that, prior to training, standardiza tion
preprocessing is performed on each dimension of features by