arXiv:2001.02348v3  [cs.IT]  20 Jan 20201
Unsupervised Learning for Passive Beamforming
Jiabao Gao, Caijun Zhong, Xiaoming Chen, Hai Lin and Zhaoyan g Zhang
Abstract — Reconﬁgurable intelligent surface (RIS) has recently
emerged as a promising candidate to improve the energy and
spectral efﬁciency of wireless communication systems. How ever,
the unit modulus constraint on the phase shift of reﬂecting
elements makes the design of optimal passive beamforming
solution a challenging issue. The conventional approach is to
ﬁnd a suboptimal solution using the semi-deﬁnite relaxatio n
(SDR) technique, yet the resultant suboptimal iterative al gorithm
usually incurs high complexity, hence is not amenable for re al-
time implementation. Motivated by this, we propose a deep
learning approach for passive beamforming design in RIS-
assisted systems. In particular, a customized deep neural n etwork
is trained ofﬂine using the unsupervised learning mechanis m,
which is able to make real-time prediction when deployed onl ine.
Simulation results show that the proposed approach maintai ns
most of the performance while signiﬁcantly reduces computa tion
complexity when compared with SDR-based approach.
Index Terms — Reconﬁgurable intelligent surface, passive
beamforming, deep learning, unsupervised learning
I. INTRODUCTION
With the commercialization of ﬁfth generation wireless
communication systems, how to reduce the network deploy-
ment cost and energy consumption has stood out as one of
the major challenges for future sustainable and green wirel ess
systems. Recently, the reconﬁgurable intelligent surface (RIS)
has emerged as a promising candidate to tackle the above
challenges thanks to low manufacturing, hardware and energ y
cost.1Speciﬁcally, the RIS is a planar array composed of a
large number of low-cost reconﬁgurable reﬂecting elements ,
which are able to modify the phase shift of the incident signa l.
Through proper adjustment of the phase shifts, the reﬂected
signal from the RIS can add coherently with the signal from
the direct path at the intended user to substantially improv e
the receive signal strength.
It is worth noting that RIS is a brand new technology that
signiﬁcantly differs from other related technologies such as
amplify-and-forward (AF) relaying and backscatter commun i-
cations. For instance, compared to AF relaying, the RIS does
not need to generate its own transmission signal, but passiv ely
reﬂects the incident signal, hence having much lower power
consumption. Compared to the backscatter communications,
the RIS does not deliver any of its own information, but only
acts as a helper to enhance the performance of existing links
[1].
Apparently, the design of phase shifts, also known as
passive beamforming, is of critical importance for RIS-ass isted
communication systems. However, the non-convexity intro-
duced by unit modulus constraint makes the derivation of
optimal solution difﬁcult. In [1], a suboptimal solution fo r
passive beamforming in RIS-assisted single user multiple-
input single-output downlink systems is proposed using the
1Please note, there have been other terminologies for RIS, su ch as intelligent
reﬂecting surface [1], intelligent wall [2], passive intel ligent mirror [3], and
reconﬁgurable metasurface [4].conventional semi-deﬁnite relaxation (SDR) technique. Ho w-
ever, the SDR-based approach is computationally expensive
and is not amenable for real-time implementation. In [3],
the authors investigated the multi-user scenario and addre ssed
the problem of maximizing the achievable rate by combining
alternating maximization with the majorization-minimiza tion
method. Later on, by imposing a rank-1 constraint on the
channel between the source and RIS, a closed-form analytica l
solution was derived in [5]. Besides, energy efﬁciency for R IS-
assisted systems was investigated in [6], while [7] tackled
the problem of minimizing the total transmit power subject
to individual signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio c onstraint.
In practice, discrete phase shifts are used due to hardware
constraint. In this regard, [8] and [9] have investigated pe r-
formance of RIS systems with only a ﬁnite number of phase
shift levels.
In the past few years, deep learning (DL) has demonstrated
its remarkable potential in dealing with non-convex proble ms
[10, 11]. In addition, DL based approach enables fast compu-
tation compared with the traditional iterative algorithms [12].
These desirable features make it appealing for many practic al
applications in wireless communications [13]. In the conte xt of
RIS-assisted wireless communications, a supervised learn ing
based approach was proposed in [14] where a deep neural
network (DNN) is trained ofﬂine to establish the implicit
relationship between the measured coordinate information and
RIS’s phase conﬁguration. Nevertheless, a major issue for
supervised learning is how to obtain labels. In [14], the opt imal
labels were obtained via exhaustive search, which is extrem ely
expensive to implement in practice, especially if large num ber
of training samples are required.
To avoid the labelling overhead of supervised learning, in
this paper, we propose to adopt the unsupervised learning
mechanism [10, 15] for passive beamforming design, where
no labels are required. In particular, a customized DNN
architecture is developed for the passive beamforming desi gn
problem, and a set of tailored features are selected for the
training process. Simulation results show that the propose d
unsupervised learning based approach requires much less
computational time with tolerable performance deteriorat ion
when compared with the conventional SDR-based approach.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the RIS-assisted wireless communication syste m
model and the problem formulation of passive beamforming.
In Section III, conventional approaches for the passive bea m-
forming problem in single antenna case and multi-antenna
case are brieﬂy introduced. The unsupervised learning base d
approach is proposed in Section IV , and Section V presents
simulation results to evaluate the performance of the propo sed
approach. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section VI.
Notations: Scalars, vectors and matrices are denoted by
italic letters, bold-face lower-case and bold-face upper- case
letters, respectively. Cx×ydenotes the space of x×ycomplex