14 Dor Bank, Noam Koenigstein, Raja Giryes
5 Advanced autoencoder techniques
Autoencoders are usually trained by a loss function corresponding to the diﬀerence
between the input and the output. As shown above, one of the strengths of autoen-
coders is the ability to use their latent representation for diﬀerent usages. On the
otherhand,bylookingatthereconstructionqualityofautoencodersforimages,one
of its major weaknesses becomes clear, as the resulting images are usually blurry.
The reason for that is the used loss function, which does not take into account how
realisticitsresultsareanddoesnotusethepriorknowledgethattheinputimagesare
notblurred.Inrecentyears,thereweresomedevelopmentsrelatedtoautoencoders,
which deal with this weakness.
5.1 Autoencoders and generative adversarial networks
Variationalautoencodersaretrained(usually)onMSEwhichyieldsslightlyblurred
images, but allows inference over the latent variables in order to control the out-
put. An alternative generative model to autoencoders that synthesize data (such as
images) is the Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). In a nutshell, a GAN ar-
chitecture consists of two parts: The generator which generates new samples, and
a discriminator which is trained to distinguish between real samples, and generated
ones. The generator and the discriminator are trained together using a loss function
thatenforcesthemtocompetewitheachother,andbythusimprovesthequalityofthe
generateddata.Thisleadstogeneratedresultsthatarequitecompellingvisually,but
inthecostofthecontrolontheresultingimages.Diﬀerentworkshavebeendonefor
havingtheadvantagesofbothmodels,bydiﬀerentcombinationsofthearchitectures
andthelossfunctions.InAdversarialAutoencoders[34],TheKL-divergenceinthe
VAElossfunctionisreplacedbyadiscriminatornetworkthatdistinguishesbetween
thepriorandtheapproximatedposterior.In[28],thereconstructionlossintheVAE
lossisreplacedbyadiscriminator,whichmakesthedecodertoessentiallymergewith
thegenerator.In[14],thediscriminatoroftheGANiscombinedwithanencodervia
sharedweights,whichenablesthelatentspacetobeconvenientlymodeledbyGMM
for inference. This approach was then used in [25] for self-supervised learning. We
detail next two other directions for combining GANs with autoencoders.
5.2 Adversarially learned inference
One of the disadvantages of GANs is mode collapse, which unlike autoencoders,
may cause them to represent via the latent space just part of the data (miss some
modes in its distribution) and not all of it.
In Adversarially Learned Inference (ALI) there is an attempt to merge the ideas
of both VAEs and GANS, and get a compromise of their strengths and weaknesses