2 Dor Bank, Noam Koenigstein, Raja Giryes
Fig. 1: An autoencoder example. The input image is encoded to a compressed
representation and then decoded.
In the most popular form of autoencoders, 𝐴and𝐵are neural networks [40]. In
the special case that 𝐴and𝐵are linear operations, we get a linear autoencoder [3].
In the case of linear autoencoder where we also drop the non-linear operations, the
autoencoder would achieve the same latent representation as Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) [38]. Therefore, an autoencoder is in fact a generalization of PCA,
where instead of ﬁnding a low dimensional hyperplane in which the data lies, it is
able to learn a non-linear manifold.
Autoencoders may be trained end-to-end or gradually layer by layer. In the latter
case, they are ”stacked” together, which leads to a deeper encoder. In [35], this
is done with convolutional autoencoders, and in [54] with denoising autoencoder
(described below).
This chapter is organized as follows. In Section 2, diﬀerent regularization tech-
niques for autoencoders are considered, whose goal is to ensure that the learned
compressedrepresentationismeaningful.InSection3,thevariationalautoencoders
are presented, which are considered to be the most popular form of autoencoders.
Section4coversverycommonapplicationsforautoencoders,Section5.1brieﬂydis-
cusses the comparison between autoencoders and generative adversarial networks,
and Section 5 describes some recent advanced techniques in this ﬁeld. Section 6
concludes this chapter.
2 Regularized autoencoders
Since in training, one may just get the identity operator for 𝐴and𝐵, which keeps
the achieved representation the same as the input, some additional regularization is
required. The most common option is to make the dimension of the representation
smallerthantheinput.Thisway,a 𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑘 isimposed.Thisoptionalsodirectly
serves the goal of getting a low dimensional representation of the data. This repre-
sentationcanbeusedforpurposessuchasdatacompression,featureextraction,etc.
Itsimportanttonotethatevenifthe 𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑘 iscomprisedofonlyonenode,then