Autoencoders 13
Similar to the original AutoRec, two symetrical models have been proposed,
one that works with user preference r𝑚vectors and the other with item preference
vectors r𝑛. In the general case, these vectors may consist of explicit ratings. The
Collaborative Denoising Auto-Encoder (CDAE) model [59] is essentially applying
thesameapproachonvectorsofimplicitratingsratherthanexplicitratings.Finally,
a variational approach have been attempted by applaying VAE in a similar fashion
[31].
4.6 Use of autoencoders for dimensionality reduction
Real world data such as text or images is often represented using a sparse high-
dimensional representation. While many models and applications work directly in
the high dimensional space, this often leads to the curse of dimensioanlity [15].
The goal of dimensionality reduction is to learn a a lower dimensional manifold,
so-called “intrinsic dimensionality” space.
AclassicalapproachfordimensionalityreductionisPrincipalComponentAnal-
ysis (PCA) [58]. PCA is a linear projection of data points into a lower dimensional
spacesuchthatthesquaredreconstructionlossisminimized.Asalinearprojection,
PCA is optmial. However, non-linear methods such as autoencoders, may and often
do achieve superior results.
Other methods for dimensionalty reduction employ diﬀerent objectives. For ex-
ample, Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) is a supervised method to ﬁnd a lin-
ear subspace, which is optimal for discriminating data from diﬀerent classes [11].
ISOMAP[48]learnsalowdimensionalmanifoldbyretainingthegeodesicdistance
betweenpairwisedataintheoriginalspace.Forasurveyofdiﬀerentdimensioanlity
methods see [51].
The use of autoencoders for dimensionality reduction is stright forward. In fact,
the dimensionality reduction is performed by every autoencoder in the bottleneck
layer.Theprojectionoftheoriginalinputintothelower-dimensionalbottleneckrep-
resentation is a dimension reduction operation through the encoder and under the
objective given to the decoder. For example, an autoencoder comrised of a simple
fullyconnectedencoderanddecoderwithasquaredlossobjectiveperformsdimen-
sionreductionwithasimilarobjectivetoPCA.However,thenon-linearityactivation
functionsoftenallowsforasuperiorreconstructionwhencomparedtosimplePCA.
More complex architectures and diﬀerent objectives allow diﬀerent complex di-
mension reduction models. To review the diﬀerent applications of autoencoders for
dimension reduction, we erefer the interested reader to [24, 56, 57].