10 Dor Bank, Noam Koenigstein, Raja Giryes
data do have labels) for improving classiﬁcation results. In this case, the encoder
is used as a feature extractor and is "plugged" into a classiﬁcation network. This is
mainlydoneinthesemi-supervisedlearningsetup,wherealargedatasetisgivenfor
a supervised learning task, but only a small portion of it is labeled.
Thekeyassumptionisthatsampleswiththesamelabelshouldcorrespondtosome
latent presentation, which can be approximated by the latent layer of autoencoders.
First, the autoencoders are trained in an unsupervised way, as described in previous
sections. Then (or in parallel), the decoder is put aside, and the encoder is used as
theﬁrstpartofaclassiﬁcationmodel.Itsweightsmaybeﬁnetuned[13]orstayﬁxed
during training. A simpler strategy can be found in [17], where a support vector
machine (SVM) is trained on the output features of the encoder. In cases where
the domain is high dimensional, and the layer-by-layer training is unfeasable, one
solution is to train each layer as a linear layer before adding the non linearity. In
thiscase,evenwithdenoisingtheinputs,thereexistsaclosedformsolutionforeach
layer, and no iterative process is needed [9].
Anotherapproachuseautoencodersasaregularizationtechniqueforaclassiﬁca-
tion network. For example, in [29, 60], two networks are connected to the encoder,
a classiﬁcation network (trained with the labelled data) and the decoder network
(trained to reconstruct the data, whether labeled or unlabeled). Having the recon-
structionheadinadditiontotheclassiﬁcationheadservesaregularizerforthelatter.
An illustration is given in ﬁgure 5.
4.3 Use of autoencoders for clustering
Clustering is an usupervised problem, where the target is to split the data to groups
such that sampless in each group are similar to one another, and diﬀerent from the
samples in the other groups. Most of the clustering algorithms are sensitive to the
dimensions of the data, and suﬀer from the curse of dimensionality.
Assumingthatthedatahavesomelow-dimensionallatentrepresentation,onemay
useautoencoderstocalculatesuchrepresentationsforthedata,whicharecomposed
of much less features. First, the autoencoder is trained as described in the sections
before. Then, the decoder is put aside, similarly to the usage in classiﬁcation. The
latentrepresentation(theencodersoutput)ofeachdatapointisthenkept,andserves
as the input for any given clustering algorithm (e.g., 𝐾-means).
Themaindisadvantageofusingvanillaautoencodersforclusteringisthattheem-
beddings are trained solely for reconstruction and not for the clustering application.
Toovercomethis,severalmodiﬁcationscanbemade.In[45],theclusteringisdone
similarly to the K-means algorithm [55], but the embeddings are also retrained at
eachiteration.Inthistraininganargumentisaddedtotheautoencoderlossfunction,
which penalizes the distance between the embedding and the cluster center.
In [20], A prior distribution is made on the embeddings. Then, the optimization
is done both by the reconstruction error and by the KL-Divergence between the
resultingembeddingsdistributionandtheassumedprior.Thiscanbedoneimplicitly,