search or work on eciently optimizing hyper-parameters for the ImageNet
challenge yet, due to its huge scale and the complexity of CNN models used
on ImageNet.
8.1.2. Complex Search Space
In many problems to which ML algorithms are applied, only a few hyper-
parameters have signicant eects on model performance, and they are the
main hyper-parameters that require tuning. However, certain other unimpor-
tant hyper-parameters may still aect the performance slightly and may be
considered to optimize the ML model further, which increases the dimension-
ality of hyper-parameter search space. As the number of hyper-parameters
and congurations increase, they exponentially increase the dimensionality of
the search space and the complexity of the problems, and the total objective
function evaluation time will also increase exponentially [7]. Therefore, it is
necessary to reduce the in
uence of large search spaces on execution time by
improving existing HPO methods.
8.2. Model Performance
8.2.1. Strong Anytime Performance and Final Performance
HPO techniques are often expensive and sometimes require extreme re-
sources, especially for massive datasets or complex ML models. One exam-
ple of a resource-intensive model is deep learning models, since they view
objective function evaluations as black-box functions and do not consider
their complexity. However, the overall budget is often very limited for most
practical situations, so HPO algorithms should be able to prioritize objective
function evaluations and have a strong anytime performance, which indicates
the capacity to detect optimal or near-optimal congurations even with a very
limited budget [97]. For instance, an ecient HPO method should have a
high convergence speed so that there would not be a huge dierence between
the results before and after model convergence, and should avoid random
results even if time and resources are limited, like RS methods cannot.
On the other hand, if conditions permit and an adequate budget is given,
HPO approaches should be able to identify the global optimal hyper-parameter
conguration, named a strong nal performance [97].
8.2.2. Comparability of HPO Methods
To optimize the hyper-parameters of ML models, dierent optimization
algorithms can be applied to each ML framework. Dierent optimization
52