Table 1: The comparison of common HPO algorithms ( nis the number of hyper-parameter
values and kis the number of hyper-parameters)
HPO
MethodStrengths Limitations Time
Com-
plexity
GS ·Simple.·Time-consuming,
·Only ecient with categorical
HPs.O(nk)
RS·More ecient than GS.
·Enable parallelization.·Not consider previous results.
·Not ecient with conditional
HPs.O(n)
Gradient-
based
models·Fast convergence speed for con-
tinuous HPs.·Only support continuous HPs.
·May only detect local optimums.O(nk)
BO-GP·Fast convergence speed for con-
tinuous HPs.·Poor capacity for parallelization.
·Not ecient with conditional
HPs.O(n3)
SMAC ·Ecient with all types of HPs. ·Poor capacity for parallelization. O(nlogn )
BO-TPE·Ecient with all types of HPs.
·Keep conditional dependencies.·Poor capacity for parallelization. O(nlogn )
Hyperband ·Enable parallelization.·Not ecient with conditional
HPs.
·Require subsets with small bud-
gets to be representative.O(nlogn )
BOHB·Ecient with all types of HPs.
·Enable parallelization.·Require subsets with small bud-
gets to be representative.O(nlogn )
GA·Ecient with all types of HPs.
·Not require good initialization.·Poor capacity for parallelization. O(n2)
PSO·Ecient with all types of HPs.
·Enable parallelization.·Require proper initialization. O(nlogn )
5.2. Apply HPO Algorithms to ML Models
Since there are many dierent HPO methods for dierent use cases, it
is crucial to select the appropriate optimization techniques for dierent ML
models.
Firstly, if we have access to multiple delities, which means that it is able
to dene meaningful budgets: the performance rankings of hyper-parameter
congurations evaluated on small budgets should be the same as or simi-
lar to the conguration rankings on the full budget (the original dataset);
BOHB would be the best choice, since it has the advantages of both BO and
Hyperband [6] [97].
On the other hand, if multiple delities are not applicable, which means
that using the subsets of the original dataset or the subsets of original features
is misleading or too noisy to re
ect the performance of the entire dataset,
BOHB may perform poorly with higher time complexity than standard BO
37