functions [2]. Therefore, the gradient-based algorithms can only be used in
some cases where it is possible to obtain the gradient of hyper-parameters;
e.g., optimizing the learning rate in neural networks (NN) [11]. Still, it is not
guaranteed for ML algorithms to identify global optimums using gradient-
based optimization techniques.
4.3. Bayesian Optimization
Bayesian optimization (BO) [87] is an iterative algorithm that is popu-
larly used for HPO problems. Unlike GS and RS, BO determines the future
evaluation points based on the previously-obtained results. To determine the
next hyper-parameter conguration, BO uses two key components: a surro-
gate model and an acquisition function [57]. The surrogate model aims to
t all the currently-observed points into the objective function. After ob-
taining the predictive distribution of the probabilistic surrogate model, the
acquisition function determines the usage of dierent points by balancing the
trade-o between exploration and exploitation. Exploration is to sample the
instances in the areas that have not been sampled, while exploitation is to
sample in the currently promising regions where the global optimum is most
likely to occur, based on the posterior distribution. BO models balance the
exploration and the exploitation processes to detect the current most likely
optimal regions and avoid missing better congurations in the unexplored
areas [88].
The basic procedures of BO are as follows [87]:
1. Build a probabilistic surrogate model of the objective function.
2. Detect the optimal hyper-parameter values on the surrogate model.
3. Apply these hyper-parameter values to the real objective function to
evaluate them.
4. Update the surrogate model with new results.
5. Repeat steps 2 - 4 until the maximum number of iterations is reached.
Thus, BO works by updating the surrogate model after each evaluation on
the objective function. BO is more ecient than GS and RS since it can de-
tect the optimal hyper-parameter combinations by analyzing the previously-
tested values, and running a surrogate model is often much cheaper than
running the entire objective function.
However, since Bayesian optimization models are executed based on the
previously-tested values, they belong to sequential methods that are di-
26