Gradient-based algorithms are not a prevalent choice for hyper-parameter
optimization, since they only support continuous hyper-parameters and can
only detect a local instead of a global optimum for non-convex HPO problems
[2]. Therefore, gradient-based algorithms can only be used to optimize certain
hyper-parameters, like the learning rate in DL models.
Bayesian optimization models are divided into three dierent models |
BO-GP, SMAC, and BO-TPE | based on their surrogate models. BO algo-
rithms determine the next hyper-parameter value based on the previously-
evaluated results to reduce unnecessary evaluations and improve eciency.
BO-GP mainly supports continuous and discrete hyper-parameters (by round-
ing them), but does not support conditional hyper-parameters [14]; while
SMAC and BO-TPE are both able to handle categorical, discrete, continu-
ous, and conditional hyper-parameters. SMAC performs better when there
are many categorical and conditional parameters, or cross-validation is used,
while BO-GP performs better for only a few continuous parameters [15].
BO-TPE preserves the specied conditional relationships, so one advantage
of BO-TPE over BO-GP is its innate support for specied conditional hyper-
parameters [14].
Metaheuristic algorithms, including GA and PSO, are more complicated
than many other HPO algorithms, but often perform well for complex op-
timization problems. They support all types of hyper-parameters and are
particularly ecient for large conguration spaces, since they can obtain the
near-optimal solutions even within very few iterations. However, GA and
PSO have their own advantages and disadvantages in practical use. PSO
is able to support large-scale parallelization, and is particularly suitable for
continuous and conditional HPO problems [19]; on the other hand, GA is
executed sequentially, making it dicult to be parallelized. Therefore, PSO
often executes faster than GA, especially for large conguration spaces and
large datasets. However, an appropriate population initialization is crucial
for PSO; otherwise, it may converge slowly or only identify a local instead of
a global optimum. Yet, the impact of proper population initialization is not
as signicant for GA as for PSO [108]. Another limitation of GA is that it
introduces additional hyper-parameters, like its crossover and mutation rates
[18].
The strengths and limitations of the hyper-parameter optimization algo-
rithms involved in this paper are summarized in Table 1.
36