Manual tuning is infeasible for many problems due to several factors, like
a large number of hyper-parameters, complex models, time-consuming model
evaluations, and non-linear hyper-parameter interactions [9]. These factors
inspired increased research into techniques for the automatic optimization of
hyper-parameters [80].
4.1.2. Grid Search
Grid search (GS) is one of the most commonly-used methods to explore
hyper-parameter conguration space [81]. GS can be considered an exhaus-
tive search or a brute-force method that evaluates all the hyper-parameter
combinations given to the grid of congurations [82]. GS works by evaluating
the Cartesian product of a user-specied nite set of values [6].
GS cannot exploit the well-performing regions further by itself. There-
fore, to identify the global optimums, the following procedure needs to be
performed manually [2]:
1. Start with a large search space and step size.
2. Narrow the search space and step size based on the previous results of
well-performing hyper-parameter congurations.
3. Repeat step 2 multiple times until an optimum is reached.
GS can be easily implemented and parallelized. However, the main draw-
back of GS is its ineciency for high-dimensionality hyper-parameter con-
guration space, since the number of evaluations increases exponentially as
the number of hyper-parameters grows. This exponential growth is referred
to as the curse of dimensionality [83]. For GS, assuming that there are k
parameters, and each of them has ndistinct values, its computational com-
plexity increases exponentially at a rate of O(nk) [19]. Thus, only when the
hyper-parameter conguration space is small can GS be an eective HPO
method.
4.1.3. Random Search
To overcome certain limitations of GS, random search (RS) was proposed
in [13]. RS is similar to GS; but, instead of testing all values in the search
space, RS randomly selects a pre-dened number of samples between the
upper and lower bounds as candidate hyper-parameter values, and then trains
these candidates until the dened budget is exhausted. The theoretical basis
of RS is that if the conguration space is large enough, then the global
24