decision trees to be combined, denoted by 'n estimators' in sklearn. XGBoost
has several additional hyper-parameters, including [60]: 'min child weight'
which means the minimum sum of weights in a child node; 'subsample' and
'colsample bytree' used to control the subsampling ratio of instances and
features, respectively; and four continuous hyper-parameters | 'gamma',
'alpha', 'lambda', and 'learning rate' | indicating the minimum loss reduc-
tion for a split, L1, andL2regularization term on weights, and the learning
rate, respectively.
3.1.6. Ensemble Learning Algorithms
Apart from tree-based ensemble models, there are several other generic
ensemble learning methods that combine multiple singular ML models to
achieve better model performance than any singular algorithms alone. Three
common ensemble learning models | voting, bagging, and AdaBoost | are
introduced in this subsection [61].
Voting [61] is a basic ensemble learning algorithm that uses the majority
voting rule to combine singular estimators and generate a comprehensive es-
timator with improved accuracy. In sklearn, the voting method can be set
to be 'hard' or 'soft', indicating whether to use majority voting or averaged
predicted probabilities to determine the classication result. The list of se-
lected single ML estimators and their weights can also be tuned in certain
cases. For instance, a higher weight can be assigned to a better-performing
singular ML model in a voting model.
Bootstrap aggregating [61], also named bagging, trains multiple base esti-
mators on dierent randomly-extracted subsets to construct a nal predictor
[62]. When using bagging methods, the rst consideration should be the type
and number of base estimators in the ensemble, denoted by 'base estimator'
and 'n estimators', respectively. Then, the 'max samples' and 'max features',
indicating the sample size and feature size to generate dierent subsets, can
also be tuned.
AdaBoost [61], short for adaptive boosting, is an ensemble learning method
that trains multiple base learners consecutively (weak learners), and later
learners emphasize the mis-classied samples of previous learners; ultimately,
a nal strong learner is obtained. During this process, incorrectly-classied
instances are retrained with other new instances, and their weights are ad-
justed so that the subsequent classiers focus more on dicult cases, thereby
gradually building a stronger classier. In AdaBoost, the type of base esti-
mator, 'base estimator', can be set to a decision tree or other methods. In
18