represent the entire search space, hyper-parameters, and hyper-parameter
values, respectively.
2. Evaluate the performance of each individual in the current generation
by calculating the tness function, which indicates the objective func-
tion of a ML model.
3. Perform selection, crossover, and mutation operations on the chromo-
somes to produce a new generation involving the next hyper-parameter
congurations to be evaluated.
4. Repeat steps 2 & 3 until the termination condition is met.
5. Terminate and output the optimal hyper-parameter conguration.
Among the above steps, the population initialization step is an impor-
tant step of GA and PSO since it provides an initial guess of the optimal
values. Although the initialized values will be iteratively improved in the
optimization process, a suitable population initialization method can signif-
icantly improve the convergence speed and performance of POAs. A good
initial population of hyper-parameters should involve individuals that are
close to global optimums by covering the promising regions and should not
be localized to an unpromising region of the search space [100].
To generate hyper-parameter conguration candidates for the initial pop-
ulation, random initialization that simply creates the initial population with
random values in the given search space is often used in GA [101]. Thus,
GA is easily implemented and does not necessitate good initializations, be-
cause its selection, crossover, and mutation operations lower the possibility
of missing the global optimum.
Hence, it is useful when the data analyst does not have much experi-
ence determining a potential appropriate initial search space for the hyper-
parameters. The main limitation of GA is that the algorithm itself introduces
additional hyper-parameters to be congured, including the tness function
type, population size, crossover rate, and mutation rate. Moreover, GA is a
sequential execution algorithm, making it dicult to parallelize. The time
complexity of GA is O(n2) [102]. As a result, sometimes, GA may be ine-
cient due to its low convergence speed.
4.5.2. Particle Swarm Optimization
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) [103] is another set of evolutionary
algorithms that are commonly used for optimization problems. PSO algo-
rithms are inspired by biological populations that exhibit both individual and
33