many BBO algorithms are often unsuitable for HPO problems with
limited time and resource budgets.
Therefore, appropriate optimization algorithms should be applied to HPO
problems to identify optimal hyper-parameter congurations for ML models.
3. Hyper-parameters in Machine Learning Models
To boost ML models by HPO, rstly, we need to nd out what the key
hyper-parameters are that people need to tune to t the ML models into
specic problems or datasets.
In general, ML models can be classied as supervised and unsupervised
learning algorithms, based on whether they are built to model labeled or
unlabeled datasets [28]. Supervised learning algorithms are a set of machine
learning algorithms that map input features to a target by training on labeled
data, and mainly include linear models, k-nearest neighbors (KNN), support
vector machines (SVM), na ve Bayes (NB), decision-tree-based models, and
deep learning (DL) algorithms [29]. Unsupervised learning algorithms are
used to nd patterns from unlabeled data and can be divided into clus-
tering and dimensionality reduction algorithms based on their aims. Clus-
tering methods mainly include k-means, density-based spatial clustering of
applications with noise (DBSCAN), hierarchical clustering, and expectation-
maximization (EM); while two common dimensionality reduction algorithms
are principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis
(LDA) [30]. Moreover, there are several ensemble learning methods that com-
bine dierent singular models to further improve model performance, like vot-
ing, bagging, and AdaBoost. In this paper, the important hyper-parameters
of common ML models are studied based on their names in Python libraries,
including scikit-learn (sklearn) [31], XGBoost [32], and Keras[33].
3.1. Supervised Learning Algorithms
In supervised learning, both the input xand the output yare available,
and the goal is to obtain an optimal predictive model function fto minimize
the cost function L(f(x);y) that models the error between the estimated
output and ground-truth labels. The predictive model function fvaries
based on its model structure. With limited model architectures determined
by dierent hyper-parameter congurations, the domain of the ML model
11