ing the covariance matrix of the data matrix to obtain the eigenvectors of
the covariance matrix. The matrix comprises the eigenvectors of kfeatures
with the largest eigenvalues ( i.e., the largest variance). Consequently, the
data matrix can be transformed into a new space with reduced dimension-
ality. Singular value decomposition (SVD) [77] is a popular method used
to obtain the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of PCA.
Therefore, in addition to 'n components', the SVD solver type is another
hyper-parameter of PCA to be tuned, which can be assigned to 'auto', 'full',
'arpack' or 'randomized' [31].
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [78] is another common dimensional-
ity reduction method that projects the features onto the most discriminative
directions. Unlike PCA, which obtains the direction with the largest variance
as the principal component, LDA optimizes the feature subspace of classica-
tion. The objective of LDA is to minimize the variance inside each class and
maximize the variance between dierent classes after projection. Thus, the
projection points in each class should be as close as possible, and the distance
between the center points of dierent classes should be as large as possible.
Similar to PCA, the number of features to be extracted, 'n components',
should be tuned in LDA models. Additionally, the solver type of LDA can
also be set to 'svd' for SVD, 'lsqr' for least-squares solution, or 'eigen' for
eigenvalue decomposition [79]. LDA also has a conditional hyper-parameter,
the shrinkage parameter, 'shrinkage', which can be set to a 
oat value along
with 'lsqr' and 'eigen' solvers.
4. Hyper-parameter Optimization Techniques
4.1. Model-free Algorithms
4.1.1. Babysitting
Babysitting, also called 'Trial and Error' or grad student descent (GSD),
is a basic hyper-parameter tuning method [8]. This method is implemented
by 100% manual tuning and widely used by students and researchers. The
work
ow is simple: after building a ML model, a student tests many possible
hyper-parameter values based on experience, guessing, or the analysis of
previously-evaluated results; the process is repeated until this student runs
out of time (often reaching a deadline) or is satised with the results. As such,
this approach requires a sucient amount of prior knowledge and experience
to identify optimal hyper-parameter values with limited time.
23