machines in parallel [6]. Genetic algorithms and particle swarm optimization
are the two main POAs that are popularly-used for HPO problems.
4.5.1. Genetic Algorithm
Genetic algorithm (GA) [18] is one of the common metaheuristic algo-
rithms based on the evolutionary theory that individuals with the best sur-
vival capability and adaptability to the environment are more likely to survive
and pass on their capabilities to future generations. The next generation will
also inherit their parents' characteristics and may involve better and worse
individuals. Better individuals will be more likely to survive and have more
capable ospring, while the worse individuals will gradually disappear. After
several generations, the individual with the best adaptability will be identi-
ed as the global optimum [99].
To apply GA to HPO problems, each chromosome or individual represents
a hyper-parameter, and its decimal value is the actual input value of the
hyper-parameter in each evaluation. Every chromosome has several genes,
which are binary digits; and then crossover and mutation operations are
performed on the genes of this chromosome. The population involves all
possible values within the initialized chromosome/parameter ranges, while
the tness function characterizes the evaluation metrics of the parameters
[99].
Since the randomly-initialized parameter values often do not include the
optimal parameter values, several operations, including selection, crossover,
and mutation operations, must be performed on the well-performing chromo-
somes to identify the optimums [18]. Chromosome selection is implemented
by selecting those chromosomes with good tness function values. To keep
the population size unchanged, the chromosomes with good tness function
values are passed to the next generation with higher probability, where they
generate new chromosomes with the parents' best characteristics. Chromo-
some selection ensures that good characteristics of each generation can be
passed to later generations. Crossover is used to generate new chromosomes
by exchanging a proportion of genes in dierent chromosomes. Mutation
operations are also used to generate new chromosomes by randomly altering
one or more genes of a chromosome. Crossover and mutation operations en-
able later generations to have dierent characteristics and reduce the chance
of missing good characteristics [3].
The main procedures of GA are as follows [98]:
1. Randomly initialize the population, chromosomes, and genes, which
32