explore the search space to detect optimal or near-optimal solutions. Hence,
they are particularly suitable for the HPO problems with large conguration
space due to their high eciency. For instance, they can be used in deep neu-
ral networks (DNNs) which have a large conguration space with multiple
hyper-parameters, including the activation and optimizer types, the learning
rate, drop-out rate, etc.
Although using HPO algorithms to tune the hyper-parameters of ML
models greatly improves the model performance, certain other aspects, like
their computational complexity, still have much room for improvement. On
the other hand, since dierent HPO models have their own advantages and
suitable problems, overviewing them is necessary for proper optimization
algorithm selection in terms of dierent types of ML models and problems.
This paper makes the following contributions:
1. It reviews common ML algorithms and their important hyper-parameters.
2. It analyzes common HPO techniques, including their benets and draw-
backs, to help apply them to dierent ML models by appropriate algo-
rithm selection in practical problems.
3. It surveys common HPO libraries and frameworks for practical use.
4. It discusses the open challenges and research directions of the HPO
research domain.
In this survey paper, we begin with a comprehensive introduction of the
common optimization techniques used in ML hyper-parameter tuning prob-
lems. Section 2 introduces the main concepts of mathematical optimization
and hyper-parameter optimization, as well as the general HPO process. In
Section 3, we discuss the key hyper-parameters of common ML models that
need to be tuned. Section 4 covers the various state-of-the-art optimization
approaches that have been proposed for tackling HPO problems. In Section
5, we analyze dierent HPO methods and discuss how they can be applied
to ML algorithms. In Section 6, we provide an introduction to various public
libraries and frameworks that are developed to implement HPO. Section 7
presents and discusses the experimental results of using HPO on benchmark
datasets for HPO method comparison and practical use case demonstration.
In Section 8, we discuss several research directions and open challenges that
should be considered to improve current HPO models or develop new HPO
approaches. We conclude the paper in Section 9.
5