instead of a sharp optimum that only performs well in a singular validation
set [6]. However, cross-validation increases the execution time several-fold. It
would be benecial if methods can better deal with overtting and improve
generalization in future research.
8.2.4. Randomness
There are stochastic components in the objective function of ML algo-
rithms; thus, in some cases, the optimal hyper-parameter conguration might
be dierent after each run. This randomness could be due to various pro-
cedures of certain ML models, like neural network initialization, or dierent
sampled subsets in a bagging model [93]; or due to certain procedures of
HPO algorithms, like crossover and mutation operations in GA. In addition,
it is often dicult for HPO methods to identify the global optimums, due to
the fact that HPO problems are mainly NP-hard problems. Many existing
HPO algorithms can only collect several dierent near-optimal values, which
is caused by randomness. Thus, the existing HPO models can be further
improved to reduce the impact of randomness. One possible solution is to
run a HPO method multiple times and select the hyper-parameter value that
occurs most as the nal optimum.
8.2.5. Scalability
In practice, one main limitation of many existing HPO frameworks is that
they are tightly integrated with one or a couple of machine learning libraries,
like sklearn and Keras, which restricts them to only work with a single node
instead of large data volumes [3]. To tackle large datasets, some distributed
machine learning platforms, like Apache SystemML [129] and Spark MLib
[130], have been developed; however, only very few HPO frameworks exist
that support distributed ML. Therefore, more research eorts and scalable
HPO frameworks, like the ones supporting distributed ML platforms, should
be developed to support more libraries.
On the other hand, future practical HPO algorithms should have the
scalability to eciently optimize hyper-parameters from a small size to a
large size, irrespective of whether they are continuous, discrete, categorical,
or conditional hyper-parameters.
8.2.6. Continuous Updating Capability
In practice, many datasets are not stationary and are constantly updated
by adding new data and deleting old data. Correspondingly, the optimal
54