which have a larger search space than KNN.
The performance of BO and multi-delity models is much better than GS
and RS. The computation time of BO-GP is often higher than other HPO
methods due to its cubic time complexity, but it can obtain better perfor-
mance metrics for ML models with small-size continuous hyper-parameter
space, like KNN. Conversely, hyperband is often not able to obtain the
highest accuracy or the lowest MSE among the optimization methods, but
their computational time is low because it works on the small-sized subsets.
The performance of BO-TPE and BOHB is often better than others, since
they can detect the optimal or near-optimal hyper-parameter congurations
within a short computational time.
For metaheuristics methods, GA and PSO, their accuracies are often
higher than other HPO methods for classication problems, and their MSEs
are often lower than other optimization techniques. However, their computa-
tional time is often higher than BO-TPE and multi-delity models, especially
for GA, which does not support parallel executions.
To summarize, it is simple to implement GS and RS, but they often can-
not detect the optimal hyper-parameter congurations or cost much compu-
tational time. BO-GP and GA also cost more computational time than many
other HPO methods, but BO-GP works well on small conguration space,
while GA is eective for large conguration space. Hyperband's computa-
tional time is low, but it cannot guarantee to detect the global optimums.
For ML models with large conguration space, BO-TPE, BOHB, and PSO
often work well.
8. Open Issues, Challenges, and Future Research Directions
Although there have been many existing HPO algorithms and practical
frameworks, some issues still need to be addressed, and several aspects in this
domain could be improved. In this section, we discuss the open challenges,
current research questions, and potential research directions in the future.
They can be classied as model complexity challenges and model performance
challenges, as summarized in Table 10.
8.1. Model Complexity
8.1.1. Costly Objective Function Evaluations
To evaluate the performance of a ML model with dierent hyper-parameter
congurations, its objective function must be minimized in each evaluation.
50