exploration and exploitation, they might only reach a local instead of a global
optimum. RS does not have this limitation since it does not focus on any
specic area. Additionally, it is dicult to parallelize BO models since their
intermediate results are dependent on each other [7].
4.4. Multi-delity Optimization Algorithms
One major issue with HPO is the long execution time, which increases
with a larger hyper-parameter conguration space and larger datasets. The
execution time may be several hours, several days, or even more [93]. Multi-
delity optimization techniques are common approaches to solve the con-
straint of limited time and resources. To save time, people can use a subset
of the original dataset or a subset of the features [94]. Multi-delity involves
low-delity and high-delity evaluations and combines them for practical
applications [95]. In low-delity evaluations, a relatively small subset is eval-
uated at a low cost but with poor generalization performance. In high-delity
evaluations, a relatively large subset is evaluated with better generalization
performance but at a higher cost than low-delity evaluations. In multi-
delity optimization algorithms, poorly-performing congurations are dis-
carded after each round of hyper-parameter evaluation on generated subsets,
and only well-performing hyper-parameter congurations will be evaluated
on the entire training set.
Bandit-based algorithms categorized to multi-delity optimization algo-
rithms have shown success dealing with deep learning optimization problems
[3]. Two common bandit-based techniques are successive halving [96] and
Hyperband [16].
4.4.1. Successive Halving
Theoretically speaking, exhaustive methods are able to identify the opti-
mal hyper-parameter combination by evaluating all the given combinations.
However, many factors, including limited time and resources, should be con-
sidered in practical applications. These factors are called budgets ( B). To
overcome the limitations of GS and RS and to improve eciency, successive
halving algorithms were proposed in [96].
The main process of using successive halving algorithms for HPO is as
follows. Firstly, it is presumed that there are nsets of hyper-parameter
combinations, and that they are evaluated with uniformly-allocated budgets
(b=B=n). Then, according to the evaluation results for each iteration, half
of the poorly-performing hyper-parameter congurations are eliminated, and
29