demonstrated in steps 4-5. The successive halving algorithm discards the
identied poorly-performing congurations and passes the well-performing
congurations on to the next iteration. This process is repeated until the
nal optimal hyper-parameter conguration is identied. By involving the
successive halving searching method, Hyperband has a computational com-
plexity ofO(nlogn ) [16].
4.4.3. BOHB
Bayesian Optimization HyperBand (BOHB) [97] is a state-of-the-art HPO
technique that combines Bayesian optimization and Hyperband to incorpo-
rate the advantages of both while avoiding their drawbacks. The original
Hyperband uses a random search to search the hyper-parameter congura-
tion space, which has a low eciency. BOHB replaces the RS method by
BO to achieve both high performance as well as low execution time by ef-
fectively using parallel resources to optimize all types of hyper-parameters.
In BOHB, TPE is the standard surrogate model for BO, but it uses multidi-
mensional kernel density estimators. Therefore, the complexity of BOHB is
alsoO(nlogn ) [97].
It has been shown that BOHB outperforms many other optimization tech-
niques when tuning SVM and DL models [97]. The only limitation of BOHB
is that it requires the evaluations on subsets with small budgets to be rep-
resentative of evaluations on the entire training set; otherwise, BOHB may
have a slower convergence speed than standard BO models.
4.5. Metaheuristic Algorithms
Metaheuristic algorithms [98] are a set of algorithms mainly inspired by
biological theories and widely used for optimization problems. Unlike many
traditional optimization methods, metaheuristics have the capacity to solve
non-convex, non-continuous, and non-smooth optimization problems.
Population-based optimization algorithms (POAs) are a major type of
metaheuristic algorithm, including genetic algorithms (GAs), evolutionary
algorithms, evolutionary strategies, and particle swarm optimization (PSO).
POAs start by creating and updating a population as each generation; each
individual in every generation is then evaluated until the global optimum is
identied [14]. The main dierences between dierent POAs are the methods
used to generate and select populations [17]. POAs can be easily parallelized
since a population of Nindividuals can be evaluated on at most Nthreads or
31