optimization, particle swarm optimization, genetic algorithm, grid search.
1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) algorithms have been widely used in many appli-
cations domains, including advertising, recommendation systems, computer
vision, natural language processing, and user behavior analytics [1]. This
is because they are generic and demonstrate high performance in data ana-
lytics problems. Dierent ML algorithms are suitable for dierent types of
problems or datasets [2]. In general, building an eective machine learning
model is a complex and time-consuming process that involves determining
the appropriate algorithm and obtaining an optimal model architecture by
tuning its hyper-parameters (HPs) [3].
Two types of parameters exist in machine learning models: one that
can be initialized and updated through the data learning process ( e.g., the
weights of neurons in neural networks), named model parameters; while
the other, named hyper-parameters, cannot be directly estimated from data
learning and must be set before training a ML model because they dene the
architecture of a ML model [4]. Hyper-parameters are the parameters that
are used to either congure a ML model ( e.g., the penalty parameter Cin a
support vector machine, and the learning rate to train a neural network) or
to specify the algorithm used to minimize the loss function ( e.g., the activa-
tion function and optimizer types in a neural network, and the kernel type
in a support vector machine) [5].
To build an optimal ML model, a range of possibilities must be ex-
plored. The process of designing the ideal model architecture with an opti-
mal hyper-parameter conguration is named hyper-parameter tuning. Tun-
ing hyper-parameters is considered a key component of building an eective
ML model, especially for tree-based ML models and deep neural networks,
which have many hyper-parameters [6]. Hyper-parameter tuning process is
dierent among dierent ML algorithms due to their dierent types of hyper-
parameters, including categorical, discrete, and continuous hyper-parameters
[7]. Manual testing is a traditional way to tune hyper-parameters and is still
prevalent in graduate student research, although it requires a deep under-
standing of the used ML algorithms and their hyper-parameter value settings
[8]. However, manual tuning is ineective for many problems due to certain
factors, including a large number of hyper-parameters, complex models, time-
consuming model evaluations, and non-linear hyper-parameter interactions.
2