6.16. TPOT
TPOT [122] is a Python tool for auto-ML that uses genetic programming
to optimize ML pipelines. TPOT is built on top of sklearn, so it is easy to
implement TPOT on ML models. 'TPOTClassier' is its principal function,
and several additional hyper-parameters of GA must be set to t specic
problems.
6.17. Nevergrad
Nevergrad [123] is an open-source Python library that includes a wide
range of optimizers, like fast-GA and PSO. In ML, Nevergrad can be used
to tune all types of hyper-parameters, including discrete, continuous, and
categorical hyper-parameters, by choosing dierent optimizers.
7. Experiments
To summarize the content of Sections 3 to 6, a comprehensive overview
of applying hyper-parameter optimization techniques to ML models is shown
in Table 2. It provides a summary of common ML algorithms, their hyper-
parameters, suitable optimization methods, and available Python libraries;
thus, data analysts and researchers can look up this table and select suitable
optimization algorithms as well as libraries for practical use.
To put theory into practice, several experiments have been conducted
based on Table 2. This section provides the experiments of applying eight
dierent HPO techniques to three common and representative ML algorithms
on two benchmark datasets. In the rst part of this section, the experimental
setup and the main process of HPO are discussed. In the second part, the
results of utilizing dierent HPO methods are compared and analyzed. The
sample code of the experiments has been published in [124] to illustrate the
process of applying hyper-parameter optimization to ML models.
7.1. Experimental Setup
Based on the steps to optimize hyper-parameters discussed in Section
2.2, several steps were completed before the actual optimization experiments
start.
Firstly, two standard benchmarking datasets provided by the sklearn li-
brary [31], namely, the Modied National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology dataset (MNIST) and the Boston housing dataset, are selected as
43