models, then choosing other HPO algorithms would be more ecient [97].
ML algorithms can be classied by the characteristics of their hyper-
parameter congurations. Appropriate optimization algorithms can be cho-
sen to optimize the hyper-parameters based on these characteristics.
5.2.1. One Discrete Hyper-parameter
Commonly for some ML algorithms, like certain neighbor-based, clus-
tering, and dimensionality reduction algorithms, only one discrete hyper-
parameter needs to be tuned. For KNN, the major hyper-parameter is k,
the number of considered neighbors. The most essential hyper-parameter of
k-means, hierarchical clustering, and EM is the number of clusters. Similarly,
for dimensionality reduction algorithms, including PCA and LDA, their basic
hyper-parameter is 'n components', the number of features to be extracted.
In these situations, Bayesian optimization is the best choice, and the
three surrogates could be tested to nd the best one. Hyperband is another
good choice, which may have a fast execution speed due to its capacity for
parallelization. In some cases, people may want to ne-tune the ML model by
considering other less important hyper-parameters, like the distance metric
of KNN and the SVD solver type of PCA; so BO-TPE, GA, or PSO could
be chosen for these situations.
5.2.2. One Continuous Hyper-parameter
Some linear models, including ridge and lasso algorithms, and some na ve
Bayes algorithms, involving multinomial NB, Bernoulli NB, and complement
NB, generally only have one vital continuous hyper-parameter to be tuned.
In ridge and lasso algorithms, the continuous hyper-parameter is 'alpha', the
regularization strength. In the three NB algorithms mentioned above, the
critical hyper-parameter is also named 'alpha', but it represents the additive
(Laplace/Lidstone) smoothing parameter. In terms of these ML algorithms,
BO-GP is the best choice, since it is good at optimizing a small number of
continuous hyper-parameters. Gradient-based algorithms can also be used,
but might only detect local optimums, so they are less eective than BO-GP.
5.2.3. A Few Conditional Hyper-parameters
It is noticeable that many ML algorithms have conditional hyper-parameters,
like SVM, LR, and DBSCAN. LR has three correlated hyper-parameters,
'penalty', 'C', and the solver type. Similarly, DBSCAN has 'eps' and 'min samples'
that must be tuned in conjunction. SVM is more complex, since after setting
38