the benchmark datasets for HPO method evaluation on data analytics prob-
lems. MNIST is a hand-written digit recognition dataset used as a multi-
classication problem, while the Boston housing dataset contains information
about the price of houses in various places in the city of Boston and can be
used as a regression dataset to predict the housing prices.
At the next stage, the ML models with their objective function need to be
congured. In Section 5.2, all common ML models are divided into ve cat-
egories based on their hyper-parameter types. Among those ML categories,
"one discrete hyper-parameter", "a few conditional hyper-parameters", and
"a large hyper-parameter conguration space with multiple types of hyper-
parameters" are the three most common cases. Thus, three ML algorithms,
KNN, SVM, and RF, are selected as the target models to be optimized, since
their hyper-parameter types represent the three most common HPO cases:
KNN has one important hyper-parameter, the number of considered near-
est neighbors for each sample; SVM has a few conditional hyper-parameters,
like the kernel type and the penalty parameter C; RF has multiple hyper-
parameters of dierent types, as discussed in Section 3.1.5. Moreover, KNN,
SVM, and RF can all be applied to solve both classication and regression
problems.
In the next step, the performance metrics and evaluation methods are
congured. For each experiment on the selected two datasets, 3-fold cross
validation is implemented to evaluate the involved HPO methods. The two
most commonly-used performance metrics are used in our experiments. For
classication models, accuracy is used as the classier performance metric,
which is the proportion of correctly classied data; while for regression mod-
els, the mean squared error (MSE) is used as the regressor performance
metric, which measures the average squared dierence between the predicted
values and the actual values. Additionally, the computational time (CT) ,
the total time needed to complete a HPO process with 3-fold cross-validation,
is also used as the model eciency metric [55]. In each experiment, the op-
timized ML model architecture that has the highest accuracy or the lowest
MSE and the optimal hyper-parameter conguration will be returned.
After that, to fairly compare dierent optimization algorithms and frame-
works, certain constraints should be satised. Firstly, we compare dierent
HPO methods using the same hyper-parameter conguration space. For
KNN, the only hyper-parameter to be optimized, 'n neighbors', is set to be
in the same range of 1 to 20 for each optimization method evaluation. The
hyper-parameters of SVM and RF models for classication and regression
45