whereBis a set of regression trees in the forest. The major procedures of
SMAC are as follows [3]:
1. RF starts with building Bregression trees, each constructed by sam-
plingninstances from the training set with replacement.
2. A split node is selected from dhyper-parameters for each tree.
3. To maintain a low computational cost, both the minimum number of
instances considered for further split and the number of trees to grow
are set to a certain value.
4. Finally, the mean and variance for each new conguration are estimated
by RF.
Compared with BO-GP, the main advantage of SMAC is its support for all
types of variables, including continuous, discrete, categorical, and conditional
hyper-parameters [91]. The time complexities of using SMAC to t and
predict variances are O(nlogn ) andO(logn), respectively, which are much
lower than the complexities of BO-GP [3].
4.3.3. BO-TPE
Tree-structured Parzen estimator (TPE) [12] is another common surro-
gate model for BO. Instead of dening a predictive distribution used in BO-
GP, BO-TPE creates two density functions, l(x) andg(x), to act as the
generative models for all domain variables [3]. To apply TPE, the observa-
tion results are divided into good results and poor results by a pre-dened
percentiley, and the two sets of results are modeled by simple Parzen win-
dows [12]:
p(xjy;D) =l(x); if y<y
g(x); if y>y: (25)
After that, the expected improvement in the acquisition function is re-

ected by the ratio between the two density functions, which is used to
determine the new congurations for evaluation. The Parzen estimators are
organized in a tree structure, so the specied conditional dependencies are
retained. Therefore, TPE naturally supports specied conditional hyper-
parameters [91]. The time complexity of BO-TPE is O(nlogn ), which is
lower than the complexity of BO-GP [3].
BO methods are eective for many HPO problems, even if the objective
functionfis stochastic, non-convex, or non-continuous. However, the main
drawback of BO models is that, if they fail to achieve the balance between
28