other after each iteration, so this process is easily parallelized to improve
model eciency [9].
The main limitation of PSO is that it requires proper population initial-
ization; otherwise, it might only reach a local instead of a global optimum, es-
pecially for discrete hyper-parameters [105]. Proper population initialization
requires developers' prior experience or using population initialization tech-
niques. Many population initialization techniques have been proposed to im-
prove the performance of evolutionary algorithms, like the opposition-based
optimization algorithm [101] and the space transformation search method
[106]. Involving additional population initialization techniques will require
more execution time and resources.
5. Applying Optimization Techniques to Machine Learning Algo-
rithms
5.1. Optimization Techniques Analysis
Grid search (GS) is a simple method, its major limitation being that it is
time-consuming and impacted by the curse of dimensionality [83]. Thus, it is
unsuitable for a large number of hyper-parameters. Moreover, GS is often not
able to detect the global optimum of continuous parameters, since it requires
a pre-dened, nite set of hyper-parameter values. It is also unrealistic for
GS to be used to identify integer and continuous hyper-parameter optimums
with limited time and resources. Therefore, compared with other techniques,
GS is only ecient for a small number of categorical hyper-parameters.
Random search is more ecient than GS and supports all types of hyper-
parameters. In practical applications, using RS to evaluate the randomly-
selected hyper-parameter values helps analysts to explore a large search
space. However, since RS does not consider previously-tested results, it may
involve many unnecessary evaluations, which decrease its eciency [13].
Hyperband can be considered an improved version of RS, and they both
support parallel executions. Hyperband balances model performance and
resource usage, so it is more ecient than RS, especially with limited time
and resources [15]. However, GS, RS, and Hyperband all have a major con-
straint in that they treat each hyper-parameter independently and do not
consider hyper-parameter correlations [107]. Thus, they will be inecient
for ML algorithms with conditional hyper-parameters, like SVM, DBSCAN,
and logistic regression.
35