tions in the search space, ultimately selecting the best-performing hyper-
parameter combination. Grid search (GS) [12] is a decision-theoretic ap-
proach that involves exhaustively searching for a xed domain of hyper-
parameter values. Random search (RS) [13] is another decision-theoretic
method that randomly selects hyper-parameter combinations in the search
space, given limited execution time and resources. In GS and RS, each hyper-
parameter conguration is treated independently.
Unlike GS and RS, Bayesian optimization (BO) [14] models determine the
next hyper-parameter value based on the previous results of tested hyper-
parameter values, which avoids many unnecessary evaluations; thus, BO can
detect the optimal hyper-parameter combination within fewer iterations than
GS and RS. To be applied to dierent problems, BO can model the distribu-
tion of the objective function using dierent models as the surrogate function,
including Gaussian process (GP), random forest (RF), and tree-structured
Parzen estimators (TPE) models [15]. BO-RF and BO-TPE can retain the
conditionality of variables [15]. Thus, they can be used to optimize condi-
tional hyper-parameters, like the kernel type and the penalty parameter Cin
a support vector machine (SVM). However, since BO models work sequen-
tially to balance the exploration of unexplored areas and the exploitation of
currently-tested regions, it is dicult to parallelize them.
Training a ML model often takes considerable time and space. Multi-
delity optimization algorithms are developed to tackle problems with lim-
ited resources, and the most common ones being bandit-based algorithms.
Hyperband [16] is a popular bandit-based optimization technique that can be
considered an improved version of RS. It generates small versions of datasets
and allocates a same budget to each hyper-parameter combination. In each
iteration of Hyperband, poorly-performing hyper-parameter congurations
are eliminated to save time and resources.
Metaheuristic algorithms are a set of techniques used to solve complex,
large search space and non-convex optimization problems to which HPO
problems belong [17]. Among all metaheuristic methods, genetic algorithm
(GA) [18] and particle swarm optimization (PSO) [19] are the two most
prevalent metaheuristic algorithms used for HPO problems. Genetic algo-
rithms detect well-performing hyper-parameter combinations in each gener-
ation, and pass them to the next generation until the best-performing com-
bination is identied. In PSO algorithms, each particle communicates with
other particles to detect and update the current global optimum in each it-
eration until the nal optimum is detected. Metaheuristics can eciently
4