The main process of HPO is as follows [10]:
1. Select the objective function and the performance metrics;
2. Select the hyper-parameters that require tuning, summarize their types,
and determine the appropriate optimization technique;
3. Train the ML model using the default hyper-parameter conguration
or common values as the baseline model;
4. Start the optimization process with a large search space as the hyper-
parameter feasible domain determined by manual testing and/or do-
main knowledge;
5. Narrow the search space based on the regions of currently-tested well-
performing hyper-parameter values, or explore new search spaces if
necessary.
6. Return the best-performing hyper-parameter conguration as the nal
solution.
However, most traditional optimization techniques [25] are unsuitable
for HPO, since HPO problems are dierent from traditional optimization
problems in the following aspects [10]:
1. The optimization target, the objective function of ML models, is usu-
ally a non-convex and non-dierentiable function. Therefore, many
traditional optimization methods designed to solve convex or dieren-
tiable optimization problems are often unsuitable for HPO problems,
since these methods may return a local optimum instead of a global op-
timum. Additionally, an optimization target lacking smoothness makes
certain traditional derivative-free optimization models perform poorly
for HPO problems [26].
2. The hyper-parameters of ML models include continuous, discrete, cat-
egorical, and conditional hyper-parameters. Thus, many traditional
numerical optimization methods [27] that only aim to tackle numerical
or continuous variables are unsuitable for HPO problems.
3. It is often computationally expensive to train a ML model on a large-
scale dataset. HPO techniques sometimes use data sampling to obtain
approximate values of the objective function. Thus, eective optimiza-
tion techniques for HPO problems should be able to use these approx-
imate values. However, function evaluation time is often ignored in
many black-box optimization (BBO) models, so they often require ex-
act instead of approximate objective function values. Consequently,
10