techniques have their own strengths and drawbacks in dierent cases, and
currently, there is no single optimization approach that outperforms all other
approaches when processing dierent datasets with various metrics and hyper-
parameter types [3]. In this paper, we have analyzed the strengths and weak-
nesses of common hyper-parameter optimization techniques based on their
principles and their performance in practical applications; but this topic
could be extended more comprehensively.
To solve this problem, a standard set of benchmarks could be designed
and agreed on by the community for a better comparison of dierent HPO
algorithms. For example, there is a platform called COCO (Comparing Con-
tinuous Optimizers) [127] that provides benchmarks and analyzes common
continuous optimizers. However, there is, to date, not any reliable platform
that provides benchmarks and analysis of all common hyper-parameter opti-
mization approaches. It would be easier for people to choose HPO algorithms
in practical applications if a platform like COCO exists for HPO problems.
In addition, a unied metric can also improve the comparability of dier-
ent HPO algorithms, since dierent metrics are currently used in dierent
practical problems [6].
On the other hand, based on the comparison of dierent HPO algorithms,
a way to further improve HPO is to combine existing models or propose new
models that contain as many benets as possible and are more suitable for
practical problems than existing singular models. For example, the BOHB
method [97] has had some success dealing with HPO problems by combining
Bayesian optimization and Hyperband. In addition, future research should
consider both model performance and time budgets to develop HPO algo-
rithms that suit real-world applications.
8.2.3. Over-tting and Generalization
Generalization is another issue with HPO models. Since hyper-parameter
evaluations are done with a nite number of evaluations in datasets, the
optimal hyper-parameter values detected by HPO approaches might not be
the same optimums on previously-unseen data. This is similar to over-tting
issues with ML models that occur when a model is closely t to a nite
number of known data points but is unt to unseen data [128]. Generalization
is also a common concern for multi-delity algorithms, like Hyperband and
BOHB, since they need to extract subsets to represent the entire dataset.
One solution to reduce or avoid over-tting is to use cross-validation to
identify a stable optimum that performs best in all or most of the subsets
53