optimums, or at least their approximations, can be detected. With a limited
budget, RS is able to explore a larger search space than GS [13].
The main advantage of RS is that it is easily parallelized and resource-
allocated since each evaluation is independent. Unlike GS, RS samples a xed
number of parameter combinations from the specied distribution, which
improves system eciency by reducing the probability of wasting much time
on a small poor-performing region. Since the number of total evaluations
in RS is set to a xed value nbefore the optimization process starts, the
computational complexity of RS is O(n) [84]. In addition, RS can detect the
global optimum or the near-global optimum when given enough budgets [6].
Although RS is more ecient than GS for large search spaces, there are
still a large number of unnecessary function evaluations since it does not
exploit the previously well-performing regions [2].
To conclude, the main limitation of both RS and GS is that every eval-
uation in their iterations is independent of previous evaluations; thus, they
waste massive time evaluating poorly-performing areas of the search space.
This issue can be solved by other optimization methods, like Bayesian opti-
mization that uses previous evaluation records to determine the next evalu-
ation [14].
4.2. Gradient-based Optimization
Gradient descent [85] is a traditional optimization technique that calcu-
lates the gradient of variables to identify the promising direction and moves
towards the optimum. After randomly selecting a data point, the technique
moves towards the opposite direction of the largest gradient to locate the
next data point. Therefore, a local optimum can be reached after conver-
gence. The local optimum is also the global optimum for convex functions.
Gradient-based algorithms have a time complexity of O(nk) for optimizing k
hyper-parameters [86].
For specic machine learning algorithms, the gradient of certain hyper-
parameters can be calculated, and then the gradient descent can be used
to optimize these hyper-parameters. Although gradient-based algorithms
have a faster convergence speed to reach local optimum than the previously-
presented methods in Section 4.1, they have several limitations. Firstly, they
can only be used to optimize continuous hyper-parameters because other
types of hyper-parameters, like categorical hyper-parameters, do not have
gradient directions. Secondly, they are only ecient for convex functions
because the local instead of a global optimum may be reached for non-convex
25