On the other hand, nonconvex functions have multiple local optimums,
but only one of these optimums is the global optimum. Most ML and HPO
problems are nonconvex optimization problems. Thus, utilizing inappro-
priate optimization methods may only result in a local instead of a global
optimum.
There are many traditional methods that can be used to solve opti-
mization problems, including gradient descent, Newton's method, conjugate
gradient, and heuristic optimization methods [20]. Gradient descent is a
commonly-used optimization method that uses the negative gradient direc-
tion as the search direction to move towards the optimum. However, gradient
descent cannot guarantee to detect the global optimum unless the objective
function is a convex function. Newton's method uses the inverse matrix of
the Hessian matrix to obtain the optimum. Newton's method has faster con-
vergence speed than gradient descent, but often requires more time and larger
space than gradient descent to store and calculate the Hessian matrix. Con-
jugate gradient searches along the conjugated directions constructed by the
gradient of known data points to detect the optimum. Conjugate gradient
has faster convergence speed than gradient descent, but its calculation of con-
jugate gradient is more complex. Unlike other traditional methods, heuristic
methods use empirical rules to solve the optimization problems instead of
following systematical steps to obtain the solution. Heuristic methods can
often detect the approximate global optimum within a few iterations, but
cannot guarantee to detect the global optimum [20].
2.2. Hyper-parameter Optimization Problem Statement
During the design process of ML models, eectively searching the hyper-
parameters' space using optimization techniques can identify the optimal
hyper-parameters for the models. The hyper-parameter optimization process
consists of four main components: an estimator (a regressor or a classier)
with its objective function, a search space (conguration space), a search
or optimization method used to nd hyper-parameter combinations, and an
evaluation function to compare the performance of dierent hyper-parameter
congurations.
The domain of a hyper-parameter can be continuous ( e.g., learning rate),
discrete ( e.g., number of clusters), binary ( e.g., whether to use early stopping
or not), or categorical ( e.g., type of optimizer). Therefore, hyper-parameters
are classied as continuous, discrete, and categorical hyper-parameters. For
continuous and discrete hyper-parameters, their domains are usually bounded
8