a dierent kernel type, there is a separate set of conditional hyper-parameters
that need to be tuned next, as described in Section 3.1.3. Hence, some HPO
methods that cannot eectively optimize conditional hyper-parameters, in-
cluding GS, RS, BO-GP, and Hyperband, are not suitable for ML models
with conditional hyper-parameters. For these ML methods, BO-TPE is the
best choice if we have pre-dened relationships among the hyper-parameters.
SMAC is also a good choice, since it also performs well for tuning conditional
hyper-parameters. GA and PSO can be used, as well.
5.2.4. A Large Hyper-parameter Conguration Space with Multiple Types of
Hyper-parameters
Tree-based algorithms, including DT, RF, ET, and XGBoost, as well
as DL algorithms, like DNN, CNN, RNN, are the most complex types of
ML algorithms to bed tuned, since they have many hyper-parameters with
various, dierent types. For these ML models, PSO is the best choice since it
enables parallel executions to improve eciency, particularly for DL models
that often require massive training time. Some other techniques, like GA,
BO-TPE, and SMAC can also be used, but they may cost more time than
PSO, since it is dicult to parallelize these techniques.
5.2.5. Categorical Hyper-parameters
This category of hyper-parameters is mainly for ensemble learning algo-
rithms, since their major hyper-parameter is a categorical hyper-parameter.
For bagging and AdaBoost, the categorical hyper-parameter is 'base estimator',
which is set to be a singular ML model. For voting, it is 'estimators', in-
dicating a list of ML singular models to be combined. The voting method
has another categorical hyper-parameter, 'voting', which is used to choose
whether to use a hard or soft voting method. If we only consider these cate-
gorical hyper-parameters, GS would be sucient to detect their suitable base
machine learners. On the other hand, in many cases, other hyper-parameters
need to be considered, like 'n estimators', 'max samples', and 'max features'
in bagging, as well as 'n estimators' and 'learning rate' in AdaBoost; conse-
quently, BO algorithms would be a better choice to optimize these continuous
or discrete hyper-parameters.
In conclusion, when tuning a ML model to achieve high model perfor-
mance and low computational costs, the most suitable HPO algorithm should
be selected based on the properties of its hyper-parameters.
39