addition, the maximum number of estimators at which boosting is termi-
nated, 'n estimators', and the learning rate that shrinks the contribution of
each classier, should also be tuned to achieve a trade-o between these two
hyper-parameters.
3.1.7. Deep Learning Models
Deep learning (DL) algorithms are widely applied to various areas | like
computer vision, natural language processing, and machine translation |
since they have had great success solving many types of problems. DL mod-
els are based on the theory of articial neural networks (ANNs). Common
types of DL architectures include deep neural networks (DNNs), feedforward
neural networks (FFNNs), deep belief networks (DBNs), convolutional neu-
ral networks (CNNs), recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and many more
[63]. All these DL models have similar hyper-parameters since they have
similar underlying neural network architecture. Compared with other ML
models, DL models benet more from HPO since they often have many
hyper-parameters that require tuning.
The rst set of hyper-parameters is related to the construction of a DL
model; hence, named model design hyper-parameters. Since all neural net-
work models have an input layer and an output layer, the complexity of a
deep learning model mainly depends on the number of hidden layers and the
number of neurons in each layer, which are two main hyper-parameters to
build DL models [64]. These two hyper-parameters are set and tuned accord-
ing to the complexity of the datasets or the problems. DL models need to
have enough capacity to model objective functions (or prediction tasks) while
avoiding over-tting. At the next stage, certain function types need to be set
or tuned. The rst function type to congure is the loss function type, which
is chosen mainly based on the problem type ( e.g., binary cross-entropy for bi-
nary classication problems, multi-class cross-entropy for multi-classication
problems, and RMSE for regression problems). Another important hyper-
parameter is the activation function type used to model non-linear functions,
which be set to 'softmax', 'rectied linear unit (ReLU)', 'sigmoid', 'tanh', or
'softsign'. Lastly, the optimizer type can be set to stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), adaptive moment estimation (Adam), root mean square propagation
(RMSprop), etc. [65].
On the other hand, some other hyper-parameters are related to the opti-
mization and training process of DL models; hence, categorized as optimizer
hyper-parameters. The learning rate is one of the most important hyper-
19