in practical applications [12] [23]. On the other hand, the hyper-parameter
conguration space sometimes contains conditionality. A hyper-parameter
may need to be used or tuned depending on the value of another hyper-
parameter, called a conditional hyper-parameter [10]. For instance, in SVM,
the degree of the polynomial kernel function only needs to be tuned when
the kernel type is chosen to be polynomial.
In simple cases, all hyper-parameters can take unrestricted real values,
and the feasible set Xof hyper-parameters can be a real-valued n-dimensional
vector space. However, in most cases, the hyper-parameters of a ML model
often take on values from dierent domains and have dierent constraints,
so their optimization problems are often complex constrained optimization
problems [24]. For instance, the number of considered features in a decision
tree should be in the range of 0 to the number of features, and the number
of clusters in k-means should not be larger than the size of data points.
Additionally, categorical features can often only take several certain values,
like the limited choices of the activation function and the optimizer of a
neural network. Therefore, the feasible domain of Xoften has a complex
structure, which increases the problems' complexity [24].
In general, for a hyper-parameter optimization problem, the aim is to
obtain [19]:
x= arg min
x2Xf(x); (6)
wheref(x) is the objective function to be minimized, such as the error rate or
the root mean squared error (RMSE); xis the hyper-parameter conguration
that produces the optimum value of f(x); and a hyper-parameter xcan take
any value in the search space X.
The aim of HPO is to achieve optimal or near-optimal model performance
by tuning hyper-parameters within the given budgets [3]. The mathemati-
cal expression of the function fvaries, depending on the objective function
of the chosen ML algorithm and the performance metric function. Model
performance can be evaluated by various metrics, like accuracy, RMSE, F1-
score, and false alarm rate. On the other hand, in practice, time budgets are
an essential constraint for optimizing HPO models and must be considered.
It often requires a massive amount of time to optimize the objective function
of a ML model with a reasonable number of hyper-parameter congurations.
Every time a hyper-parameter value is tested, the entire ML model needs to
be retrained, and the validation set needs to be processed to generate a score
that re
ects the model performance.
9