function 'AgglomerativeClustering' is a common type of hierarchical cluster-
ing. In agglomerative clustering, the linkage criteria, 'linkage', determines
the distance between sets of observations and can be set to 'ward', 'com-
plete', 'average', or 'single', indicating whether to minimize the variance of
the all clusters, or use the maximum, average, or minimum distance between
every two clusters, respectively. Like other clustering methods, its main
hyper-parameter is the number of clusters, 'n clusters'. However, 'n clusters'
cannot be set if we choose to set the 'distance threshold', the linkage distance
threshold for merging clusters, since if so, 'n clusters' will be determined au-
tomatically.
DBSCAN [74] is a density-based clustering method that determines the
clusters by dividing data into clusters with suciently high density. Unlike
other clustering models, the number of clusters does not need to be con-
gured before training. Instead, DBSCAN has two signicant conditional
hyper-parameters | the scan radius represented by 'eps', and the mini-
mum number of considered neighbor points represented by 'min samples' |
which dene the cluster density together [75]. DBSCAN works by starting
with an unvisited point and detecting all its neighbor points within a pre-
dened distance 'eps'. If the number of neighbor points reaches the value of
'min samples', this unvisited point and all its neighbors are dened as a clus-
ter. The procedures are executed recursively until all data points have been
visited. A higher 'min samples' or a lower 'eps' indicates a higher density to
form a cluster.
3.2.2. Dimensionality Reduction Algorithms
The increasing amount of collected data provides ample information, but
also increases problem complexity. In real-world applications, many features
are irrelevant or redundant to predict target variables. Dimensionality re-
duction algorithms often serve as feature engineering methods to extract
important features and eliminate insignicant or redundant features. Two
common dimensionality-reduction algorithms are principal component anal-
ysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). In PCA and LDA, the
number of features to be extracted, represented by 'n components' in sklearn,
is the main hyper-parameter to be tuned.
Principal component analysis (PCA) [76] is a widely used linear dimen-
sionality reduction method. PCA is based on the concept of mapping the
originaln-dimensional features into k-dimension features as the new orthog-
onal features, also called the principal components. PCA works by calculat-
22