6. Existing HPO Frameworks
To tackle HPO problems, many open-source libraries exist to apply theory
into practice and lower the threshold for ML developers. In this section,
we provide a brief introduction to some popular open-source HPO libraries
or frameworks mainly for Python programming. The principles behind the
involved optimization algorithms are provided in Section 4.
6.1. Sklearn
In sklearn [31], 'GridSearchCV' can be implemented to detect the optimal
hyper-parameters using the GS algorithm. Each hyper-parameter value in
the human-dened conguration space is evaluated by the program, with
its performance evaluated using cross-validation. When all the instances in
the conguration space have been evaluated, the optimal hyper-parameter
combination in the dened search space with its performance score will be
returned.
'RandomizedSearchCV' is also provided in sklearn to implement a RS
method. It evaluates a pre-dened number of randomly-selected hyper-
parameter values in parallel. Cross-validation is conducted to eectively
evaluate the performance of each conguration.
6.2. Spearmint
Spearmint [87] is a library using Bayesian optimization with the Gaussian
process as the surrogate model. Spearmint's primary deciency is that it is
not very ecient for categorical and conditional hyper-parameters.
6.3. BayesOpt
Bayesian Optimization (BayesOpt) [109] is a Python library employed
to solve HPO problems using BO. BayesOpt uses a Gaussian process as its
surrogate model to calculate the objective function based on past evaluations
and utilizes an acquisition function to determine the next values.
6.4. Hyperopt
Hyperopt [110] is a HPO framework that involves RS and BO-TPE as
the optimization algorithms. Unlike some of the other libraries that only
support a single model, Hyperopt is able to use multiple models to model
hierarchical hyper-parameters. In addition, Hyperopt is parallelizable since
it uses MongoDb as the central database to store the hyper-parameter combi-
nations. Hyperopt-sklearn [111] and hyperas [112] are the two libraries that
can apply Hyperopt to scikit-learn and Keras libraries.
40