hyper-parameter values or combinations may also change with the changes
in data. Currently, developing HPO methods with the capacity to continu-
ously tune hyper-parameter values as the data changes has not drawn much
attention, since researchers and data analysts often do not alter the ML
model after achieving a currently optimal performance [3]. However, since
their optimal hyper-parameter values would change as data changes, proper
approaches should be proposed to achieve continuous updating capability.
9. Conclusion
Machine learning has become the primary strategy for tackling data-
related problems and has been widely used in various applications. To apply
ML models to practical problems, their hyper-parameters need to be tuned to
t specic datasets. However, since the scale of produced data is greatly in-
creased in real-life, and manually tuning hyper-parameters is extremely com-
putationally expensive, it has become crucial to optimize hyper-parameters
by an automatic process. In this survey paper, we have comprehensively dis-
cussed the state-of-the-art research into the domain of hyper-parameter opti-
mization as well as how to apply them to dierent ML models by theory and
practical experiments. To apply optimization methods to ML models, the
hyper-parameter types in a ML model is the main concern for HPO method
selection. To summarize, BOHB is the recommended choice for optimizing a
ML model, if randomly selected subsets are highly-representative of the given
dataset, since it can eciently optimize all types of hyper-parameters; other-
wise, BO models are recommended for small hyper-parameter conguration
space, while PSO is usually the best choice for large conguration space.
Moreover, some existing useful HPO tools and frameworks, open challenges,
and potential research directions are also provided and highlighted for prac-
tical use and future research purposes. We hope that our survey paper serves
as a useful resource for ML users, developers, data analysts, and researchers
to use and tune ML models utilizing proper HPO techniques and frameworks.
We also hope that it helps to enhance understanding of the challenges that
still exist within the HPO domain, and thereby further advancing HPO and
ML applications in future research.
References
[1] M.I. Jordan, T.M. Mitchell, Machine learning: Trends,
perspectives, and prospects, Science 349 (2015) 255{260.
55