Table 10: The open challenges and future directions of HPO research
Category Challenges & Future Re-
quirementsBrief Description
Model complexityCostly objective function eval-
uationsHPO methods should reduce evaluation time
on large datasets.
Complex search space HPO methods should reduce execution time on
high dimensionalities (large hyper-parameter
search space).
Model performanceStrong anytime performance HPO methods should be able to detect the op-
timal or near-optimal HPs even with a very
limited budget.
Strong nal performance HPO methods should be able to detect the
global optimum when given a sucient bud-
get.
Comparability There should exist a standard set of bench-
marks to fairly evaluate and compare dierent
optimization algorithms.
Over-tting and generalization The optimal HPs detected by HPO methods
should have generalizability to build ecient
models on unseen data.
Randomness HPO methods should reduce randomness on
the obtained results.
Scalability HPO methods should be scalable to multi-
ple libraries or platforms ( e.g., distributed ML
platforms).
Continuous updating capabil-
ityHPO methods should consider their capacity
to detect and update optimal HP combinations
on continuously-updated data.
Depending on the scale of data, the model complexity, and available compu-
tational resources, the evaluation of each hyper-parameter conguration may
cost several minutes, hours, days, or even more [93]. Additionally, the values
of certain hyper-parameters have a direct impact on the execution time, like
the number of considered neighbors in KNN, the number of basic decision
trees in RF, and the number of hidden layers in deep neural networks [125].
To solve this problem by HPO algorithms, BO models reduce the to-
tal number of evaluations by spending time choosing the next evaluating
point instead of simply evaluating all possible hyper-parameter congura-
tions; however, they still require much execution time due to their poor
capacity for parallelization. On the other hand, although multi-delity opti-
mization methods, like Hyperband, have had some success dealing with HPO
problems with limited budgets, there are still some problems that cannot be
eectively solved by HPO due to the complexity of models or the scale of
datasets [6]. For example, the ImageNet [126] challenge is a very popular
problem in the image processing domain, but there has not been any re-
51