These factors have inspired increased research in techniques for automatic
optimization of hyper-parameters; so-called hyper-parameter optimization
(HPO) [9]. The main aim of HPO is to automate hyper-parameter tuning
process and make it possible for users to apply machine learning models to
practical problems eectively [3]. The optimal model architecture of a ML
model is expected to be obtained after a HPO process. Some important
reasons for applying HPO techniques to ML models are as follows [6]:
1. It reduces the human eort required, since many ML developers spend
considerable time tuning the hyper-parameters, especially for large
datasets or complex ML algorithms with a large number of hyper-
parameters.
2. It improves the performance of ML models. Many ML hyper-parameters
have dierent optimums to achieve best performance in dierent datasets
or problems.
3. It makes the models and research more reproducible. Only when the
same level of hyper-parameter tuning process is implemented can dif-
ferent ML algorithms be compared fairly; hence, using a same HPO
method on dierent ML algorithms also helps to determine the most
suitable ML model for a specic problem.
It is crucial to select an appropriate optimization technique to detect
optimal hyper-parameters. Traditional optimization techniques may be un-
suitable for HPO problems, since many HPO problems are non-convex or
non-dierentiable optimization problems, and may result in a local instead
of a global optimum [10]. Gradient descent-based methods are a common
type of traditional optimization algorithm that can be used to tune con-
tinuous hyper-parameters by calculating their gradients [11]. For example,
the learning rate in a neural network can be optimized by a gradient-based
method.
Compared with traditional optimization methods like gradient descent,
many other optimization techniques are more suitable for HPO problems, in-
cluding decision-theoretic approaches, Bayesian optimization models, multi-
delity optimization techniques, and metaheuristics algorithms [7]. Apart
from detecting continuous hyper-parameters, many of these algorithms also
have the capacity to eectively identify discrete, categorical, and conditional
hyper-parameters.
Decision-theoretic methods are based on the concept of dening a hyper-
parameter search space and then detecting the hyper-parameter combina-
3