parameters in DL models [66]. It determines the step size at each iteration,
which enables the objective function to converge. A large learning rate speeds
up the learning process, but the gradient may oscillate around a local min-
imum value or even cannot converge. On the other hand, a small learning
rate converges smoothly, but will largely increase model training time by re-
quiring more training epochs. An appropriate learning rate should enable the
objective function to converge to a global minimum in a reasonable amount
of time. Another common hyper-parameter is the drop-out rate. Drop-out
is a standard regularization method for DL models proposed to reduce over-
tting. In drop-out, a proportion of neurons are randomly removed, and the
percentage of neurons to be removed should be tuned.
Mini-batch size and the number of epochs are the other two DL hyper-
parameters that represent the number of processed samples before updating
the model, and the number of complete passes through the entire training
set, respectively [67]. Mini-batch size is aected by the resource require-
ments of the training process and the number of iterations. The number
of epochs depends on the size of the training set and should be tuned by
slowly increasing its value until validation accuracy starts to decrease, which
indicates over-tting. On the other hand, DL models often converge within
a few epochs, and the following epochs may lead to unnecessary additional
execution time and over-tting, which can be avoided by the early stopping
method. Early stopping is a form of regularization whereby model training
stops in advance when validation accuracy does not increase after a certain
number of consecutive epochs. The number of waiting epochs, called early
stop patience, can also be tuned to reduce model training time.
Apart from traditional DL models, transfer learning (TL) is a technology
that obtains a pre-trained model on the data in a related domain and transfers
it to other target tasks [68]. To transfer a DL model from one problem to
another problem, a certain number of top layers are frozen, and only the
remaining layers are retrained to t the new problem. Therefore, the number
of frozen layers is a vital hyper-parameter to tune if TL is used.
3.2. Unsupervised Learning Algorithms
Unsupervised learning algorithms are a set of ML algorithms used to iden-
tify unknown patterns in unlabeled datasets. Clustering and dimensionality-
reduction algorithms are the two main types of unsupervised learning meth-
ods. Clustering methods include k-means, DBSCAN, EM, hierarchical clus-
tering, etc.; while PCA and LDA are two commonly-used dimensionality
20