En-De En-Ru En-Cs En-Uk En-Is En-Ha
Language Pairs0.02.55.07.510.012.515.017.5Translation Non-MonotonicityTranslation Non-Monotonicity (E-X)
MS Translator
GPTFigure 15: Comparisons of Translation Non-
Monotonicity for the E-X language pairs. GPT Trans-
lations score higher on translation non-monotonicity
for 3 out of 4 high-resource language pairs.
measure the number of unaligned words in
the translation using the same word to word
alignments as in the previous measurement.
This indicates the presence of words that have
no support in the source and is included to
measure words that are potentially inserted in
the translation without any basis in the input.
We collect the measurements on these properties
over the test sets for all the language pairs under
investigation. We compare MS Translator with
GPT throughout. We report the results in the next
section and present our analysis grouped by the
translation direction.
5.3 X-E Translation characteristics
Figures 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 represent the compar-
isons of GPT translations against MS Translator for
X-E language pairs. Figure 7 shows that GPT trans-
lations obtain lower perplexities, thereby demon-
strating greater ﬂuency. Figure 8 shows that GPT
translations suffer from the problem of punctua-
tion insertion with a much higher frequency than
MS translator. We attribute this to the language
modeling bias, which would prefer to generate a
well-formed sentence, even if such well-formed-
ness is unsupported in the input. Figure 9 shows
that GPT translations incur slightly higher num-
ber of unaligned source words on 7 out of 8 eight
language pairs. Greater unaligned source words
would imply either the presence of greater para-
phrasticity in the translations or greater inadequacy
(dropped or inserted content). Figure 10 shows that
GPT translations incur almost similar number of
unaligned target words, suggesting that the GPTLang-Pair System PI #NM#USW #UTW #
De-Fr MS-Translator 3.61 17.68 10.91 25.39
GPT 42.98 17.21 11.42 25.11
Fr-De MS-Translator 2.63 14.63 21.87 14.63
GPT 60.30 14.52 21.77 14.52
Table 9: Translation Characteristics Comparisons for
De-Fr and Fr-De : GPT shows a much higher tendency
to add an end of sentence marker into the translation
when it is absent in the source.
translations are similarly adequate in terms of po-
tential insertions. Another measurement, presented
in Figure 11 shows that GPT translations are more
non-monotonic than its NMT counterpart.
5.4 E-X Translation characteristics
Figures 12, 13, 14 and 15 represent the compar-
isons of GPT translations against MS Translator
for E-X language pairs. Figure 12 shows that simi-
lar to X-E translations, GPT E-X translations also
suffer from a higher frequency of punctuation in-
sertions. The magnitude of the difference however,
is smaller than the X-E translations, suggesting a
weaker language modeling bias for these languages.
Figure 13 shows that in general, GPT translations
incur greater number of unaligned source words
than its NMT counterpart. Figure 14 shows that
the number of unaligned translation words for GPT
translations do not differ greatly from MS Transla-
tor. Similarly, Figure 15, which compares transla-
tion non-monotonicity shows no aggregate trends.
As such, we ﬁnd that the translation characteristics
for E-X language language pairs depends heavily
on the individual language pair under considera-
tion.
5.5 X-Y Translation characteristics
Table 9 reports the results of the ﬁve measurements
for De-Fr and Fr-De translation directions. The
results for direct translation pairs are quite differ-
ent from the X-E and E-X cases, since typically
non-English centric translations are done through
pivoting. As such, the trends for measurements
over Fluency (F), Unaligned Source Words (USW),
Unaligned Translation Words (UTW) and Trans-
lation Non-Monotonicity (NM) do not show any
conclusive evidence of greater paraphrasticity of
GPT translations. However, GPT translations still
produce greater number of punctuation insertions
than the MS Translator system.