to the sentence-based metric. Remarkably, as the
window size grows, the performance surpasses MS-
Translator model and approaches the WMT-Best
systems. This is consistent with the ﬁndings of Sun
et al. (2020) for conventional MT models. The ta-
ble also displays the total number of requests for
each window size. We observe that the number of
requests decreases dramatically as the window size
increases, while the performance either improves
signiﬁcantly or remains relatively stable depending
on the metric used. Therefore, this document-level
setup achieves high efﬁciency without compromis-
ing the quality.
Experiment 2: The second set of experiments
investigates few-shot translation for the document
setting. Following the sentence experiments, we
focus on using 5-shots. We also use the News
Commentary dataset, which has document-level
annotations. Table 6 summarizes the results. The
ﬁrst two rows show the best WMT22 and the MS-
Translator results for reference.
The following rows are named GPT-XX-YY
where XX stands for the scope of translation (sen-
tence or document) and YY stands for the source
of the 5 shots (QR,DR,DF or DH as explained be-
low). Rows GPT-Sent-QR and GPT-Sent-DR show
results for sentence-level translation. The former
uses the same quality-based shots from Table 3,
while the latter uses 5 randomly selected shots
from the document set, excluding the test data. We
perform document translation (referred to as Doc
in the table) for a window of 10 sentences in the
following rows. Rows named GPT-Doc-QR and
GPT-Doc-DR use the same shots as the sentence
case. For row GPT-Doc-DF, we select a random
document from the document data pool and use the
ﬁrst 5 sentences of the document as shots (i.e. doc-
ument ﬁrst DF). For row GPT-Doc-DH, we store
GPT outputs in history for use in shots. We trans-
late the ﬁrst document 0-shot, and the subsequent
documents 5-shots. For shot selection, we pick a
random document from the previously translated
documents and use the ﬁrst 5 sentences as shots (i.e.
document history DH). The results indicate that
document translation outperforms sentence trans-
lation across metrics. However, while few-shots
yield some consistent gains for sentence translation,
this is not the case for document translation. This
may be explained by the fact that document trans-
lation provides enough context, making few-shots
redundant. It can be also observed from the tablethat the Doc-COMETKiwi shows more gain than
the sentence level metrics but this might need more
indepth analysis to verify.
3.6 Robustness Toward Domain Shift
We use the WMT datasets to examine how domain
shift affects the performance of GPT models on
German and Chinese, both from and to English.
The WMT22 datasets span four domains: Conver-
sational, News, e-Commerce and Social. Table 7
shows the scores of the four domains on the WMT
testsets.
GPT achieves remarkable improvements on the
conversational domain for DE-EN, ZH-EN and
EN-ZH, as evidenced by both COMET and lex-
ical scores (BLEU and ChrF). This contrasts with
previous observations where lexical scores consis-
tently deteriorate with GPT models.
GPT performs comparably to the other systems
on the news domain according to COMET scores
for all directions. It surpasses both other systems
on DE-EN, while slightly trailing behind on EN-
DE. For ZH-EN and EN-ZH, GPT exceeds MS-
Translator, but falls slightly short of WMT-Best
system. However, GPT scores signiﬁcantly lower
in terms of BLEU metric for both ZH-EN and EN-
DE.
GPT clearly outperforms both systems on ZH-
EN and matches WMT-Best on DE-EN for the e-
commerce domain. It slightly lags behind on other
directions. In this domain, we observe consistent
lower scores in BLEU metric for all directions even
for ZH-EN which outperforms signiﬁcantly on both
COMET metrics.
GPT outperforms both systems on DE-EN for
the social domain. However, on ZH-EN and EN-
ZH, GPT only surpasses them on COMETkiwi,
while showing lower BLEU score for all directions
with a signiﬁcant difference in ZH-EN which ex-
hibits substantial gains on COMETkiwi.
The results demonstrate GPT’s robust translation
capabilities across different domains and languages.
It performs well on DE-EN, ZH-EN and EN-ZH for
all domains. However, we observe a discrepancy
on lexical metrics for ZH-EN and DE-EN on News
and Social domains even with GPT’s high perfor-
mance on those languages. We conduct a further
examination of the ZH-EN results to gain more in-
sights. We ﬁnd that the news from Chinese outlets
follows a more templatic style especially in the pre-
ﬁx of the news. For NMT systems that are trained