Sequence Type Translation Instance Phenomenon
Source Bis auf die E 95 02 wurden alle Lokomotiven zerlegt .
MS Translator With the exception of E 95 02, all locomotives were dismantled . Non-Monotonicity (NM)
GPT All locomotives were dismantled except for the E 95 02.
Source Oder ist sie ganz aus dem Sortiment genommen?
MS Translator Or is it completely removed from the range? Fluency (F)
GPT Or has it been completely removed from the range?
Source Sehen Sie bitte im Screenshot was der Kollege geschrieben hat
MS Translator Please see in the screenshot what the colleague wrote Punctuation Insertion (PI)
GPT Please see the screenshot for what the colleague wrote .
Source Die Email zur Stornierung wurde am 26.12. #NUMBER# versendet.
MS Translator The cancellation email was sent on 26.12. #NUMBER# . Dropped Content (USW)
GPT The cancellation email was sent on December 26th.
Source "We won’t accept the CAA and that is for sure.
MS Translator “ 我们不会接受CAA，这是肯定的。 Inserted Content (UTW)
GPT “ 我们不会接受《公民法》，这是肯定的。
Table 8: Illustrated Examples of the Phenomena as described in Section 5. The origin of these differences
between translations lie in the computational mechanism leveraged for translations: When controlled for quality,
higher translation non-monotonicity suggests a more abstractive computation used for obtaining the translations.
Similarly, Fluency, Punctuation Insertion, Dropped and Inserted Content measure different translation characteris-
tics.
De-En Ru-En Cs-En Uk-En Zh-En Ja-En Is-En Ha-En
Language Pairs0102030405060Unaligned Source Words PercentageUnaligned Source Words (X-E)
MS Translator
GPT
Figure 9: Comparisons of Unaligned Source Words
for the X-E language pairs. GPT Translations consis-
tently incur greater number of unaligned source words.
NMT systems. We ﬁrst discuss the measurements
designed to elicit artifacts associated with the lan-
guage modeling bias.
5.2 Language Modeling Bias Artifacts
We propose and use ﬁve measurements over the test
sets to quantitatively explore language modeling
bias, in order to enumerate the differences in trans-
lations obtained from traditional NMT systems and
GPT. Below, we describe the properties as well as
the algorithms used for quantifying them (corre-
sponding illustrative examples of the phenomena
are presented in Table 8):
1.Translation Non-Monotonicity (NM): We
aim to measure how closely the translation
De-En Ru-En Cs-En Uk-En Zh-En Ja-En Is-En Ha-En
Language Pairs01020304050Unaligned Translation Words PercentageUnaligned Translation Words (X-E)
MS Translator
GPTFigure 10: Comparisons of Unaligned Translation
Words for the X-E language pairs. GPT Translations
consistently incur greater number of unaligned target
words.
tracks the source sentence. A more paraphras-
tic or a less literal translation is likely to devi-
ate from a close tracking of the source word
order (across language pairs). We use the non-
monotonicity metric proposed in Schioppa
et al. (2021), which computes the deviation
from the diagonal in the word to word align-
ment as the non-monotonicity measure. This
measurement could also be interpreted as
a normalized measure of alignment cross-
ings, which has been shown to correlate with
translation non-literalness (Schaeffer and Carl,
2014). This measurement has also been used
in Anonymous (2023b) for investigating trans-
lation literalness.