and therefore, exploring how to more efﬁ-
ciently utilize them is an important research
question. We are investigating more sophis-
ticated fusion techniques that can achieve
higher quality and efﬁciency.
•Better metrics : The limitations of lexical
matching metrics can mislead translation qual-
ity assessment. Therefore, developing met-
rics that can measure the contextual correct-
ness of LLM-generated translations is essen-
tial. Future research can also explore new
ways to evaluate the quality of machine trans-
lations more accurately, especially when using
LLMs.
Overall, our study provides valuable insights into
the strengths and weaknesses of GPT models for
machine translation and opens up opportunities for
future improvements and developments in this ﬁeld.
We investigated how GPT models can transform
machine translation as it is doing with other gen-
erative tasks. We demonstrated that these models
excel at translating well-represented languages in
their training data, but they face challenges with
less-resourced languages. We also assessed trans-
lation and reasoning tasks and detected discrepan-
cies in the level of support of the tasks even for
the same languages. One of the main beneﬁts of
training such costly models is to achieve high per-
formance across diverse tasks and languages, but
this demands more data across languages. Which
poses several challenges for models scalability, di-
versity, and fairness. As a future research direction,
we propose to tackle the challenge of enabling truly
multilingual capability for such models that would
enable the same capabilities across languages.
Limitations
We conducted our evaluation on 18 translation di-
rections with reliable test sets and baselines. The
conclusion of the study should be taken in this con-
text and not generalized to other languages with-
out further evaluation. While a more comprehen-
sive evaluation is needed on more languages, we
should be cautious about drawing conclusions from
low quality testsets or weaker baselines which are
usually dominating the research results for low re-
source languages.
One of the limitations of this study is the inad-
equacy of current automatic evaluation metrics to
capture the quality of GPT outputs accurately. Wefound that lexical comparison based metrics such
as BLEU or chrF gave misleading signals, and that
document-level evaluation had limited capability
to realize the effect of context-based translation.
These limitations stem from the inherent challenges
of evaluating natural language generation systems,
especially for complex tasks such as machine trans-
lation. Therefore, we complemented our automatic
evaluation with a comprehensive analysis, consid-
ering all metrics together, as well as human eval-
uation and qualitative analysis to cover a broad
range of phenomena. We recommend that readers
consider the overall evaluations as a whole, rather
than relying solely on a speciﬁc metric, to better
understand the quality of GPT models’ machine
translation capabilities.
Ethics Statement
In our study, we evaluated the quality of GPT trans-
lations using various quantitative metrics. How-
ever, we acknowledge that these models may har-
bor language-speciﬁc biases and produce transla-
tions that perpetuate stereotypes and misinforma-
tion. One form of bias that we have identiﬁed is
that the models perform better for some languages
than others, as shown in §3.3 and §3.4. This may
create unfairness and unequal outcomes for users
paying the same cost. Furthermore, the models
may amplify stereotypes from the training data,
leading to inaccurate translations. For instance, the
model may fail to correctly translate a sentence
with a female name like “Julia” as a male. Lastly,
we also observed instances of false insertions in
translations (misinformation) and hallucinations,
especially in E-X translation directions. We are
committed to addressing these issues and mitigat-
ing biases and misinformation in our research and
future work.
References
Sweta Agrawal, Chunting Zhou, Mike Lewis, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Marjan Ghazvininejad. 2022. In-
context examples selection for machine translation.
Farhad Akhbardeh, Arkady Arkhangorodsky, Mag-
dalena Biesialska, Ond ˇrej Bojar, Rajen Chatterjee,
Vishrav Chaudhary, Marta R Costa-jussà, Cristina
España-Bonet, Angela Fan, Christian Federmann,
et al. 2021. Findings of the 2021 conference on ma-
chine translation (WMT21). In Proceedings of the
Sixth Conference on Machine Translation , pages 1–
88.