prompts, document-level translation, domain ro-
bustness and possible advantages of integrating
them with conventional NMT systems.
To explore the potential of GPT models for trans-
lation, we perform comprehensive experiments to
examine their translation abilities. Speciﬁcally, we
investigate the performance of GPT models for ma-
chine translation across 18 language pairs, covering
both high and low-resource languages, as well as
English-centric and non-English-centric directions.
We compare the quality of three GPT models: text-
davinci-002 ,text-davinci-003 (GPT3.5), and Chat-
GPT, and show that they differ signiﬁcantly in their
translation capabilities.
We also explore the impact of prompting strate-
gies on the performance of GPT models for ma-
chine translation. We examine both the content and
the form of the prompts, and identify the best prac-
tices for obtaining optimal results. Furthermore, we
test the hypothesis that GPT models would enhance
document-level translation, as they could exploit
the context and coherence of the entire document to
generate more accurate and ﬂuent translations. We
evaluate this hypothesis on various language pairs
using several metrics. Additionally, we evaluate the
cross-domain generalization ability of GPT models
for translation tasks and examine their robustness
under domain shift.
Moreover, we conduct extensive human evalua-
tions and analyses to provide valuable insights into
the strengths and weaknesses of GPT models for
machine translation, and to suggest directions for
future work. We also perform comprehensive anal-
yses to understand whether GPT and NMT models
have complementary characteristics, and we pro-
pose several ideas to combine the advantages of the
two paradigms. Finally, we touch on the effective-
ness of GPT models on cross-lingual natural lan-
guage tasks beyond translation, and explore their
multilingual capabilities and limitations.
To explore the research questions above, we or-
ganize the paper as follows:
•We provide a detailed experimental setup (§2),
which includes the datasets used (§2.1), the
machine translation systems used in the com-
parison(§2.2), the GPT systems (§2.3), and
the evaluation methods (§2.4).
•We present a series of experiments (§3) that in-
vestigate different aspects of GPT models for
machine translation. These experiments coverprompt selection strategies (§3.1), zero-shot
translation capabilities of GPT models (§3.2),
GPT performance on high-resource languages
(§ 3.3), GPT performance on low-resource
and non-English-centric languages (§ 3.4),
document-level MT with GPT (§3.5), trans-
lation robustness toward domain shift (§3.6),
and hybrid GPT and NMT translation (§3.7).
•We then present the human evaluation and
analysis that provides insights into the quality
of GPT translations (§4).
•We discuss the characteristics of GPT transla-
tions (§5) vis-à-vis NMT and analyze the dif-
ferentiating aspects of GPT translations (§5.1)
by quantitatively enumerating language mod-
eling bias artifacts (§5.2), the characteristics
of translation across various language direc-
tions (§5.3-§5.5), as well as parallel data bias
artifacts (§5.6).
•We explore the multilingual capabilities of
GPT models beyond translation (§6).
•We conclude by summarizing our ﬁndings and
suggesting future directions for research (§7).
2 Experimental Setup
2.1 Datasets
We considered 18 different translation directions
across a diverse set of languages for our com-
prehensive evaluation. The evaluation covers
both high- and low-resource languages, as well
as English-centric and non-English-centric direct
translations. The languages considered in this
study include European (English- EN, French- FR,
German- DE, Czech- CSand Icelandic- IS), Asian
(Chinese- ZHand Japanese- JA), Cyrillic (Russian-
RUand Ukrainian- UK) and African (Hausa- HA).
We use publicly available datasets to facilitate re-
producibility and data sharing. We use the WMT22
testsets2for all languages except for Icelandic and
Hausa, for which we use the WMT21 testsets3. We
use WMT22 datasets for two reasons: ﬁrst, they
are recent and less likely to overlap with the GPT
models training data that was collected until June
2https://www.statmt.org/wmt22/
translation-task.html
3https://www.statmt.org/wmt21/
translation-task.html