heavily on similar data, it is easier to reproduce the
same patterns, e.g., WMT-Best scores 31.3 BLEU.
For more general commercial scale systems that
are trained on much larger and diverse data, it is
harder to produce the same exact patterns, as such,
MS-Translator scores 28.2 BLEU. For GPT, which
is mostly trained on English, it is harder to get the
lexical matches and it mostly produces the English
news style, scoring 23.3 BLEU. However, COMET-
22, using the same reference, seems to provide a
more robust signal with all three systems being
almost on the same level. This conﬁrms the ro-
bustness of neural metrics across domains (Freitag
et al., 2022) and GPT’s ability to handle diverse
domains while being more robust towards parallel
data biases , which we will explore further in §5.
Therein, we show that in general, GPT performs
better in cases where the input resonates with the
noisy parts of parallel data.
3.7 Hybrid GPT and NMT Translation
To explore the possibility of leveraging the strong
performance of GPT on various languages, we pro-
pose and evaluate several hybrid approaches that
combine the strengths of NMT and GPT systems.
The basic idea is to use Microsoft Translator (MS-
Translator) system as the primary translation sys-
tem, and then use GPT as a fallback system when
the quality of MS-Translator is unsatisfactory.
We use COMETkiwi as the quality estimation
model and COMET-22 as the performance eval-
uation metric. We ﬁrst establish an upper bound
by selecting the best translation from either sys-
tems according to COMETkiwi, which we call
the “Max-Routing” approach. Then we experiment
with a more practical approach where we use GPT
only when the COMETkiwi score of MS-Translator
falls below a predeﬁned threshold. In this experi-
ment, we set the threshold to the 50-th percentile of
the COMETkiwi scores of MS-Translator, mean-
ing that we use GPT for any translation that has
a COMETkiwi score lower than the median MS-
Translator COMETKiwi score, which can be easily
estimated from previous translation requests.
Figure 1 presents the results of our experiments
on 12 language pairs. Firstly, we observe that in
all language pairs, the “Hybrid Max-Routing” ap-
proach consistently achieves the highest COMET-
22 scores, surpassing both the individual systems.
“Hybrid Max-Routing” achieves a maximum gain
of 1.6 Comet-22 points in the EN-UK language pairwhich is not among top performance language for
GPT. This indicates that combining the strengths
of NMT and GPT systems can lead to a signiﬁcant
improvement in translation quality.
Next, we compare the performance of the indi-
vidual systems. In general, MS-Translator achieves
higher scores than GPT on most language pairs,
which is expected given that MS-Translator is an
NMT system speciﬁcally optimized for translation
tasks. However, GPT outperforms MS-Translator
on certain language pairs, such as DE-EN, EN-JA,
and EN-ZH. This suggests that GPT can be a valu-
able fallback system in cases where the quality of
the primary system is unsatisfactory.
We also compare the performance of the two
hybrid approaches. The “Hybrid Max-Routing”
approach achieves slightly higher scores than the
“Hybrid Threshold” approach on most language
pairs, indicating that routing to GPT only when
the quality of MS-Translator falls below a certain
threshold may not always be the optimal strategy.
However, the “Hybrid Threshold” approach still
achieves comparable results to the upper bound
on all language pairs, while using GPT for only
50% of the instances. This suggests that it can
be a more practical approach in scenarios where
computational resources are limited.
Figure 2 demonstrates that hybrid approaches
achieve larger and more consistent improvements
than shots selection across all languages and direc-
tions. Figure 3 zooms in on the high-performing
DE-EN and EN-DE systems. The hybrid system
outperforms both WMT-Best and MS-Translator
systems in both directions, even though the GPT
system only outperforms them in DE-EN with 5-
shot setup.
In summary, our experiments demonstrate the
potential of combining NMT and GPT systems to
improve machine translation quality. The results
suggest that a hybrid approach that uses GPT as
a fallback system can achieve higher performance
than either individual systems. Future research
can explore more advanced techniques that can
leverage the strengths of both systems and optimize
the hybrid approach.
4 Human Evaluation and Analysis
We use source-based sentence-level contrastive
Direct Assessment + Scalar Quality Metric (con-
trastive DA+SQM; Akhbardeh et al. 2021, Kocmi
et al. 2022a) to perform human evaluation of the