•Relevance : We consider relevant shots that
are close to the input sentence. Based on pre-
liminary experiments12we use the cosine dis-
tance between LaBSE embeddings as a mea-
sure of closeness. We always select relevant
pairs from high quality ones (the top 1M pairs
from LaBSE-scored training data). For com-
putational efﬁciency, we adopt a two stage
approach. We ﬁrst use the input text and ap-
ply elastic search13to retrieve the top 64 pairs
then return the top 1 or 5 shots based on the
LaBSE distance.
In the results, we refer to full random as RR(Ran-
dom) while high quality are referred to as QR
(Quality Random). The high quality shots selected
through relevance are referred to as QS(Quality
Selected).
3.2 Zero-Shot Translation Capabilities of
GPT Models
We compare the general zero-shot translation capa-
bilities of the three GPT models on four language
pairs, in eight distinct translation directions. The
selected languages were chosen with a focus on
balancing representation. The languages include
1) German, which is one of the most represented
non-English languages in GPT training data, 2)
Russian, a large-scale non-Latin language, 3) Chi-
nese, which represents a large-scale language with
a script distinct from that of the majority of training
data languages, and 4) French-German pair as non
English-centric use case.
In this experiment, we compare the performance
of three GPT models text-davinci-002 ,text-davinci-
003, and ChatGPT with the top ranked systems
in WMT22, as shown in Table 2. Remarkably,
text-davinci-002 shows lower performance, under-
performing across all language pairs compared to
the other two GPT models. On the other hand,
text-davinci-003 clearly shows better translation
performance across all languages in this evaluation.
Its zero-shot performance is comparable to the best
performing WMT DE-EN system and outperforms
the best ZH-EN WMT system.
ChatGPT shows a storng performance in the
DE-EN language pair, while performing similarly
totext-davinci-003 when translating to English as
well as French-German pairs. In terms of translat-
12We also tried using COMET and embeddings based on a
trained NMT model.
13Based on BM25 text retrieval.ing from English to other languages, text-davinci-
003shows better performance than the other two
GPT models. It is noteworthy that the translation
between French and German, which is not English-
centric, exhibits surprising competitiveness with
state-of-the-art systems, despite the fact that the ma-
jority of the training data used for the GPT model
is English-centric.
While both COMETkiwi and COMET-22 show
relevant results, both lexical metrics (BLEU and
ChrF) show consistent degradation with GPT mod-
els. This is consistent with similar ﬁndings from
(Vilar et al., 2022) on PALM-540B model. We
conducted human evaluation and more thorough
analysis to further understand such results.
From these results, we can see that the three
variants of GPT models exhibit different charac-
teristics. However, the nature and extent of these
differences remain unclear and require further in-
vestigation, depending on the availability of more
information regarding the models, their training
data, and their training methods. This superior per-
formance of text-davinci-003 , which is achieved
in a zero-shot setting, motivates further investiga-
tion into the effect of few-shot in-context learning
and shot selection strategies. We investigate these
questions further in the sections below.
3.3 GPT Performance on High-resource
Languages
Given the results in the previous section, we focus
on evaluating text-davinci-003 model, expanding
the scope of the study to 18 language pairs and
comparing its performance with that of a commer-
cial system (Microsoft Translator) in addition to
WMT SoTA systems. For consistency, in all the
subsequent results, we use the term “GPT” to de-
note the text-davinci-003 model, unless explicitly
stated otherwise.
We experiment with various shot selection strate-
gies: zero-shot, random (RR), quality (QR) and rel-
evance selected (QS) prompts as described in §3.1.
We report results for 1 and 5 shots along with the
best WMT systems and MS-Translator.
Table 3 shows the performance of GPT text-
davinci-003 with few-shot setups on high-resource
languages from WMT Testsets. With both refer-
ence and reference-less COMET scores, the model
achieved impressive zero-shot results for all lan-
guages when translating into English. However,
the few-shot conﬁgurations did not yield signiﬁ-