De-En Ru-En Cs-En Uk-En Is-En Ha-En
Language Pairs0246810121416Translation Non-MonotonicityTranslation Non-Monotonicity (X-E)
MS Translator
GPTFigure 11: Comparisons of Translation Non-
Monotonicity for the X-E language pairs. GPT
Translations consistently score higher on the non-
monotonicity of translations.
En-De En-Ru En-Cs En-Uk En-Zh En-Ja En-Is En-Ha
Language Pairs0102030405060Percentage Of Punctuation InsertionsPunctuation Insertions (E-X)
MS Translator
GPT
Figure 12: Comparisons of Punctuation Insertions
for the E-X language pairs. On 8 out of 8 language
pairs, GPT translations obtain higher scores.
2.Translation Fluency (TF): We measure
translation ﬂuency using a strong, indepen-
dently trained language model (‘gpt2-large’,
Radford et al. (2019)). We restrict this mea-
surement to X-E direction, since GPT-2 has
only been trained on English text (Radford
et al., 2019).
3.Punctuation Insertion (PI): Language mod-
eling bias can prefer one mode of sentence
completion in contrast to others. This can re-
veal itself in the presence of not well-formed
inputs such as sentences that do not end with
typical end of sentence markers (comma, pe-
riod and exclamation). We measure the frac-
tion of input sentences for which the transla-
tion contains an end of sentence marker but
the source does not. The insertion of an end
of sentence marker in such instances is inade-
quate for translation, a task which strives for
En-De En-Ru En-Cs En-Uk En-Zh En-Ja En-Is En-Ha
Language Pairs01020304050Unaligned Source Words PercentageUnaligned Source Words (E-X)
MS Translator
GPTFigure 13: Comparisons of Unaligned Source Words
for the E-X language pairs. GPT Translations, on aver-
age, incur greater number of unaligned source words.
En-De En-Ru En-Cs En-Uk En-Zh En-Ja En-Is En-Ha
Language Pairs0102030405060Unaligned Translation Words PercentageUnaligned Translation Words (E-X)
MS Translator
GPT
Figure 14: Comparisons of Unaligned Translation
Words for the E-X language pairs. GPT Translations
consistently incur greater number of unaligned target
words.
bitext equivalency.
4.Unaligned Source Words (USW ): We mea-
sure the number of source words left un-
aligned in a word to word alignment obtained
over the source and output translations. When
controlled for quality, a more paraphrastic
translation is likely to contain more words that
do not align with the words in the source sen-
tence. This measurement was used in Anony-
mous (2023b) as a measure of translation lit-
eralness and we use it similarly to obtain a
measurement of content that is dropped in a
translation – an untranslated word or phrase
in a source sentence is likely to ﬁnd no align-
ments in the output. For obtaining word to
word alignments, we use a multilingual-bert
based aligner (Devlin et al., 2019; Dou and
Neubig, 2021).
5.Unaligned Translation Words (UTW ): We