by the lower quality measurements for E-X GPT
translations obtained previously. In general, we
ﬁnd that for deriving conclusions about GPT trans-
lation quality for E-X, it is more important to focus
on the single language pair under consideration,
i.e. the target non-English language is of critical
importance and the effects of language modeling
bias cannot be generalized as in the case of X-E
translations.
Areas of Improvements: One artifact of the lan-
guage modeling bias is that GPT inserts end of
sentence markers not present in the source with a
far greater frequency than the NMT system under
investigation. This holds true across both X-E, E-X
and X-Y translation directions. Such a proclivity to-
wards greater ﬂuency might not be appropriate for
domains wherein a very literal (and faithful) trans-
lation is desired. Similarly, greater paraphrasticity
might not be appropriate for certain domains. Also,
a related area of improvement for future evaluations
would be to conduct separate evaluations of ﬂuency
and adequacy, in addition to joint adequacy and ﬂu-
ency quality estimation done presently. Instituting
a norm of using multi-dimensional automatic qual-
ity measurements (Raunak et al., 2022) can provide
very targeted signals on differentiating aspects of
translation quality, useful especially when there are
competing state-of-the-art approaches.
Areas of Application: Our results also suggest
that the greater paraphrastic nature of GPT transla-
tions could have applications in improving NMT
models on the translation of ﬁgurative text. Sim-
ilarly, the greater gains obtained by GPT transla-
tions in the highest perplexity buckets of multi-
ple E-X the test sets suggest that GPT translations
might be favored over NMT models when the input
domain is likely to contain noisy, ill-formed sen-
tences. These two application areas, based on the
demonstrated characteristics of GPT translations,
offer two avenues that could beneﬁt from a com-
bination of NMT models with GPT. For example,
based on the results in Table 10, a hybrid English-
Japanese system that could improve upon both MS
Translator and GPT translations would be the one
wherein the highest perplexity inputs are routed to
be translated by GPT whereas the lower perplexity
inputs are translated through NMT models (e.g.,
MS Translator). Such a composition might be able
to leverage complementary strengths of NMT and
LLM systems for translation.6 Multilingual Capabilities beyond
Translation
In this section, we investigate the multilingual capa-
bilities of GPT models beyond translation. Specif-
ically, we aim to assess how well the models per-
form on emerging reasoning tasks15for various
languages compared to English. We are interested
in understanding the degree of multilingual support
that GPT models can offer given their translation
performance. That is, can we use the translation
performance as a proxy for the multilingual perfor-
mance on other tasks?
We use MGSM Benchmark(Shi et al., 2022)
which is a Multilingual Grade School Math
(MGSM) arithmetic reasoning benchmark. The
multilingual problems are human translated from
the English dataset GSM8K which is English-
language human-annotated grade-school math
problem dataset. The dataset supports a set of
ten languages other than English (EN): Bengali
(BN), Chinese (ZH), French (FR), German (DE),
Japanese (JA), Russian (RU), Spanish (ES), Swahili
(SW), Telugu (TE), and Thai (TH).
Table 11 presents the results on the MSGM
benchmark. We ﬁrst use Native-CoT, which uses
prompts and CoT in the native language of each
dataset. We observe that text-davinci-003 surpasses
text-davinci-002 for all languages, highlighting the
effectiveness of text-davinci-003 on multilingual
tasks. The performance is especially high on EN,
DE, FR and ES, while RU, JA and ZH exhibit lower
scores than the Latin languages. The low-resource
languages, however, achieve limited performance,
indicating the need for better approaches to attain
truly multilingual support.
We then use Translate-EN, which translates all
prompts and CoT into English. We ﬁnd that this
setup enhances the performance on the non-Latin
group (RU, JA and ZH) as well as the low-resource
group (TH, TE, BN and SW), although the enhance-
ments are not uniform across languages. Surpris-
ingly, this setup shows a deterioration on the Latin
languages.
Our third and ﬁnal setup is Translate-EN+,
which is similar to Translate-EN, but keeps the tem-
plate in English for all sentences instead of trans-
lating it. Stabilizing the template improved results
signiﬁcantly in some languages such as French,
Spanish and Russian, and gave comparable scores
to Translate-EN in others.
15as recently studied in the chain of thought paradigm