DE-EN CS-EN JP-ENZH-ENRU-ENUK-ENIS-ENHA-ENEN-DE EN-CS EN-JPEN-ZHEN-RUEN-UKEN-ISEN-HA FR-DEDE-FR0204060Figure 6: Human Evaluation: GPT Win Rates (%) based on Item Scores per language pair.
De-En Ru-En Cs-En Uk-En Zh-En Ja-En Is-En Ha-En
Language Pairs050100150200250Translation PerplexityFluency Comparisons (X-E)
MS Translator
GPT
Figure 7: Fluency Comparisons for the X-E language
pairs. On 7 out of 8 language pairs, GPT translations
obtain lower perplexity, thereby producing more ﬂuent
translations. The magnitude of the difference is higher
for Zh-En and Ja-En language pairs.
for the task could also mean that LLM based trans-
lations might not track the desired characteristics
of translations such as faithfulness to the source
as well as the NMT models trained with explicit
teacher-forced supervision (Anonymous, 2023b).
Language Modeling Bias: Despite the impres-
sive performance of in-context learning, constrain-
ing LLM behavior to explicitly follow the speciﬁ-
cations of a desired task is a non-trivial problem.
Analyses of in-context learning have revealed how
theimplicit zero-shot performance of LLMs might
be higher than their observed zero-shot perfor-
mance, with the demonstrations within in-context
learning themselves providing only limited learn-
ing signals (Min et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022;
Anonymous, 2023a). A direct implication of these
De-En Ru-En Cs-En Uk-En Zh-En Ja-En Is-En Ha-En
Language Pairs010203040506070Percentage Of Punctuation InsertionsPunctuation Insertions (X-E)
MS Translator
GPTFigure 8: Comparisons of Punctuation Insertions for
theX-E language pairs. On 8 out of 8 language pairs,
GPT translations show a greater bias towards inserting
unsupported end of sentence markers in translation.
results for translation is that the demonstrations
used for in-context learning might failto over-
ride the underlying computational bias of language
modeling which is likely to favor greater ﬂuency
at the cost of adequacy. Such language model-
ing bias might also introduce undesirable artifacts,
e.g., punctuation insertions, acronym expansions,
world knowledge insertion, etc. in the translations
which could cause it to veer off from a faithful
cross-lingual representation of the input.
In the next subsection, we propose properties
along which ﬁner-grained characteristics of GPT
translations could be enumerated. These measures
are designed to provide indirect measurements of
the language modeling bias as well as the parallel
data bias, which could allow a better differentia-
tion of GPT translations against translations from