How Good Are GPT Models at Machine Translation?
A Comprehensive Evaluation
Amr Hendy, Mohamed Abdelrehim, Amr Sharaf, Vikas Raunak,
Mohamed Gabr, Hitokazu Matsushita, Young Jin Kim,
Mohamed Aﬁfy, Hany Hassan Awadalla
Microsoft
Abstract
Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT)
models have shown remarkable capabilities
for natural language generation, but their
performance for machine translation has not
been thoroughly investigated. In this pa-
per, we present a comprehensive evaluation
of GPT models for machine translation, cov-
ering various aspects such as quality of dif-
ferent GPT models in comparison with state-
of-the-art research and commercial systems,
effect of prompting strategies, robustness to-
wards domain shifts and document-level trans-
lation. We experiment with eighteen dif-
ferent translation directions involving high
and low resource languages, as well as non
English-centric translations, and evaluate the
performance of three GPT models: ChatGPT,
GPT3.5 (text-davinci-003), and text-davinci-
002. Our results show that GPT models
achieve very competitive translation quality
for high resource languages, while having lim-
ited capabilities for low resource languages.
We also show that hybrid approaches, which
combine GPT models with other translation
systems, can further enhance the translation
quality. We perform comprehensive analysis
and human evaluation to further understand
the characteristics of GPT translations. We
hope that our paper provides valuable insights
for researchers and practitioners in the ﬁeld
and helps to better understand the potential and
limitations of GPT models for translation.
1 Introduction
Recent advancements in natural language process-
ing (NLP), particularly the development of large-
scale language modeling techniques, have brought
remarkable improvements in machine translation
as well as in other NLP tasks (Fan et al., 2021; Kim
et al., 2021; Costa-jussà et al., 2022). The emer-
gence of large language models with diverse capa-
bilities, including machine translation, has opened
Corresponding author: hanyh@microsoft.comup new possibilities for building more effective
translation systems (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdh-
ery et al., 2022). Among these models, the latest
Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) mod-
els (Brown et al., 2020) have gained signiﬁcant
attention for their ability to generate coherent and
context-aware text. We present a comprehensive
evaluation of GPT models for machine translation,
exploring their strengths and limitations, and pro-
viding insights for researchers and practitioners
working in the area of machine translation.
GPT models and the conventional Neural Ma-
chine Translation (NMT) systems are both based on
the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017),
but they differ in several aspects. First, GPT models
are decoder-only models that use the same param-
eters to process the context and the source as a
single input for generating the next output. On the
other hand, NMT models usually have an encoder-
decoder architecture that encodes the source sen-
tence in the encoder network and decodes the tar-
get sentence conditioned on the previous outputs
in the decoder network. Second, GPT models are
mainly trained on monolingual data, with a strong
bias towards English1, whereas NMT models rely
on large amounts of highly curated parallel data.
Third, GPT models need a much larger number of
parameters to achieve multilingual in-context capa-
bilities. We have observed that GPT models exhibit
promising translation capabilities, even with these
differences in architecture and training data.
The performance of GPT models in machine
translation, despite their promising potential, re-
mains under-investigated relative to commercial
and state-of-the-art research systems. This study
aims to address this research gap by systemati-
cally assessing the efﬁcacy of GPT models for ma-
chine translation, with a focus on their performance,
1https://github.com/openai/gpt-3/blob/master/
dataset_statistics/languages_by_character_count.
csvarXiv:2302.09210v1  [cs.CL]  18 Feb 2023