to the lack of metrics that can handle the non one-
to-one sentence mapping that the systems may pro-
duce. To address this challenge, we have adapted
the COMET metrics to better suit document-level
evaluation. The adaptation involves splitting the
document into multiple segments with an overlap-
ping sliding window and computing the average
score across these segments to compare two doc-
uments. We use Doc-COMETkiwi to refer to the
modiﬁed metric throughout the evaluation.
This simple modiﬁcation has three clear design
advantages over a pure sentence-level evaluation.
First, it allows each sentence to be evaluated within
its context. Second, it enables each sentence to
be evaluated across multiple contexts due to the
overlapping nature of the sliding window. Lastly, it
avoids the limited context window of the evaluation
models that could hinder quality assessment over
longer static windows on documents. We do not
claim that this is an optimal metric for evaluating
document-level translation, but it overcomes the
limitation of the one-to-one sentence mapping and
may capture the quality of translation in ambiguous
contexts better than sentence-level representation.
We argue that developing more robust document-
level metrics is still essential.
The current metrics for evaluating machine trans-
lation performance may not be adequate for mea-
suring the performance of GPT models, and it may
be necessary to develop new metrics that take into
account the unique characteristics of these models.
Human Evaluation and Analysis We per-
form human evaluation (§ 4) using source-based
sentence-level contrastive Direct Assessment +
Scalar Quality Metric (contrastive DA+SQM;
Akhbardeh et al. 2021, Kocmi et al. 2022a), with
annotations provided by professional annotators.
We also conduct thorough analysis on various char-
acteristics of the translation (§5).
3 Experiments
In this section, we present various experiments. In
§3.1, we describe several prompt selection strate-
gies. In §3.2, we evaluate various GPT models in a
zero-shot setup. In §3.3, we show results for high-
resource language pairs, followed by results for
low-resource and non-English pairs in §3.4. §3.5
provides document translation results. §3.6 exam-
ines the robustness of GPT models under domain
shift. Finally, in §3.7, we discuss the potential of
combining the beneﬁts of GPT and NMT models.3.1 Prompt Selection Strategies
It has been shown that the performance of LLMs
can be enhanced through in-context learning by
providing few labelled examples (prompts) in ad-
dition to the test input (Brown et al., 2020). This
few-shot paradigm has demonstrated strong perfor-
mance across multiple natural language processing
(NLP) tasks (Ouyang et al., 2022; Goyal et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022).
There has also been a series of recent works on in-
context learning for machine translation (MT) with
rather mixed results and various ways of shot selec-
tion. Recently, Zhang et al. (2023) use GLM-130B
and show consistent but rather low correlation be-
tween the performance of MT and shot selection
as compared to random. They use different fea-
tures that show varying level of correlation to the
performance. In the same spirit, Vilar et al. (2022)
use different prompt selection schemes with PaLM-
540B model with the main conclusion that shot
selection is not necessarily better than random but
they point out the importance of using high qual-
ity shots. In the same vein, Agrawal et al. (2022)
use a much smaller model XGLM-7.5B and multi-
ple selection criteria for the shots. They show that
a combination of a retrieval and task metrics are
consistently better than the random baseline across
different translation directions.
In this paper, we explore prompt selection strate-
gies along two dimensions: quality and relevance.
Our pool to select few-shot examples is the cleaned
WMT training data for each direction. This is ob-
tained by ﬁltering the full training data using lan-
guage identiﬁcation and length ratio. The size of
the full and cleaned training data is shown in Ta-
ble 12 for each direction. We do not use the devel-
opment data from WMT shared tasks, despite its
high quality, for shot selection to avoid any small
chance of leaking information about the test set. In
all cases, we test the performance with 0, 1 and 5
shots. In our preliminary experiments, we found
that increasing beyond 5 shots did not result in any
meaningful improvement. We show below how we
select shots based on quality and relevance.
•Quality : To ensure high quality shots we sort
our training data using LaBSE (Feng et al.,
2020). We consider high quality shots that are
randomly chosen from the top 1 million pairs
as opposed to the full data. We also found it
useful to select sentences that are longer than
50 tokens.