5.6 Parallel Data Bias Artifacts
To illustrate the parallel data bias, we analyze the
translations on low-quality inputs. The intuition
behind our experiment is that low-quality inputs
are more likely to correspond to the noisy parts of
the parallel data that underlie NMT systems trained
on large-scale datasets mined from the web. As
such, GPT should outperform NMT systems on
such low-quality inputs.
Experiment: We split the test sets into 3 buckets
based on perplexity of the source sentence. We
notice that the highest perplexity inputs typically
correspond to ill-formatted texts, with many inputs
pertaining to the e-commerce domain. Such inputs
are more likely to resonate with the noisy parts of
the parallel corpora on which NMT models are typ-
ically trained. For example, such high-perplexity
inputs might correspond to ill-formed texts scraped
from e-commerce websites usually present in par-
allel corpora. Since we use GPT-2 for obtaining
perplexities, we conduct this experiment for E-X
language pairs only.
Results: Table 10 presents the results of the ex-
periment across different language pairs. The mea-
surement reported is the average difference in the
quality between GPT and MS Translator as mea-
sured using COMET-KIWI. We observe that on
English to Chinese, English to Japanese and En-
glish to Russian language pairs, on which parallel
data mining is typically harder owing to a change
in script, GPT translations obtain higher perfor-
mance than MS Translator on the highest perplex-
ity bucket. For low-resource language pairs, GPT
gains proportionally in even the lowest perplexity
buckets.
Overall, we ﬁnd that that in four out of ﬁve
high resource language pairs in Table 10, GPT
obtains higher improvements in the bucket with
the highest input perplexity, when compared to
the other lower-perplexity buckets. In the cases
of English (Latin script) to Chinese, English to
Japanese and English to Russian (Cyrillic script),
the differences follow a monotonic order with
respect to input perplexity. The results suggest
that for these language pairs, GPT does obtain
better performance on the lower quality inputs.
We attribute this behavior to the parallel data bias.
Such parallel data noise biases are likely to be
correlated with input domains as well, but we leave
such an exploration to future work.Split En-De En-Ru En-Cs En-Zh En-Ja En-Is En-Ha
Lowest -0.02 -0.68 -0.43 0.22 -0.04 -6.34 1.63
Medium -0.48 -0.41 -0.97 0.47 -0.18 -5.71 1.21
Highest -0.18 -0.14 -1.10 1.63 0.38 -6.15 1.11
Table 10: Exploring Parallel Data Bias : On English
to Chinese, Japanese and Russian language pairs, GPT
translations obtain higher performance than MS Trans-
lator in the highest perplexity bucket. For low-resource
language pairs, GPT gains proportionally in even the
lowest perplexity buckets.
5.7 Summary
We demonstrated that the computational mecha-
nisms operating behind LLMs and NMT models
produce translation artifacts that can be quantita-
tively differentiated. In this subsection, we sum-
marize our comprehensive characterization of the
translations produced by GPT.
Improvements Produced by GPT: For X-E
translations, the translations produced by GPT are
more ﬂuent, obtaining consistently lower perplex-
ity (as shown in Figure 7). At the same time, GPT
translations for X-E language pairs generally incur
higher number of unaligned source words (Fig-
ure 9) and in general, similar number of unaligned
target words (Figure 10). GPT translations are also
more non-monotonic, producing translations that
involve longer range reorderings (Figure 11). The
combination of these results yields an interesting
conclusion: that X-E translations by GPT are more
ﬂuent and more paraphrastic than the NMT system
under investigation (MS Translator), while being
faithful to the source. The greater paraphrasticity
is not accompanied by content that is unsupported
by the source, i.e., the problem of inserted factual
content is not a prominent issue in these language
pairs.
For E-X translations, GPT incurs a greater num-
ber of unaligned source words (USW, Figure 14),
along with greater translation non-monotonicity
in general (NM, Figure 15), suggesting greater
paraphrasticity. However, at the same time, GPT
translations incur a slightly higher number of un-
aligned translation words as well. This suggests
that greater paraphrasticity is not the only cause
behind the higher USW and NM measurements,
and a less adequate translation than the NMT sys-
tem under investigation is a plausible cause behind
these observations as well. This is corroborated