What Makes Multi-modal Learning
Better than Single (Provably)
Yu Huang1,∗, Chenzhuang Du1,*, Zihui Xue2, Xuanyao Chen3,4,
Hang Zhao1,4, Longbo Huang1,†
1Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2The University of Texas at Austin3Fudan University
4Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
Abstract
The world provides us with data of multiple modalities. Intuitively, models fusing
data from different modalities outperform their uni-modal counterparts, since more
information is aggregated. Recently, joining the success of deep learning, there is
an influential line of work on deep multi-modal learning, which has remarkable
empirical results on various applications. However, theoretical justifications in this
field are notably lacking.
Can multi-modal learning provably perform better than uni-modal?
In this paper, we answer this question under a most popular multi-modal fusion
framework, which firstly encodes features from different modalities into a common
latent space and seamlessly maps the latent representations into the task space. We
prove that learning with multiple modalities achieves a smaller population risk than
only using its subset of modalities. The main intuition is that the former has a more
accurate estimate of the latent space representation. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first theoretical treatment to capture important qualitative phenomena
observed in real multi-modal applications from the generalization perspective.
Combining with experiment results, we show that multi-modal learning does
possess an appealing formal guarantee.
1 Introduction
Our perception of the world is based on different modalities, e.g.sight, sound, movement, touch, and
even smell [ 36]. Inspired from the success of deep learning [ 26,21], deep multi-modal research is also
activated, which covers fields like audio-visual learning [ 8,43], RGB-D semantic segmentation [ 35,
20] and Visual Question Answering [17, 2].
While deep multi-modal learning shows excellent power in practice, theoretical understanding of deep
multi-modal learning is limited. Some recent works have been done towards this direction [ 39,48].
However, these works made strict assumptions on the probability distributions across different
modalities, which may not hold in real-life applications [ 30]. Notably, they do not take generalization
performance of multi-modal learning into consideration. Toward this end, the following fundamental
problem remains largely open:
∗equal contribution
†Correspondence to: longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).