We also attempt to understand the use of sample size for exploring the latent space. Table 2 presents
the latent representation quality ηobtained by using different numbers of sample size, which is
measured by the test accuracy of the pretrain+finetuned modal. Here, the ratio of sample size is set
to the total number of training samples. The corresponding curve is also ploted in Figure 2(a). As
the number of sample size grows, the increase in performance of ηis observed, which is in keeping
with the O(p
1/m)term in our upper bound for η. The phenomenon that the combination of Text,
Video and Audio (TV A) modalities underperforms the uni-modal when the number of sample size
is relatively small, can also be interpreted by the trade-off we discussed in Theorem 2. When there
are insufficient training examples, the intrinsic complexity of the function class induced by multiple
modalities dominates, thus weakening its latent representation quality.
(a) Latent representation quality vs.The ratio of the
sample size on IEMOCAP
(b) Latent representation quality vs. The number of
modalities on simulated data
Figure 2: Evaluation of the latent representation quality on different data sets
5.2 Synthetic Data
In this subsection, we investigate the effect of modality correlation on latent representation quality.
Typically, there are three situations for the correlation across each modality [ 39]. (i) Each modality
does not share information at all, that is, each modality only contains modal-specific information. (ii)
The other is that, all modalities only maintain the share information without unique information on
their own. (iii) The last is a moderate condition, i.e., each modal not only shares information, but also
owns modal-specific information. The reason to utilize simulated data in this section is due to the
fact that it is hard in practice to have natural datasets that possess the required degree of modality
correlation.
Data Generation. For the synthetic data, we have four modalities, denoted by m1, m2, m3, m4,
respectively, and the generation process is summarized as follows:
Step 1: Generate mi∼ N(0,I),i= 1,2,3,4, where miis i.i.d. 100-dimensional random vector;
Step 2: Generate mi←(1−w)·mi+w·m1fori= 2,3,4
Step 3: Generate the labels as follows. First, add the four modality vectors and calculate the
sum of coordinates. Then, obatin the 1-dimensional label, i.e. y= (m1+m2+m3+
m4).sum (dim= 1)
We can see that information from m1is shared across different modalities, and wcontrols how much
is shared, which one can use to measure the degree of overlaps. We tune it in {0.0,0.2,0.5,0.8,1.0}.
A high weight w(close to 1) indicates a high degree of overlaps, while w= 0means each modality
is totally independent and is non-overlapping.
Training Setting. We use the multi-layer perceptron neural network as our model. To be more
specific, we first use a linear layer to encode the input to a 10-dimension latent space and then we
map the latent feature to the output space. The first layer’s input dimension depends on the number
of modality. For example, if we use two modalities, the input dimension is 200. We use SGD as our
9