Remark. A few remarks are in place. First of all, γS(M,N)defined in (8)compares the quality
between latent representations learning from MandNmodalities with respect to the given dataset S.
Theorem 1 bounds the difference of population risk training with two different subsets of modalities
byγS(M,N), which validates our conjecture that including more modalities is advantageous
in learning. Second, for the commonly used function classes in the field of machine learning,
Radamacher complexity for a sample of size m,Rm(F)is usually bounded byp
C(F)/m, where
C(F)represents the intrinsic property of function class F. Third, (7)can be written as γS(M,N) +
O(q
1
m)in order terms. This shows that as the number of sample size grows, the performance of
using different modalities mainly depends on its latent representation quality.
4.2 Upper Bound for Latent Space Exploration
Having establish the connection between the population risk difference with latent representation
quality, our next goal is to estimate how close the learned latent representation ˆgMis to the true
latent representation g⋆. The following theorem shows how the latent representation quality can be
controlled in the training process.
Theorem 2. LetS={(xi, yi)}m
i=1be a dataset of mexamples drawn i.i.d. according to D.LetM
be a subset of [K]. Assuming we have produced the empirical risk minimizers (ˆhM,ˆgM)training
with the Mmodalities. Then, for all 1> δ > 0,with probability at least 1−δ:
η(ˆgM)≤4LRm(H ◦ G M) + 4LRm(H ◦ G ) + 6Cr
2 ln(2 /δ)
m+ˆL(ˆhM◦ˆgM,S) (9)
where ˆL(ˆhM◦ˆgM,S)≜ˆr
ˆhM◦ˆgM
−ˆr(h⋆◦g⋆)is the centered empirical loss. □
Remark. Consider sets N ⊂ M ⊂ [K]. Under Assumption 3, GN⊂ GM⊂ G, optimizing over a
larger function class results in a smaller empirical risk. Therefore
ˆL(ˆhM◦ˆgM,S)≤ˆL(ˆhN◦ˆgN,S) (10)
Similar to the analysis in Theorem 1, the first term on the Right-hand Side (RHS), Rm(H ◦ G M)∼p
C(H ◦ G M)/mandRm(H ◦ G N)∼p
C(H ◦ G N)/m. Following the basic structural property
of Radamacher complexity [ 5], we have C(H ◦ G N)≤C(H ◦ G M). Therefore, Theorem 2 offers
the following principle for choosing modalities to improve the latent representation quality.
Principle: choose to learn with more modalities if:
ˆL(ˆhN◦ˆgN,S)−ˆL(ˆhM◦ˆgM,S)≥r
C(H ◦ G M)
m−r
C(H ◦ G N)
m
What this principle implies are twofold. (i) When the number of sample size mis large, the impact of
intrinsic complexity of function classes will be reduced. (ii) Using more modalities can efficiently
optimize the empirical risk, hence improve the latent representation quality.
Through the trade-off illustrated in the above principle, we provide theoretical evidence that when
N ⊂ M and training samples are sufficient, η(ˆgM)may be less than η(ˆgN), i.e.γS(M,N)≤0.
Moreover, combining with the conclusion from Theorem 1, if the sample size mis large enough,
γS(M,N)≤0guarantees r
ˆhM◦ˆgM
≤r
ˆhN◦ˆgN
, which indicates learning with the M
modalities outperforms only using its subset Nmodalities.
Role of the intrinsic property C(·)Hypothesis function classes are typically overparametrized in
deep learning, and will be extremely large for some typical measures, e.g., VC dimension, absolute
dimension. Some recent efforts aim to offer an explanation about why neural networks generalize
better with over-parametrization [ 28,29,4]. [28] suggest a novel complexity measure based on
unit-wise capacities, which implies if both in overparametrized settings, the complexity will not
change much or even decrease when we have more modalities (using more parameters). Thus, the
inequality in the principle is trivially satisfied, and we will choose to learn with more modalities.
6