Figure 1: MvsNmodalities latent space representation , where the latter is a subset of the former.
zM,zNandz⋆are images on the latent space Zcorresponding to the representation mappings ˆgM,
ˆgNandg⋆.Midenotes modality i.
Can multi-modal learning provably performs better than uni-modal?
In this paper, we provably answer this question from two perspectives:
• (When) Under what conditions multi-modal performs better than uni-modal?
• (Why) What results in the performance gains ?
The framework we study is abstracted from the multi-modal fusion approaches, which is one of
the most researched topics of multi-modal learning [ 3]. Specifically, we first encode the complex
data from heterogeneous sources into a common latent space Z. The true latent representation is
g⋆in a function class G, and the task mapping h⋆is contained in a function class Hdefined on the
latent space. Our model corresponds to the recent progress of deep multi-modal learning on various
applications, such as scene classification [9] and action recognition [24, 43].
Under this composite framework, we provide the first theoretical analysis to shed light on what makes
multi-modal outperform uni-modal from the generalization perspective. We identify the relationship
between the population risk and the distance between a learned latent representation ˆgand the g⋆,
under the metric we will define later. Informally, closer to the true representation leads to less
population loss, which indicates that a better latent representation guarantees the end-to-end multi-
modal learning performance. Instead of simply considering the comparison of multi vs uni modalities,
we consider a general case, MvsNmodalities, which are distinct subsets of all modalities. We
focus on the condition that the latter is a subset of the former. Our second result is a bound for the
closeness between ˆgand the g⋆, from which we provably show that the latent representation ˆgM
learning from the Mmodalities is closer to the true g⋆than ˆgNlearning from Nmodalities. As
shown in Figure 1, ˆgMhas a more sufficient latent space exploration than ˆgN. Moreover, in a specific
linear regression model, we directly verify that using multiple modalities rather than its subset learns
a better latent representation.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
•We formalize the multi-modal learning problem into a theoretical framework. Firstly,
we show that the performance of multi-modal learning in terms of population risk can
be bounded by the latent representation quality , a novel metric we propose to measure
the distance from a learned latent representation to the true representation, which reveals
that the ability of learning the whole task coincides with the ability of learning the latent
representation when we have sufficient training samples.
•We derive an upper bound for the latent representation quality of training over a subset of
modalities. This directly implies a principle to guide us in modality selection, i.e., when
the number of sample size is large and multiple modalities can efficiently optimize the
empirical risk, using multi-modal to build a recognition or detection system can have a better
performance.
•Restricted to linear latent and task mapping, we provide rigorous theoretical analysis that
latent representation quality degrades when the subset of multiple modalities is applied.
2