1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Nature Research, brought to you courtesy of Springer Nature Limited (“Nature Research”)
 
Terms and Conditions
 
Nature Research supports a reasonable amount of sharing of content by authors, subscribers and authorised or authenticated users (“Users”), for
small-scale personal, non-commercial use provided that you respect and maintain all copyright, trade and service marks and other proprietary
notices. By accessing, viewing or using the nature content you agree to these terms of use (“Terms”). For these purposes, Nature Research
considers academic use (by researchers and students) to be non-commercial.
 
These Terms are supplementary and will apply in addition to any applicable website terms and conditions, a relevant site licence or a personal
subscription. These Terms will prevail over any conflict or ambiguity with regards to the terms, a site licence or a personal subscription (to the
extent of the conflict or ambiguity only). By sharing, or receiving the content from a shared source, Users agree to be bound by these Terms.
 
We collect and use personal data to provide access to the nature content. ResearchGate may also use these personal data internally within
ResearchGate and share it with Nature Research, in an anonymised way, for purposes of tracking, analysis and reporting. Nature Research will
not otherwise disclose your personal data unless we have your permission as detailed in the Privacy Policy.
 
Users and the recipients of the nature content may not:
 
use the nature content for the purpose of providing other users with access to content on a regular or large scale basis or as a means to 
circumvent access control; 
use the nature content where to do so would be considered a criminal or statutory offence in any jurisdiction, or gives rise to civil liability, 
or is otherwise unlawful; 
falsely or misleadingly imply or suggest endorsement, approval , sponsorship, or association unless explicitly agreed to by either Nature 
Research or ResearchGate in writing; 
use bots or other automated methods to access the nature content or redirect messages; or 
override any security feature or exclusionary protocol. 
 
These terms of use are reviewed regularly and may be amended at any time. We are not obligated to publish any information or content and may
remove it or features or functionality at our sole discretion, at any time with or without notice. We may revoke this licence to you at any time and
remove access to any copies of the shared content which have been saved.
 
Sharing of the nature content may not be done in order to create substitute for our own products or services or a systematic database of our
content. Furthermore, we do not allow the creation of a product or service that creates revenue, royalties, rent or income from our content or its
inclusion as part of a paid for service or for other commercial gain. Nature content cannot be used for inter-library loans and librarians may not
upload nature content on a large scale into their, or any other, institutional repository.
 
To the fullest extent permitted by law Nature Research makes no warranties, representations or guarantees to Users, either express or implied
with respect to the nature content and all parties disclaim and waive any implied warranties or warranties imposed by law, including
merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose.
 
Please note that these rights do not automatically extend to content, data or other material published by Nature Research that we license from
third parties.
 
If you intend to distribute our content to a wider audience on a regular basis or in any other manner not expressly permitted by these Terms
please contact us at
 
onlineservice@springernature.com
The Nature trademark is a registered trademark of Springer Nature Limited.