Letters Nature MediciNeand research support. These team members include E. Johnson, F. Garcia-Vicente, 
D. Melnick, J. Heller and S. Singh. We also thank C. Christensen and his team at 
Northwestern Medicine IT, including M. Lombardi, C. Wilbar and R. Atanasiu. We 
would also like to acknowledge the work of the team working on labeling infrastructure and, specifically, J. Y oshimi, who implemented many of the features we needed for labeling of ROIs, and J. Wong for coordinating and recruiting radiologist labelers. 
We would also like to acknowledge the work of the team that put together the data-handling infrastructure, including G. Duggan and K. Eswaran. Lastly, we would like to 
acknowledge the helpful feedback on the initial drafts from Y . Liu and S. McKinney.
Author contributions
D.A., A.P .K., S.B. and B.C. developed the network architecture and data/modeling infrastructure, training and testing setup. D.A. and A.P .K. created the figures, wrote the methods and performed additional analysis requested in the review process. J.J.R., 
S.S., D.T., D.A., A.P .K. and S.B. wrote the manuscript. D.P .N. and J.J.R. provided clinical 
expertise and guidance on the study design. G.C and S.S. advised on the modeling techniques. M.E., S.S., J.J.R., B.C., W .Y . and D.A. created the datasets, interpreted the data 
and defined the clinical labels. D.A., B.C., A.P .K. and S.S. performed statistical analysis. 
S.S, L.P . and D.T. initiated the project and provided guidance on the concept and design. 
S.S. and D.T supervised the project.Competing interests
D.P .N. and J.J.R. are paid consultants of Google Inc. D.P .N. is on the Medical Advisory 
Board of VIDA Diagnostics, Inc. and Exact Sciences. M.E. ’s lab received funding from 
Google Inc. to support the research collaboration. This study was funded by Google 
Inc. The remaining authors are employees of Google Inc. and own stock as part of the standard compensation package. The authors have no other competing interests  to disclose.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0447-x.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0447-x.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.T.Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc. 2019
NATuRE MEDiCiNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
The Nature trademark is a registered trademark of Springer Nature Limited.