Letters
https:/ / doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0447-x1Google AI, Mountain View, CA, USA. 2Stanford Health Care and Palo Alto Veterans Affairs, Palo Alto, CA, USA. 3Northwestern Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. 
4New Y ork University-Langone Medical Center, Center for Biological Imaging, New Y ork City, NY, USA. 5These authors contributed equally: Diego Ardila, 
Atilla P. Kiraly, Sujeeth Bharadwaj, Bokyung Choi. *e-mail: tsed@google.comWith an estimated 160,000 deaths in 2018, lung cancer is 
the most common cause of cancer death in the United States1. 
Lung cancer screening using low-dose computed tomography 
has been shown to reduce mortality by 20–43% and is now 
included in US screening guidelines1–6. Existing challenges 
include inter-grader variability and high false-positive and 
false-negative rates7–10. We propose a deep learning algorithm 
that uses a patient’s current and prior computed tomography volumes to predict the risk of lung cancer. Our model achieves 
a state-of-the-art performance (94.4% area under the curve) on 6,716 National Lung Cancer Screening Trial cases, and 
performs similarly on an independent clinical validation set 
of 1,139 cases. We conducted two reader studies. When prior computed tomography imaging was not available, our model 
outperformed all six radiologists with absolute reductions of 
11% in false positives and 5% in false negatives. Where prior computed tomography imaging was available, the model per -
formance was on-par with the same radiologists. This creates 
an opportunity to optimize the screening process via com-
puter assistance and automation. While the vast majority of patients remain unscreened, we show the potential for deep 
learning models to increase the accuracy, consistency and 
adoption of lung cancer screening worldwide.
In 2013, the United States Preventive Services Task Force rec -
ommended low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) lung cancer 
screening in high-risk populations based on reported improved mortality in the National Lung Cancer Screening Trial (NLST)
2–5. 
In 2014, the American College of Radiology published the Lung-RADS guidelines for LDCT lung cancer screening, to standardize 
image interpretation by radiologists and dictate management rec
-
ommendations1,6. Evaluation is based on a variety of image find -
ings, but primarily nodule size, density and growth6. At screening 
sites, Lung-RADS and other models such as PanCan are used to 
determine malignancy risk ratings that drive recommendations for 
clinical management11,12. Improving the sensitivity and specificity 
of lung cancer screening is imperative because of the high clinical 
and financial costs of missed diagnosis, late diagnosis and unneces -
sary biopsy procedures resulting from false negatives and false posi -
tives5,13–17. Despite improved consistency, persistent inter-grader 
variability and incomplete characterization of comprehensive imaging findings remain as limitations
7–10 of Lung-RADS. These limitations suggest opportunities for more sophisticated systems to improve performance and inter-reader consistency
18,19. Deep 
learning approaches offer the exciting potential to automate more complex image analysis, detect subtle holistic imaging findings and 
unify methodologies for image evaluation
20.
A variety of software devices have been approved by the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) with the goal of address -
ing workflow efficiency and performance through augmented 
detection of lung nodules on lung computed tomography (CT)21. 
Clinical research has primarily focused on either nodule detec -
tion or diagnostic support for lesions manually selected by imag -
ing experts22–27. Nodule detection systems were engineered with 
the goal of improving radiologist sensitivity in identifying nod -
ules while minimizing costs to specificity, thereby falling into the category of computer-aided detection (CADe)
28. This approach 
highlights small nodules, leaving malignancy risk evaluation and clinical decision making to the clinician. Diagnostic support for 
pre-identified lesions is included in computer-aided diagnosis 
(CADx) platforms, which are primarily aimed at improving speci
-
ficity. CADx has gained greater interest and even first regulatory approvals in other areas of radiology, though not in lung cancer at the time of manuscript preparation
29.
To move beyond the limitations of prior CADe and CADx 
approaches, we aimed to build an end-to-end approach perform -
ing both localization and lung cancer risk categorization tasks using the input CT data alone. More specifically, we were interested in replicating a more complete part of a radiologist’s workflow, includ
-
ing full assessment of LDCT volume, focus on regions of concern, comparison to prior imaging when available and calibration against biopsy-confirmed outcomes.
Another important high-level decision in our approach was to 
learn features using deep convolutional neural networks (CNN), rather than using hand-engineered features such as texture fea
-
tures or specific Hounsfield unit values. We chose to learn features because this approach has repeatedly been shown superior to hand-engineered features in many open computer vision competitions in 
the past five years
30,31, including the Kaggle 2017 Data Science Bowl 
which used NLST data32.
There were three key components in our new approach (Fig.  1). 
First, we constructed a three-dimensional (3D) CNN model that performs end-to-end analysis of whole-CT volumes, using LDCT End-to-end lung cancer screening with  
three-dimensional deep learning on low-dose 
chest computed tomography
Diego Ardila   1,5, Atilla P. Kiraly1,5, Sujeeth Bharadwaj1,5, Bokyung Choi1,5, Joshua J. Reicher2,  
Lily Peng1, Daniel T se   1*, Mozziyar Etemadi   3, Wenxing Y e1, Greg Corrado1, David P. Naidich4  
and Shravya Shetty1
NATuRE MEDiCiNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
The Nature trademark is a registered trademark of Springer Nature Limited.