Letters Nature MediciNevolumes with pathology-confirmed cancer as training data (the 
‘full-volume model’).
Second, we trained a CNN region-of-interest (ROI) detection 
model to detect 3D cancer candidate regions in the CT volume (the ‘cancer ROI detection model’). We collected additional bounding box labels to train this model.
Third, we developed a CNN cancer risk prediction model that 
operates on outputs from both the cancer ROI detection model and full-volume model. This can also incorporate regions from a patient’s previous scans, which is accomplished by assessing regions in prior scans corresponding to the cancer candidate regions in the current scan, and then assigning a case-level malignancy score (we 
use the term ‘case’ to refer to a single patient visit, which could con
-
tain multiple CT volumes). This component was also trained on 
case-level, pathology-confirmed cancer labels (see Methods, Model development and training).
To complete this study, multiple datasets were acquired and vari
-
ous clinical evaluations were performed, as follows.
A deep learning model for analysis of malignancy risk in lung 
cancer screening CTs was developed from a NLST dataset consist -
ing of 42,290 CT cases from 14,851 patients, 578 of whom devel -
oped biopsy-confirmed cancer within the 1-year follow-up period. This represents the entire publicly available dataset provided by the National Institutes of Health (there were 26,722 patients in 
NLST). Details of how this dataset was selected from the entire NLST screening arm and the inclusion/exclusion criteria are given in Extended Data Fig. 1. Patients were randomly assigned into one of three sets: a training set (70%), a tuning set (15%) and a test set 
(15%). All CT scan volumes from each patient were then placed into 
the corresponding set based on this patient assignment. An individ
-
ual volume was considered cancer-positive if the result of a biopsy or surgical resection was positive during the screening study year, and considered cancer-negative if the patient was cancer-free in the 
1-year follow-up screen. Supplementary Tables 1, 2 and 3 contain 
information on demographics and cancer staging, CT model manu
-
facturer and nodule characteristics for all NLST subsets.
On the test dataset, for 6,716 cases (86 cancer-positives) the 
model achieved an area under the receiver operating characteris -
tic of 94.4% (95% confidence interval, 91.1–97.3) (see Methods, Statistical analysis). For comparison with radiologists, we then thresholded the model’s predictions at three different cutoffs to 
produce four different lung malignancy scores (LUMAS). These 
thresholds were chosen so that LUMAS scores corresponded with the probability of malignancy in Lung-RADS buckets 1/2, 3+, 4A+ and 4B/X on the tuning set
33 (see Methods, Operating point selec -
tion, for more detail on model score thresholding for LUMAS). Buckets 1 and 2 were combined, as they have the same management recommendation: referral to continued annual screening.
We conducted a two-part retrospective reader study with six US 
board-certified radiologists (average of 8 years clinical experience, 
range 4–20 years). In the first part, the radiologists graded a sin
-
gle-screening CT volume. Readers were given access to associated patient demographics and clinical history, while the deep learning model did not have access to this information. Additionally, while 
the volumes were resampled for the model, the readers assessed 
the full-resolution original CT cases. Neither the radiologists nor the model had access to previous screening CT volumes from the 
 
patient (see Methods, Reader studies). Radiologists reviewed a subset  
of the test dataset consisting of 507 patients (83 cancer-positives). 
On this subset of the test set, the model’s area under the curve (AUC) was 95.9 (95% confidence interval, 92.8–98.1). This AUC, 
and the sensitivity/specificity for LUMAS and radiologists, are pre
-
sented in Fig.  2a,b. The performance of all six radiologists trended 
at or below the model’s receiver operating curve (Fig. 2b).
We compared the model to the average reader performance by 
measuring the sensitivity and specificity for each LUMAS score 
and its corresponding Lung-RADS risk bucket (see Methods, Reader studies). The model achieved significantly better sensitivity (P < 0.05 for all three thresholds) and better specificity (P < 0.05 for 
two of three thresholds) than the average radiologist (Fig.  2c,d). For 
instance, comparison of the operating point of LUMAS 3+ to Lung-
RADS 3+ yielded a statistically significant specificity boost of 11.6% 
(95% confidence interval, 7.8–15.1) and a sensitivity boost of 5.2% (95% confidence interval, 0.38–9.9).
We present an alternative methodology for comparison in 
Supplementary Table 4a,b where, rather than using LUMAS, we set the model sensitivity to match the average reader, compared speci
-
ficity and then matched specificity to compare sensitivity.
Extended Data Fig. 2 shows the same analysis presented in this 
section, except that the results have been reweighted to take into 
account the sampling from the total of 26,722 patients in the NLST 
screening arm.
In the second part, CT volumes from both the current and  
previous year were available to the model and the same six  
radiologists. Comparison with previous scans to assess inter -
val growth is an important component of Lung-RADS34. Readers  
Input Model Output
Prior Current
Current
Full-v olume
modelCancer
ROI
detectionROI 1
ROI 2
Learned f eaturesPrior CurrentCancer r isk prediction
modelMalignancy probability
LUMAS r isk bu cket
Cancer localization
Fig. 1 | Overall modeling framework. For each patient, the model uses a primary LDCT volume and, if available, a prior LDCT volume as input. The model 
then analyzes suspicious and volumetric ROIs as well as the whole-LDCT volume and outputs an overall malignancy prediction for the case, a risk bucket score (LUMAS) and localization for predicted cancerous nodules.
NATuRE MEDiCiNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
The Nature trademark is a registered trademark of Springer Nature Limited.