Letters Nature MediciNedetection model is still forced to produce two ROIs which are then later rejected 
by the cancer risk prediction model. The final model is an ensemble of ten models trained with different random initializations. Additional detail can be found in Supplementary Information, Additional modeling details.
Clinical validation. The NLST-based test set comprised 6,716 cases, 86 of which 
had a biopsy-confirmed cancer within 1 year of screening. The model’s output is 
a probability between 0 and 1, which was bucketed using three thresholds. We 
used a previously developed approach to estimate the positive predictive value (PPV) of Lung-RADS 3, Lung-RADS 4A and Lung-RADS 4B/X
33. We then chose 
three operating points that matched these PPV values on our tuning set, to have comparable probability of malignancy with the four existing Lung-RADS risk buckets. Since Lung-RADS 1 and 2 have the same management recommendations 
(return to routine annual screening) and risk of malignancy, we grouped these in the same bucket for this experiment. These operating points define LUMAS by establishing cutoffs for 1/2 versus 3 and 4A/B/X, 1/2/3 versus 4A/B/X and 1/2/3/4A versus 4B/X: the same cutoffs within Lung-RADS at which the likelihood of malignancy increases and management is changed. When readers gave S- (other non-lung cancer findings) or C- (prior lung cancer diagnosis) modified ratings, these were treated in the same way as those without modifications (for example, 3C was treated the same as 3), and cases with ratings of 0 were considered not gradable and dropped from the analysis. Both test sets were run only once to avoid influencing model development. Additionally, all individuals who worked on modeling and image analysis were blinded to the diagnoses in the test set.
Operating point selection. We define three LUMAS operating points as a way to 
compare the model to the readers. We computed Lung-RADS 3+ performance on our tune set using the nodule annotations from the original NLST readers, to arrive at a PPV of 0.11. We then adjusted the threshold of our model on the tune set to match this PPV of 0.11 and used the resulting model score threshold as our LUMAS 3+ threshold. We estimated 4A+ and 4B/X PPVs using a previous analysis of NLST
33, which gave a PPV of 0.15 for 4A+ and 0.25 for 4B/X from which 
we computed LUMAS thresholds for 4A and 4B/X, respectively. We present an alternative way of making model-to-reader comparisons in Supplementary Table 4.
Retrospective application of model to NLST. The model used current and 
prior CT volumes when available. We followed the methodology in prior work
33 
to estimate the performance of Lung-RADS 3 across the entire held-out test set, 
using nodule growth annotations to take into account priors when possible. For brevity, we call this performance estimate retrospective-Lung-RADS. As can be seen from Figs. 2b and 3b , retrospective-Lung-RADS seems to overestimate the 
specificity and underestimate the sensitivity compared to the readers for Lung-RADS 3+. Reasons for these differences may include the fact that the NLST dataset nodule annotations are insufficient for accurate computation of Lung-RADS retrospectively. For example, endobronchial nodules were not noted in the NLST data and were therefore ignored, and the exact amount of nodule growth was not noted. As retrospective-Lung-RADS operates in such a different part of the receiver operating curve compared to Lung-RADS, we chose a different, non-LUMAS, operating point to compare our model’s performance to the readers in NLST (see Fig. 4a). We found two operating points, one which matched the sensitivity and one which matched the specificity of retrospective-Lung-RADS on our tune set. We then chose a final operating point midway between these two to improve both sensitivity and specificity in a balanced manner.
Reader studies. A two-part reader study was conducted comparing the model 
to six radiologists on a subset of the test set. All radiologists were US board-certified with an average of 8 years’ clinical experience (range 4–20 years). Each 
reader independently reviewed the same set of cases and applied the Lung-RADS 2014 v.1 criteria to determine a Lung-RADS score. A fully featured, web-based DICOM viewer (eUnity, Client Outlook Inc.) with FDA 510(k) clearance was 
used to evaluate cases. While the first reader study did not use prior imaging, the 
second used a single prior CT scan for comparison. In each case, readers were 
given information about the patient: race, gender, ethnicity, smoking history and cancer history. The model does not make use of this clinical information, as initial experiments with this data did not improve performance.
Performance comparisons were made for malignancy risk evaluation between 
the model and the average results of the six radiologists. For the model (using LUMAS) and the average reader (using Lung-RADS), we computed sensitivity and specificity at each of the three risk bucket thresholds—3+ , 4A+  and 4B/X. 
The average reader sensitivity and specificity were computed by taking the 
average of the six individual reader sensitivities and specificities, respectively. 
The without priors reader study subset consisted of 507 patients, 83 of which 
were cancer-positives. There was a single volume per patient and the subset was 
enriched for biopsied cases (see Extended Data Fig. 1 for details on exclusion and enrichment). The cancer-negative biopsy cases were down-weighted in the 
subsequent analysis such that the final metrics on negatives were representative 
of a random sampling of negatives from the NLST test set. The with priors reader 
study was conducted on all cases from the without priors reader study that had an available prior.Reader study—lung cancer screening on a single CT volume. A total of 507 cases 
(83 cancer-positives) were each independently interpreted by six US board-certified 
radiologists. In this study, neither the model nor the readers were given access to prior cases. Only axial CT slices were available for the first 250 cases; for the remaining cases, 
sagittal and coronal reformations and maximum-intensity projection images were available. Lung-RADS scores, slice number and anatomic lung location were recorded, 
and readers saved an ROI for each lesion with a Lung-RADS score of 2 or greater.
Reader study—lung cancer screening using current and prior CT volume. After 
completing part one, 308 patients (40 cancer-positives) that were known to have prior 
CTs available were re-presented to the same readers, now with a scan from the prior 
year available and with readers following the guidelines for Lung-RADS with baseline comparisons. They were then allowed to modify their Lung-RADS scores from part 
one. The model was also given access to the same CT scan from the prior year.
Localization analysis. Each NLST cancer-positive volume was labeled by two 
radiologists from a pool of nine (including five fellows and four practicing radiologists with a range of experience of 4–21 years (average, 9 years)). The 
radiologists were given the coarse locations of pathology-confirmed malignancies 
noted in NLST, and were then asked to label all malignancies with bounding boxes. 
We used all boxes labeled by either radiologist. Overlapping boxes referencing the same malignancy were combined into a single box by averaging the coordinates comprising the box. The Hit@N metric was defined as the fraction of true-positive 
cases in which the top N candidate lesions from the detection model made any 
overlap with an annotated malignancy. The recall metric involving all cancer-
positive cases is presented in Supplementary Table 8.
Statistical analysis. All confidence intervals were computed based on the 
percentiles of 1,000 random resamplings (bootstraps) of the data. Confidence 
intervals for differences were derived by computing the metric of interest and then computing a reader–model difference on each bootstrap. P values for sensitivity 
and specificity comparisons were computed using a standard permutation test
52 using 10,000 random resamplings of the data. Briefly, for each resampling 
we randomly swapped the reader and model results for each case35. We then 
performed a two-sided hypothesis test comparing the model–reader difference with the distribution of 10,000 model–reader differences across the resampled data 
to obtain an empirical P value.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
This study used three datasets that are publicly available: LUNA: https://luna16.grand-challenge.org/data/; LIDC: https://wiki.cancerimagingarchive.net/display/Public/LIDC-IDRI; NLST: https://biometry.nci.nih.gov/cdas/learn/nlst/images/The dataset from Northwestern Medicine was used under license for the current study, and is not publicly available.
Code availability
The code used for training the models has a large number of dependencies on internal tooling, infrastructure and hardware, and its release is therefore not feasible. However, all experiments and implementation details are described in sufficient detail in the Methods section to allow independent replication with non-proprietary libraries. Several major components of our work are available in open source repositories: Tensorflow: https://www.tensorflow.org; Tensorflow 
Estimator API: https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/estimators; Tensorflow Object Detection API: https://github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/master/research/object_detection—the lung segmentation model and cancer ROI detection model were trained using this framework; Inflated Inception: https://github.com/deepmind/kinetics-i3d—the full-volume model and the second-stage model were trained using this feature extractor.
References
 41. National Cancer Institute. National Lung Screening Trial https://www.cancer.gov/types/lung/research/nlst (2018)
 42. The American College of Radiology. Adult lung cancer screening specifications. https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Lung-Cancer-
Screening-Resources (2014).
 43. Abadi, M. et al. Tensorflow: a system for large-scale machine learning. OSDI  
16, 265–283 (2016).
 44. He, K., Gkioxari, G., Dollar, P . & Girshick, R. Mask R-CNN. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)  https://doi.org/10.1109/
iccv.2017.322 (IEEE, 2017).
 45. Setio, A. A. A. et al. Validation, comparison, and combination of algorithms for automatic detection of pulmonary nodules in computed tomography images: The LUNA16 challenge. Med. Image Anal. 42, 1–13 (2017).
 46. Huang, J. et al. Speed/accuracy trade-offs for modern convolutional object detectors. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) https://doi.org/10.1109/cvpr.2017.351 (IEEE, 2017).
NATuRE MEDiCiNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
The Nature trademark is a registered trademark of Springer Nature Limited.