Letters Nature MediciNepoint. For the 1-year cancer outcomes data, we found a boost in  
specificity (5.0%; 95% confidence interval, 4.2–5.7). We also  
analyzed the model’s performance for a longer-term endpoint, can -
cer within 2 years, resulting in an AUC of 87.3% (95% confidence 
interval, 83.2–90.9). For this endpoint, the model yielded improve -
ments in both sensitivity (9.5%; 95% confidence interval, 2.5–16.4) 
and specificity (5.1%; 95% confidence interval, 4.4–5.9) relative to retrospective-Lung-RADS.
Extended Data Fig. 4 shows the same analysis presented in this 
section, except that the results have been reweighted to take into account the sampling from the total 26,722 patients in the NLST 
screening arm.
Under insitutional review board (IRB) approval, we evaluated the 
model on an additional independent, fully de-identified screening dataset from a US academic medical center, resulting in an AUC of 95.5% (95% confidence interval, 88.0–98.4) (Fig.  4b and Extended 
Data Fig.  5a). This dataset contained 1,739 cases (27 cancer-posi
-
tives) and was used to evaluate model performance for biopsy and/or surgically confirmed lung cancers. The model was not trained or tuned using this dataset. Images were not submitted for re-inter
-
pretation by radiologists (see Methods, Development and valida -
tion datasets, for more details on the dataset). We also evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of LUMAS (Fig.  4b). For LUMAS 3+, we 
found a sensitivity of 81.5% (95% confidence interval, 66.7–95.0) 
and a specificity of 89.3% (95% confidence interval, 87.5–91.2).
We performed a localization analysis to measure how often a 
correct cancer diagnosis was linked with a correct localization. A 
bounding box was produced by the model for the top two candi
-
date lesions by malignancy risk. For the localization ground truth, each of 79 scans was labeled by two radiologists from a pool of nine. 
Every scan was derived from a cancer-positive patient in NLST. The 
radiologists were given the location and staging information from 
the pathology report, as well as all CT volumes from the patient’s data. They were then instructed to label all malignancies with a bounding box. The highest-ranked bounding box overlapped with 
a malignancy in the scan labeled by our radiologists in all but one 
case (Figs.  2e and 3e), for a Hit@1 rate of 98%. The Hit@2 rate was 
100% (see Methods, Localization analysis, for more details on the Hit metric). These findings were consistent regardless of the specific LUMAS score used to define a true-positive. For a more detailed 
analysis of the extent of overlap, see Extended Data Fig. 5b.
Given the perceived ‘black box’ nature of deep learning, an 
important step in evaluating clinical performance is a deeper assess
-
ment of the modeling results. We measured performance on many 
data subsets to show that the model’s overall performance improve -
ments were not obscuring poor performance in clinically relevant subsets. Additionally, we attempted to understand where the model’s performance improvements were greatest. The full list of 
subsets and metrics can be seen in the Supplementary Information 
(see Supplementary Tables 5 and 6). The model was not statistically inferior relative to the average reader for any metric, subset or risk bucket in either part of the reader study.
Some of the subsets we analyzed were based on a patient’s can
-
cer stage when diagnosed according to NLST pathology data. In the first part of the reader study (see Reader study—lung cancer screen
-
ing on a single CT volume), LUMAS 4B/X versus the average reader 
Lung-RADS 4B/X showed an absolute improvement in sensitivity of 
24.4% (95% confidence interval, 10.4–37.2) for early-stage cancers.
Another group of subsets were based on NLST nodule size anno -
tations. On the subset with nodules 8–15 mm, we saw an absolute 
improvement in sensitivity of 42.4% (95% confidence interval, 24.7–58.0) in LUMAS 4B/X versus the average reader Lung-RADS 4B/X. 
An example case of this type is illustrated in Extended Data Fig. 6d, annotated by one radiologist as containing a 12-mm nodule.
Further exploration of model results was completed by two 
additional radiologists (with 10 and 21 years of clinical experience) reviewing the 140 cases of disagreement between the radiologist 
consensus and the model from the first part of the reader study (without priors volumes) to evaluate possible causes of disparities (see Supplementary Information, Subjective analysis). The radiolo
-
gists observed scarring in 22% of the model–reader disagreements and, in 57% of these cases, LUMAS appropriately assigned a lower risk bucket than the readers. This downgrading of scarring accounts 
for some of the specificity improvements in the model. An example 
where LUMAS downgraded risk for a cancer-negative case with scarring is shown in Extended Data Fig.  6c (See Supplementary Information, Subjective analysis, for more details of the analysis).
Further analysis of the model’s results included examining attri
-
bution regions computed with integrated gradients35, using three 
radiologists with an average of 23 years’ clinical experience (range 
10–38 years). Positive and negative classification regions were 
examined by three radiologists on a subset of examples from the test set. The attribution regions indicated that the model primarily con
-
centrated within and on the edges of the nodule, although in some cases also on the vasculature in the parenchyma (see Supplementary Information, Subjective analysis; Extended Data Fig. 7 and example 
model false positives in Extended Data Fig. 8).
In summary, we used advanced deep learning techniques to 
train models with state-of-the-art-performance by leveraging full 
3D LDCT volumes, pathology-confirmed case results and prior 
volumes. These models, if clinically validated, could aid clinicians 
in evaluating lung cancer screening exams.
Our end-to-end priors approach generates case-level malignancy 
risk predictions as well as localization information for LDCT lung screening volumes. The strong performance of the model at the 
case level has important potential clinical relevance. The observed 
increase in specificity could translate to fewer unnecessary follow-up procedures. Increased sensitivity in cases without priors could translate to fewer missed cancers in clinical practice, especially as 
more patients begin screening. For patients with prior imaging 
exams, the performance of the deep learning model could enable gains in workflow efficiency and consistency as assessment of prior imaging is already a key component of a specialist’s workflow
36. 
Given that LDCT screening is in the relatively early phases of adop -
tion, the potential for considerable improvement in patient care in the coming years is substantial. The model’s localization directs follow-up for specific lesion(s) of greatest concern. These predic
-
tions are critical for patients proceeding for further work-up and treatment, including diagnostic CT, positron emission tomography (PET)/CT or biopsy.
Malignancy risk prediction allows for the possibility of aug
-
menting existing, manually created interpretation guidelines such as Lung-RADS, which are limited to subjective clustering and assessment to approximate cancer risk. Numerous investigations 
have evaluated CADx applications built to assist radiologists in clas
-
sification of suspected lesions previously detected and segmented 
by radiologists18. These prior CADx studies typically report only a 
lesion-level classification performance, which is not comparable to this work. In contrast, the model presented performs human-inde
-
pendent detection and classification on full volumes. Past non-peer-reviewed efforts that have attempted direct, automated malignancy prediction from full volumes using deep learning methods reported 
AUCs as high as 0.88 (ref. 
37). However, these models were primarily 
trained and tested on smaller portions of the NLST dataset, did not 
evaluate the use of priors and did not report localization metrics32,37. 
We hypothesize that taking into account a larger context in our can -
cer risk prediction model (larger ROIs around candidate regions, whole-3D volume assessment and priors) and training on a larger portion of NLST led to superior performance.
While we did note a performance decrease in the with-priors 
subset, we also found a corresponding drop in performance for our readers. This decrease may be because patients with easy-to-spot 
NATuRE MEDiCiNE | www.nature.com/naturemedicine
The Nature trademark is a registered trademark of Springer Nature Limited.