2 nature research  |  reporting summary April 2018Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement . This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data - A description of any restrictions on data availability
We used three datasets which are publicly accessible:  LUNA: https://luna16.grand-challenge.org/data/ LIDC:  https://wiki.cancerimagingarchive.net/display/Public/LIDC-IDRI NLST: https://biometry.nci.nih.gov/cdas/learn/nlst/images/  The dataset from Northwestern was used under license for the current study, and so is not publicly available. The data, or a te st subset, may be available from 
Northwestern Medicine subject to ethical approvals.
Field-specific reporting
Please select the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences  Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/authors/policies/ReportingSummary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size The first step in determining the sample size was the size of the test set we decided to use for the dataset from the National Lung Cancer 
Screening Trial (NLST). We had to balance having enough data to train the algorithm while having enough data to validate the al gorithm. We 
used a 70% training (29,541 cases, 401 cancer positive), 15% tuning (6,309 cases, 100 cancer positive), 15% testing (6,729 case s, 87 cancer 
positive) split which is a standard way of splitting datasets for deep learning research. We believe this sample size was suffi cient for the test 
set because the test set represents all 33 sites in the NLST trial, it contains all 4 stages of cancer, and all CT manufacturer s present in the trial. 
 For our independent dataset, the medical institution returned all available cases after NLST publication related to lung cancer  screening. We 
used all cases where we could arrive at a clear conclusion about the cancer outcome.  For our reader studies, we used positive enrichment by taking all cases within the test set with a same-year positive cancer di agnosis or 
biopsy, and then randomly sampling negatives. We believe the sample of negatives was sufficient as it was 5x larger than the nu mber of 
positives used and we were able to see statistically significant improvements in performance for specificity in both reader stu dies.  
   
Data exclusions We excluded data only when it made subsequent analysis not possible:  We excluded 3 studies that were not gradable as determined by our readers as there would be no way of making a reader-model com parison 
since no reader grade was returned. Cases where neither reader found a bounding box suspicious for malignancy in the volume were excluded from the localization ana lysis since 
there was no bounding box to compare to. There were a small number of patients in the independent dataset where either there were no images or it was not possible to as sess ground 
truth due to insufficient follow-up, for instance the image was suspicious for cancer but was missing a biopsy confirmation.  
Replication We replicated the high performance of our model on a completely independent dataset from an academic medical center, with diffe rent scan 
parameters, and from a disjoint time period.
Randomization For NLST, we randomly split patients into the train, tune, or test split. All imaging and metadata from each patient was associ ated with the 
same split as the patient.  For the reader study, we randomly selected negative cases from the test set. After a random selection of cases we randomly chos e one 
volume from each patient to avoid having the same patient twice in the reader study. 
Blinding We held out the data from the test set and did not give anyone in the research group access to the images until we froze our ch oice of model 
and produced the test set results. We have done only one previous evaluation on the test set for an abstract for RSNA-2018 (usi ng a different 
The Nature trademark is a registered trademark of Springer Nature Limited.