1 nature research  |  reporting summary April 2018
Corresponding author(s): Daniel Tse
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency  and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see  Authors & Referees  and the  Editorial Policy Checklist .
Statistical parameters
When statistical analyses are reported, confirm that the following items are present in the relevant location (e.g. figure lege nd, table legend, main 
text, or Methods section).
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size ( n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
An indication of whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistics including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coeffici ent) AND 
variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Clearly defined error bars 
State explicitly what error bars represent (e.g. SD, SE, CI)
Our web collection on statistics for biologists  may be useful.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection eUnity: FDA-approved fully featured PACS viewer. Used to collect reader study results. 
MAPLE: Internal labeling tool. Used to collect localization ground truth.
Data analysis Colab: Internal version of Colab which is an iPython notebook viewer Pandas: Internal fork of  open source library Pandas which is a framework for tabular data Matplotlib: Internal fork of open source library Matplotlib which is for making plots sklearn: Internal fork of open source library Scikit-Learn which we used for metrics such as AUC Tensorflow: Internal fork of open source library used to train machine learning models Apache Beam: Internal fork of open source library used for large scale batch processing Tensorflow object detection API: https://github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/master/research/object_detection Inflated Inception: https://github.com/deepmind/kinetics-i3d  
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published lit erature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers 
upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research  guidelines for submitting code & software  for further information.
The Nature trademark is a registered trademark of Springer Nature Limited.