Measuring Calibration in Deep Learning
Jeremy Nixon
Google Brain
jeremynixon@google.comMichael W. Dusenberry
Google Brain
dusenberrymw@google.comLinchuan Zhang
Google
linchzhang@google.com
Ghassen Jerfel
Google Brain, Duke University
ghassen@google.comDustin Tran
Google Brain
trandustin@google.com
Abstract
The reliability of a machine learning model’s con-
ﬁdence in its predictions is critical for high-risk ap-
plications. Calibration—the idea that a model’s pre-
dicted probabilities of outcomes reﬂect true probabil-
ities of those outcomes—formalizes this notion. Cur-
rent calibration metrics fail to consider all of the pre-
dictions made by machine learning models, and are in-
efﬁcient in their estimation of the calibration error. We
design the Adaptive Calibration Error (ACE) metric to
resolve these pathologies and show that it outperforms
other metrics, especially in settings where predictions
beyond the maximum prediction that is chosen as the
output class matter.
1. Introduction
The reliability of a machine learning model’s conﬁ-
dence in its predictions is critical for high risk applica-
tions, such as deciding whether to trust a medical diag-
nosis prediction ( 1;6;10). One mathematical formula-
tion of the reliability of conﬁdence is calibration ( 8;2).
Intuitively, for class predictions, calibration means that
if a model assigns a class with 90% probability, that
class should appear 90% of the time.
Recent work proposed Expected Calibration Error
(ECE; 9), a measure of calibration error which has lead
to a surge of works developing methods for calibrated
deep neural networks (e.g., 5;7). In this paper, we show
that ECE has numerous pathologies, and that recent cali-
bration methods, which have been shown to successfully
recalibrate models according to ECE, cannot be properly
evaluated via ECE.
Issues with calibration metrics include: not com-
puting calibration across all predictions, issues coming
out of ﬁxed calibration ranges, and an inefﬁcient bias-
variance tradeoff. We solve these issues through in-cluding all predictions, adaptive calibration ranges, and
thresholding.
We identify and examine challenges in measuring
calibration and propose several new calibration met-
rics that are designed to resolve them: Static Calibra-
tion Error (SCE), Adaptive Calibration Error (ACE), and
Thresholded Adaptive Calibration Error (TACE). We
perform experiments across MNIST, Fashion MNIST,
CIFAR-10/CIFAR-100, and ImageNet 2012. They in-
dicate, for example, that ECE does not work well when
class predictions beyond the maximum prediction matter
more, and so our ability to evaluate recalibration meth-
ods such as temperature scaling suffers. TACE, ACE
and SCE and other more ﬂexible calibration metrics are
more robust.
In general, we recommend the use of Adaptive Cali-
bration Error in calibrating a model. Our recommenda-
tion is grounded in experiments demonstrating that the
evaluation of calibration is more effective with ACE and
TACE (Figure 1, Table 2) than the others. TACE should
be used in settings where the class count is high (ex.,
100+ in our experiments) to use bins more efﬁciently
and compute a score that focuses on likely predictions.
2. Background & Related Work
2.1. Measurement of Calibration
Assume the dataset of features and outcomes {(x,y)}
are i.i.d. realizations of the random variables X,Y∼P.
We focus on class predictions. Suppose a model predicts
a classywith probability ˆp. The model is calibrated if
ˆpis always the true probability. Formally,
P(Y=y|ˆp=p) =p
for all probability values p∈[0,1]and class labels
y∈ {0,...,K−1}. The left-hand-side denotes the true
data distribution’s probability of a label given that the
model predicts ˆp=p; the right-hand-side denotes that
1
38