value. Any difference between the left and right sides
for a given pis known as calibration error .
Expected Calibration Error (ECE). To approxi-
mately measure the calibration error in expectation, ECE
discretizes the probability interval into a ﬁxed number
of bins, and assigns each predicted probability to the bin
that encompasses it. The calibration error is the differ-
ence between the fraction of predictions in the bin that
are correct (accuracy) and the mean of the probabilities
in the bin (conﬁdence). Intuitively, the accuracy esti-
matesP(Y=y|ˆp=p), and the average conﬁdence is
a setting of p. ECE computes a weighted average of this
error across bins:
ECE =B/summationdisplay
b=1nb
N|acc(b)−conf(b)|,
wherenbis the number of predictions in bin b,Nis
the total number of data points, and acc(b)andconf(b)
are the accuracy and conﬁdence of bin b, respectively.
ECE as framed in ( 9) leaves ambiguity in both its bin-
ning implementation and how to compute calibration for
multiple classes. In ( 5), they bin the probability interval
[0,1]into equally spaced subintervals, and they take the
maximum probability output for each datapoint (i.e., the
predicted class’s probability). We use this for our ECE
implementation.
3. Issues With Calibration Metrics
3.1. Not Computing Calibration Across All Pre­
dictions
Expected Calibration Error was crafted to mirror re-
liability diagrams, which are structured around binary
classiﬁcation such as rain vs not rain ( 3). A consequence
is that the error metric is reductive in a multi-class set-
ting. In particular, ECE is computed using only the pre-
dicted class’s probability, which implies the metric does
not assess how accurate a model is with respect to the
K−1other class probabilities. We examine increas-
ing the prevalence of those predictions via label noise,
and ﬁnd that ECE becomes a worse approximation of
the calibration error (Figure 1).
3.2. Fixed Calibration Ranges
One major weakness of evenly spaced binning met-
rics is caused by the dispersion of data across ranges.
In computing ECE, there is often a large leftward skew
in the output probabilities, with the left end of the re-
gion being sparsely populated and the rightward end be-
ing densely populated. (That is, network predictions are
typically very conﬁdent.) This causes only a few bins to
Figure 1. As label noise increases, ECE is outperformed by
ACE and TACE. This shows that ECE becomes a worse ap-
proximation of true calibration error as class predictions be-
yond the predicted one matter more. (The x= 0 extreme has
a true data distribution with deterministic y;x→ ∞ extreme
has a true data distribution with uniform y.)
contribute the most to ECE—typically one or two as bin
sizes are 10-20 in practice ( 5).
More broadly, sharpness, which is the desire for mod-
els to always predict with high conﬁdence, i.e., predicted
probabilities concentrate to 0 or 1, is a fundamental
property ( 4). Because of the above behavior, ECE con-
ﬂates calibration and sharpness when a model is highly
accurate.
3.3. Bias­Variance Tradeoff
Selecting the number of bins has a bias-variance
tradeoff as it determines how many data points fall into
each bin and therefore the quality of the estimate of cal-
ibration from that bin’s range. In particular, a larger
number of bins causes more granular measures of cal-
ibration error (low bias) but also a high variance of each
bin’s measurement as bins become sparsely populated.
This tradeoff compounds particularly with the problem
of ﬁxed calibration ranges, as certain bins have many
more data points than others.
3.4. Pathologies in Static Binning Schemes
Metrics that depend on static binning schemes like
ECE suffer from issues where you can get near 0 cal-
ibration error due to positive and negative predictions
overlapping in the same bin. For example, assuming the
dataset is 45% positive we could simply output a predic-
tion in the range of (0.41, 0.43) for the negative exam-
ples and (0.47, 0.49) for the positive examples to create
a set of predictions that has 1.0 AUC, 0 ECE and yet be
uncalibrated.
39