Copyright © by SIAM. Unauthorized reproduction  of this article is prohibited. 3588 K. ZHANG, A. KOPPEL, H. ZHU, AND T. BA¸ SAR
withfunctionapproximation[42], ortheirvariant, actor-criticalgorith ms[8,9,10,15],
thelimitpointsofthealgorithmsstartingfromanyinitializationsup posedlyconstitute
thelocally optimal policies ; i.e., the algorithms enjoy global convergence to the local
optima. However, by the theory of stochastic approximation [11], such a c laim can
only be made locally; i.e., local optimality can only be obtained if the al gorithm starts
aroundalocalminimum, undertheassumptionthata strictLyapunovfunctionexists.
Therefore, globalconvergence of PG methods to the actual locally optimal policies,
thoughclaimedinsomeliterature, remainsopen. Anotherlineoftheoret icalstudiesof
PG methods only focuses on showing the one-step policy improveme nt [37, 41, 42] by
choosing appropriate stepsizes and/or batch data sizes. Such one-step result still does
not imply any global convergence result. In summary, the misuse of the t ermlocally
optimal policy and the lack of studying global convergence of PG methods motivate
us to further investigate this problem from a nonconvex optimization p erspective.
Thanks to the analytical tools from optimization, we are able to ﬁrst reco ver the
asymptotic convergence and then provide the convergence rate to stationary-point
policies.
Encouragedbythisconnectionbetweennonconvexoptimizationandpolicy search,
we then tackle a related question: what implications do recent algorit hms that can
escape saddle points for nonconvex problems [16, 25] have on policy gradient m eth-
ods in RL? To answer this question, we identify several structural properties of RL
problems that can be exploited to mitigate the underlying nonconvexi ty which rely
on some key assumptions on the policy parameterization and reward. Speciﬁ cally,
the reward needs to be bounded and either strictly positive or negati ve. In addition,
the policy parameterization needs to be regular; i.e., its Fisher information matrix is
positive deﬁnite (a conventional assumption in RL [27]). Under these m ild conditions,
we establish that PG methods can escape saddle points and converge to app roximate
second-order stationary points (SOSPs) with high probability, when a periodically
enlarged stepsize strategy is employed. We refer to the resulting method as modiﬁe d
RPG (MRPG). The strict positivity/negativity of the reward functi on may amplify
the variance of the gradient estimate, compared to the setting that has r eward values
with both signs but of smaller magnitude. This increased variance can be alleviated
by introducing a baselinein the gradient estimate, as advocated by [9, 23, 40]. There-
fore, we propose two further modiﬁed updates that include the basel ines, both shown
to converge to SOSPs as well.
Main contribution. Our main contribution is threefold. (i) We propose a
series of RPG methods that unbiasedly estimate the true policy gradi ent forinﬁnite-
horizon discounted MDPs (section 3). These proposed methods facilitate the use
of analytical tools from nonconvex optimization to establish their conver gence to
stationary-point policies (spotlighted in a companion report [54]). (ii) By virtue of
such a connection of PG methods and nonconvex optimization, we propose mo diﬁed
RPG methods using periodically enlarged stepsizes, with guarante ed convergence to
actuallocally optimal policies under mild conditions on the reward functions and
parameterization of the policies (section 4). (iii) We connect the cond ition on the
reward function to the reward-reshaping technique advocated in em pirical RL studies,
while justifying its beneﬁt from a nonconvex optimization perspec tive. The proof
technique underlying this result (Theorem 4.8) is a unique contr ibution of this work,
and hinges on reworking and ﬁxing the ﬂaws in the analysis of [16]. Overall , we
believe this perspective opens the door to exploiting more advance s in nonconvex
optimization to improve the convergence of PG methods in RL.
Notation. We denote the probability measure over the space \scrS by\scrP (\scrS ), and theDownloaded 03/23/21 to 128.83.214.19. Redistribution subject to SIAM license or copyright; see https://epubs.siam.org/page/terms