patches. van den Oord et al. [25]maximize mutual information using a multi-sample version of
noise contrastive estimation [ 37,41]. See [ 38] for a review of different variational bounds for mutual
information.
State representation learning: Learning better state representations is an active area of research
within robotics and reinforcement learning. Recently, Cuccu et al. [55]and Eslami et al. [4]show
that visual processing and policy learning can be effectively decoupled in pixel-based environments.
Jonschkowski and Brock [56]and Jonschkowski et al. [57]propose to learn representations using
a set of handcrafted robotic priors. Several prior works use a V AE and its variations to learn a
mapping from observations to state representations [ 50,18,58]. Single-view TCN [ 40] and TDC
[59] learn state representations using self-supervised objectives that leverage temporal information in
demonstrations. ST-DIM can be considered as an extension of TDC and TCN that also leverages the
local spatial structure (see Figure 3bfor an ablation of spatial losses in ST-DIM).
A few works have focused on learning state representations that capture factors of an environment that
are under the agent’s control in order to guide exploration [ 60,61] or unsupervised control [ 62]. [EMI,
61] harnesses mutual information between state embeddings and actions to learn representations
that capture just the controllable factors of the environment, like the agent’s position. ST-DIM, on
the other hand, aims to capture every temporally evolving factor (not just the controllable ones)
in an environment, like the position of enemies, score, balls, missiles, moving obstacles, and the
agent position. The ST-DIM objective is also different from EMI in that it maximizes the mutual
information between global and local representations in consecutive time steps, whereas EMI just
considers mutual information between global representations. Lastly, ST-DIM uses an InfoNCE
objective instead of the JSD one used in EMI. Our work is also closely related to recent work in
learning object-oriented representations [ 63,64,65].
Evaluation frameworks of representations: Evaluating representations is an open problem, and
doing so is usually domain speciﬁc. In vision tasks, it is common to evaluate based on the presence
of linearly separable label-relevant information, either in the domain the representation was learned
on [66] or in transfer learning tasks [ 67,68]. In NLP, the SentEval [ 69] and GLUE [ 70] benchmarks
provide a means of providing a more linguistic-speciﬁc understanding of what the model has learned,
and these have become a standard tool in NLP research. Such et al. [71]has shown initial quantitative
and qualitative comparisons between the performance and representations of several DRL algorithms.
Our evaluation framework can be thought of as a GLUE-like benchmarking tool for RL, providing a
ﬁne-grained understanding of how well the RL agent perceives the objects in the scene. Analogous to
GLUE in NLP, we anticipate that our benchmarking tool will be useful in RL research in order to
better design components of agent learning.
5 Experimental Setup
We evaluate the performance of different representation learning methods on our benchmark. Our
experimental pipeline consists of ﬁrst training an encoder, then freezing its weights and evaluating its
performance on linear probing tasks. For each identiﬁed generative factor in each game, we construct
a linear probing task where the representation is trained to predict the ground truth value of that factor.
Note that the gradients are not backpropagated through the encoder network, and only used to train
the linear classiﬁer on top of the representation.
5.1 Data preprocessing and acquisition
We consider two different modes for collecting the data: (1) using a random agent (steps through
the environment by selecting actions randomly), and (2) using a PPO [ 72] agent trained for 50M
timesteps. For both these modes, we ensure there is enough data diversity by collecting data using 8
differently initialized workers. We also add additional stochasticity to the pretrained PPO agent by
using an ✏-greedy like mechanism wherein at each timestep we take a random action with probability
✏2.
2For all our experiments, we used ✏=0.2.
6