Capturing small objects: As we can see in Table 3, ST-DIM performs better at capturing small
objects than other methods, especially generative models like V AE and pixel prediction methods.
This is likely because generative models try to model every pixel, so they are not penalized much if
they fail to model the few pixels that make up a small object. Similarly, ST-DIM holds this same
advantage over Global-T-DIM (see Table 9), which is likely due to the fact that Global-T-DIM is not
penalized if its global representation fails to capture features from some patches of the frame.
Robust to presence of easy-to-exploit features: Representation learning with mutual information
or contrastive losses often fail to capture all salient features if a few easy-to-learn features are
sufﬁcient to saturate the objective. This phenomenon has been linked to the looseness of mutual
information lower bounds [ 34,35] and gradient starvation [78]. We see the most prominent example
of this phenomenon in Boxing. The observations in Boxing have a clock showing the time remaining
in the round. A representation which encodes the shown time can perform near-perfect predictions
without learning any other salient features in the observation. Table 4shows that CPC, Global T-DIM,
and ST-DIM perform well at predicting the clock variable. However only ST-DIM does well on
encoding the other variables such as the score and the position of the boxers.
We also observe that the best generative model (PIXEL-PRED) does not suffer from this problem.
It performs its worst on high-entropy features such as the clock and player score (where ST-DIM
excels), and does slightly better than ST-DIM on low-entropy features which have a large contribution
in the pixel space such as player and enemy locations. This sheds light on the qualitative difference
between contrastive and generative methods: contrastive methods prefer capturing high-entropy
features (irrespective of contribution to pixel space) while generative methods do not, and generative
methods prefer capturing large objects which have low entropy. This complementary nature suggests
hybrid models as an exciting direction of future work.
Table 4: Breakdown of F1 Scores for every state variable in Boxing for ST-DIM, CPC, and Global-T-
DIM, an ablation of ST-DIM that removes the spatial contrastive constraint, for the game Boxing
METHOD V AE PIXEL -PRED CPC GLOBAL -T-DIM ST -DIM
CLOCK 0.03 0.27 0.79 0.81 0.92
ENEMY _SCORE 0.19 0.58 0.59 0.74 0.70
ENEMY _X 0.32 0.49 0.15 0.17 0.51
ENEMY _Y 0.22 0.42 0.04 0.16 0.38
PLAYER _SCORE 0.08 0.32 0.56 0.45 0.88
PLAYER _X 0.33 0.54 0.19 0.13 0.56
PLAYER _Y 0.16 0.43 0.04 0.14 0.37
8 Conclusion
We present a new representation learning technique which maximizes the mutual information of
representations across spatial and temporal axes. We also propose a new benchmark for state
representation learning based on the Atari 2600 suite of games to emphasize learning multiple
generative factors. We demonstrate that the proposed method excels at capturing the underlying
latent factors of a state even for small objects or when a large number of objects are present, which
prove difﬁcult for generative and other contrastive techniques, respectively. We have shown that
our proposed benchmark can be used to study qualitative and quantitative differences between
representation learning techniques, and hope that it will encourage more research in the problem of
state representation learning.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the collaborative research environment provided by Mila and Microsoft Research.
We thank Aaron Courville, Chris Pal, Remi Tachet, Eric Yuan, Chinwei-Huang, Khimya Khetrapal,
Tristan Deleu, and Aravind Srinivas for helpful discussions and feedback during the course of this
work. We would also like to thank the developers of PyTorch [ 79] and Weights&Biases.
9