method named Spatiotemporal DeepInfomax (ST-DIM), which maximizes the mutual information
across both the spatial and temporal axes.ScoreLivesItems in InventoryAgent’s x, y location Skull’s x, y location Room number
Agent’s x, y location Blinky’s x, y location Inky’s x, y location Sue’s x, y location 
ScoreLivesNum GhostsNum dots eaten
Figure 1: We use a collection of 22 Atari 2600 games to evaluate state representations. We leveraged
the source code of the games to annotate the RAM states with important state variables such as the
location of various objects in the game. We compare various unsupervised representation learning
techniques based on how well the representations linearly-separate the state variables. Shown above
are examples of state variables annotated for Montezuma’s Revenge and MsPacman.
To systematically evaluate the ability of different representation learning methods at capturing the true
underlying factors of variation, we propose a benchmark based on Atari 2600 games using the Arcade
Learning Environment [ALE, 28]. A simulated environment provides access to the underlying
generative factors of the data, which we extract using the source code of the games. These factors
include variables such as the location of the player character, location of various items of interest
(keys, doors, etc.), and various non-player characters, such as enemies (see ﬁgure 2). Performance of
a representation learning technique in the Atari representation learning benchmark is then evaluated
using linear probing [29], i.e. the accuracy of linear classiﬁers trained to predict the latent generative
factors from the learned representations.
Our contributions are the following
1.We propose a new self-supervised state representation learning technique which exploits the
spatial-temporal nature of visual observations in a reinforcement learning setting.
2.We propose a new state representation learning benchmark using 22 Atari 2600 games based
on the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE).
3.We conduct extensive evaluations of existing representation learning techniques on the
proposed benchmark and compare with our proposed method.
2 Spatiotemporal Deep Infomax
We assume a setting where an agent interacts with an environment and observes a set of high-
dimensional observations X={x1,x2,...,x N}across several episodes. Our goal is to learn an
abstract representation of the observation that captures the underlying latent generative factors of the
environment.
This representations should focus on high-level semantics (e.g., the concept of agents, enemies,
objects, score, etc.) and ignore the low-level details such as the precise texture of the background,
which warrants a departure from the class of methods that rely on a generative decoding of the full
observation. Prior work in neuroscience [ 30,31] has suggested that the brain maximizes predictive
information [32] at an abstract level to avoid sensory overload. Predictive information, or the mutual
information between consecutive states, has also been shown to be the organizing principle of
retinal ganglion cells in salamander brains [ 33]. Thus our representation learning approach relies
on maximizing an estimate based on a lower bound on the mutual information over consecutive
observations xtandxt+1.
2