Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 11 of 43
Electronic s 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 43 
 
 data problems. The advantage of ANN is its skill of dealing with nonlinear functions and 
learning weights that help map any input to the output for any data. The activation func-
tions provide nonlinear properties to their ANN, which can benefit the net to learn any 
complex relation associated with input data and output data, known as a universal ap-
proximation. Many researchers adopt ANNs to solve complex relations, for example, the 
coexistence of cellular and WiFi networks in an unlicensed spectrum [78]. 
Another example is feed -forward neural network probabilistic neural network 
(PNN) in [79] and knowle dge-based neural network described in [80,81]. In [82] this ap-
proach was used for modeling a solar field in direct steam generation parabolic trough. 
ANN is used as an optimizer in many research projects to solve bundling problems; for 
example, in [83] it was used to optimize a flight trajectory for rockets. An ANN optimized 
the design and optimization of microwave circuits in [84]. Model-aided wireless AI em-
bedding expert knowledge in DNN to solve wireless system optimization to find the best 
architecture of an ANN [22]. ANN is also used to optimize and control thin film growth 
processes [85]. A sampling method for the ANN model’s optimal design [86]. A feedfor-
ward neural network optimization is applied to synthesize fault -tolerance [87]. ANNs, to-
gether wit h the Xinanjiang model to employed to explore nonlinear transformations [88]. 
Some optimized artificial neural network models for predicting chlorophyll dynamics 
were done to decrease the cost of aquatic environmental in -situ monitoring and increase 
bloom forecasting accuracy [89]. A problem of crude oil distillation systems was solved 
using ANN by optimizing heat -integration [90]. ANN solved the optimization problem 
and extraction of anthocyanins in black rice using orthogonal arrays [91]. ANN solves the 
optimization problems in traffic lights timing traffic light controller [92]. Also, ANN is 
used as an optimizer and applied to waves energy converters (WEC) to predict overtop-
ping rates as part of a sustainable optimization of coastal or harbor defense stru ctures and 
their conversion for constructing a predictive model [1]. The architecture of the artificial 
neural network is shown in Figure 3. Each neuron output includes an activation function 
of a sum of all inputs weights, while the neuron input is a sum of all weights included in 
the bias, as shown in Figure 4. The bias is a constant used to adjust the output and the 
weighted sum of the inputs to the neuron, while the activation functions are a powerhouse 
for neural networks  [93–99]. The neural network weights updates in the back -propagation 
process are done to get the gradients as a neural network using many hidden layers. The 
gradient may vanish and explode during the backward propagation [100,101]. 
 
Figure 3. Artiﬁcial neural network architectures with feed-forward and backpropagation algorithms.
Electronic s 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 43 
 
 Figure 3. Artificial neural ne twork architectures with feed -forward and backpropagation algorithms.  
 
Figure 4. Details of a single perceptron neuron for an artificial neural network.  
6.2. Recurrent Neural Network  
Recurrent neural network architecture is from a neural network family, t hough, is 
displays differences compared to ANN, in which the looping constraint on the hidden 
layer turns back to RNN [15]. The feedback constraint is back -propagated to ensure that 
the subsequent data is looped into the input data from the last step in ea ch neuron’s first 
step, as shown in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5. Details of the recurrent neural network architectures network.  
RNN is normally used to solve problems associated with text data, time -series data, 
and audio data. Because the parameters go through different time steps, these steps are 
called parameter sharing, ending with fewer parameters to be trained  [102]. This action 
could save computational time because the gradient computes only at the last step and 
vanishes in every neuron in the RNN. The err or is back -propagated from the previous 
time step to the first step. The error at each time step is calculated, allowing us to update 
Figure 4. Details of a single perceptron neuron for an artiﬁcial neural network.
6.2. Recurrent Neural Network
Recurrent neural network architecture is from a neural network family, though, is
displays differences compared to ANN, in which the looping constraint on the hidden
layer turns back to RNN [ 15]. The feedback constraint is back-propagated to ensure that
the subsequent data is looped into the input data from the last step in each neuron’s ﬁrst
step, as shown in Figure 5.