Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 32 of 43
Table 15. Overview of signiﬁcant studies on NNs based optimization using node numbers in hidden layers and learning rate.
Enhancement Method Reference Year Application Enhanced
ANN-based GA [140] 2021 Time-series forecasting for real-life data
ANN-based binary BSA [171] 2021 Virtual power plant
ANN-based PSO [120] 2021 Microgrid energy management
ANN-based LSA [30] 2016 Home energy management
DNN-based PSO [115] 2019 Digital modulation recognition
ANN-based AMARM [201] 2017 Design ANN architectures.
BPNN-based PSO [116] 2021 Global solar irradiance prediction
ANN-based BSA [167] 2018 Estimating state of charge of lithium-Ion battery
ANN-based PSO [211] 2016 Wireless sensor localization for cycling tracking
ANN-based PL [202] 2020 Wireless communication network
ANN-based ABC [155] 2014 Electric load forecasting
ANN-based SAPSO [117] 2020 Kambara reactor desulfurization
10. Conclusions and Future Work
This review includes extensive research on ANNs’ importance, advantages and types
of utilization in a series of applications and also neural network enhancement based on
optimizations for network architecture design, training and testing. The literature shows
that optimization for AI generally and neural networks speciﬁcally has been a hot topic
during the past ten years and has increased year by year up to 2021. The review has
undertaken neural network enhancements by optimizing the parameters, such as weight
optimizations, initial weight optimizations, bias and learning rate optimizations, number
of hidden layers, number of nodes in hidden layers, and activation functions. On the
other hand, the enhancement could be trained by modifying the neural network’s regular
algorithms, for example, replacing the feed-forward or the back-propagation for tuning
network weights based on the error rate per epochs. This review covers a test case study
of ANN-based optimization algorithm techniques to provide a quick example of ANN
improvement. As presented, the hybrid or mix techniques of ANN-PSO, ANN-GA, ANN-
ABC, and ANN-BSA are compared in a fair comparison for their objectives, regressions,
training performance, training time, and application of microgrid energy management. The
inﬂuence of each technique can economize time for selecting parameters and for the training.
The enhanced ANN nets are tested on distributed energy resources in the form of an energy
management system. The quick results show that virtual power plants save a reasonable
amount of supplied power. From this review, the research emphasizes enhancing the
neural network by optimization algorithms used to search for ANN best parameters and
training parameters to achieve the best structure network have been satisﬁed based on the
comparison tables as well as the testing results for improving the ANN performance by
PSO, GA, ABC, and BSA, optimization techniques. Also, this review has proved that neural
network is a very hot topic recently and could improve both neural networks or maybe
other AI techniques or ML to search for optimal parameters to solve the problems in a short
time and efﬁcient way. This review and the case study also include several important and
targeted recommendations for the further development of the ANN-based optimization
method, such as:
 Generally, ANN intelligent methods are associated with powerful optimization tools,
such as PSO, ABC, BSA, and GA techniques, in various engineering applications, such
as electromagnetism, signal processing, and pattern recognition and classiﬁcation,
robotics. Nevertheless, they have a problem with constancy and cost. Thus, future
research should be conducted on the appropriate optimization method selection,
ﬁnding the system’s optimal value, such as cost-effect components with high accuracy.
 The conventional NN technologies create issues; for example, the human brain is
highly complex, non-linear, and sensitive [ 212]. Therefore, additional investigation
is needed on human brain monitoring optimization to obtain high accuracy. The
low timing loss under the high-risk, complex situation to achieve high reliability,