Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 3 of 43
Supporting AI, ML, DL with optimization techniques has gained importance in the
last few years. There is a lot of ongoing research using optimization to enhance or boost
performance by ﬁnding the optimal parameters values to help architecture design. In [ 24],
a fuzzy logic controller design improvement for PV Inverters utilizes differential search
optimization to ﬁnd the optimal membership function patterns, which improve the fuzzy
controller to a higher level of accuracy. In [ 25] the ML, this approach optimizes the Support
Vector Machine model parameters and simultaneously locates the best features subset.
Allowing the optimization technique to do the job is the smartest way to improve almost
any AI or ML performance [ 26]. It is essential to process pre-setting to guarantee optimal
results for almost any application. In the DL and particularly deep neural networks (DNNs)
and ANN, the more hidden layers, number of neurons, and complex activation functions,
the better the outcomes but will cost more time and more complexity of the network [ 27,28].
So, to use the optimum numbers of parameters by trial and error is a time-consuming and
impossible way to follow. From another point of view, the ANN with human estimation
parameters setup could bring outcomes, but how to conﬁrm this is the best outcome
of the ANN? For these reasons, the optimization algorithm can solve these issues, and
this review delivers a detailed analysis of various examples of ANN-based optimization
techniques. For instance, In [ 29–31], optimization techniques optimize ANN parameters to
solve different electricity and communications ﬁelds by ﬁnding optimal parameters for the
optimum ANN structure.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the materials and
methods used. Section 3 addresses the challenges and motivations for ANN-based op-
timization, while Section 4 presents a review of optimization algorithms, Section 5 ad-
dresses neural network structure types. Section 6 is the complete overview of neural
networks enhanced by optimization algorithms, Section 7 is an application on artiﬁcial
neural network-based optimization algorithms, Section 8 covers artiﬁcial neural network
training-based optimized parameters and ﬁnally, Section 9 presents the conclusions and
future work.
2. Materials and Methods
A literature survey for material contents was done to present, identify, analysis,
classify and review the distinguished ANN-based optimization techniques for various
applications and controller enhancement. In this comprehensive review, the survey has
gone through voluminous publisher databases. For example, IEEE Xplore library, Web of
Science, Elsevier Scopus, and MDPI open access for putting into practice the search queries
to ensure all selected articles meet the essential quality measures, novelty, originality, high
impact, and high h-index. Following the guidelines [ 32–34], to present an in-depth review
and understanding of utilized various keywords to ﬁnd signiﬁcant journals within the
scope of the research, including multiple types of neural networks, such as ANN, RNN,
CNN, GNN, and many more and different kinds of optimization techniques such as PSO,
EA, CSA, and many more. In this section, the enhancement of the architecture of the
neural network is further evaluated. Different neural network structures are presented,
selecting and validating the superiority of using various optimization techniques to search
for optimal ANN parameters and comparing the performance [ 35] to designate the best
parameters results in the comparative performance output of the ANN controllers.
Most of the included articles were about the focus of this research review, that is how
to boost the performance of neural networks using optimization algorithms by modifying
the neural network structure. The screening stage comprises three stages. Firstly, matching
articles were excluded, bringing in about 433 best articles which were examined in the
next step, where the signiﬁcant papers were reviewed by looking at their title, keywords
and abstract. This step resulted in 306 documents for additional investigation. The third
stage is the eligibility step, in which the full texts of papers were studied, in which 219
were counted as eligible for review of references. In this review, only the meaningful and
suitable literature has been considered by evaluating the article’s relevant content and the