Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 25 of 43
values according to Levenberg-Marquardt optimization is considered the fastest back-
propagation algorithm in the Matlab toolbox. However, it does require more memory than
other algorithms. Hidden layers are chosen to be two layers using the sigmoid activation
function and the optimization is adapted to search for the number of the nodes in both
hidden layers; the optimization algorithms are also set to search for the optimal value
for learning rate. This optimization process is done using random trail values in ANN
training based on the aforementioned inputs and outputs data. The optimal trail is the
minimalist mean absolute error (MAE). Those trials from each optimization algorithm
have been done separately, and each optimization takes days to come up with the best
parameters. All these algorithms have addressed the limitations of the search for a set of
trails, as presented in Table 12. The algorithms use random ANN trial parameters as the
initial step pre iteration process includes ANN training for 10000 epochs to evaluate the
minimum objective function. Figure 8 shows that the numbers of inputs and outputs layers
are known based on the data [ 209]. The duration time of each ANN training is unexpected
could take a long or short time depending on the trial training points of the ANN training.
The training can show good or bad performance from the very early stages of the training,
but this is not sure because it sometimes behaves differently and improves or remains in
the middle or end of the training.
In this study, the BSA objective of enhancing the ANN structure toward optimal
parameters was the best among the other techniques, which minimize the MAE to reaches
a value of 0.0062 [ 171]. The GA objective was 0.0080, which is not very far from the BSA
objective. Simultaneously, the MAE of the PSO and the ABC was greater at 0.0144 and
0.0172, respectively, compared to the other two techniques, as shown in Figure 9. The
BSA’s main principles have been done through its crossover consists of two parts. The ﬁrst
part generates the binary matrix, and the second part compares population X(i,j) and the
trial population. Crossover is used to obtain an updated map(i,j). Also, this part works on
the control mechanism of boundaries for a trial population. As presented, enhancing the
neural network could help the system enormously and the enhanced ANN is proven to be
overwhelmingly impressive, or at least competitive, by training and testing is as important
as the optimal design of the ANN structure. This study also introduces a novel way of
solving optimization tasks by the neural network.
Table 12. Optimization algorithms data and limitations.
Symbol Description
P Controller input data
t Controller output data
iteration ANN = 100 Maximum iterations for ANN
Population size = 20 Size of the population
Lower LR= 0 Min value of LR
Upper LR= 1 Max value of LR
Lower N1= 6 Min value of nodes in hidden layer1
Upper N1= 30 Max value of nodes in hidden layer1
Lower N2= 6 Min value of nodes in hidden layer2
Upper N2= 30 Max value of nodes in hidden layer2