Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 6 of 43
 Obscure duration time for the network; the optimum results may be produced during
the training phase as expected because the network minimizes to a certain level the
error on the sample to allow the training completion.
 Depending on the hardware, ANNs need powerful dual processors and ANN struc-
tures. This drawback is called the realization that the whole approach is equipment-
dependent.
 Gradual corruption slows down the process over time and it suffers relative degrada-
tion, and the network problems do not immediately degrade directly.
 Difﬁculty recognizing network problems if they exist since ANNs are based on nu-
merical data that explain the difﬁculties in numerical values before being introduced
to the ANNs. This could depend on the researcher’s ability to display the mechanism
and inﬂuence the network’s performance.
Artiﬁcial neural network applications that have increased dramatically in the world
in the middle of the last century are developing very fast. At present, besides the computer
capabilities, the advantages of ANNs have been examined, and the problems users have
encountered. However, it is very important not to neglect the ANN network’s disadvan-
tages, which are a developing science branch, and should excluded one after another, and
the advantages of the ANNs are growing progressively. That is, the avenue of using ANNs
will be an increasingly important indispensable part of our lives. The enhancement of
ANNs by using optimization methods could eliminate some of their disadvantages in
picking the best network structure using the proper optimization techniques. The chal-
lenge is ﬁnding a system coding that enables appropriate tuning of neural structures in
professional networks, including the best number of neurons, hidden layers, weights, bias,
and self-shaping architecture and multi-stage objective functions.
It is very important to select and adjust the best suitable neural network parameters for
any given application, as there are many possibilities. However, not every neural network
can could act perfectly in all applications. Some types are more practical in particular
applications; for example, CNN is good for images and videos, while RNN is good for
text and classiﬁcation problems, so the networks need to be studied and adjusted, and the
problems need to be compared and contrasted. Somehow, to enhance the neural networks
with optimization it is important to select the neural network parameter optimizer to obtain
the best outputs.
Like other AI algorithms, neural networks can deal with non-linear and complicated
problems with a high volume of data. The superiority of neural networks over other
different AI algorithms lies in that they are very effective for many inputs and outputs.
While it is true that fuzzy or adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS) techniques
have drawbacks, they can accept many inputs, although they are limited in the number of
outputs they can support. Neural networks do not have this limitation which makes them
work better for classiﬁcation and regression studies.
4. Review of Optimization Algorithms
An optimization algorithm is an essential tool for selecting the best solution from
a set of all possible solutions for analyzing, classifying, or improving existing systems
or data. Above all optimization problems get at least one objective function or more
objective functions. However, the target is to determine the optimal key that fulﬁlls the
complementarity conditions. Optimization problems are found in numerous scientiﬁc
areas, such as medicine, engineering, business, and many more. Optimization algorithms
are classiﬁed into various types: deterministic optimization and global optimization [ 23,37],
continuous optimization [ 21,38], multi-objective optimization [ 39–41], etc. Overall, each
optimization method is designed to serve speciﬁc targets. For instance, the local algorithms
solve some optimization problems, such as discrete variables or integers, whereas it is easy
for global algorithms. The global optimization algorithms can be categorized as either
evolutionary algorithms or deterministic algorithms.