Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 24 of 43
studies involving neural networks for improving optimization techniques design and
application enhancement.
Table 11. Studies involving neural networks for improving optimization techniques design and application enhancement.
Neural Networks
OptimizerOptimization
Algorithm EnhancedOptimizer Problem Application Improved
ANN [203] GWOANN is applied to estimate the
ﬁtness function value of GWOPressurized water reactor
ANN [204] RSWANN as a tool in ﬁnding the
parameter optimization of RSWA sensitive to exact measurement of
aluminum alloy
CNN [11] TOThe trained CNN approximately
evaluates individualsCross-sectional image of an interior
permanent magnet motor
8. Application on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks Based Optimization Algorithms
Previous research on optimal scheduling controllers was developed for energy man-
agement, reliable power generation, cost minimization, and carbon emission calculation [64] .
A binary BSA algorithm and binary PSO are utilized to search for optimal binary
schedules [ 120,205]. These algorithm techniques have powerful optimization skills, search
exploration process, fast convergence for the solution, and other conventional optimization
techniques and overcome local minima traps. Besides, developing an enhanced ANN-
based BBSA and ANN-based BPSO schedule controller ensures the best performance across
different load conditions. [ 206,207]. An ANN is on track as a prediction technique to ﬁnd
the best weight values for neural nets designed for efﬁcient system operation. In this
paper, these nets operate in optimum ON/OFF status by training on input and output
data patterns obtained from scheduling controllers [ 206,208]. This section presents ANN-
based optimization algorithms implementation for ANN-PSO, ANN-GA, ANN-ABC, and
ANN-BSA, respectively, to search for the optimal values of the number of nodes in hidden
nodes layer1 and layer2 as well as the best value of the learning rate. The algorithms
apply limitations of, e.g., (max and min) number of nodes in each hidden layer and the
learning rate. The output data is relayed on a binary schedule (25x24) obtained from the
scheduling controller. The input data includes six inputs, including solar irradiances, wind
speed, energy price, battery status, gird status, and diesel fuel status refer to [ 206,208].
In all the ANN-based algorithms, the iteration of ANN is set to 100 iterations, and the
population size is 20 populations. Table 10 presents a brief list describing the data and
the limitations of the aforementioned algorithm techniques. The mean absolute error
(MAE) is an objective function that enhances the ANN performance by decreasing the error
function expressed in the general ﬂow chart of optimization of ANN optimal parameters,
as shown in Figure 7. All the inputs and outputs of the ANN-based optimization algorithm
training for the virtual power plants system in [ 208] can be expressed by the following
Equations (1) and (2):
Input =2
6666664solar irradiances (R)
wind Speed (W)
energy price (E)
battey status (B)
grid status (G)
diesel f uel status (D)3
7777775(1)
Output =2
64DG(1,1). . . DG(1,25)
.........
DG(24,1). . . DG(24,25)3
75 (2)
ANN deep neural networks using feed-forward structures have been adopted in this
study. The use of trainlm as a network training function that updates weight and bias