Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 2 of 43
some others are subsections of the neural network, such as generative adversarial network
(GAN) by Goodfellow in [ 5,6]. The deep learning (DL) approach utilizes a hierarchy of
concepts in a ﬁeld that assists a computer in building knowledge from experience [ 7]. This
approach has found its use especially in visual object or speech recognition as well as
genomics and medicines [ 8,9]. The neural networks are a family of deep learning (DL) and
ML methods based on artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) with multi-hiding layers [ 10–14].
Neural networks are applied in many different implementations with slight variations in
their structures, such as recurrent neural networks (RNN), Artiﬁcial neural network (ANN),
and convolutional neural networks (CNN) [ 15,16]. Due to their feature engineering and
decision boundaries, the novel neural network approaches are preferred over machined
learning in some ﬁelds like self-driving vehicles, unmanned drones, and complex deep
learning problems [ 17]. The decision boundary is used to classify any data point as one of
the two classes, positive or negative. For this reason, if the data is not separable for any
reason, the neural networks in deep learning will not be a good choice [18,19].
Artiﬁcial neural networks are computational algorithms that are utilized to model
data. Their design is based on the biological nervous system, hence the name [ 20,21]. An
ANNs contain a set of processing elements called neurons that are interrelated components.
These neuron structures act as a harmonious rhythm to solve certain complex problems.
ANN can be used in scenarios when it is difﬁcult to extract trends or detect patterns.
ANNs have recently gained popularity after almost 50 years of existence. Through their
rapid increases and importance, the underlying logic behind ANNs has existed; however,
due to the pervasive and ubiquitous adoption of powerful computational tools in our
contemporary society, ANNs have had a sort of renaissance, much to the beneﬁt of experts,
engineers, and consumers.
The current cutting-edge in deep-learning and ANNs focuses highly on their ability to
model and interpret complex data and their ability to scale due through optimization and
parallelization [ 22]. The current framework for designing ANNs is widely available, with a
myriad of tools facilitating their development. Python, C++, Google’s Tensorﬂow, Theano,
Matlab, and Spark contain a robust set of mathematical operations that necessitate ANNs.
Due to the algorithm behind ANNs, the models are inherently liable for extracting meaning
from imprecise or intricate problems. Speaking reductively, ANNs are data modeling tools
that are trained on a given dataset.
Optimization problems often require good optimization methods to minimize or
maximize objective functions. These functions can often not solve problems accurately, for
example, when they are not linear or polynomial and must be approximated. Full or partial
derivatives are used in some algorithms to linearize these functions at speciﬁc points [ 23],
whereas evolutionary algorithms (EA) may be employed for approximation. The objective
function approximation in optimization problems makes it possible to apply other artiﬁcial
intelligent techniques through a non-linear regression to resolve an optimization problem.
The objective function’s derivate should be polynomial to calculate the optimization prob-
lem’s solution. Algorithms are normally used to optimize, e.g., weights, optimize network
architecture, optimize learning rules, neurons, activation function, and bias. Another way
to optimize and enhance the ANN is by using an optimizer to replace the neural network’s
original algorithms with optimization algorithms, replacing the backpropagation with
any optimization techniques to solve certain associated issues. However, using an opti-
mization algorithm in place of back-propagation, like using the Liebenberg Marquardt
neural network with any optimization techniques for fast or accurate achievement in the
neural network training. This research review highlights improving the neural network
by optimizing algorithms by handling neural network parameters or training parameters
to ﬁnd the ﬁnest structure network pattern to solve the problems with high accuracy and
faster. This review included testing results for improving the ANN performance using four
optimization algorithms to search for ANN’s optimal parameters, such as the number of
neurons in the hidden layers and learning rate. The obtained neural net is used for solving
energy management problems in the virtual power plant system.