Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 13 of 43
Electronic s 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 43 
 
 the weights. The Elman neural network (ENN) has similar concept properties to RNNa, 
and it has standard back -propagation k nown as the Elman backpropagation algorithm 
(EBP). RNN is used in many applications for real -world problem -solving, as in [38].  
6.3. Convolution Neural Network  
A convolutional neural network is a neural network family compared to a multilayer 
perceptron (MLP) [93]. The CNN has hidden layers called convolutional layers. Also, 
CNN has other non -convolutional layers [15,103]. The basic concept of CNN structure is 
the convolutional layers that pull through the input weight and transform the neurons’ 
input on the activation function.  
To the next convolutional layer, is the convolutional operation, as shown in Figure 6. 
Each convolutional layer specifies the number of filters used to detect the patterns of 
shapes in specific object shapes, for example (circle, squire, corner, eyes, feathers, etc.). 
These filters help extract the right and relevant features from the input data. CNN is the 
most widely used type of neural network for analyzing images. However, image analysis 
is but one use of CNN and it can be used  for other data analysis problems such as classi-
fication problems. Most generally, CNN is a critical neural network specializing in picking 
out patterns and making sense of them. This pattern detection is what makes CNN so 
useful for image analysis. These CNN models are used across different applications and 
domains, especially in image and video processing projects. CNN is related to solving 
images as multiple -image-based depth estimation or estimates depths in the edges; basi-
cally, they are used to classi fy the edges in backgrounds or reflections [5]. CNN was used 
to detect wildfire smoke images [104] and forest fire smoke recognition [105]. 
 
Figure 6. Details of the convolution neural network architectures network with convolution layers.  
7. Overview of Neural Networks Enhanced by Optimization Algorithms  
The optimization technique aims to improve the applications by finding the minimal 
error, minimal cost, maximum performance and efficiency. It can be categorized into two 
principal ideologies: physical and biological -based [44]. for example, chaotic optimi zation 
algorithm (COA), simulated annealing (SA), gravitational search algorithm, etc. or a biol-
ogy-based algorithm such as genetic algorithm (GA), practical swarm optimization, bac-
terial foraging optimization, harmony search algorithm, cuckoo search algor ithm, ant col-
ony optimization, dolphin swarm algorithm (DSA) bee colony algorithm, firefly algo-
Figure 6. Details of the convolution neural network architectures network with convolution layers.
7. Overview of Neural Networks Enhanced by Optimization Algorithms
The optimization technique aims to improve the applications by ﬁnding the minimal
error, minimal cost, maximum performance and efﬁciency. It can be categorized into two
principal ideologies: physical and biological-based [ 44]. for example, chaotic optimization
algorithm (COA), simulated annealing (SA), gravitational search algorithm, etc. or a
biology-based algorithm such as genetic algorithm (GA), practical swarm optimization,
bacterial foraging optimization, harmony search algorithm, cuckoo search algorithm,
ant colony optimization, dolphin swarm algorithm (DSA) bee colony algorithm, ﬁreﬂy
algorithm, LSA, backtracking search algorithm, etc. [ 46]. In this review, some common
optimization algorithms that enhance the performance of neural networks are discussed in
detail in the following subsections.
7.1. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks Based Particle Swarm Optimization
The PSO method was ﬁrst discovered by Eberhart and Kennedy inspired by the
movement of organisms such as bird ﬂocking and ﬁsh schooling in 1995 [ 106]. PSO uses
a velocity vector to update each particle’s current position in the swarm [ 107]. The PSO-
based neural network is used extensively compared to the other algorithms and applied by
many researchers in different applications. For example, it is used to solve mathematical
problems of predicting the uniaxial compressive strength of rock samples from other states
in Malaysia [ 108]. Also, this combination of ANN-based PSO is used for detecting trip pur-
poses from smartphone-based travel surveys of GPS data [ 109]. ANN-based PSO is used
smartly to improve the prediction performance model for Wi-Fi indoor localization strate-
gies by reducing the maximum location error with astonishing results [ 110]. In [ 111], PSO
optimization swas used to design a dynamic modular neural network based on adaptive
PSO to solve the problem related to a subnetwork output. Optimization enhances many al-
gorithms and applications to solve complex linear and nonlinear problems; for example, an
efﬁcient PSO-based ANN was utilized for the nonlinear mathematical model of Troesch’s
problem. PSO was used to obtain a unique numerical solution by weights optimization
for the ﬁnal network [ 112]. Network weight optimization is very popular for optimizing
the initial weights or entire network weights. For example, in [ 72], optimization is used
to ﬁnd the best weights for self-adaptive parameters and strategy-based PSO (SPS-PSO)
algorithm to optimize feedforward NN (FNN) design. Again, weights optimization using
ANN-based PSO solves a non-linear channel equalization problem as in [ 113], and in [ 49],