Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 7 of 43
There are hundreds of common optimization techniques for many relevant scientiﬁc
code archives. The challenge is knowing the best techniques to suit a particular optimization
problem because some techniques use derivatives while others do not. The conventional
methods normally use ﬁrst order derivatives, and others use the second derivative for their
objective function. The search type is either direct or stochastic search for targeted objective
functions that result in its function’s maximum or minimum output.
Normally, the most popular kinds of optimization problem facing neural networks
involve continuous function optimization. Their input pretext for their function estimates
numeric values for either the input function or the output function. However, the more
available information for the target function, the more accurate the achieved optimization
will be. In contrast, the differentiable function can determine any sample in the input
search. Optimization algorithms are, in general, categorized into two groups: deterministic
and heuristic algorithms. Deterministic techniques exploit their analytical capabilities,
while in contrast, heuristic techniques are more ﬂexible and efﬁcient than deterministic
techniques through fast-to-obtained solutions, decreasing the number of global solutions.
Global optimization algorithms are used to ﬁnd the global minimum or maximum in
complex problems. This is harder than local optimization with bound constraints and
does not require derivatives. Both the local and global optimizations are a matching set
in solving linear, non-linear, quadratic, and least squares constrained or unconstrained,
dense or sparse, forward or reverse communication, continuous, mixed-integer, integer
problems [ 42]. The optimization techniques are classiﬁed according to the underlying
principle of a biological and physical-based algorithm. The ﬁrst category is a biology-based
algorithm such as genetic algorithm (GA), harmony search algorithm (HSA), particle swarm
optimization (PSO), bacteria foraging optimization (BFO), cuckoo search algorithm (CSA),
bee colony algorithm (BCA), ant colony optimization (ACO), ﬁreﬂy algorithm (FA) [ 43],
backtracking search algorithm (BSA), lightning search algorithm (LSA), etc. The second
category is physics-based algorithms such as simulated annealing (SA), gravitational search
algorithm (GSA), chaotic optimization algorithm (COA), etc. [ 44,45]. In this review, some
of the most popular optimization algorithms are explained.
The particle swarm optimization algorithm is one of the most popular evolutionary
optimization algorithms [ 46]. The PSO algorithm principle depends on the velocity and
position of particles [ 47]. The authors described that the PSO algorithm is utilized to
automatically design an ANN method to improve the synaptic mass, architecture, and
transfer functions for each neuron [ 48–52]. Nevertheless, PSO has some drawbacks: it is
vulnerable to becoming stuck in local minima and selecting control parameters incorrectly,
resulting in a bad solution. In [ 48], an ANN-based PSO method was used to predict the
thermal properties of molecular structure.
Another popular algorithm is the gravitational search algorithm, a physics-based opti-
mization algorithm inspired by Newton’s motion and gravity laws [ 49]. The GSA optimiza-
tion method has been used in some applications to ﬁnd the best solution for a short-term
training feedforward approach to ANN problems and to improve the performance [53–57] .
In [50], the authors addressed an ANN-based GSA optimization approach to enhance kid-
ney image quality classiﬁcation for a bio-medical application. The study in [ 51] presented
a GSA optimization-based ANN to solve geotechnical engineering issues for improving
geogrid-reinforced soil structures.
One optimization algorithm is the neural network algorithm (NNA), which is inspired
by the functioning of biological nervous systems and artiﬁcial neural networks [ 52]. NNA
has recently been used in machine learning, as an intelligent controller, in biodiversity
assessment, intelligent feature recognition, and for uncertain data streams to provide
a way of learning features, predicting highly nonlinear functions, discovering useful
hidden representations of the input because it does not require mathematical models and it
achieves good prediction for ANN [ 58–61]. However, NNA controllers require massive
data and long-time training and learning. In [ 53], an artiﬁcial bee colony (ABC) and an
NNA intelligent feature recognition for STEP-NC-compliant manufacturing can adjust