Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 20 of 43
network with random weights by combining BSA and a neural network with random
weights (NNRWs) to optimize the hidden layer parameters of the single-layer feed-forward
network (SLFN), and NNRWs is used to derive the output layer weights [ 168]. In [ 169]
a modiﬁed BSA (MBSA) has been improve by learning and niching together with ANN
training and in [ 170] an ANN prediction method based on adaptive BSA was used for
optimizing the connection weights matrix of the echo state network reservoir [ 170]. These
studies involving BSA for neural network design and applications enhancement for the
best neural network structure boost the performance level and reduce the time-consuming
network setup. Table 7 presents different research projects involving BSA for design and
application enhancement.
Table 7. Studies involving BSA for neural network design and application enhancement.
Neural Networks Optimizer Optimizer Problem Application Improved
Back-propagation
NN [167]BSATo ﬁnd the optimal values of hidden layer
neurons and learning rateEstimating state of charge of
lithium-ion batteries
SLFN [168] BSATo optimize the neural network with random
weights, and derive the output layer weights.Improve neural network design
ANN [169] Modiﬁed BSAFor learning and niching strategies such as
learning strategy, a niching strategy, and a
mutation strategyChaotic time series prediction and
benchmark functions
Echo State
Network/RNN [ 170]Adaptive BSATo optimize the connection weights matrix of
the echo state network reservoirEcho state network
architecture design
ANN [171] Binary BSATo optimize the number of nodes in hidden
layers and learning rateEnergy management to reduce
the cost
7.6. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks Based Other Optimization Search Algorithms
Neural network-based optimization algorithms are a hot topic in the research ﬁeld.
Many algorithms have been studied in the past ten years; their combination has become
very attractive because of the incredible outcomes from that merging or enhancement. As
a result, many studies have been conducted in different applications in life; in this section,
some signiﬁcant research has been investigated to highlight the importance of enhancing
neural networks with optimizations. A short wind speed forecasting-based prediction
problem has been solved by ANN hybrid with crisscross optimization in [ 172]. ANN also
solves the reliability-based design problem of double-loop reliability-based optimization
approaches [ 173]. Deterministic global optimization and ANN to solve the convex and
concave envelopes of the nonlinear activation function in [ 4]. A graph neural network
called RouteNet solves complex relationships between topology, routing, and input trafﬁc
to produce accurate estimates solutions in [81].
This section focuses on mixing different types of neural networks with other optimiza-
tion algorithm techniques. For example, FNN training employs a symbiotic organisms
search (SOS) algorithm to solve the UCI machine learning repository problems [ 84]. An
ANN model using the teaching–learning-based optimization algorithm (TLBO) solves en-
ergy consumption estimates in Turkey [ 174]. Also, the ANNs with ant colony optimization
(ACO) assess residential buildings’ performance by training the NN based on ACO instead
of the BP algorithm [ 175]. In [ 176], a social spider optimization was used to improve
the training phase of ANN with multilayer perceptrons for the context of Parkinson’s
disease recognition. A dynamic optimization problem (DOPs) used with neural network
(NN)-based information transfer method (NNIT) used for solving issues associated with
environmental changes in [ 177]. Also, an automated optimization-oriented strategy for
designing high power ampliﬁers using DNNs with a deep learning regression network
and electromagnetic-based Thompson sampling efﬁcient multi-objective optimization
(TSEMO) [ 178]. Another continuous optimization based on deep RNNs uses metaheuristic
algorithms to solve the difﬁculties of optimization problems for noise to signal ratio [ 40].
A neural network in numerous learning problems and backpropagation (BP) methods