Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 12 of 43
Electronic s 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 43 
 
 Figure 3. Artificial neural ne twork architectures with feed -forward and backpropagation algorithms.  
 
Figure 4. Details of a single perceptron neuron for an artificial neural network.  
6.2. Recurrent Neural Network  
Recurrent neural network architecture is from a neural network family, t hough, is 
displays differences compared to ANN, in which the looping constraint on the hidden 
layer turns back to RNN [15]. The feedback constraint is back -propagated to ensure that 
the subsequent data is looped into the input data from the last step in ea ch neuron’s first 
step, as shown in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5. Details of the recurrent neural network architectures network.  
RNN is normally used to solve problems associated with text data, time -series data, 
and audio data. Because the parameters go through different time steps, these steps are 
called parameter sharing, ending with fewer parameters to be trained  [102]. This action 
could save computational time because the gradient computes only at the last step and 
vanishes in every neuron in the RNN. The err or is back -propagated from the previous 
time step to the first step. The error at each time step is calculated, allowing us to update 
Figure 5. Details of the recurrent neural network architectures network.
RNN is normally used to solve problems associated with text data, time-series data,
and audio data. Because the parameters go through different time steps, these steps are
called parameter sharing, ending with fewer parameters to be trained [ 102]. This action
could save computational time because the gradient computes only at the last step and
vanishes in every neuron in the RNN. The error is back-propagated from the previous time
step to the ﬁrst step. The error at each time step is calculated, allowing us to update the
weights. The Elman neural network (ENN) has similar concept properties to RNNa, and
it has standard back-propagation known as the Elman backpropagation algorithm (EBP).
RNN is used in many applications for real-world problem-solving, as in [38].
6.3. Convolution Neural Network
A convolutional neural network is a neural network family compared to a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) [ 93]. The CNN has hidden layers called convolutional layers. Also, CNN
has other non-convolutional layers [ 15,103]. The basic concept of CNN structure is the
convolutional layers that pull through the input weight and transform the neurons’ input
on the activation function.
To the next convolutional layer, is the convolutional operation, as shown in Figure 6.
Each convolutional layer speciﬁes the number of ﬁlters used to detect the patterns of shapes
in speciﬁc object shapes, for example (circle, squire, corner, eyes, feathers, etc.). These
ﬁlters help extract the right and relevant features from the input data. CNN is the most
widely used type of neural network for analyzing images. However, image analysis is but
one use of CNN and it can be used for other data analysis problems such as classiﬁcation
problems. Most generally, CNN is a critical neural network specializing in picking out
patterns and making sense of them. This pattern detection is what makes CNN so useful
for image analysis. These CNN models are used across different applications and domains,
especially in image and video processing projects. CNN is related to solving images as
multiple-image-based depth estimation or estimates depths in the edges; basically, they
are used to classify the edges in backgrounds or reﬂections [ 5]. CNN was used to detect
wildﬁre smoke images [104] and forest ﬁre smoke recognition [105].