Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 8 of 43
geometric and topological information. The study in [ 54] addressed estimating biodiversity
assessment based on AI and NNA.
Another powerful optimizer is the BSA which generates a trial population and then
takes partial advantage of its experiences from previous generations. Crossover is devel-
oped in the trial population. The initial trial populations are taken from mutations. The
described beneﬁts of BSA are in their search exploration process, which has the advantage
of using the mutation and crossover strategies. Though it has some limitations, such as
time-consuming computation because of the dual population algorithm, one parameter is
only used to control the amplitude of the search direction matrix in the mutation phase, and
crossover is complex [ 55–57]. In [ 29,30], BSA is applied for a fuzzy logic speed controller
optimization approach for induction motor drives. The deterministic global optimization in
numerical optimization helps to search for global solutions for optimization problems [ 42].
The lightning search algorithm was ﬁrst proposed by Shareef and his colleagues [ 58].
Afterwards Ali upgraded it with quantum mechanics theories to generate a quantum-
inspired LSA (QLSA) [ 59]. The LSA optimization approach has been utilized in numerous
applications [ 30,60,61]. The study in [ 30] described an LSA-based ANN method home
energy management scheduling controller for residential demand response strategies. The
study in [ 62] proposed a neural networks-based LSA to ﬁnd the optimized feedforward
learning process to solve datasets. In [ 63], the author addressed ﬁnding the optimal Kp
and Ki value of the LSA-based PI voltage controller and implementing it into the dSPACE
controller. Table 1 lists the advantages and disadvantages of the most popular nature-
inspired optimization techniques. However, not all optimization algorithms and their
variants provide superior solutions to speciﬁc problems. Also, even though some of the
optimization techniques are efﬁcient, they still need further improvement to enhance
their performance. Besides, how to speed up the convergence of an algorithm is still
a very challenging question, so new Nature-inspired optimization techniques must be
continuously developed to advance the ﬁeld of computational intelligence or heuristic
optimization [60,61,64–73].
Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages of the most popular nature-inspired optimization techniques.
Technique Advantages Disadvantages
PSO [62]- Fast convergence.
- The capability of solving complex problems in a
different application domain.- Easily get trapped in local minima.
- Improper selection of control parameters leads to
a poor solution.
GA [63]- It does not require derivative information
- Suitable for a large number of variables,- No guarantee of ﬁnding the global minimum,
- Long time for convergence,
- Hard to ﬁne-tune all the parameters, like
mutation rate, crossover parameters, etc., this is
often done by just trial and error.
NNA [52]- Easy to learn and implement.
- It obtains good results when dealing with
lower-dimensional optimization problems.- Abrupt switching to the exploitation stage by
quickly varying wavelength and pulse
emission rate.
- Difﬁcult to solve high-dimensional
optimization problems.
ABC [64]- Strong robustness
- Fast convergence and ﬂexibility- Premature convergence in the later
search period.
- Accuracy problems that in some cases cannot
meet the optimal solution.
LSA [58]- Suitable for the search exploration process.
- Has the advantage of using the mutation and
crossover strategies.- Time-consuming in computation because of the
use of the dual population algorithm.
- One parameter only controls the amplitude of
the search direction matrix in the
mutation phase.
- Crossover is complex.