Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 33 of 43
modularity, efﬁciency, and performance; further investigation of the system’s proper
optimization selection is needed.
 Despite the beneﬁts of optimization algorithms in reducing technical loss, low error,
and cost, their use in ANN has been very limited. Only computational intelligence
optimization algorithms have made signiﬁcant progress toward optimizing the con-
troller design and the price. As a result, advanced optimization algorithms will be
better choices for ANN design.
 Enhancement of ANN parameters with optimization could result from new algorithms
that save more time adjusting the ANN toward optimal architectures by avoiding trial
and error or random selection. Like this, the optimal solution is considered as a smaller
network, a straightforward calculation method, and less time could be achieved.
The neural networks of intelligence dependence evolutionary algorithms improve
neural networks’ design by reducing training time or solving problems using the ANN
method. For quick tracking, less steady-state errors, and high performance, ANN tech-
niques can be used to monitor robotic sensing and control monitor and achieve bidirectional
power management. However, real-time data integrity, reduced operations time, expensive
processing equipment, and the need for good parameter selection and manual tuning are
all disadvantages. As a result, more research is required to select proper optimization
methods for enhancing neural network structure design is important.
DL methods are fast evolving for higher performance. There are adequate review
articles about the progressing algorithms in particular application domains. Future work
could be carried out considering other DL methods such as denoising autoencoder, deep
belief networks, and long short-term memory. Further study and review can enhance or
hybridize ML with optimization techniques, random forest, Markov chain Monte Carlo, or
support victor machines. Future work can also consider many optimizations to improve AI
and ML to boost their performance [ 213–215]. Future studies can consider DL from another
perspective, for example, continuous or online optimization.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.S.U., M.G.M.A. and J.A.A.; methodology, M.G.M.A.
and M.R.S.; software, M.G.M.A.; A.M. and J.A.A., validation M.A.H., S.M.; formal analysis, T.S.U.;
investigation, S.M.S.H. and T.S.U.; resources, T.S.U. and R.M.; data curation, M.G.M.A. and R.M.;
writing—original draft preparation, M.G.M.A., R.M.; writing—review and editing, S.M., S.M.S.H.
and T.S.U. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the
study.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
ABC Artiﬁcial bee colony
ACO Ant colony optimization
ACS Artiﬁcial cooperative search algorithm
ADNN Adadelta deep neural networks
ADPSO Adaptive dynamic particle swarm optimization
AFSA Artiﬁcial ﬁsh swarm optimization
AI Artiﬁcial intelligence
AMARM Adaptive memetic algorithm with a rank-based mutation
AMSG Adam optimization stochastic gradient descent
ANFIS Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems
ANN Artiﬁcial neural networks
ANN-ABC Artiﬁcial neural networks-based artiﬁcial bee colony
ANN-BSA Artiﬁcial neural networks-based backtracking search algorithm
ANN-BABC Artiﬁcial neural networks-based bainary artiﬁcial bee colony