Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 5 of 43
3. Challenges and Motivations for ANN-Based Optimization
Neural networks can study large volumes of data with complex features and extract
different patterns in a relevantly short amount of time. Therefore, they are useful for
many industrial applications, such as predicting certain behaviors, detecting anomalies or
errors in data, detecting certain images, sounds or pictures. They could use self-learning
to produce the best output, with unlimited provided inputs [ 36]. The neural networks
modeling approach is very ﬂexible and quick to solve problems, and it does not rely on
physics-founded algorithms to build models. They are easy to modify and deal with based
on operator experiences and merge with the ANN structure model. Neural networks
are good for solving complex non-linear relationships as their inputs are saved in their
particular networks as an alternative to a database line. For that reason, the loss of data
will not disturb the NN operation process. The following points list the main motivations
associated with the use of ANNs:
 Ability to accept unlimited inputs and outputs; this unique advantage makes ANNs
more important and popular than other AI methods, making them suitable for small
or huge dataset analysis.
 Skills to learn and model non-linear and complex relationships, the ANNs can handle
various real-life applications in different ﬁelds that are complicated and non-linear;
this is a very signiﬁcant advantage.
 Skills of training without complete information and the data may produce output,
and the performance depends on the importance of the missing data.
 Distinct from the other deep learning prediction techniques, ANNs do not need
any enforcement restrictions on the input variables, such as how the data need to
be distributed.
 Skills to create ML: ANNs can learn events and sort wise decisions via commenting to
reach similar events better.
 Multi-processing capability, the ANNs can assure numerical efﬁciency with their
power of performing several duties simultaneously.
 Ability to tolerate faults, whereby ANNs can produce output results even if some cells
are corrupted, and this advantage allows ANNs to tolerate faults.
 Ability to generalize; as soon as the ANNs learn from the initial input relations, they
can conjecture unknown relationships in anonymous data, thus making the model
generalized and allowing it to predict unknown data.
 In using distributed memory during the ANN learning, an essential process is ad-
justing samples and indoctrinating the network according to the desired output by
viewing these samples to the network. This process allows the network to achieve
and select the instance straight proportionally and by failing to show the event to the
network in its full features, and the network may yield false outputs.
However, artiﬁcial neural networks, although considered one of the best general
algorithms solving problems, they are very much a stochastic problem, where model
weights are used and every iteration is reorganized with the backpropagation of the error
algorithm signal. ANNs’ performance is good, yet several disadvantages and challenges
face the ANN to assure the proper network structure, duration, best tuning parameters,
trial and error, and more explanations that must rely on an expert user. The next points
express the main challenges for ANNs as follows:
 Mysterious network behavior, After the ANN produces an analytical result, it is
unexplained why or how selecting these outputs and rejecting the others may make it
untrusted in the network.
 Appropriate network architecture design. ANNs have no exact law to determine the
best structure design or a proper network structure must be achieved by experience
and trial and error.