Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 9 of 43
Table 1. Cont.
Technique Advantages Disadvantages
EA [65]- Robust concerning noisy evaluation functions.
- Easily to adjust to the problem- Usually provide reasonably good performance
- Premature convergence to a local
global minimum.
BSA [73]- Suitable for the search exploration process.
- Has good mutation and crossover strategies.- Time-consuming in computation because of the
dual population algorithm.
GSA [67]- Faster solution convergence- Easily gest trapped in local minima, and
weakness in its strategy to diversify the
algorithm’s population
FA [68]- Easy to implement
- Capable of automatic subdivision and dealing
with multimodality.- Gets trapped in several local minimal.
- Performs local searches
- Does not memorize the history of the better
situation, and may end up missing situations
5. Neural Networks in Deep Learning
Deep learning (DL) is a subset of ML which is based on learning data representations,
unlike task-speciﬁc algorithms. It is inspired by the function and structure of the brain,
known as artiﬁcial neural networks. The approach utilizes a hierarchy of concepts in a ﬁeld
that assists a computer in building knowledge from experience. This technique does not
require computer knowledge to be provided through human input as it is automatically
gathered. The hierarchy of concepts facilitates breaking complex concepts into simpler
ones with several layers [ 8]. DL techniques use several layers of abstraction to learn when
there is more than one processing layer. This approach has found its use especially in visual
object or speech recognition as well as genomics and medicines. DL implements a back-
propagation approach to detect patterns in complex datasets. It does this by considering
how the internal parameters should be altered to move from one representation layer to
the next. Deep convolutional and recurrent nets have facilitated breakthroughs in image
and audio processing as well as text and speech detection, respectively [16,69].
Neural networks have different implementations with slight variations, including
RNN, ANN, and CNN [ 15,16]. Due to their feature engineering and decision boundaries,
such novel NN approaches are preferred over machine learning by the people active in the
study of self-driving vehicles, unmanned drones, or complex deep learning problems [ 17].
The decision boundary is a technique used to classify any data point as belonging to one
of two classes, positive or negative. For this reason, if the data is not separable for any
reason, neural networks will not be a good choice in deep learning. On the other hand,
feature engineering is composed of two steps: feature selection and extraction. These two
components make up the model building. The multi-layer ANNs are also neurons placed
similarly to the human brain. Each neuron is connected to other neurons with certain
coefﬁcients. During training, information is distributed to these connection points to learn
the network structure and functioning [18].
6. Neural Networks Structure Types
In deep learning, many neural network types use different principles to determine
rules for various applications and formulate the foundation for most pre-trained models.
The most well-known neural networks are ANN [ 70], CNN [ 71], and RNN [ 72]. On the
other hand, many neural networks are developed with unique structures to serve different
software. For example, radial basis function neural networks, modular neural networks,
multilayer perceptron neural networks, and sequence-to-sequence models neural networks
use their unique strengths to serve and ﬁt some applications well compared to other net-
works. DNN [ 73] and another deep learning NN are so-called graph neural networks
(GNNs), designed for graphic data classiﬁcation problems [ 74,75]. LSTM recurrent neural