Electronics 2021 ,10, 2689 19 of 43
7.4. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks Based Evolutionary Algorithm
Most of the research discussing neural networks-based evolutionary algorithms im-
proves the neural networks’ design to either reduce the training time or solve problems
encountered by ANNs [ 159]. This combination is used in many applications to solve
different problems, for example, an adaptive co-optimization of ANNs using EA for global
radiation forecasting using hybrid ANN models. It predicted monthly radiation by typical
weather and geographic data-adaptive the EAs utilized to improve prediction performance
was developed to train the neural networks [ 160]. At the same time, another study used
multiverse optimization for new natural EA together with ANN to develop advanced
detection approaches for intrusion detection systems [ 161]. The combined effort between
ANN and EA is reported in many research studies, yet only some signiﬁcant research
has been considered in this review. For example, in a correlation analysis of the training
process, self-organizing combined with genetic EA, is applied to boost built structures of
neural network’s performance and efﬁciency [ 162], while another research study evaluated
a model-based optimization process for high voltage alternating current systems [ 163].
Though some studies use EA optimization for ANN weights optimization, this unique com-
bination is used in mobile communications to solve weights optimization problems in ANN
optimal modeling by applying a framework for predicting received signal strength [ 164].
Also, in the chemistry ﬁeld, the EA introduces chemical reaction optimization (CRO), used
as a global optimization technique to replace BP in training neural networks [ 165], for
better performance and saving more time for the training process. An optimization tech-
nique, EA based on pieces of training, approximates the solution of fractional differential
equations [ 166]. Table 6 presents research involving EA for neural network structure design
and application enhancement.
Table 6. Studies involving EA for neural networks design and application enhancement.
Neural Networks Optimizer Optimizer Problem Application Improved
ANN [160] EA To co-optimize the ANN properties Global radiation forecasting
ANN [161]Multiverse optimizer
(MVO)/EATo allow ENN to solve problems
encountered by ANNsIntrusion detection systems using
multiverse optimization via a
benchmark dataset
ANN [162]Self-organized
genetic EATo improve the performance efﬁciency
and structural efﬁciency of the
built ANNStructure of neural network and
its implementation
ANN [163] EAFor optimization and ANN
for modelingHigh voltage AC systems
ANN [164] EAsFor self-adaptive control parameters
and dynamically adjust the population
size for ANN weight optimizationUnmanned aerial vehicle
measurements for mobile
communications
ANN [166] EATo adjust the weights to satisfy the
differential equationsDifferential equations of
fractional order
ANN [165] EA/CROTo replace backpropagation in training
neural networksANN architecture design
7.5. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks-Based Backtracking Search Algorithm
BSA optimization technique is an evolutionary computation technique for producing
a trial population that includes two new crossovers and mutation operators proposed
by [62]. BSA dominates searching for the best value of the populations and searches in
the space boundary to get the exploitation capabilities and very robust exploration [ 62].
BSA dominates the search’s value for the best populations and the boundary of the space
to provide very sturdy exploration and exploitation capabilities. Thus, considerable re-
search has proven it as one of the most powerful optimization techniques [ 62]. Numerous
researchers widely use BSA in modern applications, such as solving the state of charge of
lithium-ion batteries by improving a backpropagation neural network (BPNN) by optimiz-
ing hidden layer neurons’ optimal value learning rate [ 167]. The BSA improved neural