CV in medical modalities with non-standardized data collection
requires the integration of CV into existing physical systems. For
instance, in otolaryngology, CNNs can be used to help primary care
physicians manage patients ’ears, nose, and throat40, through
mountable devices attached to smartphones41. Hematology and
serology can bene ﬁt from microscope-integrated AIs42that
diagnose common conditions43or count blood cells of various
types44—repetitive tasks that are easy to augment with CNNs. AI in
gastroenterology has demonstrated stunning capabilities. Video-based CNNs can be integrated into endoscopic procedures45for
scope guidance, lesion detection, and lesion diagnosis. Applications
include esophageal cancer screening46, detecting gastric can-
cer47,48, detecting stomach infections such as H. Pylori49,a n de v e n
ﬁnding hookworms50. Scientists have taken this ﬁeld one step
further by building entire medical AI devices designed for
monitoring, such as at-home smart toilets out ﬁtted with diagnostic
CNNs on cameras51. Beyond the analysis of disease states, CV can
serve the future of human health and welfare through applications
such as screening human embryos for implantation52.
Computer vision in radiology is so pronounced that it has
quickly burgeoned into its own ﬁeld of research, growing a corpus
of work53–55that extends into all modalities, with a focus on X-
rays, CT, and MRI. Chest X-ray analysis —a key clinical focus
area33—has been an exemplar. The ﬁeld has collected nearly 1
million annotated, open-source images56–58—the closest Ima-
geNet9equivalent to date in medical CV. Analysis of brain
imagery59(particularly for time-critical use-cases like stroke), and
abdominal imagery60have similarly received substantial attention.
Disease classi ﬁcation, nodule detection61, and region segmenta-
tion (e.g. ventricular62) models have been developed for most
conditions for which data can be collected. This has enabled theﬁeld to respond rapidly in times of crisis —for instance, developing
and deploying COVID-19 detection models63. The ﬁeld continues
to expand with work in image translation (e.g. converting noisyultrasound images into MRI), image reconstruction and enhance-ment (e.g. converting low-dosage, low-resolution CT images into
high-resolution images
64), automated report generation, and
temporal tracking (e.g. image registration to track tumor growthover time). In the sections below, we explore vision-basedapplications in other specialties.
CARDIOLOGY
Cardiac imaging is increasingly used in a wide array of clinical
diagnoses and work ﬂows. Key clinical applications for deep learning
include diagnosis and screening. The most common imagingmodality in cardiovascular medicine is the cardiac ultrasound, or
echocardiogram. As a cost-effective, radiation-free technique,
echocardiography is uniquely suited for DL due to straightforwarddata acquisition and interpretation —it is routinely used in most
acute inpatient facilities, outpatient centers, and emergency
rooms
65. Further, 3D imaging techniques such as CT and MRI are
used for the understanding of cardiac anatomy and to bettercharacterize supply-demand mismatch. CT segmentation algorithms
have even been FDA —cleared for coronary artery visualization66.
There are many example applications. DL can be trained on a
large database of echocardiographic studies and surpass theperformance of board-certi ﬁed echocardiographers in view
classi ﬁcation67. Computational DL pipelines can assess hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, cardiac amyloid, and pulmonary arterialhypertension68. EchoNet69—a deep learning model that can
recognize cardiac structures, estimate function, and predict
systemic phenotypes that are not readily identi ﬁable to human
interpretation —has recently furthered the ﬁeld.
To account for challenges around data access,70data-ef ﬁcient
echocardiogram algorithms70have been developed, such as semi-
supervised GANs that are effective at downstream tasks (e.gpredicting left ventricular hypertrophy). To account for the fact thatmost studies utilize privately held medical imaging datasets, 10,000
annotated echocardiogram videos were recently open-sourced36.
Alongside this release, a video-based model, EchoNet-Dynamic36,
was developed. It can estimate ejection fraction and assesscardiomyopathy, alongside a comprehensive evaluation criterionbased on results from an external dataset and human experts.
PATHOLOGY
Pathologists play a key role in cancer detection and treatment.
Pathological analysis —based on visual inspection of tissue
samples under microscope —is inherently subjective in nature.
Differences in visual perception and clinical training can lead toinconsistencies in diagnostic and prognostic opinions
71–73. Here,
DL can support critical medical tasks, including diagnostics,
prognostication of outcomes and treatment response, pathologysegmentation, disease monitoring, and so forth.
Recent years have seen the adoption of sub-micron-level
resolution tissue scanners that capture gigapixel whole-slideimages (WSI)
74. This development, coupled with advances in CV
has led to research and commercialization activity in AI-driven
digital histopathology75. This ﬁeld has the potential to (i)
overcome limitations of human visual perception and cognitionby improving the ef ﬁciency and accuracy of routine tasks, (ii)
develop new signatures of disease and therapy from morpholo-
gical structures invisible to the human eye, and (iii) combine
pathology with radiological, genomic, and proteomic measure-ments to improve diagnosis and prognosis
76.
One thread of research has focused on automating the routine,
time-consuming task of localization and quanti ﬁcation of
morphological features. Examples include the detection andclassi ﬁcation of cells, nuclei, and mitoses77–79, and the localization
and segmentation of histological primitives such as nuclei,
glands, ducts, and tumors80–83. These methods typically require
expensive manual annotation of tissue components by patholo-gists as training data.
Another research avenue focuses on direct diagnostics84–86and
prognostics87,88from WSI or tissue microarrays (TMA) for a variety
of cancers —breast, prostate, lung cancer, etc. Studies have even
shown that morphological features captured by a hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) stain are predictive of molecular biomarkers
utilized in theragnosis85,89. While histopathology slides digitize
into massive, data-rich gigapixel images, region-level annotations
are sparse and expensive. To help overcome this challenge, the
ﬁeld has developed DL algorithms based on multiple-instance
learning90that utilize slide-level “weak ”annotations and exploit
the sheer size of these images for improved performance.
The data abundance of this domain has further enabled tasks
such as virtual staining91, in which models are trained to predict
one type of image (e.g. a stained image) from another (e.g. a rawmicroscopy image). See Fig. 1b. Moving forward, AI algorithms
that learn to perform diagnosis, prognosis, and theragnosis using
digital pathology image archives and annotations readily availablefrom electronic health records have the potential to transform the
ﬁelds of pathology and oncology.
DERMATOLOGY
The key clinical tasks for DL in dermatology include lesion-speci ﬁc
differential diagnostics, ﬁnding concerning lesions amongst many
benign lesions, and helping track lesion growth over time
92.A
series of works have demonstrated that CNNs can match the
performance of board-certi ﬁed dermatologists at classifying
malignant skin lesions from benign ones7,93,94. These studies have
sequentially tested increasing numbers of dermatologists (25 –7
57–93, 157 –94), consistently demonstrating a sensitivity and
speci ﬁcity in classi ﬁcation that matches or even exceeds physician
levels. These studies were largely restricted to the binaryA. Esteva et al.
3
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2021)     5