classi ﬁcation task of discerning benign vs malignant cutaneous
lesions, classifying either melanomas from nevi or carcinomas
from seborrheic keratoses.
Recently, this line of work has expanded to encompass
differential diagnostics across dozens of skin conditions95, includ-
ing non-neoplastic lesions such as rashes and genetic conditions,
and incorporating non-visual metadata (e.g. patient demographics)
as classi ﬁer inputs96. These works have been catalyzed by open-
access image repositories and AI challenges that encourage teams
to compete on predetermined benchmarks97.
Incorporating these algorithms into clinical work ﬂows would
allow their utility to support other key tasks, including large-scaledetection of malignancies on patients with many lesions, and
tracking lesions across images in order to capture temporal
features, such as growth and color changes. This area remainsfairly unexplored, with initial works that jointly train CNNs to
detect and track lesions
98.
OPHTHALMOLOGY
Ophthalmology, in recent years, has observed a signi ﬁcant uptick
in AI efforts, with dozens of papers demonstrating clinical
diagnostic and analytical capabilities that extend beyond current
human capability99–101. The potential clinical impact is signi ﬁ-
cant102,103—the portability of the machinery used to inspect the
eye means that pop-up clinics and telemedicine could be used to
distribute testing sites to underserved areas. The ﬁeld depends
largely on fundus imaging, and optical coherence tomography
(OCT) to diagnose and manage patients.
CNNs can accurately diagnose a number of conditions. Diabetic
retinopathy —a condition in which blood vessels in the eyes of
diabetic patients “leak ”and can lead to blindness —has been
extensively studied. CNNs consistently demonstrate physician-level
grading from fundus photographs104–107, which has led to a recent
US FDA-cleared system108. Similarly, they can diagnose or predict
the progression of center-involved diabetic macular edema109,
age-related macular degeneration107,110, glaucoma107,111, manifest
visual ﬁeld loss112, childhood blindness113, and others.
The eyes contain a number of non-human-interpretable
features, indicative of meaningful medical information, that CNNs
can pick up on. Remarkably, it was shown that CNNs can classify a
number of cardiovascular and diabetic risk factors from fundus
photographs114, including age, gender, smoking, hemoglobin-A1c,
body-mass index, systolic blood pressure, and diastolic blood
pressure. CNNs can also pick up signs of anemia115and chronic
kidney disease116from fundus photographs. This presents an
exciting opportunity for future AI studies predicting nonocular
information from eye images. This could lead to a paradigm shiftin care in which eye exams screen you for the presence of both
ocular and nonocular disease —something currently limited for
human physicians.
MEDICAL VIDEO
Surgical applicationsThe CV may provide signi ﬁcant utility in procedural ﬁelds such as
surgery and endoscopy. Key clinical applications for deep learning
include enhancing surgeon performance through real-time con-
textual awareness
117, skills assessments, and training. Early studies
have begun pursuing these objectives, primarily in video-based
robotic and laparoscopic surgery —a number of works propose
methods for detecting surgical tools and actions118–124.S o m e
studies analyze tool movement or other cues to assess surgeon
skill119,121,123,124, through established ratings such as the Global
Operative Assessment of Laparoscopic Skills (GOALS) criteria for
laparoscopic surgery125. Another line of work uses CV to recognize
distinct phases of surgery during operations, towards developingcontext-aware computer assistance systems126,127. CV is also
starting to emerge in open surgery settings128, of which there is
a signi ﬁcant volume. The challenge here lies in the diversity of
video capture viewpoints (e.g., head-mounted, side-view, andoverhead cameras) and types of surgeries. For all types of surgicalvideo, translating CV analysis to tools and applications that can
improve patient outcomes is a natural next direction of research.
Human activity
CV can recognize human activity in physical spaces, such as
hospitals and clinics, for a range of “ambient intelligence ”
applications. Ambient intelligence refers to a continuous, non-invasive awareness of activity in a physical space that can provideclinicians, nurses, and other healthcare workers with assistance
such as patient monitoring, automated documentation, and
monitoring for protocol compliance (Fig. 3). In hospitals, for
example, early works have demonstrated CV-based ambientintelligence in intensive care units to monitor for safety-criticalbehaviors such as hand hygiene activity
32and patient mobiliza-
tion8,129,130. CV has also been developed for the emergency
department, to transcribe procedures performed during theresuscitation of a patient131, and for the operating room (OR), to
recognize activities for work ﬂow optimization132. At the hospital
operations level, CV can be a scalable and detailed form of labor
and resource measurement that improves resource allocation for
optimal care133.
Outside of hospitals, ambient intelligence can increase access to
healthcare. For instance, it could enable at-risk seniors to liveindependently at home, by monitoring for safety and abnormal-ities in daily activities (e.g. detecting falls, which are particularlydangerous for the elderly
134,135), assisted living, and physiological
measurement. Similar work136–138has targeted broader categories
of daily activity. Recognizing and computing long-term descriptiveanalytics of activities such as sleeping, walking, and sitting overtime can detect clinically meaningful changes or anomalies
136.T o
ensure patient privacy, researchers have developed CV algorithms
that work with thermal video data136. Another application area of
CV is assisted living or rehabilitation, such as continuous signlanguage recognition to assist people with communicationdifﬁculties
139, and monitoring of physiotherapy exercises for stroke
rehabilitation140. CV also offers potential as a tool for remote
physiological measurements. For instance, systems could use
video141to analyze heart and breathing rates141. As telemedicine
visits increase in frequency, CV could play a role in patient triaging,
Fig. 3 Ambient intelligence. Computer vision coupled with sensors
and video streams enables a number of safety applications in clinical
and home settings, enabling healthcare providers to scale their
ability to monitor patients. Primarily created using models for ﬁne-
grained activity recognition, applications may include patientmonitoring in ICUs, proper hand hygiene and physical actionprotocols in hospitals and clinics, anomalous event detection, andothers.A. Esteva et al.
4
npj Digital Medicine (2021)     5 Seoul National University Bundang Hospital