learning24—in which implicit labels are extracted from data points
and used to train algorithms (e.g predicting the spatial arrange-ment of tiles generated from splitting an image into pieces) —
have pushed the ﬁeld towards fully unsupervised learning, which
lacks the need for labels. Applying these techniques in medicinewill reduce the barrier to development and deployment.
Medical data access is central to this ﬁeld, and key ethical and
legal questions must be addressed. Do patients own their de-identi ﬁed data? What if methods to re-identify data improve over
time? Should the community open-source large quantities of data?
To date, academia and industry have largely relied on small, open-source datasets, and data collected through commercial products.
Dynamics around data sharing and country-speci ﬁc availability will
impact deployment opportunities. The ﬁeld of federated learn-
ing
25—in which centralized algorithms can be trained on distributed
data that never leaves protected enclosures —may enable a
workaround in stricter jurisdictions.These advances have spurred growth in other domains of CV,
such as multimodal learning, which combines vision with other
modalities such as language (Fig. 1a)26, time-series data, and
genomic data5. These methods can combine with 3D vision27,28
to turn depth-cameras into privacy-preserving sensors29,m a k i n g
deployment easier for patient settings such as the intensive care
unit8. The range of tasks is even broader in video. Applications
like activity recognition30and live scene understanding31are
useful in detecting and responding to important or adverse
clinical events32.
MEDICAL IMAGING
In recent years the number of publications applying computer
vision techniques to static medical imagery has grown from
hundreds to thousands33. A few areas have received substantial
attention —radiology, pathology, ophthalmology, and dermatol-
ogy—owing to the visual pattern-recognition nature of diagnostic
tasks in these specialities, and the growing availability of highly
structured images.
The unique characteristics of medical imagery pose a number of
challenges to DL-based computer vision. For one, images can be
massive. Digitizing histopathology slides produces gigapixelimages of around 100,000 ×100,000 pixels, whereas typical CNN
image inputs are around 200 ×200 pixels. Further, different
chemical preparations will render different slides for the same
piece of tissue, and different digitization devices or settings may
produce different images for the same slide. Radiology modalities
such as CT and MRI render equally massive 3D images, forcing
standard CNNs to either work with a set of 2D slices, or adjust their
internal structure to process in 3D. Similarly, ultrasound renders a
time-series of noisy 2D slices of a 3D context –slices which are
spatially correlated but not aligned. DL has started to account for
the unique challenges of medical data. For instance, multiple-
instance-learning (MIL)
34enables learning from datasets containing
massive images and few labels (e.g. histopathology). 3D convolu-
tions in CNNs are enabling better learning from 3D volumes (e.g
MRI and CT)35. Spatio-temporal models36and image registration
enable working with time-series images (e.g. ultrasound).
Dozens of companies have obtained US FDA and European CE
approval for medical imaging AI37, and commercial markets have
begun to form as sustainable business models are created. For
instance, regions of high-throughput healthcare, such as India and
Thailand, have welcomed the deployment of technologies such as
diabetic retinopathy screening systems38. This rapid growth has
now reached the point of directly impacting patient outcomes —
the US CMS recently approved reimbursement for a radiology
stroke triage use-case which reduces the time it takes for patientsto receive treatment
39.
Fig. 1 Example medical computer vision tasks. a Multimodal
discriminative model. Deep learning architectures can be con-
structed to jointly learn from both image data, typically withconvolutional networks, and non-image data, typically with generaldeep networks. Learned annotations can include disease diagnos-tics, prognostics, clinical predictions, and combinations thereof.bGenerative model. Convolutional neural networks can be trained
to generate images. Tasks include image-to-image regression
(shown), super-resolution image enhancement, novel image gen-eration, and others.
Fig. 2 Physician-level diagnostic performance. CNNs —trained to classify disease states —have been extensively tested across diseases, and
benchmarked against physicians. Their performance is typically on par with experts when both are tested on the same image classi ﬁcation
task. aDermatology7andbRadiology156. Examples reprinted with permission and adapted for style.A. Esteva et al.
2
npj Digital Medicine (2021)     5 Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;