particularly in times of high demand such as the COVID-19
pandemic142. CV-based ambient intelligence technologies offer a
wide range of opportunities for increased access to quality care.;However new ethical and legal questions will arise
143in the design
of these technologies.
CLINICAL DEPLOYMENT
As medical AI advances into the clinic144, it will simultaneously
have the power to do great good for society, and to potentially
exacerbate long-standing inequalities and perpetuate errors in
medicine. If done properly and ethically, medical AI can become aﬂywheel for more equitable care —the more it is used, the more
data it acquires, the more accurate and general it becomes. The
key is in understanding the data that the models are built on and
the environment in which they are deployed. Here, we presentfour key considerations when applying ML technologies in
healthcare: assessment of data, planning for model limitations,
community participation, and trust building.
Data quality largely determines model quality; identifying
inequities in the data and taking them into account will lead
towards more equitable healthcare. Procuring the right datasetsmay depend on running human-in-the-loop programs or broad-
reaching data collection techniques. There are a number of
methods that aim to remove bias in data. Individual-level bias canbe addressed via expert discussion
145and labeling adjudication146.
Population-level bias can be addressed via missing data supple-
ments and distributional shifts. International multi-institutionalevaluation is a robust method to determine generalizability of
models across diverse populations, medical equipment, resource
settings, and practice patterns. In addition, using multi-tasklearning147to train models to perform a variety of tasks rather
than one narrowly de ﬁned task, such as multi-cancer detection
from histopathology images148, makes them more generally useful
and often more robust.
Transparent reporting can reveal potential weaknesses and help
address model limitations. Guardrails to protect against possibleworst-case scenarios —minority, dismissal, or automation bias —
must be put in place. It is insuf ﬁcient to report and be satis ﬁed
with strong performance measures on general datasets whendelivering care for patients —there should be an understanding of
the speci ﬁc instances in which the model fails. One technique is to
assess demographic performance in combination with saliencymaps
149, to visualize what the model pays attention to, and check
for potential biases. For instance, when using deep learning to
develop a differential diagnosis for skin diseases95, researchers
examined the model performance based on Fitzpatrick skin typesand other demographic information to determine patient typesfor which there were insuf ﬁcient examples, and inform future data
collection. Further, they used saliency masks to verify the modelwas informed by skin abnormalities and not skin type. See Fig. 4.
A known limitation of ML is its performance on out-of-
distribution data –data samples that are unlike any seen during
model training. Progress has been made on out-of-distributiondetection
150and developing con ﬁdence intervals to help detect
anomalies. Additionally, methods are developing to understand
Fig. 4 Bias in deployment. a Example graphic of biased training data in dermatology. AIs trained primarily on lighter skin tones may not
generalize as well when tested on darker skin157. Models require diverse training datasets for maximal generalizability (e.g.95).bGradient
Masks project the model ’s attention onto the original input image, allowing practitioners to visually con ﬁrm regions that most in ﬂuence
predictions. Panel was reproduced from ref.95with permission.A. Esteva et al.
5
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2021)     5