REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
Deep learning-enabled medical computer vision
Andre Esteva1✉, Katherine Chou2,5, Serena Yeung3,5, Nikhil Naik1,5, Ali Madani1,5, Ali Mottaghi3,5, Yun Liu2, Eric Topol4,
Jeff Dean2and Richard Socher1
A decade of unprecedented progress in arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) has demonstrated the potential for many ﬁelds —including
medicine —to bene ﬁt from the insights that AI techniques can extract from data. Here we survey recent progress in the
development of modern computer vision techniques —powered by deep learning —for medical applications, focusing on medical
imaging, medical video, and clinical deployment. We start by brie ﬂy summarizing a decade of progress in convolutional neural
networks, including the vision tasks they enable, in the context of healthcare. Next, we discuss several example medical imaging
applications that stand to bene ﬁt—including cardiology, pathology, dermatology, ophthalmology –and propose new avenues for
continued work. We then expand into general medical video, highlighting ways in which clinical work ﬂows can integrate computer
vision to enhance care. Finally, we discuss the challenges and hurdles required for real-world clinical deployment of thesetechnologies.
npj Digital Medicine             (2021) 4:5 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-020-00376-2
INTRODUCTION
Computer vision (CV) has a rich history spanning decades
1of
efforts to enable computers to perceive visual stimuli mean-ingfully. Machine perception spans a range of levels, from low-level tasks such as identifying edges, to high-level tasks such as
understanding complete scenes. Advances in the last decade have
largely been due to three factors: (1) the maturation of deeplearning (DL) —a type of machine learning that enables end-to-
end learning of very complex functions from raw data
2(2) strides
in localized compute power via GPUs3, and (3) the open-sourcing
of large labeled datasets with which to train these algorithms4.
The combination of these three elements has enabled individual
researchers the resource access needed to advance the ﬁeld. As
the research community grew exponentially, so did progress.
The growth of modern CV has overlapped with the generation
of large amounts of digital data in a number of scienti ﬁcﬁelds.
Recent medical advances have been proli ﬁc5,6, owing largely to
DL’s remarkable ability to learn many tasks from most data
sources. Using large datasets, CV models can acquire many
pattern-recognition abilities —from physician-level diagnostics7to
medical scene perception8. See Fig. 1.
Here we survey the intersection of CV and medicine, focusing
on research in medical imaging, medical video, and real clinical
deployment. We discuss key algorithmic capabilities whichunlocked these opportunities, and dive into the myriad ofaccomplishments from recent years. The clinical tasks suitable
for CV span many categories, such as screening, diagnosis,
detecting conditions, predicting future outcomes, segmentingpathologies from organs to cells, monitoring disease, and clinical
research. Throughout, we consider the future growth of this
technology and its implications for medicine and healthcare.
COMPUTER VISION
Object classi ﬁcation, localization, and detection, respectively refer
to identifying the type of an object in an image, the location
of objects present, and both type and location simultaneously.The ImageNet Large-Scale Visual Recognition Challenge
9(ILSVRC)
was a spearhead to progress in these tasks over the last decade. Itcreated a large community of DL researchers competing and
collaborating together to improve techniques on various CV tasks.
The ﬁrst contemporary, GPU-powered DL approach, in 2012
10,
yielded an in ﬂection point in the growth of this community,
heralding an era of signi ﬁcant year-over-year improvements11–14
through the competition ’sﬁnal year in 2017. Notably, classi ﬁcation
accuracy achieved human-level performance during this period.
Within medicine, ﬁne-grained versions of these methods15have
successfully been applied to the classi ﬁcation and detection of
many diseases (Fig. 2). Given suf ﬁcient data, the accuracy often
matches or surpasses the level of expert physicians7,16. Similarly,
the segmentation of objects has substantially improved17,18,
particularly in challenging scenarios such as the biomedical
segmentation of multiple types of overlapping cells in microscopy.
The key DL technique leveraged in these tasks is the convolutionalneural network
19(CNN) —a type of DL algorithm which hardcodes
translational invariance, a key feature of image data. Many other
CV tasks have bene ﬁted from this progress, including image
registration (identifying corresponding points across similar
images), image retrieval ( ﬁnding similar images), and image
reconstruction and enhancement. The speci ﬁc challenges of
working with medical data require the utilization of many types
of AI models.
These techniques largely rely on supervised learning, which
leverages datasets that contain both data points (e.g. images) and
data labels (e.g. object classes). Given the sparsity and access
difﬁculties of medical data, transfer learning —in which an
algorithm is ﬁrst trained on a large and unrelated corpus (e.g.
ImageNet4), then ﬁne-tuned on a dataset of interest (e.g. medical)
—has been critical for progress. To reduce the costs associated
with collecting and labeling data, techniques to generatesynthetic data, such as data augmentation
20and generative
adversarial networks (GANs)21are being developed. Researchers
have even shown that crowd-sourcing image annotations canyield effective medical algorithms
22,23. Recently, self-supervised
1Salesforce AI Research, San Francisco, CA, USA.2Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA.3Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.4Scripps Research Translational Institute, La
Jolla, CA, USA.5These authors contributed equally: Katherine Chou, Serena Yeung, Nikhil Naik, Ali Madani, Ali Mottaghi.✉email: andre.esteva@gmail.comwww.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;