> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 8
IV. DISCUSSION AND EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS 
A. Activation function 
1) Discussion of Activation Function 
Convolutional neural networks can harness different 
activation functions to express complex features. Similar to the 
function of the neuron model of the human brain, the activation 
function here is a unit that determines which information should 
be transmitted to the next neuron. Each neuron in the neural 
network accepts the output value of the neurons from the 
previous layer as input, and passes the processed value to the 
next layer. In a multilayer neural network, there is a function 
between two layers. This function is called activation function, 
whose structure is shown in the following Fig. 21. 
 
In this figure, x i represents the input feature; n features are 
input to the neuron j at the same time; w ij represents the weight 
value of the connection between the input feature x i and the 
neuron j; b j represents the internal state of the neuron j, which 
is the bias value; and y j is the output of the neuron j. 𝑓(∙) is the 
activation function, which can be sigmoid function, tanh (x) 
function [10], Rectified Linear Unit [52], etc. [53] 
If an activation function is not used or a linear function is 
used, the input of each layer will be a linear function of the 
output of the previous layer. In this case, He et al. [38] verify 
no matter how many layers the neural network has, the output 
is always a linear combination of the input, which means hidden 
layers have no effect. This situation is the primitive perceptron 
[2], [3], which has the limited learning ability. For this reason, 
the nonlinear functions are introduced as activation functions. 
Theoretically, the deep neural networks with nonlinear 
activation function can approximate any function, which 
greatly enhances the ability of neural networks to fit data. 
In this section, we mainly focus on several frequently-used 
activation functions. To begin with, sigmoid function is one of 
the most typical non-linear activation functions with an overall 
S-shape (see Fig. 22 (a)). With x value approaching 0, the 
gradient becomes steeper. Sigmoid function can map a real 
number to (0, 1), so it can be used for binary classification 
problems. In addition, SENet [48] and MobileNet v3 [46] need 
to transform the output value to (0, 1) for attention mechanism, 
in which sigmoid is a good way to implement.  
Different from sigmoid, tanh function [10] (see Fig. 22 (b)) 
can map a real number to (-1, 1). Since the mean value of the 
output of tanh is 0, it can achieve a kind of normalization. This 
makes the next layer easier to learn.  
In addition, Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [52] (see Fig. 22 
(c)) is another effective activation function. When x is less than 
0, its function value is 0; when x is greater than or equal to 0, 
its function value is x itself. Compared to sigmoid function and 
tanh function, a significant advantage of using ReLU function 
is that it can speed up learning. Sigmoid and tanh involve in exponential operation that require division while computing 
derivatives, whereas the derivative of ReLU is a constant. 
Moreover, in the sigmoid and tanh function, if the value of x is 
too large or too small, the gradient of the function is pretty small, 
which can cause the function to converge slowly. However, 
when x is less than 0, the derivative of ReLU is 0, and when x 
is greater than 0, the derivative is 1, so it can obtain an ideal 
convergence effect. AlexNet [11], the best model in ILSVRC-
2012, uses ReLU as the activation function of CNN-based 
model, which mitigates gradient vanishing problem when the 
network is deep, and verifies that the use of ReLU surpasses 
sigmoid in deep networks.  
From what discussed above, we can find that ReLU does not 
consider the upper limit. In practice, we can set an upper limit, 
such as ReLU6 [54].  
However, when x is less than 0, the gradient of ReLU is 0, 
which means the back-propagated error will be multiplied by 0, 
resulting in no error being passed to the previous layer. In this 
scenario, the neurons will be regarded as inactivated or dead. 
Therefore, some improved versions are proposed. Leaky ReLU 
(see Fig. 22 (d)) can reduce neuron inactivation. When x is less 
than 0, the output of Leaky ReLU is 𝑥/𝑎, instead of zero, where 
‘a’ is a fixed parameter in range (1, +∞). 
Another variant of ReLU is PReLU [38] (see Fig. 22 (e)). 
Unlike Leaky ReLU, the slope of the negative part of PReLU is 
based upon the data, not a predefined one. He et al. [38] reckon 
that PReLU is the key to surpassing the level of human 
classification on the ImageNet 2012 classification dataset.  
Exponential Linear Units (ELU) function [55] (see Fig. 22 
(f)) is another improved version of ReLU. Since ReLU is non-
negatively activated, the average value of its output is greater 
than 0. This problem will cause the offset of the next layer unit. 
ELU function has a negative value, so the average value of its 
output is close to 0, making the rate of convergence faster than 
ReLU. However, the negative part is a curve, which demands 
lots of complicated derivatives. 
 
2) Experimental Evaluation 
To compare aforementioned activation functions, two classic 
CNN models, LeNet-5 [10] and VGG-16 [32], are tested on 
four benchmark datasets, including MNIST [10], Fashion-
MNIST [56], CIFAR-10 [57] and CIFAR-100 [57]. LeNet-5 is 
the first modern but relatively shadow CNN model. In the 
following experiments, we train LeNet-5 from scratch. VGG-
16 is a deeper, larger, and frequently-used model. We conduct  



n
ij iji bwxf
1∑     f  
xn bjw1jx1
xiwij
wnjyj = 
 
Fig. 21.  General activation function structure 
(a) Sigmoid function
 (b) Tanh function (c) ReLU function
(d) Leaky ReLU function (e) PReLU function (f) ELU function 
Fig. 22.  Diagrams of Sigmoid, Tanh, ReLU, Leaky ReLU, PReLU, and ELU