> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 18 
CNN cannot correctly recognize Fig. 33 (b), (c), or (d) is the 
same cat as the former, which is obvious to humans. This 
problem is caused by the architecture of CNN. Therefore, in 
order to teach a CNN system to recognize different patterns of 
one object, a massive amount of data should be fed, making up 
for the flaw of CNN architectures with diverse data. However, 
labeled data is typically hard to obtain. Although some tricks 
like data augmentation can bring about some effects, the 
improvement is relative limited. 
Pooling layer is widely used in CNN for many advantages, 
but it ignores the relationship between the whole and the part. 
For effectively organizing network structures and solving the 
problem of spatial information loss of traditional CNN, Hinton 
et al. [186] proposed Capsule Neural Networks (CapsNet) 
where neurons on different layers focus on different entities or 
attributes, so that they add neurons to focus on the same 
category or attribute, similar to the structure of a capsule. When 
CapsNet is activated, the pathway between capsules forms a 
tree structure composed of sparsely activated neurons. Each 
output of a capsule is a vector, the length of which represents 
the probability of the existence of an object. Therefore, the 
output features include the specific pose information of objects, 
which means that CapsNet has the ability to recognize the 
orientation. In addition, unsupervised CapsNet was created by 
Hinton et al. [187], called Stacked Capsule Autoencoder 
(SCAE). SCAE consists of four parts: Part Capsule 
Autoencoder (PCAE), Object Capsule Autoencoder (OCAE), 
and the decoders of PCAE and OCAE. PCAE is a CNN with a 
top-down attention mechanism. It can identify the pose and 
existence of capsules of different parts. OCAE is used to 
implement inference. SCAE can predict the activations of 
CapsNet directly based on the pose and the existence. Some 
experiments have proved that CapsNet is able to reach state-of-
the-art results. Although it did not achieve satisfactory results 
on complicated large-scale data sets, like CIFAR-100 or 
ImageNet, we can see that it is potential. 
VII. CONCLUSION  
Due to the advantages of convolutional neural networks, such 
as local connection, weight sharing, and down-sampling 
dimensionality reduction, they have been widely deployed in 
both research and industry projects. This paper provides a 
detailed survey on CNN, including common building blocks, 
classic networks, related functions, applications, and prospects. 
First, we discuss basic building blocks of CNN and present 
how to construct a CNN-based model from scratch. 
Second, some excellent networks are expounded. From them, 
we obtain some guidelines for devising novel networks from 
the perspective of accuracy and speed. More specifically, in 
terms of accuracy, deeper and wider neural structures are able 
to learn better representation than shallow ones. Besides, 
residual connections can be leveraged to build extremely deep 
neural networks, which can increase the ability to handle 
complex tasks. In terms of speed, dimension reduction and low-
rank approximation are very handy tools. 
Third, we introduce activation functions, loss functions, and 
optimizers for CNN. Through experimental analysis, several conclusions are reached. Also, we offer some rules of thumb for 
the selection of these functions. 
Fourth, we discuss some typical applications of CNN. 
Different dimensional convolutions should be designed for 
various problems. Other than the most frequently-used two-
dimensional CNN used for image-related tasks, one-
dimensional and multi-dimensional CNN are harnessed in lots 
of scenarios as well. 
Finally, even though convolutions possess many benefits and 
have been widely used, we reckon that it can be refined further 
in terms of model size, security, and easy hyperparameters 
selection. Moreover, there are lots of problems that convolution 
is hard to handle, such as low generalization ability, lack of 
equivariance, and poor crowded-scene results, so that several 
promising directions are pointed. 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] W. S. Mcculloch, and W. H. Pitts, “A logical Calculus of Ideas 
Immanent in Nervous Activity,” The Bulletin of Mathematical 
Biophysics, vol. 5, pp. 115-133, 1942. 
[2] F. Rosenblatt, “The Perceptron: A Probabilistic Model for Information 
Storage and Organization in the Brain,” Psychological Review, pp. 
368-408, 1958. 
[3] C. V. D. Malsburg, “Frank Rosenblatt: Principles of Neurodynamics: 
Perceptrons and the Theory of Brain Mechanisms.” 
[4] Davd. Rumhar, Geoffrey. Hinton, and RonadJ. Wams, “Learning 
representations by back-propagating errors.” 
[5] A. Waibel, T. Hanazawa, G. E. Hinton, K. Shikano, and K. J. Lang, 
“Phoneme recognition using time-delay neural networks,” IEEE 
Transactions on Acoustics Speech & Signal Processing, vol. 37, no. 3, 
pp. 328-339, 1989. 
[6] W. Zhang, “Shift-invariant pattern recognition neural network and its 
optical architecture,” in Proceedings of annual conference of the Japan 
Society of Applied Physics, 1988. 
[7] Y. Lecun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, W. 
Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel, “Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten 
Zip Code Recognition,” Neural Computation, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 541-
551. 
[8] K. Aihara, T. Takabe, and M. Toyoda, “Chaotic neural networks,” 
Physics Letters A, vol. 144, no. 6-7, pp. 333-340. 
[9] Specht, and D.F., “A general regression neural network,” IEEE 
Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 568-576. 
[10] B. L. Lecun Y , Bengio Y , et al., “Gradient-based learning applied to 
document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 
2278-2324, 1998. 
[11] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton, “ImageNet Classification 
with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks,” Advances in neural 
information processing systems, vol. 25, no. 2, 2012. 
[12] N. Aloysius, and M. Geetha, "A review on deep convolutional neural 
networks," Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on 
Communication and Signal Processing, ICCSP 2017. pp. 588-592. 
[13] A. Dhillon, and G. K. Verma, “Convolutional neural network: a review 
of models, methodologies and applications to object detection,” 
Progress in Artificial Intelligence, 2019/12/20, 2019. 
[14] W. Rawat, and Z. Wang, “Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for 
Image Classification: A Comprehensive Review,” Neural 
Computation, pp. 1-98. 
[15] Q. Liu, N. Zhang, W. Yang, S. Wang, Z. Cui, X. Chen, and L. Chen, 
“A Review of Image Recognition with Deep Convolutional Neural 
Network.” 
[16] S. Rehman, H. Ajmal, U. Farooq, Q. U. Ain, and A. Hassan, 
"Convolutional neural network based image segmentation: a review." 
[17] T. Lindeberg, “Scale invariant feature transform,” 2012. 
[18] N. Dalal, and B. Triggs, "Histograms of oriented gradients for human 
detection." pp. 886-893. 
[19] T. Ahonen, A. Hadid, and M. Pietikainen, “Face description with local 
binary patterns: Application to face recognition,” IEEE transactions on