> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 1
 
Abstract—Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is one of the 
most significant networks in the deep learning field. Since CNN 
made impressive achievements in many areas, including but not 
limited to computer vision and natural language processing, it 
attracted much attention both of industry and academia in the past 
few years. The existing reviews mainly focus on the applications of 
CNN in different scenarios without considering CNN from a 
general perspective, and some novel ideas proposed recently are 
not covered. In this review, we aim to provide novel ideas and 
prospects in this fast-growing field as much as possible. Besides, 
not only two-dimensional convolution but also one-dimensional 
and multi-dimensional ones are involved. First, this review starts 
with a brief introduction to the history of CNN. Second, we 
provide an overview of CNN. Third, classic and advanced CNN 
models are introduced, especially those key points making them 
reach state-of-the-art results. Fourth, through experimental 
analysis, we draw some conclusions and provide several rules of 
thumb for function selection. Fifth, the applications of one-
dimensional, two-dimensional, and multi-dimensional convolution 
are covered. Finally, some open issues and promising directions 
for CNN are discussed to serve as guidelines for future work. 
 
Index Terms —Deep learning, convolutional neural networks, 
deep neural networks, computer vision. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
ONVOLUTIONAL Neural Network (CNN) has been making 
brilliant achievements. It has become one of the most 
representative neural networks in the field of deep learning. 
Computer vision based on convolutional neural networks has 
enabled people to accomplish what had been considered 
impossible in the past few centuries, such as face recognition, 
autonomous vehicles, self-service supermarket, and intelligent 
medical treatment. To better understand modern convolutional 
neural network and make it better serve human beings, in this 
paper, we present an overview of CNN, introduce classic 
models and applications, and propose some prospects for CNN. 
The emergence of convolutional neural networks cannot be 
separated from Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). In 1943, 
McCulloch and Pitts [1] proposed the first mathematical model 
of neurons—the MP model. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, 
Rosenblatt [2], [3] proposed a single-layer perceptron model by 
adding learning ability to the MP model. However, single-layer 
 
This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of 
China under grant No. 61602150, Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu 
Province under grant No. BK20191298. (Corresponding author: Fan Liu) perceptron network cannot handle linear inseparable problems 
(such as XOR problems). In 1986, Hinton et al. [4] proposed a 
multi-layer feedforward network trained by the error back-
propagation algorithm—Back Propagation Network (BP 
Network), which addressed some problems that single-layer 
perceptron could not solve. In 1987, Waibel et al. [5] proposed 
Time Delay Neural Network (TDNN) for speech recognition, 
which can be viewed as a one-dimensional convolutional neural 
network. Then, Zhang [6] proposed the first two-dimensional 
convolutional neural network—Shift-invariant Artificial 
Neural Network (SIANN). LeCun et al. [7] also constructed a 
convolutional neural network for handwritten zip code 
recognition in 1989 and used the term "convolution" firstly, 
which is the original version of LeNet. In the 1990s, various 
shallow neural networks were successively proposed, such as 
Chaotic neural networks [8] and A general regression neural 
network [9]. The most famous one is LeNet-5 [10]. 
Nevertheless, when the number of layers of neural networks is 
increased, traditional BP networks would encounter local 
optimum, overfitting, gradient vanishing, and gradient 
exploding problems. In 2006, Hinton et al. [11] proposed the 
following points: 1) Multi-hidden layers artificial neural 
networks have excellent feature learning ability; 2) The "layer-
wise pre-training" can effectively overcome the difficulties of 
training deep neural networks, which brought about the study 
of deep learning. In 2012, Alex et al. [11] achieved the best 
classification result at that time using deep CNN in the 
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (LSVRC), 
which attracted researchers much of attention and greatly 
promoted the development of modern CNN. 
Before our work, there exist several researchers reviewed 
CNN. Aloysius et al. [12] paid attention to frameworks of deep 
learning chronologically. Nevertheless, they did not fully 
explain why these architectures are better than their 
predecessors and how these architectures achieved their goals. 
Dhillon et al. [13] discussed the architectures of some classic 
networks, but there are many new-generation networks, after 
their work, have been proposed, such as MobileNet v3, 
Inception v4, and ShuffleNet series, which deserve researchers’ 
attention. Besides, the work reviewed applications of CNN for 
object detection. Rawat et al. [14] reviewed CNN for image 
recognition. Liu et al. [15] discussed CNN for image 
Zewen Li, Wenjie Yang, Shouheng Peng, and Fan Liu are with College of 
Computer and Information, Hohai University, Nanjing, 210098, China 
(servon@hhu.edu.cn , vicent@hhu.edu.cn , shoehengpeng@hhu.edu.cn , 
fanliu@hhu.edu.cn ) A Survey of Convolutional Neural Networks: 
Analysis, Applications, and Prospects  
Zewen Li, Wenjie Yang, Shouheng Peng, Fan Liu, Member, IEEE  
C