> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 16 
C. Applications of multi-dimensional CNN 
In theory, CNN can be leveraged in data with any dimension. 
However, since high dimensional data is hard to understand for 
human, multi-dimensional CNN is not too common in over 
three dimensions. Therefore, to better explain the key points, 
we take applications of three-dimensional CNN (3D CNN), for 
instance. It does not mean that higher dimensions are infeasible. 
1) Human Action Recognition 
Human Action recognition refers to the automatic 
recognition of human actions in videos by machines. As a kind 
of rich visual information, action recognition method based on 
human body posture is used in many jobs. Cao  et al. [146] 
utilized 3D CNN to extract features of joints instead of the 
whole body, and then these features are fed into a linear SVM 
for classification . Another approach [147]  is to extend 2D 
image convolutions to 3D video convolutions to extract spatio-
temporal patterns. Huang et al. [148] designed a 3D-CNN 
structure to carry out sign language recognition that the 3D 
convolutional layers automatically extract distinct spatial and 
temporal features from the video stream, which are input to the 
fully connected layer for classification. In addition, it is also 
possible to integrate the features extracted from 3D CNN and 
2D CNN. Huang et al. [149] fused the 3D convolutional pose 
stream with the 2D convolutional appearance stream that 
provides more discriminative human action information. 
2) Object Recognition/Detection 
In 2015, Wu et al. [150] proposed a generative 3D CNN of 
shape named 3D ShapeNet, which can be applied to object 
detection of RGBD images. In the same year, Maturana et al. 
[151]proposed VoxNet, which is a 3D CNN architecture that 
contains two 3D convolutional layers, pooling layer, and two 
fully-connected layers. In 2016, Song et al. [152] proposed a 
3D region proposal network to learn the geometric feature of 
objects and designed a Joint Object Recognition Network that 
fuses the output of VGGNet and the 3D CNN to learn 3D 
bounding box and object classification jointly. In 2017, Zhou et 
al. [153] proposed a single end-to-end VoxelNet for point-
cloud-based 3D detection . VoxelNet contains feature learning 
layers, convolution middle layers, and RPN. Each convolution 
middle layer uses 3D convolutions, batch normalization layers, 
and ReLU to aggregate voxel-wise features. Pastor et al. [154] 
designed TactNet3D, harnessing tactile features to recognize 
objects. 
In addition, high dimensional images, like X-rays and CT 
images, can be detected by 3D CNN. A lot of practitioners [155], 
[156] are dedicated to these jobs. 
VI. PROSPECTS FOR CNN 
With the rapid development of CNN, some methods are 
proposed to refine CNN, including model compression, security, 
network architecture search, etc. In addition, convolutional 
neural networks have many obvious disadvantages, like losing 
spatial information and other limitations. New structures need 
to be introduced to handle these problems. Based on the points 
mentioned above, this section briefly introduces several 
promising trends of CNN. A. Model Compression 
Over the past decade, convolutional neural networks have 
been designed with various modules, which helped CNN reach 
good accuracy. However, high accuracy typically relies on 
extreme deep and wide architectures, which makes it 
challenging to deploy the models to embedded devices. 
Therefore, model compression is one of the possible ways to 
handle this problem, including low-rank approximation, 
network pruning, and network quantization. 
 
The methods of low-rank approximation consider the weight 
matrix of the original network as the full-rank matrix and then 
decomposes it into a low-rank matrix to approximate the effect 
of the full-rank matrix. Jaderberg et al. [157] proposed a 
structure-independent method using cross-channel redundancy 
or ﬁlter redundancy to reconstruct a low-rank filter. Sindhwani 
et al. [158] proposed a structural transformation network to 
learn a large class of structural parameter matrices 
characterized by low displacement rank through a unified 
framework. 
Besides, according to the granularity of networks, pruning 
can be divided into structured pruning and unstructured pruning. 
Han et al. [159] proposed deep pruning for CNN to prune 
networks by learning essential connections. However, the fine-
grain pruning method increases the irregular sparsity of 
convolution kernels and computational cost. Therefore, many 
pruning methods focus on coarse granularity. Mao et al. [160] 
deemed that coarse pruning reaches a better compression ratio 
than fine-grained pruning. Through weighing the relationship 
between sparsity and precision, they provide some advice on 
how to ensure accuracy when structural pruning. 
Network quantization is another way to reduce 
computational cost, including binary quantization, ternary 
quantization, and multivariate quantization. In 2016, Rastegari 
et al. [161] proposed Binary-Weight Networks and XNOR-
Networks. The former makes the values of networks 
approximate to binary values, and the latter approximate 
convolutions by binary operations. Lin et al. [162] use a linear 
combination of multiple binary weight bases to approximate 
full-precision weights and multiple binary activation to reduce 
information loss, which suppresses the prediction accuracy 
degradation caused by previous binary CNN. Zhu et al. [163] 
proposed that ternary quantization could alleviate the accuracy 
degradation. Besides, multivariate quantization is leveraged to 
represent weights by several values [164], [165]. 
As increasing networks use 1 × 1 convolution, low-rank 
approximation is difficult to achieve model compression. 
Network pruning is a major practical way in model compression 
tasks. Binary quantization tremendously reduces the model size 
with the cost of losing accuracy. Hence, ternary quantization  
Fig. 30. Three directions of model compression