> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 17 
and multivariate quantization are harnessed to strike a proper 
balance between model size and accuracy. 
B. Security of CNN 
There are many applications of CNN in daily life, including 
security identification system [166],[167], medical image 
identification [168],[156],[155], traffic sign recognition [169], 
and license plate recognition [170]. These applications are 
highly related to life and property security. Once models are 
disturbed or destroyed, the consequences will be severe. 
Therefore, the security of CNN is expected to be attached great 
importance. More precisely, researchers [171],[172],[173],[174] 
have proposed some methods to deceive CNN, resulting in a 
sharp drop in the accuracy. These methods can be classified into 
two categories: data poisoning and adversarial attacks. 
Data poisoning indicates that poisoning the training data 
during the training phase. Poison refers to the insertion of noise 
data into the training data. It is not easily distinguished at the 
image level and has no abnormalities found during the training 
process. Whereas in test stages, the trained model would reveal 
the problem of low accuracy. Furthermore, the noise data can 
even be fine-tuned so that the model can identify certain targets 
incorrectly. Liao et al. [172] introduced that generated 
perturbation masks are injected into the training samples as a 
backdoor to deceive the model. Backdoor injection does not 
interfere with normal behaviors but stimulates the backdoor 
instance to misclassify specific targets. Liu et al. [175] 
proposed a method of fine-tuning and pruning what can 
effectively defend against the threat of backdoor injection. The 
combination of pruning and fine-tuning succeeds in suppressing, 
even eliminating the effects of the backdoors. 
 
Adversarial attack is also one of the threats faced by deep 
neural networks. In Fig. 31, some noise is added to a normal 
image. Although naked eyes cannot distinguish the difference 
between two images, the CNN based model cannot recognize 
them as the same. Goodfellow et al. [174] reckoned that the 
main factor for the vulnerability of neural networks is linear 
characteristics, like ReLU, Maxout, etc. The cheap, analytical 
disturbance of these linear models would damage the neural 
network. Besides, they proposed a fast gradient notation to 
generate adversarial examples and found that many models 
misclassified these examples. Akhtar et al. [176] listed three 
directions of defense against adversarial attacks, which are 
respectively improved on training examples, modified trained 
networks, and additional networks. First, for the training 
examples, adversarial examples can be utilized to enhance the 
robustness of models. Second, network architectures can be 
adjusted to ignore noise. Last, additional networks can be used 
to help the backbone network against adversarial attacks. C. Network Architecture Search 
Network Architecture Search (NAS) is another method to 
realize automatic machine learning of CNN. NAS constructs a 
search space through design choices, such as the number of 
kernels, skip connections, etc. Besides, NAS finds a suitable 
optimizer to control the search process in the search space. As 
shown in Fig. 32, NAS could be divided into NAS with agents 
and without agents. Due to the high demand for NAS on 
computing resources, the integrated models consist of learned 
optimal convolutional layers in the small-scale data sets. Small-
scale data sets are the agents that generate the overall model, so 
this approach is the NAS with agents. The agentless NAS refers 
to learning the whole model directly on large-scale data sets. 
 
In 2017, Google Inc. [177] proposed a machine learning 
search algorithm that uses reinforcement learning to maximize 
the target network and implements an auto-built network on 
CIFAR-10 data set, achieving similar precision and speed to 
networks with similar structure. Nevertheless, this approach is 
computationally expensive. Pham et al. [178] proposed 
Efficient Neural Architecture Search (ENAS), which shares 
parameters among sub-models and reduces resource 
requirements. Cai et al. [179] proposed ProxylessNAS, which 
is a path-level NAS method that has a model structure 
parameter layer at the end of the path and adds a binary gate 
before the output to reduce GPU utilization. It can directly learn 
architectures on the large-scale data set. Additionally, there are 
many ways to reduce the search space of reinforcement learning. 
Tan et al. [180] designed Mobile Neural Architecture Search 
(MNAS) to solve the CNN inferring delay problem. They 
introduced a decomposed hierarchical search space and 
performed the reinforcement learning structural search 
algorithm on this space. Ghiasi et al. [181] proposed NAS-FPN 
by applying NAS to feature pyramid structure search of object 
detection. They combined scalable search space with NAS to 
reduce search space. The scalable search space can cover all 
possible cross-scale connections and generate multi-scale 
feature representations. 
D. Capsule Neural Network 
A lot of impressive applications of CNN are emerging in 
modern society, from simple cat-dog classifiers [182] to 
sophisticated autonomous vehicles [181], [183], [184]. 
However, is CNN a panacea? When does it not work? 
 
CNN is not sensitive to slight changes of images, such as 
rotation, scaling, and symmetry, which has been demonstrated 
by Azulay et al. [185]. However, when trained with Fig. 33 (a),  
Fig. 31. A demonstration of fast adversarial example generation [174] 
LearnerProxy
TaskTarget 
Task&
HardwareTarget 
Task&
HardwareLearner
 
Fig. 32. The procedure of NAS. [179] (a) NAS with agents (b) NAS without 
agents. 
Fig. 33. The same cat in different ways