Algorithm 1: LLM-driven EA (LMEA)
Input: The optimization problem T, maximum
number of generations G, population size N;
Output: the best found solution s∗
1P←randomly initialize Nsolutions to T;
2g= 1;
3while g≤Gdo
4 prompt ←construct prompt based on Tandpop;
5 P′←instruct LLM with prompt to generate N
offspring solutions;
6 P←the top Nsolutions among P∪P′;
7 Self-adapt the temperature of LLM if necessary;
8 g←g+ 1;
9end
10s∗←the best solution in P;
11return s∗
there has been much evidence [34]–[36] showing that the
prompt format can significantly influence the quality of the
LLM’s output. In general, when faced with a specific task,
one needs to carefully craft the prompt to align with the
desired outcome. This involves considering the context, the
level of detail required, and the clarity of the instruction.
Previous research has identified several effective techniques for
prompting. For example, one can include several task examples
as demonstrations in the prompt, i.e., in-context learning [53],
and can explicitly instruct the LLM to think step by step, i.e.,
chain of thoughts [34]. In this work, to make LLMs function
effectively as the operators of EAs, we carefully design a well-
structured prompt that consists of several parts including task
descriptions, solution properties, population information, and
operator instructions.
C. Intersection between EAs and LLMs
Currently, research at the intersection of LLMs and EAs is
still in its early stage. Due to the remarkable capabilities of
LLMs in code generation, several recent works have attempted
to combine LLMs with EAs to generate neural network struc-
tures [54], programs that fulfill specific functionalities [55],
and meta-heuristics [56]. Furthermore, the core ideas of EAs,
including natural selection and genetic variations, have also
been employed to evolve prompts to enhance the performance
of LLMs [57]. Regarding directly applying LLMs to solve
optimization problems, there is very limited research. One
such work is [58], which presents preliminary results of
using LLMs for solving linear regression problems and TSPs.
Another very recent work [59] incorporates LLMs as the
mutation operator in continuous multi-objective optimization
algorithm. However, the utilization of LLMs for evolutionary
combinatorial optimization still remains unexplored.
III. LMEA FOR COMBINATORIAL OPTIMIZATION
In this section, we first present the framework of LMEA,
then delve into the construction of prompts to instruct the
LLM, and finally describe the self-adaptation mechanismof the LLM’s temperature. An overview of LMEA is also
illustrated in Figure 1.
A. Algorithm Framework
As presented in Algorithm 1, LMEA follows the conven-
tional EA framework [1]. Given an optimization problem T,
LMEA first randomly generates Nsolutions to form the initial
population (line 1) and then proceeds with the evolutionary
process (lines 3-9). In each generation, LMEA constructs a
prompt (line 4) to guide LLM in selecting parent solutions
from the current population and then conduct crossover and
mutation based on them, generating Noffspring solutions (line
5). These Nsolutions are then combined with the current
population (line 6) and the top Nsolutions are retained for the
next generation (line 7). In addition, the LLM’s temperature
would be adjusted if necessary (see Section III-C). Finally,
LMEA would terminate when the number of generations
reaches a predefined number and the best found solution is
returned (lines 10-11).
B. LLMs as Evolutionary Optimizers
LMEA employs the LLM as evolutionary operators in a
zero-shot manner. Specifically, the parent selection and genetic
variations (crossover and mutation) are accomplished through
the in-context learning process of the LLM [53], which is
facilitated by carefully constructed prompts.
To be concrete, the prompt consists of three parts:
•Problem description and solution properties : this part
includes the description of the optimization problem
to be solved and specifications of the desired solution
properties.
•In-context examples : some solutions to the optimization
problem and their corresponding fitness are provided as
demonstrations for the LLM. Typically, these solutions
are derived from the current population.
•Task Instructions : this part provides explicit instructions
for the LLM to perform parent selection and carry out
crossover and mutation, generating new solutions.
Figure 1 illustrates an example of the constructed prompt when
using LMEA to solve TSPs. The problem description contains
the coordinates of the points in the TSP instance, while the
solution properties specify the constraints that TSP solutions
must meet (traversing each point exactly once) and that shorter
lengths are preferable. In-context examples consist of TSP
solutions from the current population and their corresponding
lengths. Task Instructions guide the LLM in generating new
TSP solutions.
It is important to note that, unlike the traditional practice
of implementing evolutionary operators step-by-step through
programming, LMEA does not instruct the LLM on how to
precisely perform parent selection, crossover, and mutation.
Instead, LMEA instructs the LLM at a higher level using
natural language. This approach only requires minimal reliance
on domain expertise. Finally, the prompt also strictly defines
the format of the LLM’s output to enable LMEA to interpret
the output easily. For example, the results of parent selection