interesting question: can LLMs be used to help EAs solve
complex optimization problems?
This work provides an affirmative answer to the above
question. Specifically, we propose an innovative approach,
named LLM-driven EA (LMEA), for solving combinatorial
optimization problems. In each generation of the evolutionary
search, LMEA constructs a prompt to instruct the LLM to se-
lect parent solutions from the current population, and perform
crossover and mutation to generate offspring solutions. Then,
these new solutions are evaluated and added to the population
for the next generation. Additionally, a simple self-adaptation
mechanism is integrated into LMEA to control the temperature
of the LLM, thus balancing its exploration and exploitation.
From the perspective of designing EAs, LMEA has two
appealing features. First, due to the capabilities of LLMs,
in LMEA we can describe the optimization problem and the
desired solution properties in natural language to instruct the
LLM. In consequence, optimization with LMEA enables quick
adaptation to different optimization problems by changing the
problem description and solution specifications in the prompt.
Compared to the traditional practice of formally defining the
problem and implementing operators through programming,
LMEA follows an approach that is more direct and only
demands minimal domain knowledge and human efforts. Sec-
ond, LMEA leverages the LLM in a zero-shot manner. Here,
the term “zero-shot” means that no additional training of the
model is required, which is a significant advantage compared
to meta-optimization approaches that require extensive com-
putational resources to optimize the algorithm.
We investigate the power of LMEA on the classical travel-
ing salesman problems (TSPs) widely used in combinatorial
optimization research. The experimental results demonstrate
that, despite its minimal reliance on domain expertise, LMEA
performs competitively to the traditional heuristics on TSP
instances with up to 20 nodes. Surprisingly, it consistently
obtains the optimal solutions on TSP instances with 10 nodes
and 15 nodes. Furthermore, we conduct experiments to verify
the effectiveness of the LLM-driven genetic operators and the
self-adaptation mechanism.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt of
utilizing LLMs in evolutionary combinatorial optimization.
Also, we would like to note that this work is not to show
that LMEA can outperform those sophisticated specialized
solvers for classical combinatorial optimization problems like
TSPs. Instead, the goal is to introduce an approach with a
significant departure from previous design paradigms of EAs.
Importantly, this approach indeed demonstrates its capacity
to solve non-trivial hard combinatorial optimization problems.
We hope that our results will inspire further exploration of
LLM-driven EAs for combinatorial optimization challenges.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II briefly reviews the literature on EAs for combinatorial
optimization, LLMs and prompts, as well as the intersection
between EAs and LLMs. Section III presents the approach
LMEA. Experiments on TSPs are presented in Section IV.
Finally, Section V concludes the paper with discussions.II. R ELATED WORKS
A. EAs for Combinatorial Optimization
Combinatorial optimization involves finding the best possi-
ble solution from a finite solution set. It has many applications
in various domains [38]. From the perspective of computa-
tional complexity, many combinatorial optimization problems
are NP-hard due to their discrete and nonconvex nature [39].
For these problems, exact methods such as the branch and
bound algorithms [40] can find the optimal solutions, but
generally suffer from exponential time complexity. In contrast,
meta-heuristics seek to find good (but not necessarily optimal)
solutions within reasonable computation time. EAs, as one
of the mainstream meta-heuristics, have achieved significant
progress in solving combinatorial optimization problems over
the past decades and are still undergoing diverse and flour-
ishing development. Currently, EAs have established them-
selves as state-of-the-art methods for various combinatorial
optimization problems [2]–[7], [9]–[12]. These algorithms
range from classic EAs like genetic algorithms [2], [3], hybrid
approaches such as memetic algorithms [4], [5], [7], [12], to
co-evolutionary algorithms [41].
In general, when applying EAs to solve combinatorial
optimization problems, algorithm practitioners often need to
design operators tailored to the problem to obtain satisfactory
performance. These operators can be specific to the solution
representations, such as the various crossover variants [42]
(e.g., single-point, multi-point, shuffle, and matrix) for binary
solution representations in set maximization problems, as well
as the k-opt mutation [43] and edge assembly crossover [44]
for the permutation-based solution representations in TSPs
and vehicle routing problems (VRPs). In certain cases, one
also needs to design repair operators [45] to ensure that
the solutions found by EAs adhere to problem constraints,
and regrouping operators [2] to maintain population diversity.
Overall, the design of effective operators relies on a deep
understanding of the problem of interest, which requires
extensive domain expertise and human efforts [24].
B. Large Language Models (LLMs) and Prompts
LLMs are large deep neural networks (often with billions
of parameters) which are trained on vast amounts of text data
to perform next-token prediction, i.e., predict the proceeding
token given a sequence of tokens seen before. In the last
two years, scaling up LLMs has yielded groundbreaking
performance across a broad spectrum of tasks [29]–[33], [46]–
[49]. Among them of particular interest are tasks involving
reasoning and decision-making, such as planning [37], [50],
[51] and solving mathematical problems [35], [36], [52].
Given the inherent inter-connections between optimization,
reasoning, and decision-making, it is likely that LLMs could
also demonstrate competence in optimization tasks, which is
indeed one motivation behind this work.
A prompt is the instruction that guides LLMs into gen-
erating desired output. Although a prompt can be in var-
ious forms such as a question, a sentence, or a keyword,