6 U. MONTANARO ET AL.
ofcommunicationlinksbetweenvehicleshasrecentlymotivatedresearcherstoinvestigate
the possibility of coordinating vehicle motion by using different communication networktopologies
2betweenvehiclesofaplatoon;see,forinstance,[ 42,43]andreferencestherein.
Thefocusoftheplatooncontrolsystemisthentoguaranteeplatoonformationandstabil-ity independently from the underlying communication network topology while assuringrobustnesstouncertainandtimevaryingcommunicationdelays.
However, the current literature does not provide a systematic approach either for the
selection of the underlying network topology or for the information that vehicles in theplatoon should share to achive the synchronised motion, and usually only platoons withhomogenous vehicles (i.e. with equal acceleration/deceleration capability, equal actuatordelays, etc.) with the same preferences (such as spacing policy, time headway, etc.) areconsidered.
The information shared among the vehicles for maintaining the synchronised motion
oftheplatoondependonthevehicledynamicmodelusedforthedesignofplatooncontrolalgorithms.Usually,whenthecontrolobjectiveistoimposeindividualandstringstability,only the longitudinal vehicle dynamics are considered. According to the automotive lit-erature,thelongitudinalcontrolsystemarchitectureforvehicleplatooningishierarchicalwhere it is composed by an upper-level controller, known also as Cooperative AdaptiveCruiseControl(CACC)system,andalow-levelcontroller[ 44,45].Theformerdetermines
either the desired acceleration or driving/braking torque for each vehicle based on infor-mation collected from its neighbours, while the latter is instead locally used to generate
foreachvehiclethethrottleand/orbrakecommandsrequiredtoexactlytrackthedesired
referencesasplannedbytheupper-levelCACC.Figure 2depictsthetwo-levelplatooncon-
trolarchitecturewheretheEstimation&AmbientConditionblockisusedtoreconstructinformationnotdirectlymeasured(suchastheairmassincomingintotheengine)byon-board sensors and provide ambient data (such as road slope) to the Inner-loop low-levelcontroller,whiletheLocalisationblockisusedtolocalisethevehicleonaLocalDynamicMap (LDM). The reference speed is provided to the leader by planning controllers, e.g.speed optimisation controllers for the minimisation of the fuel consumption of the fleet(see Section 5for further details on speed optimisation supported by V2X communica-
tion), and the V2X devices are used to gather information from the neighbouring vehicleintheplatoon.
Figure 2. Generalcontrolarchitectureforvehicleplatooning.