VEHICLE SYSTEM DYNAMICS 11
indicated asPV(PrecedingVehicle) inFigure 3,isinviewofthesubjectvehicle(seealso
Figure3). The 7th preceding vehicle (c7), which is beyond the sight of the SV, suddenly
decelerates between t=2st ot =5 s and its velocity drops from 60km/h to 35km/h and
then continues moving slowly. This slow vehicle gradually affects the traffic downstream,
e.g.fromthe6thvehicle(c6)towardsthe1stvehiclec1.ThescenariodescribedinFigure 3
isthenanalysedconsideringthefollowingcases,(i)onroadvehiclesarenotconnectedandt h es u b j e c tv e h i c l es e n s e so n l yt h ep o s i t i o no fv e h i c l ec 1a n dl a n es e l e c t i o ni sp e r f o r m e dbyusingasetofrules;(ii)aconnectedenvironmentisassumedandthesubjectvehiclecansenseinadvancethevelocityreductionofvehiclec7viacommunicationnetworksandusethis information to change its longitudinal and lateral motions before vehicle c1 starts toslowdown.
Numericalresultsshowthatinthecasewherethesubjectvehicledoesnothaveaviewof
trafficconditionsontheroadsegmentbeyonditssight(case(i)),itmustreduceitsveloc-ity from about 58 to 35km/h (a velocity reduction of about 40%) before initiating a lanechangemanoeuvreat t=30s.But,whentrafficinformationisincluded(case(ii)),thelane
changemanoeuvreinitiatesat t=16sandthevelocityforthesubjectvehicleisreducedat
most by 17.25%. Intuitively, the latter vehicle response improves both the average vehiclespeedandfueleconomyaswell.Whentheoptimallanechangeisused,theaverageveloc-ity increases about 7.72% while fuel consumption is reduced about 40%. For accuratelyevaluatingfuelreductioninmorerealisticconditions,amixedscenariowasalsosimulatedwhere a road segment of 2km was considered with three lanes including a merging lane.
Energyconsumptionontheroadsegmentwasevaluatedfordifferentpenetrationrates.In
addition,resultswerecomparedwithrespecttothecases:(a)novehicleisequippedwiththeoptimalselectionofthetargetlaneand(b)somevehiclesadoptCooperativeAdaptiveCruise Control (CACC). Numerical results showed that the optimal lane selection basedon traffic information always provides better performance in terms of fuel economy withrespecttotheCACCbyimprovingfulleconomyupto14%.Also,withlowpenetrationrate,the optimal lane selection provides consistent improvement of fuel economy comparedwith no vehicle so equipped. For instance, with a penetration rate of 10%, a fuel econ-omyofabout8.8%isobtained.Controlledvehiclesinamixedscenario alsoimprovefueleconomyofconventionalvehicles.Forinstance,whenthepenetrationrateis25%,thefuelreductionofallvehiclesis9.2%.Suchadditionalbenefitisduetotheintrinsiccooperationamong vehicles that share the same road section. Indeed, some of the conventional vehi-cles must adapt their velocity and target lane with respect to the controlled ones to avoidcollisions.
Forthelaneselectionmethoddescribedabove,eachvehicleselectsasequenceoftarget
lanes using off-board data collected via V2X communication by optimising a cost func-tionthatweightsonlyindividualperformanceindices(fuelconsumption,traveltime,etc.).Hence,thisapproachdoesnotexploitthepotentialofV2Xcommunicationtocreatecoop-erative driving scenarios aiming to improve the traffic flow, pollutant emissions and fuelconsumption of road networks. To improve the use of road infrastructures, in [ 69–71],
cooperative lane selection methods have been proposed. The common idea underlyingthese methods is to measure the performance of a group of vehicles and select the set oflanes that guarantees the minimisation of a common cost function. When these methodsare adopted, the road is divided in segments and at the beginning of each segment thefollowingstepsareperformed: