VEHICLE SYSTEM DYNAMICS 15
applications[ 85,86].Foramoredetaileddiscussionondifferentvehiclemodels,thereader
isdirectedtowardstheworkby[ 81,87–89].
4. Intersection management
Intersections are shared areas (or conflict areas) and represent bottlenecks in the traffic
flow.Theycanbeclassifiedas(i)SignalisedIntersectionswhichareequippedwithtrafficlights, and (ii) Non-Signalised Intersections which do not have traffic lights and driversmust interact with each other. Although intersections represent a small fraction of theroad system, a noteworthy amount of fatalities occur within the area jointly used by theintersecting streets and are mainly caused by human errors [ 90]. For example, during
the 10-year time period from 2005 to 2014, over 20% of the fatalities on EU roads tookplace at intersections [ 91]. Furthermore, ineffective intersection management (e.g. traffic
lights with fixed timing, stop signs etc.) can increase the time that vehicles are stationaryatjunctionstherebyresultinginanincreaseoftraveltime,fuelconsumptionandpollutantemissions. Hence, the correct management of intersections is of utmost importance forkeepingtrafficsafe,improvingtrafficflow,andatthesametimereducingenergyconsump-tion,pollutantemissions,andtraveltime.Autonomousvehiclesandtheircooperationwithintelligent road intersections can reduce human mistakes and improve the efficiency ofintersection management systems, thereby improving safety, energy and traffic efficiency[92]. In addition to traffic timing, V2X communication systems can be used to provide
detailed vehicle information and driver’s intentions of vehicles approaching the intersec-tion. Such information can be collected and exploited to anticipate the behaviour of thevehicles,particularlythosethatarenotwithinthelineofsightoftheon-boardsystemsofthesubjectvehicle.Therefore,thissectionisdevotedtoanalysingtheworkingprincipleofCooperative Intersection Management (CIM) systems. Hereafter, a CIM system refers tothoseintersectioncontrolsystemswhichexploitV2Xcommunicationstoprovidesolutionstotheproblemofcoordinatingthemotionofasetofvehiclesthroughintersectionssafelyandefficiently.ThemanagementalgorithmsforCIMsolutionsaremainlybasedonheuris-tic rule-based methods [ 92] or optimisation based methods [93 ]. In the case of heuristic
rule-basedmethods,thevehiclescooperatetopasstheintersectionbyusingasetoffixedrulesimplementedasaninteractionprotocolamongthevehiclesandthecoordinationunit.On the other hand, optimisation-based methods mathematically formulate a CIM prob-lem and solve it by using tools from control theory. It is noted that the decision variables(also known as control variables) depend on the adopted method. They can be the tim-ingoftrafficlights,timeslotstoeachvehicletopasstheintersection,intersectionpassingsequence,accelerationanddeceleration,etc.Inwhatfollows,CIMsolutionsforsignalisedintersectionandnon-sigalisedintersectionareanalysedtoidentifypotentialbenefitsandlimitationsofeachmethodforautonomousdrivingsystems.
In signalised intersections, the safety requirement is usually assumed satisfied under
t h ei m p l i c i th y p o t h e s i st h a ta l lt h ev e h i c l e sr e s p e c tt h et r a ffi cl i g h ts i g n a l s .T h e r e f o r e ,t h e
objective of CIM systems can be to reduce idling at red lights to maximise traffic flow or
to improve fuel efficiency. The idea behind these controlling systems is to use informa-tion collected by means of V2X communication links to adjust vehicles motion with theaimtoreduceidlingandfuelconsumptionatredlights.Typically,itisassumedthatvehi-cles approaching the intersection can communicate with the infrastructure and receive