VEHICLE SYSTEM DYNAMICS 5
slowdown or standstill, thus reducing traffic flow and drivers comfort, while increasing
a tt h es a m et i m ef u e lc o n s u m p t i o n[ 34] and the possibility of rear-end collisions [ 35]. It
is noted that autonomous vehicles that adjust the inter-vehicular distance based only onthe position of the lead vehicle (measured through local sensors) have limited capabilityto be operated in platoons [ 35,36]. Furthermore, the limitation of autonomous vehicles
to be organised in platoons depends also on the platoon spacing strategies. In the con-text of vehicle platooning, spacing strategies are mainly classified as: (i) constant policy,and(ii)headwaypolicy(alsoknownasvelocity-dependentspacingpolicy).Whenacon-stant policy is adopted, the inter-vehicular gap is independent from the velocities of thevehicles.Thispolicycanincreasethroughputmorethantheheadwaypolicyandhasbeenused initially to show the benefits of automated highways to increase road capacity [ 25].
Ontheotherhand,intheheadwaypolicy,eachvehicleadaptstheinter-vehiculardistancelinearly based on its own speed and the time headway where reducing the time headwaywill increase the achievable benefits from platooning. However, it is noted that, for bothconstant and headway policies, maintaining the string stability is a major concern. Fortheconstan tpolicy ,itwaspro ventha tthestringstabilitycannotbeguaran teedwhenpla-toon control systems make decision based only on the inter-vehicular gap [ 37,38]w h i l e
fortheheadwaypolicythestringstabilitysufferswhenreducingthetimeheadway[ 33,35].
Through V2X communication, it is possible to mitigate the limitations of both constantandheadwaypolicies.Forinstance,amultitudeofinformationobtainedfromallorafrac-tion of the vehicles in the platoon (e.g. acceleration of the lead vehicle, spacing error of
other vehicles in the string, vehicles position, velocity and accelerations, etc.) can guar-
antee the string stability of constant policy [ 37]. On the other hand, platoons of CAVs
c a nb eo p e r a t e da l s ow i t hat i m e - h e a d w a ye q u a lt o0 . 6s[ 39], which is also accepted by
passengers as experimentally shown in [ 28]. Moreover, by increasing the range of infor-
mationsharedbyvehiclesinaplatoon,betterperformanceintermsofstringstabilitycanbe achieved. For instance, in [ 39], it was shown that by including information from the
vehicle ahead the lead vehicle (defined as second lead vehicle) into the control actions ofsubjectvehicle
1(seeFigure 1(a)),itispossibletoreducetheminimumtimeheadwayswith
respecttothecasewhereonlyinformationfromtheleadvehiclewasusedwithoutjeopar-disingstringstability.Anotherexampleisdocumentedin[ 40]whereitwasproventhatby
includinginformationfromthefollowingvehicleintothecomputationoftheaccelerationo ft h es u b j e c tv e h i c l e( s e eF i g u r e 1(b)), it is possible to preserve the cooperative motion
alsowhenoneofthevehiclesinthestringhaslimitedspeedperformancecomparedtotheothervehiclesinthefleet.Thus,thereisaprooffromtheliteraturethatvaryingthenum-ber of communication links has an effect on the string stability of a platoon. The idea ofimproving the performance and robustness of vehicle platoons by increasing the number
(a) (b)
Figure 1. (a)Platoonscenariopresentedin[ 39]and(b)platoonscenariopresentedin[ 40].Greyarrows
indicatethecommunicationlinkscarryingdataamongvehicles.