26 U. MONTANARO ET AL.
become comparable to the slip values [ 149]. Furthermore, LS methods might fail in case
the variability of the vehicle slip profiles is not large enough (i.e. when vehicle slip pro-
filesdonotverifypersistentexcitationconditions)thuspreventingtheconvergenceoftheLS-algorithms[ 147].
The effectiveness of the cooperative method in [ 147,148] to improve the estimation of
the road friction coefficient provided by slip-based identification tecniques was provennumerically where a fleet of five vehicles was considered. A numerical investigation fordifferent road conditions revealed that the proposed cooperative estimation can enhancethe estimation of the road friction coefficient by up to 34% with respect to the case theslip-basedidentificaitonmethodisperformedbyeachvehicleindividuallyandwithoutanysharedinformation.Furthermore,asacasestudy,acooperativealgorithmwasemployedbyacollisionavoidancecontrollertogeneratefeasiblelongitudinalandlateralvehicleacceler-ations.Thecontrollerwasthennumericallytestedforascenariowherethesubjectvehiclehad to avoid two consecutive fixed obstacles. For this scenario, numerical results showedthat an accurate estimation of the road friction coefficient was fundamental to avoid col-lisions for slippery roads. It was shown that when the low-level estimation method wasusedwithoutanycorrection,theestimationerrorduringtheevasivemanoeuvrewasabout10%, but this accuracy was not sufficient to avoid a collision. On the other hand, when acooperativeapproachwasexploited,theresidualestimationerrorwassmallerthan3%andthe vehicle could successfully perform the evasive manoeuvre. Thus, the literature existswithsomeattemptstocooperativelyestimatetheroadfrictioncoefficientforautonomous
vehicles which are supported by promising numerical results. However, no experimental
evidence of the effectiveness of these cooperative schemes has been provided to the bestof the authors’ knowledges. Furthermore, it is noted that the tyre-road friction not onlydependsonroadconditionsbutalsoontyreconditions.Itmightbeinterestingtoseehowmuch the tyre-road friction coefficient varies for a variety of tyres and vehicles [ 150]. So
far,itisexpectedthatthespreadisnotverysignificant,therefore,thecooperativemethodscanprovideatleastsomegeneralwarningofpossibledangerontheroadahead[ 151,152].
However,besidestyre-roadfrictionalsothehydroplaningphenomenonshouldbeconsid-ered. Hydroplaning might be observed as very low friction, but it is a different physicalphenomenonanditstronglydependsonvelocity,treaddepthandvehicleweight.Conse-quently largerdifferencesmightoccur betweenvehiclesinhydroplaning cases. Thereforeideally,besidesafrictionnumberalsotheroadconditionshouldbeestimatedandcommu-nicatedbetweenvehicles.Hence,thequestionofunderstandingifcooperativeestimationof road friction is beneficial for autonomous driving scenarios is still open. As a possi-ble approach for creating a cooperative estimate of road condition for a fleet of vehicleswith large difference in the tyre-road friction coefficients is to augment the informationavailabletoon-boardvehicledynamicsbasedestimationsystemswithenvironmentalsen-sorsdatagatheredbythefleet.Environmentalsensors,suchascameras,opticalandradiofrequency-basedsensorsutilisechangesinthesignalreflectance,polarisationandabsorp-tionpropertiescausedbytheroadsurface.Forinstance,opticalsensorscansenseifaroad
isslipperybyanalysinghowbeamsoflightarescatteredandabsorbedbytheroadsurface,
while cameras can discern the road type based on pixel luminance levels. The advantageof using environmental sensors is that in principle they might provide an estimate of theroadconditionindependentlyfromthetyreconditionandvehiclemotion(e.g.theyworkalso for stationary vehicles). Consequently, data gathered from a fleet of vehicles can be