VEHICLE SYSTEM DYNAMICS 17
those unconnected. However, for high density traffic of 900 vehicles/hour/lane, the fuel
consumption of connected vehicles increased with the penetration rate. This unwantedeffect was caused by the impossibility of connected vehicles to implement their optimalspeed profiles in high-traffic density. It is noted that in the above-mentioned researchpapers, only the traffic light information was considered to optimise the speed of con-nected autonomous vehicles. However, V2V communication systems can be also used togatheradditionalinformationsuchasneighbouringvehiclestatestofurtherimprovefuelefficiency.Forinstance,in[103 ,104],anoptimisationcontrolalgorithmwhichutilisesboth
V2I(SPaT)andV2Vcommunicationwasproposed.Theideabehindtheapproachwastoadjustthemotionofeachconnectedautonomousvehiclewithrespecttothevelocityofitssuccessor to possibly allow both vehicles to cross the intersection in the same green lightwindow .Inthescenarioofhavingastringof15vehiclesonaroadandtrafficlightslocatedevery 500m, the simulation results showed that the fuel economy of traffic utilising bothV2I and V2V information can be improved by 22% compared to the case when just V2Iinformationisavailableand50%comparedtothecasethatthecooperationisnotused.In[102], V2X communication systems were also used to broadcast the length of the queue
stoppedattheupcomingtrafficlight,thustoadjustthevehiclemotiontoavoidstoppagesbehindtraffic.Numericalresultsshowedthatbyincludingtrafficdatainthecomputationofthespeedprofile,itispossibletofurtherincreasefuelefficiencywithrespecttothecasewhere only SPaT information was used in mixed traffic. However for the this case study,theincreasewaslimitedto2%.
In non-signalised intersection, as there are no signals or sign-posts available, vehicles
mustcoordinatetheuseofthecommonareawithinthejunction.Thiscoordinationprob-lem is usually formulated as calculating the trajectories for individual vehicles that allowthem to safely reach their destination in a finite time. According to [ 105], any solution
shouldmeetthebasicrequirementsofsafetyandliveness(definedbelow),whileoptimis-ingperformancemetrics(e.g.fuelconsumption,traveltime,etc.).Here,safetymeansthatthere is no collision between pairs of vehicle crossing the intersection whereas livenessguarantees that all vehicles enter and exit the coordination area in finite time so that per-manent stops and traffic deadlocks within the intersection are avoided. It is noted thatdespite the management of signalised intersections in which vehicles can be either justconnected or connected autonomous, for the management of a non-signalised intersec-tion, a common assumption is that all vehicles are connected and autonomous. For themanagement of a non-signalised intersection, Ref. [ 106]p r o posedarule-ba seda p p r oa c h
known as resource-reservation scheme. Achievable mobility and environmental benefitswerereportedin[ 107]throughtestingthemethodforafour-wayintersection.Theaverage
delay to pass the intersection, fuel consumption, and pollutant emissions were comparedwith traffic lights and roundabouts. The simulation results in [ 107] indicated that the
resource-reservation method always outperform current traffic lights and roundaboutsregardless of traffic density. The average reduction in travel delay and fuel consumptionwithrespecttotrafficlightsandroundaboutswere50%and20%,respectively.Also,pollu-
tant emissions such as HC, NOx, CO were reduced by replacing traffic lights with CIMs.
On average, the HC reduction was 35%, while NOx and CO reductions were 33% and43%,respectively.Theapplicationofresource-reservationmethodwasthesubjectofotherresearch as well, e.g. [ 108,109]. However, their findings and results are in agreement with
the outcome of [ 107]. Although a rule-based method can be more effective with respect