18 U. MONTANARO ET AL.
to the roundabouts and traffic lights, itsperformance and the safety and liveness require-
ments are not guaranteed for events which have not been considered in rule definitions.As a result, the general lack of formal guarantees in terms of the object and constraintsform the main weaknessof rule-based solutions [ 105]. On the other hand, the main idea
behindoptimisation-basedmethodsistoreformulatetheproblemofcoordinatingasetofv e h i c l e st h r o u g ha ni n t e r s e c t i o na sa no p t i m i s a t i o nc o n t r o lp r o b l e m[ 105]. The require-
mentsofsafetyandlivenessarerecastasconstraintsoftheproblemwhileminimisingtheperformance metrics. Collision-free and deadlock-free solutions are achieved by impos-ing constraints on the motion trajectories of vehicles. In this approach, for each pair ofvehicles, it is required that the travel trajectories do not cross each other (safety require-ment). In addition, each travel trajectory must enter and leave the common area of theintersectioninafinitetime(livenessrequirement).Examplesofoptimisationbasedstrate-gies can be found in [ 110–113]. In [110 ,111], the objectives of the minimisation was the
traveltimeanditwasnumericallyproventhatoptimal-basedCIMscanoutperforminter-sections controlled thought traffic lights, roundabouts and all-way stop control in termsof fuel efficiency and travel time and for different road condition (dry, rainy and snowy).In [112] the target was to minimise the overlap of the vehicles position inside the inter-
section zone. Namely, the acceleration profiles of the vehicles were computed such thatonly a limited number of vehicles are present inside the intersection at each time instant.Numericalresultsshowedthatoptimal-basedCIMshavethepotentialtoreducefuelcon-sumption with respect to intelligent traffic light, i.e. those where the timing depends on
thetrafficqueuesbehindthestopbar,especiallyforthecasewhentrafficvolumesexceed
the capacities of the roads. In [ 113],amulti-objectiveoptimisationapproachwasusedin
whichthecostfunctionincludedatermtopenalisespeedvariationwithrespecttoaspeedreference, and a term to penalise excessive acceleration/deceleration. It was numericallyproven that the optimal CIM was able to double the traffic flow compared to the casewhere traffic lights were used for coordinating a four-way intersection. Although opti-misation based approaches consider vehicle dynamics and physical constraints to assurecollision-free and deadlock-free solutions, the time to reach the optimal solution expo-nentiallyincreaseswiththenumberofconflictrelationshipsamongthevehicles[ 105,114].
For these reasons, the optimisation-based approach becomes numerically intractable forreal-timescenarios.Toaddressthecomputationissuesassociatedwithoptimisation-basedmethods,in[114 ]authorshaveproposedasub-optimalsolutioninwhichacontrollercal-
culates the occupancy time interval (i.e. the optimal time instants that must be used byeachvehicletosafelyenterandleavetheintersection)basedonsharedinformationoftraf-fic vehicles. Then, based on the allocated time instances, each vehicle computes its ownoptimal trajectory so that a local objectiveis minimised. The effectiveness of the methodtosolvetheintersectionproblemwasdemonstratedthroughsimulations.Furthermore,aset of 1000 simulations was analysed to assess the average time to solve the optimisationproblemwithandwithouttheproposedsolution.Analysisofthesimulationresultsshowedthattheaveragetimetosolvetheoptimalcontrolproblemwasabout10.14swithastandard
deviationof24s.Ontheotherhand,whentheproposedmethodwasapplied,theaverage
computationaltimereducedto0.043swithastandarddeviationof0.022s.Regardingsub-optimalityofthesolution,numericalresultsshowedthattheapproximatedalgorithmgaveresults20%lessaccuratethananoptimalsolutionforabout85%oftherandomrealisations.The aforementioned survey for intersection management showed that integrationof V2X