28 U. MONTANARO ET AL.
beenshownthatfuelreductioncanalsobeachievedbyperformingmanoeuvrescooper-
atively.Forinstance,inthecaseofnon-signalisedintersections,vehiclescancollaboratetoensurecollisionavoidance.Inaddition,cooperationalsoreducesthestationarywaittimes at signalised and non-signalised intersections which helps in reduction of fuelconsumption.Similarly,cooperativetechniquestoequalisethevelocitiesofvehiclesoveraroadsegmentremoveexcessiveaccelerations/decelerationswhichresultinanincreaseintheglobalfuelefficiency.
•In the case of a mixed scenario (of cooperative and non-cooperative vehicles), achiev-able benefits through cooperation not only depend on the control/estimation algo-rithms, but also on the penetration rate and the traffic scenario (e.g. traffic density,numbers of lane, etc.). In addition, human-driven vehicles can also benefit from thepresence of connected autonomous vehicles (for instance, in terms of fuel reduction).Suchadditionalbenefitisduetotheintrinsiccooperationamongvehiclesthatsharethesameroadsection.
•Althoughresultsdiscussedthroughoutthepaperconfirmthatconnectedautonomousvehicleshavethepotentialtoimprovetrafficsafety,fuelefficiencyandtrafficflow,mostof the results have been obtained through simulation under assumptions that mightbe not completely fulfilled in a real environment, e.g. (i) ideal working conditions ofthe communication channel (e.g. no packet loss, communication failure, noise, etc.),(ii)perfectknowledgeofvehicledynamics(vehicleparameters,roadfrictioncondition,etc.),(iii)perfectknowledgeofthepositionsofthevehicles.Hence,additionalinvestiga-
tionisrequiredtounderstandhowtheaforementioneduncertaintiesaffectcooperating
drivingscenarios.
Although beyond the scope of the paper, it is noted that, from a computer sci-
ence perspective, cybersecurity is an active research area for connected autonomousvehicles. Information shared among CAVs in cooperative driving scenarios must beprotected from cyber-attacks to guarantee road safety and privacy of CAVs and otherroad users. The ongoing research on CAVs as cooperative mobile computing systemsfocuses to identify the cyber threats and to design strategies for preventing dam-ages caused by such cyber-attacks. Cyber threats and attacks studied in the literatureinclude: (a) impersonation attack (the attacker pretends to be a legitimate vehiclewith the aim to send false messages); (b) message spoofing (the attacker sends falsemessages to spread wrong information in the network); (c) spamming attack (use-less messages are spread to increase the transmission latency and bandwidth usage);(d) sybil attack (the attacker pretends to have multiple identities and act as if it werea large fleet of CAVs) and (e) message tampering (the attacker aims to drop, mod-i f yo rc o r r u p tt h em e s s a g e ss e n tb yl e g i t i m a t ev e h i c l e st op r e v e n to t h e rv e h i c l e st oknowtheoriginaldata).Requirementsforcybersecuritysolutionsforimprovingtrust-worthiness of information source ranges from (i) authentication (vehicles must usemessages transmitted only by legitimate network), (ii) non-repudiation (if requireda sender must not deny a transmission of a message), to (iii) integrity (received
messages are the same as the original messages and they have not been altered dur-
ing the transmission). The reader is referred to recent surveys on cybersecurity forCAVs [154 –157] available in the computer science literature on mobile computing
for a detailed and comprehensive analysis of the cyber threats and the correspondingsolutions.