10
Party1…Party2Partyn𝑤′=𝑤+aggregate(∆𝑤!+	∆𝑤"+⋯	+∆𝑤#)𝑤′
𝑤′
𝑤′∆𝑤"∆𝑤#∆𝑤!CentralServer
(a) FL without privacy.
Party1…Party2Partyn𝑤′=𝑤+M(aggregate(∆𝑤!+	∆𝑤"+⋯	+∆𝑤#))𝑤′
𝑤′
𝑤′∆𝑤"∆𝑤#∆𝑤!CentralServer (b) Centralized DP: FL with a trusted server.
Party1…Party2Partyn𝑤′=𝑤+aggregate(M(∆𝑤!) +	M(∆𝑤")+⋯	+M(∆𝑤#))𝑤′
𝑤′
𝑤′M(∆𝑤")M(∆𝑤#)M(∆𝑤!)CentralServer
(c) Local DP: FL without a trusted server.
 (d) Distributed DP with SMC: FL without a trusted server.
Fig. 4: An illustration of one round of federated learning without privacy and with different DP mechanisms. Mdenotes a DP mechanism used to
privatize the data. In centralized DP (b), the central server is trusted. In local DP (c), the central server is not trusted, gradients are perturbed to
ensure local DP before forwarding to the central server. In distributed DP (d), the central server is also not trusted, gradients are perturbed via DP
mechanism Mand encrypted via encryption operation Eto ensure privacy before forwarding to the central server, who needs to ﬁnally decrypt ( D)
the aggregated ciphertext.
Fig. 5: Data v.s. model poisoning attacks in FL.
proposed attack also works on other well-known optimizers
such as AdaGrad and RMSProp. Baruch et al. [133] showed
that the core part of gradient descent algorithms is the direction
of the descent. Speciﬁcally, for gradient descent algorithms, to
guarantee the descent of the loss, the inner product between
the ground-truth gradient and the robust aggregated gradient
must be non-negative:
hw;w0i0; (3)
whereh;iis the inner product operation, wis the optimal
gradient, and w0=aggregate (w1;;wn)is the aggre-
gated gradient with aggregate ()being arbitrary aggregation
function. To make the aggregation fail, they proposed an“inner product manipulation attack” that can make the inner
product between the ground-truth gradient and the robust
aggregated gradient negative. To do this, each Byzantine par-
ticipant uploaded the negative of the average benign gradients.
They showed the proposed attack can successfully bypass
Coordinate-wise Median [23] and Krum [22]. Xie et al. [70]
claimed that by consistently applying small changes to many
parameters, a Byzantine participant can perturb the model’s
convergence. First, they used the local data of Byzantine
participants to estimate the mean and standard deviation of the
distribution. Then, they analyzed the range in which changes
to the parameters will not be detected by the defense, and
upon choosing the maxima of this range the convergence is
averted.
B. Targeted Attacks
In targeted poisoning attacks, the learnt model outputs the
target label speciﬁed by the adversary for particular testing
examples, e.g., predicting spams as non-spams, and predicting
attacker-desired labels for testing examples with a particular
Trojan trigger (backdoor/trojan attacks). However, the testing
error for other testing examples is unaffected. Generally,
targeted attacks is more difﬁcult to conduct than untargeted
attacks as the attacker has a speciﬁc goal to achieve.