4
TABLE II: A summary of attacks against server-based FL.
Attack TypeAttack Target Attacker Role FL Scenario Attack Complexity
Model Training Data Participant Server H2B H2C Attack Iteration Auxiliary Knowledge Required
One Round Multiple Rounds
RobustnessUntargeted attack YES NO YES NO YES NO YES YES YES
Targeted attack YES NO YES NO YES NO YES YES YES
PrivacyInfer Class Representatives NO YES YES YES YES NO NO YES YES
Infer Membership NO YES YES YES YES NO NO YES YES
Infer Properties NO YES YES YES YES NO NO YES YES
Infer Training Inputs and Labels NO YES NO YES YES NO YES YES NO
TABLE III: A list of abbreviations used in this survey.
AI Artiﬁcial Intelligence
ML Machine Learning
FL Federated Learning
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
I.I.D. Independent and Identically Distributed
IoT Internet of Things
HFL Horizontally Federated Learning
VFL Vertically Federated Learning
FTL Federated Transfer Learning
H2B HFL to businesses
H2C HFL to consumers
SGD Stochastic Gradient Descent
SMC Secure Multiparty Computation
DP Differential Privacy
CDP Centralized Differential Privacy
LDP Local Differential Privacy
DDP Distributed Differential Privacy
HE Homomorphic Encryption
RFA Robust Federated Aggregation
GAN Generative Adversarial Network
MIA Membership Inference Attack
AT Adversarial Training
FAT Federated Adversarial Training
API Application Programming Interface
and robustness in FL. The major contributions of this survey
include:
This survey presents a comprehensive categorization of
FL, and summarized threats and the corresponding pro-
tections for FL in a systematic manner.
Existing privacy and robustness attacks and defenses
are well explored to help readers better understand the
assumptions, principles, reasons and differences of the
current progress in the domain of FL privacy and robust-
ness.
The conﬂicts between privacy and robustness, and among
multiple design goals are identiﬁed; the gaps between
the current works and the real scenarios in FL are
summarized.
Future research directions will assist community to re-
think and improve their current designs towards robust
and privacy-preserving FL of real practicality and impact.
Meanwhile, it is suggested to integrate multidisciplinary
goals in the system design of FL.
F . Survey Organization
The rest of the survey is organized as follows. Before going
into an in-depth discussion on privacy and robustness in FL,
in Section II, we ﬁrst summarize the threat models from a
general perspective and discuss the customized threat models
for privacy and robustness respectively. Section III presents a
comprehensive review of the privacy attacks in FL, particularlytargeting the sensitive information (class representative, mem-
bership, properties, training inputs and labels) in HFL with
homogeneous architectures. To address the corresponding pri-
vacy attacks, Section IV lists the most representative privacy-
preserving techniques and current practices that have applied
these techniques in FL. Section V shows the detailed poisoning
attacks that aim to compromise system robustness, including
the untargeted and targeted poisoning attacks, followed by
their countermeasures in Section VI. From the lessons learned
in this survey paper, the research gaps towards realizing
trustworthy FL, along with directions for future research are
provided in Section VII. Finally, concluding remarks are drawn
in Section VIII.
For better readability, we give a diagram in Fig. 2 show-
ing the different aspects covered in the survey. The list of
abbreviations used in this survey is provided in Table III.
Throughout this survey, we will interchangeably use partic-
ipants/clients/users to represent the participants in FL.
II. T HREAT MODELS
Before reviewing attacks on FL, we ﬁrst present a summary
of the threat models. Generally, threat models in FL can
be categorized into two types: (1) Insider v.s. Outsider; (2)
Training Phase v.s. Inference Phase. These threat models apply
to both the privacy and robustness. Additionally, privacy and
robustness have their own threat models.
A. Insider v.s. Outsider
Attacks can be carried out by insiders and outsiders. Insider
attacks include those launched by the FL server and the
participants in the FL system. Outsider attacks include those
launched by the eavesdroppers on the communication channel
between participants and the FL server, and by users of the
ﬁnal FL model when it is deployed as a service.
Insider attacks are generally more dangerous than outsider
attacks, as it strictly enhances the capability of the adversary.
Thus, our discussion of attacks against FL will focus primarily
on the insider attacks.
B. Training Phase v.s. Inference Phase
Training Phase. Attacks conducted during the training phase
attempt to learn, inﬂuence, or corrupt the FL model itself [62].
During the training phase, the attacker can run data poisoning
attacks to compromise the integrity of the training dataset [37],
[35], [63], [64], [65], [66], or model poisoning attacks to
compromise the integrity of the learning process [36], [67].
The attacker can also launch a range of inference attacks on
an individual participant’s update or on the aggregated update
from all participants during training phase [28].