14
B=8 in DLG, and B=1 in iDLG, which is not the real case
for FL, in which gradient is normally shared after at least 1
epoch of local training; (3) used untrained model, neglecting
gradients over multiple communication rounds. Attacking FL
system in a more efﬁcient manner and under more practical
settings remains largely unexplored.
Rethinking Current Defenses: FL with secure aggregation
for the purpose of privacy is more susceptible to poisoning at-
tacks as the individual updates cannot be inspected. Similarly,
it is still unclear if adversarial training, one state-of-the-art
defense approach against adversarial attacks in conventional
ML [162], [163], [164], can be adapted to FL, as adversarial
training was developed primarily for IID data and remains
unclear for its performance in non-IID settings. Moreover,
adversarial training is computationally expensive and may
hurt the performance [165], which may not be feasible for
H2C scenario. In terms of differential privacy (DP) based
methods [7], [166], [84], [167], [168], [169], record-level
DP bounds the success of membership inference, but does
not prevent property inference applied to a group of training
records [28]. Participant-level DP, on the other hand, is geared
to work with thousands of users for training to converge
and achieving an acceptable trade-off between privacy and
accuracy [7]. The FL model fails to converge with a small
number of participants, making it unsuitable for H2B scenar-
ios. Furthermore, DP may hurt the accuracy of the learned
model [170], which may not be appealing to the industry.
Further work is needed to investigate if participant-level DP
can protect FL systems with fewer participants.
Optimizing Defense Mechanism Deployment: When de-
ploying defense mechanisms to check if any adversary is
attacking the FL system, the FL server will need additional
computational cost. In addition, different types of defense
mechanisms may have different effectiveness against different
attacks, and incur different costs. It is important to study how
to optimize the timing of deploying the defense mechanisms
or the announcement of deterrence measures. Game theoretic
research holds promise in addressing this challenge.
Test-phase Privacy in FL: This survey mainly focuses on
the training phase attacks and defenses in FL, considering the
more attack possibilities opened by the distributed training
property of FL systems. In fact, FL is also vulnerable to both
privacy and robustness attacks during test/inference phase by
the users of the ﬁnal FL model when it is deployed as a service.
In terms of the privacy vulnerability, the trained global
model may reveal sensitive information from model predic-
tions when deployed as a service, causing privacy leakage. In
such a setting, an adversary does not have direct access to
the model parameters, but may be able to view input-output
pairs. Previous researches have shown a series of privacy
leakage given only black-box access to the trained models,
such as (1) model stealing attacks in which model parameters
can be reconstructed by an adversary who only has access to
an inference/prediction API based on those parameters [171],
[172], [173], [174]; (2) membership inference attacks which
aim to determine if a particular record was used to train the
model [78]. FL models face the similar dilemma during model
deployment for testing purpose. The development of effectivedefenses against privacy leakage during model deployment
calls for further investigations.
Test-phase Robustness in FL: In terms of the robustness
vulnerability, recent studies [175], [176], [177] have shown
that FL is also vulnerable to well-crafted adversarial examples.
During inference time, the attackers can add a very small
perturbation to the test data, making the test data almost indis-
tinguishable from natural data and yet classiﬁed incorrectly by
the global model. For federated robustness against adversarial
examples, [175], [176] proposed to apply adversarial training
(AT) to FL, i.e, federated adversarial training (FAT), in order
to achieve adversarial robustness in FL. [175] noticed that
conducting AT on all participants leads to divergence of the
model. To solve this problem, they conducted AT on only
a proportion of participants for better convergence. Another
recent work [176] considered hardware heterogeneity in FL,
i.e., only limited users can afford AT. Hence, they conduct
AT on only a proportion of participants that have powerful
computation resources while conducting standard training on
the rest of the participants. [177] investigated the impact
of communication rounds in FAT and proposed a dynamic
adversarial training. The training of all the above FAT works
are unstable, which potentially hurts the convergence and
performance. Moreover, adversarial training typically requires
signiﬁcant computation and longer time to converge, and it is
unclear how it performs in non-IID settings. How to speed
up adversarial training in FL and the investigation of its
applicability in non-IID settings may be required in the future.
Overall, there exist difﬁculties in applying adversarial training
to the federated setting. This motivates future works to explore
more effective approaches to maintain both natural accuracy
and robust accuracy in FL.
In addition to the adversarial examples, recent works [172],
[173] have validated that the API services (the victim/target
model) can be easily stolen and are vulnerable to adversarial
example transferability attack. It would be interesting to ex-
plore whether the collaboratively built global model in FL is
also facing the similar problem, and how to effectively claim
the ownership of the trained model [178].
Overall, it would be of much importance towards realizing
trustworthy FL by defending against both training-phase and
test-phase attacks.
Relationship with GDPR: GDPR1deﬁnes 6-core prin-
ciples as rational guidelines for service providers to man-
age personal data, including: (1) Lawfulness, fairness and
transparency; (2) Purpose limitation; (3) Data minimisation;
(4) Accuracy; (5) Storage limitation; (6) Integrity and con-
ﬁdentiality (security). GDPR also requires Data Controllers
to provide the following rights for Data Subjects if capable
(The GDPR Articles 12–23): (1) Right to be informed, (2)
Right of access, (3) Right to rectiﬁcation, (4) Right to erasure
(Right to be forgotten), (5) Right to restrict processing, (6)
Right to data portability, (7) Right to object, and (8) Rights in
relation to automated decision making and proﬁling. Although
FL has emerged as a prospective solution that facilitates
distributed collaborative learning without disclosing original
1https://gdpr-info.eu