7
whereais a constant, m1,m2are the plaintexts that need to
be encrypted, c1,c2are the ciphertext of m1,m2respectively.
Homomorphic encryption is widely used and is especially
useful for securing the learning process by computing on
encrypted data. However, doing arithmetic on the encrypted
numbers comes at a cost of memory and processing time. For
example, with Paillier encryption scheme, the encryption of
an encoded ﬂoating-point number (whether single or double
precision) is 2mbits long, where mis typically at least 1024
and the addition of two encrypted numbers is 2 3 orders
of magnitude slower than the unencrypted equivalent [9].
Moreover, polynomial approximations need to be made to
evaluate non-linear functions in machine learning algorithms,
resulting in a trade-off between utility and privacy [79], [80].
For example, to protect individual gradients, Aono et al. [31]
used additively homomorphic encryption to preserve the pri-
vacy of gradients and enhance the security of the distributed
learning system. However, their protocol not only incurs large
communication and computational overhead, but also results
in utility loss. Furthermore, it is not able to withstand collusion
between the server and multiple participants. Hardy et al. [9]
applied federated logistic regression on vertically partitioned
data encrypted with an additively homomorphic scheme to
secure against an honest-but-curious adversary. Overall, all
these works incur extra communication and computational
overheads, which limit their applications in H2C scenarios.
B. Privacy-Preservation through SMC
Secure Multiparty Computation (SMC) [93] enables differ-
ent participants with private inputs to perform a joint compu-
tation on their inputs without revealing them to each other.
Mohassel et al. [89] proposed SecureML which conducts
privacy-preserving learning via SMC, where data owners need
to process, encrypt and/or secret-share their data among two
non-colluding servers in the initial setup phase. SecureML
allows data owners to train various models on their joint
data without revealing any information beyond the outcome.
However, this comes at a cost of high computation and
communication overhead, which may hamper participants’
interest to collaborate. Bonawitz et al. [5] proposed a secure,
communication-efﬁcient, and failure-robust protocol based on
SMC for secure aggregation of individual gradients. It ensures
that the only information about the individual users the server
learns is what can be inferred from the aggregated results. The
security of their protocol is maintained under both the honest-
but-curious and malicious settings, even when the server and
a subset of users act maliciously – colluding and deviating
arbitrarily from the protocol. That is, no party learns anything
more than the sum of the inputs of a subset of honest users
of a large size [5].
In general, SMC techniques ensure a high level of privacy
and accuracy, at the expense of high computation and commu-
nication overhead, thereby doing a disservice to attracting par-
ticipation. Another main challenge facing SMC-based schemes
is the requirement for simultaneous coordination of all partic-
ipants during the entire training process. Such a multi-party
interaction model may not be desirable in practical settings,especially under the commonly considered participant-server
architecture in FL settings. Besides, SMC-based protocols
can enable multiple participants to collaboratively compute
an agreed-upon function without leaking input information
from any participant except for what can be inferred from
the outcomes of the computation [99], [100]. That said, SMC
cannot fully guarantee protection from information leakage,
which requires additional differential privacy techniques to
be incorporated into the multi-party protocol to address such
concerns [101], [102], [103], [104].
In summary, homomorphic encryption or SMC-based ap-
proaches may not be applicable to large-scale FL scenarios
as they incur substantial additional communication and com-
putation costs. Moreover, encryption based techniques need
to be carefully designed and implemented for each operation
in the target learning algorithm [105], [106]. Lastly, all the
cryptography based protocols prevent anyone from auditing
participants’ updates to the joint model, which leaves spaces
for the malicious participants to attack. For example, malicious
participants can introduce stealthy backdoor functionality into
the global model without being detected [36].
C. Privacy-Preservation through Differential Privacy
Differential privacy (DP) was originally designed for the
single database scenario, where for every query made, a
database server answers the query in a privacy-preserving
manner with tailored randomization [95]. In comparison with
encryption based approaches, differential privacy trades off
privacy and accuracy by perturbing the data in a way that
(i) is computationally efﬁcient, (ii) does not allow an attacker
to recover the original data, and (iii) does not severely affect
the utility.
The concept of differential privacy is that the effect of
the presence or the absence of a single record on the output
likelihood is bounded by a small factor . As deﬁned in Deﬁ-
nition 4.1, (;)-approximate differential privacy [96] relaxes
pure-differential privacy by a additive term, which means
the unlikely responses need not satisfy the pure differential
privacy criterion.
Deﬁnition 4.1: (;)-differential privacy [96]. For scalars
 > 0and0 < 1, mechanismMis said to preserve
(approximate) (;)-differential privacy if for all adjacent
datasetsD;D02Dnand measurable S2range(M),
PrfM(D)2Sg  exp()PrfM(D0)2Sg+ :
To avoid the worst-case scenario of always violating privacy
of afraction, the standard recommendation is to choose 
1=jDj, wherejDjis the size of the database. This strategy
forecloses possibility of one particularly devastating outcome,
but other forms of information leakage remain.
The privacy community generally categorizes DP into the
following three categories as per different trust assumptions
and noise sources: centralized DP (CDP), local DP (LDP) and
distributed DP (DDP). A comprehensive comparison among
CDP, LDP and DDP is listed in Table V.
Centralized Differential Privacy (CDP) . CDP was orig-
inally designed for the centralized scenario where a trusted