1
Privacy and Robustness in Federated Learning:
Attacks and Defenses
Lingjuan Lyu, Han Yu, Xingjun Ma, Chen Chen, Lichao Sun, Jun Zhao, Qiang Yang,Fellow, IEEE , and
Philip S. Yu, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —As data are increasingly being stored in different
silos and societies becoming more aware of data privacy issues,
the traditional centralized training of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
models are facing efﬁciency and privacy challenges. Recently,
federated learning (FL) has emerged as an alternative solution
and continue to thrive in this new reality. Existing FL protocol
designs have been shown to be vulnerable to adversaries within
or outside of the system, compromising data privacy and system
robustness. Besides training powerful global models, it is of
paramount importance to design FL systems that have privacy
guarantees and are resistant to different types of adversaries.
In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive survey on privacy
and robustness in federated learning over the past 5 years.
Through a concise introduction to the concept of FL, and a
unique taxonomy covering: 1) threat models; 2) privacy attacks
and defenses; 3) poisoning attacks and defenses, we provide
an accessible review of this important topic. We highlight the
intuitions, key techniques as well as fundamental assumptions
adopted by various attacks and defenses. Finally, we discuss
promising future research directions towards robust and privacy-
preserving FL, and their interplays with multidisciplinary goals
of FL.
Index Terms —Federated Learning, Privacy, Robustness, At-
tacks, Defenses
I. I NTRODUCTION
AS computing devices become increasingly ubiquitous,
people generate huge amounts of data through their day-
to-day usage. Collecting such data into centralized storage
facilities is costly and time consuming. Traditional central-
ized machine learning (ML) approaches cannot support such
ubiquitous deployments and applications due to infrastructure
shortcomings such as limited communication bandwidth, inter-
mittent network connectivity, and strict delay constraints [1].
Another critical concern is data privacy and user conﬁdential-
ity as the usage data usually contain sensitive information [2].
Sensitive data such as facial images, location-based services,
or health information can be used for targeted social adver-
tising and recommendation, posing immediate or potential
Lingjuan Lyu is with Sony AI. E-mail: Lingjuan.Lv@sony.com.
Han Yu and Jun Zhao are with the School of Computer Science
and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. E-mail:
han.yu@ntu.edu.sg, junzhao@ntu.edu.sg.
Xingjun Ma is with the School of Information Technology, Deakin Univer-
sity, Geelong, Australia. E-mail: daniel.ma@deakin.edu.au.
Chen Chen is with College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University,
China. E-mail:cc33@zju.edu.cn.
Lichao Sun is with Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Lehigh University. E-mail: lis221@lehigh.edu.
Qiang Yang is with Department of AI, WeBank, Shenzhen, China, and
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology. E-mail: qyang@ust.hk
Philip S. Yu is with Information Technology, University of Illinois at
Chicago. E-mail: psyu@uic.edu.
Corresponding authors.TABLE I: Taxonomy for horizontal federated learning (HFL).
HFL Number of Par-
ticipantsTraining Partici-
pationTechnical Capa-
bility
H2B small frequent high
H2C large not frequent low
privacy risks. Hence, private data should not be directly shared
without any privacy protection. As societies become increas-
ingly aware of privacy preservation, legal restrictions such as
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) are emerging,
which makes data aggregation practices less feasible [3].
In this scenario, federated learning (FL) (also well known
as collaborative learning), which distributes model training to
the devices from which data originate, emerged as a promising
alternative ML paradigm [4]. FL enables a multitude of partic-
ipants to construct a joint ML model without exposing their
private training data [4], [5]. It can also handle unbalanced
and non-independent and identically distributed (non-I.I.D.)
data, which naturally arise in the real world [6]. In recent
years, FL has beneﬁted a wide range of applications such
as next word prediction [6], [7], visual object detection for
safety [8], entity resolution [9], recommendation [10], [11],
[12], industrial IoT [13], and graph-based analysis [14], [15],
[16], etc.
A. Categorization of Federated Learning based on Distribu-
tion
Based on the distribution of data features and data samples
among participants, federated learning can be generally classi-
ﬁed as horizontally federated learning (HFL), vertically feder-
ated learning (VFL) and federated transfer learning (FTL) [17].
Under HFL, datasets owned by each participant share sim-
ilar features but concern different users [18]. For example,
several hospitals may each store similar types of data ( e.g.,
demographic, clinical, and genomics) about different patients.
If they decide to build a machine learning model together using
FL, we refer to such a scenario as HFL. In this paper, we
further classify HFL into HFL to businesses (H2B), and HFL
to consumers (H2C). A comparison between H2B and H2C
is listed in Table I. The main difference lies in the number
of participants, FL training participation level and technical
capability, which can inﬂuence how adversaries attempt to
compromise the FL system. Under H2B, there are typically a
handful of participants. They can be frequently selected during
FL training. The participants tend to possess signiﬁcant com-
putational power and sophisticated technical capabilities [3].
Under H2C, there can be thousands or even millions of
potential participants. In each round of training, only a subsetarXiv:2012.06337v3  [cs.CR]  19 Jan 2022