15
training data, unfortunately, FL is not naturally compliant with
the GDPR [179], as pointed out by a recent survey [179]
that has dedicated to surveying the relationship between FL
and GDPR requirements. For example, secure aggregation
mechanism in FL ampliﬁes the lack of transparency and
fairness in FL systems, thus fails to fully comply with the
GDPR requirements of fairness and transparency; malicious
participants in FL may conduct either data or model poisoning
attack for an unauthorised purpose, local ML model parame-
ters obtained from participants is no longer minimal for the
original purpose. These possible attacks, which lead to non-
compliance with the GDPR, should be addressed. Henceforth,
it is worthwhile to explore approaches to empower FL-based
systems to follow the GDPR regulatory guidelines, thus fully
comply with the GDPR.
Threats and Protections of VFL and FTL: This survey
mainly focuses on the threats to HFL, there are some recent
exploratory efforts on threats and protections of VFL and FTL.
For VFL, Secureboost [180] considered user privacy and
data conﬁdentiality in VFL, and presented an approach to train
a high-quality tree boosting model collaboratively. A recent
work called FederBoost [181] pointed out that Secureboost
is expensive since it requires cryptoraphic computation and
communication for each possible split, thus they proposed a
vertical FederBoost which does notrequire any cryptographic
operation. Another recent work [182] uncovered the risk
ofcatastrophic data leakage in vertical federated learning
(CAFE) through a novel algorithm that can perform large-
batch data leakage with high data recovery quality and theo-
retical guarantees. They empirically demonstrated that CAFE
can recover large-scale private data from the shared aggregated
gradients in VFL settings, overcoming the batch limitation
problem in current data leakage attacks.
For FTL, [183] proposed an end-to-end privacy-preserving
multi-party learning approach with two variants based on
homomorphic encryption and secret sharing techniques, re-
spectively, to build a heterogeneous federated transfer learning
(HFTL) framework. [21] adopted two secure approaches,
namely, homomorphic encryption (HE) and secret sharing for
preserving privacy. The HE approach is simple but computa-
tionally expensive. By contrast, the secret sharing approach
offers the following advantages: (i) there is no accuracy
loss, (ii) computation is much faster than HE approach. The
major drawback of the secret sharing approach is that one
has to ofﬂine generate and store many triplets before online
computation.
Overall, there is still a large space for VFL and FTL. It is
worth further investigation as for whether existing threats in
HFL are all valid in VFL and FTL, or if there are new threats
and countermeasures in VFL and FTL.
Vulnerabilities to Free-riding Participants: In FL sys-
tems, there may exist free-riders, who aim to beneﬁt from
the global model, but do not want to contribute any useful
information, thus compromising collaborative fairness [167],
[168], [184]. The main incentives for free-riders include: (1)
the participant dose not have any data to train the local model;
(2) the participant is too concerned about its privacy thus
chooses to release fake updates; (3) the participant does notwant to consume or does not have any local computation
power to train the local model. In the current FL paradigm [6],
all participants receive the same federated model at the end
of the collaborative training, regardless of their individual
contributions. This makes the paradigm vulnerable to free-
riding participants [167], [168], [185], [148], [186]. How to
prevent free-riding remains an open challenge.
More Possibilities in FL with Heterogeneous Architec-
tures: Most privacy and robustness researches are focused
on FL with homogeneous architectures. It remains unclear
whether existing attacks, privacy-preserving techniques and
defense mechanisms can be adapted to FL with heterogeneous
architectures. It is valuable future work to explore similar types
of attacks and defenses in heterogeneous FL.
Decentralized FL: Decentralized FL is an emerging re-
search area, where there is no single central server in the
system [7], [3], [167], [168]. Decentralized FL is potentially
more useful for H2B scenarios where the business participants
do not trust any third party. In this paradigm, each participant
could be elected as a server in a round robin manner. The
recent emerging swarm learning [187] can be deemed as a
decentralized FL framework, which unites edge computing,
blockchain-based peer-to-peer networking and coordination
while maintaining conﬁdentiality without the need for a central
coordinator. It is interesting to investigate whether existing
threats to server-based FL still apply in decentralized FL.
Efﬁcient FL with Single Round Communication: In addi-
tion to privacy and robustness, communication cost is another
major concern that may hinder the practical deployment of FL.
One-shot FL has recently emerged as a promising approach
for communication efﬁciency. It allows the central server to
learn a model in a single communication round. Despite the
low communication cost, existing one-shot FL methods are
mostly impractical or face inherent limitations, e.g., a public
dataset is required, participants’ models are homogeneous,
additional data/model information needs to be uploaded, un-
satisfactory performance [188], [189], [190]. A recent work
proposed a more practical data-free approach named FedSyn
for one-shot FL framework with heterogeneity [191]. FedSyn
is the ﬁrst method that can be practically applied to various
real-world applications due to the following beneﬁts: (1)
FedSyn requires no additional information (except the model
parameters) to be transferred between participants and the
server; (2) FedSyn does not require any auxiliary dataset for
training; (3) FedSyn is the ﬁrst to consider both model and
statistical heterogeneities in FL, i.e., the participants’ data are
non-iid and different participants may have different model
architectures. Other alternative one-shot FL approaches with
practical assumptions are worthwhile to explore, considering
the alluring communication efﬁciency and less privacy and
robustness attack surfaces exposed in one-shot FL.
Achieving Multiple Objectives Simultaneously: There are
no existing works that can satisfy multiple goals simultane-
ously: (1) fast algorithmic convergence; (2) good generalisa-
tion performance; (3) communication efﬁciency; (4) fault tol-
erance; (5) privacy preservation; and (6) robustness to targeted,
untargeted poisoning attacks, and free-riders. Previous works
have attempted to solve multiple objectives at the same time.