13
to train clean models given backdoor-poisoned data. They
frame the overall learning process as a dual-task of learning
the clean and the backdoor portions of data. From this view,
they identify two inherent characteristics of backdoor attacks
as their weaknesses: 1) the models learn backdoored data much
faster than learning with clean data, and the stronger the attack
the faster the model converges on backdoored data; 2) the
backdoor task is tied to a speciﬁc class (the backdoor target
class). Based on these two weaknesses, ABL introduces a two-
stage gradient ascent mechanism for standard training to 1)
help isolate backdoor examples at an early training stage, and
2) break the correlation between backdoor examples and the
target class at a later training stage. Extensive experiments
on multiple benchmark datasets against 10 state-of-the-art
attacks empirically show that ABL can automatically prevent
backdoor attacks during training, without degrading the main
performance.
Despite the promising backdoor defense results in the
centralized setting, it is still unclear whether these defenses
can be smoothly adapted to FL setting, especially in the
non-iid setting. For backdoor defense in FL, Sun et al. [38]
showed that clipping the norm of model updates and adding
Gaussian noise can mitigate backdoor attacks that are based
on the model replacement paradigm. Andreina et al. [157]
incorporated an additional validation phase in each round of
FL to detect backdoor. However, None of these provides certi-
ﬁed robustness guarantees. Certiﬁed robustness for FL against
backdoor attacks remain largely unexplored. Xie et al. [143]
provided the ﬁrst general framework called Certiﬁably Robust
Federated Learning (CRFL), to train certiﬁably robust FL
models against backdoors.
To defend against the targeted poisoning attack by sybil
clones, Fung et al. [37] exploited the characteristic behavior
that sybils are more similar to each other than the similarity
observed amongst the honest clients, and proposed FoolsGold:
a new defense scheme against FL Sybil attacks by adapting the
learning rate of participants based on contribution similarity.
Note that FoolsGold does not bound the expected number of
attackers by assuming that attackers can spawn a large number
of Sybils, rendering assumptions about proportions of honest
participants unrealistic [22]. Additionally, FoolsGold requires
no auxiliary information beyond the learning process, and
makes fewer assumptions about participants and their data.
The robustness of FoolsGold holds for different distributions
of participant data, varying poisoning targets, and various
Sybil strategies, and can be applied successfully on both
FedSGD and FedAvg.
We list the most representative defenses against poisoning
attacks against FL in Table VI. Some robust aggregation
algorithms have breaking points, i.e., the fraction of malicious
participants, robustness guarantees cannot be provided if the
fraction of malicious participants is larger than the breaking
point.
Remark . Note that both the untargeted and targeted poison-
ing attacks are less effective in settings with infrequent partici-
pation like H2C [35]. Moreover, under practical production FL
environments, Shejwalkar et al. [141] have showed that FL,
even without any defenses, is highly robust in practice. Forproduction cross-device FL (H2C), which contains thousands
to billions of clients, poisoning attacks have no impact on
existing robust FL algorithms even with impractically high
percentages of compromised clients. For production cross-
silo FL (H2B), which contains up to hundred clients, data
poisoning attacks are completely ineffective; model poisoning
attacks are unlikely to play a major risk when the clients
involved are bound by contract and their software stacks
professionally maintained (e.g., in banks, hospitals). Some
exceptional cross-silo scenarios are most likely with a strong
incentive (e.g., ﬁnancial) causing multiple parties to be willing
to risk breach of contract by colluding or for one party to hack
thereby risking criminal liability. Therefore, we conclude that
these poisoning attacks are more likely to happen in some
exceptional H2B scenarios.
VII. D ISCUSSIONS AND PROMISING DIRECTIONS
There are still potential vulnerabilities which need to be
addressed in order to improve the privacy and robustness of
FL systems. Moreover, there are multiple design goals that are
equally important with privacy and robustness, thus need to be
considered simultaneously in FL. In this section, we outline
research directions which we believe are promising.
Curse of Dimensionality: Large models, with high di-
mensional parameter vectors, are particularly susceptible to
privacy and security attacks [158]. Most FL algorithms require
overwriting the local model parameters with the global model.
This makes them susceptible to poisoning attacks, as the
adversary can make small but damaging changes in the high-
dimensional models without being detected. Almost all of the
well-designed Byzantine-robust aggregators [22], [23], [58]
still suffer from the curse of dimensionality. Speciﬁcally, the
estimation error scales up with the size of the model in a
square-root manner. Thus, sharing model parameters may not
be a strong design choice in FL, it opens all the internal
state of the model to inference attacks, and maximizes the
model’s malleability by poisoning attacks. The large number
of hyperparameters might also adversely affect communication
and accuracy, though the follow up work [159] tried adaptive
gradient clipping strategies to help alleviate this issue. To
address these fundamental shortcomings of FL, it is worth-
while to explore whether sharing gradients is essential. Instead,
sharing less sensitive information ( e.g.,SIGNSGD [160]) or only
sharing model predictions [158], [25], [87] in a black-box
manner may result in more robust privacy protection in FL.
Rethinking Current Privacy Attacks: There are several
inherent weaknesses in current attacks that may limit their
applicability in FL [161]. For example, GAN attack assumes
that the entire training corpus for a given class comes from
a single participant, and only in the special case where all
class members are similar, GAN-constructed representatives
are similar to the training data [76]. These assumptions may
be less practical in FL. For DLG [29] and iDLG [32], both
works: (1) adopt a second-order optimization method called
L-BFGS, which is more computationally expensive compared
with ﬁrst-order optimization methods; (2) are only applicable
to gradients computed on mini-batches of data, i.e., at most