on the MNIST, CelebA, CIFAR10 and Omniglot datasets.
The contributions of our work can be summarized as fol-
lows:
•We propose a new generative model disentanglement
learning method by introducing latent variable guidance
to variational autoencoders (V AE). Both unsupervised
and supervised versions of Guided-V AE have been de-
veloped.
•In unsupervised Guided-V AE, we introduce deformable
PCA as a subtask to guide the general V AE learning pro-
cess, making the latent variables interpretable and con-
trollable.
•In supervised Guided-V AE, we use an adversarial exci-
tation and inhibition mechanism to encourage the disen-
tanglement, informativeness, and controllability of the
latent variables.
Guided-V AE can be trained in an end-to-end fashion. It
is able to keep the attractive properties of the V AE while sig-
niﬁcantly improving the controllability of the vanilla V AE.
It is applicable to a range of problems for generative mod-
eling and representation learning.
2. Related Work
Related work can be discussed along several directions.
Generative model families such as generative adversar-
ial networks (GAN) [ 18,2] and variational autoencoder
(V AE) [ 29] have received a tremendous amount of atten-
tion lately. Although GAN produces higher quality synthe-
sis than V AE, GAN is missing the encoder part and hence
is not directly suited for representation learning. Here, we
focus on disentanglement learning by making V AE more
controllable and transparent.
Disentanglement learning [ 41,48,23,1,16,26] recently
becomes a popular topic in representation learning. Ad-
versarial training has been adopted in approaches such as
[41,48]. Various methods [ 44,28,37] have imposed con-
straints/regularizations/supervisions to the latent variables,
but these existing approaches often involve an architectural
change to the V AE backbone and the additional components
in these approaches are not provided as secondary decoder
for guiding the main encoder. A closely related work is the
β-V AE [ 20] approach in which a balancing term βis intro-
duced to control the capacity and the independence prior.
β-TCV AE [ 8] further extends β-V AE by introducing a total
correlation term.
From a different angle, principal component analysis
(PCA) family [ 22,27,7] can also be viewed as repre-
sentation learning. Connections between robust PCA [ 7]
and V AE [ 29] have been observed [ 10]. Although being a
widely adopted method, PCA nevertheless has limited mod-
eling capability due to its linear subspace assumption. Toalleviate the strong requirement for the input data being
pre-aligned, RASL [ 45] deals with unaligned data by es-
timating a hidden transformation to each input. Here, we
take advantage of the transparency of PCA and the model-
ing power of V AE by developing a sub-encoder (see Fig.
1.a), deformable PCA, that guides the V AE training process
in an integrated end-to-end manner. After training, the sub-
encoder can be removed by keeping the main V AE back-
bone only.
To achieve disentanglement learning in supervised
Guided-V AE, we encourage one latent variable to directly
correspond to an attribute while making the rest of the vari-
ables uncorrelated. This is analogous to the excitation-
inhibition mechanism [ 43,53] or the explaining-away [ 52]
phenomena. Existing approaches [ 38,37] impose super-
vision as a conditional model for an image translation
task, whereas our supervised Guided-V AE model targets
the generic generative modeling task by using an adversar-
ial excitation and inhibition formulation. This is achieved
by minimizing the discriminative loss for the desired latent
variable while maximizing the minimal classiﬁcation error
for the rest of the variables. Our formulation has a con-
nection to the domain-adversarial neural networks (DANN)
[15], but the two methods differ in purpose and classiﬁca-
tion formulation. Supervised Guided-V AE is also related
to the adversarial autoencoder approach [ 40], but the two
methods differ in the objective, formulation, network struc-
ture, and task domain. In [ 24], the domain invariant vari-
ational autoencoders method (DIV A) differs from ours by
enforcing disjoint sectors to explain certain attributes.
Our model also has connections to the deeply-supervised
nets (DSN) [ 36], where intermediate supervision is added to
a standard CNN classiﬁer. There are also approaches [ 14,5]
in which latent variables constraints are added, but they
have different formulations and objectives than Guided-
V AE. Recent efforts in fairness disentanglement learning
[9,47] also bear some similarity, but there is still a large
difference in formulation.
3. Guided-V AE Model
In this section, we present the main formulations of our
Guided-V AE models. The unsupervised Guided-V AE ver-
sion is presented ﬁrst, followed by introduction of the su-
pervised version.
3.1. V AE
Following the standard deﬁnition in variational autoen-
coder (V AE) [ 29], a set of input data is denoted as X =
(x1,...,xn)wherendenotes the number of total input sam-
ples. The latent variables are denoted by vector z. The
encoder network includes network and variational parame-
tersφthat produces variational probability model qφ(z|x).
The decoder network is parameterized by θto reconstruct
7921