(a) Bald (b) Bangs (c) Black Hair
(d) Mouth Slightly Open (e) Receding Hairlines (f) Young
Figure 5. Latent factors learned by Guided-V AE on CelebA: Each image shows the traversal results of Guided-V AE on a single latent
variable which is controlled by the lightweight decoder using the corresponding labels as signal.
with same dimensions (i.e. dzdef=dzcont). We compare
the classiﬁcation errors of different models with multiple
choices of dimensions of the latent variables in Table 2. In
general, V AE [ 29],β-V AE [ 20], and FactorV AE [ 28] do not
beneﬁt from the increase of the latent dimensions, and β-
TCV AE [ 8] shows evidence that its discovered representa-
tion is more useful for classiﬁcation task than existing meth-
ods. Our Guide-V AE achieves competitive results compare
toβ-TCV AE, and our Guided- β-TCV AE can further reduce
the classiﬁcation error to 1.1%whendz= 32 , which is
1.95% lower than the baseline V AE.
Moreover, we study the effectiveness of zdefandzcont
in Guided-V AE separately to reveal the different properties
of the latent subspace. We follow the same classiﬁcation
task procedures described above but use different subsets
of latent variables as input features for the classiﬁer f(·).
Speciﬁcally, we compare results based on the deformation
variables zdef, the content variables zcont, and the whole
latent variables zas the input feature vector. To conduct a
fair comparison, we still keep the same dimensions for the
deformation variables zdefand the content variables zcont.
Table 3shows that the classiﬁcation errors on zcontare sig-
niﬁcantly lower than the ones on zdef, which indicates the
success of disentanglement as the content variables should
determine the class of digits. In contrast, the deformation
variables should be invariant to the class. Besides, when the
dimensions of latent variables zare higher, the classiﬁcation
errors onzdefincrease while the ones on zcontdecrease, in-
dicating a better disentanglement between deformation and
content with increased latent dimensions.Model dzdefdzcontdzzdefError↑zcontError↓zError↓
GUIDED -VAE 8 8 16 27.1% 3.69% 2.17%
16 16 32 42.07% 1.79% 1.51%
32 32 64 62.94% 1.55% 1.42%
Table 3. Classiﬁcation on MNIST using different latent vari-
ables as features: Classiﬁcation error over Guided-V AE with dif-
ferent dimensions of latent variables [ ↑means higher is better, ↓
means lower is better]
4.2. Supervised Guided­V AE
4.2.1 Qualitative evaluation
We ﬁrst present qualitative results on the CelebA dataset
[39] by traversing latent variables of attributes shown in Fig-
ure4and Figure 5. In Figure 4, we compare the traver-
sal results of Guided-V AE with β-V AE for two labeled at-
tributes (gender, smile) in the CelebA dataset. The bottle-
neck size is set to 16 ( dz= 16 ). We use the ﬁrst two latent
variables z1,z2to represent the attribute information, and
the restz3:16to represent the content information. During
evaluation, we choose zt∈ {z1,z2}while keeping the re-
maining latent variables zrst
tﬁxed. Then we obtain a set
of images through traversing t-th attribute (e.g., smiling to
non-smiling) and compare them over β-V AE. In Figure 5,
we present traversing results on another six attributes.
β-V AE performs decently for the controlled attribute
change, but the individual zinβ-V AE is not fully entan-
gled or disentangled with the attribute. We observe the tra-
versed images contain several attribute changes at the same
time. Different from our Guided-V AE, β-V AE cannot spec-
ify which latent variables to encode speciﬁc attribute infor-
mation. Guided-V AE, however, is designed to allow deﬁned
7925