latent variables to encode any speciﬁc attributes. Guided-
V AE outperforms β-V AE by only traversing the intended
factors (smile, gender) without changing other factors (hair
color, baldness).
4.2.2 Quantitative evaluation
We attempt to interpret whether the disentangled at-
tribute variables can control the generated images from the
supervised Guided-V AE. We pre-train an external binary
classiﬁer for t-th attribute on the CelebA training set and
then use this classiﬁer to test the generated images from
Guided-V AE. Each test includes 10,000generated images
randomly sampled on all latent variables except for the par-
ticular latent variable ztwe decide to control. As Figure
6shows, we can draw the conﬁdence- zcurves of the t-th
attribute where z=zt∈[−3.0,3.0]with0.1as the stride
length. For the gender and the smile attributes, it can be
seen that the corresponding ztis able to enable ( zt<−1)
and disable ( zt>1) the attribute of the generated image,
which shows the controlling ability of the t-th attribute by
tuning the corresponding latent variable zt.
3
 2
 1
 0
 1
 2
 3
z
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0probability
z1:Gender
z2:Smile
Figure 6. Experts (high-performance external classiﬁers for at-
tribute classiﬁcation) prediction for being negatives on the gener-
ated images. We traverse z1(gender) and z2(smile) separately to
generate images for the classiﬁcation test.
4.2.3 Image Interpolation
We further show the disentanglement properties of us-
ing supervised Guided-V AE on the CIFAR10 dataset. ALI-
V AE borrows the architecture that is deﬁned in [ 11],
where we treat Gzas the encoder and Gxas the decoder.
This enables us to optimize an additional reconstruction
loss. Based on ALI-V AE, we implement Guided-ALI-V AE
(Ours), which adds supervised guidance through excitation
and inhibition shown in Figure 1. ALI-V AE and AC-GAN
[3] serve as a baseline for this experiment.
To analyze the disentanglement of the latent space, we
train each of these models on a subset of the CIFAR10
dataset [ 31] (Automobile, Truck, Horses) where the class
label corresponds to the attribute to be controlled. We use
a bottleneck size of 10 for each of these models. We fol-
low the training procedure mentioned in [ 3] for training the
AC-GAN model and the optimization parameters reported
in [11] for ALI-V AE and our model. For our Guided-ALI-Model Automobile-Horse ↓Truck-Automobile ↓
AC-GAN [ 3] 88.27 81.13
ALI-VAE†91.96 78.92
GUIDED -ALI-VAE (O URS) 85.43 72.31
Table 4. Image Interpolation: FID score measured for a subset
of CIFAR10 [ 31] with two classes each. [ ↓means lower is better]
†ALI-V AE is a modiﬁcation of the architecture deﬁned in [ 11]
Figure 7. Interpolation of images in z,z1:3andzrst
1:3for AC-GAN,
ALI-V AE and Guided-ALI-V AE (Ours).
V AE model, we add supervision through inhibition and ex-
citation on z1:3.
To visualize the disentanglement in our model, we in-
terpolate the corresponding z,ztandzrst
tof two images
sampled from different classes. The interpolation here is
computed as a uniformly spaced linear combination of the
corresponding vectors. The results in Figure 7qualitatively
show that our model is successfully able to capture com-
plementary features in z1:3andzrst
1:3. Interpolation in z1:3
corresponds to changing the object type. Whereas, the in-
terpolation in zrst
1:3corresponds to complementary features
such as color and pose of the object.
The right column in Figure 7shows that our model can
traverse in z1:3to change the object in the image from an
automobile to a truck. Whereas a traversal in zrst
1:3changes
other features such as background and the orientation of the
automobile. We replicate the procedure on ALI-V AE and
AC-GAN and show that these models are not able to con-
sistently traverse in z1:3andzrst
1:3in a similar manner. Our
model also produces interpolated images in higher quality
as shown through the FID scores [ 19] in Table 4.
4.3. Few­Shot Learning
Previously, we have shown that Guided-V AE can per-
form images synthesis and interpolation and form better
representation for the classiﬁcation task. Similarly, we can
apply our supervised method to V AE-like models in the
few-shot classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, we apply our adver-
sarial excitation and inhibition formulation to the Neural
Statistician [ 13] by adding a supervised guidance network
after the statistic network. The supervised guidance sig-
7926