Guided Variational Autoencoder for Disentanglement Learning
Zheng Ding∗,1,2, Yifan Xu∗,2, Weijian Xu2, Gaurav Parmar2, Yang Yang3, Max Welling3,4, Zhuowen Tu2
1Tsinghua University2UC San Diego3Qualcomm, Inc.4University of Amsterdam
Abstract
We propose an algorithm, guided variational autoen-
coder (Guided-VAE), that is able to learn a controllable
generative model by performing latent representation disen-
tanglement learning. The learning objective is achieved by
providing signals to the latent encoding/embedding in VAE
without changing its main backbone architecture, hence re-
taining the desirable properties of the VAE. We design an
unsupervised strategy and a supervised strategy in Guided-
VAE and observe enhanced modeling and controlling ca-
pability over the vanilla VAE. In the unsupervised strategy,
we guide the VAE learning by introducing a lightweight de-
coder that learns latent geometric transformation and prin-
cipal components; in the supervised strategy, we use an ad-
versarial excitation and inhibition mechanism to encourage
the disentanglement of the latent variables. Guided-VAE
enjoys its transparency and simplicity for the general rep-
resentation learning task, as well as disentanglement learn-
ing. On a number of experiments for representation learn-
ing, improved synthesis/sampling, better disentanglement
for classiﬁcation, and reduced classiﬁcation errors in meta
learning have been observed.
1. Introduction
The resurgence of autoencoders (AE) [ 34,6,21] is an
important component in the rapid development of modern
deep learning [ 17]. Autoencoders have been widely adopted
for modeling signals and images [ 46,50]. Its statistical
counterpart, the variational autoencoder (V AE) [ 29], has led
to a recent wave of development in generative modeling due
to its two-in-one capability, both representation and statis-
tical learning in a single framework. Another exploding di-
rection in generative modeling includes generative adver-
sarial networks (GAN) [ 18], but GANs focus on the gener-
ation process and are not aimed at representation learning
(without an encoder at least in its vanilla version).
Compared with classical dimensionality reduction meth-
ods like principal component analysis (PCA) [ 22,27] and
∗Authors contributed equally.Laplacian eigenmaps [ 4], V AEs have demonstrated their un-
precedented power in modeling high dimensional data of
real-world complexity. However, there is still a large room
to improve for V AEs to achieve a high quality reconstruc-
tion/synthesis. Additionally, it is desirable to make the V AE
representation learning more transparent, interpretable, and
controllable.
In this paper, we attempt to learn a transparent repre-
sentation by introducing guidance to the latent variables in
a V AE. We design two strategies for our Guided-V AE, an
unsupervised version (Fig. 1.a) and a supervised version
(Fig. 1.b). The main motivation behind Guided-V AE is to
encourage the latent representation to be semantically inter-
pretable, while maintaining the integrity of the basic V AE
architecture. Guided-V AE is learned in a multi-task learn-
ing fashion. The objective is achieved by taking advantage
of the modeling ﬂexibility and the large solution space of
the V AE under a lightweight target. Thus the two tasks,
learning a good V AE and making the latent variables con-
trollable, become companions rather than conﬂicts.
Inunsupervised Guided-V AE , in addition to the stan-
dard V AE backbone, we also explicitly force the latent vari-
ables to go through a lightweight encoder that learns a de-
formable PCA. As seen in Fig. 1.a, two decoders exist, both
trying to reconstruct the input data x: The main decoder,
denoted as Dec main , functions regularly as in the standard
V AE [ 29]; the secondary decoder, denoted as Dec sub, ex-
plicitly learns a geometric deformation together with a lin-
ear subspace. In supervised Guided-V AE , we introduce a
subtask for the V AE by forcing one latent variable to be
discriminative (minimizing the classiﬁcation error) while
making the rest of the latent variable to be adversarially
discriminative (maximizing the minimal classiﬁcation er-
ror). This subtask is achieved using an adversarial excita-
tion and inhibition formulation. Similar to the unsupervised
Guided-V AE, the training process is carried out in an end-
to-end multi-task learning manner. The result is a regular
generative model that keeps the original V AE properties in-
tact, while having the speciﬁed latent variable semantically
meaningful and capable of controlling/synthesizing a spe-
ciﬁc attribute. We apply Guided-V AE to the data modeling
and few-shot learning problems and show favorable results
7920