Target Image
PGGAN
CelebA-HQPGGAN
ChurchPGGAN
Conference RoomPGGAN
Bedroom
Single Latent Code Ours (Layer 2) Ours (Layer 4) Ours (Layer 8)
Figure 10: Comparison of the inversion results using different
GAN models as well as performing feature composition at dif-
ferent layers. Each row stands for a PGGAN model trained on
a speciﬁc dataset as prior, while each column shows results by
composing feature maps at a certain layer.
Tab.4shows the quantitative comparison, where our ap-
proach achieves the best performances on both settings of
center crop and random crop. Fig. 8includes some examples
of restoring corrupted images. It is obvious that both
existing inversion methods and DIP fail to adequately ﬁll in
the missing pixels or completely remove the added noises.
By contrast, our method is able to use well-trained GANs
as prior to convincingly repair the corrupted images with
meaningful ﬁlled content.
Semantic Manipulation. Besides the aforementioned low-
level applications, we also test our approach with some
high-level tasks, like semantic manipulation and style mix-
ing. As pointed out by prior work [ 21,15,35], GANs have
already encoded some interpretable semantics inside the
latent space. From this point, our inversion method provides
a feasible way to utilize these learned semantics for real
image manipulation. We apply the manipulation framework
based on latent code proposed in [ 35] to achieve semantic
facial attribute editing. Fig. 9shows the manipulation
results. We see that mGANprior can provide rich enough
information for semantic manipulation.
4.4. Knowledge Representation in GANs
As discussed above, the major limitation of using single
latent code is its limited expressiveness, especially when the
test image presents domain gap to the training data. Here
we verify whether using multiple codes can help alleviate
this problem. In particular, we try to use GAN models
trained for synthesizing face, church, conference room, and
bedroom, to invert a bedroom image. As shown in Fig. 10,
when using a single latent code, the reconstructed image
still lies in the original training domain ( e.g., the inversion
Grayscale Image
Ground Truth Corrupted Image Layer 8 Layer 4 Layer 2
Figure 11: Colorization and inpainting results with mGANprior
using different composition layers. AuC (the higher the better) for
colorization task are 86.83%, 87.44%, 90.02% with respect to the
2nd, 4th, and 8th layer respectively. PSNR (the higher the better)
for inpainting task are 21.19db, 22.11db, 20.70db with respect to
the 2nd, 4th, and 8th layer respectively. Images in green boxes
indicate the best results.
with PGGAN CelebA-HQ model looks like a face instead
of a bedroom). On the contrary, our approach is able to
compose a bedroom image no matter what data the GAN
generator is trained with.
We further analyze the layer-wise knowledge of a well-
trained GAN model by performing feature composition at
different layers. Fig. 10suggests that the higher layer is
used, the better the reconstruction will be. That is because
reconstruction focuses on recovering low-level pixel values,
and GANs tend to represent abstract semantics at bottom
layers while represent content details at top layers. We also
observe that the 4th layer is good enough for the bedroom
model to invert a bedroom image, but the other three models
need the 8th layer for satisfying inversion. The reason is
that bedroom shares different semantics from face, church,
and conference room, therefore the high-level knowledge
(contained in bottom layers) from these models cannot be
reused. We further make per-layer analysis by applying our
approach to image colorization and image inpainting tasks,
as shown in Fig. 11. The colorization task gets the best
result at the 8th layer while the inpainting task at the 4th
layer. That is because colorization is more like a low-level
rendering task while inpainting requires the GAN prior to
ﬁll in the missing content with meaningful objects. This is
consistent with the analysis from Fig. 10, which is that low-
level knowledge from GAN prior can be reused at higher
layers while high-level knowledge at lower layers.
5. Conclusion
We present mGANprior that employs multiple latent
codes for reconstructing real images with a pre-trained
GAN model. It enables these GAN models as powerful
prior to a variety of image processing tasks.
Acknowledgement: This work is supported in part by the
Early Career Scheme (ECS) through the Research Grants
Council of Hong Kong under Grant No.24206219 and in
part by SenseTime Collaborative Grant.
3019