Image Processing Using Multi-Code GAN Prior
Jinjin Gu1,2, Yujun Shen1, Bolei Zhou1
1The Chinese University of Hong Kong2The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
jinjingu@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {sy116, bzhou }@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
(a) Image Reconstruction (b) Image Colorization (c) Image Super-Resolution 
(d) Image Denoising (e) Image Inpainting (f) Semantic Manipulation 
Figure 1: Multi-code GAN prior facilitates many image processing applications using the reconstruction from ﬁxed PGGAN [ 23] models.
Abstract
Despite the success of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) in image synthesis, applying trained GAN models
to real image processing remains challenging. Previous
methods typically invert a target image back to the latent
space either by back-propagation or by learning an addi-
tional encoder. However, the reconstructions from both of
the methods are far from ideal. In this work, we propose
a novel approach, called mGANprior, to incorporate the
well-trained GANs as effective prior to a variety of image
processing tasks. In particular, we employ multiple latent
codes to generate multiple feature maps at some intermedi-
ate layer of the generator, then compose them with adaptive
channel importance to recover the input image. Such
an over-parameterization of the latent space signiﬁcantly
improves the image reconstruction quality, outperforming
existing competitors. The resulting high-ﬁdelity image
reconstruction enables the trained GAN models as prior to
many real-world applications, such as image colorization,
super-resolution, image inpainting, and semantic manipu-
lation. We further analyze the properties of the layer-wise
representation learned by GAN models and shed light on
what knowledge each layer is capable of representing.1
1Code is available at this link .1. Introduction
Recently, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [ 16]
have advanced image generation by improving the synthesis
quality [ 23,8,24] and stabilizing the training process [ 1,7,
17]. The capability to produce high-quality images makes
GANs applicable to many image processing tasks, such as
semantic face editing [ 27,36], super-resolution [ 28,42],
image-to-image translation [ 53,11,31],etc. However, most
of these GAN-based approaches require special design of
network structures [ 27,53] or loss functions [ 36,28] for
a particular task, limiting their generalization ability. On
the other hand, the large-scale GAN models, like StyleGAN
[24] and BigGAN [ 8], can synthesize photo-realistic images
after being trained with millions of diverse images. Their
neural representations are shown to contain various levels
of semantics underlying the observed data [ 21,15,35,44].
Reusing these models as prior to real image processing with
minor effort could potentially lead to wider applications but
remains much less explored.
The main challenge towards this goal is that the standard
GAN model is initially designed for synthesizing images
from random noises, thus is unable to take real images for
any post-processing. A common practice is to invert a given
image back to a latent code such that it can be reconstructed
by the generator. In this way, the inverted code can be
3012