used for further processing. To reverse the generation
process, existing approaches fall into two types. One is
to directly optimize the latent code by minimizing the
reconstruction error through back-propagation [ 30,12,32].
The other is to train an extra encoder to learn the mapping
from the image space to the latent space [ 34,52,6,5].
However, the reconstructions achieved by both methods are
far from ideal, especially when the given image is with high
resolution. Consequently, the reconstructed image with low
quality is unable to be used for image processing tasks.
In principle, it is impossible to recover every detail of
any arbitrary real image using a single latent code, oth-
erwise, we would have an unbeatable image compression
method. In other words, the expressiveness of the latent
code is limited due to its ﬁnite dimensionality. Therefore,
to faithfully recover a target image, we propose to employ
multiple latent codes and compose their corresponding fea-
ture maps at some intermediate layer of the generator. Uti-
lizing multiple latent codes allows the generator to recover
the target image using all the possible composition knowl-
edge learned in the deep generative representation. The
experiments show that our approach signiﬁcantly improves
the image reconstruction quality. More importantly, being
able to better reconstruct the input image, our approach
facilitates various real image processing applications by
using pre-trained GAN models as prior without retraining
or modiﬁcation, which is shown in Fig. 1. We summarize
our contributions as follows:
•We propose mGANprior , shorted for multi-code GAN
prior, as an effective GAN inversion method by using
multiple latent codes and adaptive channel importance.
The method faithfully reconstructs the given real im-
age, surpassing existing approaches.
•We apply the proposed mGANprior to a range of real-
world applications, such as image colorization, super-
resolution, image inpainting, semantic manipulation,
etc, demonstrating its potential in real image process-
ing.
•We further analyze the internal representation of dif-
ferent layers in a GAN generator by composing the
features from the inverted latent codes at each layer
respectively.
2. Related Work
GAN Inversion. The task of GAN inversion targets at
reversing a given image back to a latent code with a pre-
trained GAN model. As an important step for applying
GANs to real-world applications, it has attracted increasing
attention recently. To invert a ﬁxed generator in GAN,
existing methods either optimized the latent code based on
gradient descent [ 30,12,32] or learned an extra encoder
to project the image space back to the latent space [ 34,52,
6,5]. Bau et al. [3] proposed to use encoder to providebetter initialization for optimization. There are also some
models taking invertibility into account at the training stage
[14,13,26]. However, all the above methods only consider
using a single latent code to recover the input image and the
reconstruction quality is far from ideal, especially when the
test image shows a huge domain gap to training data. That
is because the input image may not lie in the synthesis space
of the generator, in which case the perfect inversion with a
single latent code does not exist. By contrast, we propose
to increase the number of latent codes, which signiﬁcantly
improve the inversion quality no matter whether the target
image is in-domain or out-of-domain.
Image Processing with GANs. GANs have been widely
used for real image processing due to its great power of
synthesizing photo-realistic images. These applications
include image denoising [ 9,25], image inpainting [ 45,47],
super-resolution [ 28,42], image colorization [ 38,20], style
mixing [ 19,10], semantic image manipulation [ 41,29],etc.
However, current GAN-based models are usually designed
for a particular task with specialized architectures [ 19,41]
or loss functions [ 28,10], and trained with paired data
by taking one image as input and the other as supervision
[45,20]. Differently, our approach can reuse the knowledge
contained in a well-trained GAN model and further enable
a single GAN model as prior to all the aforementioned tasks
without retraining or modiﬁcation. It is worth noticing that
our method can achieve similar or even better results than
existing GAN-based methods that are particularly trained
for a certain task.
Deep Model Prior. Generally, the impressive performance
of the deep convolutional model can be attributed to its ca-
pacity of capturing statistical information from large-scale
data as prior. Such prior can be inversely used for image
generation and image reconstruction [ 40,39,2]. Upchurch
et al. [40] inverted a discriminative model, starting from
deep convolutional features, to achieve semantic image
transformation. Ulyanov et al. [39] reconstructed the target
image with a U-Net structure to show that the structure
of a generator network is sufﬁcient to capture the low-
level image statistics prior to any learning. Athar et al.
[2] learned a universal image prior for a variety of image
restoration tasks. Some work theoretically explored the
prior provided by deep generative models [ 32,18], but the
results using GAN prior to real image processing are still
unsatisfying. A recent work [ 3] applied generative image
prior to semantic photo manipulation, but it can only edit
some partial regions of the input image yet fails to apply
to other tasks like colorization or super-resolution. That is
because it only inverts the GAN model to some intermediate
feature space instead of the earliest hidden space. By
contrast, our method reverses the entire generative process,
i.e., from the image space to the initial latent space, which
supports more ﬂexible image processing tasks.
3013