Citation: Alangari, N.; El Bachir
Menai, M.; Mathkour, H.;
Almosallam, I. Exploring Evaluation
Methods for Interpretable Machine
Learning: A Survey. Information 2023 ,
14, 469. https://doi.org/10.3390/
info14080469
Academic Editor: Lesheng Jin
Received: 9 July 2023
Revised: 7 August 2023
Accepted: 19 August 2023
Published: 21 August 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
  information
Review
Exploring Evaluation Methods for Interpretable Machine
Learning: A Survey
Nourah Alangari1,*, Mohamed El Bachir Menai1
, Hassan Mathkour1
and Ibrahim Almosallam2
1Department of Computer Science, College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud University,
Riyadh 11543, Saudi Arabia
2Saudi Information Technology Company (SITE), Riyadh 12382, Saudi Arabia
*Correspondence: nmalangari@ksu.edu.sa
Abstract: In recent times, the progress of machine learning has facilitated the development of decision
support systems that exhibit predictive accuracy, surpassing human capabilities in certain scenarios.
However, this improvement has come at the cost of increased model complexity, rendering them black-
box models that obscure their internal logic from users. These black boxes are primarily designed
to optimize predictive accuracy, limiting their applicability in critical domains such as medicine,
law, and ﬁnance, where both accuracy and interpretability are crucial factors for model acceptance.
Despite the growing body of research on interpretability, there remains a signiﬁcant dearth of
evaluation methods for the proposed approaches. This survey aims to shed light on various evaluation
methods employed in interpreting models. Two primary procedures are prevalent in the literature:
qualitative and quantitative evaluations. Qualitative evaluations rely on human assessments, while
quantitative evaluations utilize computational metrics. Human evaluation commonly manifests
as either researcher intuition or well-designed experiments. However, this approach is susceptible
to human biases and fatigue and cannot adequately compare two models. Consequently, there
has been a recent decline in the use of human evaluation, with computational metrics gaining
prominence as a more rigorous method for comparing and assessing different approaches. These
metrics are designed to serve speciﬁc goals, such as ﬁdelity, comprehensibility, or stability. The
existing metrics often face challenges when scaling or being applied to different types of model
outputs and alternative approaches. Another important factor that needs to be addressed is that while
evaluating interpretability methods, their results may not always be entirely accurate. For instance,
relying on the drop in probability to assess ﬁdelity can be problematic, particularly when facing the
challenge of out-of-distribution data. Furthermore, a fundamental challenge in the interpretability
domain is the lack of consensus regarding its deﬁnition and requirements. This issue is compounded
in the evaluation process and becomes particularly apparent when assessing comprehensibility.
Keywords: interpretability; explainable AI; evaluating interpretability
1. Introduction
People rely on data-driven technology in nearly every aspect of their daily life. Speciﬁ-
cally, decision-making systems and black-box algorithms have begun making decisions
that were previously decided purely by people. These systems and algorithms play a
signiﬁcant role in determining and directing a wide variety of real-world decisions, ranging
from applications with limited consequences to decision-making systems that affect human
rights, with performances that match or exceed that of humans. Accuracy is the leading
metric in assessing machine learning models. Nevertheless, this metric can be misleading,
as a model can achieve high accuracy by focusing on unimportant features or patterns in
the data or accidental artifacts. For example, a recent study by Ribeiro et al. [ 1] presented
a model that classiﬁes images of a husky or a wolf, in which only one misclassiﬁcation
Information 2023 ,14, 469. https://doi.org/10.3390/info14080469 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/information