Information 2023 ,14, 469 2 of 29
error was made. However, the model decided whether an image contains a wolf or a husky
based on the presence of snow in the background.
Notwithstanding, there is mistrust in the decisions made by data-driven technology
in critical domains, such as parole hearings (e.g., in 2016, prisoner Glen Rodrigues was
denied parole due to an incorrect high-risk COMPAS (Correctional Offender Management
Proﬁling for Alternative Sanctions) score [ 2]). In addition, existing metrics do not show
how the model reasons or when it will fail; for instance, adversarial examples have shown
the lack of the robustness of deep neural networks, as the system can be broken in sur-
prising ways [ 3]. Altogether, there is an urgent need to demystify black-box models and
improve their transparency and interpretability towards trustworthy and reliable machine
learning models.
Interpretability/explainability in machine learning aims to bridge this gap by justify-
ing the reasoning behind decisions made by learned models. The explanation/interpretation
term appears in multiple ﬁelds from philosophy to social science and logic, with different
deﬁnitions depending on the ﬁeld/context. In computer science, the need for interpretable
decisions was discussed in the 1980s [ 4] with the rise of expert systems and rules. In
the context of machine learning, many deﬁnitions are provided. Biran and Cotton [ 5]
stated that “systems are interpretable if their operations can be understood by a human,
either through introspection or through a produced explanation”. Miller [ 6] suggested
that interpretability is “the degree to which an observer can understand the cause of a
decision”. Doshi-Velez and Kim [ 7] deﬁned interpretability as “the ability to explain or to
provide the meaning in understandable terms to a human”. The same deﬁnition is pro-
vided in [ 8]. A more speciﬁc deﬁnition of interpretability in a machine learning framework
is [9] “the use of machine learning models for the extraction of relevant knowledge about
domain relationships contained in data”. In most of the literature, interpretability and
explainability are used interchangeably [ 6,10]; in this survey, we also use both to refer to
the same task. However, some references distinguish between them and consider that
interpretable models are explainable by default. The reverse is rarely true. Gilpin et al. [ 11]
considered interpretability as a part of explainability. Pearl [ 12,13] considered interpretabil-
ity/explainablity to be a task that cannot be handled with the level of association needed to
go further to the causal level.
When analyzing the process of providing interpretable models, four dimensions can
be identiﬁed: the stage, speciﬁcity, scope, and output (Figure 1). The ﬁrst dimension, stage,
describes when the process occurs, with two alternative stages occurring during (intrinsic)
and after (post hoc) building the model. The post hoc can be further subdivided into
model-agnostic and model-speciﬁc methods, creating a second dimension, speciﬁcity, in
which model-agnostic methods can be applied to any black-box model regardless of its
internal components, whereas model-speciﬁc methods target particular classes of models.
The third dimension, scope, determines what depth the interpretation reaches: global, for
the whole model, or local, per decision. Finally, local interpretations are either built upon
the input features feature-based or by providing examples instance-based. Instance-based
examples include prototypes, the most inﬂuential examples, or critics, which can be either
original or artiﬁcial points. Approaches can be both post hoc and global or post hoc and
local, as the relationship between these dimensions is many-to-many. Nevertheless, certain
dimensions, such as ante hoc (intrinsic) and model-agnostic, cannot overlap by deﬁnition.
It is important to be aware that certain approaches are repeated across several dimen-
sions yet have distinct meanings. For example, the importance of a feature might be global
or local. “Feature importance” in local interpretation refers to how much each input feature
contributes to the model’s prediction. In the context of global interpretation, it relates to
“what are the model’s most crucial features?” (feature weight). Then, these features are
either given or used to create a simpliﬁed model (for example rules) that closely resembles
the original one.
In recent years, the number of interpretation techniques and models has exploded.
However, according to Adadi and Berrada [ 14], these studies are mostly concerned with