Information 2023 ,14, 469 10 of 29
4.1. Interpretation as Model
In this category, the original model is approximated by a simpler proxy model
(post hoc) or the interpretation is augmented during the model building process (ante
hoc/intrinsic). The ﬁrst consideration is how well the approximation matches the original
model. Fidelity ensures that the proxy model captures the decision-making process of the
original black-box model, so the explanations are accurate and can be used to understand
the target model (Table 3 summarizes the various techniques).
TREPAN [ 22] ensures that the extracted tree accurately models the networks by
measuring the percentage of agreement between the tree and network on test-set examples.
The same procedure was followed in [ 53] by considering the black-box models as teachers,
while the student was the transparent model that mimicked the scores assigned by the
teacher. Then, how accurately the student models anticipated their teachers’ outputs was
examined on test sets. Additionally, in [ 44], the decision tree extracted from a random
forest was evaluated on a separate test set to see how well its predictions matched those
of the random forest. The test was based on the F1 score, and a close match implies
the faithfulness of the interpretation. In line with the idea of evaluating explanations on
independent test sets, Tan et al. [ 54] evaluated the selected prototypes by using them in
another model nearest-prototype classiﬁer. They interpreted tree ensembles by providing
different numbers of prototypes for each class.
Ablation studies aim to determine the effect of different components of the objective
function by removing one objective and observing the result. In [ 43], ablation studies
are used to ensure the correctness of decision sets by studying the impact of removing
different components from the objective function on the interpretability and predictive
accuracy. At each time, one objective is removed, the precision, recall, and overlap, the
predictive power and interpretability of these ablated models are quantitatively evaluated.
Additionally, in [ 55], ablation studies are used to assess the different components of their
generative model.
Table 3. Explanation correctness of models.
Ref. Metric Name Proxy Model How the Faithfulness Measured
[22] Fidelity Decision treeThe percentage of test-set examples on
which the classiﬁcation made by a tree
agrees with black-box (NN) counterpart.
[53] FidelityLinear model,
iGAMCompare the output of both black-box
with transparent models on test-sets
[44]Accuracy relative to
the complex modelDecision treeFind the match between the two models
on test-sets
[55] -Global prototypes
per classUse prototypes in nearest-prototype
classiﬁer
Self-Explaining Neural Networks (SENN) [ 76] provide an intrinsic explanation by
teaching the neural network to explain itself. To provide interpretations, the SENN model
relies on the basis concepts. Individual features in low dimensions, tissue ruggedness, or
irregularities in image processing are examples of basis concepts that are either learnt by a
network or offered by an expert. When SENN classiﬁes any instances, it assigns relevance
scores (weights) to each of the basis concepts. Consequently, in this context, ﬁdelity assesses
how closely the relevance scores correspond to truly relevant features. To address this
question, researchers analyze how deleting features affects the model’s prediction. First,
some features were removed, the decrease in the probability of the predicted class was
measured, and the prediction of the model was compared against the interpreter’s own