Information 2023 ,14, 469 3 of 29
giving novel techniques, with just a few providing assessments; only 5% of the publications
they analyzed for their XAI survey are concerned with evaluating interpretability method-
ologies. This was mirrored in the existing surveys, since they were primarily concerned
with providing and classifying ideas without evaluating them.
Interpretability Dimensions
Stage
Post hoc
Model-agnostic Model-speciﬁcAnte hocScope
Global Local
Figure 1. Interpretability dimensions.
There is an urgent need in the ML interpretability research ﬁeld to focus more on
comparing and assessing the existing explanation methods instead of continuing to create
new methods. Assessment and evaluation of interpretability is a very challenging task due
to the subjective nature of interpretability and the lack of consensus on an exact deﬁnition of
interpretability. In addition, it must be contextualized considering the application domain
and the target audience. Furthermore, the various types of approaches each have limitations
and strengths and different types of interpretation, ranging from text, images, heat maps,
and segments of the input to more formal types, such as rules and weights. Moreover,
most works codiﬁed criteria in their objective function instead of measuring their values in
the evaluation.
Evaluation is an essential part of building any effective machine learning model to
assess to what degree the model meets the claimed goal. For many years, accuracy was
the leading factor in adopting any model; however, accuracy is no longer a sufﬁcient
metric. The basic question when evaluating an interpretation is “what makes an expla-
nation adequate?” There is no consensus on the notion of interpretability, and there is a
great deal of disagreement over what constitutes a good explanation. Additionally, the
plethora of proposed explanation strategies and various types of interpretation make it
hard to agree on a single metric of evaluation. Consequently, one way is to categorize the
different evaluation methods according to their goal. A suitable method of measuring in-
terpretability should “reﬂect the capability to convey the trained model’s output behaviors
in a human understandable way” [ 15,16]. This suggests two important factors that need to
be considered:
1. Fidelity: Does the resulting explanation accurately reﬂect the computation performed
by the original model during the decision-making process? To prevent providing a
falsely convincing explanation, the reported explanation must be faithful to what is
computed. Generally, unfaithfulness is brought up in post hoc explanations. In this
survey, we group all methods that examine this factor under the heading “evaluating
correctness”. Additionally, instability is an undesirable phenomenon that undermines
our trust in the model’s decision; thus, a further subsection is introduced to examine
the robustness of the interpretation.
2. Comprehensibility: Are the generated explanations “human-understandable”? This
can be determined by designing an experiment in which human assessors judge the
understandability or by relying on the ﬁndings of prior research that have demon-
strated the understandability of a particular model, such as a rule or tree. This factor is
discussed in two subsections of this survey: human evaluators and comprehensibility.