Information 2023 ,14, 469 8 of 29
case) classiﬁes a given instance, and whether the user is able to select a subset of features
with a relevant one.
3.2. Find Alignment
In this category, the tasks were designed to evaluate how close the explanation is to
human reasoning.
Task 7: Alignment between humans and models
Are the human explanations aligned with the one provided by the model? Based on
the idea that a good model explanation should be consistent with humans’ explanation.
Model comparison is performed among LIME [ 1], DeepLIFT [ 48], and SHAP [ 21] with
human explanations. Human subjects were asked to write a short description; then,
agreement between human explanations and the explanations of the other three models
was identiﬁed [ 21]. However, the match between human and model explanations does not
imply explanation correctness, especially if all the used models are post hoc.
On the assumption that alignment implies consistency, the authors of [ 34] propose a
measure for “human accuracy” that evaluates the alignment between the labels provided
by humans for certain terms corresponding to and those produced by the model.
The most basic approach of evaluating extracted reasonings is comparing them
to human-marked reasonings. Evaluating Rationales and Simple English Reasoning
(ERASER) [ 35] is proposed as a benchmark with exhaustive annotated rationales for NLP
tasks, along with two types of metrics: exact matches and ranking metrics. The amount of
overlap between the ground truth and the extracted reasonings in an exact match case is cal-
culated using the intersection-over-union (IOU) measure, a metric derived from computer
vision that allows partial match credit assignment. In the ranking cases, marked tokens
receive higher points. Speciﬁcally, the area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC) is
calculated by moving a threshold over the token scores.
Yang et al. [ 47] refer to this task as “groundability”, which measures the alignment of
model interpretations with human interpretations.
Kim et al. [ 46] refer to this task as the “agreement task”. They sequentially provide
participants with individual prediction–explanation pairs and inquire about their level
of conﬁdence in the model’s prediction based on the explanation. This task gauges the
extent of conﬁrmation bias stemming from a speciﬁc interpretability method. Nonetheless,
it does not assess the effectiveness of explanations in discerning accurate from erroneous
predictions—an essential aspect of explanations in AI-assisted decision-making.
Task 8: Select the best explanation
Human subjects are given two different explanations from two different algorithms and
select the one that they find to be of better quality . This approach is presented in [ 7] as a binary
forced choice and is the most commonly used approach in the literature [21,26,30,36,40–42].
Task 9: Veriﬁcation
Can human subjects ﬁnd consistency between system prediction and recommended
prediction? In this task [ 32,33], the user is given observations (data instances), predictions
recommended by the model, and an explanation, and then, the user decides based on the
explanation of their agreement/disagreement with the recommendation.
Task 10: Understand internal reasoning processes
Can human subjects understand the internal reasoning process by showing the visu-
alization of the model’s intermediate outputs at each step? In this task [ 30], users were
shown the model’s intermediate outputs along with the ﬁnal prediction and then asked
to judge whether they understood the internal reasoning process or what the model was
doing at each step.
Task 11: Reconstruct target instance
Can human subjects reconstruct target instance by modifying each component of the
generative model? In this task [ 31], a user is presented with two representation values,
zand z0, along with their respective instance values, xand x0, as well as the distance
between them, d(x,x0). Additionally, they give controls (sliders for continuous dimensions,