Information 2023 ,14, 469 24 of 29
more challenging when considering the different possible forms of explanation, ranging
from features or weights to other models.
In light of the different approaches and types of explanations, deﬁning a standard for
the implementation of metrics that applies to all state-of-the-art interpretability methods
is difﬁcult at this stage, as interpretability depends on several factors. One suggested
direction for tackling the problem is contextualizing the evaluation concerning the domain,
model, and target audience. Also, there is a need for a multi-disciplinary collaboration that
includes human–computer interaction, AI–human partnership, psychology, and cognitive
science to tackle the comprehension issues.
In many situations, accuracy and interpretability represent contradictory objectives.
Thus, researchers attempt to obtain the best trade-off between them based on the user’s
requirements and the domain. The quality of interpretation is inherently tied to the
quality of the classiﬁer. Consequently, when evaluating interpretability by comparing
the interpretation with the ground truth, it is essential to consider both the quality of the
interpretation and the underlying classiﬁer, as any errors can potentially propagate through
the system. However, in our analysis of reviewed papers, we observed that none of the
works accounted for this potential vulnerability or quantiﬁed the impact of data or classiﬁer
mistakes on the resulting interpretations.
The use of human-based evaluation methodologies presents certain limitations, includ-
ing the presence of biases and fatigue. Furthermore, humans may struggle to objectively
compare two models once they have gained an understanding of the model or instance, as
it is difﬁcult for them to forget and repeat the experiment. In such cases, a well-designed
task that encompasses all relevant factors can be advantageous. Conversely, computational
metrics provide a more objective approach to evaluating interpretations. Although mea-
suring correctness or ﬁdelity can typically be achieved by observing a drop in probability
when removing important features, the correlation between features remains an open issue.
Establishing a dataset for comparing model-agnostic approaches could prove to be useful.
Moreover, applying model-agnostic approaches to explain transparent models could help
uncover situations where they fail.
Correctness (ﬁdelity), comprehensibility, and robustness are the most studied criteria
in the literature; however, there are other criteria, such as scalability, which refers to the
ability of the post hoc interpretable model to be scaled to other models (as being agnostic),
and generality, which implies that the model does not need special training regimes or
architecture. These are less important than the previously considered ones.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.A., M.E.B.M. and I.A.; Writing—original draft, N.A.;
Writing—review & editing, N.A., M.E.B.M. and I.A.; Supervision, M.E.B.M., H.M. and I.A. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The authors would like to thank the Deanship of Scientiﬁc Research (DSR) in King Saud
University for funding and supporting this research through the initiative of DSR Graduate Students
Research Support (GSR).
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Tulio Ribeiro, M.; Singh, S.; Guestrin, C. “Why should i trust you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer. In Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 13–17
August 2016; pp. 1135–1144.
2. Jiao, J. The Pandora’s Box of the Criminal Justice System. 2017. Available online: https://dukeundergraduatelawmagazine.org/
2017/09/25/the-pandoras-box-of-the-criminal-justice-system/ (accessed on 18 August 2023).
3. Goodfellow, I.J.; Shlens, J.; Szegedy, C. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. arXiv 2014 , arXiv:1412.6572.
4. Michie, D. Machine learning in the next ﬁve years. In Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference on European Working Session
on Learning, Glasgow, UK, 3–5 October 1988; Pitman Publishing, Inc.: Lanham, MD, USA, 1988; pp. 107–122.