Information 2023 ,14, 469 23 of 29
The stability of rule-based approaches extracted by model-agnostic explainers [ 106]
was evaluated by ﬁnding the similarity between the resulting rules over independent runs
using the Jaccard coefﬁcient:
J(X,Y) =jX\Yj
jX[Yj, (21)
where Xand Yare two given sets of features that are included in the rules from two runs.
The Jaccard coefﬁcient calculates the similarity [ 120] by comparing the common and distinct
features in the two sets. The output value ranges from 0 to 1, where a higher coefﬁcient is
an indication of a high similarity of rules over the two runs.
To evaluate the attribution robustness in [ 121], two metrics were used: Kendall’s
tau rank order correlation and top- kintersection. Utilizing the feature rank provided by
the attribution method, the rank correlation was used to compare interpretations’ sim-
ilarities. The size of the kmost important feature intersection is computed before and
after perturbation.
Dai et al. [ 75] measure stability by adding noise to a random point xto produce similar
points, ﬁnding explanations for these similar points, and then calculating the average L1
distance between x0sexplanation and the explanations of the similar points. They also make
a distinction between stability and consistency. Stability means that similar points have the
same explanations, while consistency means that for a single point, the explanation should
be the same when calculated multiple times.
Discussion
Fragility/instability is an emerging problem in interpretable machine learning that
vastly affects trust, pushing us to increase the robustness of model interpretations through
regularization terms and metrics. Robustness in the interpretation methods does not im-
ply their correctness, but instability would make the interpretations untrusted. The role
of robustness in human alignment is conﬁrmed in [ 121], as they found that the attribu-
tions produced by regularized models are much more aligned with human perceptions,
which agrees with prior studies that found that robust models align better with human
perception [ 122]. Additionally, adversarial robustness represents a prospective direction
to improve learned representations [ 123]. Another important result relates sensitivity to
ﬁdelity, as lowering the sensitivity of the explanation was found to increase its ﬁdelity and,
hence, its correctness [ 66]. These results all emphasize the importance of robustness in
interpretable models.
Melis and Jaakkola [ 76] noted instability even in situations where the underlying
model remains stable. This occurrence casts doubt upon the reliability of such explana-
tions [83].
7. Conclusions
For a long time, predictive accuracy was the dominant evaluation criterion in machine
learning; however, it is no longer sufﬁcient to comply with other requirements of models,
such as interpretability. Thus, there has been a surge in proposed methods that provide
interpretable predictions. Despite this signiﬁcant progress in methods, there is a lack of
quantitative evaluation criteria, which makes it difﬁcult for practitioners to know when to
use each explanation method.
This survey presented a review of the evaluation methods proposed in the literature
to assess the interpretability of machine learning models. Followers of the literature will
see that the discipline has shifted from subjective assessments such as “you’ll know it
when you see it” to a more objective and methodical approach. However, the literature
analysis led to the conclusion that there is a lack of agreement on what constitutes a
comprehensible or understandable explanation. Despite the different proposed approaches
and proxy measures, such as complexity, the question of what makes the explanation
comprehensible is still unanswered, and it remains an open problem. The question becomes