Information 2023 ,14, 469 4 of 29
Existing surveys on interpretable machine learning, such as [ 5,8,14,17], primarily
concentrate on presenting and categorizing various proposed approaches. However, they
often do not extensively discuss the assessments of these approaches. While some surveys
include a section on evaluation aspects, they may not be comprehensive [ 18]. Additionally,
certain surveys speciﬁcally center on the evaluation of causal interpretability, like the
work by Moraffah et al. [ 19]. To address this gap, our survey primarily emphasizes the
evaluation of feature-based methods. These methods, recognized for their simplicity
and intuitiveness, have been extensively studied and benchmarked among the various
approaches for providing interpretations [20].
This survey categorizes the literature on evaluating interpretability into qualitative
and quantitative evaluations (Figure 2), with the former relying on humans and the latter
employing computational metrics to evaluate correctness (ﬁdelity), comprehensibility
(providing the interpretation in human-understandable terms), and robustness (stability).
It provides insights into the existing interpretability evaluation methods to understand
each method’s suitable scenario.
Methods to Evaluate Interpretability
Human-based (qualitative)
Access the classiﬁer Find-alignmentComputational-based (quantitative)
Correctness Comprehensibility Stability
Figure 2. Methods to evaluate interpretability.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The background section covers the
fundamental concept in the domain required to go through in the paper. The qualitative
evaluation section (human-based) reviews human-subject studies to assess interpretability.
The quantitative evaluation section reviews existing computational methods and is sepa-
rated into three subsections: ﬁdelity, comprehensibility, and stability. Finally, a discussion
of the ﬁndings and conclusions is presented.
2. Background
When studying the interpretability of predictive models, we may choose to consider a
set of dimensions which determine the model’s interpretability.
2.1. Interpretability as Stages: Post Hoc vs. Ante Hoc
Explaining a machine learning model can be achieved by either adopting a transparent
model (using an inherently interpretable model such as a decision tree or injecting the
interpretation with the learning process to enable the model to generate explanations in
the process of decision making) (intrinsic or ante hoc) or by interpreting the model after its
completion process (post hoc) [ 8]. The post hoc requires extra modeling effort. Its main
advantage is the preservation of accuracy, and it can be used with already-existing models.
In intrinsically interpretable models, in some cases, the interpretability comes at the cost
of accuracy.
Post Hoc Interpretability
Post hoc interpretability has two main categories: model-agnostic and model-speciﬁc.
Agnostic approaches are not tied to any particular type of black-boxes nor do they require
the original data to provide their explanation. Usually, model-agnostic approaches utilize
reverse engineering to acquire the approximation of the original model as they are only able
to observe the input and output of the black-box model. Thus, the black-box is queried with
a test dataset in order to create an oracle dataset to train the explainer and operate on data
level only without accessing the inner details of the model. Model-agnostic interpretability