Information 2023 ,14, 469 11 of 29
prediction of relevance. After that, the correlation of these probabilities decreases and the
relevance scores on various points were computed, and the aggregate statistics were shown.
Global ﬁdelity is not always attainable. Hence, proxy model local ﬁdelity has been
introduced in LIME [ 1], where ﬁdelity corresponds to the model behavior with respect to
the instance being explained. Global ﬁdelity implies local ﬁdelity, but local ﬁdelity does
not entail global ﬁdelity. LIME approximates the model locally using a simpler model and
relies on qualitative evaluation; LIME only codiﬁes ﬁdelity but never quantiﬁes it.
4.2. Interpretation as Feature-Attribution (Saliency/Heat-Maps)
Interpretation can be provided in terms of the most contributed/important features
for a given decision. Across a variety of ﬁelds, feature importance was by far the most
used and studied interpretability approach [ 20]. Often, it is referred to as feature-level
interpretation, feature attribution, feature contribution, or saliency map. Depending on the
input, important features might be coefﬁcient weights, saliency maps that assign a weight
to each pixel based on its importance, or the most signiﬁcant words in natural language
processing (NLP).
This method’s ﬂaw is that it provides interpretations in input terms, which usually
seem persuasive but are not always accurate. For instance, saliency methods highlight the
pixels that best represent the real class in the image. They primarily determine where the
classiﬁer “looks” to produce a prediction. They are popular in explaining the prediction
of deep neural networks on images. As revealed by sanity checks [ 56], depending solely
on visual assessment might be deceiving. Sanity checks [ 56] evaluate the adequacy of
explanation approaches based on the concept of a statistical randomization test, which com-
pares a natural experiment against an artiﬁcially randomized experiment. Two randomized
tests were investigated: a model parameter randomization test and a data randomization
test. The ﬁrst test is a model parameter randomization test, where the output of a saliency
method performed on a trained model is compared with the output of the same model
architecture with random weights. If the saliency method relies on the model’s parameters,
then the output of the two cases should be different. While the similarity of the outputs
indicates the insensitivity of the saliency map to the model parameters, saliency is not
useful in understanding the model’s behavior. The second test is a data randomization test,
where the saliency method performed on a base model is compared with the output of the
same model trained with randomly permuted labels. If the saliency method relies on the
data labels, the output of the two cases should be different. The insensitivity indicates that
the method does not depend on the relationship between the instances being explained and
their class labels. However, some tested methods fail the proposed tests and are invariant
to either network reparameterizations or label perturbations. Thus, the failed methods are
inadequate for some tasks, such as model debugging.
Evaluating the saliency map correctness had to ensure that the highlighted pixels are
the actual pixels used during classiﬁcation (relevancy of the heat map). The quality of the
saliency map depends on the quality of both the algorithm used to compute it and the
classiﬁer’s performance. Thus, it is very difﬁcult to deﬁne objective criteria.
Many approaches suggested in the literature include removal-based and ground-truth
approaches. In the removal-based approach, input variables that are highly important for
the prediction are perturbed or masked to determine whether this causes a decline in the
prediction score or in the expected difference between input explanations when applying
perturbations to the output (see Table 4). In the ground truth approach, the areas located
on saliency maps are compared to annotated data.