Information 2023 ,14, 469 9 of 29
radio buttons for discrete dimensions) that let the user to alter each component of z. This
quantiﬁes the human interpretability of generative model representations and is referred to
as “interactive reconstruction”.
3.3. Discussion
Qualitative evaluation is useful for providing insight into how humans react and for
understanding the interpretation/explanation provided by the model. Lakkaraju et al. [ 43]
utilized human users because they believe that “there can be no better judges than humans
to evaluate this notion of interpretability”. However, many factors can inﬂuence the results
of human experiments, such as human fatigue, inadmissible practice sessions, and human
background. Furthermore, studies have shown that humans trust and are satisﬁed with
a model’s explanation if it matches their expectations and their point of view. Therefore,
relying on human trust as an evaluation metric is a source of bias, as such a metric rewards
the alignment and similarity instead of faithfulness and correctness [ 49]. Also, providing
explanations increases human trust regardless of its correctness, Kim et al. [ 46] found
that providing explanations makes participants more likely to believe that the model
predictions are correct. For example, 60% of their participants found the explanations for
incorrect model predictions convincing, which aligns with the observations of Poursabzi-
Sangdeh et al. [50].
Herman [ 49] states that considering cognitive attributes and user expectations as
indicators for user trust and understanding introduces bias, causing implicit human cog-
nitive bias. Finally, as demonstrated in [ 51], a model may provide plausible but poorly
faithful explanations.
An important consideration with human-based tasks is to ensure that participants rely
on the provided explanations rather than their existing knowledge to complete the task.
This phenomenon is often referred to as the “effect of human prior knowledge”. To mitigate
this effect, Kim et al. [ 46] adopted several measures, including selecting non-common
contexts that are not readily known by non-experts and omitting semantic class labels.
Also all the reviewed papers have one common aspect: human-based evaluations are
consistently conducted on relatively small sample sizes. The largest of these studies was
undertaken by Kim et al. [46], involving 1000 participants.
4. Computational Metric: Correctness with Respect to the Original
Model/Faithfulness/Fidelity
One of the most important criteria in assessing an interpretation is its correctness with
respect to a black-box model (the model being explained). Correctness, often referred to as
faithfulness or ﬁdelity, assesses “the ability of the explanations to reﬂect the behavior of
the prediction model” [ 52]. Depending on the nature of explanation, many approaches are
employed to determine ﬁdelity (see Table 2).
Table 2. Explanation correctness approaches.
References Validation Approach Explanation Type
[22,44,53,54] Separate test-set Global models (post hoc)
[43,55] Ablation studies Global models (intrinsic)
[34,40,41,48,56–71] Removal-approachAll feature attribution
approaches
[35,55,61,72–75]Compare interpretation
with ground-truthAll types when data are
available