Information 2023 ,14, 469 18 of 29
indicator of success in identifying important features. However, it becomes challenging to
disentangle whether the decrease in probability is due to successfully specifying important
features or due to the production of instances outside the data distribution.
To mitigate distribution shifts, one suggested approach is to retrain the model using
perturbed instances. Nevertheless, this solution is computationally expensive and may
lead to slight variations in the resulting models.
Saliency methods, despite their visual appeal, have been found to possess signiﬁ-
cant vulnerabilities that can lead to misleading attributions, thereby undermining their
reliability [ 90]. A theoretical explanation [ 91] reveals that some backpropagation-based
approaches, namely, guided backpropagation and deconvolutional networks, were per-
forming (partial) image recovery that has nothing to do with the network decisions, which
is the reason for their compelling visualizations. It is important to note that while some
approaches may fulﬁll speciﬁc metrics, they can still fail in other critical aspects. For
instance, integrated gradients [ 65] may satisfy completeness but fail when subjected to a
simple sanity check [ 56]. This highlights the potential pitfalls of solely relying on visual
assessments and emphasizes the urgent need for reliable evaluation approaches.
The process of evaluating feature attribution methods is difﬁcult due to the lack of
ground truth, which attracts some researchers to prepare datasets with explanations to
compare with. However, the alignment between the generated explanation and the ground
truth cannot be more different than the reliance on the human assessment unless the ground
truth explanation is embedded within the learning process or employed in a way other
than comparing the results.
5. Computational Metrics: Comprehensibility
Comprehensibility refers to “how easily we can inspect and understand a model
constructed by the learning system” [ 23]. Michalski [ 92] conﬁrmed the importance of
comprehensibility and stated that the results should be semantically and structurally
similar to those a human expert might produce by observing the same entities, where the
components should be comprehensible and directly interpretable in natural language.
Measuring comprehensibility should be contextualized, and the interpretation must
be relevant considering a particular audience in a chosen domain [ 9]. Additionally, com-
prehensibility is model-dependent and varies from one model to another; hence, in this
section, it will be categorized according to the explanation.
Comprehensibility was previously explored in symbolic AI and fuzzy logic, which
has been reﬂected in the well-established evaluation framework of comprehensibility for
each of the rules and trees. Other formats, such as heat maps (salient maps) and prototypes,
is still ill-deﬁned.
5.1. Rules/Decision Trees
Generally, trees are considered to be naturally interpretable due to their graphical
structure and the fact that they only contain a subset of attributes, which narrows the
analysis to the most relevant attributes. Furthermore, the tree’s hierarchical structure
provides information about the attribute’s importance, as the most important attributes are
closer to the root [93].
In the context of rule-based approaches, complexity is mainly related to many factors,
including the number of rules, number of terms, number of conditions, etc., and there is no
standard measure to evaluate the complexity of rules [ 15]. Nevertheless, there is agreement
upon the following factors/proxies for the interpretability of rules [94–97]:
Complexity of the rules:
1. The number of rules should be as small as possible, since according to Occam’s
razor principle, “the best model is the simplest one ﬁtting the system behavior well”.
Additionally, rule weights or degrees of plausibility should be avoided.
2. For the number of conditions, the rule antecedent should contain only a few conditions
limited by 72 distinct conditions.