Information 2023 ,14, 469 5 of 29
becomes the only choice when we try to explain proprietary models and also discover the
pattern in the model’s behavior. Model-agnostic approaches vary from simple, such as
partial dependency plot PDP , to complex, such as SHAP [ 21], which is a game-theoretic
technique based on Shapley values. Model-speciﬁc approaches, on the other hand, consider
input, output, and the inner-workings of the model. So, they are tied to a particular type of
black-box and cannot be generalized to other types.
2.2. Interpretability by Scope
In global interpretability, the model is completely interpretable, and we can understand
the model’s logic and the reasoning behind different possible outcomes. TERPAN [ 22,23] is
an example of global interpretation that ﬁts a black-box into a simpler model.
In local interpretability, the interpretation does not explain the whole model’s behavior
but instead it is provided per decision. Many approaches provide local interpretation, either
by locally approximating the complex model around the point of interest or by providing
the most important features in different forms (heat maps for images [ 24,25], weight of
features [ 1], etc.). For example, a perturbation-based approach queries the model with
perturbed versions around the point of interest to approximate the model locally; Local
Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME) [1] is an example of this approach.
The saliency/heat maps are another form of local explanation to explain the pre-
diction of neural networks. They present the explanation visually by highlighting the
most inﬂuential parts in the input. The salient regions could be identiﬁed by deleting
or “perturbing” different regions, then observing how the prediction changes [ 26]. The
network is repeatedly tested to produce a heat-map that highlights the most inﬂuential
parts of the data [ 27]. A saliency map can be computed directly using the input gradient;
it gives importance weights to pixels based on ﬁrst-order derivatives [ 28]. As the deriva-
tives can miss important aspects of the information that ﬂows through a network, other
enhanced approaches have been proposed, such as class activation mapping (CAM) [ 24]
and gradient-weighted class activation mapping (Grad-CAM) [ 25]. These maps are useful
to give insight on the most inﬂuential parts, or where the network is looking. However,
they are restricted to neural networks (mostly CNN), and some times they are scattered
and need to be interpreted.
These dimensions may overlap as one model can be post hoc and either local or
global. Some examples include LIME [ 1], which is local, post hoc, and model-agnostic, and
GoldenEye [ 29], which is global, post hoc, and model-agnostic. However, no overlap can
be found between intrinsic and agnostic models.
Another rarely mentioned dimension is the output type, which is the dimension with
the least overlap. Regardless of whether the interpretation is local or global, it may be
expressed in terms of features such as the weight of the most affected feature or salience fea-
tures, another instance to explain the prediction (prototype, critic, counterfactual, inﬂuential
training example), or another model (simpler model). The feature-based interpretation is
provided as the attribution of each feature, or, in other words, a ranking of which features
mattered most to the model in making a prediction for the given instance or for the whole
model. The attribution can be found either by perturbing input instances around the
point of interest, then approximating the decision boundary of the original model using
perturbation-based methods, or by calculating the partial derivative of the target with
respect to every input feature using gradient-based methods. In the instance-based inter-
pretation, it is provided as an example that could be prototype, critic, or counterfactual. In
the ﬁrst one, the prototype interpretation provides representative points for the class, while
inﬂuential examples are provided by looking at the training examples and ﬁnding the most
inﬂuential one to model prediction for the point of interest. Meanwhile, the counterfactual
interpretation provides the required change for the point of interest to ﬂip the prediction.