Information 2023 ,14, 469 7 of 29
Task 3: Identify classiﬁer irregularities
Can human subjects identify and describe classiﬁer irregularities based on the ex-
planation only (insights)? During training, the artifacts in the data lead to undesirable
correlations. Therefore, can explanations reveal this correlation? To answer this question, a
logistic regression classiﬁer is trained to distinguish between photos of wolves and huskies
based on snow in the background [ 1]. The experiment starts by showing test predictions
that are all correct except one, without explanation to an expert. Then, the expert is asked
questions (Do you trust the algorithm? Why? How do you think this algorithm distin-
guishes between images?). After that, an explanation is shown, and the same questions
are repeated. By comparing the answers before and after explanations, more than 30%
answered yes to “do you trust the classiﬁer?”, and less than 50% noticed the snow in the
background. After presenting the explanation, all experts obtained the correct insight, and
the trust decreased.
Task 4: Forward Simulation
Can human subjects correctly predict outcomes based on explanations only “for-
ward simulation/prediction”? Doshi-Velez and Kim [ 7] suggested “forward simula-
tion/prediction” as an evaluation approach of interpretable models. In this approach,
both an explanation and input are presented, and the user is asked to predict the model’s
output, i.e., the user is asked to simulate the model’s behavior based on the explanation. For-
ward simulation is used frequently in assessing interpretability, as in [ 36], where the users
were asked to predict the classiﬁer behavior on a random set with binary forced choice.
A short survey is presented to users with backgrounds in machine learning to make
predictions on given instances in [ 37]. The mean response time is used to estimate in-
terpretability in [ 38] after the user is provided with a list of feature values along with a
graphical depiction of the explanation, and then the user is asked to make a prediction. An
important ﬁnding is that using the same users across all experiments substantially reduced
response time, which is one of the most vital shortcomings of using humans to compare
among different models.
A simulation was also used in [ 30,39] to evaluate how well the user understood the
model process.
An empirical study of the complexity factors most affecting human simulatability is
presented in [ 32]. This study was conducted by varying three types of complexity model
sizes, cognitive chunks, and repeated terms. Three metrics were considered to measure the
effect response time, accuracy, and subjective difﬁculty. The simulation task was studied by
varying the number of cognitive chunks between 1, 3, and 5. Unsurprisingly, increasing
the complexity results in longer response times, especially for cognitive chunks, while the
other two metrics were less clear with varying cognitive chunks.
Task 5: Counterfactual
Can human subjects determine if the correctness of a prediction would change if some
of the features in the input example were changed? In this task [ 32], the users were asked
to change features in the input data, which led to a change in the model’s prediction. This
task aims to determine whether the users are able to detect how to change the prediction
by making small changes in the input.
Task 6: Describe the class characteristics
Can human subjects describe all the characteristics of a class based on the explanation?
To determine the human ability to understand the decision boundaries of the classes in the
data along with the classes’ patterns, this task [ 43] was carried out in two stages: descriptive
questions and multiple choice questions. In the ﬁrst stage, the users were asked to explain
in plain text all the characteristics of a particular class based on the explained model (the
presented rules). In the second stage, the users were asked “true” or “false” questions to
decide if the information provided was sufﬁcient to conclude a particular class.
The same approach was followed to assess the human understandability of an ex-
tracted tree [ 44] by asking the user to determine how the interpretable model (tree in their