Information 2023 ,14, 469 17 of 29
metric, Reasoning Graph Similarity, is a more ﬂexible measure that compares the predicted
and golden reasoning graphs using the graph edit distance function. This function utilizes
insertion, deletion, and substitution as elementary graph edit operators for nodes and
edges. However, computing the graph edit distance can be computationally expensive due
to its NP-complete nature, so an approximation of this value is computed to mitigate the
computational burden.
Dai et al. [ 83] employ the linear weight of logistic regression as a ground truth for
explanation, which is suitable only for inherently interpretable machine learning models
that explicitly encode feature weights. They quantify ﬁdelity by measuring the intersection
between the top kimportant features predicted by the model and those provided by the
explanation for the same k.
Table 5. Datasets used to compare with (ground-truth).
Ref. Metric Data
[72] Outside–inside relevance ratio PASCAL VOC2007 [84]
[61] Outside–inside relevance ratioA subset from imageNet dataset with segmentation
masks, and some images from the Pascal VOC
[55,73] Normalized cross correlationComputed to compare with disease effect maps in
ADNI dataset [85]
[80]Phrase/word correlation
Segment AUCSentiment analysis: SST dataset [86]
Image classiﬁcation: MS COCO dataset [87]
[74] Explanation accuracy Synthetic datasets
[35]Comprehensiveness and
sufﬁciencyERASER: A Benchmark to Evaluate Rationalized
NLP Models [35]
[82]Reasoning Graph Accuracy
Reasoning Graph SimilaritySTREET: Structured Reasoning and Explanation
Multi-Task benchmark [82]
4.3. Discussion
Before approving any explanation approach, ensuring the correctness or ﬁdelity of the
explanations is of utmost importance. Otherwise, the provided explanations may mislead
users, leading to erroneous or unfounded decisions. A more concerning scenario arises
when explanations are optimized to conceal biased or undesirable properties within the
model. Slack et al. [ 88] demonstrated the ability to deceive post hoc perturbation-based
approaches using a scaffolding classiﬁer designed to identify out-of-distribution (OOD)
instances. This highlights the potential dangers of misleading or manipulated explanations.
Shamsabadi et al. [ 89] coined the term ’fairwashing’ to describe the phenomenon where
model explanation methods are manipulated to rationalize decisions made by an unfair
black-box model using deceptive surrogate models. They also introduce a fairwashing
detector that employs Kullback–Leibler divergence for detection.
Perturbation-based approaches aim to attribute the inﬂuence of individual features
in achieving a speciﬁc prediction by modifying features within the instance of interest
and observing the corresponding decrease in classiﬁer probability. However, instances
generated using such perturbations have the potential to deviate from the underlying data
manifold. This characteristic is exploited by the scaffolding classiﬁer, which examines
each instance and behaves like the original classiﬁer if the perturbation is within the data
manifold. However, if the perturbation lies outside the manifold, the scaffolding classiﬁer
exhibits arbitrary behavior.
The out-of-distribution (OOD) problem extends to evaluation approaches. In these
evaluations, a decrease in the area under the curve (AUC) probability is utilized as an