Information 2023 ,14, 469 21 of 29
an explanation with low effective complexity both simple and broad, as the low value
implies the ability to ignore some of the features even though they do have an effect
(reduced cognitive salience) due to the small effect.
Dai et al. [ 75] measure sparsity by counting the number of features with an attributed
importance with respect to a threshold.
Another related term in the context of NLP models is plausibility, which refers to
how convincing the interpretation is to a human [ 110]. Plausibility does not imply faith-
fulness [ 51]. Commonly, plausibility is measured by the degree to which the model’s
highlights resemble gold-annotated human highlights [111].
5.3. Discussion
Measuring comprehensibility is problematic, and even ﬁnding a suitable proxy is
not direct. A common proxy is the model size. Feldman [ 112] relates the difﬁculty in
the domain of Boolean concepts to the complexity measured by the length of the shortest
propositional formula, which is aligned with the assumption that the smaller the model
is, the more comprehensible it is, and has been used in the literature as the number of
rules and length of trees. However, a smaller size was sometimes provided at the cost of a
less accurate or less informative model, as in the medical domain, in which experts prefer
larger trees over shorter trees, favoring more informative attributes to support medical
decisions [ 113]. Additionally, in an experiment with 100 nonexperts, the participants
evaluated the larger model as understandable due to their ability to provide classiﬁcation-
relevant information [ 114]. Moreover, there is an old trade-off between the accuracy and
comprehensibility/complexity of a model, which has been discussed extensively in the
literature, as in the minimum description length principle [115] and Occam’s razor [116].
Another proxy is cognitive chunks. Miller [ 117] stated that humans can hold 72items
in their working memory at the same time; thus, explanations should consider this capacity
limit. Additionally , adding intermediate terms instead of a conjunction could facilitate the task.
The comprehensibility of salient maps and prototypes is ill-deﬁned, demanding more
effort/attention in deﬁning and evaluating the complexity and understandability of such
forms, as the ﬁle size and such proxies are not sufﬁcient proxies for comprehensibility.
Human studies could play an important role in this criterion, and importing metrics from
social studies could be helpful, as previously observed, with cognitive chucks limited
to 5–9.
6. Computational Metric: Stability/Robustness
Interpretability aims to increase the trust in ML models by providing an explanation
of why models make a certain decision, and for interpretations to be trustworthy, they
should be reliable. The fragility/instability of interpretation limits trust and presents a
security concern. Stability implies that similar instances with the same label should have
similar explanations; slight variations of an instance that did not change the predicted
class should not substantially change the explanation. High stability is always desirable.
Fragility occurs when applying imperceptible perturbations to the input does not change
the prediction of the model but substantially manipulates explanations.
Ghorbani et al. [ 118] deﬁne the fragility of neural network interpretation in the context
of images and suggest that “for a given image, it is possible to generate a perceptively
indistinguishable image that has the same prediction label by the neural network, yet is
given a substantially different interpretation”.
Additionally, Kindermans et al. [ 90] introduce axiom input invariance, which ensures
the interpretation reliability of the input’s contribution to model prediction. Then, they
showed that most saliency methods are not invariant under simple transformations, such
as constant shifts. To understand the instability phenomena in neural networks, Goodfel-
low et al. [ 3] provided insight into why interpretation is fragile, as the decision boundaries
of neural networks are roughly piecewise linear with many transitions. According to Ghor-
bani et al. [ 118], the interpretation of instances near transitions is more fragile. They also