3
TABLE 2
A List Of Key Acronyms
NOMENCLATURE
Full Form Abbreviation Full Form Abbreviation
Artiﬁcial Intelligence AI Few-Shot Learning FSL
Deep Learning DL Machine Learning ML
Zero-Shot Learning ZSL One-Shot Learning OSL
Neural Architecture Search NAS Conventional Neural Network CNN
K-NearestNeighbor KNN Support Vector Machine SVM
Nearestcentroid Classiﬁer NCC Graph Few-Shot learning GFL
Variational Auto Encoders VAE Few-Shot Object Detection FSOD
Long Short-Term Memory LSTM Data Augmentation DA
Few-Shot Cross-Domain FSCD Contrast Learning CL
 Perspective of Challenges
 Few-shot Learning Inaccurate data distribution 
 assessment
 Data Augmentation:  To Evaluate 
 The True Data Distribution With 
 Maximum Probability
 Feature Reuse Sensitivity
 Transfer Learning:  Builds Data-
 To-Label Mappings For Specific 
 Problems
 Generality of future tasks
 Meta-learning:  Derive Task-To-
 Target Model Mappings Out Of 
 Specific Problems
 Defects of single-modal 
 information
 Multimodal Learning:  
 Complementary Learning Of 
 Small Samples With Limited 
 Information
 Future Direction
 Optimized few-shot 
 learning benchmark 
 dataset Using only few sample to 
 evaluate the real data 
 distribution  Improve robustness of 
 data-to-label mapping  Learn more effectively 
 from historical tasks  How to use modal info 
 more effectively Meta Learning Learning model parameters
 Learning Metrics
 Learning Transmit 
 Information
 Multimodal Learning Multimodal embedding Data Augmentation Hand-Crafted Rules
 Learn Data Processing
 Transfer Learning Pretrain and Fine-tuning
 Cross-domain
 Generate semantic 
 information based on 
 pixels Computer Vision 
 Applications Few-shot image 
 classification
 Few-shot object 
 detection
 Few-shot semantic 
 segmentation
 Few-shot instance 
 segmentation Overview (Q&A) What Is Few-shot Learning?
 What Is Machine Learning 
 And How It Is Different 
 From Few-Shot Learning?
 What Is Meta-Learning and 
 How It Is Different From 
 Few-shot Learning?
 What Is Transfer Learning 
 and How It Is Different 
 From Few-shot Learning?
Fig. 1. The conceptual map of the survey.
We investigate an adequate number of papers in
recent three years and summarize the main achieve-
ments of FSL in the ﬁeld of computer vision, includ-
ing image classiﬁcation, object detection, semantic
segmentation, and instance segmentation.
With these challenges mentioned at the end of the
survey, combined with practical applications, we
delve into the current challenges of FSL and explore
how to ﬁnd breakthrough points in each branch to
jointly drive the research of FSL towards a more
practical direction.
We provide unique insights into the evolution of FSL
and identify several future directions and potential
research opportunities concerning each challenge.2 C ONCEPTS AND PRELIMINARIES
As a branch of machine learning (ML), FSL is still a young
ﬁeld. What is FSL, and how does it relate to machine
learning, transfer learning, and meta-learning? What are
the variants of FSL that currently exist? What benchmark
datasets frequently appear in research papers? In this sec-
tion, we will address the obstacles to FSL for readers by
answering these questions.
2.1 What Is Few-Shot Learning?
The concept of FSL is inspired by the robust reasoning and
analytical capabilities of humans, and it is widely found
in edge computing scenarios. In 2020, Wang et al. [5] give
a detailed deﬁnition of FSL through experience, task, and