5
of FSL related research papers has increased linearly almost
every year. In the past 2020, the number of relevant papers
has reached as high as 239, and the number of citations has
reached 2731 times, accordingly. Fig. 3 provides a knowl-
edge map covering the hot research topics and cutting-edge
developments in the ﬁeld of FSL in recent years, including
but not limited to zero-shot learning, one-shot learning,
transfer learning, multi-task learning, and meta-learning.
FSL related tasks include feature representation, visual-
ization, robotics and cross-domain transfer. Among them,
domain adaptation is a widely utilized method for few-shot
cross-domain learning. Computer vision with predominant
green color is the most active research ﬁeld, including image
classiﬁcation, object detection, semantic segmentation, and
instance segmentation.
Fig. 2. The number of FSL-related papers published in prestigious
journals from 2010 to the ﬁrst half of 2021, excluding citations.
sensorsrobustnessrepresentation learningmeta-learning
image reconstructionhuman-designed attributes
face recognitioneducation
associative memory
semantic segmentationpredictive models
online learningmeasurement
gallium nitridedynamic time warping
convolutioncnnattribute learning
attention
adversarial learningzero-shotsupervised learningsemantic representation
multi-task learning
image segmentationtransductive learningconvolutional neural network (one-shot
memory
zero-shot classification
siamese networkobject detectionlearning (artificial intellige
domain adaptation
correlationactive learning
zero shot learning
prototypesencoding
convolutional neural networkslibrary instruction
convolutional neural networkclassificationimage recognition
few-shot learninginformation literacy
zero-shot learning (zsl)
computer visiongeneralized zero-shot learningreinforcement learning
object recognition
gesture recognitionlearning
visualizationmachine learningtransfer learning
neural networks
semanticstrainingone-shot learningzero-shot learning
VOSviewer
Fig. 3. The knowledge graph uses Few-shot learning, One-shot learning
and Zero-shot learning as keywords to relate the main advances and
research directions in the ﬁeld of Few-shot learning in recent three
years.
The most signiﬁcant difference between FSL and tra-
ditional machine learning is that the set of classes of the
support set and the query set are disjoint. In machine
learning, the classes of the test set are included in the
training set in advance. FSL combines the limited supervi-
sion information with prior knowledge to train the model.
The input of the model is generally given in the form of
tasks. Through continuously collecting tasks, the model canrecognize the similarities and differences between data as
well as task. When the model encounters an unseen task,
knowledge transfer can be accomplished quickly with just
a few iterative training steps with appropriate initializa-
tion parameters. In contrast, traditional machine learning
requires optimization through the loss function generated
by a large scale data sets in the model. In conclusion, FSL
is only a very young branch of machine learning, which
mainly addresses the issue of difﬁcult access to quality data
sets in machine learning scenarios.
2.3 What Is Transfer Learning and How It Is Different
From Few-shot Learning?
Traditional transfer learning involves applying knowledge
learned in the source domain to a different but related target
domain. In FSL, the limited amount of training data, domain
variations, and task modiﬁcations are the key factors that
cause the model to fail to transfer well from the source
domain to the target domain. For instance, a medical image
dataset with low similarity to the natural image dataset
imagenet is difﬁcult to identify accurately without the help
of relevant expertise, even for a human-guided by only a
few images. Certainly, it is also effective when the source
domain and target domain are relative similar. The end in
FSL tasks, if the prior knowledge is obtained from other
tasks or domains by pre-training, FSL can belong to transfer
learning, which mainly learns the mapping of data to labels.
According to the taxonomy of transfer learning, there are
many variants of FSL problems, including one-shot learning
(OSL), zero-shot learning (ZSL), and cross-domain few-shot
learning.
One-shot learning : OSL has only one correct
label for each sample in the support data set, which
aims to ﬁnd the most similar class as a match among
the seen-classes. During the police interrogation,
these two processes are incredibly similar. The wit-
ness just looked once at the suspect, and the photos
given by the police can be regarded as the query
image. The witness only needs to answer ’yes’ or ’no’
towards those photos. Similarly, one-shot learning
does not classify the data speciﬁcally, but simply
makes a cluster in order of similarity function. Ac-
cording to the existing work, one-shot learning can
be divided into two main approaches. One is to use
generative models to caste prior knowledge [13], [14],
[15], where bayesian programming learning [16] is
the most representative framework [17] in this ﬁeld.
Another method is to convert a OSL classiﬁcation
task into a veriﬁcation task [18], [19].
Zero-shot learning : ZSL was ﬁrst proposed by
Lampert et al. [20], which considers a more extreme
case in FSL. In the absence of any query samples,
the inference mechanism is solely relied on to iden-
tify samples that have not been seen before. ZSL
is essentially done by using high-dimensional se-
mantic features [21], [22], [23] to replace the low-
dimensional raw data. Embedding representations
and autoencoders are the most efﬁcient ways to
construct intermediate semantic spaces, which con-
tains attributes that more comprehensively deﬁne the