9
TABLE 4
The latest performance of FSL in the hand-crafted rules.
Model Core View Key Approach Experimental Dataset Using External Dataset Data Level Feature Level
FTT [45] Enriching Instant Attributes Places-CNN Transient Attributes Database " "
CSEI [46] Erase Repair Metric based miniImageNet % "
Image Deformation [15] Semantic Invariance Meta-learning miniImageNet " "
AdarGCN [47] Denoising the collected web images GCN layer - " " -
Covariance-Preserving Adversarial
Augmentation Network [48]”Variability” of covariance information
as base instancesGenerative Adversarial Network ImageNet " "
Spot and Learn [49] extracts varying sequences of patches reinforcement learning miniImagenet % "
Saliency-guided Hallucination [50] Background - Prospective Learning Realation network miniImagenet % "
Laso [51] Explore the reliable differences between labels Transfer learning MS-COCO " "
Dual TriNet [52] Semantic Synthesis Example Auto Encoder MS-COCO % "
from another perspective, proposing to use a pre-trained
model to decompose visual features into three parts and
then select the original, foreground, and background images
to be re-stitched into new visual features. Similarly, Laso
[51] explores the differences in features between different
datasets in a high-dimensional space. Combining different
labels through the intersection and complementation of sets
allows images to contain key information from multiple
classes at the feature level simultaneously. Training this part
of the image as a support set can signiﬁcantly improve the
classiﬁcation performance of small samples. Chen et al. [56]
go further by extending the features to a high-dimensional
semantic space. In FSL, feature-level augmentation is more
effective than data-level augmentation by modeling the
valid information in a compressed manner. Fig. 8 shows the
main methods based on features level under hand-crafted
rules.
Geometric transformations Color Flip
  Differential  Search
Auto Encoder Contrast Generator
Metric
Original
 Augmented
Fig. 9. Learned Data Processing aims to learn a policy generator in
multiple task spaces so as to automatically match different tasks. Its
biggest beneﬁt over hand-crafted rule is that it can be reused.
3.2 Learning Data Processing
In 2018, data augmentation entered the area of auto aug-
mentation with the maturation of meta-learning. Through
the combination of meta-learning with other data augmen-
tation methods, a large amount of excellent work emerged
during this period. Hu et al. [57] was inspired by the
DARTS algorithm to abstract the data augmentation into
multiple sub-strategies, each with a certain probability of
being selected according to the different few-shot tasks. In
addition to the probability-based method, another approach
is based on generation. Li et al. [58] proposed the adversarial
feature phantom network-AFHN. The phantom diversity
and discriminative features are conditional on a small num-
ber of labelled samples. Chen et al. [56] attempt to train a
meta-learner and generate a network to learn similaritiesand differences between images end-to-end by fusing pairs
of images. MetaGAN [59], on top of which an adversarial
generator conditional on the task is introduced, which helps
FSL tasks form generalizable decision boundaries between
different classes. On the other hand, Zhang et al. [50] further
demonstrate the usefulness of phantom data generation for
FSL and propose a low-cost automated data generation
method that uses a direct foreground-background combi-
nation to generate feature space-level data for training. In
addition, it is also effective to explore the migratable differ-
ences between and within classes in support datasets. Delta-
encoder [60] uses auto-encoder [61] to learn differences in
the same class for transfer learning, which is different from
metric-based computation [62] of visual similarity. Table. 5
summarizes the data augmentation methods for learning
data process. Fig. 9 shows the main approaches involved
in auto-learning data processing under FSL.
3.3 Discussion and Summary
To maximize the evaluation of the distribution of the real
data in FSL setting, data augmentation has from the hand-
crafted rules to the auto learned data processing stage. The
watershed is the maturity of meta-learning in 2018. This
section comprehensively investigates the emerging repre-
sentative technologies in the ﬁeld of data augmentation and
reviews the evolution of few-shot data augmentation. Table.
5 summarizes the model in different dimensions clearly.
4 T RANSFER LEARNING BUILDS DATA-TO-LABEL
MAPPINGS FORSPECIFIC PROBLEMS
Transfer learning [63] is a classical learning paradigm, which
aims to solve the challenging problem that there are only
a few or even no labelled samples [64] in the FSL [65].
Feature reuse is the core idea of transfer learning to solve
FSL absence of data setting. The basic operation is to pre-
train the model on an extensive dataset and then ﬁne-
tune on the limited support set. When source and target
domains exist a large gap, knowledge transfer is invariably
much less effective. This cross-domain setting brings a new
challenge for FSL. In FSL, transfer learning can be broadly
divided into pre-training and ﬁne-tuning stage, which can
also be referred to the baseline. Fig. 10 illustrates the general
process.
4.1 Pre-training and Fine-Tuning
From 2012 to 2018, a large number of excellent works
have emerged in the ﬁeld of computer vision and natural