1
A Comprehensive Survey of Few-shot Learning:
Evolution, Applications, Challenges, and Opportunities
Yisheng Song, Ting Wang, Subrota K Mondal, Jyoti Prakash Sahoo
Abstract —Few-shot learning (FSL) has emerged as an effective learning method and shows great potential. Despite the recent
creative works in tackling FSL tasks, learning valid information rapidly from just a few or even zero samples still remains a serious
challenge. In this context, we extensively investigated 200+ latest papers on FSL published in the past three years, aiming to present a
timely and comprehensive overview of the most recent advances in FSL along with impartial comparisons of strengths and
weaknesses of the existing works. For the sake of avoiding conceptual confusion, we ﬁrst elaborate and compare a set of similar
concepts including few-shot learning, transfer learning, and meta-learning. Furthermore, we propose a novel taxonomy to classify the
existing work according to the level of abstraction of knowledge in accordance with the challenges of FSL. To enrich this survey, in each
subsection we provide in-depth analysis and insightful discussion about recent advances on these topics. Moreover, taking computer
vision as an example, we highlight the important application of FSL, covering various research hotspots. Finally, we conclude the
survey with unique insights into the technology evolution trends together with potential future research opportunities in the hope of
providing guidance to follow-up research.
Index Terms —Cross-domain, Few-shot Learning, Fine Tuning, Meta learning, Transfer Learning.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
Recent advances in hardware and information technology
have accelerated the interconnection of billions of devices
in various IoT-enabled application domains. Smart and
adaptive devices are increasingly deployed in critical infras-
tructures such as health, transportation, industrial produc-
tion, environmental detection, home automation, and many
other justifying the Internet of Everything (IoE) frameworks.
These massive number of terminal devices have been gen-
erating a huge amount of data, which need to be sent back
to the server for central processing and storage. Although
the total amount of generated data at the edge is very large,
the volume of every dataset generated by a single device or
single scene is extremely limited with very few samples.
Traditional data-driven and single-domain algorithms do
not perform well in these settings. To this end, numerous
research has been conducted in exploring effective learning
methods based on few samples and cross-domain scenes.
Few-shot learning (FSL) as well as meta-learning have in-
evitably emerged as a promising way. However, how to
effectively obtain valid information from small sample data
set or even cross-domain still remains the greatest challenge
faced by FSL today.
(Corresponding author: Ting Wang.)
Yisheng Song and Ting Wang are with the Engineering Research Center
of Software/Hardware Co-design Technology and Application, Ministry
of Education; the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Comput-
ing; East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China (email:
71205902054@stu.ecnu.edu.cn; twang@sei.ecnu.edu.cn).
Subrota K Mondal is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Macau
University of Science and Technology, Macao, China (email: skmon-
dal@must.edu.mo).
Jyoti Prakash Sahoo is with the Department of Computer Science &
Information Technology, Institute of Technical Education and Research,
Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, India (email: jpsahoo@ieee.org).Besides, data distribution in real-world scenarios of-
ten has long-tail effects and it is difﬁcult to generalize
the same model across diverse domains. Taking the smart
manufacturing industrial inspection as an example, such
poor generalization issue has become one of the key chal-
lenges affecting the performance of its intelligent models.
Speciﬁcally, current industrial quality inspection equipment
requires certain speciﬁc lighting conditions, and the AI
models trained under one lighting condition are difﬁcult
to ”generalize” to other lighting conditions. In addition,
considering the high accuracy requirements of industrial
quality inspection scenarios, current AI models, usually us-
ing supervised learning, require a large number of defective
samples for training. However, it is difﬁcult to collect a
sufﬁcient number of satisfactory samples as the proportion
of defective products in actual production scenes is small.
Moreover, it is not possible to transfer across domains either.
For example, a model for PC appearance defect detection
cannot be directly used to detect defects of mobile phone
screens, refrigerators, washing machines, or even different
models of PCs. Similarly, as another example, when recog-
nizing character images of components and circuit boards,
as there are many suppliers of components, many types of
devices, and many different character styles, thus it is not
possible to collect a sufﬁcient number of all kinds of samples
of character images for one supplier, resulting in few or no
samples of each type. Table 1 provides a detailed summary
of these challenges.
To address these challenges more effectively, FSL has
produced some creative work on data, algorithms, and
models. Up to now, as one of the most classical taxonomy,
FSL is classiﬁed into meta-learning and metric-based learn-
ing. In this review, from the perspective of challenges, we
divide the FSL into data augmentation, transfer learning,
meta-learning, and multimodal learning. Data augmenta-arXiv:2205.06743v2  [cs.LG]  24 May 2022