13
Subsequently, Arvind Srinivasan et al. [132] proposed a new
architecture to improve Inception-Net, U-Net, Attention U-
Net, and Squeeze-Net, which takes the time to generate
embedding quality as a cost. The processing based on the
embedding representation plays a vital role in FSL.
The relational network [133] differs from the three mod-
els mentioned above in that its similarity is calculated by
using a neural network. In contrast to the Siamese neural
networks and prototype networks, relational networks can
be seen as providing a learnable nonlinear classiﬁer for
determining relationships. The classiﬁer can be a feature
extractor of a pre-trained neural network [122] or a multiple
embedded module [134]. The most signiﬁcant contribution
of the relational network is that it breaks away from a single
linear metric function and explores the use of an alternative
model to generate similarity. Table. 7 categorizes each of the
representative metric learning algorithms, comparing their
innovations on the original approach.
5.3 Learning To Transmit Information
It is proved that graph neural networks (GNNs) [137] have
performed well on relational-based tasks in recent years
[138]. Researchers have found that its classes-based transfer
of information can work well to help FSL learn to identify
new class, while avoiding these classes being dominated
by proprietary features. Primarily, early graph neural net-
works simulate the propagation of weights between differ-
ent nodes by creating full connections between support and
query sets. The nodes can be represented by either a one-
hot encoding or an embedding vector, and the connections
between nodes can be passed through edges. Given the
complexity of graph neural network algorithms, most graph
neural networks currently have a shallow number of layers.
In order to better accommodate FSL, graph neural networks
have been uniquely designed with nodes and edges in
recent developments. Fig. 12 shows a recent representative
algorithm for FSL of graph neural networks from the per-
spective of exploring small sample distributions.
Distribution
Graph
embf…generation 1 generation 2 … generation n
Point
Graph …Prediction
Fig. 12. DPGN [139] is concerned with the relationship between samples
in GNN, in addition to the relationship between sample distributions.
Where Point Graph is used to describe the samples and Distribution
Graph is used to describe the distribution. The two GNNs fuse the
instance-level and distribution-level relationships by passing information.
The EGNN uses vertex sets, edge sets, and task sets to
encode the labels of nodes. When updates occur between
nodes, both the similarity and the difference are considered,
which greatly improves the generalization performance of
graph neural networks to FSL. Meta-GCN [140] further
incorporates the idea of meta-learning, which enables the
updating of weights of graphs under FSL to also be opti-
mized according to the gradient descent steps, the wholeprocess requires very few gradient steps and can receive
new data quickly. Subsequently, several models based on
improvements in the graph structure itself have emerged.
The prototype network was improved by GFL [141] network
that focuses on learning small samples of data with a graph
structure. DPGN uses a dual graph neural network that de-
scribes samples while modelling their distribution. Further-
more, GERN [142] uses embedding of graph neural network
connections to achieve more robust intra-class weight trans-
fer. Nevertheless, none of these approaches addressed the
problem of shallow layers of graph neural networks until
2021, HGNN [143] designed three sections of bottom-to-top,
and skip connections to remove the pitfall of ordinary GNNs
losing the hierarchical association between nodes. Based on
this, Frog-GNN [144] uses multidimensional information to
synthesize information about the adjacency between nodes
to form pairwise relational features of intra-class similarity
and inter-class dissimilarity. At present, graph neural net-
works are widely used for tasks such as few-shot image
classiﬁcation [145], [146], semantic segmentation [147] and
instance segmentation tasks.
5.4 Discussion and Summary
In FSL, meta-learning mainly explore the mapping from the
task to the target model. It trains a super-tuning device
that gives a good set of hyperparameters as it converges
according to the different tasks. In contrast to multi-task
learning, which learns only focus on single task. However,
meta-learning is not universal for all conditions. The current
idea of meta-learning is to have enough historical tasks. If
there are not enough tasks on certain problems, then meta-
learning may not be able to solve those problems. Similarly,
if the domain gap between source and target is too large, the
results will also become terrible.
6 M ULTIMODAL COMPLEMENTARY LEARNING OF
SMALL SAMPLES WITHLIMITED INFORMATION
Until now, FSL has made signiﬁcant progress in the uni-
modal domain. Within unimodal learning, models are pri-
marily responsible for representing information as feature
vectors that can be processed by a computer or further
abstracted into higher-level semantic vectors. Particularly,
multimodal learning in FSL refers to learning better feature
representations by exploiting complementarities between
multiple modalities and removing redundancies between
modalities. In real life, when parents teach their babies
about things, they always include general information along
with semantic descriptions. This is crucial for FSL, which
inherently comes with little valid information to make a
good evaluation of the data or feature distribution. Inspired
by this, many research works [8], [148], [149] consider the
introduction of other modal information when solving FSL.
By fusing multimodal information, the ability of the model
to perceive small sample data can be improved. Fig. 13
shows the main paths of FSL under multimodality,
6.1 Multimodal embedding
Recent works [9], [148], [149], [150], [160] proved the limi-
tations of visual features for FSL of certain tasks. Semantic