4
performance of machine learning, which is one of the most
recognized deﬁnitions so far: A computer program is said
to learn from experience Ewith respect to some classes of
taskTand performance measure Pif its performance can
improve with EonTmeasured by P. It is worth mentioning
here that Ein FSL is very small. In recent years, relevant
neural scientiﬁc evidence [6], [7] has shown that innate
human abilities are related to various memory systems,
including parametric slow learning neocortical systems and
non-parametric fast hippocampal learning systems, which
correspond to FSL’s data-based slow learning and feature-
based fast learning, respectively.
To better understand FSL, it is necessary to introduce
two concepts, one is N-way- K-shot problem and the other
is cross-domain FSL. The N-way- K-shot problem is often
used to describe the speciﬁc problems encountered by FSL.
In this case, the support set represents the small dataset used
in the training phase, which generates reference information
for the second phase of testing. The query set is the task on
which the model actually needs to predict. Notice that the
query set classes never appear in the support set. Classical
N-way- K-shot represents support set with Ncategories
andKsamples per category, then the whole task has only
NKsamples. As thus, N-way- 1-shot represents one-
shot learning and N-way- 0-shot represents zero-shot learn-
ing. The concept of cross-domain originates from transfer
learning, which refers to the transfer the knowledge from
source domain to target domain. There usually exist domain
gaps between these domains. Cross-domain FSL integrates
the features of cross-domain and FSL, and is a challenging
direction that has recently emerged.
At this stage, there still exist many challenges in FSL,
which are generated from various aspects, including but not
limited to data, models, and algorithms. In this context, the
challenges can be generally summarized according to the
degree of integration of knowledge as follows:
Inaccurate data distribution assessment :
FSL does not have access to large datasets due to
costs, ethical, legal, or other reasons. Consequently,
relying on few samples for learning produces biases
in estimating the actual data distribution, which
may be fatal for some tasks. To this end, maximizing
the exploration of data distributions with limited
information becomes the most signiﬁcant challenge
for FSL. Data augmentation is the direct way to
address the inaccurate estimation of FSL. The
primary efforts currently focus on exploring
migratable intra-class or inter-class features and
customizing speciﬁc images using generators.
Feature reuse sensitivity : Continuous accu-
mulation of a priori knowledge by sampling large-
scale auxiliary datasets. Transfer learning can eas-
ily use it from the source domain to the similar
target domain. Pre-training aims to extract high-
dimensional feature vectors through a feature extrac-
tor, while the goal of ﬁne-tuning is to make minor
adjustments to the initial parameters of the pre-
training. Transfer learning focuses on the data level
and obtains more valuable features independent of
the task by mapping data to labels. It has an out-standing performance in optimizing speciﬁc tasks,
but it is generally limited by the characteristics of
current tasks and has a poor generalization to future
tasks. Especially when there is a large shift in the
domain, without ﬁltering and alignment of features
may result in negative knowledge transfer.
Generality of future tasks : Differing from
transfer learning, meta-learning learns to quickly
build mappings from known tasks to target models
in previously unseen tasks by double sampling the
task and data. In FSL, by exploring the task space,
summarizing meta-knowledge in different tasks can
result in fast aggregation of unseen tasks at a lower
cost. As a general learning framework, meta-learning
is independent of speciﬁc problems and more ori-
ented to future tasks instead of optimizing the cur-
rent one. However, meta-learning has proven effec-
tive only when the testing and training tasks are
relatively similar, and it is highly depends on the
network structure and lacks ﬂexibility. When training
meta-learners with a set of tasks at the same time, it
is even difﬁcult to adapt to the distribution of tasks,
requiring a redesign of the network structure.
Defects of single-modal information : It is
difﬁcult to learn features effectively because FSL
is inherently information-limited. This situation is
improved to a great extent when aided by getting
information from other modalities. In this respect,
semantic assistance [8], [9] is an excellent method
to provide external prior knowledge, where through
the introduction or generation of semantic informa-
tion as weak supervision, adaptive classiﬁcation can
be accomplished in conjunction with the original
model.
2.2 What Is Machine Learning And How It Is Different
From Few-shot Learning?
The traditional Von Neumann computer architecture allows
users to execute a series of instructions step by step in the
form of a program [10]. However, this method does not
work in ML. On the contrary, ML uses large-scale datasets as
input. Its judgment on a new sample is based on statistical
results extracted by historical data. Now, the burgeoning
of 5G [11] provides massive connectivity for millions of end
devices, enabling an interconnection of everything. The total
amount of data generated by terminal devices is huge, but
the amount of one single data set is extremely small. Hence,
traditional ML, whose performance strongly depends on
large data sets, cannot perform well in this setting with few
samples. To this end, FSL emerges and provides a promising
way to handle the data scarcity scenario.
In recent ten years, the research on FSL has been ex-
tensively conducted, and signiﬁcant research progress has
been achieved, e.g. the KGBert [12] proposed by Alibaba
surpasses humans in the ﬁeld of FSL for the ﬁrst time. Fig. 2
exhibits the statistics of paper publications related to FSL in
recent ten years based on the statistical results of the Web of
Science. As revealed, there are relatively few related papers
from 2011 to 2015 due to that the FSL theory is still incom-
plete. With the rise of deep learning since 2015, the number