2
TABLE 1
Current challenges that industry urgently needs to address
Scenes Challenges Key Solutions
Quality Inspection LineSusceptible to light
Few sample data
Unable to transfer across-domainsFew shot cross-domain transfer
Robust model generalization
Electronic Component IdentiﬁcationA variety of colors, sizes and brands
Insufﬁcient samples of each brand
Existence of unseen new brandsFew-shot learning
Transfer learning
Uniﬁed feature representation
tion focuses on simulating data in different scenarios by
metric or generative methods to maximize the actual data
distribution. Transfer learning is mainly combined with pre-
training and ﬁne-tuning to extract prior knowledge from
large-scale auxiliary data sets. When domain relevance is
relatively uncommon or large auxiliary datasets are not
available, transfer learning has deﬁnite limitations. Meta-
learning is currently the mainstream approach to solve the
FSL problem. In recent years, some scholars have ques-
tioned ”Is such a kind of meta or episodic-training paradigm
really responsible and optimal for the FSL problem?”. This
has led to extensive discussions [1], [2] on the necessity
of meta-learning for FSL. As for multimodal learning, it
integrates different dimensions of information, such as lan-
guage, images, and audio. Multimodal learning is expected
to break the dilemma of insufﬁcient useful information for
FSL in the real human information world.
Due to the speciﬁcity of FSL, each method of FSL is
confronting multifaceted challenges to varying degrees. One
of the most direct challenges in data augmentation is that
the data samples are too limited and the model cannot
evaluate the true data distribution by relying solely on a
few samples. As a result, the model trained in this setting is
biased and easily falls into over-ﬁtting. In transfer learning,
features can effectively alleviate the problem of FSL, where
the volume of data is small and cannot be migrated across
similar domains. Nevertheless, how to represent features
effectively, how to reuse features between different tasks,
and how to establish an effective mapping between data
and labels are great challenges that exist in transfer learning.
Moreover, in the meta-learning paradigm, when training the
meta-learner with a set of tasks, it not only samples the data
space but also the task space. By constantly adapting to each
speciﬁc task, it makes the network have an abstract learn-
ing ability. When the training task and the target task are
distinctly different, the effect of meta-learning is minimal.
Furthermore, in the ﬁeld of multimodal learning, extensive
studies have been conducted to explore how to effectively
integrate information from multiple modalities to assist the
FSL.
Several existing survey papers have investigated the re-
lated work of FSL, for instance, the work [3] categorizes FSL
approaches into experience learning and conception learn-
ing. The work [4] classiﬁes FSL approaches into generative
models and discriminative models according to probability
distribution. Lately, the work [5] proposes a new taxonomy
to classify the FSL approaches from the aspect of data,
models, and algorithms. Nevertheless, to the best of our
knowledge, no one paper has ever provided a taxonomyfrom the perspective of challenges in FSL. By summarizing
the challenges of FSL, readers can better grasp the motiva-
tion and principle behind the FSL, rather than being limited
to various models. A list of key acronyms used in this paper
is summarized in Table 2.
1.1 Organization of the Survey
The remainder of this survey is organized as follows.
Section 2 provides an overview of FSL, introducing FSL,
comparatively analyzing machine learning, meta-learning,
and transfer learning along with summarizing the current
variants of FSL and challenges. Furthermore, to tackle the
obstacles systematically, in this section we demonstrate a
new taxonomy to classify the existing FSL related works.
Section 3 to Section 6 present a systematic investigation
on the current mainstream researches from the perspective
of challenges in FSL and provide a comparative analysis
from various aspects. With this taxonomy, a discussion and
summary are provided at the end of each section, giving
our insights into the respective ﬁelds accompanied by some
potential research opportunities. Section 7 takes computer
vision as an example, counting the latest progress of FSL
in image classiﬁcation, object detection, semantics segmen-
tation, and instance segmentation in chronological order.
Section 8 delves into exploring the current challenges faced
by FSL and how to seek breakthroughs in each branch. The
overall outline of this paper is shown in Fig. 1.
The main contributions of this survey can be summa-
rized as follows:
We start with the edge computing scenario, in which
the few-shot learning challenges arise, explaining
and clarifying several similar concepts that are easily
confused with FSL. This will be beneﬁcial to help
readers establish the relationship between few-shot
learning, transfer learning, and meta-learning.
We comprehensively investigate the FSL related
work from the perspective of challenges through
knowledge graphs and heat maps. With this taxon-
omy, we divide the FSL into several different levels,
where the highest level is multimodal learning that
mainly uses various semantic knowledge to assist
judgment, and the second, third, and fourth levels
are single-modal learning that addresses data level,
feature level, and task level challenges, respectively.
Notably, we also provide insightful discussions on
FSL cross-domain research, which is currently the
more challenging direction in the ﬁeld of FSL.