15
from the blurred image. Eventually, the model will use
more details to generate images. Nevertheless, sometimes
text descriptions contain multiple targets and a single text
description does not capture all the details in an image.
Sharma et al. [156] provided a dialogue interface that uses
textual information from the dialogue to obtain more de-
tailed information about the image.
Another set of text-to-image algorithms is based on the
variant auto-encoder with embedding. Unlike the gener-
ative approach, the input to the encoder is a vector of
attributes. Akata et al. [157] explored semantic features from
different sources, such as WordNet and word embeddings.
However, these methods were unable to recognize parts
of an image without part-term annotation. Elhoseiny et al.
[158] used a visual classiﬁer to detect patches from bird
image dataset by using only text terms and tests without
partial annotation. The results show that visual text infor-
mation and bird parts can be linked with zero samples.
6.3 Discussion and Summary
Multi-modal FSL is still in the developing stage and there
are currently several challenges until now: how to combine
data from heterogeneous domains, how to deal with the
different levels of noise that occur during the combination
of different modalities, and how to learn together. Table.
8 classiﬁes FSL tasks in multimodality as representation,
alignment, fusion, co-learning, and translation. In a multi-
modal FSL, a good feature representation should be able
to ﬁll in the missing modalities based on the observed
modal information. More approaches will emerge in the
future, going well beyond modal embedding and generating
semantic information from images.
7 FSL A PPLICATIONS INCOMPUTER VISION
In the past ﬁve years, we systematically combed and sum-
marized FSL in the ﬁeld of computer vision [161] and
divided tasks into image classiﬁcation, object detection, se-
mantic segmentation, and instance segmentation. Following
is a detailed summary in the form of graphs and tables
based on the time dimension. By reading this section, the
reader will be able to gain a comprehensive grasp of FSL in
the ﬁeld of computer vision.
7.1 Few-shot Image Classiﬁcation
Except like Google and Facebook, most researchers in real
life do not have access to a large dataset of good quality.
In FSL computer vision classiﬁcation tasks, each task may
contain only one or a few samples. Solving few-shot image
classiﬁcation tasks is mainly addressed by data augmenta-
tion, transfer learning, meta-learning, and multimodal fu-
sion learning. At present, the top three methods in terms of
accuracy are all based on feature augmentation and feature
transformation of the backbone model. In this section, we
investigates all few-shot image classiﬁcation models from
2016 to the present and counts the best performance of all
models on the mini-ImageNet benchmark dataset. Here we
use 5-way-1-shot and 5-way-5-shot as baseline tasks. Table.
9 and Fig. 14 illustrate our investigation results.7.2 Few-shot Object Detection
Few-Shot Object Detection (FSOD) is the task of detecting
rare objects from several samples. There has been a lot of
progress in FSL for image classiﬁcation, but rarely for object
detection. At present the evolution of few-shot object detec-
tion can be divided into three main camps: Data augmen-
tation, transfer learning, and meta-learning. Out of them,
Attention mechanisms plays a pivotal role in small sample
target detection. Equally, the issue of slow inference for a
few-shot object detections to meet real-time requirements
remains serious. The Table. 10 and Fig. 14 are used to show
recent advances in object detection in FSL.
7.3 Few-shot Semantic Segmentation
Few-shot semantic segmentation was ﬁrst proposed in [31]
until 2017. And it has been widely used in scenes such
as medical images and driverless cars. Unlike traditional
semantic segmentation, few-shot semantic segmentation has
less pixel annotation information in support data set. To
our best knowledge, few-shot semantic segmentation can be
broadly classiﬁed into supervised semantic segmentation,
unsupervised semantic segmentation, and video semantic
segmentation. In the machine learning stage, the more clas-
sical approach is to use probabilistic mappings as prior
knowledge for derivation. In the deep learning phase, a
large number of efﬁcient algorithms for segmentation tools
have emerged, but these models often require a large num-
ber of manual sample annotations. Recently, [201] has made
signiﬁcant improvements to few-shot semantic segmenta-
tion by proposing a more concise paradigm where only the
classiﬁer is meta-learned and the feature encoding decoder
remains trained using a conventional segmentation model.
Providing the Table. 16 and Fig. 14 for showing few-shot
semantic segmentation.
7.4 Few-Shot Instance Segmentation
In contrast to semantic segmentation, instance segmentation
involves identifying each pixel in an image and labelling
it separately. Recently, few studies are dealing with the
problem of segmenting few samples of instances. Current
work still focuses on how to improve R-CNNs using some
effective tools. The most recent work [210] proposes an in-
cremental few-shot instance segmentation algorithm, which
greatly improves the performance on benchmark data sets.
In this section, we survey papers of recent three years on
few-shot instance segmentation. Table. 12 and Fig. 14 show
the research progress of the few-shot instance segmentation.
8 F UTURE DIRECTION AND OPPORTUNITIES OF
FSL
Considerable recent work has made promising progress
on various task settings for FSL. Nonetheless, for more
challenging scenes, both the training and validation data
sets are minimal, where the distribution of other data neither
helps real samples to be evaluated nor has extensive training
data or validation datasets for transfer learning. Moreover,
meta-learning also does not have enough tasks to initialize
the parameters. With the taxonomy proposed in this sur-
vey, in this section we put forward several possible future