8
learning has been used to explore more robust
feature representations using contrast learning.
3 D ATAAUGMENTATION TOEVALUATE THETRUE
DATADISTRIBUTION WITHMAXIMUM PROBABILITY
In real-world FSL tasks, the number of samples in the
support and query sets is usually limited due to privacy,
collection costs, and labeling costs. To mitigate this issue,
data augmentation is recognized as the most direct way
to increase the sample richness in FSL. Nevertheless, the
core risk of the FSL data augmentation is how likely the
augmented dataset can evaluate the distribution behind the
real data. Based on whether the data augmentation tech-
niques can be reused on other tasks, FSL data augmentation
is divided into hand-crafted rules and automatic learning
data processing.
3.1 Hand-Crafted Rules
Hand-Crafted rules require guidance from experts with
specialized domain knowledge. A representative result is
that Bouthillier et al. proposed to randomly discard pix-
els [41] on a random rectangular area to generate black
rectangular blocks of simulated noise. Similar operations
also include random erase [42] and ﬁll [43], [44] in FSL.
Nevertheless, brieﬂy relying on the simple transformation of
single-sample pixels cannot prevent the risk of overﬁtting.
Further, the hand-crafted rules contains data level and fea-
ture level according to the dimension of information. Table.
4 summarizes the data augmentation methods for hand-
crafted rules making.
Original
AdarGCN
FTT
Image Deformation
CSEI
Fig. 7. FSL data augmentation based on data level mainly includes
internet data collection, environment variation, difference transfer and
random crop ﬁlling. Here a picture of a panda is used as an example to
implement the above variation.
3.1.1 Data Level
The data level augmentation is mainly a transformation of
the input data that aims to scale up existing data by making
modiﬁcations to the data marginally for achieving diversity
in model input. Random erasure [42] and random cropping
[43], [53] are classical algorithms by simulating the images
with different degrees of damage and thus improving the
generalization of the model. Inspired by this, Li et al.
[46] discarded the traditional approach based on a entire
feature extractor for images and instead focused on local
patch images. These methods require large-scale datasetsas support. It is not easy to achieve in the FSL settings.
Conversely, CSEI [46] does not require extra data sets. The
speciﬁc operation is to erase most of the discriminatory area
in the support set derived from the metric function and
replace it with an image ﬁll using the restoring operation.
FTT [45] enriches the data set by linear interpolation of some
transiently transformed attributes, such as different weather
and lighting. Z Chen et al. [15] proposes an end-to-end
approach to partitioning images as a whole inspired with
the idea of MIXUP [54], which argues that images preserve
important semantic information even after they have un-
dergone various distortions. The most signiﬁcant difference
between image distortion and GNN is that image distortion
simply stitches two images together in a linear pattern. This
method is able to achieve maximum deformation without
loss of classiﬁcation. In addition, it is a good direction for
data expansion by using the large amount of unlabelled data
sets in the real world for supplementation. Finally, when
both the source and target classes both have only a limited
number of samples, AdarGCN’s [47] implementation crawls
data from internet resources and automatically removes
irrelevant noise to achieve controllable data augmentation.
At the same time, AdarGCN can automatically determine
how far the information has been propagated in each graph
node. In conclusion, data augmentation at the data level
focuses on increasing the number of samples by means of
pixel transformations and pixel generation. Fig. 7 shows the
main methods based on data level under hand-crafted rules.
Global Features
Local FeaturesHigh-dimensional 
vectors
Prospects Feature
Bacground Feature
Fig. 8. Feature level-based data enhancement can be mainly divided into
global features and local features. Global features focus on the whole
image, including the foreground and background. Local features, on the
other hand, selectively focus on the subject part in the foreground.
3.1.2 Feature Level
Feature level data augmentation mostly maps pixel infor-
mation into a high-dimensional latent space. It carries more
valid information than mere original pixels. Gao et al. [48]
ﬁrst explored the underlying distribution behind few-shot
data and proposed an adversarial covariance augmentation
network to overcome the limitations of FSL. Its experiments
have shown that relying solely on learning the features of
the entire image brings noise into the results. Chu et al.
[49] tried to compute feature representations for each patch,
rather than the entire image. Each small patch is connected
by RNN and the features of the image are further fused.
This heuristic algorithm is far superior to simple attentional
models[55]. Zhang et al. [50] explain partial feature learning