6
categories. Up to now, zero-shot learning is one of the
closest methods to human intelligence that discerns
previously unobserved categories. One-shot learning
and FSL can essentially be considered as special ZSL.
Cross-domian few-shot learning : In transfer
learning, each class in the target domain has a suf-
ﬁciently large number of available samples. When
a large domain shift occurs between the source do-
mains and target domains, knowledge transfer tends
to become very challenging. Cross-domain few-shot
learning combines the challenges of transfer learning
and FSL. In the existence of domain gaps, where
the intersection of classes in the source and target
domains is empty, and the available sample size for
each class in the target domain is extremely small.
The improvement of the model’s generalization ca-
pability through source domain data alone brings
very limited performance to the model. The present
work mainly focuses on the shift transformation of
features and the construction of auxiliary datasets.
Cross-domian few-shot learning can be regarded as
one of the most challenging setting in the ﬁeld of FSL
at present.
2.4 What Is Meta-Learning and How It Is Different From
Few-shot Learning?
Meta-learning is a general learning paradigm that provides
training on tasks in an episodic-training mechanism. Fig.
4 illustrates the three-steps involved in meta-learning [24]
training. Meta-learning focuses on improving generalization
for unseen tasks using prior knowledge. If prior knowledge
is used to teach the model how to learn on a speciﬁc task,
meta-learning can be regarded as a variant of FSL. It is
emphasized that meta learning is not equivalent to FSL.
FSL should be seen rather as an ultimate goal. It aims
to achieve robust generations without relying on a large
scale of datasets. By dual sampling of data and task space,
meta-learning is enabled to construct a large number of
auxiliary tasks related to the unseen task. Even if some
papers do not use meta-learning, it is likely to improve the
model’s performance if episodic-training mechanism can be
considered, such as meta reinforcement learning [25], [26],
meta video detection [27], and so on.
Fig. 4. Meta-learning training three-step approach includes: ﬁnd the
learning algorithm, deﬁne loss function using tasks, ﬁnd parameter that
can minimze loss function.Nevertheless, meta-learning has its own limitations:
when the training and testing tasks exist obviously domain
gap, Meta-learning is rarely used to initialize parameter
weights. It can easily lead to negative migration of the
model. In addition, meta-learning is highly dependent on
the structure of the network, and needs to be redesigned for
widely varying tasks. In spite of this, meta-learning is still
one of the most effective methods to solve FSL.
2.5 Datasets
Before the availability of FSL benchmark datasets, re-
searchers regularly used tasks like manually constructing N-
way-K-shots to evaluate the performance of models. How-
ever, these simple tasks cannot reﬂect the complexity of
real-world problems. After 10 years of evolution, the FSL
benchmark dataset has completed the transition from a
single domain, single dataset to a cross-domain, multiple
dataset.
As shown in Fig. 5, during 2017-2021, 898 papers used
the CUB-200-2011 [28] dataset, accounting for 46.6% of
the total number of statistics; 587 papers used the Mini-
ImageNet [29] dataset, accounting for 30.5%; and 335 papers
using the Omniglot [30] dataset, accounting for 17.4% ; 44
papers used the PASCAL-5i [31] dataset, and 46 papers
used the Meta-DataSet [32]. The other speciﬁc datasets are
Paris-Lille-3D [33], N-Digit MNIST [34], SUN397 [35], which
are used in 15 papers in the past ﬁve years. In terms of
quantity, the CUB-200-2011, Mini-ImageNet, and Omniglot
benchmark datasets occupy a dominant position in the ﬁeld
of FSL. Table. 3 compares the datasets mentioned above
from different dimensions. By the publication of the article,
a more objective benchmark dataset [36] for evaluating the
cross-domain ability of FSL was proposed. 1) CropDiseases
[37], a plant diseases dataset , 2) EuroSAT [38], a dataset for
satellite images, 3) ISIC [39] a medical skin image dataset, 4)
ChestX [40], a dataset for X-ray chest images. The similarity
comparing to MiniImageNet is decreas across these datasets.
2.6 Taxonomy
According to the degree of integration of knowledge, FSL is
broaderly divided into a single-modal learning and a multi-
modal learning. In this survey, The single-modal learning
can be further divided into data augmentation, transfer
learning, and meta learning. It mainly focuses on abstracting
or transferring limited information into higher-level feature
vectors or meta-knowledge. Multimodal learning is more
close to the real world of human intelligence, which no
longer relies on the limited sample, and tries to ﬁnd the
space of other modalities to assist the FSL. With this tax-
onomy, we exhaustively review and discuss each method.
Fig. 6 vividly demonstrates the FSL’s taxonomy under the
challenge perspective.
Evaluate The True Data Distribution : The
key to the difﬁculty of FSL is that limited samples
cannot reﬂect the actual data distribution. The most
intuitive idea of machine learning is to generate
additional data based on a certain probability model
or to extend the auxiliary data set using a large