Takeaway 10.Maintaining deployed modelsrequires
long-term engineering resource commitments. Focus-
ingontimesavedinsteadofpureMLmetricshelpsor-
ganizations adoptthetechnology.
5.2 Measuringimpact
Typicalmachinelearningprojectsmeasuresuccessinterms ofmodel
evaluation metrics (e.g. F1-score, ROC-AUC, etc.) (also se e discus-
sioninthelastsection)orbusinesskeyperformanceindica tor(KPIs)
(e.g.click-throughrate,dailyactiveusers,etc.).Howev er,inthelife
cycle of AI4G projects, model evaluation metrics serve more as a
basisofdiscussionswithPOsaboutamodel’scapabilitiesa ndlim-
itations; the KPIs important to the POs are outcomes that can be
several steps removed from the model outputs. It is importan t to
learn about the PO’s KPIs in the scoping phase of the project t o
inform theapproach.
A challenge in creating lastingimpact comes from the lack of
a business model for these AI4G endeavors. We are ﬁnding ways
to step out of a funding mindset and grow the technical capabi l-
ities of the PO so that they could be self-suﬃcient in subsequ ent
datacollectionandre-trainingeﬀorts.Thisisanotherpla cewhere
two-waycommunicationisimportant(seeSection2):thetec hnical
teamoftendoesnotgettoseetheimpactoftheirworkintheﬁe ld.
Maintaining arelationship withthePOafterthetechnicalp ortion
of the project is complete to get updates on how their workﬂow s
have been impacted is important in maintaining a long-term c ol-
laboration and acts as part of a larger feed-back loop for sol ving
theapplicationproblem.
InourengagementswithPOs,wedonotconcernourselveswith
deﬁningwhatisapositiveimpactagainsttheﬁnalproblemth ePO
aims to tackle. We rely on the domain experts at the PO to deter -
mine what the intended eventual impact is and to what extent a
project furthers the PO’s mission. More proximal to data mod el-
ing,incollaboratingwithPOsonAI4Gprojectswehavefound two
ways forAI techniques torealize impact:ﬁnding structurea nd in-
sightsfromlargedatasets,andmakingdomainexperts’work ﬂows
more eﬃcient so that they may scale outtheir work. Therefore , it
may requireworking with thePOto ﬁnd ways totrack theimme-
diateimpact of anAI4G modelontheir dataanalysis orworkﬂo w
eﬃciency, inadditiontoimpacts onthePO’s end mission.
Takeaway 11.Domain experts within POs should
deﬁne mission-related impacts. When quantiﬁcation
of direct model impact is needed, work with the PO
to identify opportunities to quantify both immedi-
ate (workﬂow or analysis enhancement) and farther-
removed(mission-related)impactsoftheAI4Gproject.
6 CASESTUDIES
6.1 NLP tomap Syrian conﬂict
Problem :
The Carter Center (TCC) has beenworking onsupportinga poli t-
ical solutiontothewars inSyria3.Since 2012,TCC has initiated a
conﬂict mapping project that analyzes an unprecedented vol ume
of citizen-generated information about the conﬂict. Every week,
3https://www.cartercenter.org/countries/syria.htmlTCC compiles a report using the information it receives from the
Armed Conﬂict Location and Event Data (ACLED) Project4[47],
whichcuratesnewsstoriesandarticlesrecordingincident srelated
to the war in Syria. This report is read by various committees in
the UN, foreign ministries and NGOs. Given the weekly timeli ne
(Takeaway7),collatingtheincomingdataintoastructures uitable
for their analysis manually has been diﬃcultgiven the incre asing
volumeofreports.Automatingthiscurationprocesswouldr educe
thethousandsof hoursofwork neededbyprofessional analys ts.
Solution :
Our work automated this process by classifying the informat ion
into several categories such as shelling, artillery ﬁre, an d aerial
bombardment.WehelpedTCCbuildahigh-precision,neuraln etwork-
based natural language processing (NLP) model that reclass iﬁes
the input conﬂict events at the granularity desired by TCC (T ake-
away 6). This improvement in data processing allowed TCC em-
ployeestothenfocusonsubsequentanalysisoftheconﬂicte vents
(Takeaway 9).
6.2 Mappingsolarfarmsacross India
Problem :
At the end of 2020, India was only 2% away from the target of
40% installed non-fossil fuel electricity capacity, one of its Paris
Climate Agreement targets [32]. While it is encouraging to s ee
renewable energy production systems, such as solar farms, b eing
rapidly built, it is also important to locate such installat ions in a
waythatavoidsencroachingonthehabitatsofendangeredsp ecies
andotherecologicalreserves.Aninternationalconservat ionNGO
has been working with states in India to create a tool for iden ti-
fying areas where solar and wind developments are less likel y to
cause ecological harm. However, information on where solar in-
stallations are located is only available for two states, an d so we
workedtogetherwiththeNGOtousesatelliteimagerytotryi den-
tifysolarinstallations across allof India.
Solution :
Finding solar farms from satellite imagery is straight-for ward to
formulateasasemanticsegmentationtask,butthelabelsth atwere
availablefortheprojectwerebothfewandnotintheformatn eeded
forthis MLtask:only72pointlabelsoflocationsofsolarfa rmsin
two states were available (Takeaway 3). To overcome this lim ita-
tion,weﬁrstpre-trainedaconvolutionalneuralnetworkto cluster
pixels in the input satellite imagery by color (i.e. in an uns uper-
vised manner). We then used an interactive training applica tion
toquicklyﬁne-tunethenetworktosegmenttheclassesofint erest
andusedthisﬁne-tunedmodeltoobtainweaksegmentationla bels
fortheentiretyofthestudyarea.Theseweaklabelsmakeitp ossi-
bletotrainasupervisedsemantic segmentationnetworktha twas
capable of accurately detecting solar farms. Solar farms fo und by
thissupervisedmodelwerevalidatedbyanalystsattheNGO. Into-
talwewereabletoﬁndandvalidate1422solarinstallations across
India. The human-in-the-loop process we used was a crucialc om-
ponentinbothtrainingand evaluation,enablingMLmodelsy ield
reliableresultsgiventhesmallamountsoflabelsavailabl einitially
(Takeaway 9). Given the large area of interest, we must also r ely
4https://www.acleddata.com/data/