tosolveproblemsthathave notfoundsolutionsintheprivat esec-
tor.Forexample,researchers intheﬁeldofcomputationals ustain-
ability[24]developandapplymethodstotackleproblemssu chas
wildlifeconservation [19],bioacoustics[82],bird-migr ation track-
ing [59] and poverty detection [34]. In recent years, a numbe r of
pieces of criticism have been directed at the AI4G movement [ 10,
26,40].Whilethesecritiquesraiseimportantconcernssuc hasthe
biasofmodelstrainedonlimiteddata,shiftingattentiona wayfrom
rootcausesofsocietalproblems,andapaternalisticunder standing
of the aﬀected community, the discussion largely centers on the
diﬃcultyof deﬁning what is “good”in oursocietalcontext.
Inthisarticlewedistillﬁrst-handexperiencesfromourre search
lab focused on AI4G projects spanning several application a reas
over two years. Cognizant of the complexity of problems in th e
AI4Gdomainandourexpertiserestrictedtothetechnicalsi deofAI
(statistics, modeling,and engineering), wecollaboratee xtensively
with external partner organizations (PO) to deﬁne good outcomes
forourprojects,sourceandcuratedata,andrealizereal-w orldim-
pact from our modeling solutions. These AI4G projects contribute
to solving problems in two ways: we develop and apply AI tech-
niques toacceleratepreviouslymanualtaskssuchasdatapr ocess-
ing to enable the PO to arrive at their solutionfaster, and we ana-
lyze and model collecteddata for additional insights. The c ollabo-
rativeandpracticalnatureofsuchprojectsmeans thatthe deliver-
ablesarenotjustmodelweights,sourcecode,andtechnicalpaper s;
they crucially involve working with these POs (whose techni cal
capabilities and infrastructure vary greatly) to develop w orkable
engineering solutions for deployment that respect resourc e con-
straintsthatPOsface,aswellascommunicatinganddocumen ting
oursolutions–and theirlimitations –forthedomainexpert sout-
side of computer science and engineering who use our models t o
impact society.
WehighlightchallengesthataremorepronouncedinAI4Gpro jects
compared to machine learning (ML) projects in the academic a nd
corporate spheres, outline strategies we have learned for u nder-
takingsuchprojects,andreﬂectondiﬃcultieswehavefaced mea-
suring our impact. We break these down into four sections in t he
restofthediscussion:communication,data,modeling,and impact.
Finally, we describetwo case studies,i.e. AI4G projects ,that exem-
plifythesediﬃcultiesandhowweapproachedtheminareal-w orld
setting.
2 COMMUNICATION
Therelationshipandinteractionbetweendatascientistsa ndPOs–
whoarethedomainexpertsthatdeﬁneproblems,curatedata, and
actonmodeloutputs–isanimportantﬁrsttopic.Domainexpe rts
sometimes have decades worth of experience working in a prob -
lem area. Communicating all of this accumulated knowledge t o
datascientistswithinafewdaysorweeksduringprojectpla nning
canbediﬃcult,butdatascientistsmustbewillingandready toin-
corporate this knowledge into their modeling approaches. W hile
straightforward,accuratebi-directionalcommunication atallstages
ofanAI4Gprojectisessentialforitssuccess,wefocusbelo wonar-
eas wheredatascientists mayneedtodrivetheconversation with
thePO.2.1 Settingrealisticexpectations from AI
It is often the case that POs have inﬂated expectations about the
capabilities of modern AI-based techniques due to the hype s ur-
rounding the ﬁeld1and its misrepresentation in the media [38].
In our experience, when initially proposing and scoping pro jects,
somePOsmaybelievethattherearepre-existingAItoolstha tcan
beimmediatelyadaptedforanichepurposewithlittletonot rain-
ing data (cf. [15]). However, our experience also shows that POs
respond well to open, honest communication about AI’s capab ili-
ties,ortheneedfor(labeled)trainingdata.Earlyconvers ationsof-
ten involved directing POs’ expectations away from a model t hat
achievesalloftheirgoals,whichwouldrequiremoretraini ngdata
than is currently available, to more targeted models for whi ch ap-
propriate and suﬃcient training data is available, and whic h will
still bring them signiﬁcantly closer to their goals. For cer tain use
cases, an adequateand achievable approach is to use AI as a co m-
plementary tool to streamline and accelerate current workﬂ ows,
ratherthanentirely supplantingthem.
One such example we have worked on involved a PO who ini-
tiallyapproachedusaboutbuildinganaturallanguageproc essing
(NLP)modeltoextractverynuancedauthorintentfromdecon tex-
tualized 1- or 2-sentence texts in a small corpus of unlabele d doc-
uments. After gaining a better understanding of the speciﬁc use
caseforthemodel,weworkedwiththePOtoreframetheproble m
in terms of multi-label topic classiﬁcation, and also worke d with
them to label the data. The result was a model that allowed the
POtoincorporateanentirelynewdatasource(text)intoabr oader
initiative focusedon quantifying human activities’ impac ts onen-
vironmental resources.
InadditiontodiscussingthegenerallimitationsofAI-bas edmeth-
odswith regards to what can beachieved, depending on the PO’ s
domain and technical expertise, it may also be crucial to mak e
them aware of more concrete issues encountered while buildi ng
MLmodels.Theseincludeoverﬁttinginsmalldataregimes,m odel
bias, generalization issues after deploying a model,adver sarial at-
tacks,dataandmodelprivacyconcerns,limitationsofinte rpretable
models, etc. For example, lesion shape irregularity is one o f the
mostcriticalfeaturesintheclinicaldiagnosisofmelanom a[1].On
theotherhand,recentstudieshavedeterminedthatconvolu tional
neural networks are negatively-biased in capturing shape- related
information from images [5, 21]. Clinical researchers who m ay
wishtodevelopaconvolutionalmodelformelanomadetectio nare
likely to be unaware of this ﬁnding, and eﬀective communicat ion
of this knowledge may facilitate the development of alterna tive
approaches. We believe that knowledge transfer should be a c ore
componentofan AI4Gproject.
In contrast to these positive cases, there may be circumstan ces
in which POs need to be informed when their goals – even with
proper reframing – may not be achievable with AI. For example ,
a model trained to detect ﬁsh species from underwater camera s
may be highly accurate in identifying a few common species, b ut
theresearchers mayliketodetectveryrarespeciesif,fore xample,
detectionof therare species is key todeciding whether some eco-
nomic development opportunityis allowed. In these cases, m odel
1For example, a Gartner 2020 report on emerging technologies places AI at the peak
intermsof inﬂated expectations [46].