At the same time, most of the models used in AI4G projects do
notenablecompleteautomation.Forexample,theoutputofa medi-
caldiagnosismodelwillbeinterpretedbyhealthprofessio nals,and
ﬁnal decision may be made based on the patient’s clinical his tory
and the presence of secondary signs and symptoms that are not
captured by the model [39]. Here, a human mustbe in the mod-
eling loop evaluating every output of a model. More broadly, the
output of allAI4G models will be inspected by domain experts
in the PO and their feedback will constitute a form of weak su-
pervision that must be included in the modeling process in or der
to produce a suitable deliverable. For example, POs that rel y on
highly accurate land cover data will often need to make manua l
corrections to modeled outputs, and, as such, will have a diﬃ cult
time using land cover predictions with artifacts such as rou nded
cornersonbuildingthatarenoteasilycorrectableinGISso ftware.
This type of feedback is only apparent after one iteration of mod-
elling and inspecting the results with the PO. Glacier monit oring
is another scenario where incorporatinghumans in the looph ave
beenshownvaluable.Barakaet.alproposedaglaciermappin gtool
thatusessemanticsegmentationpredictionsasastartingp ointand
allows domain experts for easy adjustments of those predict ions
for afaster glacier mappingsystem [7].
Thus, achieving a balance between having human feedback in-
cluded in the modeling process and staying within-scope is a cru-
cial part of ﬁnishing such AI4G projects. We have found activ e
learningpipelinestobebeneﬁcialtowardsthisend.Withan active
learning pipeline, participants at the PO can be engaged dir ectly
during the modeling process and will allow their feedback (i n the
form oflabels) tobedirectlyincorporatedin theﬁnaldeliv erable.
We note that the active learning loop can also incorporate hu -
mansmoretightly.Forexample,whenhumansarefurtherallo wed
tochoosethelocationstolabel(versus beingpresented loc ations),
and can observe the eﬀect labeling those locations has on mod el
output after a retraining period, they can more eﬃciently tr ain
land cover models [52]. Finally, as active learning methods more
tightly couple dataset collection with model training, the y show
promise in reducing the total amount of manual eﬀort require d
to produce a ﬁnal product. For instance, active learning tra ining
of camera trap species identiﬁcation models has been found t o
match state-of-the-art accuracy with orders of magnitude f ewer
annotated training samples [55].
Takeaway 9.AI4G projects require humans in the
loop to some extent. Active learning pipelines can en-
ablePOstoengagewiththemodelingprocessdirectly
duringa project.
5 IMPACT
Lacking in theusualbusiness indicators such as revenue and user
engagement, oneofthemostdiﬃcultaspectsofanAI4Gprojec tis
measuring the degree to which it is successful, and weighing the
success by the potential impact in advancing a PO’s mission. In
turn, an AI4G project’s potential impact will not be realize d with-
out the PO or the broader communities adopting the technolog y.
Indeed,therearemanymorepressreleases,blogposts,andp romis-
ing published results than functioning AI systems actively “doing
good”intheworld.Inthissection,weattempttounderstand whythat is by exploring the three related issues of deployment, adop-
tionand impact.
5.1 Uphillpathto deployment andadoption
Unlikeresearch developing novel techniques ortheoretica lunder-
standing, AI4G projects necessitate the deployment of any d evel-
opedmodels,andseparatelyandoftenmorediﬃcult,theadop tion
of such technologies by the PO and related communities, for t he
eﬀort tobemeaningful [72].This “last mile” problem can bee spe-
cially challenging in AI4G projects since engineering is of ten not
afocusfor aPO ora research group.
Inourexperience, deployment entails threescenarios:
i) aone-timescoringofrelevantinputdatatoproducederiv ed
datafor thePO’s downstream analysis and publication,
ii) areal-timeAPIexposingthemodelforapplicationssuch as
anti-poaching and invasive species monitoring,
iii) a batch processing mechanism triggered automatically or
bytheusertoprocessalargequantityofrawdataforrecur-
ringanalysis,suchaswhileprocessingconﬂictvideosfrom
a region forweapondetection[2].
Theﬁrstscenariorequirestheleastengineeringeﬀortbeyo ndmodel
development,butmaynotresultinlastingimpact.Real-tim eAPIs
have recurring cost, in addition to requiring upkeep and int egra-
tion with the client application consuming model output. Ba tch
processingcouldtakeadvantageofdiscountcloudcomputea tlow-
traﬃc times and parallelize model scoring. It is often neces sary
to guide the PO in understanding whether they require real-t ime
always-onmodeldeploymentorifoﬄinebatchprocessingiss uﬃ-
cient.ThereisalsoalotofenthusiasmfordeployingMLmode lson
edge devices so that the PO can avoid uploading the raw data fo r
processinginlow-connectivityregions.Inthiscase,itis important
to communicate any trade-oﬀs compressing the model through
techniquessuchasquantizationmayhaveonperformance[60 ,76].
To truly enable productivity gains from using AI tools and cl oud
infrastructure,thePOsoftenneedamuchlargerpieceofsof tware
toorchestratescoring rawdatausing themodeland interact with
themodeloutputs,ofwhichWildlifeInsights isanotableex ample
foracceleratingwildlifesurveysusingcomputervisionmo dels[3].
Adoption is the harder problem because, in many ways, it is
outside of the control of the technical team. Identifying ho w ML
metrics translate into time saved in the PO’s workﬂows is par a-
mount. Taking input from human-computer interaction exper ts
maybehelpfulat this stage, as is thinking abouthow tointeg rate
modeloutputwith thesoftwareusedindownstream analysis. For
example,beingabletopreview modeloutputsaboveacertain con-
ﬁdencethresholdcanhelpthedomainexperttoﬁlteroutinpu tﬁles
thatdonot containany subjects ofinterest; pre-populatin gthela-
bel ﬁeld with the most common class may save many keystrokes
duringmanualreview[27].Wehavealsofoundthatopen-sour cing
themodeldevelopmentcodebuildstrustinthemodel,andthe code
repositorywithdiscussionboardscanactasahubforthecom mu-
nityinvolved intransfusing AI into their domain.