creationmayneedtobepostponedfortime-consumingdataco llec-
tionand labeling. And in some cases itmay benecessary toask if
the current stateofmachine learning is abletomeaningfull y help
thePO inmeeting its goals.
Takeaway 1.EducatingPOs aboutAI’s limits and op-
portunitiesisacorepartofanAI4Gproject.Potentially
unrealistic expectations for AI can often be reframed
into achievable goals that streamline the PO’s work-
ﬂows.
2.2 Project scoping andimplementation
CollaborationsbetweenPOsandtechnicalexpertsonAI4Gpr ojects
are typically short-term or phased, hence it is important to set
priorities and expectations before beginning a project. Fo r exam-
ple, one project we have worked on involves counting herd ani -
mals (e.g. cattle) over large areas from satellite imagery t o moni-
tortheeﬀectiveness ofconservationpolicies.Thisis anex pensive
task to perform manually, but can potentially be automated w ith
computervisionmodels.Instancesegmentationoftheanima lsisa
straightforwardapproach,however itisriskyduetothelac kofla-
beleddataorlowspatialresolutionoftheimagery.Lessstr aightfor-
wardmodelingapproaches,suchascoarseranimaldensityes tima-
tionmodels,cansatisfythesameprojectgoals,butmaytake more
eﬀorttodeﬁneupfront.Suchapproachesmayalsobeinformed by
domain knowledge – herd animals move in groups, resulting in
dense crowds more easily identiﬁable in imagery than indivi dual
animals. The back-and-forth communication with the PO to un -
derstand the goal and explore appropriate modeling solutions is a
crucial partoftheprojectlifecycle.
Wesummarizequestionstoexplorewhenscopingaprojectwit h
a PO as aguideline forfutureprojects:
(1) Setting accurate goals: is the project oriented towards the
prediction or estimation of quantities, or is it towards the
visualization and representation of data? If the project is
oriented towards prediction/estimation, then whatwill be
done with the output from the model, whowill use it (say,
for decision-making), and wherewill it be deployed? If the
project is oriented towards visualization/representatio n or
to interpretability/inference, whatformat is expected, who
will be consuming the end result, and – again – wherewill
itbedeployed?
(2) What are the resource constraints of the PO? Thecompute
andstorageresourcesavailableandthetypeofdevicewhere
thesolutionwillbedeployed(cloud-based,battery-power ed
devices) should be taken into account to determine what
modelingsolutionsarepossible.
(3) WhatisthetechnicalexpertiseavailableatthePO?This will
determine theamountof supportavailablefor maintaining
a deliverablebeyond thedurationof theproject.
(4) Does the problem require developing novel machine learn -
ing techniques? This will inform the project timeline and
the risk. It could present an opportunity to identify larger
researchchallengesandbringthemintotheMLcommunity
atlarge.
(5) To what degree is data/model privacy a concern? The data
availabletothePOcanoftencontainpersonallyidentiﬁabl einformation about individuals. This would not only make
thedatasetnotreleasableforthesakeofreproducibility, but
also limit the public release of models since they may be
subjecttoprivacyattacks [62].
(6) Ispreciseinformationonthedatawelldocumented?TheP O
should convey the assumptions and the procedures under-
lyingdatacollection.Ifthedatahasalreadybeenprocesse d,
the processing steps should be communicated because cer-
tainpre-processingstepscanintroducebiasinthedata[20 ].
(7) How could the PO’s domain knowledge be incorporatedin
modeling?Duringtheprojectdevelopment stage,itmaybe
necessarytonotrelyentirelyondata-driventechniques(f or
instance, for feature learning), but also utilize PO’s know l-
edgeofdomain-relevantmetricsandfeaturesthathavebeen
identiﬁed as signiﬁcant in their ﬁeld. For example, in radi-
ology, dozens of hand-crafted radiomic features have been
previously found to be signiﬁcant predictors of cancer sur-
vival and response totherapy[4].
Takeaway 2.Toensure we develop solutionsthatare
practicallyuseful,projectscopingneedstobeanongo-
ing dialoguewiththePO.
3 DATA
Most AI4G projects start with the PO sharing a dataset they ha ve
previously collected and labeled, or pointing out public da tasets
that are relevant to the problem. While speciﬁc funding oppo rtu-
nitiesforcreatingdatasetsforMLapplicationsandnovelm ethods
to take advantage of weakly labeled public data [73, 83] or ge n-
erated data [8] exist, exploiting these is often not possibl e. This
is in contrast to enterprise applications where ML teams are also
responsible for collecting training data and have budget al located
forcuratingdatasetswithspeciﬁcMLtasksinmind.Inthiss ection
we reﬂect on recurring challenges related to data availabil ity and
qualityinthecontext ofAI4Gprojects;foranin-depth disc ussion
ofdata issues present inhigh-stakes AI applications,refe r to[57].
3.1 Adaptingtopreviously collecteddatasets
Limitations in the data collection process often inﬂuence t he de-
gree to which an AI4G project can be successful, possibly mor e
so than they aﬀect the outcomes of commercial or academic AI
projects,which have morecontrolover datacollection.
First, there is a discrepancy between the purpose of data col -
lection by POs that have the goal of solving an application pr ob-
lem and data collectionbygroups that have the goal of creati ng a
generalizable model.ThePOs need not necessarily care abou tthe
metadataassociatedwithdatapointsthattheylabelforfur thering
theirgoals,whilesuchmetadatamaybeimportantforquanti fying
how a model trained on such data will generalize. Put diﬀeren tly,
ifdatacollectionisconductedbyaPOwithafocusonthecont ent,
ratherthantechnicalspeciﬁcationsofthedata,thenthisc ancause
problemsin post-hocmodelingsteps.
Extending the example of counting herd animals from the last
section,thePO mightlabelherd animals fromsatelliteimag ery at
a variety of spatial resolutions. The imagery could be at a sp atial
resolution of 0.1, 0.3, or 0.5 m/pixel; as long as the PO can co unt
the types of animals of interest over a given area and date, th ey