eﬀectsonoceanwaves.Asanotherexample,thexBDdatasetas so-
ciatedwiththexViewChallenge[28]isalarge-scalepublic dataset
designed to enable building damage assessment for humanita rian
assistance and disaster recovery. It consists of data from 1 9 dis-
asters from around the world between 2011 and 2019. However,
scenes from the 19 disasters are present in all of the oﬃcial t rain,
testandhold-outsplits,whereasitwouldbemoreusefultor eport
performance on unseen locations as the next disaster will li kely
strike elsewhere. The same is true for the SpaceNet Challeng e Se-
ries for building footprint extraction, where the default s plits cre-
atedbythechallenge’sutilitiescontainoverlappingloca tions[69].
Subsequentstudieshaveshownthatperformancedropsdrast ically
when applying a trained building damage classiﬁer to an unse en
location, even within the same region [29, 68]. As another ex am-
plerequiringspatialgeneralization, untilveryrecently ,allstudies
of animal species classiﬁcation on camera trap images were s plit
across sequences of images but not across locations. This re sults
in precision and recall metrics of greater than 90% [44]. In r eality,
performanceismuchworseifwesplitthedatabycameralocat ion,
and even worseif we splitbyecosystem [9,58].
Many past studies in wildﬁre risk prediction, another probl em
important to both disaster relief and environmental conser vation,
assumecertainrandomvariablestobeindependentandident ically
distributed in the evaluation phase [12, 53, 56]. However, n atural
hazards like wildﬁres are stochastic events with spatio-te mporal
dimensions, and evaluating models of such events based on ra n-
domizedtraining and testsplits leads toinformationleaka ge, mis-
leading organizations whooperationalizesuch models[22] .
In applying machine learning to medical imaging, Zech et al.
[80]foundthatadatasetofchestx-rayscuratedforscreeni ngpneu-
monia cases could be used to train a model to accurately predi ct
which hospital system the x-ray comes from, indicating that the
pneumoniadetectionmodeldevelopedfromthedatasetcould have
been aided by features not related to the medical condition. The
training and testsplits should bechosen tomeasure how well the
modelwillwork forunseen x-raymachines.
Takeaway 5.Carefully consider how to splitthe data
intotrainingandtestsetssothatthemodel’sabilityto
generalize tounseen instances of inputis measured.
4 MODELING
The models used in AI4G contexts usually involve a diﬀerent s et
of requirements and constraints compared to general AI appl ica-
tions. First, AI4G models are developed in applied ML contex ts.
Most of the models are developed with domain-speciﬁc motiva -
tions and limitations in mind. In consequence, models devel oped
formainstreamMLﬁelds,suchasNLPorcomputervision,requ ire
cautious adaptation and deployment to the speciﬁc domain. F ur-
thermore, the process of model development is motivated ﬁrs t by
application requirements instead of pure novelty or state- of-the-
art performance.
4.1 Incorporatingdomain expertise
Domain expertise from the PO can help in model development as
POsoftenhavedecadesofexperienceandaccumulatedknowle dgein deﬁning and solving related problems. Speciﬁcally, doma in ex-
pertiseisusefulin:i)determiningadequatefeaturesandd atarepre-
sentations, ii) enforcing inductive bias and regularizati on in mod-
els, iii) choosing simpliﬁed parameterizations, iv) inter preting the
learned modelsand outputs.
Domain expertise is invaluable for collecting features tha t are
relevanttoaproblem.ThisisespeciallyrelevantinAI4Gpr oblems
where there are few samples compared to the number of feature s
or where informative features are mixed with noisy features . For
instance, topredict the lateeﬀects of chemotherapy oncanc er pa-
tients, we found that including all chemotherapy drugs gave us a
higher predictive performance as compared to prior work. Ho w-
ever, clinical researchers know that only certain drugs hav e been
clinicallylinkedtocertainlateeﬀectsinotherprioranal yses.This
suggests that the additional confounding features were pro bably
spuriouscontributorstopredictiveperformanceandhence should
notbeincludedin themodel.
In addition to helping determine data representation, doma in
expertise can help improve performance by embedding speciﬁ c
knowledge, often in the form of inductive bias or regulariza tion,
in model design. For example, ﬁnding promising solar cell te ch-
nologiesisoftenadiﬃcultandatime-consumingtask.Asola rcell
consistsofastackofvarioussemiconductormaterials,whe reeach
layer performs a certain electrical and optical function an d fabri-
cationparameters areoptimizedformaximizing solarenerg y cap-
tured.A machine learning modelcan avoid theneed for resour ce-
intensive physical experiments and accelerate the paramet er op-
timization step. Combining a supervised machine learning m odel
with a physical model of solar cell operation calibrated by a n ex-
pertallowed foramodelregularizationmethodbasedonphys ical
principles [49] and an order of magnitude reduction in the ti me
and resources requiredtocreate a solarcell[45, 49].
Further, AI4G projects often involve collaborations spann ing
multiplecountriesandPOsinadiﬀerent countryarelikelyt oface
unique challenges that only local experts would be aware of. For
example, work on the anti-poaching PAWS project [18] uses th e
localknowledgeofparkrangers toconstrainpredictedsear ch pat-
terns toareas that canbefeasiblyvisited.
If an interpretable model is used, then domain experts may be
able to use aggregated model predictions to draw larger conc lu-
sionsaboutaproblem.Forexample,inourcollaborationstu dying
thefoodsecurityinlow-resourcecommunitiesinMalawibas edon
survey panel dataof households,domainexperts were ableto use
the outputs of interpretable models to recognize spatial an d sea-
sonalpatternsassociatedwiththefoodsecuritystatusoft hecom-
munitiesandvillages.Thesecommunity-levelinsightscan helplo-
cal governments manage their resources more eﬃciently acro ss
thecommunities and over time.
Takeaway 6.Endeavor to incorporate the PO’s do-
main expertise in model development when possible
through methods such as feature selection and engi-
neering, modelchoice, and modelregularization.