Supply Chain Risk Management and Articial Intelligence:
State of the Art and Future Research Directions
George Baryannisa, Sahar Validib, Samir Daniband Grigoris Antonioua
aDepartment of Computer Science, School of Computing & Engineering, University of
Hudderseld, Hudderseld, UK;bDepartment of Logistics, Operations, Hospitality and
Marketing, Hudderseld Business School, University of Hudderseld, Hudderseld, UK
ABSTRACT
Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) encompasses a wide variety of strategies
aiming to identify, assess, mitigate and monitor unexpected events or conditions
which might have an impact, mostly adverse, on any part of a supply chain. SCRM
strategies often depend on rapid and adaptive decision making based on potentially
large, multidimensional data sources. These characteristics make SCRM a suitable
application area for Articial Intelligence (AI) techniques. The aim of this paper is
to provide a comprehensive review of supply chain literature that addresses prob-
lems relevant to SCRM using approaches that fall within the AI spectrum. To that
end, an investigation is conducted on the various denitions and classications of
supply chain risk and related notions such as uncertainty. Then, a mapping study is
performed to categorise existing literature according to the AI methodology used,
ranging from mathematical programming to Machine Learning and Big Data An-
alytics, and the specic SCRM task they address (identication, assessment or re-
sponse). Finally, a comprehensive analysis of each category is provided to identify
missing aspects and unexplored areas and propose directions for future research at
the con
uence of SCRM and AI.
KEYWORDS
supply chain risk management; articial intelligence; decision making; SCRM
strategy; supply chain disruption
1. Introduction
Supply chains, especially global ones, have always been aected by predictable or
unforeseen events that threaten their protability and continuity. Practitioners and
researchers have, thus, been interested in investigating the causes of these events in
an attempt to mitigate the eects of the associated risks. This interest has increased
signicantly over the past two decades for three main reasons. First, the adoption of
lean management and just-in-time philosophy in production and logistics may have
increased eciency but have left supply chains vulnerable to adverse events since they
leave little room for error and change (Snyder et al. 2016). Second, rms are increas-
ingly global and less vertically integrated, increasing the complexity of supply chains
and exposing them to much more risks (Behzadi et al. 2018). Third, numerous events
have been witnessed to disrupt global supply chains and have attracted worldwide
attention. These range from natural disasters, such as the 2011 Thailand 
oods which
caused a global shortage of hard disk drives (Chopra and Sodhi 2014), to man-made
Corresponding author. Email: g.bargiannis@hud.ac.uk