propose a two-phase knowledge framework for risk assessment, with experts formulat-
ing the initial input to genetic algorithms. Micheli, Mogre, and Perego (2014) propose
a decision support system that involves the decision maker throughout the SCRM
process, from the identication of risks and corresponding mitigation measures and
budget to the denition of risk proles in terms of likelihood and impact. It should also
be noted that the work of Tang, Lau, and Ho (2008) is the only fuzzy programming
study that focuses on risk assessment, rather than risk mitigation, as is the case for
all others. Table B5 in Appendix B includes all reviewed studies that fall under the
fuzzy programming category.
5.4. Hybrid Approaches within Mathematical Programming
A small subset of the SCRM approaches that exploit mathematical programming
techniques do not belong strictly to one of the previous categories, either because they
compare dierent techniques or because they attempt to combine two or more of them
in a hybrid framework. Most cases involve employing fuzzy sets in relation to stochastic
programming or robust optimisation. Two studies put dierent approaches head-to-
head for the problem of supplier selection under risk but do not propose a full-
edged
hybrid: Wu and Olson (2008) compare chance-constrained programming, data envel-
opment analysis and multi-objective programming, while Li and Zabinsky (2011) com-
pare two-stage stochastic programming with chance-constrained programming models,
noting that the latter requires less computational eort but does so at the penalty of
discretising the relationships between parameters.
A hybrid approach combining chance-constrained and fuzzy models has been pro-
posed by Pishvaee, Torabi, and Razmi (2012) for the design of a green supply chain
under uncertainty. The proposed model includes constraints on fuzzy events (e.g. re-
lated to fuzzy demands) which do not need to always hold but which need to exceed a
specic credibility threshold. Similar constraints are also used by Bai and Liu (2016)
but within a robust optimisation setting. Vahdani et al. (2013) approach the design of a
closed loop supply chain under uncertainty with a similar fuzzy chance-constrained hy-
brid, incorporating, however, interval programming as well. This allows their model to
deal with uncertain parameters presented as intervals without knowing their distribu-
tion. Another fuzzy chance-constrained hybrid is proposed by Zhalechian et al. (2016)
to simultaneously address the facility location and vehicle routing problems under un-
certainty. Due to its complexity, a hybrid metaheuristic combining the self-adaptive
genetic algorithm and variable-neighbourhood search is applied to solve it.
Instead of chance-constrained models, other proposals for supply chain network de-
sign under uncertainty combine fuzzy features with standard stochastic programming,
such as the work of Felfel, Ayadi, and Masmoudi (2016), which uses a typical two-stage
three-objective stochastic formulation; however, to select the preferred solution among
Pareto-optimal alternatives, they maximise a fuzzy membership function that corre-
sponds to a compromise among the three objectives. Vahdani et al. (2012) propose a
similar hybrid for supply chain design under uncertain capacity and costs, but also
calculate the robust counterpart of the model before solving it. Keyvanshokooh, Ryan,
and Kabir (2016) propose a hybrid robust-stochastic programming approach due to
their model incorporating stochastic uncertainty for transportation costs and polyhe-
dral uncertainty sets for demand and return. Haddadsisakht and Ryan (2018) propose
a similar robust-stochastic hybrid for closed-loop supply chain network design, but
use stochastic uncertainty for demand and polyhedral uncertainty sets for carbon tax.
15