micro-level events or conditions that adversely in
uence any part of a supply chain,
leading to operational, tactical or strategic level failures or irregularities".
2.2. Related notions
While risk and uncertainty are the most common terms used in association with SCRM
in literature, there are several related notions that usually stress either negative con-
sequences of risk or positive outcomes of managing risk. A summary of denitions
for some of these notions follows, based on relevant discussions that have appeared in
SCRM literature.
Vulnerability and disturbance are frequently used by researchers and practitioners
to describe a supply chain aected by risk. Both J uttner (2005) and Martin and
Peck (2004) dene vulnerability as an exposure to disturbances due to supply chain
risks, aecting the ability to satisfy the end customer market needs. Disruption is
a synonym of disturbance, albeit one with graver consequences: while disturbance
may simply interrupt a normal situation, disruption causes a violent dissolution of
continuity (Pfohl, K ohler, and Thomas 2010). As further analysed in Section 2.4,
disruption has been widely used to denote risks caused by natural and man-made
disasters. Other terms with negative connotations that have been used in relation to
risk are threat, crisis, disaster, catastrophe, peril, hazard and emergency.
Other negative terms associated with risk are threat , which is either viewed as a
synonym for risk, or as a lower probability event than risk (Schlegel and Trent 2014)
andcrisis , dened as "the interruption of one or more supply chain activities, resulting
in a major disruption of the normal 
ow of goods or services" (Natarajarathinam,
Capar, and Narayanan 2009).
In terms of positive outcomes, risk is often associated with robustness andresilience ,
which are usually viewed as means of decreasing supply chain vulnerability (Behzadi
et al. 2018). Robustness is dened by Colicchia and Strozzi (2012) as \the extent to
which the supply chain is able to carry its functions for a variety of possible future
scenarios". Resilience puts more emphasis on the proactive ability to adapt in prepa-
ration for unexpected events so that it is possible to quickly recover from them and
reinstate continuity of operations in the supply chain (Ponomarov and Holcomb 2009).
Other terms with positive connotations that have appeared in literature relevant to
risk are security, safety, sustainability, opportunity, 
exibility and agility.
It should be noted that the aforementioned notions are all qualitative in nature. Risk
is often quantied through a product of its probability and its impact, provided that
these can be represented numerically. Alternatively, SCRM researchers have proposed
the use of several measures, most of which are borrowed from research in nancial
risk management. Among them, the most commonly used are deviation-based, aim-
ing to quantify risk in terms of how much it aects a situation compared to normal
circumstances. Examples include variance, standard, absolute or expected deviation,
or central semideviation. Another commonly used category includes the downside-risk
measures of value-at-risk (VaR) and conditional-value-at-risk (CVaR). VaR expresses
a loss threshold given a specic probability, while CVaR expresses the average loss be-
yond that threshold. For a more detailed analysis of risk measures, please refer to Heck-
mann, Comes, and Nickel (2015) and Govindan, Fattahi, and Keyvanshokooh (2017).
5