Limited
3%Yes
4%
No93%
(a) Large datasetsFour
8%Three
11%Five or more
20%
Two
23%
One
38%
(b) Number of parameters
Figure 6.: Complexity of reviewed studies in terms of datasets and parameters.
2018). The results of this survey, illustrated in Fig. 6a, show that very few SCRM
approaches exploit large datasets: 4% use Big Data aiming to improve supply chain
visibility (Solanki and Brewster 2013), security (Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh 2013) and
sustainability (Mani et al. 2017) and a further 3% employ larger than average case
studies, although in a Big Data scale. Much like the case of Machine Learning, SCRM
research has yet to exploit the full potential of Big Data Analytics.
The complexity of the studies examined, with regard to the number of risk (or
uncertainty) aspects taken into consideration, varies considerably from one category
to another and even within categories. As shown in Fig. 6b, 38% of those that ex-
plicitly state the employed models focus on a single uncertain parameter, 23% focus
on two, 11% on three, 8% on four and the rest, 20% include models with 5 or more
uncertain parameters. On average, it seems that using fuzzy programming techniques
allows for the inclusion of a comparatively larger number of uncertain parameters.
This is in line with the observation in literature that fuzzy models are, in general,
easier to solve than stochastic ones and, hence, may accommodate more parameters
in comparison(Inuiguchi and Ram k 2000).
Fig. 7 examines the reviewed studies with regard to the specic SCRM tasks they
realise. The vast majority (84%) focuses on risk response, most prominently supply
chain models that avoid or mitigate risk and uncertainty eects. An additional 4% ac-
companies response with some form of risk assessment, while another 4% combines as-
sessment with risk identication. Identication and assessment are tackled individually
by very few studies (2% and 3%, respectively). Finally, only 9 out of the 276 reviewed
studies (3%) oer holistic approaches, encompassing all three major phases of SCRM
(identication, assessment and response). This imbalance parallels the dierence in
popularity among the employed techniques. Mathematical programming techniques
have been applied by the majority of the examined studies and such techniques are
suitable for risk response, sometimes augmented with assessment capabilities through
the use of a variety of risk measures. Such techniques are not capable of identify-
ing risks. This can only be achieved within the minority of studies that apply other
solutions, from agents and network-based models, to automated reasoning, Machine
Learning and Big Data Analytics.
23