5.6. Agent-based
SCRM is, by nature, a problem that involves several dierent entities interacting
with each other, each with dierent and possibly con
icting requirements. Hence, it
lends itself to agent-based formalisations, where entities within the supply chain are
modelled as agents and SCRM-related issues are addressed by relying on multi-agent
system research.
The earliest use of agents in the context of SCRM is the work of Kiekintveld et
al. (2004), where an agent handles interactions with suppliers, customers, manufactur-
ing and shipping operations, under circumstances of 
uctuating supply and demand.
The agent observes supply and demand conditions based on continuous market anal-
ysis and attempts to nd a balance between them, which then has to be maintained
by controlling all sales and procurements actions. Bansal et al.(2005) propose a simi-
lar agent-based approach that monitors key performance indicators (KPIs) to identify
disruptions, then evaluates corrective actions and nds the optimal one. Note that
these works are the rst approaches in this survey so far to oer a holistic approach.
Multi-agent systems have also been used as simulation tools for inventory man-
agement to reduce costs and improve ll rate (Chan and Chan 2006), to resolve col-
laboration issues among supply chain entities that arise due to uncertain supply and
demand (Kwon, Im, and Lee 2007) and to reduce costs and the bullwhip eect in a
multi-stage supply chain (Zarandi, Pourakbar, and Turksen 2008). In all the afore-
mentioned approaches, agent technology is preferred over mathematical optimisation
due to its inherent capability to capture negotiation and coordination among dier-
ent parties and the relatively less computational eort required. In contrast, Mele et
al. (2007) propose a hybrid approach for retrotting a production/distribution supply
chain design to address uncertain demand, transport and processing times. A genetic
algorithm is employed to solve a multi-stage stochastic model of the problem, but the
tness of each iteration's individuals is calculated using agent-based simulation.
The work of Giannakis and Louis (2011) is notable as it goes beyond simulation
to explore the learning capabilities of multi-agent systems in the context of SCRM.
The proposed framework addresses all SCRM phases and starts similarly to others by
monitoring KPIs to identify deviations, which are then assessed in order to pinpoint
the root cause. Through case-based learning, successful past decisions are leveraged
when similarities with the current situation are identied (e.g. with regard to root
causes). The optimal decision is selected and its results simulated and quantied, with
all the information stored in order to be considered in similar situations in the future.
Recent work by Blos, da Silva and Wee (2018) proposes a holistic disruption man-
agement framework that combines multi-agent systems with variants of Petri Nets
called Production Flow Systems and Place-Transition Petri Nets. The latter are used
to model complex supply chain networks in several disruption scenarios. An agent-
based system is used to generate more scenarios based on the existing ones, choose the
most appropriate mitigation actions and evaluate the resulting eect in performance.
Then, based on a risk event database, the supply chain is monitored in order to detect
disruptions and immediately propose mitigation plans.
As shown in Table 3, the aforementioned agent-based approaches usually focus on
very few parameters (up to 4), since it is dicult and computationally complex to
simultaneously support a large number of policies that formalise agent behaviour.
Similarly to previous categories, large datasets and predictive or learning capabili-
ties are not supported, with the exceptions of the learning capability of Giannakis
and Louis (2011) and the predictive capability of Blos, da Silva and Wee (2018). In
18