which includes 11 uncertain parameters and relies on genetic algorithms to nd opti-
mal solutions. None of the reviewed studies in this category support large datasets. In
terms of decision-making capabilities, the work of Scott et al. (2015) stands out since
it proposes a decision support system for order portfolio recommendation that com-
bines chance-constrained optimisation with supplier selection using analytic hierarchy
process. Table B3 in Appendix B oers a detailed comparison of the studies belonging
to this category.
5.2. Robust Optimisation
If distributions for uncertain parameters are unavailable, robust optimisation tech-
niques are a suitable alternative. In such techniques, uncertain parameters are assumed
to have a nite set of possible realisations. Model solutions are evaluated in terms of
solution-robustness and model-robustness. Solution-robustness determines how \close"
to optimal a given solution is, measured using a cost function. Model-robustness eval-
uates how \feasible" the solution is, by examining which constraints are violated.
Robust optimisation approaches tend to focus on a limited number of parameters,
usually 1 to 3, mostly focusing on supply or demand uncertainties. In terms of ex-
ploiting large datasets, only two approaches consider this in a limited manner, in that
they conduct evaluations with larger-than-average test sets: Pishvaee, Rabbani, and
Torabi (2011) consider problems of size up to roughly 14 million elements while Dubey,
Gunasekaran, and Childe (2015) include a scenario where the problem size rises up to
165109.
Regarding decision-making capabilities, the only study that explicitly integrates the
proposed robust optimisation model into a decision-making framework is that of Hahn
and Kuhn (2012), although the decision-making process is still purely manual. Finally,
all robust optimisation studies focus only on the risk response phase of SCRM. For
a comparison of all studies based on robust optimisation, please refer to Table B4 in
Appendix B.
5.3. Fuzzy Programming
In handling the inherent uncertainty of SCRM, it is sometimes useful to incorporate
a level of 
exibility in the assumed values of parameters or in the satisfaction of
goals. This is realised through the use of fuzzy programming methods, where uncertain
parameters are treated as fuzzy numbers and constraints as fuzzy sets. Note that, since
the focus of this survey is on the risk aspects of supply chain, studies that rely solely
on 
exible programming have been excluded, since they assume uncertainty only on
goals and not parameters.
While earlier approaches seem to support only a small number of fuzzy parameters,
more recent studies have proposed models with more than 50 of them, as is the case of
Pishvaee, Razmi, and Torabi (2014) and Babazadeh et al. (2017), with both reducing
computational complexity by relying on techniques such as Benders decomposition or
the -constraint method. As should be expected, no approach directly supports large
datasets, since model validation is almost always based on a limited case study.
In terms of decision making, there are three notable cases that propose decision
support frameworks exploiting the dened fuzzy models. The latter three are analysed
in more detail. Selim and Ozkarahan (2008) employ a simple feedback loop to modify
coecient values until an acceptable solution is reached. Tang, Lau, and Ho (2008)
14