Yes
8%Limited
39%
No53%
(a) Decision makingYes
5%
No95%
(b) Prediction and learning
Figure 5.: Decision-making, prediction and learning capabilities of reviewed studies.
capability whatsoever, while 39% oer some form of managerial insights to assist in
decision making. Only 8% provide some form of decision support system, mainly in the
agent-based, reasoning, Machine Learning and Big Data categories. Hence, the vast
majority of studies exhibit a limited ability to act as a basis for a decision-making
framework that can eectively support practitioners in managing supply chain risks.
This hinders the potential benets of the proposed models as it is dicult to answer
\whether" and \how" they can be applied to relevant SCRM problems. Also, relatively
little attention has been given to using the intelligence and knowledge gained from the
proposed models to automate, at least partially, the decision-making process.
In terms of AI in the form of predictive and learning capabilities, SCRM research is
still in its infancy, as illustrated in Fig. 5b. It is clear that, by denition, mathemati-
cal programming techniques do not have these capabilities. Although agent-based and
network-based approaches are capable of prediction and learning, there is only one
reported study (Giannakis and Louis 2011) that proposes a multi-agent system for
SCRM that is capable of learning. On the other hand, Machine Learning approaches
are, by denition, geared towards creating systems that can predict and learn based on
provided input. However, initial studies (Bruzzone and Orsoni 2003; Jiang and Sheng
2009; Chen, Xia, and Wang 2010; Zhao and Yu 2011) have only explored few Machine
Learning techniques, such as ANNs or Bayesian models. Newer techniques and recent
advances in more established ones have yet to be exploited in the context of SCRM.
The more recent studies of He et al. (2015) and Fan, Heilig, and Voss (2015) have pro-
vided conceptual SCRM frameworks that rely on Machine Learning techniques and
Big Data but have not proceeded to implementing, applying and evaluating the frame-
works. To the best of the authors' knowledge, the only recent studies that implement
learning algorithms in the context of SCRM are Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh (2013),
Garvey, Carnovale, and Yeniyurt (2015) and Ojha et al. (2018).
While the so-called Big Data and associated analysis techniques have made a con-
siderable impact in various research elds and applications, this has not yet been
made evident in the eld of supply chain research, despite the potentially transforma-
tive capabilities of data science (Waller and Fawcett 2013; Choi, Wallace, and Wang
22