with production times, quantities and capacities (input), along with corresponding
cost estimates (output). Based on these training data, the ANNs learn how to corre-
late input and output, gaining the capability of calculating cost estimates for dierent
scenarios.
ANNs are also exploited in Zhao and Yu (2011) to solve the problem of supplier
selection, while Jiang and Sheng (2009) propose a reinforcement learning algorithm to
improve the supplier selection process. Chen, Xia, and Wang (2010) employ Bayesian
learning to evaluate dierent responses to the problem of unreliable suppliers. Finally,
Garvey, Carnovale, and Yeniyurt (2015) use Bayesian networks to model risk depen-
dency graphs which have the ability to adapt when new knowledge is acquired, thus
making sure that risk propagation is modelled accurately.
The most recent studies in this category use Big Data Analytics for various SCRM
tasks. Generic SCRM frameworks based on Big Data are proposed in Fan, Heilig, and
Voss (2015) and He et al. (2015), based on monitoring data both within and external
to the supply chain. The case of 
eet management is explored in Mani et al. (2017)
with vehicle tracking systems employed to identify social and environmental risks (e.g.
theft of vehicles and goods). On the other hand, Big Data are used in Papadopoulos
et al. (2017) to determine how best to achieve supply chain resilience in the face of
disaster. While the latter three studies do not use data sources for any predictive or
learning purposes, there is a handful of recent studies that do and are brie
y described
next.
Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh (2013) analyse large amounts of Web data using semi-
supervised learning to determine the trustworthiness of vendors, thus allowing identi-
cation of deceivers. Risk identication is also explored by Ye, Xiao and Zhu (2015),
focusing, however, on nancial risk. Publicly available economic performance data
for Chinese rms are collected are used to train multi-class Support Vector Machine
(SVM) classiers. These models are able to determine whether a rm is prone to sup-
ply, demand, product or external disruptions. Bayesian prediction is used in Shang,
Dunson, and Song (2017) to assess transport time risks in air cargo supply chains.
Li and Wang (2017) use big data collected by sensors in a food supply chain to dy-
namically predict the product time-temperature prole and adjust prices accordingly.
Finally, Ojha et al. (2018) perform analysis of risk propagation using Bayes networks,
automatically learning the interconnections between several risk factors for dierent
supply chain stakeholders and using this knowledge to determine probability of occur-
rence and cost for risks.
6. Discussion and Conclusions
Based on the analysis in the previous section, answers to the research questions stated
at the beginning of this survey are provided and a set of research gaps are identied
with regard to applying AI technologies in SCRM. Then, for each one of the identied
gaps, recommendations for future research are oered.
6.1. Gaps
While most of the reviewed studies focus on designing and evaluating a mathematical
model that takes a number of uncertainties and risks into account, there is less focus
on establishing and analysing the applicability of the proposed models. Indeed, as
shown in Fig. 5a, 53% of the reviewed studies do not provide any decision-making
21