disasters such as the 9/11 terrorist attacks. They also include events that cause nan-
cial or political instability, such as the 2008 global nancial crisis (World Economic
Forum 2012) and the subsequent Great Recession or the decision in 2016 of the UK
to withdraw from the European Union (Brexit) (Matthews 2017).
Research in supply chain risk management (SCRM) has included many dierent
methodologies, from qualitative ones such as empirical studies and conceptual the-
ories to quantitative approaches such as mathematical optimisation, statistics and
simulation (Ghadge, Dani, and Kalawsky 2012). In terms of implemented strategies,
SCRM can follow either a reactive or a proactive strategy: the former is applied after
a risk materialises, while the latter allows to identify and assess risks before they oc-
cur, in order to prepare suitable mitigation and contingency plans. Experience drawn
from cases such as the Philips/Ericsson one in 2000 (Norrman and Jansson 2004) led
researchers to place more focus on proactive strategies since delayed risk responses
have proven to be signicantly damaging. Recent events such as the KFC chicken
supply crisis in early 2018 (Green 2018) strengthen the view that weighing risks and
preparing contingency plans ahead of a major switch in a supply chain can potentially
prevent signicant losses. To achieve this, proactive strategies rely on the ability to
accurately predict the likelihood of occurrence and the potential impact of risks. This
necessary predictive capability can be achieved using techniques that fall within the
broad spectrum of Articial Intelligence (AI).
AI research has had a long history since the creation of the Turing Test in 1950 and
the naming of the eld at the 1956 Dartmouth workshop (Solomono 1985). Interest
in the eld has seen wide variations, from periods of relatively low interest (known as
AI winters) to periods of resurgence and rapid progress. Starting in the early 2000s,
increasing computing power and advances in Big Data and Machine Learning research
have led to renewed interest in AI, going as far as being termed \the AI frenzy" in the
media (Lohr 2016), spearheaded by recent successes of systems such as IBM Watson1
and DeepMind's AlphaGo2. This resurgence has also led to AI being considered in
research areas and applications where it has not played an important role in the past
(such as human resources and recruitment (Zhao et al. 2015)), or in areas where classic
AI techniques have been applied but more recent advances have not been explored.
This survey aims to contribute to the latter case.
Methodologies and techniques that fall under the umbrella of AI are numerous. For
the purposes of this survey, a classication into ve broad categories is adopted: (1)
techniques that rely on some form of mathematical optimisation; (2) network-based
approaches that represent problems as sets of possible states and transitions among
them; (3) methodologies that adopt agent-based modelling and multi-agent system
interactions; (4) approaches that involve some form of automated reasoning based
on existing knowledge; and (5) machine learning and big data analytics techniques.
Exploiting these techniques can lead to several interesting applications in the eld of
SCRM, including, but not limited to, risk-aware automated supplier selection, risk
propagation modelling in a supply network, identication and prediction of deceptive
supply chain practices, data-driven explanation of disaster resilience, and end-to-end
decision support to facilitate collaborative disruption management.
The main purpose of this paper is to conduct a comprehensive review of SCRM-
related studies that involve AI methodologies to achieve their goals, essentially an-
swering the following research question: to what extent has research in the eld of
1https://www.ibm.com/watson/
2https://deepmind.com/research/alphago/
2