come from disparate sources, such as sales, consumer behaviour, product inventory,
transportation and distribution. All of these sources, especially in the case of global
supply chains, are characterised by large volumes, frequent updates and wide vari-
ability due to dierent materials, products and consumers. Several applications can
be envisioned, from reducing demand uncertainty based on consumer behaviour, to
using sensor data in distribution centres to mitigate transportation-related risks, to
increasing visibility and trust among suppliers.
The untapped potential of Big Data Analytics and AI with regard to SCRM has also
been identied by Ivanov and Dolgui (2018), who present a digitalisation framework
that envisions a cyber supply chain sitting on top of traditional supply chain analytics.
This cyber supply chain relies on and harnesses the power of big data, Internet of
Things, cloud and blockchain technologies. The authors highlight the need for research
that examines the relationships between these technologies and SCRM, a need that
has also been made evident throughout this survey.
6.3.4. Hybridisation
Something evident throughout this survey is the fact that dierent AI techniques have
a varying degree of applicability to the various phases of SCRM, due to possessing a
dierent set of capabilities. For instance, mathematical programming approaches are
successful in risk avoidance and mitigation but are incapable of automated decision
making and learning or handling large amounts of data. These are achievable through
automated reasoning, agents and Machine Learning techniques, which, however, are
not so eective in modelling highly complex systems such as supply chains. Hence, it
makes sense to investigate some form of hybridisation, which has previously only been
attempted among dierent mathematical programming techniques. Research geared
towards a hybrid framework that successfully combines powerful mathematical mod-
elling and optimisation along with some other AI technique that is capable of auto-
mated decision making based on prediction and learning has the potential to achieve
eective proactive and predictive management of risks in supply chains.
References
Abolghasemi, M., V. Khodakarami, and H. Tehranifard. 2015. \A new approach for supply
chain risk management: Mapping SCOR into Bayesian network." Journal of Industrial En-
gineering and Management 8 (1): 280{302.
Asar, A., M.C. Zhou, R.J. Caudill, and S. Asar. 2006. \Modelling risks in supply chains using
Petri net approach." International Journal of Services Operations and Informatics 1 (3):
273{285.
Azad, N., and H. Davoudpour. 2013. \Designing a stochastic distribution network model under
risk." International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 64 (1-4): 23{40.
Azad, N., H. Davoudpour, G.K.D. Saharidis, and M. Shiripour. 2014. \A new model to mitigat-
ing random disruption risks of facility and transportation in supply chain network design."
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 70 (9-12): 1757{1774.
Babazadeh, R., J. Razmi, M.S. Pishvaee, and M. Rabbani. 2017. \A sustainable second-
generation biodiesel supply chain network design problem under risk." Omega 66: 258{277.
Badurdeen, F., M. Shuaib, K. Wijekoon, A. Brown, W. Faulkner, J. Amundson, I.S. Jawahir,
T.J. Goldsby, D. Iyengar, and B. Boden. 2014. \Quantitative modeling and analysis of supply
chain risks using Bayesian theory." Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management 25
(5): 631{654.
26