clude a specic number of parameters; in the rest, the reasoning process is assumed
to apply to any type of risk.
Standard (i.e. not fuzzy) rules are employed in the works of Kayis and Karn-
ingsih (2012) and Emmenegger, Laurenzi, and Th onssen (2012). The former study
encodes SCRM knowledge in the form of rule chains and uses them to identify risks as
follows: specic characteristics of a supply network derive the occurrence of risk sub
factors, sub factors derive risk factors, risk factors derive risk events and nally, the
occurrence of a risk event leads to the system communicating this to the user. The
latter study is notable as one of the few that aims to exploit large datasets collecting
information from sources both within and beyond the supply chain in order to realise
automatic identication, validation and quantication of risks.
Large datasets are also included in the studies of Hofman (2011) and Solanki and
Brewster (2013) with the aim of increasing visibility in global supply chains. The
authors argue that administrative burden can be decreased if supply chain participants
share information such as product traceability as Linked Open Data, with appropriate
privacy, security and access control mechanisms. By minimising the amount of data
that is not visible, missing or uninterpretable, supply chain risk analysis may yield
improved results.
5.8. Machine Learning and Big Data
Within the broad eld of AI research, a rapid growth has been witnessed in recent
years in relation to research that involves Machine Learning. This includes techniques
that allow a computer program to learn by analysing input data, with or without
being given information about the corresponding output (supervised and unsupervised
forms). At the same time, the closely associated research strand of Big Data Analytics
focuses on processing and extracting knowledge from datasets that are characterised
by high volume, velocity and variety. As shown in Table 5, only a few SCRM studies
have followed these recent AI developments.
Table 5.: Machine Learning and Big Data Analytics for SCRM.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Prediction
Learning
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Bruzzone and Orsoni 2003) 2 No s Yes Yes X
(Jiang and Sheng 2009) 1 No Yes No Yes X
(Chen, Xia, and Wang 2010) 1 No s Yes Yes X
(Zhao and Yu 2011) 7 No Yes No Yes X
(Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh 2013) N/A Yes Yes Yes Yes X
(Fan, Heilig, and Voss 2015) N/A Yes Yes No Yes XXX
(Garvey, Carnovale, and Yeniyurt 2015) N/A No s No Yes X
(He et al. 2015) N/A Yes Yes Yes Yes XXX
(Ye, Xiao, and Zhu 2015) N/A Yes No Yes NoX
(Li and Wang 2017) 2 Yes s Yes No X
(Mani et al. 2017) N/A Yes s No NoX
(Papadopoulos et al. 2017) N/A Yes s No No X
(Shang, Dunson, and Song 2017) 1 Yes Yes Yes No X
(Ojha et al. 2018) N/A No s No Yes X
The earliest SCRM study that involves some form of Machine Learning is Bruzzone
and Orsoni (2003), which employs Articial Neural Networks (ANNs) for risk assess-
ment with regard to production losses. The ANNs are supplied with specic scenarios
20