2%3%
84%
4%4%3%Identication
Assessment
Response
Identication+Assessment
Assessment+Response
Holistic (I+A+R)
Figure 7.: SCRM tasks realised by the reviewed studies.
6.2. Managerial insights
The results of the survey indicate that supply chain and production researchers, in
general, are more inclined to investigate tried and proven mathematical program-
ming solutions rather than explore the potential of other AI techniques. This can be
attributed to the relatively less exposure techniques such as machine learning, au-
tomated reasoning and multi-agent systems have had within production and supply
chain research, despite the fact that they have been fruitful in other research areas.
Additionally, researchers are considerably less familiar with such techniques than they
are with stochastic or fuzzy programming, for instance.
A direct result of this imbalance is that decision makers in the industry are still
widely unaware of the potential of AI, especially in terms of managing risks and
uncertainty. However, this survey has uncovered the fact that relatively unexplored AI
techniques are more capable of providing automated decision making, predictive and
learning capabilities. Hence, decision makers should embrace these newer technologies
and collaborate with researchers to determine ways in which SCRM decision-making
can be improved. Note that this does not mean using AI as the sole decision maker,
but rather relying on AI to uncover new knowledge that decision makers can then
combine with their own expertise to arrive at the optimal decisions within the SCRM
process.
A related aspect is the observed gradual shift from analytical models to data-driven
ones, as evidenced in the work of Kuo and Kusiak (2018) for production research,
in general. This, however, is directly dependent on the availability of large amounts
of multi-dimensional data that should be as accurate as possible, since data-driven
techniques can often result in trivial or even incorrect decisions if the available data
is scarce or invalid. Thus, industry decision makers and stakeholders must strive to
enhance and safeguard data collection processes and also be ready to provide any
available data to SCRM researchers.
Availability of relevant data is often hindered by justiable concerns related to data
safety, security and transparency. Especially in the context of a supply chain, stake-
holders may be unwilling to provide detailed data even to their supply chain partners.
Fortunately, research in data security has led to several advances that guarantee pro-
24