events that carry risk and assess that risk using simulation. Other variants include P-
Trans-Nets (Blackhurst, Wu, and O'Grady 2004), which employ probabilities and are
used to simulate the performance of a supply chain, and Colored Petri Nets, used by
Zegordi and Davarzani (2012) to model change propagation and calculate the impact
of supply chain disruptions.
Bayesian networks have also been used for risk identication and assessment in
literature. Badurdeen et al. (2014) use them to create a risk network map that captures
the interrelations among risks and various driving factors; by inputting probabilities
for these factors, the network is able to calculate probabilities for specic risks. The
SCOR metrics model has also been mapped to a Bayesian network (Abolghasemi,
Khodakarami, and Tehranifard 2015), in order to assess supply chain performance
and evaluate potential aecting risks. Nepal and Yadav (2015) combine FMEA with
Bayesian networks and decision trees for the particular case of supplier selection,
computing probability and impact for sourcing risks, then calculating the total incurred
cost per supplier in order to rank them.
Qazi et al. (2017) propose a holistic SCRM approach that uses FMEA to identify
risks and risk sources, then employs Bayesian networks to build a risk dependency
network and use it to determine risk propagation, rank risks based on appropriate
measures and determine a fair allocation of budget to mitigation strategies. In a follow-
up work (Qazi et al. 2018), the authors use fault tree analysis instead of FMEA
and extend their approach to employ expected utility theory to capture dierent risk
strategies and to include dierent decision criteria apart from cost.
Table 2.: Network-based approaches to SCRM.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Prediction
Learning
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Blackhurst, Wu, and O'Grady 2004) 7 No No No NoXX
(Deleris, Elkins, and Pat e-Cornell 2004) N/A No No No No X
(Asar et al. 2006) N/A No No No NoXX
(Rossi and Pero 2012) N/A No No No NoXX
(Zegordi and Davarzani 2012) N/A No No No NoXX
(Badurdeen et al. 2014) N/A No s No NoXX
(Abolghasemi, Khodakarami, and Tehranifard 2015) N/A No No No NoXX
(Nepal and Yadav 2015) N/A No s No NoXX
(Qazi et al. 2017) N/A No s No NoXXX
(Qazi et al. 2018) N/A No s No NoXXX
In contrast to the approaches discussed so far, network-based approaches rarely fo-
cus on a specic set of uncertain parameters or risks. Instead, they provide a generalised
model that can be applied to model dynamic characteristics caused by uncertainty or
risk. Hence, in most cases, the number of parameters is not relevant so it is marked
as not applicable (N/A) in Table 2. No approaches utilise large datasets or support
learning, while some of them oer limited decision-making support, by discussing how
the proposed networks can be used by supply chain practitioners. Finally, all of the
studies in this category provide for risk identication and risk assessment, instead of
risk response which was the focus of almost all of the studies presented so far.
17