SCRM exploited AI capabilities such as decision making, prediction, learning and abil-
ity to deal with complex and uncertain environments? In order to eectively answer
this question, a critical comparison and assessment of relevant literature is conducted
through answering the following sub-questions for each reviewed study:
(1) Is any decision-making capability provided and has it been applied to in
uence
SCRM-related decisions?
(2) Is any predictive capability provided, with regard to future situations that aect
the supply chain in terms of risk?
(3) Is any learning capability provided, adapting decisions according to updated
knowledge?
(4) How many risk-related (or uncertain) parameters are considered?
(5) Are large datasets exploited?
(6) Which SCRM-related tasks (e.g. identication, assessment, response) are re-
alised?
Several literature reviews on topics relevant to SCRM have been published in re-
cent years3. However, to the best of the authors' knowledge, there has not been any
attempt to view SCRM literature under the prism of AI and assess how eectively
SCRM research has exploited the potential of AI techniques. In this context, the main
contributions of this survey are:
A comprehensive analysis of SCRM literature, in terms of AI-related capabilities,
namely decision making, prediction and learning
An investigation on the extent to which large datasets are exploited by existing
SCRM approaches
A correlation between AI-related methodologies and the SCRM tasks on which
they are applied
A detailed identication of research gaps and relevant future directions aiming
to harness the untapped potential of current advancements in AI research for
the benet of SCRM
As succinctly presented in Olhager (2013), production research and especially plan-
ning and control, has witnessed several paradigm shifts since the 1960s, moving from
a shop 
oor level to enterprise resource planning and eventually supply chain-wide de-
cision making. It can be argued that AI has gradually brought about a new paradigm
shift, leading to automated systems that can harness knowledge and data to improve
decision making within supply chains. This survey contributes to understanding the
progression of this shift so far, in what concerns SCRM, and mapping the way forward.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 oers a concise anal-
ysis of risk, uncertainty and related notions and provides the denitions of SCRM
and AI based on which this survey is constructed. Section 3 presents the methodology
followed for the review, also providing a comparison to related survey papers in liter-
ature. Section 4 contains a classication analysis of the reviewed studies, according to
publication year and venue, case studies and types of risk and uncertainty. Section 5
is the main part of the survey, answering the aforementioned research questions by
evaluating the reviewed studies in terms of their AI capabilities and the SCRM tasks
they realise. Finally, Section 6 discusses a set of research gaps that result from this
survey and proposes several interesting directions for future research.
3For a detailed analysis of relevant literature, please refer to Section 3.3
3