2. Background of Study
This section is devoted to analysing the background knowledge relevant to this litera-
ture review. It begins with a series of denitions on supply chain risk, uncertainty and
related notions, as well as SCRM, based on a meta-review conducted on previously
published survey and research agenda articles on supply chain risk. Then, a denition
of AI is provided that is relevant for the purposes of this survey.
2.1. Risk and Uncertainty
While there have been several attempts to dene supply chain risk, there is no uni-
versally accepted denition. Early attempts to dene risk in SCRM literature re-
lied on existing denitions in nance and enterprise risk management. For instance,
J uttner (2005) assumes March and Shapira's denition of risk as \the variation in the
distribution of possible outcomes, their likelihoods, and their subjective value" (March
and Shapira 1987). Risk denitions tend to be vague and ambiguous, involving a wide
array of core characteristics (Heckmann, Comes, and Nickel 2015). Among the various
proposals, there has been consensus on some characteristics of risks. Specically, there
is an agreement that risk involves exposure to an event (Holton 2004), which occurs
with varying likelihood and possible outcomes (Manuj and Mentzer 2008a).
On the other hand, there has been extensive debate on whether risk is a subjective
or objective phenomenon, whether it involves both negative and positive outcomes,
and the relation of risk and uncertainty (Khan and Burnes 2007). Those in favour of a
subjective view argue that a risk is determined by the viewpoints (social, political or
otherwise) of the stakeholders involved, while others maintain that risk is objectively
dened based on quantiable and measurable dimensions (Lupton 2013). In terms
of outcomes, risk is more commonly associated with the negative consequences (i.e.
losses) that follow an event occurrence, with relatively fewer researchers stressing the
positive eects (i.e. gains) that may be possible in a risky situation.
On the connection between risk and uncertainty, Manuj and Mentzer (2008b) view
risk as the expected outcome of an uncertain event, while Rao and Goldsby (2009)
link a risk to an event and the uncertainty of possible outcomes. Vilko, Ritala, and
Edelmann (2014) model a complete spectrum of the knowledge that decision makers
hold about the supply chain, ranging from complete certainty to radical uncertainty.
In between, there are four distinct stages of increasing levels of uncertainty; the closest
one to complete certainty is the one that the authors view as a basis for typical SCRM:
the situation where the supply chain structure is fully known and the likelihood and
impact of future events is known in terms of objective probabilities. This is in contrast
to the next more uncertain level where these probabilities are not known and SCRM
can only rely on subjective beliefs.
In the context of managing supply chain risks, the aforementioned debates can be
resolved in order to obtain a more specic risk denition. First, SCRM can certainly
benet from an objective rather than a subjective view, provided that the focus is
on wider applicability instead of individualised approaches. Second, the concept of
managing risks carries the connotation of adverse eects, in the sense of containing
or avoiding altogether the negative consequences accompanying risk. Finally, SCRM
is only eective when at least the supply chain structure is fully known. A recent risk
denition that captures these characteristics is provided by Ho et al. (2015), where
supply chain risk is dened as \the likelihood and impact of unexpected macro and/or
4