3. Review methodology
3.1. Search strategy
The literature review conducted for the purposes of this paper relies primarily on
automated search. Following recently published reviews (Fahimnia et al. 2015; Prakash,
Soni, and Rathore 2017), two levels of keywords are used, conjunctively combined
with AND. The rst level denes the search context and includes the term \supply
chain". The second level includes the following disjunction of terms related to risk and
uncertainty, as detailed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2: \risk OR uncertainty OR vulnerability
OR threat OR disruption OR disturbance OR crisis OR disaster OR catastrophe OR
peril OR hazard OR emergency OR opportunity OR resilience OR robustness OR
security OR safety OR 
exibility OR agility OR sustainability".
Bibliometric research (Mongeon and Paul-Hus 2016) suggests that the largest in-
dexing services currently are Elsevier's Scopus (with a bias towards researchers in
Europe) and Clarivate's Web of Science (with a bias towards researchers in the US).
While neither is a strict subset of the other, Scopus seems to have a slightly larger
coverage (22,800+ journals4as opposed to Web of Science's 20,300+5). Based on this,
Scopus was chosen as the primary resource for automated search.
To decide on a time period for the search, this survey relies on previously published
supply chain risk literature reviews, where the earliest reviewed study is published in
1978. Hence, it is reasonable to set the time period from 1978 up to and including
June 2018.
To assess and ensure completeness, three ancillary search procedures are included:
(1) backwards snowballing (i.e. checking reference lists) on select primary studies; (2)
title and abstract search on recent volumes of the most prominent journals in relevant
elds and (3) comparison against the articles explored by previous literature reviews
on supply chain risk (more details in Section 3.3).
3.2. Search scope
A series of inclusion and exclusion criteria frames the scope of this survey. First,
studies must be peer-reviewed and written in English. Second, each study must include
at least one practice, technique or methodology that has a proactive rather than a
reactive approach to a risk-related issue in supply chains. Note that studies do not
have to explicitly mention risk; instead, they may refer to uncertainty and/or any of
the related notions in Section 2.2. Third, the aforementioned practice, technique or
methodology must be articially intelligent, according to the denition included in
Section 2.5.
Additional criteria focus on excluding studies that are not specically related to
supply chain, risk management and AI. Specically, supply chain management publi-
cations with no concrete link to risk-related issues are excluded. Moreover, enterprise
risk management publications with no clear connection to supply chain are also ex-
cluded. Studies are also excluded if the proposed approaches do not satisfy the AI
denition in Section 2.5, e.g. if they rely exclusively on AHP, TOPSIS or FMEA
methods. Finally, due to the Scopus limit of 2000 results per year, studies that have
not been referenced at least once have also been excluded (this applies only to years
2013-2016).
4http://www.elsevier.com/solutions/scopus/content
5https://clarivate.libguides.com/webofscienceplatform/coverage
8