tected collection, storage and sharing of data. Blockchains are just one example of
a promising technology that has the potential to increase trust among supply chain
partners and increase adoption of techniques that rely on access to data (Mendling
et al. 2018). Therefore, the concerns of supply chain decision makers and stakeholders
should gradually be alleviated, removing data-related barriers to progress in terms of
the adoption of AI technologies in SCRM.
6.3. Future research directions
The potential of modern AI techniques in realising proactive and predictive SCRM
has only been explored by a minority of supply chain researchers. Hence, there are
plenty of opportunities for research on the con
uence of AI and SCRM that addresses
the identied gaps. Some of these are outlined in the rest of this section.
6.3.1. Decision making and applicability
In terms of automating the decision-making process in relation to SCRM, there are
several dierent alternatives that can be explored. Multi-agent systems, coupled with
semantic reasoning on large datasets, can be used as a basis for a decision support sys-
tem for SCRM, as explored in Giannakis and Louis (2016) for the purpose of increasing
supply chain agility. To the extent that SCRM-related knowledge can be encoded in
the form of rules, automated rule-based reasoning can be exploited, similarly to its
use by Paul (2015) for supplier selection. The advantage, in this case, is that such a
system can assist in various dierent SCRM tasks: rules can help in identifying risks,
assessing their probability and impact and choosing a response strategy.
6.3.2. Prediction and learning
Machine learning techniques can also be employed to not only automate SCRM de-
cisions but also transform traditional SCRM practices of of modelling supply chains
statically to a dynamic representation of the supply chain adapted through learning
and prediction. There are several dierent tasks within Machine Learning that can be
exploited for SCRM. Indicatively, unsupervised learning algorithms can be employed
to mine patterns in supply chain data that may be related to specic risks, assisting in
risk identication. Alternatively, the algorithm can be trained to identify risk patterns
based on example patterns that have been identied by practitioners. Learning-based
classication and prediction can also facilitate the risk estimation, assessment and mit-
igation processes, as applied in other elds such as economics (Galindo and Tamayo
2000).
6.3.3. Big Data
In close correlation to Machine Learning, Big Data Analytics can also prove benecial
to SCRM, even if adoption is still relatively low. It is notable that, while research
in other elds very often combines Machine Learning techniques with Big Data, the
presented analysis only yielded a single SCRM study that features both of these char-
acteristics, that of Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh (2013). This low adoption rate may be
due to reasons such as lack of understanding and skills, inability to identify suitable
data and low acceptance by SC partners (Nguyen et al. 2017).
As discussed by Waller and Fawcett (2013), data relevant to the supply chain can
25