of a US supply chain. All of the reviewed studies relate to risk response in the form
of risk-aware or uncertainty-focused supply chain planning or design, while some of
them (Dal-Mas et al. 2011; Azad and Davoudpour 2013; Azad et al. 2014) also provide
risk evaluation by relying on risk measures such as CVaR.
In terms of decision making, research is mostly geared towards dening, solving and
evaluating the proposed stochastic model, with less focus on how it may be integrated
into an SCRM decision-making process. Some of the works (e.g. (Ryu, Dua, and Pis-
tikopoulos 2004) or (Marufuzzaman et al. 2014)) do oer some managerial insights
with regard to the obtained results without, however, incorporating these insights into
a decision support system. Table B1 in Appendix B details all reviewed studies that
incorporate stochastic programming with continuous parameters.
5.1.2. Scenario-based
Assuming a continuous distribution for uncertain parameters often leads to excep-
tionally complex problems that are hard to solve. Instead, parameter values can be
assumed to be discrete (and nite), leading to a nite number of possible realisations,
called scenarios, each one with an attached probability. This is usually combined with
a two-stage setting, where some decisions are made beforehand, leading to a set of pos-
sible realisations; then, corrective actions (known as recourse) may need to be taken,
in order to meet goals.
The scenario-based stochastic approach is by far the most popular modelling choice
for SCRM. Its characterisation with regard to AI is similar to that of the previous sub-
category; this should be expected as the approaches dier mainly in how values are
attributed to uncertain parameters. The number of uncertain parameters is slightly
increased in some studies (e.g. (You, Wassick, and Grossmann 2009; Sch utz, Tomas-
gard, and Ahmed 2009; Ghavamifar, Makui, and Taleizadeh 2018)), though it should
be noted that the more parameters a model incorporates, the less scenarios can be
supported before the problem becomes exceedingly computationally complex. Tsiakis,
Shah, and Pantelides (2001) is notable for using a Europe-wide supply chain network
to evaluate the proposed model, while Koutsoukis et al. (2000) is one of the very few
stochastic programming approaches that implements a prototype decision support sys-
tem to assist the decision maker in addressing uncertain demand. All reviewed studies
in this category are provided in Table B2 in Appendix B.
5.1.3. Other
Other SCRM-related approaches that involve stochastic optimisation primarily rely
on chance-constrained (probabilistic) programming7(Gupta, Maranas, and McDonald
2000; Mitra et al. 2008; Guill en-Gos albez and Grossmann 2010; Scott et al. 2015)) or
dynamic programming (Huchzermeier and Cohen 1996; Fang et al. 2013). The former
is used when there are \soft" constraints which need only be satised with a pre-
specied probability (or reliability level), while the latter applies a divide-and-conquer
approach, by iteratively solving smaller sub-problems and reusing such solutions when
possible.
Almost all studies in this category propose models that include a single uncertain pa-
rameter (related to demand or product quality) in order to design supply chains that
are risk-aware, with the notable exception of Pasandideh, Niaki, and Asadi (2015),
7Note that probabilistic constraints are included in other studies as well, but as part of a hybrid approach,
hence they are discussed in Section 5.4.
13