Hudnurkar et al. 2017). The two most common supply chain risk classications in
literature are shown in Fig. 1. The rst, shown on the left side, classies risks ac-
cording to the level within the supply chain network that they aect or are sourced
from (Martin and Peck 2004; J uttner 2005; Rao and Goldsby 2009). Three main lev-
els are usually recognised. The rst involves risks that are external to the network,
alternatively termed environmental . The second level groups risks that are internal to
the network but external to the focal rm, also named as network orindustry risks.
The third level includes all risks that are internal to the rm, called organisational .
Rao and Goldsby (2009) recognise two additional levels related to the specic decision
problem at hand and characteristics of individual decision makers.
An alternative risk classication approach is based on the specic subset of the
supply chain that the risk aects or is sourced from (Martin and Peck 2004; Manuj
and Mentzer 2008b; Peidro et al. 2009; Tang and Nurmaya Musa 2011; Ho et al. 2015),
shown on the right side of Fig. 1. Five separate classes are identied. The rst involves
risks that are related to the supply chain as a whole and not to any specic part of
it; this category directly corresponds to the aforementioned rst level (external to the
network) and risks within are referred to as environmental (Martin and Peck 2004),
macro (Ho et al. 2015) or SC scope (Tang and Nurmaya Musa 2011). The second class
groups risks that are related to the supply side of the chain (or source, according to
the SCOR model). On the other hand, the third class contains all demand side risks
(deliver, according to SCOR). The fourth class involves risks that aect the supply
chain processes , alternatively termed manufacturing (Ho et al. 2015) or make (Tang
and Nurmaya Musa 2011) risks. The fth and nal class groups risks that relate
tocontrol over supply chain processes (equivalent to the infrastructural risks in Ho et
al. (2015)).
2.5. Articial Intelligence
Ever since its introduction in the 1950s, the eld of AI has witnessed alternating peri-
ods of intense growth and signicant decline. In recent years, factors such as increasing
computational power and availability of Big Data, among others, have led to renewed
interest in the eld. Due to this constant evolution in AI research, the denition of
what is considered AI is also continually evolving.
Legg and Hutter (2007) have attempted a thorough analysis of well known de-
nitions of intelligence in order to come up with a formalised denition and measure
of Machine Intelligence. In their analysis, they identify two fundamental prerequisite
features for considering a human or machine intelligent: (1) the ability to carefully
choose their actions in a way that leads to success or prot, in terms of some kind
of objective or goal; (2) the ability to deal not with a fully known environment, but
with a range of possibilities which cannot be wholly anticipated, through learning and
adaptation.
For the purposes of this survey, an SCRM approach is considered as articially
intelligent if it satises both of the aforementioned characteristics: it should be able
toautonomously decide on a course of action that leads to success in SCRM-related
objectives and do so under a partially unknown supply chain environment. The partic-
ular AI techniques that are exploited can range from traditional symbolic AI, relying
on mathematical, or knowledge-based problem representations, to sub-symbolic AI,
including, for instance, fuzzy systems and evolutionary computation, to statistical AI,
encompassing Machine Learning approaches.
7