0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90Stochastic Programming - Scenario-basedStochastic Programming - Continuous
Stochastic Programming - Other
Fuzzy Programming
Robust Optimisation
Hybrid Mathematical Programming
Machine Learning and Big Data
Network-based
Agent-based
Reasoning9039
10
53
30
15
14
10
8
7
Number of studies
Figure 4.: Distribution of reviewed studies according to the adopted approach.
5. AI-focused analysis of reviewed studies
In this section, the selected studies are evaluated in terms of their AI-related capa-
bilities: the number of risk/uncertain parameters considered, the exploitation of large
datasets and their decision-making, predictive and learning capabilities. Results are
presented in comparison tables, where a Yes/ s/No value indicates full, limited or
no support of the corresponding capability. Also, the SCRM tasks realised by each
approach are determined, choosing among identication, assessment and response.
It should be noted that mathematical programming approaches (based on stochas-
tic, fuzzy and robust optimisation models) fall under the umbrella of AI based on
the denition in Section 2.5, due to their ability to assist in making decisions under
partially unknown environments. However, such approaches exhibit limited decision-
making capabilities, while their nature precludes any form of prediction or learning.
As a compromise, this survey includes such studies, but they are only brie
y discussed,
though detailed comparison tables can be found in Appendix B.
5.1. Stochastic Programming
The most common approach to SCRM is to use stochastic parameters to model any
aspect that is subject to risk or uncertainty and then optimise the resulting model with
regard to one or more objective functions, often cost-related. The heart of any stochas-
tic programming approach is the mathematical model which encodes the knowledge
and expertise of the practitioners and researchers that propose it.
5.1.1. Continuous parameters
Some models rely on the assumption that continuous distributions for all uncertain
parameters are known (or can be estimated) beforehand and all decisions are made
based on these distributions. In most cases, a single uncertain parameter (most often
demand) is included and evaluation is based on small-to-medium datasets, with the
exception of You and Grossmann (2008), which presents a slightly larger case study
12