Finally, Zahiri and Pishvaee (2017) propose a robust possibilistic model for supply
chain network design with uncertain parameters following trapezoidal distributions
and determining robustness based on the credibility measure.
Pavlov et al. (2018) address the problem of assessing the resilience of a supply
chain using a hybrid methodology that combines fuzziness and the genome method.
Supply chain reliability is modelled through possibility of failure, while the genome
method is used to determine the most ecient structure for the supply chain network
that achieves a certain (or maximum) reliability level. Jabbarzadeh, Fahimnia and
Sabouhi (2018) use fuzzy c-means clustering to score supplier sustainability based on
several criteria. These scores are then used as input parameters to a stochastic model
that aims to minimise total cost and maximise sustainability performance, when the
percentage of a supplier's capacity that is disrupted is uncertain.
Less common hybrids are centred around simulation techniques. Tong, Feng, and
Rong (2012) present a two-stage scenario-based stochastic programming model for
supply chain planning under 
uctuating demand and yield and solve it using a
simulation-based heuristic that can handle large scenario numbers. Claypool, Norman,
and Needy (2014) model supply, demand and exposure risk within a mixed-integer pro-
gramming model, whose solutions are used as inputs in a simulation that analyses the
results of implementing them.
Regardless of the combination examined, the aforementioned studies exhibit a sim-
ilar prole with regard to their AI-related features. Table B6 in Appendix B oers
a comparison of hybrid mathematical programming approaches to SCRM. Most of
them deal with a low number of uncertain parameters, with the exception of Vahdani
et al. (2012) and Zhalechian et al. (2016), while none of them exploit large datasets.
Almost all of them oer managerial insights on how the proposed models can assist in
decision making but none propose a full-
edged decision support system. Finally, with
the exception of Pavlov et al. (2018) which focuses on risk assessment, the rest focus
on risk mitigation by addressing various issues in relation to supply chain network
design under uncertainty.
5.5. Network-based
The complex and dynamic nature of SCRM decision making, especially under uncer-
tainty, has led several researchers to adopt a network-based model to represent the
various possible states, their outcomes and the possible transitions between them.
Four studies have been identied that use some form of Petri Nets and ve that use
Bayesian Belief Networks8. In addition, a Generalised Semi-Markov Process is used in
a single study (Deleris, Elkins, and Pat e-Cornell 2004) along with Monte Carlo sim-
ulation in order to estimate the probability distribution of supply chain losses caused
by disruptions.
Reasoning Petri Nets are employed by Asar et al. (2006) to model supply chains
as a discrete event system. The networks include rules that concern frequency and
cause-eect relationships of events, as well as probability of threats. Using the net-
works, the authors are able to determine how threats propagate and what preventive
actions are necessary. Supply chains have also been modelled using attributed Petri
Nets (Rossi and Pero 2012), in order to be able to embed logistic parameters within
the network. The authors compute the coverability graph of the network to identify
8Bayesian networks are only used in these studies only for inference. Studies that use such models for learning
as well are classied within the Machine Learning and Big Data category, discussed in Section 5.8
16