Deep learning: RNNs and LSTM 517
One recently proposed architecture that was inspired by LSTM is that of gated recurrent
units (GR Us) [ 10]. GR Us are simpler than LSTM, as they use one less gate and eliminate
the need for distinguishing between hidden states and memory cells. The most common
variant is described by
ut=σ(Wuhht−1+Wuxxt+bu), (21.43)
rt=σ(Wrhht−1+Wrxxt+br), (21.44)
˜ht=tanh(Whh(rt⊙ht−1)+Whxxt+bh), (21.45)
ht=ut⊙ht−1+(1−ut)⊙˜ht. (21.46)
Notice that GR Us mitigate the vanishing gradient problem using a mechanism verysimilar to that of LSTM; from Eq. (21.46), we can see that if u
t,iis nearly 1, then the
corresponding partial∂ht,i
∂ht−1,iis also nearly 1; rtandutare referred to as the reset and
update gates, respectively .
21.5. Example applications of RNNs at MICCAI
Here we explain some example applications of RNNs that have appeared at MICCAI.W e do not intend to provide an exhaustive list, but rather intend to provide the readerwith some concrete and in-depth examples of the material discussed above.
Recognizing surgical activities from motion in robot-assisted surgery. In
[8], surgical activities are recognized from motion using long short-term memory ,
speciﬁcally in the benchtop training setting for robot-assisted surgery . Here two types ofactivities are considered: short, low-level activities, or gestures , and longer, mid-level ac-
tivities, or maneuvers . Results match state-of-the-art performance in the case of gesture
recognition and surpass previous state-of-the-art performance in the case of maneuverrecognition. In the latter case, each time step was classiﬁed as one of 4 activities: suturethrow , knot tying, grasp pull run suture, and intermaneuver segment. The error rate in
this setting was reduced to 10
.5±4.0%(from 18 .3±6.2%), and the segmentwise edit
distance was reduced to 19 .5±5.2%(from 29 .7±6.8%).
Perimysium segmentation from HE stained microscopy images. In [22],
clockwork RNNs (which at their core operate at multiple time scales) are extended
from 1D to 2D for perimysium segmentation. Their approach is shown to performfavorably to multiple baselines, for example, achieving an intersection over union of0.84, in comparison to 0.77 with the common U-Net segmentation architecture [ 23].
Mitosis event detection and stage localization from phase-contrast mi-
croscopy images. In [24], CNNs and bidirectional LSTM are combined for detecting
mitosis events in phase-contrast microscopy image sequences, and, when present, for
localizing various stages (interphase, start of mitosis, formation of daughter cells, sep-aration of daughter cells) in the sequence. Here, CNNs are trained to detect the