504 Handbook of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
Figure 21.1 An example feedforward network (left) and an example recurrent neural network (right).
In the recurrent example, the function fand its parameters θhare shared over time.
or to a segmentation map of the same spatial extent. In contrast, recurrent neural net-
works naturally operate on variable-length input sequences and map to variable-length
output sequences, for example, to map from an image to various sentences that describethat image. This capability is achieved by sharing parameters and transformations overtime.
21.1.1 Simple motivating example
W e begin with a straightforward example. Consider a scenario in which we wish to
map from a set of measurements describing a tumor, x, to probability of malignancy ,
p(y|x). Suppose we wish to use feedforward neural networks to solve this problem, and
that we begin with the simple network
h=tanh(Wxhx+bh), (21.1)
p(y|x)=σ(Whyh+by), (21.2)
where all weights Wand all biases bare parameters to be learned, tanh is the hyperbolic
tangent function, and σis the sigmoid function, the output of which is between 0 and 1.
Given this network and a training set of ground-truth (xi,yi)pairs, say , one per patient,
we typically proceed by maximizing the conditional log-likelihood/summationtext
ilogp(yi|xi).
(This is equivalent to minimizing the overall cross-entropy between our predicted distri-
butions, given by the network, and the ground-truth distributions, given by our trainingdata, as usually done in practice.) Optimization is typically carried out using a variantof stochastic gradient descent, and this is usually carried out in practice by (1) forminga computation graph that corresponds to this network (and loss function) and (2) com-puting gradients via backpropagation [ 1].
W e now ask the following question: what if each patient is not associated with a
single measurement vector, but rather with a sequence of measurement vectors, each as-
sociated with a single examination? How can we modify the network above to map from