Deep learning: RNNs and LSTM 505
a sequence of measurement vectors to a single probability of malignancy , corresponding
to the latest examination date?
21.1.2 Naive solution
Perhaps the most straightforward approach is to stack each patient’s measurement vec-
tors into one, forming a new input of increased dimensionality . However, this approachis unsatisfactory for a number of reasons. First, we note that such a model makes no
attempt to capture the inductive biases we might hope for in our model: it would treat
all elements across all time steps in exactly the same way , rather than incorporating any
explicit mechanism to capture local dynamics. Second, we expect the number of exam-
inations per patient to vary , and as a reminder, the input to our network, x,h a sﬁ x e d
dimensionality . Thus if we proceed in this way , we will be forced to proceed with heuris-
tics, either by throwing away past information for some patients (those with many ex-
aminations) or by padding the inputs of other patients (those with fewer examinations).
21.1.3 Simple RNNs
Instead, let’s proceed by modifying the simple network above to carry over latent infor-
mation from time step to time step (after training, these latent states can be interpreted
as learned representations that are speciﬁc to our task). First, let’s modify our notation sothat the single-examination case more explicitly corresponds to a sequence of length 1:
h
1=tanh(Wxhx1+bh), (21.3)
p(y1|x1)=σ(Whyh1+by). (21.4)
Next, let’s modify the linear transformation used in the hidden-state computation to
depend not only our input xbut also on information from the past, which is carried
through the hidden state. W e will set our previous hidden state to 0, which can be
interpreted as carrying over no information from the past:
h0=0, (21.5)
h1=tanh(Whhh0+Wxhx1+bh), (21.6)
p(y1|x1)=σ(Whyh1+by). (21.7)
Notice that, from a modeling perspective, this network is precisely equivalent to our
original network; it differs only in notation and operation counts (introduced by the
unnecessary matrix-vector multiply involving h0=0). However, our network now nat-
urally extends to patients with any number of examinations:
h0=0, (21.8)
h1=tanh(Whhh0+Wxhx1+bh), (21.9)