514 Handbook of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
Figure 21.5 Depiction of truncated backpropagation with a sequence of T=10 time steps, perform-
ing updates every ˜T=2 time steps. As in Figs. 21.3 and21.4, inputs are fed to an RNN to form hidden
states, and these hidden states are used to compute per-time-step outputs; and during training, each
output is associated with a loss (e.g., cross-entropy). We ﬁrst compute a forward and backward pass
using the ﬁrst group alone (time steps 1 and 2), and we use the obtained gradients to update model pa-
rameters. Next, we pass the stale hidden state to the next group (this hidden state is not recomputed
using the updated parameters). Next, we compute a forward and backward pass using the secondgroup alone (time steps 3 and 4), and again update the model parameters. And so on. This heuristicdemands 1/5 the working memory as typical backpropagation (since we only need to cache states on aper-group basis during backpropagation), and it yields 5x as many gradient updates per computation.
of a sequence consists of a surgeon beginning to suture. The true underlying distribu-
tion captures many possible ways to complete the sequence (as there are many possible
ways that the suture will be completed); however, we often have access to only onesuch future – the speciﬁc future that was observed in the sequence that we collected.
Because of this, there is a disconnect between training an RNN-based generative model
andsampling from an RNN-based generative model at inference time. At training time,
we resort to teacher forcing :a tt i m et , when computing f
(ht−1,xt−1,θ), we do not sample
xt−1from our model, but rather use the observed xt−1that comes directly from our
training data.
21.4. Long short-term memory and gated recurrent units
Long short-term memory (LSTM) was introduced to alleviate the vanishing gradient
problem [ 18], and has become one of the most popular RNN architectures to date.
Gated recurrent units (GR Us) [ 10] were later introduced as a simpler alternative to
LSTM, and have also become quite popular. Here we will introduce both architecturesin the context of the vanishing gradient problem, and we will see that LSTM andGR Us alleviate this problem in very similar ways. For an intuitive view of the primary
difference between simple RNNs and LSTM / GR Us, see Fig. 21.6.
W e ﬁrst remark that many different variants of LSTM and GR Us exist in literature,
and that even the default implementations in various major deep learning frameworksoften differ. (Performance is often similar – see, e.g., [ 21] – but this can nevertheless
lead to confusion when reproducing results.) The most common variant of LSTM is