Deep learning: RNNs and LSTM 513
spectral norms (long short-term memory is the subject of Sect. 21.4). W e also remark
that exploding gradients can also be an issue (for example, if the minimum singular
value across partials is λ>1); however, gradient clipping is routinely used in practice to
mitigate this issue, with the simplest solution being to clip the derivative with respectto each
θi,s ot h a te a c hl i e si nas p e c i ﬁ e dr a n g e .
21.3.3 Truncated backpropagation through time
Notice that the computational complexity of RNNs, during both the forward andbackward passes, grows linearly with sequence length; and recall that backpropagationrequires us to cache outputs during the forward pass (so that they can be reused duringthe backward pass). This means that, during training, the amount of memory we needgrows linearly with sequence length; and the amount of compute per gradient update also
grows linearly with sequence length. This can be prohibitive when sequences are long,and truncated backpropagation through time (TBTT) [20] is a heuristic that alleviates this
issue. TBTT is applicable when we form predictions at the subsequence level, and ismost commonly used when we have predictions (and associated losses during training)atevery time step.
This is perhaps easiest explained through an example. Consider a single training
sequence with length T
=10000. Using backpropagation through time, we would com-
pute a complete forward pass, caching all intermediate results in memory , and then acomplete backward pass, in the end visiting each time step twice. T o instead proceedwith truncated backpropagation, we ﬁrst choose a maximum number of time steps
˜T≤Tto visit before performing a gradient update; moving forward with the example,
let’s choose ˜T=100. Proceeding with TBTT , we perform a forward, backward pass
using only the ﬁrst 100 time steps, after which we perform a gradient update and dis-card all cached outputs except h
100from memory . Next, we proceed to time step 101,
carrying over the stale hidden state h100(which was computed with our oldparameters, be-
fore the gradient update). W e now complete a forward, backward pass using time steps101 through 200, take an optimization step, and discard cached outputs from memory .In repeating this process until our sequence is exhausted, we require only 1% of thememory as for full backpropagation; we perform 100x as many gradient updates; andin doing so we end up performing the same amount of overall computation as one fullforward, backward pass. This is illustrated in Fig. 21.5 (with T
=10 and ˜T=2).
21.3.4 Teacher forcing
When training RNN-based generative models using the factorized representationp
(x1,x2,...,xT)=p(x1)p(x2|x1)···p(xT|x1,x2,...,xT−1), we usually have access to
only a limited training dataset which consists of a ﬁxed number of training sequences.For example, in the case of modeling surgical hand motion, imagine that the beginning