Deep learning: RNNs and LSTM 507
(In fact, again under fairly unrestrictive assumptions, one can even show that simple
RNNs are capable of simulating a T uring machine with only a small, ﬁxed number of
units (886), under which binary streams are provided as the inputs and outputs of the
RNN [6,7].)
Thus even this extremely simple architecture is very powerful from the perspective
ofrepresentation. However, in practice representational power is not our only concern,
and it is important to note that these powerful results on representation in no wayindicate that we can learn such representations from data in any reasonable amount of
time. Indeed, we will later see that a major drawback of simple RNNs is their inabilityto learn long-term dependencies from data, and that long short-term memory (LSTM)
was introduced explicitly to alleviate this issue.
21.1.5 More general recurrent neural networks
Simple RNNs map from hidden state to hidden state through Eq. ( 21.14). More gener-
ally , RNNs typically map a sequence of inputs x1,...,xTto a sequence of hidden states
h1,...,hTthrough a set of parameters θvia
ht=f(ht−1,xt,θ), (21.15)
where we emphasize that here fshould notbe interpreted as a simple activation function,
e.g., tanh orσ. For example, below we will discuss long short-term memory , for which
fis a composition involving various gates and nonlinearities.
In addition, the inputs xtare not restricted to be our observed (input) data, and
similarly , htdoes not need to be related to our observed (output) data through a simple
transformation, as seen in the motivating example above. From this perspective, RNNs
are another building block that we can use to build rich models that can be trained inan end-to-end fashion. For example, we can compose what is often referred to as a deep
RNN by applying Eq. (21.15) multiple times: ﬁrst, an RNN is applied to our observedinputs, yielding a sequence of hidden states; and these hidden states are fed as inputs
into another RNN; and so on.
21.2. Modeling with RNNs
RNNs were motivated above through a simple example: mapping from a sequence of
measurement vectors describing a tumor, x1through xT, to the probability of ma-
lignancy as of the last measurement, p(yT|x1,...,xT). This was an example of a
discriminative model, and in particular a discriminative model which maps from as e -
quence of inputs toas i n g l eo u t p u t . However, RNNs are also applicable to many other
modeling scenarios, and this section aims to introduce some of the most common typesof models found in the literature.