516 Handbook of Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
Figure 21.7 Empirical gradient magnitudes /bardbl∂+fT∂hT−τ/bardblwhile training on the ﬂattened-MNIST task (im-
ages of digits are ﬂattened and scanned sequentially, pixel by pixel, and the goal is to output the digit
upon completion).
a ﬁnal activation function to the memory cell and then weighting elements according
to the output gate.
Eq. (21.41), the formation of the new memory cell, is at the core of alleviating
the vanishing gradient problem. Notice here that there is one path between ct−1and
ctthat is modulated only by the forget gate. In the context of Sect. 21.3,w eh a v e
exponentially many paths from cT−τtocT, but one of these paths corresponds simply
to elementwise multiplications by forget gates. This in turn means that we have an
additive gradient component which itself is the product of diagonal Jacobians withdiagonal elements corresponding to the forget gates. Hence gradient contributions canstill decay exponentially with
τ,b u t if the forget gates have elements that are close to 1, then
the base of the exponential decay is also close to 1 .T h i si sp r e c i s e l yw h yi ti sc o m m o ni n
practice to initialize the bias bfo ft h ef o r g e tg a t et ob ep o s i t i v e( e . g . ,1o r2 )a tt h es t a r t
of training. Fig. 21.6 illustrates this idea.
Before moving on to GR Us, we make a few closing remarks about LSTM in hope
of avoiding confusion. First, our notation was chosen to be consistent with literature.
However, note that the true hidden state – the collection of all information passed
from one time step to the next – is actually a concatenation of htandct. Second,
it is worth noting that some sources state that LSTM “solves” the vanishing gradientproblem and/or that LSTM alleviates the exploding-gradient problem. Both of these
statements are incorrect. As we have seen, gradient norms still decay exponentially fast
with delay . This is also illustrated in Fig. 21.7, which shows gradient magnitude vs. delay
during training. And with regard to the second statement, we know of no theoreticalargument or empirical result that suggests that LSTM alleviates the exploding-gradientproblem, and indeed many practitioners still ﬁnd it necessary to clip gradients when
training LSTM networks.
After encountering LSTM, one may wonder what parts of LSTM are most necessary ,
and whether it is possible to simplify the architecture while retaining its key beneﬁts.