Deep learning: RNNs and LSTM 509
Figure 21.4 Example RNN-based generative model. At training time, each xtfed into the model is
taken directly from the observed sequence; this is known as teacher forcing. In contrast, at inference
time, each input is sampled from the distribution governed by the previous time step.
21.2.2 Generative sequence models
Another common use of RNNs is autoregressive density estimation, in which we model
a full joint distribution by making use of the factorized form
p(x1,x2,...,xT)=p(x1)p(x2|x1)···p(xT|x1,x2,...,xT−1). (21.22)
Again we can consider hand-motion data in the context of robot-assisted surgery , thistime for representation learning (e.g., for data exploration or down-stream tasks such asmotion-based search, as considered in [ 9]). Notice that the factorization above does not
make any independence assumptions over time; this model has the potential to generatefull trajectories of surgical motion through intermediate (learned) representations. Forsimplicity , assume the motion data at each time step has been discretized, so that at
each time step we have a categorical distribution. (It is not difﬁcult to instead associate
each time step with, e.g., a mixture of multimodal continuous distributions, but this isbeyond the scope of this chapter; see, e.g., [ 9].) Each RNN step is then associated with
one factor in the joint distribution:
h
t=f(ht−1,xt−1,θh), (21.23)
p(xt|x1,...,xt−1)=softmax (Whyht+by). (21.24)
This is illustrated in Fig. 21.4.
21.2.3 RNN-based encoder–decoder models
Above we have seen some of the versatility of RNN-based modeling. In this section weconsider one more discriminative model which essentially combines the ideas from the
simple discriminative and generative models that we have already discussed.
In Sect. 21.2.1, we saw an example of surgical activity recognition from hand-
motion data through the discriminative model p
(y1,..., yT|x1,...,xT). However, recall
that we made the assumption that our outputs y1,..., yTare conditionally independent