XLNet: Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining
for Language Understanding
Zhilin Yang1, Zihang Dai12, Yiming Yang1, Jaime Carbonell1,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov1, Quoc V . Le2
1Carnegie Mellon University,2Google AI Brain Team
{zhiliny,dzihang,yiming,jgc,rsalakhu}@cs.cmu.edu, qvl@google.com
Abstract
With the capability of modeling bidirectional contexts, denoising autoencoding
based pretraining like BERT achieves better performance than pretraining ap-
proaches based on autoregressive language modeling. However, relying on corrupt-
ing the input with masks, BERT neglects dependency between the masked positions
and suffers from a pretrain-ﬁnetune discrepancy. In light of these pros and cons, we
propose XLNet, a generalized autoregressive pretraining method that (1) enables
learning bidirectional contexts by maximizing the expected likelihood over all
permutations of the factorization order and (2) overcomes the limitations of BERT
thanks to its autoregressive formulation. Furthermore, XLNet integrates ideas
from Transformer-XL, the state-of-the-art autoregressive model, into pretraining.
Empirically, under comparable experiment setting, XLNet outperforms BERT on
20 tasks, often by a large margin, including question answering, natural language
inference, sentiment analysis, and document ranking.1.
1 Introduction
Unsupervised representation learning has been highly successful in the domain of natural language
processing [ 7,22,27,28,10]. Typically, these methods ﬁrst pretrain neural networks on large-scale
unlabeled text corpora, and then ﬁnetune the models or representations on downstream tasks. Under
this shared high-level idea, different unsupervised pretraining objectives have been explored in
literature. Among them, autoregressive (AR) language modeling and autoencoding (AE) have been
the two most successful pretraining objectives.
AR language modeling seeks to estimate the probability distribution of a text corpus with an au-
toregressive model [ 7,27,28]. Speciﬁcally, given a text sequence x= (x1;;xT), AR language
modeling factorizes the likelihood into a forward product p(x) =QT
t=1p(xtjx<t)or a backward
onep(x) =Q1
t=Tp(xtjx>t). A parametric model (e.g. a neural network) is trained to model each
conditional distribution. Since an AR language model is only trained to encode a uni-directional con-
text (either forward or backward), it is not effective at modeling deep bidirectional contexts. On the
contrary, downstream language understanding tasks often require bidirectional context information.
This results in a gap between AR language modeling and effective pretraining.
In comparison, AE based pretraining does not perform explicit density estimation but instead aims to
reconstruct the original data from corrupted input. A notable example is BERT [ 10], which has been
the state-of-the-art pretraining approach. Given the input token sequence, a certain portion of tokens
are replaced by a special symbol [MASK] , and the model is trained to recover the original tokens from
the corrupted version. Since density estimation is not part of the objective, BERT is allowed to utilize
Equal contribution. Order determined by swapping the one in [9].
1Pretrained models and code are available at https://github.com/zihangdai/xlnet
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.