Time. To accelerate the training of reasoner , we can cache the scores of blocks during training
judge and then each epoch only needs 2time of single-BERT training. As the numbers of epochs
until convergence are similar for CogLTX and sliding window in training, the main concern of
CogLTX is the speed of inference. Figure 6 (Right) shows the time to process a 100,000-sample
synthetic dataset with different text lengths. CogLTX, with O(n)time complexity, is faster than
vanilla BERT after L> 2,048 and approaches the speed of sliding window as the text length Lgrows.
Figure 6: Memory and Time consumption with varying text length. The data about memory are
measured with batch size = 1on a Tesla V100. The batch size is 8 in the measurement of inference
time consumption, and CogLTX does 1-step reasoning.
5 Conclusion and discussion
We present CogLTX, a cognition inspired framework to apply BERT to long texts. CogLTX only
needs ﬁxed memory during training and enables attentions between faraway sentences. Similar ideas
were investigated on document-level in DrQA [ 6] and ORQA [ 23], and there are also previous works
to extract important sentences in unsupervised ways, e.g. based on the metadata about structure [ 24].
Experiments on 4 different large datasets show its competitive performance. CogLTX is expected to
become a general and strong baseline in many complex NLP tasks.
CogLTX deﬁnes a pipeline for long text understanding under the “key sentences” assumption. Ex-
tremely hard sequence-level tasks might violate it, thus efﬁcient variational bayes methods (estimating
the distribution of z) with affordable computation still worth investigations. Besides, CogLTX has a
drawback to miss antecedents right before the blocks, which is alleviated by prepending the entity
name to each sentence in our HotpotQA experiments, and could be solved by position-aware retrieval
competition or coreference resolution in the future.
Acknowledgements
The work is supported by NSFC for Distinguished Young Scholar (61825602), NSFC (61836013),
and a research fund supported by Alibaba. The authors would like to thank Danqi Chen and Zhilin
Yang for their insightful discussion, and responsible reviewers of NeurIPS 2020 for their valuable
suggestions.
9