CogLTX: Applying BERT to Long Texts
Ming Ding
Tsinghua University
dm18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cnChang Zhou
Alibaba Group
ericzhou.zc@alibaba-inc.com
Hongxia Yang
Alibaba Group
yang.yhx@alibaba-inc.comJie Tang
Tsinghua University
jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
BERT is incapable of processing long texts due to its quadratically increasing
memory and time consumption. The most natural ways to address this problem,
such as slicing the text by a sliding window or simplifying transformers, suffer
from insufﬁcient long-range attentions or need customized CUDA kernels. The
maximum length limit in BERT reminds us the limited capacity (5 9 chunks) of
theworking memory of humans –— then how do human beings Cognize Long
TeXts? Founded on the cognitive theory stemming from Baddeley [ 2], the pro-
posed CogLTX1framework identiﬁes key sentences by training a judge model,
concatenates them for reasoning, and enables multi-step reasoning via rehearsal
anddecay . Since relevance annotations are usually unavailable, we propose to use
interventions to create supervision. As a general algorithm, CogLTX outperforms
or gets comparable results to SOTA models on various downstream tasks with
memory overheads independent of the length of text.
1 Introduction
Figure 1: An example from HotpotQA (dis-
tractor setting, concatenated). The key sen-
tences to answer the question are the ﬁrst and
last ones, more than 512 tokens away from
each other. They never appear in the same
BERT input window in the sliding window
method, hence we fail to answer the question.Pretrained language models, pioneered by BERT [ 12],
have emerged as silver bullets for many NLP tasks,
such as question answering [ 38] and text classiﬁca-
tion [ 22]. Researchers and engineers breezily build
state-of-the-art applications following the standard
ﬁnetuning paradigm, while might end up in disap-
pointment to ﬁnd some texts longer than the length
limit of BERT (usually 512 tokens). This situation
may be rare for normalized benchmarks, for example
SQuAD [ 38] and GLUE [ 47], but very common for
more complex tasks [53] or real-world textual data.
A straightforward solution for long texts is sliding
window [50], processing continuous 512-token spans
by BERT. This method sacriﬁces the possibility that
the distant tokens “pay attention” to each other, which
becomes the bottleneck for BERT to show its efﬁcacy
in complex tasks (for example Figure 1). Since the
problem roots in the high O(L2)time and space com-
plexity in transformers [ 46] (Lis the length of the
1Codes are available at https://github.com/Sleepychord/CogLTX .
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.