individual feature eciency ( F3); collective feature eciency ( F4). The complexity is low if at
least one predictive attribute can separate the classes.
Linearity measures quantify whether the classes are linearly separated. They include sum of
the error distance by linear programming ( L1); error rate of linear classier ( L2); non-linearity
of a linear classier ( L3). To obtain the linear classier, a linear Support Vector Machine
(SVM) is often used.
Neighborhood measures analyze the neighborhoods of individual examples and try to cap-
ture class overlap and the shape of the decision boundary. They include fractions of Borderline
Points ( N1); ratio of intra/extra class nearest neighbor distance ( N2); error rate of the near-
est neighbor classier ( N3); non-Linearity of the nearest neighbor classier (N4); fraction of
hyperspheres covering data ( T1); local set average cardinality ( LSC). All of them use a dis-
tance matrix between all pairs of points in the dataset to dene the instances' neighborhoods
according to their classes.
The network measures transform a dataset into a graph and extract structural and statis-
tical information from the graph. In this new representation, each example from the dataset
corresponds to a node, whilst undirected edges connect pairs of examples and are weighted by
the distances between them. These measures include average density of the network ( graph-
Density ) and Hub score ( hubs). Other complex network measures are presented by Morais and
Prati [53], however they are not detailed and we did not nd other works using them.
Finally, the dimensionality measures evaluate data sparsity according to the number of
instances relative to the predictive attributes of the dataset. The measures include the average
number of points per dimension ( T2); the average number of points per PCA dimension ( T3);
the ratio of the PCA dimension to the original dimension ( T4). While T2is the instToAttr
meta-features, the T3and T4dier from T2by using a transformed dataset instead of the
original.
These complexity measures look at dierent complexity aspects in a dataset. Thus, they
can be related to other groups of measures presented in this study. A variation of them to
characterize the classes individually instead of the whole dataset is found in Barella et al. [6].
They are appropriate to represent the complexity of imbalanced datasets. These complexity
measures are free of hyperparameters and do not require the use of summarization functions,
since some of them directly adopt a summarization procedure, e.g. F1which uses the maximum
value. However, their extraction usually has a high computational cost, which restricts their
use in MtL studies.
18