are used to represent the bits values of the represented information [78]. The unintended
relationships among the new attributes can be a deciency of this approach, considering the
meaninglessness of these relations.
Similarly, some meta-features support only categorical attributes, and the transformation
from numeric to categorical attributes may be necessary. For such, discretization techniques can
be used. These techniques distribute numeric values in distinct intervals, which correspond
to the new categories [2]. As a result, order relations in the original values and variations
within the same interval are lost. In an unsupervised approach, the intervals can be dened
using equal-width orequal-frequency , where they have the same interval width or the number of
values, respectively. Other techniques such as clustering, correlation analysis and decision tree
analysis can also be used for value discretization [19, 27]. The last two, which are supervised
approaches, use the target attribute to dene the categories.
The discretization procedure has a larger number of alternatives than the binarization pro-
cedure, which makes the result even more biased when they are arbitrary-dened. Most known
methods are based on supervised and unsupervised techniques. The unsupervised techniques
include the histogram and the clustering strategy. Given that in each transformation there
is a loss of information and a good discretization process can minimize it [32]. Because the
unsupervised approaches are the simplest alternatives to discretize the data, more information
are lost in the process, however, they have a lower cost than the supervised approaches.
The presence of missing values in the original datasets also demands attention, considering
that many meta-features do not support the defective records. The alternatives to address
this issue are: (i)imputation of values provided by a preprocessing step and (ii)removal of
attributes and/or records with missing values. This topic is also frequently ignored in MtL
papers.
4.2. Hyperparameter values
Another aspect that impacts the reproducibility of MtL experiments is the lack of details
with regards to the hyperparameter values required by the measures. Possibly, this occurs
because a value is used by default.
Tables 3, 5, 6 and 9 identify the measures that require the denition of hyperparameter
values. Some statistical measures have specic hyperparameter values. All model-based and
landmarking meta-features, on the other hand, have hyperparameter values that aect the
whole group. For the model-based, dierent DT algorithms can be used to induce the model
and each algorithm requires additional congurations. For the landmarking, the validation
strategy, the evaluation measure and also the algorithms hyperparameters can be modied. In
24