information about the boundary of the classes and combine this information with the linearity
of the DT-models induced with the worst and random attributes. The DT algorithm is a
hyperparameter dened by the user since dierent algorithms could be used.
The elite-Nearest Neighbor ( eliteNN ) is the result of the 1NN model using a subset of the
most informative attributes in the dataset, whereas the one-Nearest Neighbor ( oneNN ) is the
result of a similar learning model induced with all attributes. The distance measure used by
thekNN algorithm is a hyperparameter.
The Linear Discriminant ( linearDiscr ) and the Naive Bayes ( naiveBayes ) algorithms use all
attributes to induce the learning models. The rst technique nds the best linear combination
of predictive attributes able to maximize the separability between the classes. For such, it uses
a covariance matrix and assumes that the data follow a Gaussian distribution. This technique
can generate exceptions if the data has redundant attributes. The second technique is based
on the Bayes' theorem and calculates, for each feature, the probability of an instance to belong
to each class. The combination of all features and related probabilities for one instance returns
the class with the highest probability.
Concerning the hyperparameters, an evaluation measure such as accuracy, balanced accuracy
and Kappa is necessary to evaluate the models. Other measures such as precision, recall and F1
also could be used, however, for them, it is necessary to identify the class of interest in binary
datasets. The procedures used to induce the model are (i)using the whole instances to train
and test; (ii)holdout; and, (iii) cross validation. This information is rarely mentioned in MtL
studies and their impact in the characterization measures are not yet known. In practice, it
represents a trade-o between stable measures and computational costs.
Some variants are relative and subsampling landmarkings [23] and their combined use [74].
Instead of using the absolute performance of the landmarkers as meta-features, a relative ap-
proach adopts the landmarkers' ranking, which is obtained using pairwise comparisons. Thus,
the meta-feature can be a binary value indicating the winner, the dierence between them or
the ratio of the two performances. Besides, a meta-feature for each ranking position containing
the name of the respective landmarker is of categorical type. On the other hand, subsam-
pling landmarking works by applying traditional algorithms to a reduced subset of the original
dataset.
The performance of the landmarkers can be represented as a learning curve, represent-
ing their use with dierent sampling sizes of a dataset [42]. Furthermore, in an algorithm
recommendation scenario, their relative performance can be learned by meta-models and the
prediction from these meta-models can be used as meta-features, analogous to a stacking-based
approach [77].
14