make the learning process more dicult [38]. Most of them are originally proposed as logical
measures, however, instead of only capturing the occurrence (or not) of each property, we pro-
pose small changes to quantify each occurrence. The consistencyRatio quanties the proportion
of repeated instances with dierent targets, where zero is an ideal value. The uniquenessRatio
is a generalization of consistencyRatio , since it uses only the predictive attributes. To measure
how dissimilar the instances are in their attribute space, incoherenceRatio computes the pro-
portion of instances that do not overlap with any other instances in a predened number of
attributes. Values close to 1 are preferred in a dataset since it shows that the instances are
scattered through the input space.
The concept-based measures characterize the sparsity and the irregularity of the input-
output distribution [84]. An irregular distribution is observed when neighboring instances have
distinct target values [54]. The weighted distance ( wgDist ) captures how dense or sparse the
distribution of the instances is [83]. It could be dened as a distance-based measure. Cohesive-
ness measures the density of the example distribution [80]. Another measure of this subgroup,
the concept variation [84] is dened by the cohesiveness average of all possible instances in the
input space, therefore unfeasible. Its version using the existing instances is captured by the
summarization function mean .
Structural information works well in identifying similar datasets [87], by characterizing bi-
nary itemsets to capture the distribution of values of both single attributes ( oneItemset ) and
pairs of attributes ( twoItemset ) [76]. They capture dierent and complementary aspects of the
dataset. oneItemset captures information of each individual's attributes, whereas, twoItem-
setcaptures possible correlations concerning pairs of attributes. Association rules can also be
applied to the transformed dataset to characterize other relations between attributes [16, 54].
Time-based measures comprise the elapsed time to compute the previous groups of mea-
sures [63], such as statistical, information-theoretic, model-based and landmarking. In this case,
the same hardware should be used to compute the meta-features from dierent datasets, which
can be very restrictive. Another option is to use the number of 
oat point operations, but it is
not always possible.
3.7. Summarization Functions
In this study, the purpose of summarization functions is to normalize the cardinality of
meta-features and to characterize other meta-feature aspects, such as tendency, distribution
and variability of the results. Given that many measures are multi-valued and that their cardi-
nalities vary according to the dataset, comparisons between multiple datasets can be infeasible.
Consequently, the summarization transforms non-propositional data to propositional [79], mak-
20