negatively aects reproducibly and comparison of results. Besides, without source code and
widespread use, there is a chance that the implementations work as they should. A positive
step towards reproducibility is the \Paper with code"7platform, which provides code repository.
However, comparing the number of MtL related works published in the last 5 years with the
number of codes available at the \Paper with code" website8, the practice of publishing the
code/results is unfortunately still incipient.
5.1. MFE Tool
Aiming to oer a robust, 
exible and standalone data characterization tool, the authors
developed the Meta-Feature Extractor (MFE) tool9that contains the implementation of most
of the meta-features and summarization functions described in this paper. MFE also implements
solutions for some of the issues discussed in Section 4 and provides a simple and 
exible tool
specically designed to characterize datasets.
MFE allows the user to compute a specic, a group of or all meta-features available. It is
possible to dene which summarization functions should be computed and, optionally, to obtain
all computed values for a given set of measures, without summarizing the results. Many of the
hyperparameters can be changed according to the user's preferences, as shown in Table 12,
which also includes the default values adopted for all of them. It is worth highlighting that
the robustness of these choices, regarding the characterization process, is usually unknown,
although they are consistent with the literature and the authors' experience. The column
\Details" presents the rationale behind the decisions taken.
As a limitation, MFE does not support to characterize non-classication datasets and does
not accept datasets with missing values. An extension to other meta-features needs to follow
the discussion described in Section 4. The authors believe that MFE can be used in any MtL
experiment that requires the characterization of datasets, similar to DCT in the past, but with
more 
exibility.
6. Conclusion
The recommendation of techniques by using MtL is an eective alternative to deal with
the selection of the most suitable techniques among a large number of possibilities. However,
7https://paperswithcode.com/task/meta-learning/
8Using Scopus, we found 412 papers related to MtL in the last 5 years, whereas we found only 65 works in
the"Paper with code\ website.
9Available in Python ( https://pypi.org/project/pymfe/ ) and R ( https://cran.r-project.org/package=
mfe) languages
32