generalizations, thus restricting the search space [52, 88]. Since the true data distribution is
unknown, several techniques are typically tried to achieve a satisfactory solution for a particular
task. This trial-and-error approach is laborious and subjective, given the many choices that need
to be made. Alternatively, meta-learning (MtL) presents a data-driven, automatic selection of
techniques, by using knowledge extracted from previous tasks [13]. For instance, a meta-model
can be trained on prior tasks to recommend suitable techniques for a new task [81].
Such a recommender system requires a systematic collection of dataset characteristics, along
with the corresponding performance of dierent algorithms. These characteristics extracted
from the datasets, named meta-features, play a crucial role in the successful use of MtL [9, 10].
Many empirical studies have investigated the eectiveness of meta-features in dierent domains
[7, 9, 22, 23, 58, 59, 63, 65], and proposed dierent sets of meta-features to characterize a given
MtL task.
Unfortunately, several aspects that aect the reproducibility and generalizability of these
experiments have been neglected or ignored in the literature. These include details concerning
the dataset characterization process, hyperparameter settings used to evaluate algorithms, as
well as procedures that deal with data encoding and missing values. These aspects require
additional and careful investigation, especially given the current reproducibility crisis in machine
learning research [31].
The lack of a systematic approach to compute meta-features has obfuscated the analyses in
empirical MtL studies. To overcome this limitation, Pinto et al. [61] proposed a framework to
systematize the extraction of meta-features, dening a meta-feature in terms of three compo-
nents: meta-function ,object and post-processing . In short, a meta-function (e.g. entropy) ex-
tracts conceptual information from the object (e.g. predictive attributes) and a post-processing
function (e.g. mean) summarizes the result. Dierent variations of these three components
result in dierent meta-features. The authors claim that all current meta-features can be de-
composed using these three components. However, this framework does not directly mitigate
the reproducibility problem, since the formalization, categorization and development of the
meta-features are not addressed in the framework.
A good initiative to overcome this problem is OpenML [82], an on-line research platform
that supports a standard characterization of datasets. As such, OpenML allows the comparison
of MtL studies, insofar as they use the meta-features computed by OpenML. This set of meta-
features is itself not dened systematically, however, which may hamper their suitability for
subsequent meta-learning studies.
This paper surveys a comprehensive list of meta-features and their usage in the data clas-
sication MtL literature, and systematically organizes and categorizes these meta-features in a
2