Pinto et al. [61] proposed that the summarization functions should be organized in groups:
descriptive statistical includes the most common functions and summarizes a set of values
in a single result such as max,min,mean ,median ,sd,skewness ,kurtosis ,iqRange , among
others; distribution characterizes the distribution of the measure using multiple values. For
this purpose, the use of histogram with a xed number of bins [37] and the use of quartiles
to summarize the set of values [11] are alternatives observed in the literature; hypothesis test
assesses an assumption about a set of values, resulting in one or more values, as the p-values
and/or the tests result. However, its use has not been observed in the literature.
Conceptually, any function that oers guarantees of a xed cardinality, regardless of the
number of values received by it, can be applied as a summarization function. Thus, even though
apost-processing function [61] can also generate indiscriminate number of values, a summariza-
tion function cannot. The summarization functions presented in Table 10 can be applied to all
multi-valued measures indiscriminately. Some combinations measure/summarization-function
explore semantic concepts, e.g. the standard deviation of the classes proportion [45]. Particu-
lar summarization functions, suitable for a specic measure, such as the nrCorAttr statistical
meta-feature, that summarizes the cor, is better instantiated as a meta-feature. Section 4.4
addresses this matter as an open issue and shows possible insights concerning their use and
exploration.
4. Discussion
In machine learning, it is expected that all information necessary to reproduce empirical
experiments, obtaining similar results, should be clearly reported. For MtL, the information's
need to maintain the reproducibility is even greater, since this research topic also includes all
the machine learning analysis plus the recommendation system which is based on the charac-
terization of several datasets and the performance assessment from a set of algorithms over the
datasets. However, many details related to them are frequently ignored or subtly addressed in
the literature.
This section focuses on six aspects of the characterization process, most of them strictly
related to the taxonomy proposed in Section 2. Frequently ignored details, the unspoken
decisions taken by researchers, are reviewed, along with the enumeration of gaps that demand
further analysis whether theoretical, empirical or both.
4.1. Input Domain
The input domain denes the data type supported by a meta-feature. For instance, sta-
tistical meta-features support only numerical data while information-theoretic meta-features
22