these cases, the same set of congurations is usually adopted for all measures of the group, but
not necessarily by more than one author.
Other decisions concerning the use of meta-features and summarization functions can also
be seen as hyperparameters. For instance, how to handle the unsupported data type, as de-
scribed in Subsection 4.1, and the transformation by class [17] proposed to explore the target
information, aect the statistical and information-theoretic groups and can also be dened as
hyperparameters. Additionally, the histogram summarization function also has a hyperparam-
eter that denes the number of bins to represent the measures.
In summary, the eects of such choices in the data characterization process are unknown.
Alternatives, such as tuning the dierent parameters of the measures, using distinct instances
of the same measure and evaluating the amount of information captured by them, have not
been explored.
4.3. Range of the Measures
The data range has been frequently ignored in MtL studies, which suggests that meta-
features have been used directly without transformation or it has not been properly reported.
Although meta-features have a dierent range of values, they are used together in a meta-base.
Considering that some algorithms are in
uenced by attributes with dierent ranges [27, 86],
the meta-data can be transformed by min-max scaling or z-score normalization, as illustrated
by the vertical axis in Figure 2.
When?
How?dataset meta-feature characterization measureRescale
Normalize
Figure 2: Options to transform the range of the measures.
The transformation can occur in three distinct moments: (i)in the dataset , before any com-
putation; (ii)in the result of the characterization measure, before the summarization function;
and (iii) in the meta-base, after computing the meta-feature. These moments are represented
by the horizontal axis in Figure 2. They have some implications in the result regardless of how
the transformation occurs.
The dataset transformation is an alternative for the measures whose scale is determined by
the values present in the dataset (range is inherit ). Changes in the original data range will
25