Characterizing classication datasets: a study of meta-features for
meta-learning
Adriano Rivollia,c, Lu s P. F. Garciab,c, Carlos Soaresd, Joaquin Vanschorene, Andr e C. P. L.
F. de Carvalhoc
aComputing Department, Technological University of Paran a,
Av. Alberto Carazzai, 1640, Corn elio Proc opio, Paran a 86300-000, Brazil
bDepartment of Computer Science, University of Brasilia,
Asa Norte, Bras lia, Distrito Federal 70910-900, Brazil
cInstitute of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, University of S~ ao Paulo,
Av. Trabalhador S~ ao-carlense, 400, S~ ao Carlos, S~ ao Paulo 13560-970, Brazil
dFaculty of Engineering, University of Porto
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, s/n, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal
eDepartment of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology
P.O.Box 513, 5600MB Eindhoven, Netherlands
Abstract
Meta-learning is increasingly used to support the recommendation of machine learning algo-
rithms and their congurations. Such recommendations are made based on meta-data, con-
sisting of performance evaluations of algorithms on prior datasets, as well as characterizations
of these datasets. These characterizations, also called meta-features, describe properties of
the data which are predictive for the performance of machine learning algorithms trained on
them. Unfortunately, despite being used in a large number of studies, meta-features are not
uniformly described, organized and computed, making many empirical studies irreproducible
and hard to compare. This paper aims to deal with this by systematizing and standardizing
data characterization measures for classication datasets used in meta-learning. Moreover, it
presents MFE, a new tool for extracting meta-features from datasets and identifying more sub-
tle reproducibility issues in the literature, proposing guidelines for data characterization that
strengthen reproducible empirical research in meta-learning.
Keywords: Meta-learning, Characterization Measures, Meta-features, Classication
Problems, Reproducible Machine Learning
1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms have an inductive bias: they each make assumptions about
the data distribution and choose specic generalization hypotheses over several other possible
Email addresses: rivolli@utfpr.edu.br (Adriano Rivolli), luis.garcia@unb.br (Lu s P. F. Garcia),
csoares@fe.up.pt (Carlos Soares), j.vanschoren@tue.nl (Joaquin Vanschoren), andre@icmc.usp.br (Andr e
C. P. L. F. de Carvalho)
Preprint submitted to Information Sciences August 27, 2019arXiv:1808.10406v2  [cs.LG]  26 Aug 2019