meta-features obtained. As many measures are multi-valued, hundreds of results can be easily
obtained when combined with multiple summarization functions. The relatively low number of
meta-instances usually observed in MtL experiments together with the high number of meta-
features could generate meaningless models due to the curse of dimensionality [78]. The use of
a feature-selection algorithm can be an alternative to deal with this problem [43, 61].
Even though summarization functions are not strictly related to reproducibility issues, they
are relevant to reproducibility because dierent choices can be made in a characterization
process. The empirical analysis of summarization functions and the exploration of new ways to
summarize meta-features should be the subject of future research.
4.5. Exceptions
As discussed previously, some measures can be incorrectly computed for some datasets.
Their use requires specic conditions that cannot always be guaranteed. Operations such as
division by zero and logarithm of negative values are the main causes of exceptions.
Alternatives to deal with problematic measures are: (i)assuming it results in a missing value;
(ii)using a default value; (iii)if the measure is multi-valued, ignore it. The rst option results
in a meta-base with missing values, which eventually will be lled using some preprocessing
technique [27] or removed from the meta-base. The other two alternatives x the problem of
having a missing value during the computation of the meta-feature.
The use of a default value to represent exceptional cases can be positive when it properly
characterizes the measure and the phenomenon that generates the exception. Table 11 presents
default values, suggested by the authors, to be used when a meta-feature cannot characterize a
dataset. With the exception of sdRatio , the values are in the range of their measures, assuming
a semantic meaning as explained in the column Meaning .
The previous alternatives can introduce noise in the predictive meta-data. This does not
occur when the defective results can be removed before the summarization. As a drawback, this
alternative is valid only for the multi-valued measures. Furthermore, to discard few values for
measures with high cardinality, the nal result will not change drastically, but for the measures
with low cardinality, this approach may lead to distortions in results.
Summarization functions can also generate exceptions. This is the case of sd,kurtosis and
skewness . The sdcannot be applied to single values while the kurtosis andskewness cannot be
applied to constant vectors. The alternatives iand iican also be adopted for them. The value
0 is the default value suggested to ll the problematic cases, which represents no deviations for
sdand constant values for kurtosis and skewness .
27