statistically assessed, revealing those that better characterize each variation. After the repe-
tition of the process using dierent datasets, the most relevant features for each challenge are
obtained.
Another work for the meta-feature dimensionality reduction used Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) [30] to obtain latent meta-features [10]. After computing the principal com-
ponents, the most relevant (according to the cumulative total variance) are selected. The
authors later used a lter based on correlation with the target to select a subset of the latent
meta-features.
As PCA does not take into account the target variable to transform the data, Mu~ noz et al.
[54] used optimization to transform a set of previously selected meta-features into a 2-D space.
For such, the authors used the performance of several learning algorithms. Named instance
space, it enables the visualization of the set of datasets used in an MtL study.
Most of the studies found for this study use wrapper. Few studies use transformation ap-
proaches in MtL. Some works have compared groups of meta-features [1, 38, 63, 65], with
dierent ndings. For instance, landmarkings and model-based meta-features were the most
important characterization measures in Reif et al. [65] and Filchenkov and Pendryak [22], re-
spectively. In contrast, feature selection wrapper did not improve the predictive performance
of the meta-models in Garcia et al. [24].
To estimate the importance of a meta-feature, Filchenkov and Pendryak [22] uses a sig-
nicance measure that associates the predictive performance of a model induced using each
meta-feature alone. This process is repeated several times and the average performance ob-
tained for each meta-feature is the meta-feature signicance value. Pimentel and de Carvalho
[60] dene the meta-feature importance as the number of times it is selected when the Random
Forest algorithm is applied to the meta-base. In Salama et al. [69], Peng et al. [58], the authors
use the correlation between them and the meta-target to select the meta-features [58, 69].
The decision of whether to use reduction and/or transformation is an important issue in
the reproducibility and performance of MtL experiments. When used, a detailed specication
of the procedures adopted is essential for the replication of the experiments. Moreover, while
meta-feature selection may improve the interpretability of the meta-models, the same is not the
case when a transformation is used.
4.7. Outline
The previous subsections discussed the main aspects related to the reproducibility of MtL
experiments. They refer to the alternatives and decisions taken that need to be properly re-
ported. Furthermore, some gaps were identied, mainly because it is unknown how the dierent
29