re
ect on the outcome of these meta-features. The second alternative transforms the result of
the characterization measures. It is more suitable for multi-valued measures. Both alternatives
are not recommended for meta-features using summarization functions on a particular scale,
such as kurtosis and skewness . Finally, the most conventional approach is to transform the
meta-features result, which requires the characterization of all datasets beforehand.
Some rescaled meta-features are used along with (or instead of) their original version. The
proportion of numeric and categorical attributes [12, 36], the proportion of attributes with
outliers and normal distribution [14, 69] and the normalized entropy [17], are some examples
found in the literature. However, only a few measures have their rescaled version named. The
theoretical maximum and minimum values from the measures with a non-innity range can
be modied with the min-max scaling. The transformation of meta-features for some dataset
characteristic (e.g. the number of instances) using absolute or relative values can be a better
alternative.
In summary, the lack of information about the procedures adopted concerning the meta-
data transformation is also a barrier to reproducible MtL studies. The dierent alternatives
to transform the meta-features can suit some meta-features better than others. Although this
topic does not contribute directly to the reproducibility issue, it is a very important research
question that has not been satisfactorily addressed in the MtL literature.
4.4. Summarization Functions
In most MtL studies, summarization functions are combined with meta-features, either
implicitly or explicitly. Implicitly when they are dened as part of the meta-feature formaliza-
tion [17, 22, 40, 57], where the average result is the most natural solution used. Explicitly when
studies show the eectiveness of using other options to summarize measures [37, 61, 64, 79], as
reported in Section 3.7.
Some combinations of meta-features and summarization functions have a semantic meaning.
For instance, the standard deviation ( sd) applied to the frequencies of the classes ( freqClass )
shows how uniform the class distribution is, which may also indicate that the classes are un-
balanced. Other combinations are meaningless, as the use of the cardinality of the measure
(count ) to summarize the joint entropy ( jointEnt ), since the measure has a xed cardinality.
There are also some possible problematic combinations, such as the use of histograms to sum-
marize meta-features with low cardinality and/or with the range that is dened according to
a dataset characteristic. In this case, the histogram bins can be sparse and represent dierent
scales of values for each dataset.
The use of many functions to summarize a measure proportionally increases the number of
26