many MtL studies adopt dierent methodologies and design approaches, which aect the re-
producibility of the experiments. By discussing topics that have been frequently ignored in
the MtL literature and suggesting possible alternatives to approach them, this paper reviewed
the main characterization measures and important issues related to the reproducibility of MtL
experiments, in addition to the proposal of a new taxonomy for meta-features and the MFE
tool.
The new taxonomy organized and formalized the current meta-features and their usefulness
across dierent types of task, domain, range, and several other characteristics that can impact
MtL tasks. Based on this review, the authors enumerated the main decisions a researcher faces
when using meta-features. Moreover, a detailed discussion is provided on the cutting edge
subgroup of meta-features, their predictive power and the use cases where these measures have
been applied. In addition to this study, the MFE package was proposed to support the data
characterization process implementing the framework proposed with the main meta-features
included in the discussion.
Future work shall investigate meta-features for other types of tasks, such as regression and
clustering; increase the interpretability of the meta-features; and explore empirical analysis
showing how some choices related to the hyperparameters, cardinality and the summarization
functions can aect dataset characterizations to best distinguish the performance of meta-
models. A review of regression and clustering meta-features could improve the task represen-
tation and could also look at a dierent perspective and validate the taxonomy proposed. The
exploration of interpretability of the meta-features and the empirical analysis over hyperparam-
eters, cardinality and summarization function could improve the meta-model representation and
performance.
Acknowledgements
This study was nanced in part by the Coordena c~ ao de Aperfei coamento de Pessoal de
N vel Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001, CNPq (152098/2016-0) and FAPESP
(2016/18615-0 and 2013/07375-0). The rst, second and fth authors would like to thank
CeMEAI-FAPESP for the computational resources and Intel for the hardware and software
server used in part of the experiments.
33