Group Measure Default Meaning
Mono-valued measures
Simple catToNum d All attributes are categoric.
numToCat d All attributes are numeric.
Statistical nrCorAttr 0 No pair of attributes is highly correlated.
sdRatio -1 Invalid result.
Multi-valued measures
Statistical cor 0 No correlation.
gMean mean Mean value.
kurtosis 0 Constant values.
skewness 0 Constant values.
Landmarking linearDiscr 0 Low predictive performance.
Table 11: Suggested values to ll the missing cases for the meta-features with exceptions.
In summary, the use of these measures and summarization function does not imply that they
will generate exceptions during the extraction of meta-features. However, there is an absence
of information about the occurrence or lack of occurrence in empirical studies in MtL. Thereby,
it is strictly related to the reproducible of the MtL studies, given that it has a technical bias
and is related to the implementation and use of meta-features.
4.6. Meta-feature Space
The ratio between the number of meta-features and the number of meta-instances in MtL
experiments is usually higher than in conventional ML experiments. Furthermore, it is well
known that the most suitable meta-features varies for dierent MtL tasks [10]. Thus, some
studies have investigated the use of feature selection techniques [61, 69] and the transformation
of the meta-features' space [10, 54] to reduce the dimensionality of meta-bases, as well as to
increase the predictive performance of meta-models [35].
Meta-feature selection is just an instance of feature selection [43]. Among the dierent
approaches for meta-feature selection, wrapper appeared more often in our literature review [79,
35, 13, 65, 22, 24] than the use of a lter [58, 41, 61].
In Mu~ noz et al. [54], the authors followed a new approach for meta-feature selection. They
investigated the behaviour of several meta-features in 12 classication challenges. By modifying
a dataset to increase/decrease each investigated problem, the variance of the meta-features is
28