choices could impact the characterization process. Below, each topic regarding the reproducible
issues and gaps are summarized. The details can be seen in the respective subsection.
Input domain: Some measures support only categorical data while others, only numeric. The
alternatives to handle with this issue are ignoring ;transforming , which implies in other
decisions (see Figure 1); segmenting the experiments and datasets. The impact of such
choices in the statistical and information-theoretic meta-features is unknown. Further-
more, datasets may have missing values, which will require imputation of values or the
removal of the defective records.
Hyperparameters: Some meta-features or groups of them require the denition of hyper-
parameters (see Table 12). The way the hyperparameters aect the model-based and
landmarking meta-features is unknown. Also, approaches like tuning and the use of dif-
ferent hyperparameters values for the same measure have not been explored yet.
Range of the measures: The meta-features have distinct range of values. The alternatives
to handle with this issue are ignoring ortransforming . In the latter (see Figure 2), the
min-max rescaling andz-score normalization are procedures that can be used; the dataset ,
characterization measure and the meta-feature represent the objects to be transformed.
The gaps are concerned with identifying suitable combinations between the two dimen-
sions and the normalization of the meta-features.
Summarization functions: Dierent functions can be employed to summarize the measures
result. The investigation of how the summarization functions aect the measures' results
are still incipient. Furthermore, nding new alternatives to summarize the measures may
increase the discriminative power of the meta-features.
Exceptions: Some measures cannot be computed for all datasets. The alternatives to handle
this issue are ignoring orreplacing . In the latter, the alternatives are applying a preprocess-
ing technique ;using a default value ;removing the missing values (only for multi-valued
measures). However, the impact of such choices in the characterization result is unknown.
Meta-feature space: Meta-feature dimensionality reduction can be performed using a feature-
section and/or transformation approach. In the former, wrapper is more often used than
lter. In the latter, although PCA is most commonly used, it is used in a small number of
studies. While the use of feature selection allows model interpretability, transformation
usually has a lower computational cost.
30