support only categorical data. The alternatives adopted to handle non-supported data types
have rarely been reported in the literature, as observed in Smith et al. [71], Ali and Smith
[3], Reif et al. [65], Garcia et al. [24]. Besides the fact that such choices aect the reproducibil-
ity of MtL experiments, their impact on the outcomes is unknown.
Figure 1 summarizes the options adopted in the literature to deal with the data type. The
options consist of ignoring [37] or transforming the data [17]. By ignoring the attributes, two
problems are faced: (i)if a dataset contains only attributes with the ignored data type, all
respective measures will have missing values; (ii)in an MtL context, the algorithms/techniques
recommended may support the ignored data. In favor of this choice, it can be argued that to
using only the meta-features that are able to characterize such data is a natural choice since they
can properly represent the data [50]. Besides, their inability to process some types of data may
be aligned with the limitations of some algorithms, therefore representing useful information.
Alternatively, the datasets can be segmented by type (only numerical, only categorical and
mixed) where only the suitable measures for each group are used [10, 38].
Figure 1: Options to handle the input data type that are not supported by the meta-features.
By transforming the attributes, the meta-features can support any data types using a bi-
narization ordiscretization approaches. It leads to new decisions since there are dierent
alternatives used to transform the data, including the possibility of combining them together.
The most common transformation of categorical attributes into numerical ones is called
binarization [2]. In this process, new binary attributes are created to represent each dierent
category in the data, where is the number of distinct categories in the attribute. For each
instance, only one of the new attributes is assigned to \1" while the others are assigned to
\0". Its use to transform categorical attributes with a high number of distinct values is not
recommended, since it generates a large number of new attributes. Alternatively, each category
can be mapped to an integer and then represented in a binary hash, where log2() new attributes
23