instances' frequency is captured by the measure sizeDist . A distribution skewed to the right
indicates a complex dataset [44].
Dierent validation measures are used to represent the quality of the partitions obtained,
such as how compact each group is and how separated the groups are from each other [85].
In a classication context, this information may indicate the separability of the instances, and
possibly the classes. The Akaike Information Criterion ( AIC) and the Bayesian Information
Criterion ( BIC) measures represent the relative quality of the partitions by estimating the
amount of information lost by the model used to dene the clusters. For both, lower values
indicate a better generalization of a model. While Compactness measures how compact the
clusters are, Silhouette and the Xie-Beni index ( XB) add separation between clusters to the
compactness. The lower the value, the better for Compactness , whereas, for Silhouette andXB,
it is the opposite. Other often-used clustering validation measures are presented next.
Connectivity captures local densities by counting violations of the nearest neighbor relation-
ship of instances in dierent partitions [28]. When normalized by the number of instances, high
values indicate that the clusters are not well separated. It could be an informative measure to
characterize the suitability of the bias related to instance-based learning algorithms.
Although only these validation measures have been used to characterize datasets in MtL
studies, there are many other clustering internal validation measures [28] that could be em-
ployed. These measures can also be used without a clustering algorithm, by considering the
classes as partitions.
Dierently, purityRatio is a clustering measure that looks at the instances' classes to evaluate
the partitions. It is calculated for each class and captures the ratio of clusters that contain
instances related to the respective class. Datasets with high values are more complex than
those with low values since the classes are distributed across all partitions.
Another subset of measures, the distance-based measures [60] are obtained computing the
distance between all pairs of instances ( distInst ) and the correlations combined with the dis-
tances ( distCorrInst ). They indicate how close and related pairs of instances are, which may
in
uence the decision boundaries of learning algorithms. Finally, the center of gravity ( gravity )
computes the dispersion among the groups of instances according to their class label. In this
case, the groups are dened by the classes.
With few exceptions, all these measures have a high asymptotic computational complexity,
which restricts their use. Additionally, they allow a wide number of choices, with dierent im-
pacts in the value returned. In spite of being able to provide a good characterization, clustering
and distance measures are underexplored in the MtL literature.
16