324of a vertical search webpage for books and thus
presents a real-world scenario task. Secondly, we
thoroughly analyze the properties of capsule net-
works for HMC. To the best of our knowledge,
capsule networks have not yet been applied and
tested in the HMC domain.
2 Related Work
Neural networks for HMC: In hierarchical
multi-label classiﬁcation (HMC) samples are as-
signed one or multiple class labels, which are
organized in a structured label hierarchy (Silla
and Freitas, 2011). For text classiﬁcation (TC),
we treat a document as a sample and its cate-
gories as labels. Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) and different types of Recurrent Neu-
ral Networks (RNNs) (Goodfellow et al., 2016;
Kim, 2014), most notably long short-term mem-
ory units (LSTMs, Hochreiter and Schmidhuber,
1997) have shown to be highly efﬁcient in TC
tasks. For HMC, Cerri et al. (2014) use concate-
nated multi-layer perceptrons (MLP), where each
MLP is associated to one level of the class hierar-
chy. Kowsari et al. (2017) use multiple concate-
nated deep learning architectures (CNN, LSTM,
and MLP) to HMC on a dataset with a rather shal-
low hierarchy with only two levels. Similar to
Kiritchenko et al. (2005), Baker and Korhonen
(2017) treat the HMC task as a multi-label clas-
siﬁcation problem that considers every label in the
hierarchy, but they additionally leverage the co-
occurrence of labels within the hierarchy to initial-
ize the weights of their CNN’s ﬁnal layer (Kurata
et al., 2016).
Capsule Networks: Capsule networks encap-
sulate features into groups of neurons, so-called
capsules (Hinton et al., 2011; Sabour et al., 2017).
Originally introduced for a handwritten digit im-
age classiﬁcation task where each digit has been
associated with a capsule, capsules have shown to
learn more robust representations for each class as
they capture parent-child relationships more ac-
curately. They reached on-par performance with
more complex CNN architectures, even outper-
forming them in several classiﬁcation tasks such
as the affNIST andMultiMNIST dataset (Sabour
et al., 2017). First attempts to use capsules for sen-
timent analysis were carried out by (Wang et al.,
2018) on the basis of an RNN, however, they
did not employ the routing algorithm, thus highly
limiting the capabilities of capsules. Zhao et al.(2018) show that capsule networks can outperform
traditional neural networks for TC by a great mar-
gin when training on single-labeled and testing
on multi-labeled documents of the Reuters-21578
dataset since the routing of capsules behaves like a
parallel attention mechanism regarding the selec-
tion of categories. By connecting a BiLSTM to
a capsule network for relation extraction, Zhang
et al. (2018) show that capsule networks improve
at extracting n-ary relations, with n > 2, per sen-
tence and thus conﬁrm the observation of (Zhao
et al., 2018) in a different context. For multi-task
learning, Xiao et al. (2018) use capsule networks
to improve the differentiation between tasks. They
encapsulate features in different capsules and use
the routing algorithm to cluster features for each
task. Further applications to NLP span aggression,
toxicity and emotion detection (Srivastava et al.,
2018; Rathnayaka et al., 2018), embedding cre-
ation for knowledge graph completion (Nguyen
et al., 2019), and knowledge transfer of user in-
tents (Xia et al., 2018). Despite the suitable prop-
erties of capsule networks to classify into hierar-
chical structured categories, they have not yet been
applied to HMC. This work aims to ﬁll the gap
by applying and thoroughly analyzing capsules’
properties at HMC.
3 Capsule Network for HMC
For each category in the hierarchy, an associated
capsule outputs latent information of the category
in form of a vector as opposed to a single scalar
value used in traditional neural networks. The
vector is equivariant with its length deﬁning the
pseudo-probability of its activation and its orien-
tation representing different cases of a category’s
existence. This distributional representation in the
form of a vector instead of a scalar makes cap-
sules exponentially more informative than tradi-
tional perceptrons (Sabour et al., 2017).
The input of capsules in the ﬁrst capsule layer
of a capsule network is called primary capsules
and can be of arbitrary dimension, typically com-
ing from a convolutional layer or from the hid-
den state of a recurrent network. The output vec-
tor of a primary capsule represents latent informa-
tion such as local order and semantic representa-
tions of words (Zhao et al., 2018). Each capsule
jin the next layer, called classiﬁcation capsules ,
take as input the weighted sum sj=P
icjji^ujji
of the prediction vectors of all primary capsules