325i. A capsule’s prediction vector ^ujjiis generated
by multiplying the output ujjiby a weight matrix
Wij. Since the length of a vector of a classiﬁcation
capsule should be interpreted as the probability of
the corresponding category, a squashing function
vj=squash (sj)is applied, which scales the out-
put of each classiﬁcation capsule non-linearly be-
tween zero and one. The coupling coefﬁcients cjji
that determine the contribution of each primary
capsule’s output to a classiﬁcation capsule are cal-
culated using a dynamic routing heuristic (Sabour
et al., 2017). It iteratively decides the routes of
capsules and thus how to cluster features for each
category. The pseudocode for the full routing al-
gorithm is written in Algorithm 1.
Routing algorithm
Result: vj
Initialization:8i2Primary:8j2
Classification :bjji 0:
forr iterations do
8i2Primary :ci softmax( bi)
8j2Clas: :vj squash(P
icjji^ujji)
8i2Primary:8j2Clas: :bjji 
bjji+^ujjivj
end
Algorithm 1: Routing algorithm as described in
(Sabour et al., 2017)
The coupling coefﬁcients are generated by ap-
plying the softmax function to the log prior proba-
bilities that primary capsule ishould be coupled to
classiﬁcation capsule j. The probability is higher
when the primary capsule’s prediction vector is
more similar to the classiﬁcation capsule’s output.
Therefore, primary capsules try to predict the out-
put of the capsule in the subsequent layer. Since vj
is partially determined by ujji, their similarity in-
creases for the next iteration. Thus a convergence
is guaranteed.
This routing algorithm is superior regarding
its ability to combine and generalize information
compared to primitive routing algorithms such as
max-pooling layers, as the latter only stores the
most prominent features while the others are ig-
nored. This leads to CNNs having more difﬁculty
differentiating between classes with highly similar
features (Sabour et al., 2017), but since most label
combinations appear rarely and categories often
share features with their parents, it is a desirable
property to exploit for hierarchical classiﬁcation.
Architecture: The HMC task is converted to a
300
Primary Capsules Classiﬁcation
 Capsules
Flatten
RoutingEmbedding
Convolutional
Reshapeh
d x qs
1qCp Cc
 =d-dimension
l
lFigure 1: Architecture of our capsule network with d
being the dimensionality of a capsule’s output.
multi-label classiﬁcation task using the hierarchy
of labels: All explicitly labeled classes must also
include all ancestor labels of the hierarchy. The
architecture of our capsule network is shown in
Figure 1 and consists of four layers. We designed
a minimal capsule network, similar to CapsNet-
1 in (Xiao et al., 2018) in order to beneﬁt from
capsules and dynamic routing while maintaining
high comparability to a similarly simple CNN. In
our network, the primary capsules take as input the
output created by a preceding convolutional layer.
For each classiﬁcation capsule, the routing algo-
rithm is then used to cluster the outputs of all cp
primary capsules. The pseudo-probability jjvjjjis
then assigned to the category associated with the
effective classiﬁcation capsule. We follow Sabour
et al. (2017), and use their margin loss function.
Leveraging Label Co-occurrence: We fur-
ther follow the layer weight initialization in-
troduced by (Kurata et al., 2016) in order to
leverage label co-occurrences during the learn-
ing process of a neural network. Since label
co-occurrences such as fFiction ,Mystery & Sus-
pensegorfFiction ,Fantasygnaturally occur in
HMC because of parent-child relationships be-
tween categories, we aim to bias the learning pro-
cess of the capsule network in respect to the co-
occurrences in the dataset by initializing Wwith
label co-occurrences. Weights between a primary
capsule and the co-occurring classiﬁcation cap-
sules are initialized using a uniform distribution
while all other values are set to zero.
Label Correction: A classiﬁer may assign la-
bels to classes that do not conform with the under-
lying hierarchy of the categories as the activation
function as well as the routing algorithm look at
each category separately. For instance, if the cap-
sule network only assigns the label Fantasy then
the prediction is inconsistent with the hierarchy as
its parent Fiction has not been labeled. Inconsis-
tencies with respect to the hierarchical structure of
categories are corrected by a post-processing step.