Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop , pages 323–330
Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019. c
2019 Association for Computational Linguistics323Hierarchical Multi-label Classiﬁcation of Text with Capsule Networks
Rami Aly ,Steffen Remus , and Chris Biemann
Language Technology group
Universit ¨at Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
f5aly,remus,biemann g@informatik.uni-hamburg.de
Abstract
Capsule networks have been shown to demon-
strate good performance on structured data in
the area of visual inference. In this paper
we apply and compare simple shallow cap-
sule networks for hierarchical multi-label text
classiﬁcation and show that they can perform
superior to other neural networks, such as
CNNs and LSTMs, and non-neural network
architectures such as SVMs. For our experi-
ments, we use the established Web of Science
(WOS) dataset and introduce a new real-world
scenario dataset, the BlurbGenreCollection
(BGC). Our results conﬁrm the hypothesis that
capsule networks are especially advantageous
for rare events and structurally diverse cate-
gories, which we attribute to their ability to
combine latent encoded information.
1 Introduction
In hierarchical multi-label classiﬁcation (HMC),
samples are classiﬁed into one or multiple class
labels that are organized in a structured label hier-
archy (Silla and Freitas, 2011). HMC has been
thoroughly researched for traditional classiﬁers
(Sun and Lim, 2001; Silla and Freitas, 2011),
but with the increase of available data, the desire
for more speciﬁc and specialized hierarchies in-
creases. However, since traditional approaches fail
to generalize adequately, more sophisticated and
robust classiﬁcation methods are receiving more
attention. Complex neural network classiﬁers on
the contrary are computationally expensive, difﬁ-
cult to analyze, and the amount of hyperparam-
eters is signiﬁcantly higher as compared to other
classiﬁcation approaches. This makes it difﬁcult
to apply the local classiﬁer approach (Silla and
Freitas, 2011), where multiple classiﬁers are em-
ployed to cover different parts of the hierarchy.
Therefore, in this paper we focus on the global ap-
proach – one classiﬁer that is able to capture the
entire hierarchy at once. There are indicationsthat capsule networks (Hinton et al., 2011; Sabour
et al., 2017) are successful at ﬁnding, adapting,
and agreeing on latent structures in the underlying
data in the area of image recognition as well as
recently in the ﬁeld of natural language process-
ing (Zhao et al., 2018). This insight motivates our
research question: To which extent can the capa-
bilities of capsule networks be transferred and ap-
plied to HMC in order to capture the categories’
underlying structures?
In our experiments1we compare HMC-
adjusted capsule networks to several baseline neu-
ral as well as non-neural architectures on the
BlurbGenreCollection (BGC), a dataset which we
collected and that consists of so-called blurbs of
books and their hierarchically structured writing
genres. Additionally, we test our hypothesis on
theWeb of Science (WOS) dataset (Kowsari et al.,
2017). The main beneﬁt of capsules is their abil-
ity to encode information of each category sepa-
rately by associating each capsule with one cate-
gory. Combining encoded features independently
for each capsule, and thus category, enables cap-
sule networks to handle label combinations bet-
ter than previous approaches. This property is es-
pecially relevant for HMC since documents that
for instance only belong to a parent category, e.g.
Fiction , often share similar features such as the
most frequent words or n-grams with documents
that additionally classify into one of the parent’s
child labels, e.g. Mystery & Suspense orFantasy .
This makes it difﬁcult for traditional classiﬁers to
distinguish between parent and child labels cor-
rectly, especially if the speciﬁc combination of la-
bels was never observed during training. This pa-
per contributes in two ways: Firstly, we introduce
the new openly accessible BlurbGenreCollection
dataset for the English language. This dataset
is created and only minimally adjusted on basis
1Code for replicating results: https://github.
com/uhh-lt/BlurbGenreCollection-HMC