Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 2: Remarks on contrastive and predictive learning objectives for self-supervised learning. Between
the representation ZXand the self-supervised signal S,contrastive objective performs mutual information
maximization and predictive objectives perform log conditional likelihood maximization. We show that the SSL
objectives aim at extracting task-relevant and discarding task-irrelevant information. Last, we summarize the
computational blocks for practical deployments for these objectives.
Wheninfois small, Theorem 1 indicates that the self-supervised learned representations can extract
almost as much task-relevant information as the supervised one. While when infois non-trivial, the
learned representations may not always lead to good downstream performance. This result has also
been observed in prior work (Tschannen et al., 2019) and InfoMin (Tian et al., 2020), which claim
the representations with maximal mutual information may not have the best performance.
Theorem 2 (Task-irrelevant information with a ﬁxed compression gap I(X;SjT)).The sufﬁcient
self-supervised representation (i.e., I(Zssl
X;T)) contains more task-irrelevant information in the input
than the sufﬁcient and minimal self-supervised representation (i.e., I(Zsslmin
X ;T)). The latter contains
an amount of the information, I(X;SjT), that cannot be discarded from the input. Formally,
I(Zssl
X;XjT) =I(X;SjT) +I(Zssl
X;XjS;T)I(Zsslmin
X ;XjT) =I(X;SjT)I(Zsupmin
X ;XjT) = 0:
Theorem 2 indicates that a compression gap (i.e., I(X;SjT)) exists when we discard the task-
irrelevant information from the input. To be speciﬁc, I(X;SjT)is the amount of the shared informa-
tion between the input and the self-supervised signal excluding the task-relevant information. Hence,
I(X;SjT)would be large if the downstream tasks requires only a portion of the shared information.
2.3 C ONNECTIONS WITH CONTRASTIVE AND PREDICTIVE LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Theorem 1 and 2 state that our self-supervised learning strategies (i.e., minH(ZXjS)and
maxI(ZX;S)deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2) can extract task-relevant and discard task-irrelevant informa-
tion. A question emerges:
“What are the practical aspects of the presented self-supervised learning strategies? ”
To answer this question, we present 1) the connections with prior SSL objectives, especially for
contrastive (Oord et al., 2018; Bachman et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2019; Hjelm et al.,
2018; He et al., 2019) and predictive (Zhang et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2016; V ondrick et al., 2016;
Tulyakov et al., 2018; Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018) learning objectives, showing that these
objectives are extracting task-relevant information; and 2) a new inverse predictive learning objective
to discard task-irrelevant information. We illustrate important remarks in Figure 2.
Contrastive Learning (is extracting task-relevant information). Contrastive learning objec-
tive (Oord et al., 2018) maximizes the dependency/contrastiveness between the learned representa-
tionZXand the self-supervised signal S, which suggests maximizing the the mutual information
I(ZX;S). Theorem 1 suggests that maximizing I(ZX;S)results inZXcontaining (approximately)
all the information required for the downstream tasks from the input X. To deploy the contrastive
learning objective, we suggest contrastive predictive coding (CPC) (Oord et al., 2018)4, which is a
mutual information lower bound with low variance (Poole et al., 2019; Song & Ermon, 2019):
LCL:= max
ZS=FS(S);
ZX=FX(X);GE(zs1;zx1);;(zsn;zxn)Pn(ZS;ZX)"
1
nnX
i=1logehG(zxi);G(zsi)i
1
nPn
j=1ehG(zxi);G(zsj)i#
;(1)
whereFS:S!Z is a deterministic mapping and Gis a project head that projects a representation
inZinto a lower-dimensional vector. If the input and self-supervised signals share the same
4Other contrastive learning objectives can be other mutual information lower bounds such as DV-bound
or NWJ-bound (Belghazi et al., 2018) or its JS-divergence (Poole et al., 2019; Hjelm et al., 2018) variants.
Among different objectives, Tschannen et al. (2019) have suggested that the objectives with large variance
(e.g., DV-/NWJ-bound (Belghazi et al., 2018)) may lead to worsen performance compared to the low variance
counterparts (e.g., CPC (Oord et al., 2018) and JS-div. (Poole et al., 2019)).
4