Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING FROM A MULTI -VIEW
PERSPECTIVE
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Yue Wu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Louis-Philippe Morency
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
ABSTRACT
As a subset of unsupervised representation learning, self-supervised representation
learning adopts self-deﬁned signals as supervision and uses the learned representa-
tion for downstream tasks, such as object detection and image captioning. Many
proposed approaches for self-supervised learning follow naturally a multi-view per-
spective, where the input (e.g., original images) and the self-supervised signals (e.g.,
augmented images) can be seen as two redundant views of the data. Building from
this multi-view perspective, this paper provides an information-theoretical frame-
work to better understand the properties that encourage successful self-supervised
learning. Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate that self-supervised learned representations
can extract task-relevant information and discard task-irrelevant information. Our
theoretical framework paves the way to a larger space of self-supervised learning
objective design. In particular, we propose a composite objective that bridges the
gap between prior contrastive and predictive learning objectives, and introduce
an additional objective term to discard task-irrelevant information. To verify our
analysis, we conduct controlled experiments to evaluate the impact of the compos-
ite objectives. We also explore our framework’s empirical generalization beyond
the multi-view perspective, where the cross-view redundancy may not be clearly
observed.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Self-supervised learning (SSL) (Zhang et al., 2016; Devlin et al., 2018; Oord et al., 2018; Tian
et al., 2019) learns representations using a proxy objective (i.e., SSL objective) between inputs and
self-deﬁned signals. Empirical evidence suggests that the learned representations can generalize well
to a wide range of downstream tasks, even when the SSL objective has not utilize any downstream
supervision during training. For example, SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) deﬁnes a contrastive loss
(i.e., an SSL objective) between images with different augmentations (i.e., one as the input and the
other as the self-supervised signal). Then, one can take SimCLR as features extractor and adopt
the features to various computer vision applications, spanning image classiﬁcation, object detection,
instance segmentation, and pose estimation (He et al., 2019). Despite success in practice, only a
few work (Arora et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2020; Tosh et al., 2020) provide theoretical insights into
the learning efﬁcacy of SSL. Our work shares a similar goal to explain the success of SSL, from the
perspectives of Information Theory (Cover & Thomas, 2012) and multi-view representation1.
To understand (a subset2of) SSL, we start by the following multi-view assumption . First, we regard
the input and the self-supervised signals as two corresponding views of the data. Using our running
example, in SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020), the augmented images (i.e., the input and the self-supervised
signal) are an image with different views. Second, we adopt a common assumption in multi-view
learning: either view alone is (approximately) sufﬁcient for the downstream tasks (see Assumption 1
in prior work (Sridharan & Kakade, 2008)). The assumption suggests that the image augmentations
(e.g., changing the style of an image) should not affect the labels of images, or analogously, the self-
supervised signal contains most (if not all) of the information that the input has about the downstream
tasks. With this assumption, our ﬁrst contribution is to formally show that the self-supervised learned
1The work (Lee et al., 2020; Tosh et al., 2020) are done concurrent and in parallel, and part of their
assumptions/ conclusions are similar to ours. We will elaborate the differences more in the related work section.
2We discuss the limitations of the multi-view assumption in Section 2.1.
1arXiv:2006.05576v4  [cs.LG]  22 Mar 2021