Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 1: High-level takeaways for our main results using information diagrams. (a) We present to learn
minimal and sufﬁcient self-supervision: minimize H(ZXjS)for discarding task-irrelevant information and
maximizeI(ZX;S)for extracting task-relevant information. (b) The resulting learned representation ZX
contains all task relevant information from the input with a potential loss infoand discards task-irrelevant
information with a ﬁxed gap I(X;SjT). (c) Our core assumption: the self-supervised signal is approximately
redundant to the input for the task-relevant information.
representations can 1) extract all the task-relevant information (from the input) with a potential loss;
and 2) discard all the task-irrelevant information (from the input) with a ﬁxed gap. Then, using
classiﬁcation task as an example, we are able the quantify the smallest generalization error (Bayes
error rate) given the discussed task-relevant and task-irrelevant information.
As the second contribution, our analysis 1) connects prior arts for SSL on contrastive (Oord et al.,
2018; Bachman et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2019) and predictive learning (Zhang et al.,
2016; V ondrick et al., 2016; Tulyakov et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018) approaches; and 2) paves the
way to a larger space of composing SSL objectives to extract task-relevant and discard task-irrelevant
information simultaneously. For instance, the combination between the contrastive and predictive
learning approaches achieves better performance than contrastive- or predictive-alone objective
and enjoys less over-ﬁtting problem. We also present a new objective to discard task-irrelevant
information. The objective can be easily incorporated with prior self-supervised learning objectives.
We conduct controlled experiments on visual (the ﬁrst set) and visual-textual (the second set) self-
supervised representation learning. The ﬁrst set of experiments are performed when the multi-view
assumption is likely to hold. The goal is to compare different compositions of SSL objectives on
extracting task-relevant and discarding task-irrelevant information. The second set of experiments are
performed when the input and the self-supervised signal lie in very different modalities. Under this
cross-modality setting, the task-relevant information may not mostly lie in the shared information be-
tween the input and the self-supervised signal. The goal is to examine SSL objectives’ generalization,
where the multi-view assumption is likely to fail.
2 A M ULTI -VIEW INFORMATION -THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Notations. For the input, we denote its random variable as X, sample space asX, and outcome
asx. We learn a representation ( ZX/Z/zx) from the input through a deterministic mapping FX:
ZX=FX(X). For the self-supervised signal, we denote its random variable/ sample space/ outcome
asS/S/s. Two sample spaces can be different between the input and the self-supervised signal:
X6=S. The information required for downstream tasks is referred to as “task-relevant information”:
T/T/t. Note that SSL has no access to the task-relevant information. Lastly, we use I(A;B)
to represent mutual information, I(A;BjC)to represent conditional mutual information, H(A)to
represent the entropy, and H(AjB)to represent conditional entropy for random variables A/B/C. We
provide high-level takeaways for our main results in Figure 1. We defer all proofs to Supplementary.
2.1 M ULTI -VIEW ASSUMPTION
In our paper, we regard the input ( X) and the self-supervised signals ( S) as two views of the data.
Here, we provide a table showing different X/Sin various SSL frameworks:
Framework BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) Look & Listen (Arandjelovic & Zisserman, 2017) SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) Colorization (Zhang et al., 2016)
Inputs (X) Non-masked Words Image Image Image Lightness
Self-supervised Signals ( S) Masked Words Audio Stream Same Image with Augmentation Image Color
We note that not all SSL frameworks realize the inputs and the self-supervised signals as corresponding
views. For instance, Jigsaw puzzle (Noroozi & Favaro, 2016) considers (shufﬂed) image patches as
the input and the positions of the patches as the self-supervised signals. Another example is Learning
by Predicting Rotations (Gidaris et al., 2018), which considers an image (rotating with a speciﬁc
2