of images from one domain and a set from the other without the
need for any particular correspondence and, due to this, it
provides unique ﬂexibility in training. As for pix2pix, CycleGAN
uses GANs to perform the image-to-image translation task and
requires 2D images to train. Here, we use CycleGAN to predict
what a ﬂuorescent label would look like when imaged using other
imaging modalities. In particular, we trained CycleGAN to
predict what images of microtubules acquired with a spinning-
disk confocal would look like when processed with SRRF54,55or
imaged with a SIM microscope (Fig. 6e, f). Using our notebook,
we also trained CycleGAN to transform SRRF images into SIM
images (Fig. 6g).
ZeroCostDL4Mic within larger analysis pipelines . Zer-
oCostDL4Mic notebooks are self-contained as they are suf ﬁcient
to train, evaluate and use DL networks. However, they can also be
connected with other image-analysis tools and predictions gen-
erated within the notebooks can be further analysed elsewhere.
For instance, the StarDist notebook can easily be connected toTrackMate
38to enable automated cell tracking56(Fig. 2). In fact,
most models trained with ZeroCostDL4Mic can also be down-
loaded and used outside of ZeroCostDL4Mic (e.g., StarDist5,6,
CARE7, Noise2Void8in Fiji21and U-Net2,28and Deep-STORM29
in DeepImageJ23) and we expect cross-platform compatibilities to
improve in the future. This capability allows users to easily bene ﬁt
from the large pre-existing image-analysis ecosystem around
ImageJ/Fiji21,57. For segmentation tasks, this capability also allows
users to annotate more training images by using model predic-
tions as a starting point56.
ZeroCostDL4Mic notebooks can also be easily used sequen-
tially. For instance, we combined image-to-image translation
and nuclear segmentation tasks to track cells based on an actin
label automatically (Fig. 7and Supplementary Movie 11).
Several groups have recently published tools that ful ﬁl similar
cross-modality tasks58,59, highlighting a need for such tools in
the bioimaging community. Here, we demonstrate that
ZeroCostDL4Mic notebooks can be used in a modular fashion
to quickly and easily recapitulate sought-after solutions for the
community.
Quality control . One key feature of the ZeroCostDL4Mic
notebooks is that they allow for a detailed quality assessment ofthe trained models before they are deployed on unseen data
(Supplementary Note 2). This is essential in optimising the
network performance for a particular application, determiningits limitations and preventing the signi ﬁcant introduction of
artefacts, a commonly raised concern for DL applications in
microscopy
60,61. With this in mind, we implemented a quan-
titative QC step in all notebooks, which allows the assessmentand improvement of model performance (Supplementary
Figs. 5 and 6). These metrics allow the user to improve the
performance of a given model by tuning its hyperparameters orexploring the range of applicability to different data from whichit was trained (generalisation). The QC section typically has two
parts. In the ﬁrst part, the performance metrics shown to users
are loss curves for model training and validation (Fig. 8a).
These allow users to determine if the tested model over ﬁts
during training, identi ﬁable by an increasing divergence
between the validation and training loss. This divergenceappears if the model learns features too speci ﬁc to the training
dataset instead of general featu res applicable to all similar
datasets, therefore preventing it from generalising to unseen
data, a common problem for DL networks
62.
However, even a model that performs well on the validation
data can produce unwanted results when used on unseen data,
ultimately making the model unreliable. In the second part of
the notebooks ’QC section, these issues can be detected by
comparing the predictions from unseen data to the equivalent
ground-truth data. The metrics used in individual notebooks to
quantify the differences between predictions and ground truth
vary to re ﬂect the differences in the type of data these models
operate on. For networks producing a grey-scale image, e.g.
CARE, Noise2Void, pix2pix, CycleGAN and label-free predic-
tion (fnet), the metrics used are SSIM (structural similarity)63
and RSE (root square error) (Fig. 8b). For networks producing a
binary or semantic segmentation, e.g., U-Net, the metric used is
IoU (intersection over union) (Fig. 8c). The StarDist notebook
also makes use of the IoU as well as other metrics, including the
F1 score and the Panoptic quality64. The YOLOv2 notebook
uses the mean average precision score (mAP)65,66and F1 score,
reﬂecting the validity of the bounding box positions and the
corresponding classi ﬁcation (Fig. 8d). These metrics and our
implementations are described in detail in Supplementary
Information (Supplementary Note 2).
Fig. 7 Example illustrating how ZeroCostDL4Mic notebook can be used together. Figure highlighting how ZeroCostDL4Mic notebooks can be combined
to create a data analysis pipeline. Here, we wanted to automatically track the migration pattern of DCIS.COM cells labelled with lifeact-RFP. Theref ore, we
ﬁrst used pix2pix to predict the actin staining into nuclei staining (as in Fig. 6c) and StarDist to detect the nuclei. From the StarDist prediction, cells were
tracked automatically using TrackMate38(as in Fig. 2d; see also Supplementary Movie 11). A representative ﬁeld-of-view is displayed.ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0
10 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2276 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications