the acquisition of noisy images, and denoising strategies are
becoming increasingly essential for the interpretation of data and
its further analysis.
Content-aware image restoration (CARE)7can denoise and
improve the resolution of 2D and 3D images, using supervisedtraining. To illustrate the appl icability of our ZeroCostDL4Mic
CARE notebooks, we trained a 3D CARE network to denoise
live-cell structured illumination microscopy (SIM) imaging
data (Fig. 4a, b and Supplementary Movie 6). To generate
a suitable training dataset, both high and low SNR images of
Fig. 2 Image-segmentation networks (U-Net and StarDist). a ,bExample of data generated using the ZeroCostDL4Mic U-Net and StarDist notebooks.
aA 2D U-Net model was trained to segment neuronal membranes from EM images. This training dataset is from the 2012 ISBI segmentation challenge78.
Training source (raw data), training targets (hand-annotated binary masks), predictions (raw output of the notebook after training) and U-Net imag e
thresholded output are displayed, achieving an Intersection over Union (IoU) of 0.90 (see Supplementary Note 2 for details). The optimal threshold w as
assessed automatically using the Quality Control section of the notebook (see Supplementary Note 3). bA 3D U-Net network was trained to segment
mitochondria from EM images. The training dataset was made available by EPFL and consists of EM images of 5 × 5 × 5 µm3sections taken from the CA1
hippocampus region of the brain. A representative single Z slice, as well as an overlay displaying U-Net prediction and the ground truth, are displaye d. 3D
reconstructions displayed were performed from U-Net predictions using Imaris (Supplementary Movie 3). c,dExample of data generated using the
ZeroCostDL4Mic StarDist notebooks. c,dA StarDist model was trained ( c) to automatically detect nuclei in movies of migrating DCIS.COM cells, labelled
with SiR-DNA, to track their movement automatically ( d).cExample of Training source (DCIS.COM cells labelled with SiR-DNA), Training targets
(Ground-truth masks) and StarDist prediction (IoU of 0.86) are displayed. dStarDist outputs were used to automatically track cell movement over time in
TrackMate (Supplementary Movie 4). Cell tracks were further analysed using the online platform motilitylab.net, indicating a directed movement th at is
expected for such migration assays (error bars represent the standard deviation). IoU Intersection over Union.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2276 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5