learning33via the loading of a pretrained model as a starting
model rather than initialising training with a blank model
(Supplementary Note 4). This powerful approach allows the
platform to bene ﬁt from the growing availability of pretrained
models from model zoos without compromising on the quality of
the performance of a model on the speci ﬁc data type provided by
the user. This can also have several advantages in terms of
shortening training times and reducing the amount of required
training data. Both of these are demonstrated and discussed in
detail in a later section of this paper.
Using Google Colab for DL for microscopy . By using Google
Colab, ZeroCostDL4Mic provides free access to the high-performance computing resources needed to run the broad
range of DL networks implemented here (Fig. 1). Google Colab is
widely used in the data science community for developing DL
projects
34–36. However, to productively make use of these
resources, users typically need to possess expert knowledge which
has drastically limited its uptake by the biomedical research
community. By establishing a user-friendly and ef ﬁcient interface
with Google Colab, we aim to leverage this cloud-computing
system to deploy state-of-the-art DL models for microscopy.
Google Colab provides access to remote virtual machines with
free but ﬁnite resources which are made available for a speci ﬁc
runtime duration (maximum 12 h, see Supplementary Note 5 for
details). The runtime duration is limited as Google Colab is
intended for short, interactive use and not for long-running
background computations (such as cryptocurrency mining).
These resources are well suited for running simple DL pipelines.
They include disk space to store training data, trained models and
inference results (~68 GB), RAM to store variables and partial
blocks of data (12 or 25 GB, depending on the session), and access
to a high-end GPU (typically Tesla P100, T4 or K80). With these
resources, training DL models in ZeroCostDL4Mic only takes a
few minutes to a few hours and allows users to produce the results
shown in Figs. 2–9(see Supplementary Table 1 for details of the
dataset used and Supplementary Table 2 for training parameters
and times). Installing the necessary libraries takes less than a
minute. Training times vary depending on the network used and
the assigned GPU (see Supplementary Table 3 for install times
and training speeds), but providing a speed improvement ranging
between 5× and 200× over central processing unit (CPU)
computation time. Once a model is trained, and its performance
validated, it can be applied to new data (see Supplementary
Table 4 for inference speeds).
Resources are typically suf ﬁcient to train models on real
biological data and to provide the results presented in this paper.
We do, however, also discuss strategies to overcome potentiallimitations (Supplementary Note 5). In particular, training a
model with Colab may impose an upper limit on the number of
images that can be used during training (typically dictated by the
availability of suf ﬁcient RAM, see Supplementary Table 5 for
breaking points on training capabilities within Google Colab, and
Supplementary Table 6 for inference throughput). Again, these
limitations will strongly depend on the network and the size of
the provided images. When generating predictions, users can
easily and quickly batch process thousands of images, limited by
the available storage on Google Drive (15 GB for a free account).
Considering the resources available with Colab, we believe that
ZeroCostDL4Mic is well suited for:
1. Prototyping image-analysis work ﬂows and pipelines with-
outﬁnancial investment.
2. Executing small-to-medium-size projects (a few 10 ’so fG B
of data) compared to large-scale projects often encountered
in machine vision research.3. Short-term projects not requiring a permanent investment
in DL infrastructure.
4. As a resource for DL enthusiasts and students to learn about
DL methods and state-of-the-art architectures, such as U-Net
2,28or (generative adversarial networks) GANs30,31.
However, larger-scale (>20 GB of data) and longer-term
analysis pipelines may bene ﬁt from the investment in paid-for
cloud-based platforms (like Paperspace ( https://www.paperspace.
com/ ), Amazon Web Services (AWS) ( https://aws.amazon.com/ )
or FloydHub) or local infrastructure, therefore tuning the
resources to the needs of the speci ﬁc in-house application.
In addition, ZeroCostDL4Mic is adjustable to run outside
Google Colab (see Supplementary Note 6 and Supplementary
Fig. 4 for running ZeroCostDL4Mic notebooks within Deepnote
and FloydHub).
Within ZeroCostDL4Mic, we implemented several DL-based
image-analysis tools, including networks for image segmentation
and object detection, image denoising and restoration, super-
resolution microscopy and image-to-image translations. In the
following sections, we introduce each of the tasks and DL
networks that are currently available on our platform, showcasing
results obtained by using Colab.
Image segmentation and object detection . Manual segmentation
is a time-consuming and challenging task that typically requires
expert knowledge and can be a bottleneck for studies that aim to
quantify large datasets12,37. Hence, DL tools are of great interest in
thisﬁeld, as they can combine expert-level performance with high-
throughput analysis4. Within ZeroCostDL4Mic, we implemented
two networks, U-Net2,28and StarDist5,6, which perform state-of-
the-art image segmentation, both handling 2D and 3D imaging
datasets. To illustrate the applicability of our ZeroCostDL4Mic U-
Net 2D and 3D notebooks, we trained U-Net networks to segment
membranes from 2D electron microscopy (EM) images and mito-
chondria from 3D EM images (Fig. 2a, b and Supplementary
Movie 3). To showcase our StarDist notebooks, we ﬁrst trained a
StarDist model to segment the nuclei of densely packed cell
monolayers (Fig. 2c). Interestingly, the trained model could detect
extra nuclei that were missed when these images were manually
labelled (Fig. 2c). In addition, to facilitate the analysis of live-cell
imaging data, the outputs generated by the StarDist notebook are
directly compatible with the popular tracking software TrackMate
which consequently enables automated cell tracking (Fig. 3da n d
Supplementary Movie 4)38.
Object detection tasks have become of interest in microscopy
studies as they allow the identi ﬁcation of multiple classes/objects
in an image, e.g., counting pathogens or identifying cell types in
bioimages9,39. To provide object detection capabilities within
ZeroCostDL4Mic, we implemented the popular DL network
YOLOv23. To demonstrate how our YOLOv2 implementation is
applicable to the analysis of microscopy data, we annotated time-
lapses of cells migrating on cell-derived matrices in the function
of the shape taken by the cells as they migrate ( “elongated ”cells,
“rounded ”cells, “dividing ”cells and “spread-out ”cells) (Fig. 3
and Supplementary Movie 5). The YOLOv2 model, trained using
ZeroCostDL4Mic, correctly classi ﬁed and labelled a large fraction
of the cells in the images (as indicated by the mAP score).
Image restoration and denoising . Fluorescence live-cell imaging
has become the primary strategy to directly and dynamically
observe pathways with high molecular speci ﬁcity. However, when
performing live-cell imaging experiments, low laser intensities
need to be combined with low expression of the molecule(s) of
interest to ensure the physiological relevance of the phenomenon
observed40. Therefore, live-cell imaging experiments often lead toARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0
4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2276 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications