Supplementary Movie 7). Next, we used the ZeroCostDL4Mic
notebook to denoise data capturing the endogenous expression
levels of a glioma cell endogenously labelled for paxillin-GFP,
migrating on polyacrylamide hydrogel (Fig. 4da n dS u p p l e -
mentary Movie 9).
In all the displayed examples, the Noise2Void models trained
in ZeroCostDL4Mic performed very well and signi ﬁcantly
improved the quality of the images. However, it is important tonote that, in our hands, Noise2Void did not perform well when
used to denoise the actin dataset used to train CARE (Fig. 4a).
This is likely due to the noise in this particular dataset not beinghomogeneous and containing imprinted patterns from the SIMreconstruction process. This highlights the importance of testing
a range of networks to identify which approach is most suited for
a speci ﬁc dataset, underlining the need for a platform integrating
a broad range of networks.
Super-resolution microscopy . Over the last two decades, super-
resolution microscopy (SRM) has enabled cellular structures to be
observed down to the nanoscale
43. SRM methods often require
the post-processing analysis of images, which can be aided by DL
strategies29,44,45. Within ZeroCostDL4Mic, we implemented
Deep-STORM29, a DL network capable of reconstructing single-
molecule localisation microscopy (SMLM) data from dense
Fig. 4 Image denoising and restoration networks (CARE and Noise2Void). Example of data generated using ZeroCostDL4Mic CARE and Noise2Void
notebooks. a,bA 3D CARE network was trained using SIM images of the actin cytoskeleton of DCIS.COM cells using ﬁxed samples ( a) to denoise live-cell
imaging data ( b). Quality control metrics are as follows: mSSIM: 0.74, PSNR: 26.9 and NRMSE: 0.15. cFixed samples were imaged using SIM to obtain low
signal-to-noise images (lifeact-RFP, Training Source) and matching high signal-to-noise (Phalloidin staining, Training Target) images, and thi s paired
dataset was used to train CARE. Input, ground truth and a CARE prediction are displayed (both single Zplane and maximal projections). The QC metrics
values computed directly in the CARE notebook are indicated. bThe network trained in ( a) was then used to restore live-cell imaging data (Supplementary
Movie 6). The low SNR image (input) and the associated CARE predictions are displayed (single plane). cMovie of an ovarian carcinoma cell labelled with
lifeact-RFP migrating on cell-derived matrices (labelled for ﬁbronectin) denoised using Noise2Void. Both training source and Noise2Void predictions are
displayed (Supplementary Movie 7). For each channel, a single Zstack (time point) was used to train noise2Void, and the resulting model was applied to
the rest of the movie. dMovie of a glioma cell endogenously labelled for paxillin-GFP, migrating on 9.6 kPa polyacrylamide hydrogel, and imaged using an
SDC. Both training source and Noise2Void prediction are displayed (Supplementary Movie 9). A single image (time point) was used to train Noise2Void,
and the resulting model was applied to the rest of the movie. For all panels, yellow squares highlight a region of interest that is magni ﬁed.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2276 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7