For each provided DL network, the original network architecture
is packaged in our standard work ﬂow that every ZeroCostDL4Mic
notebook follows (Supplementary Fig. 2) and which recapitulates
crucial steps in DL: from data loading and training to model
evaluation and inference on new data. To ensure that users with
little to no coding expertise can interactively work through the
pipeline, we added a textual introduction to each analytical step,explaining the basis for the procedure and providing instructions.
To do this, we engaged with colleagues from the imaging and
biomedical research community as beta testers. While the under-
lying code is hidden by default, it remains accessible, allowing users
to learn, explore and edit the notebooks ’programmatic structure.
A clear issue with DL is the need to validate the performance of
each model on data for which the desired output is known
(ground truth). With ZeroCostDL4Mic, we wanted to streamline
the evaluation of model performance as much as possible, so weintegrated the quality control (QC) step where quantitative
metrics estimate a model ’s prediction accuracy by comparing it to
ground-truth data. These metrics vary from one network to
another to cater to the varied data output from the networks that
we implemented (Supplementary Note 2). Also, to make this
assessment easier, we decided to spatially map the potential
discrepancies, allowing a visual way to observe artefacts linked tospeciﬁc structures in the image.
In each notebook, we also included two strategies commonly
used to improve the training of DL models. Firstly, we added a
range of data augmentation steps, using the Augmentor
32or
imgaug ( https://github.com/aleju/imgaug ) python packages that
can be applied to the training data to effectively increase the
diversity of the training data without requiring the user to
produce and provide more data (Supplementary Note 3).
Secondly, we also included the possibility to perform transfer
Fig. 1 Using DL for microscopy. a Paths to exploiting DL. Training on local servers and inference on local machines (or servers) ( ﬁrst row), cloud-based
training and local inference (second row), cloud-based training and inference (third row) and pretrained networks on standard machines (fourth row ).
bOverview of ZeroCostDL4Mic. The work ﬂow of ZeroCostDL4Mic, featuring data transfer through Google Drive, training, quality control and prediction
via Google Colab. After running a network, trained models, quality control and prediction results can then be downloaded to the user ’s machine. cOverview
of the bioimage analysis tasks currently implemented within the ZeroCostDL4Mic platform. Datasets from top left to bottom right: U-Net —ISBI 2012
Neuronal Segmentation Dataset78,79, StarDist —nuclear marker (SiR-DNA) in DCIS.COM cells, YOLOv2 —bright ﬁeld in MDA-MB-231 cells, N2V —actin
label (paxillin-GFP) in U-251-glioma cells, CARE —actin label Lifeact-RFP in DCIS.COM cells, Deep-STORM —actin-labelled glial cell, fnet —bright- ﬁeld and
mitochondrial label TOM20-Alexa Fluor 594 in HeLa cells, pix2pix —actin label Lifeact-RFP and nuclear labels in DCIS.COM cells, CycleGAN —tubulin label
in U2OS cells. All datasets are available through Zenodo (see “Data availability ”) or as indicated in the GitHub repository.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2276 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3