model (model trained by others using related but different
images). When the provided pretrained model is used to perform
prediction on our data, it led to a reasonable nuclear segmenta-
tion but also to the generation of large artefacts rendering itunusable (Fig. 9d, e). Typically, to obtain high-quality predictions
from models trained from scratch, we needed to train our
StarDist models for more than 200 epochs. However, when using
transfer learning, very high-quality predictions can be made using
a model trained for as little as ﬁve epochs (Fig. 9d, e).
Discussion
By bringing previously validated methods into a streamlined
format that allows easy, cost-free access and customised DL use
for microscopy data, we believe that ZeroCostDL4Mic provides
an important step towards broadening the use of DL approaches
beyond the community of computer scientists to the biology
laboratories that generate the imaging data. We hope to make DL
available to all researchers regardless of their laboratory ’s scale
and means. We believe that this democratisation will contribute
to the acceptance and validation of DL methods in biomedical
research.
ZeroCostDL4Mic complements current community efforts to
simplify access to DL in microscopy. Other platforms, however,
suffer from either a lack of training capacity (StarDist ImageJ
plugin, DeepImageJ
23, CellPose22, NucleAIzer17, Cellpro ﬁler20or
Ilastik19), a narrow focus on a single task (i.e., image segmenta-
tion with CDeep3M10, DeepCell Kiosk15or DeepMIB16) or rely
on local servers or paid-for services (as the authors of U-Net have
implemented14, or with ImJoy18). Some methods can already be
trained on the widely used Fiji platform21(DenoiSeg11, Noise2-
Void 2D8). However, for most users, the latter methods are only
feasible for use if their machines have GPU acceleration without
which training times can take 10 ’s to 100 ’s of hours. We believe
that ZeroCostDL4Mic ﬁlls these gaps and enables affordable and
versatile DL-deployment capabilities. It also differs from existing
solutions by providing a wide variety of DL tasks within a stan-
dardised and user-friendly platform to carry out end-to-end DL
work ﬂows: (1) installing relevant computational components, (2)
loading training datasets, (3) training models with tailored data,
(4) quantitatively validating the performance of models and (5)
deploying validated models on new data. ZeroCostDL4Mic also
enables researchers to improve their understanding of DL and
experiment with hyperparameter optimisation while making
informed decisions when choosing appropriate networks for
speciﬁc applications. These steps help to both leverage the ben-
eﬁts and understand the limitations of DL approaches in research.
Currently, ZeroCostDL4Mic relies on the computing power
provided for free by Google Colab. We have characterised in
detail the limitations of using Colab for DL and found that
RAM availability often limits the number of images that can be
used for training DL networks ( see Supplementary Table 5).
Besides, the runtime duration can, in principle, limit the
number of epochs used for training. Importantly, we also
showed that each network presented here could be trained
efﬁciently within these boundaries and that transfer learning, as
implemented here, can alleviate training time limits. Therefore,
we believe that ZeroCostDL4Mic is ideal for carrying out small-
scale studies with microscopy data (a few 10 ’so fG Bo fd a t a ) .
Larger-scale analysis pipelines may require the investment
in paid-for cloud-based platforms (i.e., Paperspace, AWS or
FloydHub) or local infrastructure.
Although we have focused our development on Google Colab,
the ZeroCostDL4Mic notebooks are not strictly dependent on
them since they can be ported to any platform that supports
Jupyter notebooks. For instance, we demonstrate that theZeroCostDL4Mic Deep-STORM and StarDist 2D notebooks can
be adapted to run on Deepnote or FloydHub respectively (see
Supplementary Note 6 and Supplementary Fig. 4). Paid-for cloud-
based solutions often provide more resources than Google Colab,which will allow to train models using more data and larger batch
and patch sizes. This can lead to the creation of higher perfor-
mance and/or more general models. Access to these platforms
will only require a small ﬁnancial investment to train DL models.
For instance, FloydHub access costs $9 per month plus $1.2 per
GPU hour (as of December 2020). However, as it can take
multiple training sessions to ﬁnd a suitable set of parameters for
an individual model and dataset, we recommend ﬁrst-time users
familiarise themselves with training models and explore network
suitability using Google Colab initially before moving to paid-for
platforms.
One remaining challenge lies in handling, curating, and
annotating datasets, especially when performing segmentation
tasks: the appropriate preparation of training datasets is always
associated with human hours cost, disregarding the platform used
for training DL networks. However, we would like to highlight
that creating segmentation training datasets can be signi ﬁcantly
accelerated by initially training models ﬁrst with a small number
of images
67,68. These models can then generate masks that can be
reﬁned by users (i.e., in Fiji21) before being used for training to
obtain a high-performance model5,7,8,11,23,69. This bootstrapping
approach can be carried out iteratively, thereby increasing the
network performance progressively while increasing the amount
of training data available56.
Another challenge associated with DL is enabling model ver-
sioning to ensure reproducibility. Indeed, a DL model ’s perfor-
mance is affected by the training dataset, the network and
training parameters but also all the underlying dependencies. To
mitigate this issue, in ZeroCostDL4Mic, we provide each trained
model with a thorough report that contains all parameters used
for training (the type of the data, network parameters, essential
package versions) and the model performance (assessed via the
quality control section). This logging allows users to easily keeptrack of parameter changes and training data modi ﬁcations
during model optimisation. Importantly, to contribute to setting
good practices on reporting DL model training in the literature,
this report is human-readable and can be included as-is in a
typical “Methods ”section.
Altogether, ZeroCostDL4Mic has the potential to accelerate
the uptake of DL for new users and promote their capacity to
use powerful image-analysis strategies, thereby readily bene ﬁt-
ting from computer science innovations. Together with the help
of the broader research community, we expect to grow the
number of networks available in ZeroCostDL4Mic quickly. We
also expect ZeroCostDL4Mic to become a standard framework
that developers can use to showcase and evolve their networks,
adapting them to data analysis tasks optimised for their speci ﬁc
image-processing problems. Indeed, since the initial release of
ZeroCostDL4Mic, several groups have adapted their novel tools
with a similar structure and interface to our notebooks and by
exploiting Google Colab
70,71. Similarly, we will continuously
develop, maintain and adapt ZeroCostDL4Mic to be up-to-date
with the latest DL paradigms. This focus will incorporate the
capacity to maintain compatibility with the rapidly evolving DL
libraries available today and the ability to export models that
could be used in either DeepImageJ23,C S B D e e p7or other pre-
diction engines.
Methods
Cell culture . U-251 glioma cells were grown in DMEM/F-12 (Dulbecco ’s
Modi ﬁed Eagle ’s Medium/Nutrient Mixture F-1 2; Life Technologies, 10565-018)
supplemented with 10 % foetal bovine serum (FCS) (Biowest, S1860). U-251NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2276 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 13