Over the past decade, the amount and complexity of
bioimages have increased exponentially, translating into a
need for more complex image analysis. To combat this
data challenge, new processing tools, including arti ﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) methods, have been developed. In particular, deep
learning (DL), a subset of AI that is capable of independently
extracting relevant features from images to perform speci ﬁc tasks,
now often outperforms conventional image-processing strategies,
as was demonstrated for image classi ﬁcation1or segmentation2.
Lately, DL is increasingly employed for high-performance image-
analysis tasks such as object detection3,4, image segmentation2,5,6
and image restoration (improvement in image resolution or
denoising)7,8. In particular, the ability to automatically recognise
objects and features in images (for instance, cancer cells in biopsy
samples) is well underway to revolutionise how clinical samples
are analysed (digital pathology)4,9. These capabilities have also led
to an increased interest in DL in standard image-analysis work-
ﬂows such as nuclear segmentation5,10,11, a common task that can
be a signi ﬁcant challenge if done manually12. However, the
potentially game-changing capabilities of DL have, to date,
remained out of reach for most researchers without a strong
background in computer sciences.
A classical DL pipeline requires a computer algorithm (called
“artiﬁcial neural network ”or“DL network ”here for simplicity)
to be trained on a training dataset to generate a “model ”that
can perform a speci ﬁc task. The training step is crucial as it will
dictate the speci ﬁcity and performance of the model. Generally,
there are two different approaches to this step, using either
supervised or self-supervised training13. In the supervised
approach, paired input and output images are required. The
network learns by attempting to ﬁnd a mapping from the input
to the desired output images, on an image-by-image basis. In
the self-supervised approach, networks learn implicit patterns
in the data and therefore, do not require paired input and
output images. For instance, in a supervised image restoration
task, a DL network, such as content-aware image restoration
(CARE)7, is trained using a dataset containing many examples
of noisy and paired high-quality images. Once trained, the
model can be used to denoise images similar to the noisy images
encountered during training. Training these DL networks is
computationally expensive and often requires coding and
computational expertise. In many biomedical research labora-
tories, neither of these requirements are readily available, hin-
dering the adoption of an ever-growing number of powerful DL
methods.
To train DL networks, computer scientists typically set up local
servers with high computational power or purchase expensive
DL-ready workstations (Fig. 1a). This constitutes a robust way to
develop and deploy DL approaches but requires technical know-
how and ﬁnancial commitment to set up and maintain. An
alternative is to purchase computational resources provided by
cloud services to train DL models. Trained DL models can then
be used directly in the cloud or downloaded and used locally
(Fig. 1a). Several software packages taking these approaches have
been developed for the bioimaging community, especially trying
to simplify the interface with DL hardware (i.e., U-Net2,14,
cDeep3m10, DeepCell Kiosk15, DeepMIB16, NucleAIzer17, YAPiC
(https://yapic.github.io/yapic/ ), ImJoy18, ilastik19, CellPro ﬁler20
and Noise2Void8and DenoiSeg Fiji plugin11,21). Another solu-
tion is to take advantage of model “zoos”which provide trained
DL models with high reusability and versatility potential (Fig. 1a).
These can be used directly to obtain predictions from new data
using web interfaces or ImageJ plugins (i.e., CellPose22,
DeepImageJ23, StarDist Fiji plugin5,6). Using pretrained models
alleviates the computational requirement of training and has
therefore become popular for tasks such as cellular and nuclearsegmentation6,17,22. However, using pretrained models bears the
risk of predicting incorrect structures and artefacts if they are
used on unseen data too dissimilar to the data they were ori-
ginally trained on24,25. This is also supported by observations that
models perform best on datasets very similar to the training
datasets7,25–27(see Supplementary Note 1 and Supplementary
Fig. 1). Training will therefore often be necessary for users to
achieve optimal performance of models on their own datasets.
Given these considerations, there is a need for a tool that seam-
lessly enables users to train, validate and experiment with DL
tools for various image-analysis tasks without the constraints of
expensive resources and the potential drawbacks of pretrained
models.
Here, we developed ZeroCostDL4Mic, an entry-level, cloud-
based DL-deployment platform (Fig. 1b) that simpli ﬁes DL use
for microscopy (Supplementary Movie 1). ZeroCostDL4Mic is a
uniﬁed collection of self-explanatory Jupyter Notebooks, featur-
ing an easy-to-use graphical user interface (GUI) (Supplementary
Fig. 2) that requires only a web browser and a Google account for
a user to run any of our DL-based tasks (Fig. 1c). All calculations
are performed in the cloud using Google Colaboratory (Colab for
short), circumventing the need to purchase or install graphical
processing units (GPUs) and associated software. Using
ZeroCostDL4Mic does not require prior knowledge in coding.
Researchers can, in a few mouse clicks and aided by a common
work ﬂow, install all needed software dependencies, upload their
imaging data and run networks for training and prediction
(Supplementary Movie 1). Within our framework, models are
comprehensively evaluated for performance and reliability and
can be directly applied to new data automatically. Models can also
be ported to local machines to obtain predictions for which
accessible interfaces are available (DeepImageJ23, StarDist5,6,
CARE7). Additionally, ZeroCostDL4Mic guides researchers on
how to generate the training data necessary for DL, allowing them
to develop a deeper understanding of DL methods while experi-
menting with parameter optimisation. We integrated a broad
range of powerful DL bioimage analysis tasks withinZeroCostDL4Mic (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Movie 2). These
include several supervised and self-supervised DL networks for
image segmentation and object detection (using U-Net
2,14,28,
StarDist5,6and YOLOv23), image denoising and restoration
(using CARE7and Noise2Void8), super-resolution microscopy
(using Deep-STORM29) and image-to-image translations (using
label-free prediction —fnet26, pix2pix30and CycleGAN31).
Results
The ZeroCostDL4Mic framework . The ZeroCostDL4Mic plat-
form is built around the availability of cloud computing and the
versatility of Jupyter Notebooks (Fig. 1b). Jupyter Notebooks can
efﬁciently and interactively run Python code, currently the default
language to deploy DL applications. For cloud computing, we
focused on developing the platform around Google Colab as it
provides an appropriate range of resources for free, e.g. GPU,
random access memory (RAM) and disk space. These online
resources provide researchers interested in DL an entrance to the
ﬁeld without the need to purchase and maintain a local infra-
structure dedicated to DL and allow the versatility to easily run
multiple networks without recon ﬁguring the infrastructure. To
make ZeroCostDL4Mic as easy to use as possible, we exploited
the Jupyter Notebooks ’code readability and Colab ’s integration
of code input via a graphical user interface (GUI). While
ZeroCostDL4Mic relies on Google Colab to run, our notebooks
can be adapted to run on other cloud-based platforms such as
Deepnote ( https://deepnote.com/ ) or FloydHub ( https://www.
ﬂoydhub.com/ ).ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0
2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2276 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications