emitter datasets. Performing high-density SMLM reconstruction
has the advantage of achieving high-performance SMLM imaging
in poorly blinking conditions and offers the possibility of sig-
niﬁcantly shortening the image acquisitions.
Training Deep-STORM requires raw SMLM data accompanied
by ground-truth localisation coordinates. Importantly, Deep-
STORM can be trained using simulated data. For this purpose,we included a simulator within the ZeroCostDL4Mic notebook todirectly generate SMLM training (and test) data that can be tuned
to mimic the experimental data type that needs to be subsequently
analysed. Unlike the original Deep-STORM network, our notebookalso allows us to extract the localisation coordinates from thereconstructed image, enabling further analysis such as drift
correction (available within the notebook) and spatial point pattern
analysis
46–48.
To illustrate the capabilities of our ZeroCostDL4Mic Deep-
STORM notebook, we reconstructed the image of a glial cell,
labelled for actin and imaged using dSTORM49(Fig. 5a, b and
Supplementary Movie 10), and the image of a cancer cell
stained for tubulin and imaged using DNA-PAINT50(Fig. 5c,
d). For comparison, the same data were processed using a
Multi-Emitter Maximum Like lihood Estimation (ME-MLE)
implemented in ThunderSTORM51. Of note, Deep-STORM led
to high-quality reconstruction in a fraction of the time
necessary for ME-MLE to produce the reconstructed image.In addition, a SQUIRREL52analysis of these reconstructions
showed that Deep-STORM had better agreement with the
equivalent wide- ﬁeld image, highlighting better linearity in the
reconstructions when compared to reconstructions based on
ME-MLE localisation (Fig. 5b, d).
Image-to-image translation . Image-to-image translation refers
to a transformation from one type of image into another, such as
by predicting a ﬂuorescent label from bright- ﬁeld images or by
predicting a ﬂuorescent label from another ﬂuorescent label.
Within ZeroCostDL4Mic, we implemented three networks, label-
free prediction (fnet)26, pix2pix30and CycleGAN31capable of
performing image-to-image translations. Although label-free
prediction (fnet) and pix2pix are based on supervised learning,
CycleGAN trains in a self-supervised manner without the need
for paired ground-truth data.
Therefore, performing image-to-image translation using fnet
and pix2pix requires the user to provide a paired dataset for
training (Fig. 6a). The fnet26network was developed to perform
label-free predictions from bright- ﬁeld and EM images. It is based
on a U-Net architecture and training requires paired 3D stacks of
two channels (e.g. ﬂuorescence and bright- ﬁeld images). To
showcase the ZeroCostDL4Mic fnet notebook, we trained a fnet
model to predict TOM20 mitochondrial labelling from bright-
ﬁeld images (Fig. 6b). In contrast, pix2pix30uses GANs53to
Fig. 5 Super-resolution microscopy network (Deep-STORM). Example of data that can be generated using the ZeroCostDL4Mic Deep-STORM notebook.
aSingle frame of the raw BIN10 dataset, phalloidin labelling of a glial cell, and the wide- ﬁeld image. bTop: Comparison of ThunderSTORM51Multi-Emitter
Maximum likelihood estimation (ME-MLE) and Deep-STORM reconstructions (see also Supplementary Movie 10). ME-MLE processing times were
estimated using an Intel Core i7-8700 CPU @ 3.2 GHz, 64GB RAM machine. Bottom: SQUIRREL52analysis comparing reconstructions from
ThunderSTORM ME-MLE and Deep-STORM, highlighting better linearity of the reconstruction with respect to the equivalent wide- ﬁeld dataset for Deep-
STORM. cSingle frame of the raw of a DNA-PAINT50dataset of a U2OS cell immuno-labelled for tubulin and the wide- ﬁeld image. dTop: Comparison of
ThunderSTORM51Multi-Emitter Maximum likelihood estimation (ME-MLE) and Deep-STORM reconstructions. ME-MLE processing times were estimated
using an Intel Core i7-8700 CPU @ 3.2 GHz, 32 GB RAM. Bottom: SQUIRREL52analysis comparing reconstructions of ThunderSTORM ME-MLE and Deep-
STORM, highlighting better linearity of the reconstruction with respect to the equivalent wide- ﬁeld dataset for Deep-STORM. The reconstruction times
shown for Deep-STORM were obtained with the NVIDIA Tesla P100 PCIe 16 GB RAM available on Google Colab. RSP resolution -scaled Pearson
coefﬁcient, RSE root-squared error.ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0
8 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2021) 12:2276 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-22518-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications