Wang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcomp./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/one.tnum/eight.tnum/seven.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum
(Tahaei et al., 2023 ). This approach requires researchers to
engage end-users in the system design process early and often
(Sendak et al., 2020 ). More speciﬁcally, it is a useful strategy
to create ongoing feedback loops with users and stakeholders.
By doing so, researchers and system designers can continuously
and iteratively collect user feedback to inform the design of AI-
CDSS (Sendak et al., 2020 ;Abdulaal et al., 2021 ;Lee et al.,
2021). For example, Sendak et al. (2020) conducted many
meetings and information sessions as a communication vehicle
to convey information to and collect feedback from users and
stakeholders, while Lee et al. (2021) used a “human-in-the-loop”
approach to engage medical experts in improving an imperfect
AI-CDSS.
/four.tnum./two.tnum./six.tnum. Other considerations
The reviewed articles also reported other user suggestions and
lessons learned to address barriers in AI-CDSS adoption, such as
providing in-depth training to clinicians to ﬂatten the learning
curve (Jin et al., 2020 ;Wang et al., 2021 ), designing AI-CDSS as
a multi-user system to better engage patients in decision-making
(Caballero-Ruiz et al., 2017 ;Jacobs et al., 2021 ), expanding the
application of AI-CDSS tools to a variety of clinical scenarios
(Jin et al., 2020 ;Wang et al., 2021 ), and examining the data
quality for potential bias and fairness issues in AI-CDSS ( Jin et al.,
2020).
/four.tnum./three.tnum. Future research directions
Ourstudyrevealsseveralresearchgapsthatcouldinformfuture
research directions. First, the reviewed articles primarily focused
on evaluating the eﬀectiveness and user experience of AI-CDSS
interventions. However, other important factors that could play
a vital role in AI-CDSS adoption received little attention. For
example, the economic impact of AI-CDSS could be an important
factor for many healthcare organizations to consider. Two of
our reviewed papers ( Chiang et al., 2020 ;Kumar et al., 2020 )
reported that the physicians place slightly more orders per case,
i.e., 1.3 and 1 additional orders, respectively, compared to the
priori situations. This observation contradicts to various earlier
studies that standardized medical order systems as part of CDSS
promote cost-eﬀectiveness (e.g., Ballard et al., 2008 ). However, a
careful economic outcomes evaluation of an AI-CDSS involves
many more perspectives, including a more comprehensive set of
measurements of introduced interventions, total amount of lab
testschangespriorandafter,aswellastheaveragelengthofhospital
staybasedontheAI-CDSSrecommendations( Fillmoreetal.,2013 ;
Lewkowicz et al., 2020 ). Indeed, as Chen et al. (2022) pointed out,
the research on economic impact of CDSS intervention and cost-
eﬀectiveness measurement are varied and inconclusive, due to the
various study contexts, the quality of reporting, and evaluation
methods.Futureworkisneededtosystematicallyevaluatethecost-
eﬀectiveness of AI-CDSS implementation using a comprehensive
setofmeasurements.Second,onlyafewreviewedarticles( Beedeetal.,2020 ;Sendak
et al., 2020 ;Jacobs et al., 2021 ) took into consideration the social,
organizational, and environmental factors in AI-CDSS design
and implementation. Such factors are essential in determining
AI-CDSS adoption, but they could get overlooked easily. As
such, future work should take a more holistic, sociotechnical
approach to determine how to implement AI-CDSS in a complex
health care organization. For example, as Sittig and Singh (2015)
recommended, implementation of complex healthcare systems
should consider at least the following dimensions: hardware
and software computing infrastructure, clinical content, human-
computerinterface,people,workﬂowandcommunication,internal
organizational policies, procedures and culture, external rules,
regulations and pressures, and ﬁnally, system measurement
and monitoring. Conceptualizing AI-CDSS implementation as
a sociotechnical process could help the development team
foresee potential non-technical issues and tackle them as early
aspossible.
Third, the studies were mostly conducted in the United States
and other high-income countries (e.g., Canada, United Kingdom,
Spain, and Austria), with only a few studies being conducted in
locations with low resources where such technology can provide
signiﬁcant support to patient care (e.g., Thailand and China).
This ﬁnding reveals the gap in AI-CDSS implementation and
research in low- and middle-income countries ( Sambasivan et al.,
2012). Despite some low-resource countries having increased
their investment in health information technologies (HITs), these
countries often face much greater challenges in implementing AI-
CDSS interventions compared to high-income countries ( Tomasi
et al., 2004 ;Ji et al., 2021 ;Wang et al., 2021 ). For example, as one
reviewed study mentioned ( Jin et al., 2020 ), the implementation
of EHR systems in China is still very limited, creating a barrier
to gathering comprehensive patient data for AI-CDSS to generate
accurate recommendations. The limited access to and integration
with HITs has slowed down the implementation and adoption of
AI-CDSSinlow-andmiddle-income countries( Sambasivanetal.,
2012;Lietal.,2020 ).Futureworkcanexaminesocialandeconomic
factors that inﬂuence the success of AI-CDSS introduction in
low-resource countries and the best strategies and practices that
can be utilized to overcome barriers and challenges faced by
theselocations.
Lastly, patients’ attitude about using AI-CDSS in their
diagnostic process is another important factor to consider
(Caballero-Ruiz et al., 2017 ;Zhang et al., 2021 ). Indeed, using AI-
CDSScouldaﬀectpatient-providerinteractionandcommunication
as highlighted by several reviewed articles ( Caballero-Ruiz et al.,
2017;Tanguay-Sela et al., 2022 ). Given the increased focus
on enhancing patients’ participation in the shared decision-
making process with clinicians, it is critical to make sure
that AI-CDSS is designed as a multi-user system to better
engage patients in decision-making ( Stiggelbout et al., 2012 ).
A few of our reviewed studies touched upon this topic
(Caballero-Ruiz et al., 2017 ;Jacobs et al., 2021 ), but more
work is needed to investigate how to accomplish this design
objective.
Frontiersin ComputerScience /one.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org