Wang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcomp./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/one.tnum/eight.tnum/seven.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum
/one.tnum. Introduction
Over the past decade, we have witnessed an unprecedented
speed of the development of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) techniques,
such as deep neural networks and knowledge graph. An
essential application area of AI is the clinical domain. Seminal
work has reported their eﬀorts in utilizing state-of-the-art AI
techniquestoempowerclinicaldecisionsupportsystems(CDSS)—
electronicsystemsdesignedtogenerateandpresentpatient-speciﬁc
assessments or recommendations to help clinicians make fast
and accurate diagnostic decisions ( Bright et al., 2012 ;Erickson
et al., 2017 ;Jiang et al., 2017 ;Lindsey et al., 2018 ). It is expected
that AI-empowered CDSS interventions (AI-CDSS) will change
the landscape of clinical decision-making and profoundly impact
patient-provider relationship ( Patel et al., 2009 ;Jiang et al., 2017 ;
ShortliﬀeandSepúlveda,2018 ).
Despite the technical advancement that has truly boosted AI-
CDSS, it is well recognized that human factors (e.g., explainability,
privacy, and fairness) as well as social and organizational
dimensions of medical work are equally important in determining
the success of AI-CDSS implementation ( Cheng et al., 2019 ;
Magrabi et al., 2019 ;Knop et al., 2022 ). For instance, end-users
(i.e., clinicians in this context) may resist accepting or using AI-
CDSS due to the lack of trust in and understanding of AI-CDSS’s
capability ( Hidalgo et al., 2021 ). A possible reason is that many
AI-CDSS function as a “black box,” as such, how they generate the
recommendations remains opaque to clinicians ( Zihni et al., 2020 ;
Schoonderwoerd et al., 2021 ). These issues could lead to limited
user acceptance and system uptake ( Strickland, 2019 ). Given these
potential challenges, there is a general consensus that research
is urgently needed to understand how to appropriately design
AI-CDSS to meet user needs and align with clinical workﬂow
(Tahaei et al., 2023 ). Without involving users in rigorous system
design and evaluations, it becomes an almost impossible mission
to successfully implement and deploy AI-CDSS in complex and
dynamicclinicalcontexts( Antoniadietal.,2021 ).
With the growing awareness of the critical role of human and
social factors in AI-CDSS implementation ( Tahaei et al., 2023 ),
there is a need to synthesize the knowledge and experiences
in human-centered design and evaluation of AI-CDSS. To that
end, we conducted a systematic review on the studies focusing
on user needs, perceptions, and experiences when using AI-
CDSS in clinical settings. Our speciﬁc research questions are
as follows: (1) what are the general characteristics of prior
research on human-centered design and evaluation of AI-CDSS?
(2) How is the system designed, used, and evaluated? (3) What
are the perceived beneﬁts and challenges of using AI-CDSS in
clinical practice? These research questions guided our literature
search, screening, and analysis. Our work contributes to the
intersection of AI and human-computer interaction ﬁelds by (1)
providing an in-depth analysis and synthesis of prior research
on the design and evaluation of AI-CDSS from eventual users’
perspective; (2) further highlighting the criticality of considering
user experience, social and contextual factors when implementing
AI-CDSS; and (3) discussing design implications and future
researchonhowtodesignAI-CDSSforbetterworkﬂowintegration
anduseracceptance.TABLE/one.tnum Databasesearchresults.
Searched database Results
ACMDigitalLibrary 331
WebofScience 1,705
IEEEXplore 559
OvidMEDLINE 2,940
Scopus 14,339
Total 19,874
In the following of the paper, we ﬁrst describe the methods
we used to screen and review relevant articles (Section 2).
Then we describe the major ﬁndings of this systematic
review in Section 3, including the general characteristics
of selected studies, system features, system design and
evaluation details, and user perceptions. We conclude
this paper by discussing the implications of this review,
including AI-CDSS design and future research directions
(Section4).
/two.tnum. Methods
In this section, we describe the speciﬁc process we followed
to retrieve, screen, and identify relevant articles for this
systematicreview.
/two.tnum./one.tnum. Search strategies
As a key ﬁrst step of our literature search, we ﬁrst discussed
with an experienced librarian about the search time frame, search
terms,anddatabases.Afteriterativereﬁnementofsearchterms,we
usedAI-relatedtermssuchas“artiﬁcialintelligence”and“machine
learning,” along with decision support keywords such as “clinical
decision support” or “healthcare decision support” to perform a
literature search for articles published between January 2011 and
May 2022. The latter marks the time our literature search process
started. We selected this time frame to capture the evolvement
of the AI technology. We chose ﬁve databases to cover research
within both health care and computer science, including ACM
Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, Web of Science, Ovid MEDLINE,
andScopus.Thedatabasesearchesweresettoincludeonlystudies
publishedinpeer-reviewedjournalsandconferenceproceedingsin
English.Dissertations,posters,briefreports,andextendedabstracts
were excluded from the database search. The search process
returnedatotalof19,874articlesasshownin Table1.Theretrieved
citationswerestoredandmanagedusingCovidence/one.tnum—aweb-based
collaboration software platform that streamlines the production of
systematicandotherliteraturereviews.
/one.tnum Covidence systematic review software, Veritas Health Innova tion,
Melbourne, Australia. Available at www.covidence.org .
Frontiersin ComputerScience /zero.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org