Wang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcomp./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/one.tnum/eight.tnum/seven.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum
visualization,couldnotonlyhelpcliniciansunderstandwhetheror
not they should trust and use the AI-CDSS, but also how they can
most eﬀectively partner with it in practice ( Schoonderwoerd et al.,
2021).
It is also worth noting that one study ( Jacobs et al., 2021 )
explicitly examined when to provide additional information (e.g.,
explanations) about the predictions generated by AI-CDSS. This
study challenged the idea of using explanations to encourage users
to make determinations of trust for each prediction as medical
experts usually don’t have suﬃcient time to review additional
information for every decision. Therefore, for time-constrained
medical environments, rather than providing all evidence in
support of a prediction, it will have a higher user acceptance
to provide on-demand explanations when an AI prediction is
divergingfromexistingguidelinesorexpertknowledge.
/four.tnum./two.tnum./two.tnum. Align AI-CDSS design with clinical workﬂow
Numerous studies have revealed that failure to integrate HITs
into clinical workﬂow could result in limited user adoption ( Sittig
andSingh,2015 ).TheprimaryreasonisthatnewlyintroducedHIT
interventions could disrupt current clinical work practice, causing
not only frustrations for medical providers but also patient safety
issues(Harringtonetal.,2011 ).Whenthisproblemoccurs,medical
providers need to bypass the new technology and adopt informal,
low-tech,potentiallyunsafeworkarounds( Vogelsmeieretal.,2008 ;
Beedeetal.,2020 ).
Not surprisingly, our reviewed papers also identiﬁed workﬂow
misalignment as a major issue for the successful implementation
of AI-CDSS ( Yang et al., 2016 ,2019;Cai et al., 2019a ;Beede et al.,
2020;Sendak et al., 2020 ;Jacobs et al., 2021 ;Wang et al., 2021 ).
TheyallhighlightedtheurgentneedofdesigningAI-CDSSinaway
that can seamlessly ﬁt into the local clinical context and workﬂow.
For example, Yang et al. (2019) suggested making the AI-CDSS
“unremarkable”; that is, embedding the system into the point of
decision-makingandtheinfrastructureofthehealthcaresystemin
anunobtrusiveway.Toachievethisgoal,itiscriticaltothoroughly
examineandunderstandthedecision-makingprocesstodetermine
how best to integrate AI-CDSS into the workﬂow and how to
strategicallypresentAIoutputstoeventualusers( Yangetal.,2016 ,
2019;Cai et al., 2019a ;Beede et al., 2020 ;Jacobs et al., 2021 ;Wang
et al., 2021 ). As illustrated in the reviewed studies, ethnographic
research methods, such as interviews and in situobservation, are
suitable for examining and gaining an in-depth understanding
of the clinicians’ ﬁne-grained work practices ( Spradley, 2016a ,b;
Fetterman,2019 ).
Another important consideration is integrating AI-CDSS with
existing clinical systems to generate more accurate predictions
based on the data collected from various systems ( Sendak et al.,
2020;Jacobs et al., 2021 ;Wang et al., 2021 ). Even more, AI-
CDSS should be designed to allow clinicians to manually input
more contextual data (e.g., patient’s emotional and socioeconomic
status) to produce more adequate recommendations ( Jin et al.,
2020;Wangetal.,2021 ).ThesestrategiescouldempowerAI-CDSS
to gain access to a variety of patient data (e.g., historical medical
data and contextual data) to achieve the goal of considering the
“wholepatient.”/four.tnum./two.tnum./three.tnum. Consider social, organizational, and
environmental factors
Ourreviewedstudiesunderscorethelimitsofsolelyrelyingon
model interpretability to ensure transparency and accountability
in practice, and point out the criticality of accounting for social,
organizational, and environmental factors in achieving the values
of trustworthiness and transparency in AI-CDSS design ( Beede
et al., 2020 ;Sendak et al., 2020 ;Jacobs et al., 2021 ). InSendak
et al.(2020), the researchers shared the lessons learned when
they were designing and implementing an AI-CDSS. For instance,
it is suggested to build accountable relationships with hospital
leadership, engage stakeholders early and often, rigorously deﬁne
the problem in context, make the system an enterprise-level
solution by involving other departments and units (e.g., security
and legal departments), and create an eﬃcient communication
mechanism with frontline healthcare providers ( Sendak et al.,
2020).
Given the essential role of non-technical factors, two reviewed
studies ( Sendak et al., 2020 ;Jacobs et al., 2021 ) suggest
conceptualizing AI-CDSS as a sociotechnical system, which allows
researchers and system designers to understand and take into
account various social and organizational components that are
equally important as technical components in determining the
success of AI-CDSS implementation in a complex health care
organization. These suggestions align well with prior work which
recognizestheimportanceofdesigningHITinterventionsthrough
the lens of a sociotechnical perspective ( Or et al., 2014 ;Sittig and
Singh,2015 ;Zhangetal.,2022 ).
/four.tnum./two.tnum./four.tnum. Respect professional autonomy
A few reviewed articles highlight the need to allow clinicians
freely operate their professional judgment and decision-making
in patient care without any interference ( Romero-Brufau et al.,
2020;Sendak et al., 2020 ;Wang et al., 2021 ). In particular, they
suggest that AI-CDSS should be designed to augment human
intelligenceandcapabilitiesandworkwithcliniciansasanadjunct
oradiagnosticaid,insteadofperformingtasksinplaceofhumans.
The clinicians should rely on their expertise and the support of
AI-CDSS to make ﬁnal diagnostic decisions and be responsible
for their decisions. These suggestions align with the paradigm of
human-AI collaboration advocated by many researchers ( Amershi
etal.,2019 );thatis,humanworkers(e.g.,clinicians)andAIsystems
should work together to complete critical tasks. With this new
paradigm in clinical settings, several urgent research questions are
worth exploration, such as how to draw a clear distinction of
responsibility between AI and clinicians, what kinds of regulation
and policy need to be in place to address the accountability
issue of AI-CDSS, and how to design a “cooperative” AI-CDSS
(Goodman and Flaxman, 2017 ;Wang et al., 2021 ;Bleher and
Braun,2022 ).
/four.tnum./two.tnum./five.tnum. Adopt a human-centered design approach
Taken together, the reviewed articles along with many other
studies have highlighted the importance of employing a human-
centered approach to design AI-CDSS interventions to ensure
their eﬀective use and better integration into the clinical workﬂow
Frontiersin ComputerScience /one.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org