Wang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcomp./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/one.tnum/eight.tnum/seven.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum
FIGURE/one.tnum
PRISMA diagram: information source and search strategy.
/two.tnum./two.tnum. Article screening and selection
As shown in Figure1, this systematic review was conducted
followingthePreferredReportingItemsforSystematicReviewsand
Meta-Analyses(PRISMA)guidelines( Moheretal.,2009 ).Multiple
researchers were involved in this process. More speciﬁcally, two
researchers (LW and JL) used Covidence and independently
screened all retrieved articles and selected relevant papers for
inclusion.Twoseniorresearchers(ZZandDW)oversawthewhole
articlescreeningandselectionprocess.Anydisagreementsinarticle
selections were resolved through discussion among researchers
duringweeklyresearchmeetings.Theinclusioncriteriawerepeer-
reviewed articles that reported human-centered use, design, and
evaluationofAI-CDSSinterventionsinclinicalorhospitalsettings.
That is, end-users (e.g., clinicians) must be engaged in the system
design and/or evaluation process. Articles were excluded if they
onlyreportedthetechnologydevelopmentorimplementation(e.g.,
technical details) without examining user needs or experience, or
if they described a tool that was not used in clinical settings [e.g.,
patient-facing,AI-drivenself-diagnosischatbots( Fanetal.,2021 )].
Othersystematicreviewpaperswerealsoexcluded.
Figure1outlines the number of records that were identiﬁed,
included,andexcludedthroughdiﬀerentphases.Morespeciﬁcally,
out of the 19,874 articles that were retrieved through database
search, 17,247 (86.78%) of them were included for screening
after removing duplicates. We then screened the article titles and
abstracts consecutively to identify relevant articles. In the title
and abstract screenings, 16,215 and 965 articles were excluded,respectively. This screening process left 67 articles for full-text
review. After reviewing the full text of these 67 articles, 20 of them
weredeemedeligibleforthissystematicreview.
/two.tnum./three.tnum. Data extraction and synthesis
Guided by our research questions, two authors (LW and
ZZ) used a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet to extract data from
the included studies, such as the country where the study was
conducted, year of publication, study objectives and scope, clinical
setting, system evaluation, technology speciﬁcs, perceived beneﬁts
andchallenges,andasummaryofstudyﬁndings.Theresearchteam
met regularly to discuss the extracted data. As suggested by prior
work (Lavallée et al., 2013 ), we performed the data analysis in an
iterative manner, i.e., going back and forth to reﬁne the extracted
dataasmoreknowledgewasobtained.
/three.tnum. Results
In this section, we report the main themes that are derived
from the reviewed articles, including the general characteristics
of selected studies (e.g., country, clinical focus), system features,
system design and evaluation details, and perceived beneﬁts and
barriers. The main ﬁndings and more details about each study are
reportedin Table2.
Frontiersin ComputerScience /zero.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org