Wang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcomp./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/one.tnum/eight.tnum/seven.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum
barriers. We describe each category of perceived challenges in
detailbelow.
/three.tnum./four.tnum./two.tnum./one.tnum. Technical limitations
Technical limitations are a major perceived challenge reported
by several studies ( n=5) (Beede et al., 2020 ;Jin et al., 2020 ;
Romero-Brufauetal.,2020 ;Abdulaaletal.,2021 ;Wangetal.,2021 ).
A major user concern is that the outputs or predictions generated
byAI-CDSSmaybeinaccurate( Beedeetal.,2020 ;Romero-Brufau
etal.,2020 ;Wangetal.,2021 ).Insuchcases,medicalexpertswould
be concerned about the consequences for patients if the system
produced a wrong prediction, including the additional burden to
followuponareferral,thecostofhandlingawrongdiagnosis,and
the emotional strain a wrong prediction (e.g., false positive) could
placeonthem( Beedeetal.,2020 ;Wangetal.,2021 ).
Another related concern is that many AI-CDSS interventions
failed to consider and capture subtle, contextual factors that are
vital in the diagnostic process but can only be recognized by
medical providers who have a face-to-face conversation with the
patient (Romero-Brufau et al., 2020 ;Wang et al., 2021 ). This
technical limitation prevents AI from considering the “whole
person” as medical providers can, and as such, impacting the
adequacy and accuracy of the recommendations ( Romero-Brufau
etal.,2020 ).
The ﬁnal commonly listed technical barrier is related to the
qualityofthetrainingdataforAI-CDSS.Therewereconcernsthat
“generalizability would be diﬃcult” if the data were accrued from
a single center ( Abdulaal et al., 2021 ). Also, predictions would be
more accurate if they are based on the statistics of a very large
collection of patients over a very long period of time; when the
underlyingdataarenotrichenoughtorepresenttherichvarietyof
outcomesthatapatientcouldface,thegeneratedrecommendations
could become questionable and less useful ( Jin et al., 2020 ). This
issue could be more evident for those hospitals or healthcare
organizations that were just starting to use EHR systems to collect
andcuratedata( Jinetal.,2020 ).
/three.tnum./four.tnum./two.tnum./two.tnum. Workﬂow misalignment
Seamless integration of AI-CDSS within clinical workﬂows is
an important step for leveraging developed AI algorithms ( Juluru
et al., 2021 ). However, it has always been a challenging task, as
six reviewed articles illustrated ( Beede et al., 2020 ;Kumar et al.,
2020;Abdulaal et al., 2021 ;Jauk et al., 2021 ;Wang et al., 2021 ;
Tanguay-Sela et al., 2022 ). For instance, both Beede et al. (2020)
andWang et al. (2021) examined the use of AI-CDSS in clinics
in developing countries (China and Thailand, respectively) and
revealed that with high patient volume already a burden, medical
experts were concerned that following the protocol of using AI-
CDSSwouldincreasetheirworkloadandleadtoclinicianburnout.
Even with reasonable patient volume, Jauk et al. (2021) reached a
similar conclusion—using AI-CDSS could potentially increase the
workload of clinicians, which was considered a major reason for
thelowsystemusageduringtheirpilotstudy.Theaddedworkload
could lead to interference in the physician-patient relationship, as
clinicians were distracted by AI-CDSS from the time they were
supposedtospendwithpatients( Tanguay-Selaetal.,2022 ).
Another issue related to workﬂow integration is the
interoperability between AI-CDSS and existing clinical systems(Kumaretal.,2020 ;Abdulaaletal.,2021 ;Wangetal.,2021 ).When
AI-CDSS is not integrated with other systems that can provide
various forms of data input for AI-CDSS, their capability in
generating accurate and reliable predictions could be aﬀected. For
example, Wang et al. (2021) reported that because the evaluated
AI-CDSStoolwasnotintegratedwiththehospital’spharmaceutical
system, the medication prescriptions recommended by AI were
not available in the hospital’s pharmacy. Similarly, the COVID-19
mortality prediction app evaluated in Abdulaal et al. (2021) was a
standalone app, which could only be used in isolation rather than
in conjunction with other clinical data, leading to the concerns
aboutaccuracyofthepredictions.
/three.tnum./four.tnum./two.tnum./three.tnum. Attitudinalbarriers
Clinicians’ attitudes and opinions about AI-CDSS is another
critical factor in user adoption and uptake. Even though many
studies suggested that clinicians generally had a positive attitude
toward the use of AI-CDSS, a few studies ( n=3) reported
completelyoppositeresults( Yangetal.,2016 ,2019;Romero-Brufau
et al., 2020 ). For example, in the studies of designing decision
support for heart pump implants ( Yang et al., 2016 ,2019), the
researchersfoundthatclinicianshadnodesiretouseanAI-CDSS,
indicatednoneedfordatasupport,andexpressedresistancetoward
theideaofshowingpersonalizedpredictions.Theprimaryreasons
reportedinthesestudieswerethatcliniciansconsideredthemselves
knowing how to eﬀectively factor patient conditions into clinical
decisions, and preferred knowing facts such as the statistics from
previous similar cases (in comparison to showing probability of a
prediction). Romero-Brufau et al. (2020) also reported that only
14%oftheirclinicianparticipantswouldrecommendthetestedAI-
CDSS to other clinicians. Collectively, all these ﬁndings revealed a
conservativeattitudeofclinicianstowardtheadoptionofAI-CDSS.
Another related attitudina barrier is that clinicians tended
not to trust the outputs yielded by AI-CDSS—an issue that
has been widely explored by prior work ( Stone et al., 2022 )—
leading to limited or no use of the system. One study ( Wang
et al., 2021 ) cited several reasons for the lack of trust in AI-
CDSS suggestions: clinicians (rather than AI-CDSS) being held
accountable for medical errors, lack of explanation on how the
recommendations were generated, lack of in-depth training for
the use of AI-CDSS, and clinicians’ professional autonomy being
challenged by AI-CDSS. Additionally, if clinicians have negative
experience with current decision support tools and models, it is
unlikely for clinicians to use any AI-CDSS until they trust these
systemscandelivervalue,asstatedin Yangetal. (2016).
/three.tnum./four.tnum./two.tnum./four.tnum. Informationalbarriers
A mismatch between clinicians’ information needs and AI-
CDSS outputs could also be a barrier to the adoption of and the
trust building in AI-CDSS ( Yang et al., 2016 ;Cai et al., 2019b ;
Tanguay-Sela et al., 2022 ). An example ( Yang et al., 2016 ) is that
clinicians need support for determining whether to perform a
treatment or not, to do it now or to “wait and see”; however, AI-
CDSS tools only predicted outcomes of conducting a procedure
now,withlittleactionableinformationaboutwaitingandseeing.
More broadly, the “black box” nature of AI causes many AI-
CDSS interventions lack transparency; it is usually unclear to the
clinicians how the AI predictive model functions, how the AI
Frontiersin ComputerScience /one.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org