Wang et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/fcomp./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/one.tnum/eight.tnum/seven.tnum/two.tnum/nine.tnum/nine.tnum
arrives at its predictions and suggestions, what clinical data the AI
model is trained on, and whether or not the model is validated by
clinical trials. With a limited understanding of these aspects of AI-
CDSS, clinicians expressed the diﬃculty they had in determining
whether they should trust and use the system outputs ( Cai et al.,
2019b;Tanguay-Selaetal.,2022 ).
/three.tnum./four.tnum./two.tnum./five.tnum. Usability issues
Not surprisingly, the usability issues of AI-CDSS were also
reported in three studies ( Yang et al., 2016 ;Jin et al., 2020 ;
Wang et al., 2021 ). These issues could be attributed to the lack
of consideration of or misalignment with clinical workﬂow. For
example, one major usability issue is related to the input methods
of AI-CDSS. In Wang et al. (2021), one interaction mechanism
for AI-CDSS required clinicians to manually click through a set of
screens with questions to provide input (e.g., symptoms, medical
history, etc.); however, this interaction approach took a lot of
time to complete a diagnosis process even though it was designed
to make clinicians’ work easier. As it was not aligned well with
the clinical workﬂow (e.g., clinicians were required to complete a
patientcasewithinafewminutesgiventhehighvolumeofwaiting
patients), clinicians rarely used this interaction approach. Two
otherstudies( Yangetal.,2016 ;Jinetal.,2020 )highlightedthatdue
to clinicians’ constant moving and frequent changing ofprotective
glovesandclothesinclinicalenvironments,itischallengingtouse
current WIMP (windows, icons, menus, pointer) interaction style
tointeractwithAI-CDSS.
The learning curve of AI-CDSS was also raised by two studies
(Jin et al., 2020 ;Wang et al., 2021 ). For instance, clinicians
complained that learning how to use the system and how to read
complex visualizations or patient views took essential time away
from them. These issues were exacerbated by the lack of in-depth
trainingandtheonboardingprocess( Wangetal.,2021 ).
/three.tnum./four.tnum./two.tnum./six.tnum. Environmentalbarrier
Three studies also pointed out the unique restrictions posed
by the clinical environments where AI-CDSS was deployed ( Yang
et al., 2016 ;Beede et al., 2020 ;Wang et al., 2021 ). For example, the
AI-CDSSthatwasdesignedforthedetectionofdiabeticeyedisease
requiredhigh-qualityfundusphotosthatwerenoteasytoproduce
in locations with low resources (e.g., non-darkening environment,
lowinternetspeed,andlowqualityofcamera)( Beedeetal.,2020 ).
Yangetal. (2016)highlightedafewotherenvironmentalfactorsthat
could impact the eﬀective use of AI-CDSS; for instance, clinicians
areconstantlyonthemoveandneedtologinandoutondiﬀerent
computers,posingchallengestoeasyaccesstoAI-CDSSindynamic
clinicalenvironments.
/four.tnum. Discussion
/four.tnum./one.tnum. Principal ﬁndings
In this work, we conducted a systematic review of studies
focusing on the user experience of AI-CDSS. Of the 17,247 papers
included for screening, only 20 (0.11%) met our inclusion criteria,
highlighting the paucity of studies examining the user needs,
perceptions,andexperiencesofAI-CDSS.However,wefoundthat
there has been a growing awareness of and interest in assessinguser experience and needs of AI-CDSS, especially since 2019. This
observation is consistent with ( Tahaei et al., 2023 ) stating that
researchers, especially in the Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
community, have increasingly emphasized human factor-related
issuesinAI(e.g.,explainability,privacy,andfairness).
We found a large variation regarding the application
areas of AI-CDSS. But in general, these interventions were
mainly used for providing diagnostic support to clinicians,
recommending intervention and treatment options, alerting
patients at risk, predicting treatment outcomes, and facilitating
medical information searches. To enhance the user experience
(e.g., trust, understandability, usability) of AI-CDSS tools, a set of
reviewed studies utilized such strategies as providing explanations
for each prediction, using visual and auditory elements, and
allowing users to reﬁne the outputs. These strategies were deemed
usefulbyclinicians.
The reviewed studies assessed diﬀerent aspects of AI-CDSS,
includingeﬀectiveness(e.g.,improvedpatientevaluationandwork
eﬃciency),userneeds(e.g.,informationalandtechnologicalneeds),
user experience (e.g., satisfaction, trust, usability, workload, and
understandability), and other dimensions (e.g., the impact of AI-
CDSS on workﬂow and patient-provider relationship). In most
studies, AI-CDSS was found to be capable of improving patient
diagnosis and treatment, preventing adverse events, increasing
clinicians’ work eﬃciency, enhancing the patient-provider and
provider-provider relationship, and serving as a great opportunity
for clinician training. In addition, those systems received positive
user feedback in general, indicating a high level of user acceptance
and perceived usefulness. Despite so, our review identiﬁed a
number of challenges in adopting and using AI-CDSS in clinical
practices, which were further synthesized and categorized into
six high-level categories, including technical limitations, workﬂow
misalignment,attitudinalbarriers,informationalbarriers,usability
issues, and environmental barriers. In the next section, we discuss
the design implications of these ﬁndings and strategies that can
potentiallyimprovetheuserexperienceofAI-CDSS.
/four.tnum./two.tnum. Design implications
/four.tnum./two.tnum./one.tnum. Provide additional information about
AI-CDSS
Prior research has pointed out that the “black box” nature
of AI could cause issues related to user trust, attitude, and
understandability,amongmanyothers( Caballero-Ruizetal.,2017 ;
Shortliﬀe and Sepúlveda, 2018 ). For example, clinicians may not
understand how AI-CDSS generates recommendations for a given
patient case and how reliable those recommendations are, all of
which could aﬀect clinicians’ trust in the system. Several reviewed
articles argued that providing additional information about AI-
CDSS could help address these critical issues ( Cai et al., 2019a ;
Yang et al., 2019 ;Romero-Brufau et al., 2020 ;Sendak et al.,
2020;Jacobs et al., 2021 ;Wang et al., 2021 ;Tanguay-Sela et al.,
2022). For example, Cai et al. (2019a) highlighted the importance
of providing a holistic, global view of the AI-CDSS to users
during the onboarding process, such as the system’s capabilities,
functionality, medical point-of-view, and design objective. These
types of information, with careful design of presentation and
Frontiersin ComputerScience /one.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org