with the same structures (i.e., the three-layer neural netw orks).
In each building block, these architecture-search methods are
utilized for only optimizing the parameters, such as the num ber
of neurons in the corresponding layer. However in CNNs, the
layer-wised method cannot be applied due to their architect ure
characteristics of non-stacking routine, and we must conﬁr m
the entire architectures at a time. Furthermore, multiple d if-
ferent building blocks exist in CNNs, and different orders
of them would result in signiﬁcantly different performance .
Therefore, the architecture design in CNNs should be carefu lly
treated. Recently, Baker et al. [21] proposed an architecture
design approach for CNNs based on reinforcement learning,
named MetaQNN, which employed 10 Graphic Processing
Unit (GPU) cards with 8-10 days for the experiments on the
CIFAR-10 dataset.
Due to the drawbacks of existing methods and limited
computational resources available to interested research ers,
most of these works in CNNs are typically performed by
experts with rich domain knowledge [13]. Genetic Algorithm s
(GAs), which are a paradigm of the evolutionary algorithms
that do not require rich domain knowledge [22], [23], adapt
the meta-heuristic pattern motivated by the process of natu ral
selection [24] for optimization problems. GAs are preferre d in
various ﬁelds due to their characteristics of gradient-fre e and
insensitivity to local minima [25]. These promising proper ties
are collectively achieved by a repeated series of the selec-
tion, mutation, and crossover operators. Therefore, it can be
naturally utilized for the optimization of architecture de sign
and the connection weight initialization for CNNs. Indeed,
GAs for evolving neural networks can be traced back to
1989 [26]. In 1999, Yao [25] presented a survey about these
different approaches, which are largely for the optimizati on
of connection weights in the ﬁxed architecture topologies.
In 2002, Stanley and Miikkulainen proposed the Neuron-
Evolution Augmenting Topology (NEAT) [27] algorithm to
evolve the architecture and connection weights of a small
scale neural network. Afterwards, the HyperNEAT [28], i.e. ,
NEAT combined with the compositional pattern producing
networks [29], was proposed to evolve a larger scale neural
network with an indirect encoding strategy. Motivated by
the HyperNEAT, multiple variants [30]–[32] were proposed
to evolve even larger scale neural networks. However, the
major deﬁciencies of the HyperNEAT-based approaches are:
1) they are only suitable for evolving deep neural networks
with global connection and single building blocks, such as
SAEs and DBNs, but not CNNs where local connection exists
and multiple different building blocks need to be evolved
simultaneously, and 2) hybrid weigh connections (e.g., con -
nections between two layers that are non-adjacent) may be
evolved, which are contrast to the architectures of CNNs.
Indeed, the views have been many years that evolutionary
algorithms are incapable of evolving the architecture and
connection weights in CNNs due to the tremendous number
of related parameters [33]–[35]. Until very recently in 201 7,
Google showed their Large Evolution for Image Classiﬁcatio n
(LEIC) method specializing at the architecture optimizati onof CNNs [36]. LETC is materialized by GAs without the
crossover operator, implemented on 250 high-end computers ,
and archives competitive performance against the state-of -
the-art on the CIFAR-10 dataset by training for about 20
days. Actually, by directly using GAs for the architecture
design of CNNs, several issues would raise in nature: 1)
the best architecture is unknown until the performance is
received based on it. However, evaluating the performance o f
one individual takes a long time, and appears more severely
for the entire population. This would require much more
computational resources for speeding up the evolution; 2)
the optimal depth of CNNs for one particular problem is
unknown, therefore it is hard to constrain the search space
for the architecture optimization. In this regard, a variab le-
length gene encoding strategy may be the best choice for
both 1) and 2), but how to assign the crossover operation for
different building blocks is a newly resulted problem; and 3 )
the weight initialization values heavily affect the perfor mance
of the conﬁrmed architecture, but addressing this problem
involves a good gene encoding strategy and the optimization
of hundreds and thousands decision variables.
A. Goal
The aim of this paper is to design and develop an effective
and efﬁcient GA method to automatically discover good ar-
chitectures and corresponding connection weight initiali zation
values of CNNs (i.e., the ﬁrst two formulae in (1)) without
manual intervention. To achieve this goal, the objectives b elow
have been speciﬁed:
1) Design a ﬂexible gene encoding scheme of the architec-
ture, which does not constrain the maximal length of
the building blocks in CNNs. With this gene encoding
scheme, the evolved architecture is expected to beneﬁt
CNNs to achieve good performance in solving different
tasks at hand.
2) Investigate the connection weight encoding strategy,
which is capable of representing tremendous numbers of
the connection weights in an economy way. With this
encoding approach, the weight connection initialization
problem in CNNs is expected to be effectively optimized
by the proposed GA.
3) Develop associated selection (including the environmen -
tal selection), crossover, and mutation operators that can
cope with the designed gene encoding strategies of both
architectures and connection weights.
4) Propose an effective ﬁtness measure of the individuals
representing different CNNs, which does not require
intensive computational resources.
5) Investigate whether the new approach signiﬁcantly outpe r-
form the existing methods in both classiﬁcation accuracy
and number of weights.
B. Organization
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows: the
background of the CNNs, the related works on the architectur e
design and weight initialization approaches of CNNs are