of most researchers/users. In fact, it is not necessary to
check individual ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy, but a tenden cy
that could predict their future quality would be sufﬁcient.
Therefore, we only employ a small number of epochs to
train these individuals. With this kind of ﬁtness measureme nt,
the proposed EvoCNN method does not highly reply on the
computational resource. In summary, with the well-designe d
yet simplicity encoding strategies and this ﬁtness evaluat ion
method, researchers without rich domain knowledge could
also design the promising CNN models for addressing speciﬁc
tasks in their (academic) environment, where is the computa -
tional resources are typically limited.
TABLE IV
THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY AND THE PARAMETER NUMBERS FROM
THE INDIVIDUALS ON THE FASHION BENCHMARK DATASET .
classiﬁcation accuracy 99% 98% 97% 96% 95%
# parameters 569,250 98,588 7,035 3,205 955
Moreover, interesting ﬁndings have also been discovered
when the proposed EvoCNN method terminates, i.e., multiple
individuals are with the similar performance but signiﬁcan t
different numbers of connection weights (See Table IV), whi ch
are produced due to population-based nature of the proposed
EvoCNN method. Recently, various applications have been
developed, such as the auto-driving car and some interestin g
real-time mobile applications. Due to the limited processi ng
capacity and battery in these devices, trained CNNs with
similar performance but fewer parameters are much more
preferred because they require less computational resourc e
and the energy consumption. In addition, similar performan ce
of the individuals are also found with different lengths of
the basic layers, and there are multiple pieces of hardware
that have been especially designed to speed the primitive
operations in CNNs, such as the specialized hardware for
convolutional operations. In this regard, the proposed Evo CNN
method could give manufacturers more choices to make a
decision based on their own preferences. If the traditional
approaches are employed here, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd out such
models at a single run.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of the paper was to develop a new evolutionary ap-
proach to automatically evolving the architectures and wei ghts
of CNNs for image classiﬁcation problems. This goal has
been successfully achieved by proposing a new representati on
for weight initialization strategy, a new encoding scheme
of variable-length chromosomes, a new genetic operator, a
slacked binary tournament selection, and an efﬁcient ﬁtnes s
evaluation method. This approach was examined and com-
pared with 22 peer competitors including the most state-of-
the-are algorithms on nine benchmark datasets commonly
used in deep learning. The experimental results show that
the proposed EvoCNN method signiﬁcantly outperforms all
of these existing algorithms on almost all these datasets interms of their best classiﬁcation performance. Furthermor e,
the mean classiﬁcation error rate of the proposed algorithm
is even better than the best of others in many cases. In
addition, the model optimized by EvoCNN is with a much
smaller number of parameters yet promising best classiﬁcat ion
performance. Speciﬁcally, the model optimized by EvoCNN
employs 100 epochs to reach the lowest classiﬁcation error
rate of5.47% on the Fasion dataset, while the state-of-the-
art VGG16 employs 200epochs but 6.50% classiﬁcation error
rate. Findings from the experimental results also suggest t hat
the proposed EvoCNN method could provide more options
for the manufacturers that are interested in integrating CN Ns
into their products with limited computational and battery
resources.
In this paper, we investigate the proposed EvoCNN method
only on the commonly used middle-scale benchmarks. How-
ever, large-scale data are also widely exist in the current e ra
of big data. Because evaluating only one epoch on these large -
scale data would require signiﬁcant computational resourc e
and take a long period, the proposed ﬁtness evaluation metho d
is not suitable for them unless a huge amount computational
resources are available. In the future, we will put effort on
efﬁcient ﬁtness evaluation techniques. In addition, we wil l also
investigate evolutionary algorithms for recurrent neural net-
works, which are powerful tools for addressing time-depend ent
data, such as the voice and video data.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Cires ¸An, U. Meier, J. Masci, and J. Schmidhuber, “Mul ti-column
deep neural network for trafﬁc sign classiﬁcation,” Neural Networks ,
vol. 32, pp. 333–338, 2012.
[2] F. Ning, D. Delhomme, Y . LeCun, F. Piano, L. Bottou, and P. E. Barbano,
“Toward automatic phenotyping of developing embryos from v ideos,”
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 1360–1371,
2005.
[3] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[4] D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel, “Receptive ﬁelds, binocular interaction
and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex,” The Journal of
Physiology , vol. 160, no. 1, pp. 106–154, 1962.
[5] Y . LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howar d,
W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel, “Backpropagation applied to ha ndwritten
zip code recognition,” Neural Computation , vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 541–551,
1989.
[6] Y . LeCun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient -based learning
applied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 86,
no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 1998.
[7] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learni ng represen-
tations by back-propagating errors,” Cognitive Modeling , vol. 5, no. 3,
p. 1, 1988.
[8] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional n etworks for
large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014.
[9] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learnin g for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778.
[10] H. Bourlard and Y . Kamp, “Auto-association by multilay er perceptrons
and singular value decomposition,” Biological Cybernetics , vol. 59, no.
4-5, pp. 291–294, 1988.
[11] G. E. Hinton and R. S. Zemel, “Autoencoders, minimum des cription
length, and helmholtz free energy,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 3–3, 1994.
[12] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dime nsionality of
data with neural networks,” Science , vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507,
2006.