arXiv:1710.10741v3  [cs.NE]  10 Mar 2019Evolving Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
for Image Classiﬁcation
Yanan Sun, Bing Xue, Mengjie Zhang and Gary G. Yen
Abstract —Evolutionary computation methods have been suc-
cessfully applied to neural networks since two decades ago, while
those methods cannot scale well to the modern deep neural net -
works due to the complicated architectures and large quanti ties
of connection weights. In this paper, we propose a new method
using genetic algorithms for evolving the architectures an d
connection weight initialization values of a deep convolut ional
neural network to address image classiﬁcation problems. In the
proposed algorithm, an efﬁcient variable-length gene enco ding
strategy is designed to represent the different building bl ocks and
the unpredictable optimal depth in convolutional neural ne tworks.
In addition, a new representation scheme is developed for ef fec-
tively initializing connection weights of deep convolutio nal neural
networks, which is expected to avoid networks getting stuck into
local minima which is typically a major issue in the backward
gradient-based optimization. Furthermore, a novel ﬁtness eval-
uation method is proposed to speed up the heuristic search
with substantially less computational resource. The propo sed
algorithm is examined and compared with 22 existing algorit hms
on nine widely used image classiﬁcation tasks, including th e state-
of-the-art methods. The experimental results demonstrate the
remarkable superiority of the proposed algorithm over the s tate-
of-the-art algorithms in terms of classiﬁcation error rate and the
number of parameters (weights).
Index Terms —Genetic algorithms, convolutional neural net-
work, image classiﬁcation, deep learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated
their exceptional superiority in visual recognition tasks , such
as trafﬁc sign recognition [1], biological image segmenta-
tion [2], and image classiﬁcation [3]. CNNs are originally
motivated by the computational model of the cat visual corte x
specializing in processing vision and signal related tasks [4].
Since LetNet-5 was proposed in 1989 [5], [6], which is an
implementation of CNNs and whose connection weights are
optimized by the Back-Propagation (BP) algorithm [7], vari ous
variants of CNNs have been developed, such as VGGNet [8]
and ResNet [9]. These variants signiﬁcantly improve the cla s-
siﬁcation accuracies of the best rivals in image classiﬁcat ion
tasks. Diverse variants of CNNs differ from their architect ures
and weight connections.
Mathematically, a CNN can be formulated by (1) in the
context of an image classiﬁcation task with the input (X,Y),


Architecture =F(X,Y)
Weight=G(Architecture )
minimize L (X,Weight,Y)(1)
whereXandYare the input data and corresponding label,
respectively, F(·)denotes the architecture choosing function
with the given data, G(·)refers to the initialization methodof the connection weights Weight based on the chosen ar-
chitecture, and L(·)measures the differences between the
true label and the label predicted by the CNN using X
andWeight . Typically, the Gradient Descend (GD)-based ap-
proaches, e.g., Stochastic GD (SGD), are utilized to minimi ze
L(X,Weight,Y)within the given number of epochs, where
the connection weight values are iteratively updated. Alth ough
L(·)is not differentiable in all occasions, GD-based methods
are preferred due to their effectiveness and good scalabili ty
as the number of connection weights increases. A CNN
commonly has a huge number of connection weights. However,
F(·)andG(·)are countable functions that are discrete and
neither convex or concave, and they are not well addressed in
practice. Furthermore, because the gradient-based optimi zers
are heavily dependent on the initial values of the weights
(including biases), it is essential to choose a suitable G(·)
that can help the consecutive GD-based approaches to escape
from local minima. Furthermore, the performance of assigne d
architectures cannot be evaluated until the minimization o fL(·)
is ﬁnished, while the minimization is a progress of multiple
iterations, which in turn increases the difﬁculty of choosi ng the
potential optimal F(·). Therefore, the architecture design and
connection weight initialization strategy should be caref ully
treated in CNNs.
Typically, most of the architecture design approaches were
initially developed for the deep learning algorithms in the early
date (e.g., the Stacked Auto-Encoders (SAEs) [10], [11] and
the Deep Belief Networks (DBNs) [12]), such as Grid Search
(GS), Random Search (RS) [13], Bayesian-based Gaussion
Process (BGP) [14], [15], Tree-structured Parzen Estimato rs
(TPE) [16], and Sequential Model-Based Global Optimiza-
tion (SMBO) [17]. Theoretically, GS exhaustively tests all
combinations of the parameters to expectedly seize the best
one. However, GS cannot evaluate all combinations within an
acceptable time in reality. Moreover, GS is difﬁcult to opti mize
the parameters of continuous values [13]. RS could reduce th e
exhaustive adverse of GS, but the absolute “random” severel y
challenges the sampling behavior in the search space [18]–[ 20].
In addition, BGP incurs extra parameters (i.e., the kernels ) that
are arduous to tune. TPE treats each parameter independentl y,
while the most key parameters in CNNs are dependent (e.g.,
the convolutional layer size and its stride, more details ca n be
seen in Subsection II-A). The methods mentioned above have
shown their good performance in most SAEs and DBNs, but
are not suitable to CNNs. Their success in SAEs and DBNs is
due largely to the architecture construction approaches, w hich
are greedy layer-wised by stacking a group of building block s