... P F F C P C C
... P F C C
... P F P C C C
C Convolutional P Pooling F Full connection
Fig. 4. An example of three chromosomes with different lengt hs in EvoCNN.
TABLE I
THE ENCODED INFORMATION IN EVOCNN.
Unit Type Encoded Information
convolutional
layerthe ﬁlter width, the ﬁlter height, the number of feature
maps, the stride width, the stride height, the convolu-
tional type, the standard deviation and the mean value
of ﬁlter elements
pooling layer the kernel width, the kernel height, the stride width, the
stride height, and the pooling type (i.e., the average or
the maximal)
full connection
layerthe number of neurons, the standard deviation of
connection weights, and the mean value of connection
weights
During the evolution, all individuals are evaluated ﬁrst ba sed
on the proposed efﬁcient ﬁtness measurement (line 4). After
that, parent solutions are selected by the developed slack
binary tournament selection (line 5), and new offspring are
generated with the designed genetic operators (line 6). Nex t,
representatives are selected from the existing individual s and
the generated offsprings to form the population in the next
generation to participate subsequent evolution (line 7). I n
the following subsections, the key steps in Algorithm 1 are
narrated in detail.
B. Gene Encoding Strategy
As introduced in Subsection II-A, three different building
blocks, i.e., the convolutional layer, the pooling layer, and the
full connection layer, exist in the architectures of CNNs. There-
fore, they should be encoded in parallel into one chromosome
for evolution. Because the optimal depth of a CNN in solving
one particular problem is unknown prior to conﬁrming its
architecture, the variable-length gene encoding strategy , which
is very suitable for this occasion, is employed in the propos ed
EvoCNN method. Furthermore, because the performance of
CNNs is highly affected by their depths [8], [43]–[45], this
variable-length gene encoding strategy makes the proposed
EvoCNN method have chances to reach the best result due
to no constrains on the architecture search space.
In particular, an example of three chromosomes with dif-
ferent lengths from EvoCNN is illustrated by Fig. 4, and all
represented information in these three layers are detailed in
Table I. Commonly, hundreds of thousands connection weight s
may exist in one convolutional or full connection layer, whi ch
cannot be all explicitly represented by a chromosome and
effectively optimized by GAs. Therefore, in EvoCNN, we use
only two statistical real numbers, the standard derivation andmean value of the connection weights, to represent the numer -
ous weight parameters, which can be easily implemented by
GAs. When the optimal mean value and the standard derivation
are received, the connection weights are sampled from the
corresponding Gaussian distribution. The details of popul ation
initialization in EvoCNN are given in the next subsection
based on the gene encoding strategy introduced above.
C. Population Initialization
Algorithm 2: Population Initialization
Input: The population size N, the maximal number of
convolutional and pooling layers Ncp, and the
maximal number of full connection layers Nf.
Output: Initialized population P0.
1P0←∅;
2while|P0|≤Ndo
3part1←∅;
4ncp←Uniformaly generate an integer between
[1,Ncp];
5 while|part1|≤ncpdo
6 r←Uniformly generated a number between
[0,1];
7 ifr≤0.5then
8 l←Initialize a convolutional layer with
random settings;
9 else
10 l←Initialize a pooling layer with random
settings;
11 end
12 part1←part1∪l;
13 end
14part2←∅;
15nf←Uniformaly generate an integer between
[1,Nf];
16 while|part2|≤nfdo
17 l←Initialize a full connection layer with random
settings;
18 part2←part2∪l;
19 end
20P0←P0∪(part1∪part2);
21end
22ReturnP0.
For convenience of the elaboration, each chromosome is
separated into two parts. The ﬁrst part includes the convolu -
tional layers and the pooling layers, and the other part is th e
full connection layers. Based on the convention of the CNN
architectures, the ﬁrst part starts with one convolutional layer.
The second part can be added to only at the tail of the ﬁrst
part. In addition, the length of each part is set by randomly
choosing a number within a predeﬁned range.
Algorithm 2 shows the major steps of the population initial-
ization, where|·|is a cardinality operator, lines 3-13 show the
generation of the ﬁrst part of one chromosome, and lines 14-
19 show that of the second part. During the initialization of