the ﬁrst part, a convolutional layer is added ﬁrst. Then, a
convolutional layer or a pooling layer is determined by the
once coin tossing probability and then added to the end, whic h
is repeated until the predeﬁned length of this part is met. Fo r
the second part, full connection layers are chosen and then
added. Note here that, convolutional layers, pooling layer s,
and full connection layers are initialized with the random
settings, i.e., the information encoded into them are rando mly
speciﬁed before they are stored into the corresponding part .
After these two parts ﬁnished, they are combined and returne d
as one chromosome. With the same approach, a population of
individuals are generated.
D. Fitness Evaluation
Algorithm 3: Fitness Evaluation
Input: The population Pt, the training epoch number k
for measuring the accuracy tendency, the training
setDtrain , the ﬁtness evaluation dataset Dfitness ,
and the batch size numofbatch .
Output: The population with ﬁtness Pt.
1foreach individual sinPtdo
2i←1;
3evalsteps←|Dfitness|/numofbatch ;
4 whilei≤kdo
5 Train the connection weights of the CNN
represented by individual s;
6 ifi==kthen
7 accylist←∅;
8 j←1;
9 whilej≤evalsteps do
10 accyj←Evaluate the classiﬁcation error
on thej-th batch data from Dfitness ;
11 accylist←accylist∪accyj;
12 j←j+1;
13 end
14 Calculate the number of parameters in s, the
mean value and standard derivation from
accylist, assign them to individual s, and
updatesfromPt;
15 end
16 i←i+1;
17 end
18end
19ReturnPt.
Fitness evaluation aims at giving a quantitative measure
determining which individuals qualify for serving as paren t
solutions. Algorithm 3 manifests the framework of the ﬁtnes s
evaluation in EvoCNN. Because EvoCNN concerns on solving
image classiﬁcation tasks, the classiﬁcation error is the b est
strategy to assign their ﬁtness. The number of connection
weights is also chosen as an additional indicator to measure
the individual’s quality based on the principle of Occam’s
razor [46].With the conventions, each represented CNN is trained
on the training set Dtrain , and the ﬁtness is estimated on
another dataset Dfitness1. CNNs are frequently with deep
architectures, thus thoroughly training them for receivin g the
ﬁnal classiﬁcation error would take considerable expendit ure
of computing resource and a very long time due to the
large number of training epochs required ( >100 epochs are
invariably treated in fully training CNNs). This will make i t
much more impracticable here due to the population-based
GAs with multiple generations (i.e., each individual will t ake a
full training in each generation). We have designed an efﬁci ent
method to address this concern. In this method, each individ ual
is trained with only a small number of epochs, say 5or10
epochs, based on their architectures and connection weight
initialization values, and then the mean value and the stand ard
derivation of classiﬁcation error are calculated on each ba tch
ofDfitness in the last epoch. Both the mean value and the
standard derivation of classiﬁcation errors, are employed as the
ﬁtness of one individual. Obviously, the smaller mean value ,
the better individual. When the compared individuals are wi th
the same mean values, the less standard derivation indicate s
the better one.
In summary, three indicators are used in the ﬁtness evalu-
ation, which are the mean value, standard derivation, and th e
number of parameters. There are several motivations behind
this ﬁtness evaluation strategy: 1) It is sufﬁcient to inves tigat-
ing only the tendency of the performance. If individuals are
with better performance in the ﬁrst several training epochs of
CNNs, they will probably still have the better performance i n
the following training epochs with greater conﬁdence. 2) Th e
mean value and the standard derivation are statistical sign iﬁ-
cance indicators, thus suitable for investigating this ten dency,
and the ﬁnal classiﬁcation error can be received by optimizi ng
only the best individual evolved by the proposed EvoCNN
method. 3) CNN models with less number of connection
weights are preferred by smart devices (more details are
discussed in Section VI).
E. Slack Binary Tournament Selection
We develop one slack version of the standard binary tour-
nament selection, which are documented in Algorithm 4, to
select parent solutions for the crossover operations in the
proposed EvoCNN method. Brieﬂy, two sets of comparisons
are employed. The comparisons between the mean values of
individuals involves a threshold α, and that comparisons be-
tween the parameter numbers involves another threshold β. If
the parent solution cannot be selected with these compariso ns,
the individual with smaller standard derivation is chosen.
In practice, tremendous number of parameters exist in deep
CNNs, which would easily cause the overﬁtting problem.
Therefore, when the difference between the mean values of
two individuals is smaller than the threshold α, we further con-
sider the number of connection weights. The slight change of
1The original training set is randomly split into Dtrain andDfitness ,
whereDfitness is unseen to the CNN training phase, which can give a good
indication of the generalization accuracy on the test set.