C Convolutional P Pooling F Full connection
Convolutional 
unit listPooling
 unit listFull connection 
unit list
C1
C2
C3P1
P2F1
F2
F3Convolutional 
unit list
C1
C2Pooling 
unit listFull connection 
unit list
F1
F2
F3
F4Chromosome #1 Chromosome #2
P1
P2
P3C1 P1 C2 C3 P2 F1 F2 F3 C1 P1 C2 P3 F1 F2 F3 P2 F4
(a) Unit Collection
C1
C2
C3C1
C2P1
P2P1
P2
P3F1
F2
F3F1
F2
F3
F4crossover crossover
crossover crossovercrossover
crossover
crossover
(b) Unit Aligh and Crossover
C1 P1C2 C3 P2F1 F2 F3Offspring #1
C1 P1 C2 P3F1 F2 F3 P2 F4Offspring #2
(c) Unit Restore
Fig. 5. An example to illustrate the entire crossover proces s. In this example, the ﬁrst chromosome is with length 8 inclu ding three convolutional layers, two
pooling layers, and three full connection layers; the other one is with length 9 including two convolutional layers, thr ee pooling layers, and four full connection
layers. In the ﬁrst step of crossover (i.e., the unit collect ion), the convolutiona layers, the pooling layers, and the f ull connection layers are collected from
each chromosome and stacked with the same orders to them in ea ch chromosome (see Fig. 5a). In the second step, the unit list s with the same unit types
are aligned at the top, i.e., the two convolutional layer lis ts are picked and aligned, and the same operations on the othe r two lists. When these unit lists
ﬁnish the alignment, units at the same positions from the eac h two lists are paired and performed crossover operation, wh ich can be shown in Fig. 5b. At last,
units from these unit lists are restored based on the positio ns where they are from (see Fig. 5b). Note in Fig. 5b, the units that have experienced crossover
operations are highlighted with italics and underline font s, while the units that do not perform the crossover operatio ns remain the same.
Note here that, the selected elites are removed before the
tournament selection gets start to work (line 3 of Algorithm 5),
while the individuals selected for the purpose of diversity are
kept in the current population for the next round of tourname nt
selection (lines 4-8 of Algorithm 5) based on the convention
in the community.
H. Best Individual Selection and Decoding
At the end of evolution, multiple individuals are with
promising mean values but different architectures and conn ec-
tion weight initialization values. In this regard, there wi ll be
multiple choices to select the “Best Individual”. For examp le,
if we are only concerned with the best performance, we
could neglect their architecture conﬁgurations and consid er
only the classiﬁcation accuracy. Otherwise, if we emphasis
the smaller number of parameters, corresponding decision
could be made. Once the “Best Individual” is conﬁrmed,
the corresponding CNN is decoded based on the encoded
architecture and connection weight initialization inform ation,
and then the decoded CNN will be deeply trained with a larger
number of epochs by SGD for future usage.
IV. E XPERIMENT DESIGN
In order to quantify the performance of the proposed
EvoCNN, a series of experiments are designed and performed
on the chosen image classiﬁcation benchmark datasets, whic hare further compared to state-of-the-art peer competitors . In the
following, these benchmark datasets are brieﬂy introduced at
ﬁrst. Then, the peer competitors are given. Finally, parame ter
settings of the proposed EvoCNN method participating into
these experiments are documented.
A. Benchmark Datasets
In these experiments, nine widely used image classiﬁcation
benchmark datasets are used to examine the performance of
the proposed EvoCNN method. They are the Fashion [49], the
Rectangle [50], the Rectangle Images (RI) [50], the Convex
Sets (CS) [50], the MNIST Basic (MB) [50], the MNIST
with Background Images (MBI) [50], Random Background
(MRB) [50], Rotated Digits (MRD) [50], and with RD plus
Background Images (MRDBI) [50] benchmarks.
Based on the types of the classiﬁcation objects, these
benchmarks are classiﬁed into three different categories. The
ﬁrst category includes only Fashion, which is for recognizi ng
10 fashion objects (e.g., trousers, coats, and so on) in the
50,000 training images and 10,000 test images. The second
one is composed of the MNIST [6] variants including the
MB, MBI, MRB, MRD, and the MRDBI benchmarks for
classifying 10 hand-written digits (i.e., 0-9). Because th e
MNIST has been easily achieved 97%, these MNIST variants
are arbitrarily added into different barriers (e.g., rando m back-
grounds, rotations) from the MNIST to improve the complexit y