Algorithm 4: Slack Binary Tournament Selection
Input: Two compared individuals, the mean value
threshold α, and the paramemter number
threshold β.
Output: The selected individual.
1s1←The individual with larger mean value;
2s2←The other individual;
3µ1,µ2←The mean values of s1,s2;
4std1,std2←The standard derivations of s1,s2;
5c1,c2←The parameter numbers of s1,s2;
6ifµ1−µ2> α then
7 Returns1.
8else
9 ifc1−c2> β then
10 Returns2.
11 else
12 ifstd1< std2then
13 Returns1.
14 else ifstd1> std2then
15 Returns2.
16 else
17 Return randon one from{s1,s2}.
18 end
19 end
20end
the parameter numbers will not highly affect the performanc e
of CNNs. Consequently, βis also introduced.
By iteratively performing this selection, parent solution s
are selected and stored into a mating pool. In the proposed
EvoCNN method, the size of the mating pool is set to be the
same of the population size.
F . Offspring Generation
The steps for generating offspring are given as follows:
step 1): randomly select two parent solutions from the matin g
pool;
step 2): use crossover operator on the selected solutions to
generate offspring;
step 3): use mutation operator on the generated offspring;
step 4): store offspring, remove the parent solutions from t he
mating pool, and perform steps 1-3 until the mating
pool is empty.
The proposed crossover operation can be seen in Fig. 5. To
achieve crossover, we design a method called Unit Alignment
(UA) for recombining two individuals with different chromo -
some lengths. During the crossover operation, three differ ent
units, i.e., the convolutional layer, the pooling layer, an d the
full connection layer, are ﬁrstly collected into three diff erent
lists based on their orders in the corresponding chromosome ,
which refers to the Unit Collection (UC) phase. Then, these
three lists are aligned at the top, and units at the same posit ions
are performed the crossover. This phase is named the UA
and crossover phase. Finally, the Unit Restore (UR) phase isemployed, i.e., when the crossover operation is completed, the
units in these lists are restored to their original position s of
the associated chromosomes. With these three consequentia l
phases (i.e., the UC, the UA and crossover, and the UR), two
chromosomes with different lengths could easily exchange
their gene information for crossover. Because the crossove r
operation is performed on the unit lists where only the units
with the same types are loaded, this proposed UA crossover
operation is natural (because they have the same origins).
For the remaining units, which do not perform crossover
operations due to no paired ones, are kept at the same positio n.
Mutation operations may perform on each position of the
units from one chromosome. For a selected mutation point, a
unit could be added, deleted, or modiﬁed, which is determine d
by a probability of 1/3. In the case of unit addition, a convol u-
tional layer, a pooling layer, or a full connection layer is a dded
by taking a probability of 1/3. If the mutation is to modify an
existing unit, the particular modiﬁcation is dependent on t he
unit type, and all the encoded information in the unit would b e
changed (encoded information on each unit type can be seen in
Table I). Note that all the encoded formation is denoted by re al
numbers, therefore the Simulated Crossover (SBX) [47] and
the polynomial mutation [48] are employed in the proposed
EvoCNN method due to their notable show in real number
gene representations.
G. Environmental Selection
Algorithm 5: Environmental Selection
Input: The elistsm fraction γ, and the current population
Pt∪Qt.
Output: The selected population Pt+1.
1a←Calculate the number of elites based on γand the
predeﬁned population size Nfrom Algorithm 2;
2Pt+1←Selectaindividuals that have the best mean
values from Pt∪Qt;
3Pt∪Qt←Pt∪Qt−Pt+1;
4while|Pt+1|< N do
5s1,s2←Randomly select two individuals from
Pt∪Qt;
6s←Employe Algorithm 4 to select one individual
froms1ands2;
7Pt+1←Pt+1∪s;
8end
9ReturnPt+1.
The environmental selection is shown in Algorithm 5. Dur-
ing the environmental selection, the elitism and the divers ity
are explicitly and elaborately addressed. To be speciﬁc, a f rac-
tion of individuals with promising mean values are chosen ﬁr st,
and then the remaining individuals are selected by the modiﬁ ed
binary tournament selection demonstrated in Subsection II I-F.
By these two strategies, the elitism and the diversity are
considered simultaneously, which are expected to collecti vely
improve the performance of the proposed EvoCNN method.