end, we will review the algorithm and then point out the
limitations, which are used to highlight the necessity of th e
corresponding work in the proposed algorithm.
LEIC employed a GA to evolve the architectures of CNNs,
where individuals were evolved from scratch, and each indiv id-
ual was encoded with a variable-length chromosome. During
the phase of evolution, different kinds of layers can be inco r-
porated into the individuals by the mutation operation, wit h
the expectation that individuals with promising performan ce
will be generated. Note that, the crossover operation, whic h
are designed for local search in GAs, were not investigated
in the main part of LEIC. Without any crossover operator,
GAs typically require a large population size for reducing
the adverse impact. Therefore, LETC adopted a population
size of103, while that of a magnitude with order 102is
a general setting in the GA community. In addition, 250
high-end computers were employed for LEIC, which was
caused by the ﬁtness assignment approach utilized in LEIC.
In LEIC, each individual was evaluated with the ﬁnal image
classiﬁcation accuracy, which typically took a long time du e to
the iterative nature of GD-based optimizers. However, LEIC
reported an external experiment on the crossover operation ,
which was used only for exchanging the mutation probabiliti es
and the connection weights trained by SGD. Although it is
difﬁcult to reach the actual reason why the crossover has not
been used for evolving the architectures in LETC, it is obvio us
at least that the crossover operations are not easy to achiev e
for chromosomes with different lengths. This would be more
complicated in CNNs that have multiple different building
blocks.
In summary, the main deﬁciency of LEIC is its high com-
putational complexity mainly caused by the ﬁtness evaluati on
strategy it adopts as well as without crossover operations. The
huge computational resource that LEIC requires makes it ver y
intractable in academic environment.
C. Connection Weight Initialization
Typically, the initialization methods are classiﬁed into t hree
different categorises. The ﬁrst employs constant numbers t o
initialize all connection weights, such as the zero initial izer,
one initializer, and other ﬁxed value initializer. The seco nd is
the distribution initializer, such as using the Gaussion di stribu-
tion or uniform distribution to initialize the weights. The third
covers the initialization approaches with some prior knowl -
edge, and the famous Xavier initializer [38] belongs to this
category. Because of the numerous connection weights exist -
ing in CNNs, it is not necessary that all the connection weigh ts
start with the same values, which is the major deﬁciency of th e
ﬁrst initialization method. In the second initialization a pproach,
the shortage of the ﬁrst one has been solved, but the major dif ﬁ-
culty exists in choosing the parameter of the distribution, such
as the range of the uniform distribution, and the mean value a s
well as the standard derivation of the Gaussian distributio n. To
solve this problem, the Xavier initializer presented a rang e for
uniform sampling based on the neuron saturation prior using
the sigmoid activation function [39]. Supposed the number o fneurons in two adjacent layers are n1andn2, the values of
the weights connecting these two layers are initialized wit hin
the range of/bracketleftBig
−/radicalbig
6/(n1+n2),/radicalbig
6/(n1+n2)/bracketrightBig
by uniformly
sampling. Although the Xavier initializer works better tha n the
initialization methods from the other two categories, a cou ple
of major issues exist: 1) It highly relies on the architectur es of
CNNs, particularity the number of neurons in each layer in th e
networks (e.g., n1andn2in its formulation). If the optimal
architectures of the networks are not found, the resulted
initialized parameters perform badly as well, then there is no
way to evaluate the desired performance of the architecture s
and may mislead the adjustment of the architectures. 2) The
Xavier initializer is presented on the usage of the sigmoid
activation, while the widely used activation function in CN Ns
is the ReLU [3], [9], [40], [41].
To the best of our knowledge, there has not been any exist-
ing evolutionary algorithm for searching for the connectio n
weight initialization of deep learning algorithms includi ng
CNNs. The main reason is the tremendous numbers of weights,
which are difﬁcult to be effectively encoded into the chromo -
somes and to be efﬁciently optimized due to its large-scale
global optimization nature [42].
III. T HE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
In this section, the proposed Evolving deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (EvoCNN) for image classiﬁcation is docu-
mented in detail.
A. Algorithm Overview
Algorithm 1: Framework of EvoCNN
1P0←Initialize the population with the proposed gene
encoding strategy;
2t←0;
3while termination criterion is not satisﬁed do
4 Evaluate the ﬁtness of individuals in Pt;
5S←Select parent solutions with the developed slack
binary tournament selection;
6Qt←Generate offsprings with the designed genetic
operators from S;
7Pt+1←Environmental selection from Pt∪Qt;
8t←t+1;
9end
10Select the best individual from Ptand decode it to the
corresponding convolutional neural network.
Algorithm 1 outlines the framework of the proposed
EvoCNN method. Firstly, the population is initialized base d on
the proposed ﬂexible gene encoding strategy (line 1). Then, the
evolution begins to take effect until a predeﬁned terminati on
criterion, such as the maximum number of the generations,
has been satisﬁed (lines 3-9). Finally, the best individual is
selected and decoded to the corresponding CNN (line 10) for
ﬁnal training.