International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 39
1994 ; Takita et al. 2003 ; Foroosh et al. 2002 ), and Walsh
transform-based methods (Lazaridis and Petrou 2006 ;P a n
et al. 2008 ). Such methods are robust against the correlated
and frequency-dependent noise and non-uniform, time vary-
ing illumination disturbances. Nevertheless, these methodshave some limitations in case of image pairs with signiﬁ-cantly different spectral contents and small overlap area.
Based on information theory, the MI, such as non-rigid
image registration using MI together with B-splines (Kleinet al. 2007 ) and conditional MI (Loeckx et al. 2009 ), is a mea-
surement of statistical dependency between two images and
works with the entire image (Maes et al. 1997 ). Thus, MI is
particularly suitable for the registration of multi-modalities
(Chen et al. 2003a ,b; Johnson et al. 2001 ). Recently, Cao
et al. ( 2020 ) proposed a structure consistency boosting trans-
form to enhance the structural similarity in multi-spectraland multi-modal image registration problem, thus avoiding
spectral information distortion. However, the MI exhibits
difﬁculty in determining the global maximum of the entiresearching space, inevitably reducing its robustness. More-
over, optimization methods (e.g., continuous optimization,
discrete optimization, and their hybrid form) and transfor-mation models (e.g., rigid, afﬁne, thin plate spline (TPS),
elastic body, and diffusion models) are considered sufﬁ-
ciently mature. Please refer to Zitova and Flusser ( 2003 ),
Dawn et al. ( 2010 ), Sotiras et al. ( 2013 ) and Ferrante and
Paragios ( 2017 ) for representative literature and further
details.
The area-based methods are acceptable for medical or
remote sensing image registration, which many feature-based
methods are not workable anymore because the images often
contain less textural details and large variance of imageappearance due to the different imaging sensors. However,
the area-based methods may greatly suffer from the serious
geometrical transformations and local deformations. Whiledeep learning has proven its efﬁcacy, in which the early onesare usually employed as a direct extension of the classical
registration framework, and later ones use a reinforcement
learning paradigm to iteratively estimate the transformation,even directly estimate the deformative ﬁeld in an end-to-end
manner. The area-based matching with learning strategies
will be reviewed in the part of learning-based matching.
4.3 Graph Matching Methods
Given the feature points extracted from an image, we canconstruct a graph by associating each feature point to a
node and specifying edges. This procedure naturally pro-
vides convenience to investigate the intrinsic structure ofimage data, especially for the matching problem. By this
deﬁnition, graph matching (GM) refers to the establishment
of node-to-node correspondences between two or multiplegraphs. For its importance and fundamental challenge, GMhas been a long-standing research area over decades and is
still of great interest to researchers. From the problem settingperspective, GM can be divided into two categories, namely,
exact and inexact matching. Exact matching methods con-
sider GM to be a special case of the graph or subgraphisomorphism problem. It aims to ﬁnd the bijection of twobinary (sub)graphs; consequently, all edges are strictly pre-
served babai2018groups,cook2006mining,levi1973note ). In
fact, this requirement is too strict for real-world tasks likecomputer vision. Hence researchers often resort to inexact
matching with weighted attributes on nodes and edges. Such
an approach enjoys good ﬂexibility and utility in practice.Therefore, we primarily concentrate on the review of inexact
matching methods in this survey.
To some extent, GM possesses a simple yet general for-
mulation of the feature matching problem, which encodesthe geometrical cues into the node afﬁnities (ﬁrst-order rela-
tions) and edge afﬁnities (second-order relations) to deduce
the true correspondences between two graphs. Aside from thegeometrical cues, the high-level information of feature points
can also be incorporated in GM (e.g. descriptor similarities as
node afﬁnities). This information only serves as a supplemen-tary one and is not necessarily required. In the general and
recent form, GM can be formulated as a Quadratic Assign-
ment Problem (QAP) (Loiola et al. 2007 ). Although different
forms exist in the literature, the main body of research hasfocused on the Lawler’s QAP (Lawler 1963 ). Given two
graphs G
1=(V1,E1)andG2=(V2,E2), where |V1|=n1,
|V2|=n2, each node vi∈V1orvj∈V2represents a feature
point, and each edge ei∈E1orej∈E2is deﬁned over a
pair of nodes. Without loss of generality we assume n1≥n2,
Lawler’s QAP formulation of GM then can be written as:
max J(X)=vec(X)/latticetopKvec(X),
s.t.X∈{0,1}n1×n2,X1n2≤1n1,X/latticetop1n1=1n2,(1)
where Xdenotes the permutation matrix, i.e. Xij=1 indi-
cates that node vi∈V1corresponds to node vj∈V2and
Xij=0 otherwise, vec (X)denotes the column-wise vector-
ization of X, and 1n1and 1n2respectively denote the column
vectors of all ones, Kdenotes the afﬁnity matrix, whose
diagonal and non-diagonal entries encode the ﬁrst-order and
second-order edge afﬁnities between the two graphs. Nouniversal approach can be utilized to construct the afﬁnity
matrix; however, a simple strategy is to use the similarities
of feature descriptors [e.g. Shape Context (Belongie et al.2001 )] and differences of edge length to determine node and
edge afﬁnities.
The Koopmans–Beckmann’s QAP is another popular for-
mulation. The form is different from Lawler’s QAP asexpressed as:
J(X)=tr(K
/latticetop
pX)+tr(A1XA 2X/latticetop), (2)
123