48 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
fundamental matrix estimation from noise, which is casted
as a series of weighted homogeneous least-squares prob-lem, where the robust weights are estimated with deep
networks. Similar to DSAC, using learning techniques to
improve re-sampling strategy is also introduced in Brach-mann and Rother ( 2019 ) and Kluger et al. ( 2020 ). Brachmann
and Rother ( 2019 ) proposed NG-RANSAC, a robust estima-
tor using learned guidance of hypothesis sampling. It uses
the inlier count itself as training objective to facilitate self-supervised learning of NG-RANSAC, and can incorporate
non-differentiable task loss functions and non-differentiable
minimal solvers. While CONSAC (Kluger et al. 2020 )i s
introduced as a robust estimator for multiple parametric
model ﬁtting. It uses neural network to sequentially update
the conditional sampling probabilities for the hypothesisselection.
Learning-based mismatch removal methods have been
developed in recent years. Moo Yi et al. ( 2018 ) ﬁrst attempted
to introduce a learning-based technique termed as learning toﬁnd good correspondences (LFGC), which aims to train a net-
work from a set of sparse putative matches together with the
image intrinsics under the rigid geometrical transformationconstraints, and to label the test correspondences as inliers or
outliers and output the camera motion simultaneously. How-
ever, the LFGC may sacriﬁce many true correspondencesto estimate the motion parameters, failing to handle generalmatching problems, such as deformable and non-rigid image
matching. To this end, Ma et al. ( 2019a ) proposed a gen-
eral framework to learn a two-class classiﬁer for mismatchremoval called LMR, which uses a few images, and hand-
crafted geometrical representation for training. Their method
showed promising matching performance with linearithmictime complexity. More recently, Zhang et al. ( 2019b ) focused
on the geometrical recovery based on their order-aware net-
works (OAN) and have achieved promising performanceon pose estimation. Sarlin et al. ( 2020 ) proposed Super-
Glue, to match two sets of local features by jointly ﬁnding
correspondences and rejecting non-matchable points. This
method is implemented with graph neural networks (Scarselliet al. 2009 ) for differentiable transport problem optimiza-
tion. Similar graph neural network pipeline has been adopted
by an emerging research branch namely deep graph match-ing (Wang et al. 2019 ;Y ue ta l . 2020a ; Fey et al. 2020 ),
where cross-graph convolution (Wang et al. 2019 ), channel-
independent embedding (Y u et al. 2020a ) and Spline-based
convolution (Fey et al. 2020 ) are proposed and adopted for
supervised graph correspondence learning.
Even though applying CNNs onto point data is difﬁcult,
the latest techniques have shown great potential for matrixestimation and point data classiﬁcation with deep regressor
and classiﬁer, particularly for the challenging data or scenar-
ios. Moreover, the multi-layer perception methods in naturallanguage processing and the graph convolutional techniquesmay serve as great references for addressing these dispersed
and unstructured point data in the matching task.
4.7 Matching in 3-D Cases
Similar to its 2-D counterpart, 3-D matching methodsoften involve two steps, i.e., namely, keypoint detection
and local feature description, and a sparse correspondence
set can then be established by calculating the similaritiesbetween descriptors. Although most methods use local fea-
ture descriptors, which are designed to be robust to noise
and deformations to establish correspondences between 3-Dinstances, a variety of classical and recent works fall intoanother category. We refer the readers to the recent surveys
(Biasotti et al. 2016 ; V an Kaick et al. 2011 ) in the shape
matching area given that a detailed review of the literature isbeyond the scope for this paper.
The embedding methods aim to parametrize the com-
plex matching problem with less degrees of freedom fortractability by exploiting some natural assumptions (e.g.,
approximate isometry). A traditional approach is proposed
by Elad and Kimmel ( 2003 ) to match shapes by embedding
them in an intermediate Euclidean space. In this approach,the geodesic distances are approximated by Euclidean ones,
and the original non-rigid registration problem is reduced to
rigid registration in the intermediate space. Notably, anotherwork developed conformal mapping approaches that also use
embedding space (Lipman and Funkhouser 2009 ; Kim et al.
2011 ; Zeng et al. 2010 ).
A more direct approach is to ﬁnd a point-wise match-
ing between (subsets of) points on shapes by minimizing
the structure distortion. This formulation was developedby Bronstein et al. ( 2006 ), who introduced a highly non-
convex and non-differentiable objective and generalized
multidimensional scaling technique for optimization. Some
researchers have also attempted to mitigate the prohibitivelyhigh computational complexity issue (Sahillioglu and Yemez
2011 ;T e v se ta l . 2011 ) while considering the quadratic
assignment formulation (Rodola et al. 2012 ,2013 ; Chen and
Koltun 2015 ; Wang et al. 2011 ) in graph matching.
The family of methods based on the functional map frame-
work was ﬁrst developed by Ovsjanikov et al. ( 2012 ). Instead
of point-to-point matching in Euclidean space, these meth-ods represent the correspondences using the functional map
between two manifolds, which can be characterized by linear
operators. The functional map can be encoded in a compactform by using the eigenbases of the Laplace-Beltrami oper-
ator. Most natural constraints on the map, such as landmark
correspondences and operator commutativity, become lin-ear in this formulation, leading to an efﬁcient solution. This
approach was adopted and extended in many follow-up works
(Aﬂalo et al. 2016 ; Kovnatsky et al. 2015 ; Pokrass et al. 2013 ;
Rodolà et al. 2017 ; Litany et al. 2017 ).
123