International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 31
output of the DoG operator represents the saliency for key-
points detection. Castellani et al. ( 2008 ) also built scale space
using the DoG operator but directly on the 3-D mesh. Mian
et al. ( 2010 ) proposed an automatic scale selection technique
for extracting scale invariant features. The scale space is builtby increasing the support size, and automatic scale selectionat each keypoint is performed by using NMS along scale. The
disadvantage of sensitivity to scale of HKS was addressed by
Bronstein and Kokkinos ( 2010 ), who used Fourier transform
magnitude to extract a scale-invariant quantity from the HKS
without the need to perform scale selection. Sipiran and Bus-
tos ( 2011 ) extended the well-known Harris operator ( 1988 )
into 3-D data with an adaptive-scale determination technique.
Readers are referred to Tombari et al. ( 2013 ) for further dis-
cussion on other adaptive-scale detectors. Salti et al. ( 2015 )
devised a learning-based 3-D keypoint detector, whereby thekeypoint detection problem was cast as a binary classiﬁca-
tion problem, to determine whose support can be correctly
matched by a predeﬁned 3-D descriptor.
2.6 Summary
The basic idea of feature detectors is to distinguish the interestfeature from others through the response value, thus leading
to the solutions of two problems: (i) how to deﬁne discrimi-
nant patterns in an image, and (ii) how to repeatedly detect thesalient feature under different image conditions and image
qualities (Zhang et al. 2017b ). Along with the development of
these detectors, the main improvements and common strate-gies are related to four aspects, i.e., feature response type and
improvements on efﬁciency, robustness, and accuracy, which
lead to an increase in the matchability of detected featuresand the improved performance of their subsequent applica-tions.
For traditional methods, using more image cues can result
in better robustness and repeatability, but usually requiresmore computational cost. In addition to using low-order fea-
ture detectors, several strategies, such as approximate and
pre-compute, are designed to largely speed up the computa-tion and maintain the matchability. To ensure the robustness,
scale and afﬁne information estimation is usually required
when searching stable features. While for accuracy enhance-ment, a local extremal searching for subpixel accuracy andNMS strategy in pixel and scale space to avoid features
locally gathered, are two popular choices in traditional
pipelines.
As for learning-based detectors, repeatable and salient
keypoints can be extracted based on high-level cues cap-
tured by CNNs, except for intensity, gradient, or second-orderderivative. While the efﬁciency would largely depend on
the network structure, and early deep learning methods are
often time-consuming. Methods proposed recently, such asSuperPoint and Key.Net, have already achieved good imple-mentation in real time while maintaining state-of-the-art
performance. Multiscale sampling or changed receptive ﬁeldwould make these deep learning-based detectors invariant
to scale, where the scale or rotation information is directly
estimated in networks. They can achieve promising results,because the deep learning techniques can easily distinguishthe same structures, despite the fact that images suffer from
apparent variance and geometrical transformation. The accu-
racy can be optimized directly in the loss function of thelearning-based methods, and the differentiable form of NMS
is often used for subpixel accuracy location and repeatability
enhancement.
3 Feature Description
Once discriminative interest points are detected from raw
images, a local patch descriptor is required to be coupled
for each feature in order to establish feature correspondencecorrectly and efﬁciently across two or more images. In other
words, the feature descriptors are commonly used to trans-
form the original local information around the interest pointinto a stable and discriminative form, usually as a high-dimensional vector, so that two corresponding features are
as close as possible in the descriptor space, and two non-
corresponding features are as far as possible.
3.1 Overview of Feature Descriptors
The processing procedure of feature description can be
divided into three steps: local low-level feature extrac-
tion, spatial pooling, and feature normalization (Lowe 2004 ;
Rublee et al. 2011 ; Brown et al. 2010 ). First, the low-level
information of a local image region has to be extracted. This
information consists of pixel intensity and gradient or is
obtained from a series of steerable ﬁlters. Subsequently, thelocal patch is divided into several parts and the local informa-
tion is pooled in each part, then concatenate them by using
pooling methods, such as rectangular gridding (Lowe 2004 ),
polar gridding (Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2005 ), Gaussian
sampling (Tola et al. 2010 ), and others (Rublee et al. 2011 );
the joint feature representation is transformed into a more dis-criminative one that may preserve signiﬁcant information ina simpliﬁed form for better matching performance. Finally,
a descriptor is obtained from the normalized results of the
pooled local information, which aims to map the aggregatedresults into a long vector of either ﬂoating-point or binary
values for easily evaluating the similarity between image fea-
tures.
Similar to feature detectors, existing descriptors are pro-
posed and improved to become highly robust, efﬁcient, and
discriminant for addressing image matching problems. Esti-mating a good size and orientation for a cropped image
123