38 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
on hard samples (may result in overﬁtting as well) and thus
can achieve better matching performance. More reliable lossfunctions should also be designed according to the basic and
intrinsic properties of description task. For instance, recently
designed triplet, ranking, contrastive, and global losses, aresuperior than early simple hinge and cross-entropy losses.On the other hand, valid and comprehensive ground truth
datasets are also required for better performance in match-
ing and generalization ability. Training a descriptor togetherwith detectors into the complete matching pipeline through
an end-to-end manner has also drawn great attention at
present. This can jointly optimize the detector and descriptor,thus can achieve encouraging performance, and the unsu-
pervised training in it can perform without the need of any
labeled ground truth patch data. The current descriptors canachieve signiﬁcant matching performance across image pairsof appearance variances, such as illumination and day-night,
by using deep techniques. However, these descriptors still
suffer from serious geometrical deformation, such as largerotation or low-overlapped image pair. The low generaliza-
tion ability for new types of data is also another limitation.
The overall performance of descriptor also depends on
the appropriate detector. Different combinations of detectors
and descriptors may result in varied matching performance.
For this reason, the descriptors should be chosen accordingto a speciﬁc task and the type of image data. The advanceddescriptors using deep learning have shown great potential.
4 Matching Methods
The matching task aims to establish the correct image pixelor point correspondences between two images with or with-
out using the feature detection and/or description. This task
has played a signiﬁcant role for the entire image matchingpipeline. Different deﬁnitions of matching task are intro-
duced for speciﬁc applications and scenarios and may show
their own strengths.
4.1 Overview of Matching Methods
Over the past decades in the image matching community,existing methods can be roughly classiﬁed into two cat-
egories, saying area-based and feature-based (Zitova and
Flusser 2003 ; Litjens et al. 2017 ). Area-based methods
typically refer to dense matching, also known as image regis-
tration, which usually do not detect features. In feature-based
methods, when the feature points and their local descriptorsare extracted from the image pairs, the image matching task
could be converted into matching them in indirect and direct
ways, which correspond to the use and non-use of the localimage descriptors.Direct feature matching aims to establish the corre-
spondences from two given feature sets by directly usingthe spatial geometrical relations and optimization meth-
ods, which can be roughly classiﬁed into graph matching
and point set registration . In comparison, indirect feature
matching methods typically casts the matching task into atwo-stage problem. Such task commonly starts with estab-
lishing preliminary correspondences through the similarity
of descriptors with the distance judging from the measur-ing space. Thereafter, the false matches are removed from
the putative match sets by using extra local and/or global
geometrical constraints. Dense matching from sparse featurecorrespondences often requires a post-process of transform
model estimation, followed by image resampling and inter-
polation (warping).
We will separate the learning-based methods from area-
and feature-based methods and introduce them in a new sub-
section. From the aspect of input data, learning from images
and point data are the two main forms in learning-basedmatching. These methods can achieve better performance
for some scenarios compared to the traditional ones. The
matching task in 3-D cases is also brieﬂy introduced in thissection.
4.2 Area-Based Matching
Area-based methods aim for image registration and estab-
lish dense pixel correspondences by directly using the pixel
intensity of the entire image. A similarity metric togetherwith an optimization method is in need for geometrical
transformation estimation and common area alignment by
minimizing the overall dissimilarity between the target andwarped moving images. Consequently, several manual simi-larity metrics are frequently used, including correlation-like,
domain transformation, and mutual information (MI) meth-
ods. The optimization methods and transform models arealso required to perform the ﬁnal registration task (Zitova
and Flusser 2003 ).
In the image registration community, correlation-like
methods, which are regarded as a classical representative in
area-based methods, correspond two images by maximizing
the similarities of two sliding windows (Zitova and Flusser2003 ;L ie ta l . 2015 ). For example, the maximum correlation
of wavelet features has been developed for automatic regis-
tration (Le Moigne et al. 2002 ). However, this type of method
may greatly suffer from the serious image deformations (canonly be successfully applied when slight rotation and scaling
are presented), windows containing a smooth area without
any prominent details, and huge computational burden.
Domain transformed methods tend to align two images
on the basis of converting the original images into another
domain, such as phase correlation based on Fourier shift the-orem (Reddy and Chatterji 1996 ; Liu et al. 2005 ; Chen et al.
123