International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 51
as the building block of correspondence methods in visual
homing research (Möller et al. 2010 ). In this category, the
homing vector can be determined by transforming the cor-
respondences into motion ﬂows (Ma et al. 2018b ; Churchill
and V ardy 2013 ; Liu et al. 2013 ; Zhao and Ma 2017 ).
Ramisa et al. ( 2011 ) combined the average landmark vec-
tor with invariant feature points automatically detected in
panoramic images to achieve autonomous visual homing.
However, the feature matches are solely determined by thesimilarity of the descriptors in the method, thus leading to a
number of mismatches. The presence of outliers has been ver-
iﬁed to be the reason of performance degradation for visualhoming (Schroeter and Newman 2008 ). In order to resolve
the degradation caused by mismatches, Liu et al. ( 2013 )u s e d
a RANSAC-like method to remove mismatches. Meanwhile,Zhao and Ma ( 2017 ) proposed a visual homing method by
simultaneously mismatch removal and robust interpolation
of sparse motion ﬂows under a smoothness prior. Ma et al.
(2018b ) also proposed a guided locality preserving matching
method to handle extremely large proportions of outliers and
improve the visual homing robustness.
5.4 Image Registration and Stitching
Image registration is the process of aligning two or more
images of the same scene obtained from different view-points, at different times, or from different sensors (Zitova
and Flusser 2003 ). In the past decades, feature-based methods
in which the key requirement is feature matching have gainedincreasing attention due to its robustness and efﬁciency.
Once the correspondence is established, image registration
is reduced to estimate the transformation model (e.g., rigid,afﬁne, or projective). Finally, the source image is transformedby means of the mapping functions, which rely on some
interpolation technique (e.g., bilinear and nearest neighbor).
A large number of works have been proposed for featurematching and image registration. Ma et al. ( 2015b )p r o -
posed a Bayesian formulation for rigid and non-rigid feature
matching and image registration. To further exploit the geo-metrical cues, the locally linear transforming constraint is
incorporated. They also recently proposed a guided local-
ity preserving matching method (Ma et al. 2018a ). Their
proposed method can signiﬁcantly reduce the computationalcomplexity and is able to deal with a more complex transfor-
mation model. For non-rigid image registration, Pilet et al.
(2008 ) and Gay-Bellile et al. ( 2008 ) proposed solutions,
where robust matching techniques are insensitive to outliers.
Some efforts (Paul and Pati 2016 ;M ae ta l . 2017b ; Yang
et al. 2017a ) also attempted to modify feature detectors and
descriptors to improve the registration process.
The problem of multi-modal image registration is more
complicated due to the high variability of appearance causedby different modalities, which frequently arise in medicalimage and multi-sensor image analysis. For example, Chen
et al. ( 2010 ) developed the partial intensity invariant feature
descriptor (PIIFD) to register retinal images, whereas Wang
et al. ( 2015 ) extended PIIFD in a more robust registration
framework with SURF detector (Bay et al. 2008 ) and a single
Gaussian point matching model. On the basis of the charac-teristics of multi-modal images, Liu et al. ( 2018a ) proposed
an afﬁne and contrast invariant descriptor for IR and visible
image registration. Du et al. ( 2018 ) also proposed an IR and
visible image registration method based on scale-invariant
PIIFD feature and locality preserving matching. Ye et al.
(2017 ) proposed a novel feature descriptor based on the struc-
tural properties of images for multi-modal registration. A
detailed discussion of feature matching-based, multi-modal
registration techniques of the medical image analysis area,which are categorized as geometric methods, can be foundin Sotiras et al. ( 2013 ).
Meanwhile, image stitching or image mosaic involves
obtaining a wider ﬁeld-of-view of a scene from a sequenceof partial views (Ghosh and Kaabouch 2016 ). Compared to
image registration, image stitching deals with low overlap-
ping images and requires accurate alignment in the pixel-level to avoid visual discontinuities. Feature-based stitching
methods are popular in this area because of their invariance
properties and efﬁciency. For example, in order to iden-tify geometrically consistent feature matches and achieveaccurate homography estimation, Brown and Lowe ( 2007 )
proposed the use of the SIFT (Lowe 2004 ) feature matching
and the RANSAC (Fischler and Bolles 1981 ) algorithm. Lin
et al. ( 2011 ) used SIFT (Lowe 2004 ) to pre-compute matches
and then jointly estimating the matching and the smoothly
varying afﬁne ﬁelds for better stitching performance. Inter-ested readers can refer to the comprehensive survey (Ghosh
and Kaabouch 2016 ; Bonny and Uddin 2016 ) for an overview
of more feature-based image mosaic and stitching methods.
5.5 Image Fusion
To generate a more conducive image to subsequent appli-cations, image fusion is adopted to combine the meaningful
information from images acquired by different sensors or
under different shooting settings (Pohl and V an Genderen1998 ), wherein the source images have been accurately
aligned in advance. The very premise of image fusion is to
register source images using feature matching methods, and
the accuracy of registration directly affects the fusion quality.Liu et al. ( 2017 ) used the CNN to jointly generate the activ-
ity level measurement and fusion rules for multi-focus image
fusion. Meanwhile, Ma et al. ( 2019c ) proposed an end-to-end
model for infrared and visible image fusion, which generates
images with a dominant infrared intensity and an additional
visible gradient under the framework of generative adversar-ial networks. Subsequently, they introduced a detail loss and
123