52 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
a target edge-enhancement loss to further enrich the texture
details (Ma et al. 2020 ).
A group of methods aim to fuse images based on the local
features, among which the dense SIFT is the most popu-
lar. Liu et al. ( 2015b ) proposed the fusion of multi-focus
images with dense scale invariant feature transform, whereinthe local feature descriptors are used not only as the activity
level measurement, but also to match the mis-registered pix-
els between multiple source images to improve the qualityof the fusion results. Similarly, Hayat and Imran ( 2019 )p r o -
posed a ghost-free multi-exposure image fusion technique
using the dense SIFT descriptor with a guided ﬁlter, whichcan produce high-quality images using ordinary cameras. In
addition, Chen et al. ( 2015 ) and Ma et al. ( 2016a ) introduced a
method that can perform image registration and image fusionsimultaneously, thus fulﬁlling image fusion on unalignedimage pairs.
5.6 Image Retrieval, Object Recognition and
Tracking
Feature matching can be used to measure similarity between
images, thereby enabling a series of high-level applications,including image retrieval (Zhou et al. 2017 ), object recogni-
tion, and tracking. The goal of image retrieval is to retrieve all
images that exhibit similar scenes for a given query image.In local feature-based image retrieval, the image similarity
is intrinsically determined by the feature matches between
images. Thus, the image similarity score can be obtainedby aggregating votes from the matched features. In Zhou
et al. ( 2011 ), the relevance score is simply determined by the
number of feature matches across two images. In Jégou et al.(2010 ), the scoring function is deﬁned as a cumulation of the
squared term frequency inverse document frequency weights
on shared visual words, which is essentially a bag of features
of inner products.
Moreover, geometric context veriﬁcation, a common tech-
nique for reﬁning initial image retrieval result, is directly
related to feature matching. By incorporating the geometri-cal information, geometric context veriﬁcation technique can
be used to address the false match problem caused by the
ambiguity of local descriptor and the quantization loss. Forimage retrieval, a large group of methods estimate the trans-formation model in an explicit approach to verify the tentative
matches. For example, Philbin et al. ( 2007 ) used a RANSAC-
like method to ﬁnd the inlier correspondences, whereasAvrithis and Tolias ( 2014 ) developed a simple spatial match-
ing model inspired by Hough voting in the transformation
space. Another line of works address geometric context ver-iﬁcation without explicitly handling a transformation model.
For example, Sivic and Zisserman ( 2003 ) utilized the con-
sistency of spatial context in local feature groups to verifythe tentative correspondences. Zhou et al. ( 2010 ) proposedthe spatial coding method, whereby the valid visual word
matches are identiﬁed by verifying the global relative posi-tion consistency.
With the function of measuring similarity, feature match-
ing also plays an important role in object recognition andtracking. For example, Lowe et al. ( 1999 ) used SIFT features
to match sample images and new images. In their proposed
method, the potential model pose is identiﬁed through a
Hough transform hash table and then through a least-squaresﬁt to achieve a ﬁnal estimate of model parameters. The pres-
ence of the object is strongly evident if at least three keys
agree on the model parameters with low residuals. Modernattempts for object recognition also include some speciﬁcally
handcrafted features (Dalal and Triggs 2005 ; Hinterstoisser
et al. 2012 ) and, more recently, deep learning approaches
(Wohlhart and Lepetit 2015 ).
Tracking basically refers to estimating the trajectory of
an object over images. Feature matching across images is
the basis of feature-based tracking, and a variety of algo-rithms for these tasks have been proposed in the literature.
The feature matching pipeline is adopted in most visual
tracking systems, except that the matching is constrained tothose of the known features that are predicted to lie close
to the encountered position. The readers are referred to a
comprehensive evaluation of different feature detectors anddescriptors for tracking by Gauglitz et al. ( 2011 ), and the
recently presented benchmark (Wu et al. 2015b ), which cov-
ers a review of modern object tracking methods as well as
the role played by feature representation methods.
6 Experiments
Diverse methods for image matching have been proposed,
particularly when the deep learning techniques are becoming
increasingly popular. However, the question of which methodwould be suitable for speciﬁc applications under different
scenarios and requirements still remains. We are encouraged
to conduct more comprehensive and objective comparativeanalysis of these classical and state-of-the-art techniques.
6.1 Overview of Existing Reviews
To evaluate the existing matching methods at an early time,
the classical image registration survey (Zitova and Flusser
2003 ) provided several deﬁnitions for evaluation of regis-
tration accuracy including localization error, matching error,
and alignment or registration error. In 2005, Mikolajczyk et
al. evaluated afﬁne region detectors (Mikolajczyk et al. 2005 )
and local descriptors (Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2005 )a g a i n s t
changes of viewpoint, scale, illumination, blur, and image
compression on their own proposed VGG (a.k.a. Oxford)datasets. They also presented a comprehensive compari-
123