50 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
5 Matching-Based Applications
Image matching is a fundamental problem in computer vision
and is considered a critical prerequisite in a wide range of
applications. In this section, we brieﬂy review several repre-sentative applications.
5.1 Structure-from-Motion
Structure-from-motion (SfM) involves recovering the 3-D
structure of a stationary scene from a series of images,
which are obtained from different viewpoints by estimat-ing the camera motions corresponding to these images. SfM
involves three main stages, namely, (i) feature matching
across images, (ii) camera pose estimation, and (iii) recoveryof the 3-D structure using the estimated motion and features.
Its efﬁcacy largely depends on the admissible set of feature
matches.
In modern SfM systems (Schonberger and Frahm 2016 ;
Wu2018 ; Sweeney et al. 2015 ), the feature matching pipeline
is widely adopted across images, i.e., feature detection,
description, and nearest-neighbor matching, to provide ini-tial correspondences. The initial correspondences contain a
number of outliers. Thus, geometric veriﬁcation is required,
which is tackled via the estimation fundamental matrix usingRANSAC (Fischler and Bolles 1981 ). This can potentially
be addressed by mismatch removal methods.
Meanwhile, to enhance the SfM task, researchers have
focused on performing robust feature matching, i.e., thusestablishing rich and accurate correspondences. Evidently,
advanced descriptors can greatly affect this task (Fan et al.
2019 ). Moreover, Shah et al. ( 2015 ) proposed a geometry-
aware approach, which initially uses a small sample of
features to estimate the epipolar geometry between the
images and leverages it for the guided matching of theremaining features. Lin et al. ( 2016b ) utilized RANSAC to
guide the training of match consistency curves for differ-
entiating true and false matches. Their approach traces thecommon problems of wide-baselines and repeated structuresfor reconstructing modern cities. These correspondences are
also the prerequisites for camera pose estimation, and the
effective substitution of commonly used RANSAC for thistask has also been investigated (Moo Yi et al. 2018 ), with a
pre-stage of identifying good correspondences.
5.2 Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
Acquiring maps of the environment is a fundamental task
for autonomous mobile robots, thereby forming the basis
of many different higher-level tasks, such as navigation and
localization. The problem of simultaneous localization andmapping (SLAM) (Davison et al. 2007 ; Mur-Artal et al. 2015 ;Sturm et al. 2012 ) has received intensive attention over the
decades.
In common SLAM systems, feature matching is needed to
establish correspondences between frames, which then serve
as the input for estimating the relative camera pose and local-ization. Similar to SfM, the full-ﬂedged feature matchingpipeline is used in most SLAM systems. Typically, in Endres
et al. ( 2012 ), Endres et al. introduced a SLAM system that
incorporates feature matching to establish spatial relationsfrom the sensor data in the front-end. The well-known SIFT
(Lowe 2004 ), SURF (Bay et al. 2008 ), and ORB (Rublee et al.
2011 ) algorithms are optionally used to detect and describe
features, and RANSAC (Fischler and Bolles 1981 ) is subse-
quently used for robust matching.
An evaluation of different feature detectors and descrip-
tors can be found in Gil et al. ( 2010 ). Recently, Lowry and
Andreasson ( 2018 ) proposed a spatial veriﬁcation method for
visual localization, which is robust in the presence of a high
proportion of outliers. For a SLAM system that percepts 3-D range scans, the point set registration methods (e.g. ICP)
(Nüchter et al. 2007 ) are also used for scan matching and
localizing the robot.
Loop closure detection–another core module in SLAM
application–refers to accurately asserting that an agent has
returned to a previously visited location. It is crucial to reducethe drift of the estimated trajectory caused by accumula-tive error. A group of appearance-based approaches have
been developed to use image similarities to identify previ-
ously visited places. Feature matching results are naturallyapplicable to measure the similarity of two scenes and have
been the bases of many state-of-the-art methods. For exam-
ple, Liu and Zhang ( 2012 ) performed feature matching with
SIFT between the current image and each previously vis-
ited image, after which they determined the closed loop on
the basis of the number of accurate matches in the results.Zhang et al. ( 2011 ) used directed matching of raw features
extracted from images for detecting loop-closure events. To
achieve loop closure detection, Wu et al. ( 2014 )u s e dL S H
as the basic technique by matching the binary visual featuresin the current view of a robot with the visual features in the
robot appearance map. Liu et al. ( 2015a ) developed a consen-
sus constraint to prune outliers and veriﬁed the superiorityof their methods for loop closure detection.
5.3 Visual Homing
Visual homing aims to navigate a robot from an arbitrary
starting position to a goal or home position based solely
on visual information. This is often accomplished by esti-mating a homing vector/direction (pointing from the current
position to the home position) from two panoramic images,
which are captured respectively at the current position andthe home position. Conventionally, feature matching serves
123