64 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
6.6 Results on Loop-Closure Detection
Appearance-based loop-closure detection is a fundamental
component in visual SLAM. The essence involves recogniz-
ing previously visited areas of the environment. This task iscrucial in reducing the drift of the estimated trajectory causedby the accumulative error and contributes to global consistent
mapping.
Appearance-based loop-closure detection only uses image
similarity to identify previously visited places. This category
commonly starts with the construction of a set of putative
correspondences by a feature operator, such as SIFT, betweenthe current image and each previously visited image. Then,
the closed loop is determined on the basis of the number
of accurate matches using mismatch removal methods. Thissolution is simple but relatively effective.
Moreover, the computational requirement in directly real-
izing feature matching between the current image and each
previously visited image would be largely increased. Toensure the real-time performance of loop-closure detection,
we use a two-step approach. In the ﬁrst step, loop-closure
candidates are selected by the BoW method with presup-posed score threshold, which is fast and easy to implement.
However, the BoW method only considers whether or not a
feature exists and neglects the spatial arrangement of the fea-tures, thereby leading to perceptual aliasing problem. Thus,in the second step, a robust feature matching algorithm is
required to determine whether a loop-closure candidate is a
true loop-closure event.
To evaluate the effectiveness and compare the perfor-
mance of the loop-closure detection methods based on feature
matching, we conduct extensive experiments on four differ-ent datasets, including NewCollege ,CityCentre ,Lip6Indoor ,
and Lip6Outdoor . The performance is characterized by the
maximum recall that can be achieved at 100% precision, asshown in Table 4. The experiments are performed on a desk-
top with 2 .6 GHz Intel Core CPU, 16 GB memory.
The NewCollege and CityCentre datasets are obtained
from the work of Cummins and Newman Cummins andNewman ( 2008 ). The NewCollege dataset contains 1 ,073
images with size of 640 ×480, and the CityCentre dataset
contains 1 ,237 images with size of 640 ×480. The images
were recorded by means of the vision system of a wheeled
robotic platform while traversing 2 .2kmthrough a college’s
campus grounds and adjoining parks with buildings, roads,gardens, cars, and people. The environment is outdoor anddynamic.
The Lip6Indoor and Lip6Outdoor datasets are obtained
from Angeli et al. ( 2008 ). The Lip6Indoor dataset has 388
images with size of 240 ×192; it is an indoor image
sequence with strong perceptual aliasing problem. While
theLip6Outdoor dataset has 1 ,063 images with size of
240×192; it is a long outdoor image sequence of a street withmany buildings, cars, and people. Both image sequences are
grabbed with a single-monocular handheld camera. In addi-tion, a binary matrix is deﬁned as the ground truth for each
dataset, whose rows and columns correspond to images at
different time indices. Each element in this binary matrixdenotes the presence (set to 1) or absence (set to 0) of aloop-closure event between the corresponding frame pair.
To generate consistent maps, the loop-closure detection
module should obtain true positive detections to provideinformation for the back-end optimization, thereby reducing
the drift of the estimated trajectory caused by accumulative
error. However, the loop-closure detection result must alsoinclude no false positive detections as this can affect the per-
formance of a full SLAM system and result in a completely
inaccurate map result. In summary, the loop closure mech-anisms should work at 100% precision while maintaininghigh recall rate. In such cases, the evaluation of loop-closure
detection algorithm is performed in terms of precision-recall
metrics. Here, precision is the ratio of the number of true pos-
itive loop-closure detections to the number of total positive
loop-closure detections identiﬁed by the system, and recall
is the ratio between the true positive loop closure detectionsand the total actual loop-closure events deﬁned by the ground
truth of dataset. Combining the analysis and the curve, we
focus on the maximum recall that can be achieved at 100%precision, indicating that the loop-closure detection resultincludes no false positive detection and avoids the inﬂuence
in a full SLAM system.
Some of the representative mismatch removal methods
are adopted for comparison in our experiment. The quan-
titative comparisons, with respect to maximum recall rate
at precision of 100% on different datasets, are presented inTable 4. From the results, we can see that the methods that
pursue relaxed geometric constraints, i.e., LPM (Ma et al.
2019d ), GMS (Bian et al. 2017 ), GS (Liu and Yan 2010 ),
SM (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005 ), ICF (Li and Hu 2010 )
and VFC (Ma et al. 2014 ), are less favored in this task. In
comparison, the resampling methods that exploit parametric
models of the correspondences, i.e., RANSAC (Fischler andBolles 1981 ) and LORANSAC (Lebeda et al. 2012 ), can give
better results for loop-closure detection.
7 Conclusions and Future Trends
Image matching has played a signiﬁcant role in various
visual applications and has attracted considerable attention.
Researchers have also achieved signiﬁcant progress in this
ﬁeld in the past few decades. Therefore, we provide a compre-hensive review of the existing image matching methods–from
handcrafted to trainable ones–in order to provide better
reference and understanding for the researchers in this com-munity.
123