International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 35
tions, such as hinge, Siamese, triplet, ranking, and contrastive
losses, have been borrowed and modiﬁed in recent deepmethods. Speciﬁcally, Zagoruyko and Komodakis ( 2015 )
proposed their DeepCompare and demonstrated the mech-
anism by which to directly learn from raw image pixels witha general patch similarity function. In such scenario, variousSiamese-type CNN models are applied to encode the sim-
ilarity function. These models are then trained to identify
the positive and negative image patch pairs. The attempteddifferent network structures include Siamese with shared
or unshared weights and central-surround form. MatchNet
(Han et al. 2015 ) is proposed to simultaneously learn the
descriptor and metric. Such a technique is implemented by
cascading a Siamese-like description network and fully con-
volutional decision network. The task is converted into aclassiﬁcation problem under a cross-entropy loss. DeepDesc(Simo-Serra et al. 2015 ) uses CNNs to learn discriminant
patch representations together with L2 distance measuring.
In particular, it trains a Siamese network with pairs of posi-tive and negative patches by minimizing the pairwise hinge
loss, and the proposed hard negative mining strategy has
alleviated the unbalanced positive and negative samples.Consequently, the description performance is siginiﬁcantly
enhanced. Wang et al. ( 2014 ) proposed a novel deep rank-
ing model to learn ﬁne-grained image similarity. The modelemploys a triplet-based hinge loss and ranking function tocharacterize ﬁne-grained image similarity relationships. A
multiscale neural network architecture is utilized to capture
the global visual properties and image semantics.
Kumar et al. ( 2016 ) ﬁrst used the global loss to enlarge
the distance margin between positive and negative patch
pairs. It is implemented through triplet and Siamese networkstrained with a combination of triplet and global losses. TFeat
(Balntas et al. 2016b ) proposes to utilize triplets of training
samples for CNN-based patch description and matching. It isimplemented with shallow convolutional networks and fasthard negative mining strategy. In L2Net (Tian et al. 2017 ),
Tian et al. applied a progressive sampling strategy to optimize
the relative distance-based loss function in the Euclideanspace. The authors of that work considered the intermediate
feature map and compactness of descriptor to achieve bet-
ter performance. HardNet (Mishchuk et al. 2017 ) achieves
better improvement than L2Net by using a simple hinge
triplet loss with the “hardest-within-batch” mining. PN-Net
(Balntas et al. 2016a ) uses ideas introduced in the ﬁeld of
distance metric learning and online boosting by simultane-ously training with positive and negative constraints. The
proposed SoftPN loss function exhibits faster convergence
and lower error than hinge loss or SoftMax ratio (Wang et al.2014 ; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2015 ). Zhang et al. ( 2017c )
trained their networks by using their proposed global orthog-
onal regularization together with triplet loss for encouragingthe descriptor to be sufﬁciently “spread out”. It was carried
out to fully utilize the descriptor space.
Descriptor learning based on average precision attention
(He et al. 2018 ), introduces a general-purpose learning to
rank formulation. This approach is deﬁned to a constraintwherein the true matches should be ranked above all falsepath matches and is optimized on the basis of the binary
and real-value local feature descriptors. BinGAN (Zieba
et al. 2018 ) proposes a regularization method for genera-
tive adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014 ) to learn
discriminative yet compact binary representations of image
patches. In comparison, other methods focused on binarydescriptor learning are proposed in Erin Liong et al. ( 2015 ),
Lin et al. ( 2016a ) and Duan et al. ( 2017 ). Except for loss
function, network structure, regularization and hard nega-tive mining, Wei et al. ( 2018 ) learned a discriminative deep
descriptor by using kernelized subspace pooling. Tian et al.
(2019 ) used second-order similarity in their SOSNet. In Con-
textDesc, a more recent method, Luo et al. ( 2019 ) combined
the local patch similarity constraint with the spatial geomet-
rical constraint of interest point to train their networks, which
largely improves the matching performance.
1
As mentioned in the CNN-based detectors, an increas-
ing number of end-to-end learning methods integrate the
feature description together with the detectors into the com-plete matching pipeline. These methods are similar to thosethat have been singly designed for the description reviewed
above. The main difference may lie on the way of training and
the design of the entire network structure. The core challengeis to make the whole process differentiable and trainable. For
example, LIFT (Yi et al. 2016 ) attempts to simultaneously
implement keypoint detection, orientation estimation, andfeature description, by end-to-end CNN networks.
SuperPoint (DeTone et al. 2018 ) proposes a self-supervised
framework for training interest point detectors and descrip-tors for multiple view geometrical problems. The fully con-volutional model operates on full-sized images and jointly
computes pixel-level interest point locations and associated
descriptors, which is in contrast with path-based networks.LF-Net (Ono et al. 2018 ) devises a two-branch setup and cre-
ates virtual target responses iteratively to allow training from
scratch without handcrafted priors. This technique realizesfeature map generation, scale-invariant keypoint detection
using top K selection and NMS, orientation estimation, and
descriptor extraction. In LF-Net, the target function includesimage level loss (satisfying additional constraints amongimage pairs, depth map, and essential matrix), patch-wise
loss (learning keypoints that are good for matching and
involves the orientation and scale component geometric con-sistency), and triplet loss for descriptor learning.
1https://image-matching-workshop.github.io/leaderboard/ .
123