International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 41
4.3.4 Continuous Relaxations
A large volume of GM methods has focused on devising accu-
rate or efﬁcient algorithms to solve the QAP approximately,
albeit with no global optimality guarantee. In most cases, X
is simply relaxed to be continuous, as a DS matrix. Gold andRangarajan ( 1996 ) proposed a graduated assignment algo-
rithm, which performs gradient ascent on the relaxed problem
under an annealing schedule. The convergence of this methodhas been revisited and improved by Tian et al. ( 2012 ) with a
soft constrained mechanism. van Wyk and van Wyk ( 2004 )
proposed to enforce the one-to-one mapping constraint bysuccessively projecting onto the convex set of the desired
integer constraints. Leordeanu et al. ( 2009 ) proposed an efﬁ-
cient algorithm that optimizes in the (quasi) discrete domainvia solving a sequence of linear assignment problems. Manyfamous optimization techniques, such as ADMM (Lê-Huu
and Paragios 2017 ), tabu search (Adamczewski et al. 2015 )
and multiplicative update algorithm (Jiang et al. 2017a ), have
also been tested. Recent studies also include Jiang et al.
(2017b ) and Y u et al. ( 2018 ), which introduce new schemes
to asymptotically approximate the original QAP , and Maronand Lipman ( 2018 ), which presents a new (probably) concave
relaxation technique. Y u et al. ( 2020b ) introduced a determi-
nant regularization technique together with gradient-basedoptimization to relax this problem into continuous domain.
4.3.5 Multi-graph Matching
In contrast to the classic two-graph matching setting, jointly
matching a batch of graphs with consistent correspondences,
i.e. multi-graph matching, has recently drawn increasingattention due to its methodological advantage and potentialto incorporate cross-graph information. Arguably, one cen-
tral issue of multi-graph matching lies in the enforcement
of cycle-consistency for a feasible solution. In general, thisconcept refers to the fact that the bijection correspondence
between two graphs shall be consistent with a derived one
through an intermediate graph. Put it more concretely, forany pair of graphs G
aand Gbwith their node correspon-
dence matrix Xab,l e tGcbe an intermediate graph, the cycle
consistency constraint is enforced: XacXcb=Xab, where
Xacand Xcbare the matching solutions of Gaand Gcand
GcandGb, respectively.
Existing multi-graph matching methods can be roughly
grouped into three lines of works. For the methods fallinginto the ﬁrst group, the multi-graph matching problem is
solved by an iterative procedure for computing a number of
two-graph matching tasks (Yan et al. 2013 ,2014 ,2015a ,b;
Jiang et al. 2020b ). In each iteration, a two-graph matching
solution is computed to locally maximize the afﬁnity score,
which can leverage off-the-shelf pairwise matching solvers,such as in Jiang et al. ( 2020b ), both ofﬂine batch mode andonline setting are considered to explore the concept of cycle-
consistency over pairwise matching. Another body of worktakes the initial (noisy) pairwise matching result as input, and
aims to recover a globally consistent pairwise matching set
(Kim et al. 2012 ; Pachauri et al. 2013 ; Huang and Guibas
2013 ; Chen et al. 2014 ; Zhou et al. 2015 ; Wang et al. 2018 ;
Hu et al. 2018 ). In these methods, matching over all graphs
is jointly and equally considered to form a bulk matrix that
includes all pairwise matchings. The intrinsic structure ofthis matrix induced by the matching problem, such as cycle-
consistency, is investigated. The last group utilizes clustering
or low rank recovery techniques to solve multi-graph match-ing, which provides a new perspective in the feature space
for the problem (Zeng et al. 2012 ; Yan et al. 2015c ,2016a ;
Tron et al. 2017 ). More recently, the multi-graph matching
problem has been considered in the optimization frameworkwith a theoretically well-grounded convex relaxation (Swo-
boda et al. 2019 ), or with projected power iterations to search
for a feasible solution (Bernard et al. 2019 ).
4.3.6 Other Paradigms
Although the QAP formulation is prevalent in GM, the way
of formulation is not unique. Numerous methods deal with
GM from different perspectives or paradigms and also forman important category in this ﬁeld.
Cho et al. ( 2010 ) provided a random walk view of GM
and devised a technique to obtain solution by simulating
random walks on the association graph. Lee et al. ( 2010 )
and Suh et al. ( 2012 ) introduced Monte Carlo methods to
improve the matching robustness. Cho and Lee ( 2012 ) further
devised a progressive GM method, which combines pro-gression of graphs with matching of graphs to reduce the
computational complexity. Wang et al. ( 2018a ) proposed to
use a functional representation of graphs and conduct match-ing by minimizing the discrepancy between the original andthe transformed graphs. Subsequently, in order to suppress
the matching of outliers, Wang et al. ( 2020 ) assigned zero-
valued vectors to the potential outliers in the obtained optimalcorrespondence matrix. The afﬁnity matrix plays a key role in
the GM problem. However, the handcrafted Kis vulnerable
to scale and rotation differences. To this end, unsupervised(Leordeanu et al. 2012 ) and supervised (Caetano et al. 2009 )
methods are devised to learn K. Zanﬁr and Sminchisescu
(2018 ) recently addressed this issue with an end-to-end deep
learning scheme. Wang et al. (
2020 ) introduced a fully train-
able framework for graph matching. In this framework, they
utilized a graph network block module and simultaneously
considered the learning of node/edge afﬁnities and the solv-ing of combinatorial optimization.
123