24 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Image matching has rich meaning in pairing two objects,
thus deriving many speciﬁc tasks, such as sparse featurematching, dense matching (like image registration and stereo
matching), patch matching (retrieval), 2-D and 3-D point set
registration, and graph matching. Image matching in generalconsists of two parts, namely, the nature of the matched fea-tures and the matching strategy, which indicate what are used
to match and how to match them, respectively. The ultimate
goals are to geometrically warp the sensed image into thecommon spatial coordinate system of the reference image and
align their common area pixel-to-pixel (i.e., image registra-
tion). To this end, a direct strategy, also known as area-based
method , registers two images by using the similarity mea-
surement of the original image pixel intensity or information
after pixel-domain transformation in the sliding windows ofpredeﬁned size or even the entire images, without attemptingto detect any salient image structure.
Another classic and widely adopted pipeline called feature-
based method , i.e., feature detection and description, feature
matching, transform model estimation, image resampling
and transformation, has been introduced in the prestigious
survey paper (Zitova and Flusser 2003 ) and applied in var-
ious ﬁelds. The feature-based image matching is popular
due to its ﬂexibility and robustness and the capability of
wide range applications. In particular, feature detection canextract the distinctive structure from an image, and fea-ture description may be regarded as an image representation
method that is widely used in image coding and similarity
measurements such as image classiﬁcation and retrieval. Inaddition, due to the strong ability in deep feature acquisition
and non-linear expression, applying deep learning techniques
for image information representation and/or similarity mea-surement, as well as parameter regression of image pair
transformation, are hot topics in nowadays image matching
community, which have been proven to achieve better match-ing performance and present greater potential compared withtraditional methods.
In real-world settings, images for matching are usually
taken from the same or similar scene/object while capturedat different times, from different viewpoints or imaging
modalities. In particular, a robust and efﬁcient matching strat-
egy is desirable to establish correct correspondences, thusstimulating various methods for achieving better efﬁciency,
robustness and accuracy. Although numerous techniques
have been devised over the decades, developing a uniﬁedframework remains a challenging task in terms of the fol-lowing aspects:
– Area-based methods that directly match images often
depend on an appropriate patch similarity measurement
for creating pixel level matches between images. They
can be computational expensive and are sensitive toimage distortion, appearance changes by noise, vary-ing illumination, and different imaging sensors, which
can have negative impact on similarity measurement andmatch searching. As a result, usually these methods can
only work well under small rotation, scaling, and local
deformation.
– Feature-based matching methods are often more efﬁcient
and can better handle geometrical deformation. But they
are based on salient feature detection and description, fea-
ture matching, and geometrical model estimation whichcan also be challenging. On the one hand, in feature-
based image matching, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne and extract
a high percentage and a large number of features belong-ing to the same positions in 3-D space in the real world
to ensure the matchability. On the other hand, matching
Nfeature points to Nfeature points detected in another
image would create a total of N!possible matchings, and
thousands of features are usually extracted from high-
resolution images and dominated outliers and noise are
typically included in the points sets, which lead to signiﬁ-cant difﬁculties for existing matching methods. Although
various local descriptors have been proposed and cou-
pled with detected features to ease the matching process,the use of local appearance information will unavoid-
ably result in ambiguity and numerous false matches,
especially for images with low quality, repeated contents,and those undergoing serious nonrigid deformations andextreme viewpoint changes.
– A predeﬁned transformation model is often required to
indicate the geometrical relation between two imagesor point sets. But it may vary on different data and
is unknown beforehand thus hard to model. A sim-
ple parametric model is often insufﬁcient for imagepairs that involve non-rigid transformations caused by
ground surface ﬂuctuation and image viewpoint varia-
tions, multi-targets with different motion properties, andalso local distortions.
– The emergence of deep learning has provided a new way
and has shown great potential to address image match-
ing problems. However, it still faces several challenges.The option of learning from images for direct registra-
tion or transformation model estimation is limited when
applied to wide baseline image stereo or registrationunder complex and serious deformation. The application
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) onto sparse
point data for matching, registration, and transforma-tion model estimation is also difﬁcult, because the pointsto be matched–known as unstructured or non-Euclidean
data due to their disordered and dispersed nature–make
it difﬁcult to operate and extract the spatial relation-ships between two or more points (e.g., neighboring
elements, relative positions, and length and angle infor-
mation among multi-points) using a deep convolutionaltechnique.
123