International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 33
recently and shown promising performance; for example, the
pattern of local gravitational force local descriptor (Bhat-tacharjee and Roy 2019 ) is inspired from the law of universal
gravitation and can be regarded as a combination of force
magnitude and angle.
3.2.2 Local Binary Pattern Statistic-Based Descriptors
Different from SIFT-like approaches, several intensity statistic-
based methods, which are inspired by the local binary pattern
(LBP) (Ojala et al. 2002 ), have been proposed in the past
decades. LBP has properties that favor its usage in inter-est region description, such as tolerance against illuminationchange and computational simplicity. The drawbacks are
that the operator produces a rather long histogram and is
insigniﬁcantly robust in ﬂat image areas. Center-symmetricLBP (CS-LBP) (Heikkilä et al. 2009 ) (using SVM for clas-
siﬁer training) is a modiﬁed version of LBP combining the
strengths of SIFT and LBP to address the ﬂat area problem.Speciﬁcally, CS-LBP uses a SIFT-like grid and replaces the
gradient information with an LBP-based feature. To address
the noise, center-symmetric local ternary pattern (CS-LTP)(Gupta et al. 2010 ) suggests the use of a histogram of rel-
ative orders in patch and a histogram of LBP codes, such
as histogram of relative intensities. The two CS-based meth-
ods are designed to be more robust to Gaussian noise thanpreviously considered descriptors. RLBP (Chen et al. 2013 )
improves the robustness of LBP by changing the coding bit;
a completed modeling of the LBP operator and an associ-ated completed LBP scheme (Guo et al. 2010 ) have been
developed for texture classiﬁcation. LBP-like methods are
widely used in texture representation and face recognitioncommunity, and additional details can be found in the reviewliterature (Huang et al. 2011 ).
3.2.3 Local Intensity Comparison-Based Descriptors
Another form of descriptors is based on the comparison
of local intensities, which is also called binary descriptorsand the core challenge is the selection rule for comparison.
Because of their limited distinctiveness, these methods are
mostly limited to short-baseline matching. Calonder et al.(2010 ) proposed the BRIEF descriptor built by concatena-
tion of the results of a binary test of intensities for several
random point pairs in image patch. Rublee et al. ( 2011 )p r o -
posed rotated BRIEF combined with oriented FAST cornersand selected robust binary tests using an machine learning
strategy in their ORB algorithm to alleviate the limitations in
rotation and scale change. Leutenegger et al. ( 2011 )d e v e l -
oped the BRISK method using a concentric circle sampling
strategy with increasing radius. Inspired by the retina struc-
ture, Alahi et al. ( 2012 ) proposed the FREAK descriptor by
comparing image intensities over a retinal sampling patternfor fast computing and matching with low memory cost while
remaining robust to scale, rotation, and noise. Handcraftedbinary descriptors and classical machine learning techniques
are also widely studied and these shall be introduced in the
learning-based subsection.
3.2.4 Local Intensity Order Statistic-Based Descriptors
Thus far, many methods have been devised using orders
of pixel values rather than raw intensities, achieving morepromising performance (Tang et al. 2009 ; Toews and Wells
2009 ). Pooling by intensity orders is invariant to rotation
and monotonic intensity changes and also encodes ordi-nal information into descriptor; the intensity order-poolingscheme may enable the descriptors to be rotation-invariant
without estimation of a reference orientation as SIFT, which
appears as a major error source for most existing methods.To solve this problem, Tang et al. proposed the ordinal spa-
tial intensity distribution (Tang et al. 2009 ) method, which
normalizes captured texture information and structure infor-mation using an ordinal and spatial intensity histogram; the
proposed method is invariant to any monotonically increas-
ing brightness changes.
Fan et al. ( 2011 ) pooled local features based on their gra-
dient and intensity orders in multiple support regions and
proposed the multi-support region order-based gradient his-
togram and the multi-support region rotation and intensitymonotonic invariant descriptor methods. A similar strategy
was used in LIOP (Wang et al. 2011 ,2015 ), to encode the
local ordinal information of each pixel. In that work, the over-all ordinal information was used to divide the local patch into
subregions, which were used to accumulate LIOP . LIOP was
further improved into OIOP/MIOP (Wang et al. 2015 ), which
can then encode overall ordinal information for noise anddistortion robustness. They also proposed a learning-based
quantization to improve its distinctiveness.
3.3 Learning-Based Feature Descriptors
Handcrafted descriptors, as reviewed above, require exper-
tise to design and may disregard useful patterns hidden inthe data. This requirement has prompted the investigationson learning-based descriptors, which have recently become
dominantly popular due to their data-driven property and
promising performance. In the following, we will discussa group of classical learning-based descriptors introduced
before the deep learning era.
3.3.1 Classical Learning-Based Descriptors
The learning-based descriptors can be traced back to PCA-
SIFT (Ke et al. 2004 ), in which principal component analysis
(PCA) is used to form a robust and compact descriptor by
123