International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 57
Fig. 4 2-D shape contours used in our experiments, from left to right, ﬁsh,whale ,fu,beijing
Fig. 5 The bunny and wolf pattern of 3-D point cloud used in our
experiments
methods. However, in our case, it has a restricted performance
with low recall and high accuracy, resulting in the failure
in RemoteSensing. This ﬁnding indicates that the learning
methods are data-dependent with limited generality.
6.3 Results on Point Set Registration
The experiments for point set registration consist of twoparts: non-rigid registration with 2-D shape contour data
and rigid registration with 3-D point cloud data. In the 2-D
case, six representative methods, namely, TPS-RPM (Chuiand Rangarajan 2003 ), GMM (Jian and V emuri 2011 ), CPD
(Myronenko and Song 2010 ),L
2E(Ma et al. 2013b ), PR-
GLS (Ma et al. 2015a ), and APM (Lian et al. 2017 )a r e
evaluated. In the 3-D case, the rigid versions of GMM andCPD as well as ICP (Besl and McKay 1992 ) and GoICP
(Yang et al. 2016 ) are evaluated. The experiments of this part
are performed on a desktop with 3.4 GHz Intel Core i5-7500CPU, 8GB memory.
The point data are normalized as inputs, thus allowing
the use of a ﬁxed threshold to evaluate the registration per-formance. Speciﬁcally, a point is accurately aligned if itsdistance to the ground truth corresponding point is below a
given threshold. Thus, we can deﬁne the accuracy of reg-
istration as the percentage of accurately aligned points. In
our experiment, the threshold is empirically set to 0 .1. Four
patterns are collected to evaluate the non-rigid 2-D registra-tion results, as shown in Fig. 4. We also create ﬁve deformed
shapes for each pattern as the data to be registered, generating
a total of 20 instances. We also conduct noise, outlier, androtation experiments on these instances. For the 3-D case, as
shown in Fig. 5, two patterns are used, and we exert random
rotation to create 20 instances for each pattern. Noise andoutlier experiments are also conducted on these 40 instances.
The results of non-rigid 2-D registration are presented in
Fig. 6. The outlier experiments of APM are excluded due
to its prohibitive runtime with the increase in data points.The experimental setting is relatively challenging, and the
weaknesses of each method have emerged. For instance,
TPS-RPM is generally robust to outliers, but it can bedegraded in the case of severe noises. CPD and GMM have
similar performances and are sensitive to outliers. L
2Eand
PR-GLS utilize the information of shape context descriptorto guide the registration, but their performances are unstable.
APM can only deal with afﬁne deformation, thus leading to
its inferior performance. However, compared to other meth-ods that are only locally convergent and fail to handle violentrotations, APM is invariant to rotation owing to its global
optimality.
The results of rigid 3-D point cloud registration are pre-
sented in Fig. 7. In our random rotation settings, the locally
convergent methods, i.e., GMM, CPD, and ICP , fail to accu-
rately register the point clouds. In this regard, the globallyoptimal method, GoICP , outperforms them by a large margin.
123