40 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
where A1and A2are the weighted adjacency matrices of
the two graphs, respectively, and Kpis the node afﬁnity
matrix. In Zhou and De la Torre ( 2015 ), the relation between
Koopmans–Beckmann’s and Lawler’s QAP has been inves-
tigated, which reveals that Koopmans–Beckmann’s QAP canbe regarded as a special case of Lawler’s.
The GM problem is translated into ﬁnding the optimal
one-to-one correspondences Xthat maximizes the overall
afﬁnity score J(X). As a combinatorial QAP problem in
general, GM is known to be NP-hard. Most methods relax
the stringent constraints and provide approximate solutions
in an affordable over head. In this regard, many relaxationstrategies are introduced in the literature, thereby leading to
a variety of GM solvers. In the following, we brieﬂy review
the inﬂuential ones through the development course of GM.
4.3.1 Spectral Relaxations
The ﬁrst group of methods follow a strategy of spectral relax-
ation. Leordeanu and Hebert ( 2005 ) proposed to replace the
one-to-one mapping constraint and the binary constraint by
constraining /bardblvec(X)/bardbl
2
2=1. In this case, the solution X
can be obtained by solving an eigenvector problem. Each
element in Xis interpreted as the association of one corre-
spondence with the optimal cluster (true correspondences).A discretization strategy is used to enforce the mapping con-straints. The idea was later improved by Cour et al. ( 2007 ),
who explicitly considered enforcing the one-to-one map-
ping constraint to achieve tighter relaxation. This methodcan also be solved in closed forms as an eigenvector prob-
lem. Liu and Yan ( 2010 ) proposed to detect multiple visual
patterns by using a l
1-norm-based spectral relaxation tech-
nique, i.e. constraining /bardblvec(X)/bardbl1=1. The solution can be
efﬁciently obtained by replicator equation from evolution-
ary game theory. Jiang et al. ( 2014 ) presented a non-negative
matrix factorization technique, which extends the constraintas/bardblvec(X)/bardbl
p=1,p∈[1,2]. Meanwhile, Egozi et al.
(2012 ) presented a fairly different approach. In their work,
they provided a probabilistic interpretation of spectral match-ing schemes and derived a novel probabilistic matching
scheme wherein the afﬁnity matrix is also updated in the
iteration process. With Koopmans–Beckmann’s QAP for-mulation, the spectral methods (Umeyama 1988 ; Scott and
Longuet-Higgins 1991 ; Shapiro and Brady 1992 ; Caelli and
Kosinov 2004 ) relax Xto be orthogonal, i.e. X
/latticetopX=I.T h i s
expression can be solved in a closed form as an eigenvalueproblem. These methods possess the merit of efﬁciency due
to the loose relaxation. However, the accuracy is not advan-
taged in general.4.3.2 Convex Relaxations
Many studies have turned to investigating convex relaxations
of the original problem to obtain theoretical advantages for
solving the non-convex QAP issue. Strong convex relax-ations can be obtained by lifting methods that add auxiliaryvariables representing quadratic monomials in the original
variables. This enables the addition of additional convex con-
straints on the lifted variables. Semi-deﬁnite programming(SDP) is a general tool for combinatorial problems and has
been applied to solving GM (Schellewald and Schnörr 2005 ;
Torr 2003 ; Zhao et al. 1998 ; Kezurer et al. 2015 ). The SDP
relaxation is quite tight and allows ﬁnding a strong approxi-
mation in polynomial time. However, the high computational
cost prohibits its scalability. Some other lifting methods withlinear programming relaxations have also been developed(Almohamad and Duffuaa 1993 ; Adams and Johnson 1994 ).
The dual problem of the LP relaxations are recently exten-
sively considered to solve GM (Swoboda et al. 2017 ; Chen
and Koltun 2015 ; Swoboda et al. 2017 ; Torresani et al. 2012 ;
Zhang et al. 2016 ), which has a strong link with the MAP
inference algorithms.
4.3.3 Convex-to-Concave Relaxations
One useful strategy is to utilize the path-following technique.
This approach gradually achieves a convex-to-concave pro-
cedure of the original problem to ﬁnally ﬁnd a good solution
with the constraints satisﬁed. The computational complex-ity is also much lower than those of the lifting methods.
Zaslavskiy et al. ( 2009 ) adopted this strategy for GM prob-
lem with Koopmans–Beckmann’s QAP formulation, whichis extended by to directed graphs (Liu et al. 2012b ) and par-
tial matching (Liu and Qiao 2014 ). Zhou and De la Torre
(2015 ) presented a uniﬁed framework of GM based on the
factorization of afﬁnity matrix based on Lawler’s QAP . Sucha framework effectively reduces the computational complex-
ity and reveals the relation between Koopmans–Beckmann’s
and Lawler’s QAPs. The (advanced) doubly stochastic (DS)relaxation methods improve upon these approaches by iden-
tifying tighter formulations (Fogel et al. 2013 ; Dym et al.
2017 ; Bernard et al. 2018 ), where the tightness of spectral,
SDP , and DS relaxation is discussed and theoretically veri-
ﬁed.
123