International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-020-01359-2
Image Matching from Handcrafted to Deep Features: A Survey
Jiayi Ma1·Xingyu Jiang1·Aoxiang Fan1·Junjun Jiang2·Junchi Yan3
Received: 9 January 2020 / Accepted: 15 July 2020 / Published online: 4 August 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
As a fundamental and critical task in various visual applications, image matching can identify then correspond the same or
similar structure/content from two or more images. Over the past decades, growing amount and diversity of methods have beenproposed for image matching, particularly with the development of deep learning techniques over the recent years. However,it may leave several open questions about which method would be a suitable choice for speciﬁc applications with respect to
different scenarios and task requirements and how to design better image matching methods with superior performance in
accuracy, robustness and efﬁciency. This encourages us to conduct a comprehensive and systematic review and analysis forthose classical and latest techniques. Following the feature-based image matching pipeline, we ﬁrst introduce feature detection,
description, and matching techniques from handcrafted methods to trainable ones and provide an analysis of the development
of these methods in theory and practice. Secondly, we brieﬂy introduce several typical image matching-based applicationsfor a comprehensive understanding of the signiﬁcance of image matching. In addition, we also provide a comprehensive
and objective comparison of these classical and latest techniques through extensive experiments on representative datasets.
Finally, we conclude with the current status of image matching technologies and deliver insightful discussions and prospectsfor future works. This survey can serve as a reference for (but not limited to) researchers and engineers in image matchingand related ﬁelds.
Keywords Image matching ·Graph matching ·Feature matching ·Registration ·Handcrafted features ·Deep learning
Communicated by V . Lepetit.
B Junchi Yan
yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn
Jiayi Ma
jyma2010@gmail.com
Xingyu Jiang
jiangx.y@whu.edu.cn
Aoxiang Fan
fanaoxiang@whu.edu.cn
Junjun Jiang
junjun0595@163.com
1Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan430072, China
2School of Computer Science and Technology, HarbinInstitute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, and MoEKey Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai 200240, China1 Introduction
Vision-based artiﬁcial systems, as widely used to guide
machines to perceive and understand the surroundings for
better decision making, have been playing a signiﬁcant role
in the age of global automation and artiﬁcial intelligence.However, how to process the perceived information under
speciﬁc requirements and understand the differences and/or
relationships among multiple visual targets are crucial topicsin various ﬁelds, including computer vision, pattern recog-
nition, image analysis, security, and remote sensing. As a
critical and fundamental problem in these complicated tasks,image matching, also known as image registration or cor-respondence, aims to identify then correspond the same or
similar structure/content from two or more images. This tech-
nique is used for high-dimensional structure recovery as wellas information identiﬁcation and integration, such as 3-D
reconstruction, visual simultaneous localization and map-
ping (VSLAM), image mosaic, image fusion, image retrieval,target recognition and tracking, as well as change detection,
etc.
123