60 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Fig. 10 Examples of the Chinese character dataset
the results still exhibit the efﬁcacy of utilizing higher-order
information in GM.
The Chinese character dataset has four hand-written Chi-
nese characters with marked features wherein each characterhas 10 samples. We create matching instances between allpairs of samples for each character, i.e. 45 instances each.
The average performance is summarized in Table 2and the
example is shown in Fig. 10. The scene is relatively challeng-
ing, and we use simple edge distances to construct afﬁnity
matrix, resulting in the relatively low accuracy for all meth-
ods. However, the superior performers are still evident. FGMand TM perform similarly, but TM is more efﬁcient.
6.5 Results on Pose Estimation
The camera pose estimation aims to determine the posi-
tion and orientation of the camera with respect to the objector scene, which is a signiﬁcant step in 3-D computer vision
tasks, such as SfM, SLAM, and visual localization for self-
driving cars and augmented reality. Here, the camera poseestimation of traditional approaches estimates the pose from
a set of 2-D versus 3-D matches between pixels in a query
image and 3-D points in a scene model. However, the 3-Dmodel is typically obtained via SfM, thus leading to poten-tially inaccurate pose estimates. To address this problem, one
alternative is to perform a set of 2-D versus 2-D correspon-
dences between two or more images of the same scene.
To estimate the camera pose, the putative sparse feature
correspondences must also be constructed with off-the-shelf
feature matcher, such as SIFT. Moreover, the most classi-cal pipeline is the combination of SIFT and RANSAC. The
geometric model can be estimated and converted into the rel-
ative camera pose, i.e., rotation matrix and translation matrix.Many advanced handcrafted methods and trainable ones areconsidered as good options for their superior performance.
Here, we integrate some typical mismatch removal meth-
ods between SIFT and RANSAC, while some learning-basedmethods can intrinsically output the transform matrix from
their networks, which can be directly used for this task. In
addition, two different datasets, including indoor and outdoorscenes, are used in this experiment. The performance is char-
acterized by the mean average precision (mAP), as depicted
in Table 3. The experiments of this part are performed on a
server with 2.00 GHz Intel Xeon CPU, 128 GB memory.In the following, we brieﬂy introduce the datasets and
evaluation metrics to be used and provide quantitative com-parisons and analyses.
Outdoor scenes. We adopt the Yahoo’s YFCC100M
dataset (Thomee et al. 2016 ), with 100 million publicly
accessible tourist photos from the Internet and subsequentlycurate into 72 image sequences for SfM. From this dataset,
68 sequences are selected as valid raw data. Next, we use
the Visual SfM (Heinly et al. 2015 ) to recover the camera
poses and generate the ground-truth. This dataset is divided
into disjoint subsets for training (60%), validation (20%),
and test (20%). For fairness, all learning-based methods arere-trained on the same training set.
Indoor scenes. We adopt the SUN3D dataset (Xiao et al.
2013 ), which is an RGBD video dataset with camera poses
computed by generalized bundle adjustment. Speciﬁcally,all samples in this dataset are subsampled from videos of
every 10 frames of feature ofﬁce-like scenes. This dataset
is extremely challenging for sparse correspondence methodsdue to the few distinctive features, heavy repetitive elements,
and substantial self-occlusions. Zhang et al. ( 2019b ) reported
that some sequences in this dataset do not provide cameraposes. Thus, these sequences are dropped and 239 sequences
are ﬁnally obtained as valid data. Similar to the data of out-
door scenes, the SUN3D dataset is split into disjoint subsetsfor training (60%), validation (20%), and testing (20%).
Evaluation Metrics. Once potential inliers are obtained,
it is possible to efﬁciently estimate the rotation and transla-
tion vectors by RANSAC. The performance can be evaluatedusing the angular difference between the estimated and
ground-truth vectors; i.e., the closest arc distance in degrees
as the error metric. First, a curve should be generated by clas-sifying whether each pose as accurate or not. The precision
should be computed with respect to the given angle threshold
from 0
◦to 180◦, and a normalized cumulative curve should
be built. Second, the area under curve (AUC) is computed upto a maximum threshold of 5
◦,1 0◦,o r2 0◦. Since the curve
itself can measure precision, its AUC can be regarded as the
metric of mAP .
Several traditional mismatch removal methods, i.e., GMS
(Bian et al. 2017 ), ICF (Li and Hu 2010 ), LPM (Ma et al.
2019d ), SM (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005 ) and VFC (Ma et al.
2014 ) are used for evaluation of the pose estimation task,
in addition to two deep-learning-based methods, i.e., LFGC
(Moo Yi et al. 2018 ) and OAN (Zhang et al. 2019b ). For
these methods, pose estimation results are obtained by a sub-sequent RANSAC procedure. In addition, plain RANSAC
(Fischler and Bolles 1981 ) is also included for comparison.
As shown in Table 3, on the adopted dataset, the perfor-
mances of traditional methods are very limited due to the
dominant outliers. In contrast, the deep-learning-based meth-
ods seem to signiﬁcantly outperform the traditional methods,resilient to the high outlier ratio.
123