44 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
lishing preliminary correspondences through the similarity
of local image descriptors with the distance judging fromthe measuring space. Several common strategies, including
ﬁxed threshold (FT), nearest neighbor (NN) also called brute
force matching, mutual NN (MNN), and NN distance ratio(NNDR), are available for the construction of putative matchsets. Thereafter, the false matches are removed from the puta-
tive match sets by using extra local and/or global geometrical
constraints. We brieﬂy divide the mismatch removal meth-ods into resampling-based, non-parametric model-based, and
relaxed methods. In the following sections, we will introduce
these methods in detail and provide comprehensive analysis.
4.5.1 Putative Match Set Construction
Suppose that we have detected and extracted Mand Nlocal
features to be matched from the considering two images I
1
andI2. The descriptor matching stage operates by computing
the pairwise distance matrix with M×Nentries and then
selecting the potential true matches through the aforemen-
tioned rule.
The FT strategy considers the matches with their distances
below a ﬁxed threshold. However, this strategy can be sen-sitive and may incur numerous one-to-many matchings in
contrast to the one-to-one correspondence nature. This situ-
ation results in poor performance in feature matching task.The NN strategy can effectively deal with the data sensitivity
problem and recall more potential true matches. Such a strat-
egy has been applied in various descriptor matching methods,but it cannot avoid the one-to-many cases. In mutual NN
descriptor matching, each feature in I
1, looks for its NN in
I2(and vice versa), and the feature pairs that are mutual NN
become candidate matches in the putative match set. Thistype of strategy can obtain high ratio of correct matches but
may sacriﬁce many other true correspondences. The NNDR
considered that the distance difference between ﬁrst and sec-ond NN is signiﬁcant. Hence, the use of the distance ratio with
a predeﬁned threshold would obtain robust and promising
matching performance while not sacriﬁce many true matches.However, NNDR relies on the stable distance distribution
of these descriptors even though the method is widely used
and well performed in SIFT-like descriptor matching. In fact,NNDR is no longer applicable for descriptors of other types,such as binary or some learning based descriptors (Rublee
et al. 2011 ; Ono et al. 2018 ).
The optimal choice of these methods for descriptor match-
ing should rely on the property of descriptor and the speciﬁc
application. For example, the MNN is stricter than others with
high inlier ratio but may sacriﬁce many other potential truematches. By contrast, NN and NNDR tend to be more general
in feature matching task with relatively better performance.
Mikolajczyk and Schmid ( 2005 ) proposed a simple test about
these candidate match selection strategies. Although variousapproaches are available for putative feature correspondence
construction the use of only local appearance informationand simple similarity-based putative match selection strate-
gies, will unavoidably result in a large number of incorrect
matches, particularly when images undergo serious non-rigiddeformation, extreme viewpoint changes, low quality, and/orrepeated contents. Therefore, a robust, accurate, and efﬁcient
mismatch elimination method is urgently required in the sec-
ond stage to preserve as many true matches as possible whilekeeping the mismatch to a minimum by using additional geo-
metrical constraints.
4.5.2 Resampling-Based Methods
Resampling technique is (arguably) a prevalent paradigm and
is represented by the classic RANSAC algorithm (Fischlerand Bolles 1981 ). Basically, the two images are assumed
to be coupled by a certain parametric geometric relation,
such as projective transformation or epipolar geometry. TheRANSAC algorithm then follows a hypothesize-and-verify
strategy: repeatedly sample a minimal subset from the data,
e.g. four correspondences for projective transformation andseven correspondences for fundamental, estimate a model ashypothesis, and verify the quality by the number of consis-
tent inliers. Finally, the correspondences consistent with the
optimal model are recognized as inliers.
V arious methods have been proposed to improve the per-
formance of RANSAC. In MLESAC (Torr and Zisserman
1998 ,2000 ), the model quality is veriﬁed by a maximum
likelihood process, which albeit under certain assumptions,
can improve the results and is less sensitive to the pre-
deﬁned threshold. The idea of modifying the veriﬁcationstage is not only utilized but also further extended in manyfollowing studies due to the simple implementation. The
modiﬁcation of sampling strategy has also been considered
in quite a few studies due to the appealing result of efﬁciencyenhancement. In essence, diverse prior information is incor-
porated to increase the probability of selecting an all-inlier
sample subset. Speciﬁcally, the inliers are assumed to be spa-tially coherent in NAPSAC (Nasuto and Craddock 2002 ), or
exist with some groupings in GroupSAC (Ni et al. 2009 ).
PROSAC (Chum and Matas 2005 ) exploits a priori predicted
inlier probability, and EVSAC (Fragoso et al. 2013 )u s e s
an estimate of conﬁdence with extreme value theory of the
correspondences. Another seminal work is the locally opti-
mized RANSAC (LO-RANSAC) (Chum et al. 2003 ), with
the key observation that taking minimal subsets can amplify
the underlying noise and yield hypotheses that are far from
the ground truth. This problem is addressed by introducinga local optimization procedure when arriving at the so-far-
the-best model. In the original paper, local optimization is
implemented as an iterated least squares ﬁtting process witha shrinking inlier-outlier threshold inside an inner RANSAC.
123