36 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
Subsequently, RF-Net (Shen et al. 2019 ) creates an end-
to-end trainable matching framework that is modiﬁed fromthe LF-Net structure. First, the constructed receptive feature
maps lead to effective keypoint detection. Second, a general
loss function term, that is, neighbor mask, facilitates trainingpatch selection to enhance the stability in descriptor train-ing. D2-Net (Dusmanu et al. 2019 ) uses a single CNN to
play a dual role: simultaneously achieving a dense feature
descriptor and a feature detector. In Bhowmik et al. ( 2020 ),
a keypoint selection and descriptor matching are optimized
under high-level vision tasks by using principles from rein-
forcement learning. In addition, Li et al. ( 2020 ) introduced
dual-resolution correspondence networks to obtain pixel-
wise correspondences in coarse-to-ﬁne manner by extracting
different resolution feature maps.
Except for feature matching for the same target or scene,
semantic matching for images that are captured from sim-
ilar targets/scenes has also been studied using CNNs and
distinct promotion has been achieved. The semantic match-ing problem may pose a challenge for handcrafted methods
due to the required understanding of semantic similarity. To
this end, UCN (Choy et al. 2016 ) uses deep metric learning
to directly learn a feature space that preserves either geo-
metric or semantic similarity. The use of such an approach
also helps generate dense and accurate correspondences foreither geometric or semantic correspondence tasks. Specif-ically, UCN implements a fully convolutional architecture
with a correspondence contrastive loss for fast training and
testing, and proposes a convolutional spatial transformer forlocal patch normalization. NCN (Rocco et al. 2018 )d e v e l -
ops an end-to-end trainable CNN architecture based on the
classic idea of disambiguating feature matching by usingsemi-local constraints to ﬁnd reliable dense correspondences
between a pair of images. This framework identiﬁes sets
of spatially consistent matches by analyzing the neighbor-ing consensus patterns for a global geometric model. Themodel can be efﬁciently trained via weak supervision with-
out any manual annotations of point correspondences. This
type of framework can be applied for both category-level andinstance-level matching tasks, and other similar methods are
presented in Han et al. ( 2017 ), Plötz and Roth ( 2018 ), Chen
et al. ( 2018 ), Laskar and Kannala ( 2018 ), Kim et al. ( 2018 ,
2020 ), Ufer and Ommer ( 2017 ) and Wang et al. ( 2018 ).
3.4 3-D Feature Descriptors
Extensive studies on 3-D feature descriptors have been con-
ducted. As previously mentioned, many researchers have
turned their attention to deep learning paradigm due toits revolutionary success in numerous different areas. This
fact motivates us to categorize modern descriptors into two
groups, i.e. handcrafted and learning-based ones. Guo et al.(2016 ) presented a comprehensive performance evaluationof conventional handcrafted 3-D feature descriptors, while
the learning-based methods are left out. In the following sec-tion, we provide a brief introduction of the state-of-the-art
handcrafted descriptors and the learning-based ones.
3.4.1 Handcrafted 3-D Descriptors
Guo et al. ( 2016 ) divided the handcrafted descriptors into
spatial distribution histogram - and geometric attribute his-
togram -based descriptors, with the former representing the
local feature by histograms that encode spatial distribu-
tions of the points in the support region. In general, thelocal reference frame/axis is constructed for each keypoint.Accordingly, the 3-D support region is partitioned into bins
to form a histogram. The values of each bin are calcu-
lated by accumulating the spatial distribution measurements.Some representative work include spin image (Johnson and
Hebert 1999 ), 3-D shape context (Frome et al. 2004 ), unique
shape context (Tombari et al. 2010a ), rotational projection
statistics (Guo et al. 2013 ) and tri-spin-image (Guo et al.
2015 ). The spatial distribution histogram descriptors repre-
sent the local features by generating histograms from thestatistics of geometric attributes (e.g., normals, curvatures)in the support region. These histograms include local sur-
face patch (Chen and Bhanu 2007 ), THRIFT (Flint et al.
2007 ), point feature histogram (Rusu et al. 2008 ), fast point
feature histogram (Rusu et al. 2009 ) and signature of his-
togram of orientations (Tombari et al. 2010b ). Apart from the
geometric attribute and spatial distribution histogram-baseddescriptors, Zaharescu et al. ( 2009 ) introduced the Mesh-
HoG descriptor, which is analogous to SIFT (Lowe 2004 ),
and uses gradient information to generate a histogram.
The spectral descriptors, such as global point signature
(Rustamov 2007 ), HKS (Sun et al. 2009 ) and wave kernel
signature (WKS) (Aubry et al. 2011 ), also make up an impor-
tant category in this area. The descriptors are obtained fromthe spectral decomposition of the Laplace-Beltrami operator
associated with the shape. The Global Point Signature (Rus-
tamov 2007 ) utilizes the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of
the Laplace–Beltrami operator on the shape to represent the
local feature of points. The HKS (Sun et al. 2009 ) and WKS
(Aubry et al. 2011 ) are based on the heat diffusion process
and the temporal evolution of quantum mechanical particleson the shape, respectively.
3.4.2 Learning-Based 3D Descriptors
Efforts have also been devoted to generalizing spectral
descriptors by using different learning schemes. Litman andBronstein ( 2014 ) generalized the spectral descriptors to a
generic family and proposed to learn from examples for
obtaining optimized descriptors for a speciﬁc task. The learn-ing scheme resembles the spirit of Wiener ﬁlter in signal
123