26 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
2.1 Overview of Feature Detectors
Detected features represent speciﬁc semantic structures in
an image or the real world and can be divided into corner
feature (Moravec 1977 ;H a r r i se ta l . 1988 ; Smith and Brady
1997 ; Rosten and Drummond 2006 ; Rublee et al. 2011 ), blob
feature (Lowe 2004 ; Bay et al. 2006 ; Agrawal et al. 2008 ;Y i
et al. 2016 ), line/edge (Harris et al. 1988 ; Smith and Brady
1997 ; Canny 1987 ; Perona and Malik 1990 ), and morpho-
logical region feature (Matas et al. 2004 ; Mikolajczyk et al.
2005 ). However, the most popular features that are used for
matching are the points (a.k.a. keypoints or interest points).The points are easy to extract and deﬁne with a simpliﬁed
form compared with the line and region features, which can
be roughly classiﬁed into corner and blob.
A good interest point must be easy to ﬁnd and ideally
fast to compute, as an interest point at a good location
is crucial for further feature description and matching. To
promote (i) matchability, (ii) the capability for subsequentapplications, and (iii) matching efﬁciency and reduction of
storage requirements, many required properties have been
proposed for reliable feature extraction (Zitova and Flusser2003 ; Tuytelaars and Mikolajczyk 2008 ), including repeata-
bility, invariance, robustness and efﬁciency. The common
idea for feature detection is to construct a feature response todistinguish salient point, line, and region from one another,along with ﬂat and nondistinctive image areas. This idea can
be subsequently classiﬁed into gradient-, intensity-, second-
order derivative-, contour curvature-, region segmentation-,and learning-based detectors . In the following, we provide
a comprehensive introduction of feature detectors with these
methods, focusing more on learning-based methods to guideresearchers on how the traditional and trainable detectors
work and give insights on their strengths and weaknesses.
2.2 Corner Features
A corner feature can for example be deﬁned as the crossing
point of two straight lines with the forms of “L”, “T”, “X”, ora high curvature point of a contour. The common idea of cor-
ner detection is to compute a corner response and distinguish
it from edge, ﬂat, or other less distinctive image areas. Differ-ent strategies can be utilized for traditional corner searching,namely, gradient-, intensity-, and contour curvature-based.
Refer to Zitova and Flusser ( 2003 ), Li et al. ( 2015 ), Tuyte-
laars and Mikolajczyk ( 2008 ) and Rosten et al. ( 2010 )f o r
details.
2.2.1 Gradient-Based Detectors
A gradient-based corner response prefers the use of the ﬁrst-
order information in image to distinguish the corner feature.The earliest automatic corner detection method could betraced to Moravec detector (Moravec 1977 ), which ﬁrst intro-
duced the concept of “interest points” to deﬁne the distinctfeature points, which are extracted based on the autocor-
relation of the local intensity. This method calculates and
searches the minimum intensity variation of each pixel froma shifted window in eight directions, and the interest point isdetected if the minimum is superior to the given threshold.
However, the Moravec detector is not invariant to the
direction or image rotation due to the discontinuous compar-ing directions and sizes. The famous Harris corner detector
(Harris et al. 1988 ) was introduced to address the anisotropy
and computation complexity problem. The goal of the Har-ris method is to ﬁnd the directions of the fastest and lowest
grey-value changes using a two-order moment matrix or an
auto-correlation matrix; thus, it is invariant to orientation andillumination and has reliable repeatability and distinctive-ness. Harris was further improved in Shi and Tomasi ( 1993 )
for better tracking performance by making the features more
“spread out” and locating more accurately.
2.2.2 Intensity-Based Detectors
Several template- or intensity comparison-based corner
detectors have been proposed by comparing the intensity
of the surrounding pixels with that of the center pixel to
simplify the image gradient computing. Due to their binarynature, they are widely used in many modern applications,
particularly some with storage and real-time requirements.
The intensity-based corner detector, namely, smallest uni-
value segment assimilating nucleus (SUSAN) (Smith and
Brady 1997 ), is based on the brightness similarity between
the local radius region pixels and the nucleus. SUSAN canbe implemented rapidly because it does not require gradientcomputation. Many analogous methods have been proposed
based on the concept of brightness comparison, the most
famous of which is the FAST detector (Trajkovi´ c and Hedley
1998 ). FAST uses binary comparison with each pixel along
a circle pattern against the central pixel and then determines
more reliable corner features using a machine learning (i.e.,ID3 tree Quinlan 1986 ) strategy, which is trained on a large
number of similar scene images and can generate the best
criteria for corner selection.
As an improvement of SUSAN, FAST is extremely efﬁ-
cient with high repeatability and is used more widely. To
improve FAST without loss of efﬁciency, FAST-ER (Ros-
ten et al. 2010 ) was introduced to enhance the repeatability
by generalizing the detector based on further pixel intensity
comparison centered on the nucleus. Another improvement
is the AGAST (Mair et al. 2010 ), in which two more pixel
brightness comparison criteria are deﬁned, after which an
optimal and specialized decision tree is trained in an extended
conﬁguration space, thus rendering the FAST detector moregeneric and adaptive. To combine the efﬁciency of FAST
123