International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 47
posed end-to-end trainable deep networks to directly predict
the dense displacement ﬁeld for image alignment. Wangand Zhang ( 2020 ) introduced DeepFLASH for efﬁcient
deformable medical image registration, which is imple-
mented in a low dimensional bandlimited space thus dra-matically reduces the computational and memory request.To simultaneously enhance the topology preservation and
smoothness of the transformation model, Mok and Chung
(2020 ) proposed an efﬁcient unsupervised symmetric image
registration method which maximizes the similarity between
images within the space of diffeomorphic maps and estimates
both forward and inverse transformations simultaneously. InTruong et al. ( 2020 ), the authors introduced a universal net-
work for geometric matching, optical ﬂow estimation and
semantic corresponding, which can achieve both high accu-racy and robustness by investigating the combined use ofglobal and local correlation layers. See more details in the
registration-speciﬁc reviews (Ferrante and Paragios 2017 ;
Haskins et al. 2020 ).
Stereo matching. Over the past years, analogous to regis-
tration, numerous studies in stereo matching have focused on
accurately computing the matching cost by using deep con-volutional techniques and reﬁning the disparity map (Zbontar
and LeCun 2015 ; Luo et al. 2016 ; Zbontar and LeCun 2016 ;
Shaked and Wolf 2017 ). In addition to the deep descriptors,
such as DeepCompare (Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2015 )
and MatchNet (Han et al. 2015 ), etc., Zbontar and LeCun
(2015 ) introduced a deep Siamese network to compute the
matching cost, which is trained to predict the similaritybetween image patches. They further proposed a series of
CNNs (Zbontar and LeCun 2016 ) for the binary classiﬁ-
cation of pairwise matching and applied these in disparityestimation. Similar to converting the computation of match-
ing costs into a multi-label classiﬁcation problem, Luo et al.
(2016 ) proposed an efﬁcient Siamese network for fast stereo
matching. In addition, Shaked and Wolf ( 2017 ) improved
the performance by computing the matching cost with the
proposed constant highway networks and the disparity esti-
mation with reﬂective conﬁdence learning.
The end-to-end deep manner for this matching task has
drawn increasing attention in recent years. For instance,
Mayer et al. ( 2016 ) trained an end-to-end CNN in their Disp-
Net to obtain a ﬁne disparity map, which is extended by
Pang et al. ( 2017 ) with a two-stage CNN called cascade
residual learning (CRL). More recently, a spatial pyramidpooling module together with a 3-D convolutional strat-egy has been introduced in Chang and Chen ( 2018 ). This
approach can exploit global context information to enhance
stereo matching. Inspired from CycleGAN (Zhu et al. 2017 )
and to deal with domain gap, Liu et al. ( 2020 ) proposed
an end-to-end training framework to translate all synthetic
stereo images into realistic ones simultaneously maintainepipolar constraints. This method is implemented througha jointly optimizing between domain translation and stereo
matching. Another method in Yang et al. ( 2020 ) learns the
wavelet coefﬁcients of the disparity rather than the disparity
itself, which can learn global context information from low
frequency submodule and details from others. Moreover, theguided strategy (Zhang et al. 2019a ; Poggi et al. 2019 )i sa l s o
utilized for stereo matching.
Stereo matching with deep convolutional techniques has
been dominated for their top performance in public bench-marks
2. However, the use of CNNs in stereo matching
community is limited by the input image pairs, which are
generally captured from the binocular camera with a narrowbaseline and epipolar rectiﬁcation. Nevertheless, the network
structure, basic ideas, and some tricks or strategies in these
learning-based stereo matching may have a strong referencefor general image matching tasks.
4.6.2 Learning from Points
Learning from points is not as popular as those in images
for feature extraction, representation and similarity mea-
surements. Point-based learning, particularly for featurematching, has only been introduced in recent years. Thisis because using CNNs on point data is more difﬁcult than
on raw images due to the unordered structure and dispersed
nature of sparse points. Moreover, operating and extract-ing the spatial relationships, such as neighboring elements,
relative positions, length, and angle information, among
multi-points using deep convolutional techniques are chal-lenging. However, using deep learning techniques to solve
points-based tasks has received increasing considerations.
These techniques can be roughly divided into parameter ﬁt-ting (Brachmann et al. 2017 ; Ranftl and Koltun 2018 ) and
point classiﬁcation and/or segmentation (Qi et al. 2017a ,b;
M o oY ie ta l . 2018 ;M ae ta l . 2019a ; Zhao et al. 2019 ). The for-
mer is inspired by the classical RANSAC algorithm and aimsto estimate the transformation model, such as fundamen-
tal matrix (Ranftl and Koltun 2018 ) and epipolar geometry
(Brachmann and Rother 2019 ), by means of a data-driven
optimization strategy with CNNs. However, the latter tends
to train a classiﬁer to identify the true matches from putative
match set. Generally, parameter ﬁtting and point classiﬁca-tion are trained jointly for performance enhancement.
For trainable fundamental matrix estimation, Brachmann
et al. ( 2017 ) proposed a differentiable RANSAC, termed as
DSAC, which is based on reinforcement learning in an end-to-end manner. They replaced the deterministic hypothesis
selection by probabilistic selection to decrease the expected
loss and optimize the learnable parameters. Subsequently,Ranftl and Koltun ( 2018 ) presented a trainable method for
2http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval_scene_ﬂow.php?
benchmark=stereo
123