International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 53
Fig. 2 Examples of the ﬁve datasets. The ground truth is given using
colored correspondences. The head and tail of each arrow in the motionﬁeld correspond to the positions of feature points in two images (blue= true positive, black = true negative). For visibility, in the image pairs,
at most 100 randomly selected matches are presented, and the true neg-atives are not shown (Color ﬁgure online)
son on repeatability and accuracy for detectors and recall ,
1−precision for descriptors. Subsequently, Strecha et al.
(2008 ) published a dense 3-D dataset for wide-baseline stereo
and 3-D geometrical and camera pose evaluation.
In addition, Aanæs et al. ( 2012 ) evaluated some repre-
sentative detectors using a large dataset of known camerapositions, controlled illumination, and 3-D models, namely,
DTU. At the same time, Heinly et al. ( 2012 ) compared the
traditional ﬂoat and binary feature operators in 2012 and eval-uated their matching performance with the inter-combination
of existing detectors and descriptors on the public and their
own datasets. The evaluation was conducted on more system-atic performance metrics consisting of putative match ratio ,
precision ,matching score ,recall , and entropy . Similarly,
using inter-combination strategy, Mukherjee et al. ( 2015 )
provided a comparative experimental analysis for selectingappropriate combination of various detectors and descrip-
tors in order to solve the problems of image matching using
different image data.
More recently, inspired by emerging deep learning tech-
niques, Balntas et al. ( 2017 ) reported that existing defective
datasets and evaluation metrics may lead to unreliable com-parative results. Thus, they proposed and publicized a largebenchmark for handcrafted and learned local image descrip-
tors called Hpathes. They also comprehensively evaluated
the performance of widely used handcrafted descriptorsand recent deep ones with extensive experiments on patch
recognition, patch veriﬁcation, image matching, and patch
retrieval. Schonberger et al. ( 2017 ) conducted an experimen-
tal evaluation of learned local features, including classical
machine learning based variants of SIFT and recent CNN-based techniques, in which they considered that ﬁnding
additional true matches between similar images does notnecessarily improve performance when matching imagesunder extreme viewpoint or illumination changes. Mitra et al.
(2018 ) provided a PhotoSynth (PS) dataset for training local
image descriptors. Komorowski et al. ( 2018 ) provided a sta-
bility evaluation for handcrafted and learning-based interest
point detectors on ApolloScape street dataset (Huang et al.
2018 ). A comprehensive comparison of local image feature
detectors based on both classical and CNN techniques is con-
ducted on public datasets (Lenc and V edaldi 2014 ). That
work proposed a modiﬁed repeatability for detection eval-uation, which is more robust to feature scale variety. Jinet al. ( 2020 ) introduced a benchmark for local features and
robust estimation algorithms, focusing on the accuracy of the
reconstructed camera pose as their practical evaluation. Inaddition, Bellavia and Colombo ( 2020 ) provided a compre-
hensive analysis and evaluation about the descriptor design
based on SIFT.
From the above mentioned, we can know that several com-
prehensive and thorough evaluation of feature detectors and
descriptors can be found in Komorowski et al. ( 2018 ), Lenc
and V edaldi ( 2014 ), Heinly et al. ( 2012 ) and Schonberger
et al. ( 2017 ). However, in order to evaluate the local feature
methods, many studies compared the matching performances
on a 3-D reconstruction task, including the works of Fanet al. ( 2019 ) and Schonberger et al. ( 2017 ). In the 3-D case,
Tombari et al. ( 2013 ) presented a thorough evaluation of sev-
eral state-of-the-art 3-D keypoint detectors, and Guo et al.
(2016 ) compared ten popular local feature descriptors in the
contexts of 3-D object recognition, 3-D shape retrieval, and
123