International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 29
2.4 Learnable Features
Over the recent years, data-driven learning-based methods
have achieved signiﬁcant progress in general visual pattern
recognition tasks, and have also been applied to image featuredetection. This pipeline can be roughly classiﬁed into theusing of classical learning and deep learning.
2.4.1 Classical Learning-Based Detectors
Early from the past decade, classical learning-based meth-
ods, such as decision tree, support vector machine (SVM),and other classiﬁers by opposition to Deep Learning, havealready been used in handcrafted keypoint detection (Tra-
jkovi´ c and Hedley 1998 ; Strecha et al. 2009 ; Hartmann et al.
2014 ; Richardson and Olson 2013 ). FAST (Trajkovi´ c and
Hedley 1998 ) detector was the ﬁrst attempt to use tradi-
tional learning for reliable and matchable point identiﬁcation,
and similar strategies have been applied in many subsequentimprovements (Mair et al. 2010 ; Rublee et al. 2011 ). Strecha
et al. ( 2009 ) trained the Wald-Boost classiﬁer to learn key-
points with high repeatability on pre-aligned training sets.
More recently, Hartmann et al. ( 2014 ) showed that it can
be learnt from a structure-from-motion (SfM) pipeline to
predict which candidate points are matchable, thus signiﬁ-
cantly reducing the number of interest points without losingexcessive true matches. Meanwhile, Richardson and Olson
(2013 ) reported that hand-designed detectors can be learned
by random sampling in the space of convolutional ﬁlters andtried to ﬁnd the optimal ﬁlter using a learning strategy over
frequency-domain constraints. However, classical learning
has only been used for reliable feature selection through clas-siﬁer learning, rather than the extraction of interest featuresdirectly from raw images until the emergence of deep learn-
ing.
2.4.2 Deep Learning-Based Detectors
Inspired by the handcrafted feature detectors, a general solu-
tion for CNN-based detection is to construct response maps
to search the interest points in a supervised (Yi et al. 2016 ;
V erdie et al. 2015 ; Zhang et al. 2017b ), self-supervised
(Zhang and Rusinkiewicz 2018 ; DeTone et al. 2018 ), or
unsupervised manner (Lenc and V edaldi 2016 ; Savinov et al.
2017 ; Ono et al. 2018 ; Georgakis et al. 2018 ; Barroso-Laguna
et al. 2019 ). The task is often converted into a regression
problem that can be trained in a differentiable way under
the transformation and imaging condition invariance con-
straints. Supervised methods have shown the beneﬁts of usinganchors (e.g., obtained from SIFT method) to guide their
training, but the performance could be largely restricted by
the method of anchor construction, because the anchor itselfis intrinsically difﬁcult to reasonably deﬁne and may pre-vent the network from proposing new keypoints in case no
anchor exists in the proximity (Barroso-Laguna et al. 2019 ).
Self-supervised and unsupervised methods train detectors
without any human annotations, and only the geometric con-
straints between two images are required for optimizationguidance; a simple human aid is sometimes asked for pre-training (DeTone et al. 2018 ). In addition, many methods
integrate feature detection into the entire matching pipeline
by jointly training with feature description and matching (Yiet al. 2016 ; DeTone et al. 2018 ; Ono et al. 2018 ; Shen et al.
2019 ; Dusmanu et al. 2019 ;C h o ye ta l . 2016 ; Rocco et al.
2018 ; Dusmanu et al.
2019 ; Revaud et al. 2019 ), which can
enhance the ﬁnal matching performance and optimize the
entire procedure in an end-to-end manner.
For instance, TILDE (V erdie et al. 2015 ) trains multiple
piecewise linear regression models to detect repeatable key-points under drastic imaging changes of weather and lighting
conditions. First, it identiﬁes good keypoint candidates in
multiple training images taken from the same viewpointsusing DoG for training set collection, and then trains a gen-
eral regressor to predict a score map, whose maxima after
non-maximum suppression (NMS) can then be regarded asthe desired interest points.
DetNet (Lenc and V edaldi 2016 ) is the ﬁrst fully general
formulation for learning local covariant features; it casts thedetection task as a regression problem and then derives acovariance constraint to automatically learn stable anchors
for local feature detection under geometric transformations.
Meanwhile, Quad-net (Savinov et al. 2017 ) realizes keypoint
detection under transformation-invariant quantile ranking
with a single real-valued response function, enabling it to
learn the detector completely from scratch by optimizingfor a repeatable ranking. A similar detector in Zhang and
Rusinkiewicz ( 2018 ) combines this “ranking” loss with a
“peakedness” loss and produces a more repeatable detector.
Zhang et al. ( 2017b ) proposed TCDET detector by deﬁn-
ing a novel formulation based on the new concepts of
“standard patch” and “canonical feature” to place equal focus
on discriminativeness and covariant constraint. The proposeddetector can detect discriminative and repeatable features
under diverse image transformations. Key.Net (Barroso-
Laguna et al. 2019 ) combines handcrafted and learned CNN
ﬁlters within a shallow multiscale architecture and proposes a
light/efﬁcient trainable detector. The handcrafted ﬁlters pro-
vide anchor structures for localizing, scoring, and rankingrepeatable features that are fed to learned ﬁlters. CNN is usedto represent the scale space by detecting keypoints at differ-
ent levels; the loss function is deﬁned to detect robust feature
points from different scales and maximize the repeatabilityscore. The afﬁne region-based interest point is also learned
using CNNs in Mishkin et al. ( 2017 ,2018 ).
The methods of integrating a detector into a matching
pipeline are similar to those solely designed for detection
123