International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 37
processing. Rodolà et al. ( 2014 ) proposed a learning method
that enables the wave kernel descriptor to recognize a broaderclass of deformations from the example set by using the
random forest classiﬁer. Windheuser et al. ( 2014 ) proposed
a metric learning method to improve the representation ofthe spectral descriptors. Modern deep learning techniqueshave also been successfully applied. Masci et al. ( 2015 )p r o -
posed the ﬁrst attempt and introduced a generalization of the
CNN paradigm to non-Euclidean manifolds for shape corre-spondences. Subsequently, Boscaini et al. proposed to learn
descriptors by spectral convolutional networks (Boscaini
et al. 2015 ), and anisotropic CNNs (Boscaini et al. 2016 ).
Monti et al. ( 2017 ) proposed a uniﬁed framework for gener-
alizing CNN architectures to non-Euclidean domains (graphs
and manifolds). Xie et al. ( 2016 ) constructed a deep metric
network to form a binary spectral shape descriptor for shapecharacterization. The input is based on the eigenvalue decom-
position of the Laplace-Beltrami operator.
In the spatial domain, the differences of various deep
learning methods often lie in the representation of the con-
sumed data. Wei et al. ( 2016 ) trained a deep CNN on the
depth map representation of shapes to ﬁnd correspondences.Zeng et al. ( 2017 ) proposed to use a 3D deep CNN for
learning a local volumetric patch descriptor. This descriptor
consumes a voxel grid of truncated distance function val-ues of the local region. Elbaz et al. ( 2017 ) proposed a deep
neural network auto-encoder to address the 3D matching
problem. The authors used a random sphere cover set algo-
rithm to detect feature points and project each local regioninto a depth map as input to the neural network for producing
descriptors. Khoury et al. ( 2017 ) parameterized the input by
using spherical histograms centered at each point and uti-lized fully connected networks to generate low-dimensional
descriptors. Georgakis et al. ( 2018 ) recently employed a
Siamese architecture network that processes depth maps.Zhou et al. ( 2018 ) proposed to learn from the images of
multiple views for the description of 3D keypoints. Wang
et al. ( 2018b ) parameterized the multiscale localized neigh-
borhoods of a keypoint into regular 2D grids as the input of atriplet-architecture CNN. Deng et al. ( 2018 ) ﬁrst presented an
order-free network on the basis of PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a ).
This network can consume raw point clouds to exploit thefull sparsity in the 3D matching task.
3.5 Summary
As previously mentioned, the image patch descriptor is des-
ignated to enable accurate and effective correspondence
establishment between detected feature points. The objectiveis to transform the original image information into a discrim-
inative and stable representation that makes the two matched
features as close as possible, while the unmatched ones are farapart. To this end, the descriptors should be easy to computewith low computation and storage request. These descriptors
should also maintain their discriminative and invariant fea-tures against serious deformations and imaging conditions. In
the following section, we provide a comprehensive analysis
of the handcrafted descriptors and introduce the mechanismby which the learning-based methods can partly address thesechallenges and achieve promising performance.
Following the construction procedure of traditional local
descriptors, the ﬁrst step is to extract the low-level infor-mation, which can be brieﬂy classiﬁed into image gradient
and intensity. Speciﬁcally, the gradient information can be
regarded as a higher order image cue than raw intensity. Thepooling strategy together with a histogram or statistic manner
is often required to form a ﬂoat descriptor. Thus, this strategy
is more invariant to geometrical transformations (perhaps thepool and statistic strategy make it more independent to pixelposition and geometrical variety). Nevertheless, it requires
additional computation in gradient calculation and statistics
as well as the distance measure of ﬂoat-type data. LBP-basedmethods typically have high discriminative ability and good
robustness to illumination change and image contrast, which
are frequently used in texture representation and face recog-nition.
In contrast with the gradient and/or statistic-based meth-
ods, the simple comparison strategy on image intensity wouldsacriﬁce great discrimination and robustness. A classicalmachine learning technique is often designed to identify sub-
stantial useful bits. These types of methods are typically in
need of the reference orientation estimation to achieve rota-tion invariant, which appears to be a major error source for
most existing methods. However, the use of intensity order
is intrinsically invariant to rotation and intensity changeswithout any geometrical estimation. It can achieve promising
performance due to the combination of the use of intensity
order and statistical strategy.
Learning-based methods have largely avoided the require-
ment of manual experience and knowledge priori. They
automatically optimize and obtain the optimal parameters
and directly construct the wanted descriptor. Traditionallearning methods aim to enable the generated descriptors
superior in terms of efﬁciency, low storage, and discrimina-
tion. However, the used image cues, such as intensity andgradient, are still with low order, and they highly rely on the
framework in handcrafted methods. Nevertheless, the target
function, training skills, and datasets that appeared at thattime are signiﬁcant and useful for designing better learning-based methods. Thus, the emergence of deep learning has
further advanced this procedure in traditional learning.
Several skills can help improve the discriminability and
robustness of deep descriptors. On the one hand, the central-
surround and triplet (even more) structure may provide
substantial signiﬁcant information to learn. The hard nega-tive sample mining strategy would make the structure focused
123