International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 49
Point set learning in 3-D cases for registration is also a
hot topic. Yew et al. ( 2020 ) proposed RPM-Net for rigid
point cloud registration, in which it desensitizes initializa-
tion and improves convergence performance with learned
fusion features. Gojcic et al. ( 2020 ) introduced an end-to-
end multiview point cloud registration framework by directlylearning to register all views of a scene in a globally consistent
manner. Pais et al. ( 2020 ) introduced a learning architecture
for 3D point registration, namely 3DRegNet. This methodcan identify true point correspondences from a set of puta-
tive matches, and regress the motion parameters to align the
scans into a common reference frame. Choy et al. ( 2020 )
used high-dimensional convolutional networks to detect lin-
ear subspaces in high-dimensional spaces, then applied it for
3D registration under rigid motions and image correspon-dence estimation.
4.8 Summary
Given a pair of images of similar object/scene and with/without
the feature detection and/or description, the matching tasks
have been extended into several different forms, such asimage registration, stereo matching, feature matching, graphmatching, and point set registration. These different matching
deﬁnitions are generally introduced for speciﬁc applications,
with their own strengths presented.
Traditional image registration and stereo achieve dense
matching by means of patch-wise similarity measuring
together with optimization strategy to search the overall opti-mal solution. However, they are conducted on image pairs of
high overlapping area (slight geometrical deformation) and
binocular camera, and these may require large computationalburden and the limited handcrafted measuring metrics.
The introduction of deep learning has promoted registra-
tion accuracy and disparity estimation due to advancements
in network design and loss deﬁnition, as well as abundanttraining samples. However, we also ﬁnd that using deep
learning for these matching tasks is usually performed on
image pairs undergoing slight geometrical deformation suchas medical image registration and binocular stereo match-
ing. Applying them for more complex scenarios, such as
wide baseline images stereo or image registration with seri-ous geometric deformations, still remains open.
Feature-based matching can effectively address the limita-
tions in large viewpoint, wide baseline, and serious non-rigid
image matching problems. Among those proposed in theliterature, the most popular strategy is to construct the puta-
tive matches based on descriptor distance, followed by a
robust estimator such as RANSAC. However, a large num-ber of mismatches in the putative match sets may negatively
affect the performance in subsequent visual task and also
require considerable time for model estimation. Therefore,the mismatch removal method is required and integrated topreserve as many true matches as possible while maintain-
ing the mismatch to a minimum level using extra geometricalconstraints. Speciﬁcally, the resampling-based method, such
as RANSAC, can estimate the latent parameter model and
simultaneously remove the outliers. However, their theoreti-cally required runtime grows exponentially with the increasein outlier rate, and they cannot process the image pairs that
undergo more complex non-rigid transformations. The non-
parametric model-based methods can handle the non-rigidimage matching problem by using high-dimensional non-
parametric model, but it is still challenging in deﬁning the
objective function and ﬁnding the optimal solution in a morecomplex solution space. Different from the global constraints
in the resampling and non-parameter model-based methods,
the relaxed mismatch removal methods are commonly con-ducted on a local coherent assumption of potential inliers.Thus, much simpler but efﬁcient rules are designed to ﬁl-
ter out the outliers while maintaining the inliers within an
extremely short time. However, methods of this type are lim-ited due to their parameter sensitivity; moreover, they are
prone to preserve evident outliers, thereby affecting the accu-
racy of subsequent pose estimation and image registration.
In addition, the image patch-based descriptor may not be
workable due to the matching request in less-texture images,
shape, semantic images, and the raw points directly capturedfrom speciﬁc device. Therefore, for performing the matchingtask of these situations, the graph matching and point regis-
tration methods are more suitable. The graph structure among
neighboring points and the overall corresponding matrix areapplied to optimize and ﬁnd the optimal solution. However,
these pure point-based methods are limited by restrictions in
their computation burden and outlier sensitivity. Therefore,designing appropriate problem formulation and constraint
conditions, and proposing more efﬁcient optimization meth-
ods, are still open problems in image matching communityand require further research attention.
Analogously to image-based learning, increasing studies
have used deep learning in feature-based matching commu-
nity. The latest techniques have shown great potential formatrix estimation (e.g. fundamental matrix) and point data
classiﬁcation (such as mismatch removal) with deep regres-
sor and classiﬁer, particularly for handling challenging dataor scenarios. However, conducting convolutional networks
on point data is not as easy as on raw images due to the
unordered structure and dispersed nature of these sparsepoints. Nevertheless, recent studies have shown the feasibil-ity of using the graph convolutional strategy and multi-layer
perception methods, together with speciﬁc normalization on
such point data. In addition to rigid transformation parameterestimation, matching on point data with non-rigid and even
serious deformation by using deep convolutional techniques
may be a more challenging and signiﬁcant problem.
123