International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 55
mismatch removal methods. The features of each image are
assumed to be detected and described, and the open sourceVLFeat toolbox is used to determine the putative correspon-
dence using SIFT (Lowe 2004 ). The details of the adopted
datasets are described as follows, and some representativeimage matching examples from the used datasets are illus-trated in Fig. 2. The ground truth of each dataset is checked
by the provided geometrical transform matrix, such as homo-
graph, or provided in the manner that each match is manuallylabeled as true or false. The experiments of this part are per-
formed on a desktop with 3.4 GHz Intel Core i5-7500 CPU,
8GB memory.
DAISY (Tola et al. 2010 ): The dataset consists of wide
baseline image pairs with ground truth depth maps, includ-
ing two short image sequences and several individual imagepairs. We match each two images in one sequence and allthe individual pairs are used, which creates in total 47 image
pairs for evaluation. This dataset is a challenging one due
to the large number of matches, which is up to 8000. Theaverage numbers of matches and inlier rate are 1191.6 and
77.99%, respectively.
DTU (Aanæs et al. 2016 ): The dataset is originally desig-
nated for multiple-view stereo evaluation, which involves a
number of different scenes with a wide range of objects. The
ground truth camera positions and internal camera param-eters have high accuracy. Two scenes are selected for thisdataset (i.e., Frustum and House), after which we create 130
image pairs for evaluation. These scenes generally have large
viewpoint changes in the scenes. The average numbers ofmatches and inlier rate are 729 .3 and 58 .83%, respectively.
Retina (Ma et al. 2019d ) It consists of 70 retinal image
pairs with non-rigid transformation. Due to different modal-ities between images, ambiguous putative matches are gen-
erated, resulting in a small number of correct matches and a
low inlier ratio. The average numbers of matches and inlierrate are 158 .4 and 41 .56%, respectively.
RemoteSensing (Ma et al. 2019d ) There are 161 remote
sensing image pairs including color-infrared, SAR, and
panchromatic photographs. The feature matching task forsuch image pairs typically arises in image-based position-
ing as well as navigating and change detection. The average
numbers of matches and inlier rate are 767 .6 and 68 .50%,
respectively.
VGG (Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2005 ) It contains 40
image pairs either of planar scenes or captured by a cam-era in a ﬁxed position during acquisition. Hence, the imagetransformation can be precisely described by homography.
The ground truth homographies are included in the dataset.
These abovementioned datasets are collected and avail-
able at.
3In addition, a small UA V image registration dataset
(SUIRD) is also provided for image registration or match-
3https://github.com/StaRainJ/Imgae_matching_Datasets .ing research. This dataset includes 60 pairs of low-altitude
remote sensing images captured by small UA V and theirgroundtruth. The image pairs contain viewpoint changes in
horizontal, vertical, their mixture and extreme patterns which
produce problems of low overlap, image distortion and severeoutliers.
4Throughout the experiments, we use three evalua-
tion metrics: precision, recall, and F-score. Given the number
of true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false positives
(FP) and false negatives (FN), the precision is obtained by:
P=TP
TP+FP. (5)
The recall is given as follows:
R=TP
TP+FN. (6)
The F-score, as a summary statistic of precision and recall,
is obtained as follows:
F=2×P×R
P+R. (7)
The mismatch removal methods include: RANSAC (Fis-
chler and Bolles 1981 ) (abbreviated as RS), SM (Leordeanu
and Hebert 2005 ), ICF (Li and Hu 2010 ), GS (Liu and Yan
2010 ), LO-RANSAC (Lebeda et al. 2012 ) (abbreviated as
LRS), VFC (Ma et al. 2014 ), LPM (Ma et al. 2019d ), GMS
(Bian et al. 2017 ), and LFGC (Moo Yi et al. 2018 ).
Figure 3shows the performance on the ﬁve datasets
evaluated by precision, recall, F-score, and runtime with
cumulative distribution. In addition, the average values ofeach statistic is summarized in Table 1for a more straightfor-
ward comparison. The graph matching methods, SM and GS,
have shown relatively weak performances given the graphi-cal model, albeit with strong generality, only excavates theshallow pairwise geometric constraints. Random sampling
methods, RS and LRS, hold the key assumption that the
image pairs are related by parametric models. This assump-tion seems to work well in the datasets; however, their time
costs are not favorable. The non-parametric interpolation
method VFC is relatively robust and outperforms ICF. How-ever, its computational cost is higher than that of some other
strong competitors, e.g., LPM. LPM is simple to implement.
It utilizes a more relaxed geometric constraint, yet it achievessurprisingly excellent performance and becomes the best per-former considering the time cost. Compared with GMS, it
obtains much better performance with only a slight increase
in runtime. The recent trend has suggested a deep learningparadigm for differentiating mismatches, e.g. LFGC. LFGC
has proven to be much more effective than the traditional
4https://github.com/yyangynu/SUIRD/tree/master/SUIRD_v2.2 .
123