International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 27
and the reliability of the Harris detector, Rublee et al. ( 2011 )
proposed an integrated feature detector and descriptor formatching called ORB. The ORB uses the Harris response to
select a certain number of FAST corners as the ﬁnal detected
features. The gray-scale centroid of the local patch and thecenter pixel itself are formed as a vector to represent themain direction of the ORB feature, which helps calculate
the similarity of the binary descriptor in ORB. Recently, a
Sadder-like detector (Aldana-Iuit et al. 2016 ) has been pro-
posed to extract interest points. In this detector, the saddle
condition is veriﬁed efﬁciently by intensity comparisons on
two concentric rings with certain geometric constraints. TheSadder detector can achieve higher repeatability and greater
spread out than traditional methods even modern trainable
ones (Komorowski et al. 2018 ).
2.2.3 Curvature-Based Detectors
Another strategy for corner feature extraction is based on
detected high-level image structures, such as edges, con-
tours, and salient regions. Corner features can be deﬁned
immediately as the midpoint/endpoint or sparse samplingfrom an edge or contour (Belongie et al. 2002 ). These are
subsequently used for shape matching or point registration,
especially for an image pair of less texture or binary type.
The curvature-based strategy aims to extract the corner pointwith the maximum curvature searching based on the detected
image curve-like edges. This strategy starts with an edge
extraction and selection method, and the two subsequentsteps are the curve smoothing and curvature estimation. The
corners are ﬁnally determined by selecting the curvature
extremum points. In general, an edge detector is often ﬁrstin need for contour curvature-based corner detection.
In curve smoothing, the slope and curvature are difﬁcult to
evaluate due to the quantized position of a curve point. Noise
and local deformation in a curve may also lead to a seriousimpact on the feature stability and distinctiveness. There-
fore, smoothing methods should be implemented before
or during the curvature calculation to make the curvatureextremum points more distinct from other curve points. Two
smoothing strategies, namely, direct and indirect methods,
are generally utilized. A direct smoothing, such as Gaus-sian smoothing (Mokhtarian and Suomela 1998 ; Pinheiro
and Ghanbari 2010 ), removes noise and may change curve
locations to a certain extent. In comparison, in the indirect
smoothing strategy, e.g., the region of support method or thechord-length-based method (Ramer 1972 ; Awrangjeb and Lu
2008 ), may preserve the curve point locations.
As for curvature estimation, for each point of the smoothed
curve, a signiﬁcance response measure is needed for corner
searching, i.e., curvature. Curvature estimation methods are
also generally classiﬁed as direct and indirect. The formeris based on an algebraic or geometric estimation, such ascosine, local curvature, and tangential deﬂection (Mokhtar-
ian and Suomela 1998 ; Rosenfeld and Weszka 1975 ; Pinheiro
and Ghanbari 2010 ). The latter estimates the curvature in an
indirect way and is often used as a signiﬁcance measure, such
as counting the number of curve points through several mov-ing rectangles along the curve (Masood and Sarfraz 2007 ),
using the perpendicular distances from the chord connecting
the two endpoints of the curve to curve points (Ramer 1972 ),
and other alternatives (Zhang et al. 2010 ,2015 ). Compared
with indirect estimation methods, the direct ones are more
sensitive to noise and local variation due to the less neigh-
boring point consideration.
Finally, corners can be determined with threshold strat-
egy to remove false and indistinctive points (Mokhtarian and
Suomela 1998 ; Awrangjeb and Lu 2008 ). Additional details
can be obtained from a contour curvature-based corner survey(Awrangjeb et al. 2012 ). In addition and more recently, a mul-
tiscale segmentation-based corner detector, named MSFD
(Mustafa et al. 2018 ), has been proposed for wide-baseline
scene matching and reconstruction. Feature points in MSFD
are detected at the intersection of the boundaries of three
or more regions by using off-the-shelf segmentation meth-ods. MSFD can generate rich and accurate corner features
for wide-baseline image matching and high reconstruction
performance.
The above-mentioned corner feature detectors are easily
located in the contour or edge structures of an image (i.e., not
such spread-out or uneven distribution), and are limited by the
scale and afﬁne transformation between two images. Among
the three types of corner detection strategies, the gradient-
based methods are able to locate more accurately, whereas
the intensity-based methods show advantage for efﬁciency.The contour curvature-based methods require more compu-
tation but they are a better choice for processing textureless or
binary images, such as infrared and medical images, becausethe image cue-based feature descriptors are unworkable forthese types of images and the point-based descriptors are
often coupled for the matching task (i.e., point set registra-
tion or shape matching). Please refer to Sects. 3and 4for
details.
2.3 Blob Features
A blob feature is commonly indicated as a local closed region
(e.g., with a regular shape of circle or ellipse), inside which
the pixels are considered similar to one another and are dis-tinct from the surrounding neighborhoods. The blob feature
can be written in the form of (x,y,θ), with (x,y)being
the pixel coordinate of the feature location and θindicat-
ing the blob shape information of the feature, including
scale and/or afﬁne. Numerous blob feature detectors have
been introduced over the past decades, and they can beroughly classiﬁed into second-order partial derivative- and
123