International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 65
Image matching can be brieﬂy classiﬁed into area- and
feature-based matching. Area-based methods are used toachieve dense matching without detecting any salient fea-
ture points from the images. They are more welcomed in
high overlapping image matching (such as medical imageregistration) and narrow-baseline stereo (such as binocularstereo matching). The deep learning-based techniques have
drawn increasing attention for such a pipeline. Therefore, we
provide a brief review of these types of methods in Sect. 4
and focus more on the learning-based methods.
The feature-based image matching can effectively address
the limitations in large viewpoint, wide baseline, and seri-ous non-rigid image matching problems. It can be used in a
pipeline of salient feature detection, discriminative descrip-
tion, and reliable matching, often including transformationmodel estimation. Following this procedure, feature detec-tion can extract the distinctive structure from the image.
Meanwhile, feature description may be regarded as an image
representation method, which is widely used for image cod-ing and similarity measurement. The matching step can be
extended into different types of matching forms, such as
graph matching, point set registration, descriptor match-ing and mismatch removal, as well as the matching task
in 3-D cases. These are more ﬂexible and applicable than
area-based methods, thereby receiving considerable atten-tion in image matching area. Therefore, we review them withthe core idea that they are used from traditional techniques
to classical learning and deep learning. Moreover, to pro-
vide a comprehensive understanding of the signiﬁcance inimage matching, we introduce several applications related to
image matching. We also provide comprehensive and objec-
tive comparisons and analyses of these classical and deeplearning-based techniques through extensive experiments on
representative datasets.
Despite the considerable development in both theory and
performance, image matching remains an open problem withchallenges for further efforts.
– The two-stage strategy for feature matching, which has
been widely adopted in the literature, performs mismatch
removal on only a small set of potential correspondences
with sufﬁciently similar descriptors. However, this maylead to restricted performance in recall, which can beproblematic for some scenarios.
– In a different scenario, correspondences are sought not
between projections of physically the same points indifferent images, but between semantic analogs across
different instances within a category. This requires new
paradigms for feature matching in feature description andmismatch removal.
– Joint matching of multiple images has been proven to
drastically boost the matching performance of pairwisematching and has attracted considerable attention inrecent years. However, the complexity is still the main
concern of the problem. Thus, practical and efﬁcient algo-rithms are required.
– In recent years, deep learning schemes have rapidly
evolved and shown tremendous improvements in manyresearch ﬁelds related to computer vision. However, in theliterature of feature matching, most works have applied
deep learning techniques to feature detection and descrip-
tion. Thus, the potential capacity for accurate featurematching can be further explored in the future.
– Image matching among multi-modal images is still an
unsolved problem. In the future, deep learning techniquescan be used for better feature detection and description
performance.
– Feature matching is a fundamental task in computer
vision. However, its application has not been sufﬁcientlyexplored. Thus, one promising research direction is to
customize modern feature matching techniques to sat-
isfy different requirements of practical vision tasks, e.g.,SfM and SLAM.
Acknowledgements This work was partly supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 61773295 and61972250, Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province under GrantNo. 2019CFA037, and National Key Research and Development Pro-gram of China under Grant No. 2018AAA0100704.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of Interest The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-cate if changes were made. The images or other third party materialin this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If materialis not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and yourintended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds thepermitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
Aanæs, H., Dahl, A. L., & Pedersen, K. S. (2012). Interesting interest
points. International Journal of Computer Vision ,97(1), 18–35.
Aanæs, H., Jensen, R. R., V ogiatzis, G., Tola, E., & Dahl, A. B. (2016).
Large-scale data for multiple-view stereopsis. International Jour-
nal of Computer Vision ,120(2), 153–168.
Abdel-Hakim, A. E., & Farag, A. A. (2006). Csift: A sift descriptor
with color invariant characteristics. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1978–
1983.
123