International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79 45
This has a large-than-minimal sampling and is applied only to
the inliers of the current model. The computational cost issueof LO-RANSAC is addressed in Lebeda et al. ( 2012 ), where
several implementation improvements are suggested. The
local optimization step is augmented with a graph-cut tech-nique in Barath and Matas ( 2018 ). Many improving strategies
for RANSAC are integrated in USAC (Raguram et al. 2012 ).
More recently, Barath et al. ( 2019b ) applyed σ-consensus
in their MAGSAC, to eliminate the need of a user-deﬁnedthreshold by marginalizing over a range of noise scales.
Whereafter, observing that nearby points are more likely
to originate from the same geometric model, Barath et al.(2019a ) extracted the local structure for global sampling and
parameter model estimation by drawing samples from grad-
ually growing neighborhoods. Based on above two methods,they introduced MAGSAC++ (Barath et al. 2020 ) with a new
scoring function. This method avoids requiring the inlier-
outlier decision, in which a novel marginalization procedure
formulated as an M-estimation is solved by an iterativelyre-weighted least squares procedure, and the progressive
growing sampling strategy in Barath et al. ( 2019a )i sa l s o
applied for RANSAC-like robust estimation.
Some fundamental shortcomings are exhibited by the
resampling methods despite their efﬁcacy in wide appli-
cations of computer vision. For example, the theoreticallyrequired runtime exponentially grows with the increase ofoutlier rate. The minimal subset sampling strategy only
applies to parametric models and fails to handle image pairs
undergoing complex transformations, such as non-rigid ones.This situation motivates researchers to develop new algo-
rithms divorced from the resampling paradigm.
4.5.3 Non-parametric Model-Based Methods
A group of non-parametric model-based methods have
been proposed. Instead of simple parametric models, non-parametric models address more general priors in matching,
e.g. motion coherence, and can deal with degenerated sce-
narios. These methods are distinguished by different defor-mation functions to model the transformation and different
means to cope with gross outliers. Pilet et al. ( 2008 ) proposed
the use triangulated 2-D mesh to model the deformation usinga tailored robust estimator for eliminating the detrimentaleffect of outliers. The idea of robust estimators is also lever-
aged in Gay-Bellile et al. ( 2008 ), with Huber estimator, and
Ma et al. ( 2015 ), with L
2Eestimator, despite of their dif-
ferent modeling of deformation. A fairly different method is
proposed in Li and Hu ( 2010 ), in which the Support V ec-
tor Regression technique is employed to robustly estimate acorrespondence function and reject mismatches.
The seminal work vector ﬁeld consensus (VFC) (Ma
et al. 2013a ,2014 ) introduces a new framework for non-
rigid matching. The deformation function is restricted withinthe reproducing kernel Hilbert space in association with
Tikhonov regularization to enforce the smoothness con-straint. The estimation is conducted in a Bayesian model,
where the outliers are explicitly considered for robustness.
The VFC algorithm, and its variants (Ma et al. 2015b ,2017a ,
2019b ) have been proven effective.
4.5.4 Relaxed Methods
The recent trend has been towards developing relaxed meth-
ods for matching, where the geometric constraint is made
less strict to accommodate even complex scenarios, suchas motion discontinuities arising from image pairs of widebaselines or with objects undergoing independent motions.
Certain GM methods (Leordeanu and Hebert 2005 ;L i u
and Yan 2010 ) are available for such requirements and use
quadratic models that incorporate pairwise geometric rela-
tions of correspondences to ﬁnd the potentially correct ones.
However, the results are often coarse.
Lipman et al. ( 2014 ) considered deformations that are
piecewise afﬁne; they then formulated feature matching into
a constrained optimization problem that seeks for such adeformation consistent with the most correspondences andexerts a bounded distortion. Lin et al. ( 2014 ,2017 )p r o -
posed to identify true matches with likelihood functions
estimated using nonlinear regression technique in a speciallydesigned domain of correspondence, where motion coher-
ence is imposed, while discontinuities are also allowed. This
concept corresponds to enforcing a local motion coherenceconstraint. Ma et al. ( 2018a ,2019d ) presented a locality pre-
serving approach for matching, whereby a global distortion
model for matching is relaxed to focus on the locality ofeach correspondence in exchange for generality and efﬁ-ciency. The derived criterion has been proven able to rapidly
and accurately ﬁlter erroneous matches. A similar method
appeared in Bian et al. ( 2017 ) wherein a simple criterion
based on local supporting matches to reject outliers is intro-
duced. Jiang et al. ( 2020a ) casted feature matching as a
spatial clustering problem with outliers to adaptively clusterthe putative matches into several motion consistent clusters
together with an outlier/mismatch cluster. Another method
in Lee et al. ( 2020 ) formulates the feature matching prob-
lem as a Markov random ﬁeld that uses both local descriptordistance and relative geometric similarities to enhance the
robustness and accuracy.
4.6 Learning for Matching
Apart from detectors or descriptors, learning-based matching
methods are commonly used to substitute traditional meth-
ods in information extraction and representation or model
regression. The matching step by learning can be roughlyclassiﬁed into image-based and point-based learning. Based
123