42 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
The extension of GM to a high-order formulation is a
natural way to improve the robustness by mostly exploringthe geometrical cues. This leads to a tensor-based objective
(Lee et al. 2011 ) also called hypergraph matching:
J
H(X)=H⊗1x⊗2x...⊗mx, (3)
where mis the order of afﬁnities, H denotes the m-order tensor
encoding the afﬁnities between hyperedges in the graphs, ⊗k
is the tensor product, and x=vec(X). Representative studies
on hypergraph matching include Zass and Shashua ( 2008 ),
Chertok and Keller ( 2010 ), Lee et al. ( 2011 ), Chang and
Kimia ( 2011 ), Duchenne et al. ( 2011 ) and Yan et al. ( 2015d ).
4.4 Point Set Registration Methods
Point set registration (PSR) aims to estimate the spatial trans-
formation that optimally aligns two point sets. In feature
matching, different formulations are adopted in PSR and GM.
For two point sets, GM methods determine the alignmentvia maximizing the overall afﬁnity score of unary corre-
spondence and pairwise correspondences. By contrast, PSR
methods determine the underlying global transformation.Given the two point sets {x
i}n1
i=1and{yi}n2
i=1, the general
conventional objective can be expressed as
min J(P,θ)=/summationdisplay
i,jpij/bardblyj−T(xi,θ)/bardbl2
2+g(P)
s.t.θ∈/Theta1,P∈{0,1}n1×n2,P1n2≤1n1,P/latticetop1n1≤1n2,(4)
where θdenotes the parameters of the predeﬁned transfor-
mation. The regularization term g(P)avoids trivial solutions,
such as P=0. Compared to GM, this model only repre-
sents the general principles, but does not necessarily cover
all the algorithms for PSR. For example, a probabilistic inter-
pretation or a density-based objective can be used, and theconstraints for Pmay be only partially imposed during opti-
mization, which all differ from the above formulation.
PSR poses a stronger assumption on the data, that is,
the existence of a global transformation between point sets,
which is the key feature that differentiates it from GM.
Although the generality is restricted, this assumption leads tolow computational complexity because of the few parametersneeded for global transformation models. A sophisticated
transformation model is developed from rigid to non-rigid
ones in order to enhance the generalization ability. V ariousschemes are also proposed to improve robustness against
degradations, such as noise, outliers, and missing points.
4.4.1 ICP and Its Variants
PSR has been an important research topic for the last few
decades in computer vision, and the iterative closest point(ICP) algorithm is a popular method (Besl and McKay 1992 ).
ICP iteratively alternates between hard assignments of cor-respondences for the closest points in two point sets and
the closed-form rigid transformation estimation until con-
vergence. The ICP algorithm is widely used as baselines dueto its simplicity and low computational complexity. How-ever, a good initialization is required because ICP is prone
to be trapped into local optima. Numerous studies, such as
EM-ICP (Granger and Pennec 2002 ), LM-ICP (Fitzgibbon
2003 ), and TriICP (Chetverikov et al. 2005 ), in the research
ﬁeld of PSR have been proposed to improve ICP . The reader
is referred to a recent survey (Pomerleau et al. 2013 )f o r
a detailed discussion of ICP’s variants. The robust point
matching (RPM) algorithm (Gold et al. 1998 ) are proposed
to overcome the ICP limitations; the soft assignment anddeterministic annealing strategy are adopted, and the rigidtransformation model is generalized to a non-rigid one by
using the thin-plate spline [TPS-RPM (Chui and Rangarajan
2003 )].
4.4.2 EM-Based Methods
RPM is also a representative of the EM-like PSR methods,
which form an important category in this ﬁeld. The EM-like
methods formulate PSR as an optimization problem of either
a weighted squared loss function or the log-likelihood max-imization of Gaussian mixture models (GMMs), and local
optimum is searched through EM or EM-like algorithms. The
posterior probability of each correspondence is computed inthe E-step, and the transformation is reﬁned in the M-step.
Sofka et al. ( 2007 ) investigated the modeling of uncertainty
in the registration process and presented a covariance drivencorrespondence method in an EM-like framework. Myro-nenko and Song ( 2010 ) proposed the well-known coherent
point drift (CPD) method in which a probabilistic framework
is established on the basis of GMM; here, the EM algo-rithm is utilized for maximum likelihood estimation of the
parameters. Horaud et al. ( 2011 ) developed an expectation
conditional maximization-based probabilistic method, whichallows the use of anisotropic covariance for the mixture
model components and improves over isotropic covariance
case. Ma et al. ( 2016b ) and Zhang et al. ( 2017a ) exploited the
uniﬁcation of local feature and global feature in the GMM-based probabilistic framework. Lawin et al. ( 2018 ) presented
a density adaptive PSR method via modeling the underlying
structure of the scene as a latent probability distribution.
4.4.3 Density-Based Methods
Density-based methods introduce generative models to the
PSR problem, in which no explicit point correspondence
is established. Each point set is represented by a densityfunction, such as GMM. Registration is achieved by the mini-
123