46 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
on the traditional methods, the former aims to cope with three
typical tasks, namely image registration (Wu et al. 2015a ),
stereo matching (Poursaeed et al. 2018 ) and camera local-
ization or transformation estimation (Poursaeed et al. 2018 ;
Erlik Nowruzi et al. 2017 ; Yin and Shi 2018 ). Such a method
can directly realize task-based learning without attemptingto detect any salient image structure (e.g. interest points) in
advance. By contrast, point-based learning prefers conduct-
ing on the extracted point sets; such methods are commonlyused for point data processing, such as classiﬁcation, seg-
mentation (Qi et al. 2017a ,b) and registration (Simonovsky
et al. 2016 ; Liao et al. 2017 ). Researchers have also used
these for correct match selection and geometrical transfor-
mation model estimation from putative match sets (Moo Yi
et al. 2018 ;M ae ta l . 2019a ; Zhao et al. 2019 ; Ranftl and
Koltun 2018 ; Poursaeed et al. 2018 ).
4.6.1 Learning from Images
Matching methods of image-based learning often use CNNs
for image-level latent information extraction and similar-
ity measurement, as well as geometrical relation estimation.Therefore, the patch-based learning (Sect. 3.3: learning-
based feature descriptors) is frequently used as an extension
of area-based image registration and stereo matching. This
is because traditional similarity measurements in a slidingwindow can be easily replaced with a deep manner, i.e., deep
descriptors. However, the success achieved by researchers in
using deep learning in spatial transformation networks (STN)(Jaderberg et al. 2015 ) and optical ﬂow estimation (FlowNet)
(Dosovitskiy et al. 2015 ) has aroused a wave of studies on
directly estimating the geometrical transformation or non-parametric deformation ﬁeld with deep learning techniques,even achieving an end-to-end trainable framework.
Image registration. For area-based image registration,
early deep learning is generally used as a direct extensionof the classical registration framework, and later use the
reinforcement learning paradigm to iteratively estimate the
transformation, even directly estimate the deformative ﬁeldor displacement ﬁeld for the registration task. The most intu-
itional approach is to use deep learning networks to estimate
the similarity measurement for the target image pair in orderto drive an iterative optimization procedure. In this way,the classical measure metrics, such as the correlation-like
and MI methods, etc., can be substituted with more supe-
rior deep metrics. For instance, Wu et al. ( 2015a ) achieved
deformable image registration by using the convolutional
stacked auto-encoder (CAE) to discover compact and highly
discriminative features from the observed image patch datafor similarity metrics learning. Similarly, to obtain better
similarity measure, Simonovsky et al. ( 2016 ) used a deep
network trained from a few aligned image pairs. In addi-tion, a fast, deformable image registration method calledQuicksilver (Yang et al. 2017b ) has been devised by the
patch-wise prediction of a deformation model directly usingimage appearance, whereby a deep encoder-decoder network
is used for predicting the large deformation diffeomorphic
model. Inspired by deep convolution, Revaud et al. ( 2016 )
introduced a dense matching algorithm based on a hierarchi-cal correlation architecture. This method can handle complex
non-rigid deformations and repetitive textured regions. Arar
et al. ( 2020 ) introduced an unsupervised multi-modal image
registration technique based on an image-to-image transla-
tion network with geometric preserving constraints.
Different from metric learning, a trained agent is used for
image registration with a reinforcement learning paradigm,
and typically for estimating a rigid transformation model
or a deformable ﬁeld. Liao et al. ( 2017 ) ﬁrst used the rein-
forcement learning for rigid image registration, in which anartiﬁcial agent and a greedy supervised approach coupled
with attention-driven hierarchical strategy are used to realize
the “strategy learning” process and ﬁnd the best sequence of
motion actions to yield image alignment. An artiﬁcial agent,
which explores the parametric space of a statistical deforma-
tion model by training from a large number of syntheticallydeformed image pairs, is also trained in Krebs et al. ( 2017 )
to cope with deformable registration problem and the difﬁ-
culty in extracting reliable ground-truth deformable ﬁelds ofreal data. Instead of using a single agent, Miao et al. ( 2018 )
proposed a multi-agent reinforcement learning paradigm for
medical image registration in which the auto-attention mech-
anism is used for receptive multiple image regions. However,the reinforcement learning is often used to predict iterative
updates of the regression procedure and still consumes large
computation in the iterative process.
To reduce the run time and avoid explicitly deﬁning
a dissimilarity metric, end-to-end registration in one shot
has received increasing attention. Sokooti et al. ( 2017 ) ﬁrst
designed deep regression networks to directly learn a dis-placement vector ﬁeld from a pair of input images. Another
method in de V os et al. ( 2017 ) similarly trained a deep
network to regress and output the parameters of spatial trans-formation, which can then generate the displacement ﬁeld
to warp the moving image to the target image. However,
a similarity metric between image pairs is still required toachieve unsupervised optimization. More recently, a deep
learning framework has been introduced in de V os et al.
(2019 ) for unsupervised afﬁne and deformable image reg-
istration. The trained networks can be used to register pairsof unseen images in one shot. Similar methods regarding
deep networks as a regressor can directly learn the parame-
ter transform model from image pairs, such as Fundamental(Poursaeed et al. 2018 ), Homography (DeTone et al. 2016 ),
and non-rigid deformation (Rocco et al. 2017 ).
Many other end-to-end image level learning-based reg-
istration methods are presented. Chen et al. ( 2019 )p r o -
123