30 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
reviewed above. The main difference may lie in the way of
training, and the core challenge is to make the entire pro-cess differentiable. For example, Yi et al. ( 2016 ) attempted
to train a detector, an orientation estimator, and a descriptor
jointly based on inputting four patches. Their proposed LIFTcan be regarded as a trainable version of SIFT and requiressupervision from the SfM system for determining the fea-
ture anchor. The training procedure is conducted individually
from descriptor to detector and can use the learned resultsto guide the detector training, thus promoting detectability.
Unlike LIFT, SuperPoint (DeTone et al. 2018 ) introduces
a fully convolutional model by inputting full-sized imagesand jointly computing pixel-level interest point locations and
associated descriptors in one forward pass; a synthetic dataset
is constructed for pseudo-ground truth generation and pre-training, and the homography adaption module enables it toachieve self-supervised training while promoting detection
repeatability.
LF-Net (Ono et al. 2018 ) conﬁnes the end-to-end pipeline
to one branch to optimize the entire procedure in a dif-
ferentiable way; it also uses a fully convolutional network
operating on full-sized images to generate a rich featurescore map, which can then be used to extract keypoint
locations and the feature attributes, such as scale and ori-
entation; simultaneously, it performs a differentiable formof NMS, namely, sof targmax , for subpixel location and
increasing the accuracy and saliency of keypoint. Similar
to LF-Net, RF-Net (Shen et al. 2019 ) selects high-response
pixels as keypoints on multiscales, but the response mapsare constructed by receptive feature maps. Bhowmik et al.
(2020 ) indicated that increased accuracy for these low-level
matching scores does not necessarily translate to better per-formance in high-level vision tasks, thus they embedded
the feature detector in a complete vision pipeline, where
the learnable parameters are trained in an end-to-end man-ner. The authors overcome the discrete nature of keypointselection and descriptor matching using principles from rein-
forcement learning. Luo et al. ( 2020 ) proposed ASFeat to
explore local shape information of feature points and enhancethe accuracy of points detection, by jointly learning local
feature detectors and descriptors. Another detection-related
learning-based method is to estimate the orientation (Moo Yiet al. 2016 ), while the spatial transformation network (STN)
(Jaderberg et al. 2015 ) could also be a great reference in
deep learning-based detectors for rotation invariance (Yi et al.2016 ; Ono et al. 2018 ).
Unlike local feature descriptors, there is little review on
salient feature detectors, particularly for the recent CNN-
based techniques. To our best knowledge, the most recentsurvey (Lenc and V edaldi 2014 ) focuses on local feature
detection. It introduces the basic idea of several well-
known methods from handcrafted detectors to acceleratedand learned ones.2.5 3-D Feature Detectors
Dedicated on 3-D keypoint detectors, Tombari et al. ( 2013 )
provided an excellent survey on the state-of-the-art meth-
ods and a detailed evaluation of their performances. Inbrief, the existing methods were divided into two categories,ﬁxed-scale detectors and adaptive-scale detectors . In both
categories, keypoints are selected as local extrema of a pre-
deﬁned saliency measurement. The difference lies in theinvolvement of the scale characteristic, which deﬁnes the
support for the subsequent description stage. The ﬁxed-
scale detectors tend to search keypoints at a speciﬁc scalelevel, which is given as prior information. The adaptive-scale
detectors either extend the scale concept for 2-D images by
adopting a scale space deﬁned on the surface or implementthe traditional scale-space analysis by embedding 3-D dataonto a 2-D plane.
2.5.1 Fixed-Scale Detectors
Chen and Bhanu ( 2007 ) introduced the local surface patch
(LSP) method. The saliency of a point in LSP is measuredby its shape index (Dorai and Jain 1997 ), as deﬁned by the
principal curvatures at the point. Zhong ( 2009 ) introduced
the intrinsic shape signature (ISS) method, in which saliency
is derived from the eigenvalue decomposition of the scat-ter matrix of the support region. In this approach, the ratio
of eigenvalues is used to prune some points, and the ﬁnal
saliency is determined by the eigenvector. In this way, pointswith large variations along each principal direction are iden-
tiﬁed. Analogous to ISS, Mian et al. ( 2010 ) also utilized the
scatter matrix to prune nondistinctive points but with a differ-ent curvature-based saliency measurement. Sun et al. ( 2009 )
presented the heat kernel signature (HKS) method, based
on the properties of the heat diffusion process on a shape.
In this method, the saliency measurement is deﬁned by therestriction of the heat kernel to the temporal domain. The
heat kernel is uniquely determined by the underlying man-
ifold, which makes HKS a compact characterization of theshape.
2.5.2 Adaptive-Scale Detectors
It is desirable to adaptively ﬁt with the scale in detection.
For this purpose, Unnikrishnan and Hebert ( 2008 ) proposed
a Laplace-Beltrami scale space by computing the designedfunction on the increasing support around each point. This
function is deﬁned by a novel operator that reﬂects the local
mean curvature of the underlying shape and provides thesaliency information. Zaharescu et al. ( 2009 ) presented the
MeshDoG method, which is analogous to the DoG operator
in the 2-D case (Lowe 2004 ); nonetheless, the operator is
computed on a scalar function deﬁned on the manifold. The
123