28 International Journal of Computer Vision (2021) 129:23–79
region segmentation-based detectors. Second-order partial
derivative-based methods are based on the Laplacian scaleselection and/or Hessian matrix calculation for afﬁne invari-
ant. While segmentation-based methods prefer to detect blob
features by segmenting the morphological regions ﬁrst, thenestimate the afﬁne information with ellipse ﬁtting. Comparedwith corner features, blob features are more useful for visual
applications with high precision requirement, because more
image cues are utilized for feature identiﬁcation and repre-sentation, thus enabling the blob features to be more accurate
and robust to image transformation.
2.3.1 Second-Order Partial Derivative-Based Detectors
In methods based on second-order partial derivatives ,t h e
Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) (Lindeberg 1998 ) is applied
based on scale space theory. Here, the Laplace operator is ﬁrst
used for edge detection in accordance with the zero crossings
in the second-order differential of an image, and the Gaussianconvolution ﬁltering is then applied as a preprocessing to
reduce noise.
LoG can detect the local extremum point and the area
with normalized response arising from the circular symme-try of the Gaussian kernel. Different standard deviations of
the Gaussian function can detect the scale-invariant blobs
in different scales by searching the extremum in the multi-scale space as the ﬁnal stable blob feature. The difference of
Gaussians (DoG) (Lowe et al. 1999 ;L o w e 2004 ) ﬁlter can
be used to approximate the LoG ﬁlter, and greatly speedsup the computations. Another classical blob feature detec-
tion strategy is based on the determinant of Hessian (DoH)
(Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2001 ,2004 ). This is more afﬁne
invariant because the eigenvalue and eigenvector of the sec-ond matrix can be applied to estimate and correct the afﬁne
region.
Interest point detection by using DoG, DoH, and both
has been widely utilized in recent visual applications. The
famous SIFT (Lowe et al. 1999 ;L o w e 2004 ) extracts key-
point as the local extrema in a DoG pyramid, ﬁltered usingthe Hessian matrix of the local intensity values (the according
description part will be reviewed in the next section). Miko-
lajczyk et al. combined the Harris and Hessian detectors withthe Laplacian and Hessian matrices for scale and afﬁne fea-ture detection (Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2001 ,2004 ), i.e.,
the Harris/Hessian-Laplacian/afﬁne. SURF (Bay et al. 2006 )
accelerates the SIFT by approximating the Hessian matrix-based detector using Haar wavelet calculation, together with
an integral image strategy, thus simplifying the construction
of a second-order differential template.
Several SIFT- and SURF-based improvements, have been
successively proposed for better property in subsequent
applications. Such improvements include a fully afﬁne invari-ant SIFT detector (ASIFT) (Morel and Y u 2009 ), a center-surround extremum (Agrawal et al. 2008 ) strategy feature
detector with the Laplace calculation approximated by theproposed bilateral ﬁltering to enhance the efﬁciency, and
the efﬁcient approximation of DoH with piecewise triangle
ﬁlters in DARTs (Marimon et al. 2010 ). In addition, a cosine-
modulated Gaussian ﬁlter is utilized in the SIFT-ER detector(Mainali et al. 2013 ) to obtain high feature detectability with
minimum scale-space localization errors, in which the ﬁl-
terbank system has a highly accurate ﬁlter approximationwithout any image sub/upsampling. An edge foci-based blob
detector (Zitnick and Ramnath 2011 ) has also been intro-
duced for the matching task. In this detector, the edge foci isdeﬁned as the point in an image that is roughly equidistant
from the closest edge with orientations perpendicular to this
point.
Unlike the circle-like Gaussian response function, a non-
linear partial differential equation is applied in KAZA
detector for blob feature searching with nonlinear diffu-
sion ﬁltering (Alcantarilla et al. 2012 ). An accelerated
version called AKAZA (Alcantarilla and Solutions 2011 )i s
implemented by embedding the fast explicit diffusion in a
pyramidal framework to dramatically speedup feature detec-tion in nonlinear scale spaces. However, it still suffers from
high computation complexity. Another method is W ADE
(Salti et al. 2013 ), which implements nonlinear feature detec-
tion by a wave propagation function.
2.3.2 Segmentation-Based Detectors
The segmentation-based blob detectors begin with an irreg-
ular region segmentation based on constant pixel intensity or
zero gradient. One of the most famous region segmentation-based blob feature is maximally stable extremal region(MSER) (Matas et al. 2004
). It extracts regions that remain
stable under a large range of intensity thresholding values.
This approach does not need extra processing for scale esti-mation, and is robust to large viewpoint changes. The term
“maximally stable” describes the threshold selection process,
given that every extremal region is a connected component ofa watershed image by thresholding. An extension to MSER
was introduced in Kimmel et al. ( 2011 ) to exploit shape struc-
ture cues. Other improvements are based on the watershedregions of principal curvature images (Deng et al. 2007 ; Fer-
raz and Binefa 2012 ) or considered color information for a
higher discrimination (Forssén 2007 ).
Similar to MSER, other segmentation-based features,
such as intensity- and edge-based regions (Tuytelaars and
V an Gool 2004 ), are also used for afﬁne covariant region
detection. However, feature detection of this type is of lessuse for feature matching, and it is gradually developed toward
saliency detection and segmentation in computer vision. Spe-
ciﬁc method investigation and comprehensive reviews can befound in Mikolajczyk et al. ( 2005 ) and Li et al. ( 2015 ).
123