Once the speech audio representations are segmented, we compute a 512-dimensional PCA over
all speech representations output by wav2vec 2.0 for the training set. Next, we mean-pool the PCA
representations for a particular segment to obtain an average representation of the segment. The
PCA retains only the most important features and we found this to be effective. Segment boundaries
are noisy due to the lack of supervision and we therefore found it useful to also mean-pool pairs of
adjacent segment representations to increase robustness. This results in sequences of speech segment
representation S=s1;:::;s T;SS for a given utterance. Appendix B shows an illustration of
the segmentation strategy on an actual example as well as a quantitative evaluation of the strategy
compared to human segmented data.
2.4 Pre-processing the Text Data
Similar to how we segment the unlabeled speech audio data into suitable units for unsupervised
learning, we do the same for the unlabeled text data. We apply two pre-processing steps to the text
data: phonemization and silence token insertion.
Phonemes characterize the different sounds which distinguish words from each other, e.g., for the
word catthere are three phonemes corresponding to the three distinct sounds in the pronunciation
of the word: /K/, /AE/, /T/. We phonemize the text data because we found it easier to learn a
mapping between speech audio and the different sounds of a word rather than between audio and
words or letters. Phonemization converts a sequence of words Yinto a sequence of phonemes
P= [p1;;pM], wherepm2OandOis the phoneme inventory. We use off-the-shelf tools for
this step which we detail in Appendix § E.2.
The unlabeled speech audio data is pre-processed by applying unsupervised silence removal. However,
this process is not always accurate and many silences in the speech audio remain. To deal with this,
we enable the unsupervised model to label some segments with a phonemic silence token (SIL; § 3.1).
However, the phonemized unlabeled text data does not contain any silence tokens and this may pose
difﬁculties for adversarial learning (§ 3). We remedy this by inserting silence markers at the beginning
and end of the phonemized unlabeled text data; we also randomly insert SIL between words, or
groups of phonemes corresponding to words at a rate of 25%. Appendix C evaluates these choices.
3 Unsupervised Learning
We use adversarial training to train an unsupervised speech recognition model using the representa-
tions of the unlabeled speech audio data and the unlabeled phonemized text data [Liu et al., 2018,
Chen et al., 2019]. In the following, we detail the model architecture, the training objective as well as
the unsupervised cross-validation metric we developed.
3.1 Model Architecture
Generative adversarial networks (GAN; Goodfellow et al. 2014) train a generator network Gand
a discriminator/critic network Cwhere the generator produces samples which are then judged by
the discriminator. The discriminator is trained to classify whether samples are from the generator
or from the real data distribution. The objective of the generator is to produce samples that are
indistinguishable by the discriminator.
Concretely,Gtakes as input a sequence of Tsegment representations S= [s1;:::;s T](§ 2.3) which
are then mapped to a sequence of MphonemesG(S) = [p1;:::;p M]. The generator predicts a
distribution over the phoneme set Ofor each segment and outputs the phoneme with the highest
probability. If the argmax prediction of consecutive segments result in the same phoneme, then we
sample one of these segments, therefore MT.
The phoneme set Oincludes a silence label SIL to enable labeling silences in the speech audio as
such. Without a silence label, we noticed that the model was repurposing a particular phoneme to
label silences which resulted in much lower performance since it interfered with subsequent language
model (LM) decoding. In the backward pass, we back-propagate through segments sampled at the
generator output. We do not modify the segment representations Sduring unsupervised training. The
generator is parameterized as a single layer convolutional neural network (CNN).
4