Unlabeled speech audio
Unlabeled text
wav2vec 2.0Step 1: Get speech representationsStep 2: k-means clustering of each time-step
Step 3: Segment into phonemic units
Step 6: Phonemizep1GeneratorStep 5: Generate phoneme sequencep2p3p4Discriminatorreal or fakeStep 7: GAN trainingStep 4: Build segment representationsFigure 1: Illustration of wav2vec Unsupervised: we learn self-supervised representations with
wav2vec 2.0 on unlabeled speech audio (Step 1), identify clusters in the representations with k-means
(Step 2) to segment the audio (Step 3). Next, we build segment representations by mean pooling the
wav2vec 2.0 representations, performing PCA and a second mean pooling step between adjacent
segments (Step 4). This is input to the generator which outputs a phoneme sequence (Step 5) fed to
the discriminator, similar to phonemized unlabeled text (Step 6), for adversarial training (Step 7).
quality of the audio representations is key to the success of unsupervised speech recognition. Similar
to Liu et al. [2018] and Chen et al. [2019], we learn a mapping between segments and phonemes
using adversarial training but different to their work, we also enable the algorithm to label segments
as silences. We also introduce an unsupervised cross-validation metric to enable model development
without labeled development data. Our unsupervised speech recognition model, the generator, is very
lightweight: it consists of a single temporal convolution comprising only about 90k parameters to
which we input frozen wav2vec 2.0 representations.
Experimental results demonstrate the viability of the framework for a variety of settings and languages.
wav2vec-U improves the phone error rate (PER) on the small-scale TIMIT benchmark from 26.1
to 11.3 compared to the next best known unsupervised approach. To get a better sense of the
performance compared to the best supervised methods, we measure performance on the larger
Librispeech benchmark where our method achieves word error rate (WER) 5.9 on test-other. We also
evaluate on six other European languages of the multilingual Librispeech benchmark [Pratap et al.,
2020] and on three non-European low-resource languages.
2 Speech and Text Representations
Next, we describe how we build suitable speech and text representations for unsupervised learning.
Good representations are essential to learning a mapping from speech to text without supervision.
2.1 Self-supervised Learning of Speech Audio Representations
In the ﬁrst step, we learn representations of the speech audio signal using self-supervised learning.
There has been a lot of recent work in this direction which has shown strong performance in extremely
low-labeled data setups across a range of languages [Conneau et al., 2020] and tasks [Fan et al., 2021,
Pepino et al., 2021, Wang et al., 2021].
Wav2vec 2.0 consists of a convolutional feature encoder f:X 7! Z that maps a raw audio
sequenceXto latent speech representations z1;:::;z T, which a Transformer g:Z7!C then turns
into context representations c1;:::;c T[Baevski et al., 2020b,a]. Each ztrepresents about 25ms of
audio strided by 20ms and the Transformer architecture follows BERT [Vaswani et al., 2017, Devlin
et al., 2019]. During training, latent representations are discretized to q1;:::;q Twith a quantization
2