791 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812 
1 3
We argue that this work is distinct from the existing 
literature in two main aspects. First, this survey focuses 
on how to apply explainability and which methods are 
relevant to cybersecurity applications. Second, this survey 
analyses the security of XAI methods and identifies exist-
ing trends and challenges. It outlines technical research 
avenues that would immensely contribute to the AI and 
XAI research community.
The contributions of this survey are as follows:
– We provide a comprehensive background with the main 
concepts, existing methods, limitations, and risks associ-
ated with securing explainable systems.
– We collect and analyze 50 papers and organize them in a 
cybersecurity-oriented taxonomy.
– We discuss open research problems and identified mul-
tiple research avenues for future work.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Sec-
tion  2 introduces the taxonomy of XAI and scope of this 
survey. Section  3 introduces the surveyed terms, models, 
and XAI methods. Section  4 reviews the state of the art of 
explainable classifiers for cybersecurity tasks. Section  5 
explores the security of XAI methods. In Section  6, we 
present unaddressed AI-related research questions and our 
perspective on the future of XAI in cybersecurity. Finally, 
we conclude this survey in Section  7.
2  Taxonomy
AI models are a major actor in the cybersecurity research 
landscape. However, ensuring the proper use of AI mod -
els in a cybersecurity context is an arduous task. Shaukat 
et al. [111] provide a broad review on the applications of 
ML techniques to cybersecurity. Cybersecurity applica-
tions of AI encompass network security, computer secu-
rity, mobile security, etc. In essence, AI and XAI methods 
have been implemented on various datasets corresponding 
to the research trends. As such, we believe that discussing 
the broadest range of applications will give the reader a 
diversified vision about the landscape of XAI in a cyber -
security context. Therefore, we argue that transparency of 
and trust in AI also belong to the scope of cybersecurity 
as they contribute to reducing the potential maliciousness 
toward the AI model and the system in general. We extend 
this approach to the analysis of the security of XAI meth-
ods, where we discuss various works either compromis-
ing the explanations or defending them against unwanted/
unexpected behaviors.
XAI is a growing research domain, to which research-
ers have contributed different definitions and perspectives 
owing to a lack of standardization. For example, the authors of [2 , 128] employed the approach of the six W questions—
What, Who, When, Why, Where, and How. This approach 
helped identify different stakeholders in AI-based systems 
and define the scope of XAI and the reasoning behind the 
need for XAI. Another approach was to characterize XAI 
through its intrinsic properties. Arrieta et al. [13] classi-
fied XAI models as white box or post hoc models, whereas 
the authors of [46] and [94] outlined desirable properties 
for XAI. Hagras [46] discussed the link between human-
understandable information and the flexibility of the data 
labeling process. Paredes et al. [94] discussed explanations 
for cybersecurity and insisted that explanations should be 
able to capture changes in an attacker’s strategy, or to help 
identify anomalies when they are outlined by detection 
mechanisms. Kuppa et al. [66] proposed a taxonomy for 
XAI concerning its security properties. They also demon-
strated a novel black-box attack on explainable models and 
evaluated it on three datasets. The proposed taxonomy cov -
ered three domains: the explanations of predictions made 
by a model, the security properties associated with models 
(i.e., confidentiality, integrity, and privacy), and the threat 
models used. The authors differentiated confidentiality and 
privacy by highlighting that the former pertained to the 
features of data, while the latter pertained to the expla-
nations given to various security actors. We employed a 
different approach by considering the intersection of XAI 
and cybersecurity (Table  1). In this survey, we explored 
both methods for explaining AI-based cybersecurity appli-
cations and security analyses of XAI methods. In the first 
case, the literature we surveyed covers various practical 
scenarios, mostly supported by cybersecurity datasets (23 
papers). In the second case, we identified several properties 
with respect to the security of XAI that were discussed in 
the state of the art (27 papers). Our taxonomy differs from 
those of existing XAI surveys, as most of them considered 
XAI from an intrinsic perspective. Numerous explanation 
methods were not attacked; however, the security proper -
ties presented in this survey should be relevant for these 
methods as well. We do not mention these methods in this 
survey to preserve our cybersecurity perspective. Table  1 
describes the classification of the existing literature regard-
ing our taxonomy.
3  Preliminaries
Before discussing the intersection of XAI and cybersecurity, 
we remind the reader of certain terms, and present a few 
intrinsically explainable models and explainability methods. 
As mentioned in Section  2, we do not introduce the reader to 
models or explanation methods that were not encountered in 
the surveyed literature.