808 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812
1 3
feature spaces can be complex. Owing to the multilayered 
and highly nonlinear transformation embedded in a DL 
architecture, the association between the raw attributes given 
in the input and the embedding vectors derived at the deep 
layers cannot always be presented analytically. Therefore, 
we observed a gap between the interpretation given in the 
problem space and that provided in the feature space in most 
ML methods, especially in DL models. Although SHAP, 
LIME, and layer relevance propagation-based XAI methods 
can be used to unveil important features encoded by a DL 
model in classification, the link between the importance of 
the encoded embedding features with the contribution of the 
raw attributes given in the problem space is difficult to be 
reversibly recovered.
6.2  Privacy vs. explainability tradeoff
As discussed in Section  5.3, few papers have addressed 
the privacy challenges for XAI methods. Existing works 
have demonstrated that privacy and the design of an effec-
tive XAI method can be contradictory, and that several 
XAI methods can be useful but not secure. The two cases 
that have been explored are the “model inversion attack”  
and the “membership inference attack”. However, Liu 
et al. [75] covered several other types of privacy attacks 
orchestrated on AI models, such as “feature estimation 
attack” (learning some features from the training dataset), 
“model extraction attack” (learning an approximation of 
the model), and “model memorization attack” (retrieving 
the exact values of features). These attacks can also be 
extended to explainability methods used to interpret AI 
models, as indicated in [113, 141].
Most studies on privacy in AI focused on highlighting 
the possible attacks rather than proposing solutions to them. 
Nevertheless, a few solutions indeed have been proposed, as 
indicated in [75], e.g., i) encryption training data and ML 
model, ii) reduction of the accuracy of data and model avail-
able to an attacker using obfuscation mechanisms, such as 
noise addition to the output classifier and iii) use of aggrega -
tion techniques in the case of collaborative learning to keep 
collaborating models and datasets private.
However, these methods must be adapted to the XAI con-
text and tested to measure their effectiveness in preserving 
the privacy of models and data.
In conclusion, XAI adds an additional layer to the 
attack surface of the AI pipeline; therefore, its use must be 
carefully considered—is it wise to use an XAI method to 
understand an AI model, at the risk of making the system 
vulnerable, or should it be dispensed with to reduce the 
attack surface? Thus, the choice of an XAI method offer -
ing the best compromise between explanatory quality and 
confidentiality is crucial.6.3  Reinforcing explainability with external data
Various methods using XAI have been reported. XAI offers 
explanations on the decisions made by AI models. Meth-
ods thus far have focused on generating explanations solely 
based on data and algorithms used by AI models. However, 
external data that have not been used by security models can 
be used to reinforce the explainability of alerts. When secu-
rity operators recognize a malware activity on the Internet, 
they frequently search in external data, such as honeypots 
analysis results and/or threat intelligence reports, to confirm 
their discovery.
Takahashi et al. [125] employed this approach to reinforce 
the explainability of AI models. They established several 
security-analysis models, including malware traffic detec-
tion, sandbox analysis, code analysis, threat intelligence 
search, and Darknet traffic analysis models. Various secu-
rity operations are automated with comprehensive data. 
For example, when malware traffic is detected by a traffic 
analysis model (AI-based), the system runs other models and 
collects comprehensive information, including first name, 
family name, behavior, exploited vulnerabilities, and target 
devices. By reviewing this information, users can confirm 
that the malware traffic analysis model has detected a real 
threat.
Unlike other XAI studies in the AI domain, XAI for 
cybersecurity research can utilize assorted security-related 
data. Therefore, these data could be used to explain the deci-
sions made by security AI models and could reinforce the 
explainability of the AI models. This type of study should 
be furthered.
7  Conclusion
As with any other computer science field, Cybersecurity has 
been widely studied under the scope of AI. XAI is gaining 
momentum and might become a legal requirement for vari-
ous service providers. We surveyed the existing XAI litera-
ture related to cybersecurity from two perspectives—XAI 
for cybersecurity tasks and security of XAI methods. From 
the first perspective, although the existing literature already 
has a considerable number of scientific papers, we found a 
lack of consideration for real scenarios in their approaches. 
We believe that meaningful scientific contributions should 
go beyond the application of an XAI method to a cyberse-
curity dataset, and attempts must be made to bridge the gap 
between the fields of AI and cybersecurity. From the sec-
ond perspective, we divided the security issues into multiple 
classes and addressed the existing literature regarding the 
attack surface, current attack vectors, and potential coun -
termeasures. The state of the art reveals a lack of counter -
measures for the defense of XAI methods, which is also