800 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812
1 3
modules: (1) RF classifier (RFC) module for security pre-
dictions; (2) SHAP module extracting values relative to 
each feature of the dataset, and representing the impor -
tance of each feature in the decision made by the RFC; (3) 
Credibility assessment module (CAM), which utilizes the 
prediction and Shapley values to evaluate the confidence 
of prediction made by the RFC.
In particular, the CAM module evaluates the plausi-
bility of the second-most probable prediction over the 
confidence expressed by the Shapley values of the most 
probable prediction computed by the RFC module. In the 
case of divergence, other classifiers were used to reassess 
the decision. The CIC-IDS2018 dataset [22] was finally 
used to compare the proposed IDS with other state-of-the-
art classifiers. Adversarial attacks were also employed to 
evaluate the robustness of the proposed IDS, which out-
performed a native version of the RFC.
Gulmezoglu [43] proposed an XAI-based framework 
using side-channel analysis against website fingerprinting 
attacks. The framework detects side-channel attacks by 
discovering the most dominant features extracted from a 
dataset using CNN and RF. During the training phase, they 
used a self-generated side-channel attack dataset collected 
from the Google Chrome and Firefox browser developer 
tools. After the DL model was trained, LIME and saliency 
maps were used to examine the most dominant features of 
the website fingerprinting attack. They also verified the 
robustness of the framework. After perturbing the data 
points, a new model was trained and tested with the per -
turbed dataset. Their experiment revealed a drop of 16% in 
the attack rate, with five times less performance overhead. 
Subsequently, they generated adversarial noise to antici-
pate further attacks.
Roshan et al. [102] proposed the application of KernelS-
HAP to reconstruct the errors of an AE to select the best 
features in an anomaly detection dataset. To understand and 
interpret the roles of features in improving AE-based anom-
aly detection, they compared three cases: (1)] no feature 
selection (all features); (2) feature selection using unsuper -
vised feature correlation; (3) feature selection using SHAP.
Experiments with a subset of CIC-IDS2017 (benign data 
for training, benign and malicious data for testing) revealed 
SHAP-led feature selection as exhibiting the best overall 
performance. However, it displayed slow feature computa-
tion and the possibility of an increase in the time complexity 
with the sample size.
4.3  Explaining errors
A few studies have explained, using XAI, why a security 
model would make a mistake. Marino et al. [82] used adver -
sarial examples to explain the importance of each feature 
on the decision made by gradient-based classifiers. They examined a set of misclassified samples and found the mini-
mum amount of modification required to rectify the classifi-
cation. They compared two models, an LR and a multilayer 
perceptron [ 101]. They used the NSL-KDD dataset [ 126]. 
However, the dataset was published in 2009. This limitation 
does not influence the usability of the proposed method; 
however, it does challenge the validity of the results for cur -
rent threats. Although the study allowed determining the 
key features in the model, it did not provide interpretation 
guidelines about the meanings of the features.
Fan et al. [32] used SHAP for feature attribution compu-
tation in an Android malware detection system. The main 
purpose of their study was to maintain model classifica-
tion performance over time. They stated that the change in 
performance was difficult to understand when they updated 
the model. SHAP was used to interpret the output of the 
model by assigning Shapley values for each feature. The 
prediction change was analyzed by comparing the pattern 
changes of feature attribution. First, the feature attribution 
of each sample before and after the update was collected. 
Second, the changes in feature attributions were clustered, 
obtaining the pattern of changes. The experiment showed 
that the method successfully prevented overfitting and inef-
fective updates.
Liu et al. [76] introduced FAIXID, a framework that 
provides data cleaning and XAI for IDS. Unlike other 
studies, they offered a data cleaning method to address 
the data quality problem. The cleaning process solved 
the issue of “the data we want and the data we have.” 
Their focus was to propose several data cleaning tech -
niques, instead of the explainability method. However, 
their method was designed specifically for a homogenous 
set of features—if the dataset has different features, more 
adjustments will be needed.
Farrugia et al. [34] proposed the usage of XAI in an appli-
cation for cyber-fraud detection, with the goal of achiev -
ing a fully autonomous prescriptive solution for explain-
able cyber-fraud detection within the iGaming industry. 
The application of XAI in this context allowed the authors 
to minimize the adverse effects of incorrect predictions. A 
private dataset with labeled instances of verified fraudulent 
players made by the Gaming Innovation Group was used. 
However, this manually labeled dataset was also the main 
limitation. In their method, they trained different models 
(RF, LGB, DT, and LR) on the dataset; they used stratified 
10-fold cross-validation and compared the models using the 
area under the curve (AUC). Next, they extracted explana-
tions for every individual prediction. Finally, they empiri-
cally evaluated data drift and suggested retraining the model 
every month as the drift rate was approximately one month. 
They compared each model using the standard metrics 
(AUC, precision, time, recall, and F1), where RF obtained 
the most consistent results.