796 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812
1 3
functional components. The decomposition function can be 
described as follows:
where p denotes the number of input features, f  denotes the 
prediction function, and xs denotes the feature vector in the index 
set S, in which each subset represents a functional component.
3.3.3  Explaining neural networks
The methods presented here are specific to gradient-based 
models, which use forward and backward propagations of 
gradients during training.
Feature visualization [ 92] is an explainable method that 
converts learned features into an image visualization that 
describes the feature’s characteristics. DNNs can learn high-
level features through hidden layers. An input image under -
goes several feature engineering processes as it passes every 
layer. The deeper the layer, the more complex the learned 
features become. The feature visualization of a layer in a 
neural network (NN) is done by finding the input that maxi-
mizes the activation of that layer. The optimization problem 
of feature visualization can be described as follows:
where h denotes the activation function, image img is the 
input of the neural network, b  describes the layer, x  and y 
specify the spatial positions of a neuron, and z  is the chan-
nel index.
Saliency maps [ 9]—also known as pixel attribution, heat 
map, sensitivity map, gradient-based attribution method, or 
feature relevance—are an explanation method that explains 
individual predictions by providing attributes to each feature 
based on its degree of influence on the prediction result. 
Saliency maps can be classified into two approaches: per -
turbation- and gradient-based approaches. The perturbation-
based method generates an explanation by manipulating 
parts of an image, which is categorized as model-agnostic. 
The gradient-based approach computes the gradient of the 
prediction result with respect to the input features. Both 
approaches assign each pixel a value that can be converted 
into the categorization result’s relevance level.
Explanatory graph [ 138] is a graphical model that repre-
sents knowledge in each convolution layer of a convolu-
tional neural network (CNN). As the filter in a pretrained 
CNN is activated by different object parts, the patterns from f(x)=/uni2211.s1
s⊆{1,...,p }fs(xs)
img∗=arg max
img/uni2211.s1
x,yhn,x,y,z(img)each filter are extracted. Subsequently, the patterns are dis-
entangled in a supervised manner to generate an explana -
tory graph that clarifies the knowledge representation. The 
method visualizes the spatial relationships between patterns, 
filtering out noisy patterns, and ensuring the consistency of 
feature representation among different images.
4  Explainable classification 
for cybersecurity
In this section, we survey studies in three different scenarios: 
when explanations are used for transparency of the model; 
when explanations are used to improve the performance of 
the model; and when explanations are used to explain errors 
made by the classifier. We summarized the contents of these 
studies in Table  2.
4.1  Explanations for transparency and trust
A core objective of XAI is to provide users with action-
able explanations that will help them understand why the 
model made a decision. We divide this section by the type 
of explanation: surrogate models, global explanations, and 
interpretable models.
4.1.1  Explaining with surrogate models
Islam et al. [54] proposed a semantic approach assigning 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (C, I, A) meanings 
to attacks and features in a dataset. First, they designed a 
feature generator, where the three most important features 
for each attack are extracted. New features were then created 
by assigning a C, I, or A attribute to the ones they extracted. 
In addition, they computed a coefficient that illustrated the 
weight of the feature in the overall impact of C, I, or A. Sec-
ond, they implemented an evaluator that ran multiple attack 
detection models and measured the impacts of different sets 
of features, including the previously generated ones. They 
used the CIC-IDS2017 dataset [110]. Due to resource limi-
tations, the dataset could not be entirely exploited, thereby 
limiting the scope of validity of their results. The results 
illustrated that, although the set of generated features did 
not outperform the full set of features, it did not perform 
significantly worse. The generated features also provided 
a human operator with an explanation of the contribution 
of the C, I, or A attribute in the classification of the attack. 
Similar results were obtained when trying to detect unknown 
attacks (i.e., removing all data from a specific attack before 
training). Interestingly, a structured query language injection 
can only be detected using the proposed method. The weaker 
performance is partly due to the simplification of the attacks 
and features into three attributes (i.e., C, I, and A).