806 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812
1 3
the other on the intersection of selected features/training 
samples identified as important by each interpretation. The 
authors highlighted that the vulnerability of the interpre -
tation methods stemmed from the high dimensionality of 
the input instances and highly nonlinear structures of deep 
networks.
Rieger et al. [99] proposed a defense method against 
adversarial attacks on explanations. They aggregated mul -
tiple explanations methods to reduce the variance of each 
explanation, thereby enhancing stability against adversar -
ial examples. They explored two scenarios: one where the 
attacker was unaware of the XAI method used and optimized 
against the wrong one, and the other where the attacker 
optimized against the aggregation of XAI methods. In both 
cases, the attacker had full control over the input and full 
knowledge (but no control) about the network. In addition, 
in the second scenario, the attacker knew the parameters 
and ratios used by the aggregation method. Their results 
show that, if an attacker optimizes his/her example against 
one method, the attack does not accurately translate into 
another method. We assume that an attacker would occasion-
ally optimize against the correct explanation method. In the 
second scenario, despite the attacker having full knowledge 
about the target system, the results showed that the proposed 
aggregation method was resilient against adversarial exam-
ples. In the experiments, they used VGG16 [114], a deep 
CNN and the ImageNet [26] dataset. Although the study 
explored multiple explanation methods, it omitted the inte-
grated gradient [ 122] method from the aggregation owing to 
its computational complexity, thereby indicating a potential 
scalability issue.
Fenoy et al. [69] proposed a method for evaluating the 
robustness of XAI algorithms against adversarial noise. 
They studied the effect of the FGSM adversarial attack on 
two XAI algorithms: Grad-CAM [108] and SIDU [89]. 
These algorithms work on images, so the authors proposed 
to use a portion of 100 natural images from ImageNet. How -
ever, to assess the robustness of the algorithms, the ground 
truth of the explanation is required. Hence, Fenoy et al. [69] 
collected data from an eye tracker to create a heatmap for 
each image of the dataset. After collecting all data, they used 
Grad-CAM and SIDU to obtain a new heatmap, applied an 
adversarial attack (FGSM) on the data, and measured the 
Kullback–Leibler divergence between the eye tracker and the 
XAI algorithms. This method permits assessing and finding 
highly robust algorithms against adversarial attacks, albeit 
only on FGSM in Fenoy et al.’s study.
A few papers focused on the mathematical proof of the 
robustness of XAI methods. For example, Kindermans et al. 
[59] highlighted the sensitivity of saliency methods (used for 
XAI) to adversarial attacks. They proposed an axiom called 
“input variance,” which states that these methods must 
verify to become robust. They mathematically proved the effectiveness of their method and demonstrated it through 
experiments on the MNIST database.
Malfa et al. [70] developed a robust method to locally 
explain decisions made by NNs in NLP. They performed 
mathematical and experimental demonstrations of their pro-
posal on sentiment analysis datasets. They trained fully con-
nected NNs and CNNs for their experiments, and the results 
showed that the explanations could detect the words in the 
sentence that influenced the prediction.
Attribution methods assign a score to each feature based 
on its contribution to the classifier’s prediction. Wang et al. 
[134] showed that attribution methods were vulnerable to 
adverse perturbations. They modeled the vulnerability of 
these methods in terms of the geometry of the targeted mod-
el’s decision surface and formalized their robustness as a 
local Lipschitz condition on the mapping. Subsequently, they 
proposed a smooth surface regularization to improve the 
robustness of all gradient-based attribution methods.
Several detectors of Android malware now exist, but they 
are generally vulnerable to adversarial examples that evade 
detection. Melis et al. [83] used gradient-based explanations 
to evaluate the robustness of a model against such adversar -
ial attacks. They used gradient-based explanations to quan-
tify the evenness of feature importance, i.e., how close it is to 
equal importance for each feature. They also experimentally 
demonstrated that this uniformity was strongly correlated 
to the adversarial robustness for the gradient input and inte-
grated gradients methods.
Boopathy et al. [17] showed that attacks that sought clas-
sification and explanation evasion would generally disturb 
the explanation of the original class as well. To detect such 
attacks, they proposed a metric called l1 2-class discrepancy, 
which measured the explanation discrepancy of both the 
original class (e.g., malicious software) and the target class 
(e.g., benign software). For nonbinary classification prob-
lems, the authors adapted their method by weighting classes 
according to their importance in prediction. By incorporat-
ing this metric into the learning loss, highly robust models 
could be learned. Their experiments validated the concept 
and demonstrated the high robustness of the model.
5.5  Evaluation of the explanation
A “good” explanation is arguably difficult to define, as every 
stakeholder has different needs. In this section, we present 
studies that provide concrete evaluation of explanations, 
concerning the properties previously discussed. At the time 
of writing, the most popular perspective for evaluation was 
the robustness of the explanation.
Lin et al. [74] highlighted the lack of rigorous and com-
putationally inexpensive evaluation approaches and metrics 
to quantify the performance of explainability methods. To 
address this, they evaluated XAI methods based on their