799 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812 
1 3
The detector uses the phenomenon of skip connections to 
solve the vanishing gradient problem and reduce the train-
ing time. The study used the TON_IoT dataset [87], which 
contains several cyberattack classes, such as ransomware, 
backdoor, denial-of-service, distributed denial-of-service, 
Man-in-the-Middle, injection, cross-site scripting (XSS), 
and scanning attack. Their experiment demonstrated that the 
proposed model outperformed the long short-term memory 
and gated recurrent unit models at a lower computational 
cost. They also used LIME to investigate the contribution 
of each feature in the prediction phase.
Zebin et al. proposed an RF-based IDS to detect DNS-
over-HTTPS (DoH) attacks [124]. Precisely, they used 
SHAP to explain the results by determining the most impor -
tant features. The proposed method was evaluated with the 
CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 [86] dataset, where the traffic is 
described by 29 features. The experimental results demon-
strated the flow duration and packet length as the most dis-
criminative features.
Similarly, Giudici et al. [39] applied an enhanced version 
of SHAP (which is more global and robust in the presence of 
outlying observations), called the Shapley–Lorenz decom-
position method [40], to explain classification decisions on 
ordinal cyber-data (e.g., ordinal severity levels of cyber-risks 
include “low,” “medium,” or “high”). To explain the severity 
of each event, a linear rank regression model was used to 
express the observed severity as a function of a set of four 
explainable variables describing i) attack type (e.g., cyber -
crime or espionage), ii) attack technique (e.g., zero-day or 
malware), iii) type of victim (e.g., banking or hospital), and 
iv) geographic area where the event occurred (continent).
The explainable variables were the marginal contribu -
tions associated with each feature and are calculated using 
the Shapley–Lorenz decomposition method. The results 
showed that Shapley—Lorenz values were significantly 
easier to be interpreted than the Shapley values that were 
not normalized.
Iadarola et al. [53] introduced a framework for Android 
malware detection using an explanation method for image 
recognition. They tried to address the weakness of signature-
based anti-malware detection, which cannot detect zero-day 
malware. First, a binary executable dataset was converted into 
images, and then a CNN was used for training. In the explain -
ability steps, they generated heatmaps with Grad-CAM [108] 
and classified a subset of the test samples to the correspond-
ing class of malware. They evaluated 8,446 Android malware 
samples from 6 malware families and obtained an average 
accuracy of 0.97. In addition to its inability to detect uniden-
tified malware, the method requires a huge amount of training 
data to achieve a decent detection accuracy.
Shahid et al. [109] proposed an automated common vul-
nerability scoring system (CVSS) vector and severity score 
calculator for security vulnerability detection. The CVSS standard is an analysis of the severity of computer vulner -
abilities conducted by security experts. The CVSS vector 
represents the characteristics of a vulnerability, which can be 
computed into the severity score. The severity score repre-
sents the level of danger posed by the vulnerability and acts 
as the threshold in the classifier. CVSS scores are usually 
designed by a human expert, which is a time-consuming 
and arduous process. Consequently, automation is required. 
They trained several bidirectional encoder representations 
from transformer classifiers, with each metric producing the 
CVSS vector. The goal of the trained model was to deter -
mine the value of a CVSS vector with high accuracy. For the 
explainability method, gradient-based input using a saliency 
map was used to determine the most influential input.
4.1.3  Interpretable models
Mahbooba et al. [79] aimed at addressing the trust issue 
between users and ML models for IDS. They highlighted 
that most previous studies focused on the accuracy of clas-
sifiers without providing any insight into their reasoning or 
behavior. They used the DT algorithm on the KDD99 dataset 
[126]. In summary, their methodology comprised three main 
steps: feature ranking, DT rule extraction, and comparison 
with state-of-the-art algorithms. They described the feature 
on each branch and the threshold value to explain how the 
tree made decisions. However, their algorithm was vulner -
able to overfitting amid noise in the dataset.
Wang et al. [133] introduced TrafficAV, an explainable 
mobile malware detector. They captured the network traffic 
of a mobile device and investigated it for suspicious activity. 
TrafficAV gathers network traffic features by performing a 
multilevel network traffic analysis using the C4.5 DT algo-
rithm. The explainability method is ad hoc, based on the DT. 
They evaluated 8,312 benign applications and 5,560 mal-
ware samples on HTTP models, achieving 99.65% accuracy.
4.2  Explanations for improving the performance 
of classifiers
In this subsection, we discuss recent works about using 
XAI to improve the performance of classifiers. The major -
ity of latest publications in the field of AI have focused on 
improving accuracy, detection rate, and F1 score, while 
reducing the false alarm rate. Improving the model’s per -
formance via parameter tuning in a heuristic manner is 
computationally taxing. Consequently, XAI is deemed 
capable of increasing AI’s performance in an explainable 
way. We highlight three use cases: 1. Explainable IDS, 2. 
Side channel attack detection, and 3. Anomaly detection.
Khan et al. [131] leveraged global explanation on Tree-
SHAP to correlate an RF decision for explainable IDS. 
Their explainable IDS architecture comprised three main