790 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812
1 3
1 Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a paradigm for simulating human 
reasoning, e.g., classifying previously unobserved data, predict-
ing future events such as stock market trends, forecasting sales 
and consumer behavior. The goal of this field has been to develop 
general intelligence in AI [23]. Interest in AI-related research has 
been growing exponentially, partly motivated by its outstanding 
performance in computer vision (CV) and speech recognition. As 
researchers focus on improving model performance, the ability 
to explain the reasoning behind a model’s predictions becomes 
increasingly crucial. For example, “Why did I not get a loan?” 
and “Why does this X-ray picture say I have cancer?” are com-
pelling questions that the research community must be able to 
answer. Therefore, researchers have been exploring explainable 
AI (XAI), which is a paradigm that targets AI models and aims 
to provide explanations for their predictions.
Researchers have discussed the need to provide explanations 
for their models regarding several practical [44, 135], ethical [50], 
and operational [77] considerations. DARPA’s XAI program [44] 
highlighted that a machine learning (ML) model’s explainability 
is inversely proportional to its prediction performance (e.g., accu-
racy). Notably, deep learning (DL) models, which are arguably the 
most robust and complex type of AI algorithms, are also the most 
difficult to explain. The role of XAI is to enhance explainability 
while maintaining high performance. Xu et al. [135] claimed that 
XAI is essential for i) professionals (e.g., doctors) using AI sys-
tems to understand the decisions made, ii) end users (e.g., patients) 
who are affected by an AI decision—there are legal regulations 
that codify this need, such as the General Data Protection Regula-
tion (GDPR) [1 ], and iii) developers to improve AI algorithms by 
accurately identifying their strengths and weaknesses.
Holzinger et al. [50] highlighted the intersection between 
security and explainable ML. They argued that XAI could be 
used to select the right data anonymization techniques so that 
privacy is protected while the ML results remain viable. To com-
ply with the GDPR [1 ], researchers resort to anonymizing data 
they use. However, several standard anonymization techniques 
distort the predictions of ML algorithms. Researchers suggest 
that AI explainability could help in selecting ideal anonymization 
techniques for ML algorithms, as comprehending the ML deci-
sions would aid in understanding and estimating bias. Thus, XAI 
could be the key to designing solutions that leverage the power 
of ML while protecting privacy. There are two main approaches 
to explain deep neural networks (DNNs): i) making parts of a 
DNN transparent—sensitivity analysis [104] and layer-wise rel-
evance propagation (LRP) [15] are well-known methods, with 
superior performance for LRP to identify the most relevant pix-
els; ii) learning semantic graphs called explanatory graphs from 
existing DNNs, which aim to extract the knowledge learned by 
a DNN and model it as an explainable graph, as proposed by 
Zhang et al. [138].Longo et  al. [77] classified studies on XAI into two 
approaches: a minority of works that focuses on creating inher -
ently explainable models, and the majority that wraps black-box 
models with a layer of explainability, the so-called post hoc mod-
els. They also argued that explainability might be more attractive 
in some domains than others, including critical domains such 
as threat detection, protection against adversarial attacks, physi-
cian decision support, autonomous vehicles, and object detec-
tion. These domains are frequently explained by saliency maps 
[51]. From the perspective of technical challenges, they high-
lighted several issues, including the lack of a common approach 
to evaluate and compare AI models and the need to interpret 
explanations in the form of visualization or human-readable 
text. We conducted a rigorous literature review by investigat -
ing relevant papers from eight major digital academic libraries: 
Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore, ScienceDirect, SpringerLink, 
ACM Digital Library, Scopus, ResearchGate, and Semantic 
Scholar. During the collection process, we combed these librar -
ies based on a keyword search as follows: i) explanation-related 
terms such as “explainable,” “interpretable,” “understandable,” 
“intelligible,” and “comprehensible”; ii) AI-related terms, includ-
ing “AI,” “XAI,” “ML,” “DL,” “classification,” and “prediction” 
and “black-box.”; and iii) security-related terms, such as “adver -
sary,” “threats,” “attack,” “cybersecurity,” and “detection.”
To understand recent advancements in the field, the 
search was limited to publications between 2000 and 2022. 
The collated papers were classified by topic, i.e., applying 
XAI to cybersecurity or the security of XAI methods. We 
also checked the reference lists of the selected papers and 
employed a cascading strategy to identify additional papers, 
yielding a final list of 50 papers. The XAI has been broadly 
surveyed in several studies [ 2, 29, 47, 105]. Because it is an 
emerging field, the existing literature can be justifiably sur -
veyed without a specific domain scope. However, the recent 
advancements and increasing threats in the real world war -
rant a cybersecurity review of XAI. There are two existing 
works that address this topic from a high-level perspective: 
[6] and [121]. In [6 ], Mohiuddin et al. discussed the topic 
of XAI through the lens of multiple applications: health -
care, smart cities, NLP, security, etc. From a cybersecurity 
perspective, most of their analyses targeted intrusion detec-
tion systems, and their usage in the previously identified 
applications. The works discussed in the various cyberse-
curity subsections of that book did not explore the technical 
considerations and omitted several implementation details 
and technical results. Similarly, [121] considered various 
applications for AI models, but always presented a cyberse -
curity approach (as opposed to the scope of [6 ]). The analy -
sis was divided into three questions: what is the motivation 
for applying AI to a specific domain; what are the technical 
requirements for it; and how can XAI help with achieving 
the goals presented in the motivation?