801 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812 
1 3
4.4  Discussion
Despite not belonging to a cybersecurity use case, the mer -
its of the following study deserves the reader’s attention. 
Aguilar et al. [ 4] proposed an explainable AE using DTs 
for anomaly detection that deals with categorical data. Par -
ticularly, categorical attributes were one-hot encoded, and 
each attribute was used to construct a DT, which output the 
predicted attribute by considering other attributes. A final 
prediction layer was employed to determine whether the 
data point was an anomaly. As such, each DT explained one 
attribute, explaining the final decision through a set of DT 
rules. Twenty-eight datasets from the UCI ML Repository 
[14] were used for the experiments. Especially, datasets 
with two balanced classes or multiple imbalanced classes 
were divided using distribution optimally balanced strati-
fied cross-validation [136]. The resulting datasets had one 
majority class and one minority class for anomaly detection. 
The performance of the AE was compared with six other 
classifiers in terms of AUC and average precision score. The 
proposed solution ranked third per median value for AUC, 
but first for average precision. The strength of their study 
is the simplicity with which explanations were extracted 
from the trees while demonstrating them through synthetic 
examples. However, this system had limited scalability to 
datasets with less than a thousand attributes or with cat-
egorical attributes having tens of different values. As listed 
in Table  2, DTs have already been used in cybersecurity 
tasks, and the performance of this DT-based AE approach 
is worth investigating.
5  Security properties of XAI
In this section, we survey the literature investigating the 
security of XAI and outline several relevant security prop-
erties. We characterize the security of explanation methods 
according to four properties: fairness, integrity, privacy, and 
robustness. We include these properties under the scope of 
cybersecurity by considering how an attacker may compro-
mise them (e.g., altering explanations for an unfair treat-
ment) or how a potential victim may defend against such 
attacks (e.g., by consolidating explanations against adver -
sarial examples). By analyzing the literature, we elaborate 
on each property in the following subsections. The surveyed 
works are summarized in Table  3.
5.1  Fairness
A model is said to be fair if its output is irrelevant to indi-
viduals’ sensitive features, such as sex, race, or religion 
[95]. This is especially crucial when models used for decision-making affect individuals, such as loan, employ -
ment, insurance, or sentence. An explanation can be used to 
evaluate the fairness of a model, e.g., an auditor can verify 
the fairness of a decision by inspecting how a local model 
produced by LIME or SHAP uses the sensitive features. 
However, an agent who plans to discriminate or favor a 
group of people would attempt to deceive the auditor into 
believing the model is fair. Such an attack, called fairwash-
ing, has a notably different threat model than classic attacks 
on ML models, because a fairwasher is generally the model 
owner. The threat model is advantageous to the attacker 
because he/she generally has full knowledge of and control 
over the model, whereas the auditor may only possess lim-
ited knowledge and no control. Fairwashing has been widely 
studied, and most explanation methods thus far have been 
successfully attacked. The following studies show that, in 
general, an owner can easily fairwash their model and com-
plicate the detection of fairwashing for the auditor. These 
studies could serve as a reminder that the model owner 
should not be allowed to generate explanations.
Anders et al. [ 10] showed through differential geom-
etry that the saliency-based explanations of a classifier can 
be arbitrarily modified without changing its predictions. 
They demonstrated the relationship between explainabil-
ity and manifold learning, highlighting that the explana-
tions were based on dimensions orthogonal to the data 
manifold. They also proposed and experimented with a 
robust explanation method called tangent-space-projected 
explanation, which could not be manipulated by the attack 
described in the study.
Slack et al. [117] focused on manipulating counterfactual 
explanations. These explanations are especially attractive 
because they are actionable, i.e., they indicate what modifi-
cation of the input can modify the output. This explanation 
is generated by a local search that attempts to maximize an 
objective function. This objective function depends on the 
endpoint loss (how close its value is to the desired class) 
and the distance between the origin and the endpoint. For 
NNs, this explanation is generally computed by hill climb-
ing. A fair model should provide explanations with action-
ability (i.e., the simplicity to act on the explanation) that 
does not depend on the sensitive features, such as sex or 
race. However, the authors showed that the model owner can 
modify the learning procedure, so that a small perturbation 
applied to an input belonging to some population leads to 
counterfactual explanations. Precisely, the Euclidean norm 
of the counterfactual explanation will be remarkably lower. 
The authors experimentally demonstrated that such a modi-
fied model retained good accuracy, and the maneuver was 
not easily detected. Countermeasures include reducing the 
model complexity and adding noise to the initialization of 
the counterfactual-explanation-generation procedure.