803 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812 
1 3
Slack et al. [118] indicated that ad hoc explanations such 
as LIME and SHAP, which work by evaluating the neighbors 
of the input for which they generate an explanation, can be 
deceived. However, the neighbors may be outside the mani-
fold, i.e., they have a very low probability in the distribution 
of the input feature space. The authors exploited this fact to 
build an off-manifold point detector that detected whether 
LIME or SHAP were using some neighbors to generate an 
explanation. When this explanation process is detected, the 
model owner can substitute their model with a locally fair 
model that only relies on relevant attributes. The authors 
experimentally revealed that LIME was more vulnerable 
than SHAP. However, this attack can only be performed in 
black-box settings, when the auditor does not have access 
to the model’s internals. Additionally, its quality greatly 
depends on the off-manifold point detector, which must have 
good accuracy.
Sinha et al. [115] introduced an attack that completely 
modified the explanations with subtle input perturbations, 
while leaving the prediction unchanged in the domain of 
NLP applications. They built the input perturbation using a 
greedy algorithm based on metrics adapted to NLP applica -
tions, and successfully deceived LIME and integrated gradi-
ent explanation techniques.
Le Merrer et al. [ 72] indicated how a model owner can 
always wipe unwanted attributes from a local explanation 
when he/she controls the explanation generation method 
and not an external auditor. Precisely, they focused on local 
explanations in the form of DTs, where a model owner could 
simply eliminate any occurrence of sensitive features in the 
DT after its generation (e.g., with LIME). This attack could 
be detected by exhibiting inconsistencies between explana-
tions; however, the authors showed that these inconsistencies 
were difficult to obtain in practice, at least when the search 
was random.
Diamnov et al. [27] proposed a method that could mod-
ify a pretrained model to manipulate the output of feature 
importance explanation methods. They assumed that the 
explanation methods used in real-world settings could not 
indicate the fairness of a model. To prove their hypothesis, 
they chose several datasets from the UCI ML Repository 
[14], which contains data with sensitive features, such as 
sex or race. They optimized an existing model with a modi-
fied loss objective function. After the attack, the feature 
importance computed by the explanation method was com-
pletely modified.
Aivodji et al. [7 ] investigated the rationalization problem 
and the associated risk of fairwashing. Subsequently, they 
introduced LaundryML, an algorithm that enumerated the 
optimal model according to fidelity and unfairness. They 
considered fairwashing when the fidelity of the new model 
is high while the unfairness is significantly lower. They used 
two datasets known for their biased nature—Adult Income [62] and ProPublica Recidivism [55]. They used the fidel-
ity and unfairness metrics to evaluate the performance of 
LaundryML. The results obtained using a real-world dataset 
demonstrated the feasibility of the proposed approach.
Hence, all those attacks on fairness are fairwashing, 
where the model owner attempts to deceive auditors into 
believing their model was fair. However, fairwashing is not 
the only type of attack that can be orchestrated on fairness. 
For example, a user could create an adversarial example to 
manipulate a fair model into producing explanations that 
make it look unfair. If technically possible, this attack could 
be used to tarnish the public relations of a company.
Relevant use cases of fairwashing applied to security appli-
cations have not been published. Most scholars are interested 
in social bias, particularly linked to sex and skin color. Never -
theless, we expect fairwashing to be applicable to nationalities 
or geographical locations at a time where security products are 
playing an increasingly crucial role in cyberwarfare. Although 
fairwashing is widely studied, few defense mechanisms exist. 
In fact, several proposed attacks have resulted in their theoreti-
cal concealability. This line of research should be expanded 
to achieve verifiable fairness of ML models.
5.2  Integrity
Integrity is a classic property of data and processes that con -
cerns their trustworthiness and accuracy. A classic attack 
on the integrity of an ML model is the set of adversarial 
examples that evade a classifier by subtly modifying the fea-
ture input. Fairwashing can be considered a subcategory of 
integrity attacks, as it targets the integrity of explanations 
to feign fairness. In this subsection, we focus on integrity 
attacks that do not target fairness.
An explanation typically can be used as a second layer of 
information to complete a prediction. For example, an expert 
could use both prediction and explanation to make a deci-
sion. Therefore, an attack on integrity, in the classic sense, 
is an attack altering data provided to the expert (prediction, 
explanation) with no countermeasures indicating the manip-
ulation. Notably, during fairwashing, the objective of the 
attacker is to retain the (biased) output and modify the expla-
nation; meanwhile, in the class of attacks we describe in this 
subsection, both the output and explanation are manipulated.
The method proposed by [49] comprised optimizing a 
model to deceive saliency map-based explanation methods. 
This optimization is achieved by modifying the loss func-
tion to include the error between the produced explanation 
and the targeted, artificial explanation. The attack can be 
either passive, in which case the produced explanations are 
uninformative to the auditor, or active, in which the model 
owner fabricates the explanations. The authors experimen-
tally demonstrated the transferability of their attack to vari-
ous saliency map-based explanation methods.