805 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812 
1 3
Zhao et al. [141] showed that attackers could exploit the 
flaws of XAI to reconstruct a private image from model 
explanations. This is called an image-based model inver -
sion attack. They also indicated that the image reconstructed 
based on model prediction alone lacked quality, and that 
the exploitation of one or more explanations significantly 
improved the quality. Their experiments also confirmed that 
XAI methods that provided more explanations resulted in 
a greater loss of privacy, as they provided richer informa-
tion that can be exploited by attackers. The authors called 
for further studies on the tradeoff between explicability and 
privacy.
Shokri et al. [ 113] investigated how explainability, in 
addition to model predictions, contributed to performing 
membership inference attack, i.e., inferring whether a par -
ticular data point was present in the training dataset. They 
studied several types of explainability models and found 
that some methods, such as perturbation-based explana-
tions (e.g., SmoothGrad [ 119]), were more robust than back -
propagation explanations such as integrated gradient [122], 
although they produced explanation models with lower qual-
ity. They also demonstrated that an attacker could recon -
struct most of the dataset from the AI model prediction and 
XAI results (example-based explanation method). Finally, 
their experiments showed that i) the correlation between 
explainability and membership varied with the size of the 
dataset and that it was easier to execute a membership attack 
using XAI, on high-dimensional datasets, and ii) that minor -
ity data were more likely to be revealed.
Miura et al. [84] proposed a data-free model extraction 
(DFME) attack called MEGEX. The objective of that study 
was to clone a model without the initial dataset using both 
the prediction and explanation of the results. The initial 
hypothesis for cloning a model is that if the dataset used 
for training is available, the model can be reproduced by 
requesting the prediction; however, when the dataset is 
unknown, methods based on generative models that gen-
erate data for requested data to the victim model can be 
chosen. With MEGEX, the authors used the explanation to 
train a generative model. They compared their method with 
an existing method, DFME [127], and evaluated the test-data 
accuracy of the clone model from the two methods with the 
CIFAR-10 [ 64] and SVHN [ 91] datasets. They achieved a 
better result with fewer queries to the victim model. The 
main advantage of this method is its ability to reproduce a 
model with high accuracy and fewer queries. However, it 
requires access to the explanation from VanillaGrad.
5.4  Robustness
As we have previously defined the integrity property, where 
an attacker is attempting to forge explanations, we will dis-
cuss here works related to the robustness of explanations. In the following works, robustness is considered variations 
in explanations induced by variations of the original input.
Kang et al. [56] discussed attacking DNNs and their 
explanations with adversarial patches. An adversary patch 
is a correctly localized rectangle that does not hide objects 
in an image and causes its misclassification. By varying the 
location and perturbation ratio of the patches, the authors 
showed that these attacks could i) perturb the result of the 
DNN, but not those of the XAI model. The model can then 
determine the patch responsible for the misclassification; ii) 
perturb the DNN and explainability method, which can no 
longer detect the patches and designates other regions of the 
image as responsible for the decision.
The XAI method considered was Grad-CAM, and experi-
ments were performed on ImageNet.
Shi et al. [112] presented a variant of the IFGSM [68] 
attack, which is in turn based on FGSM [42]. The general 
idea of the IFGSM is to repeatedly adjust the perturbation 
direction with a fixed step size. Shi et al. [112] proposed 
an adaptative FGSM (Ada-FGSM) attack, where the step 
was dynamically adjusted to improve the performance. 
They compared their results with the performance of four 
other models; in terms of success rate and accuracy metrics, 
Ada-FGSM performed up to 1% better than the second-best 
model, IFGSM. They also used visualization techniques to 
follow the gradient evolution of these iterative algorithms 
and analyzed the results of their experiments. However, their 
analysis was limited to a few visual examples and was not 
applied to the entire dataset of their experiment. The gener -
ality of the behavior of Ada-FGSM with other data samples 
is difficult to determine.
Ghorbani et al. [38] indicated that the interpretation of an 
NN’s decision is fragile as a small adversarial perturbation 
could change it without changing the classification results. 
Disrupting the interpretation of NNs could harm the trust-
worthiness of certain applications, e.g., healthcare, where 
the interpretable decision was relevant as the classification 
result. They considered two categories of interpretation 
methods—the first one explained results by identifying the 
most important features (feature importance methods), and 
the second one by identifying training samples that contrib-
uted the most to the classification result (influence function 
methods). Adversarial attacks on interpretation methods aim 
to disrupt the contribution scores assigned to features and 
training samples by lowering the score of the most important 
features/training samples. The authors also defined iterative 
attacks for feature importance methods, and gradient sign-
based attacks for influence function methods. To measure 
the robustness of the different interpretation methods, the 
authors compared the interpretations (saliency maps) of 
each method on the original input, and its perturbed version. 
They used two metrics to measure the similarity between 
two interpretations—one based on rank correlation, and