807 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812 
1 3
ability to detect a backdoor trigger present in an input and 
causing its misclassification. A backdoor trigger is a small 
patch in an image (a yellow square in this paper) that causes 
the classifier (Trojan model) to misclassify the input. A good 
explanation should indicate that the reason for such mis-
classification is precisely the presence of this trigger. The 
explanation should indicate it as the region that contributed 
most to this misclassification. To diversify the evaluation 
measures, the authors considered several variations of the 
trigger by varying its color, size, and position in an image. 
They evaluated their proposal by considering several classi-
fiers and different explainability methods on the ImageNet 
dataset [103].
Hooker et al. [52] proposed a measure of the approxi-
mate accuracy of feature importance. They highlighted the 
challenge of evaluating the reliability of an explanation in 
the absence of a ground truth. One existing technique is to 
remove the important features from the input and observe 
the decrease trend of the classifier accuracy. However, this 
method has its drawbacks: it does not comply to one of the 
assumptions in ML that the training and evaluation data 
come from the same distribution. To address this issue, the 
authors proposed to evaluate the XAI methods by assess-
ing the decrease trend of the accuracy of a retrained model 
as the important features are removed. They named this 
approach “remove and retrain” (ROAR). The authors also 
performed a large-scale experiment where they choose the 
model ResNet-50, six estimators of feature importance, 
and three renowned open-source image datasets (ImageNet 
[24], Food 101 [18], and Birdsnap [16]). The results reveal 
that the commonly used base estimators were on par with 
a random assignment of importance. They concluded that 
their findings were pertinent to sensitive domains where the 
accuracy of XAI is crucial.
Adebayo et al. [3 ] showed that some saliency map (e.g., 
guided backpropagation and guided Grad-CAM) methods 
were, in fact, model- and data-independent (such as an 
edge-detection algorithm). Model independence means 
that a method is mainly based on data and not on a model; 
it evolves by comparing with a random model. Data inde-
pendence entails learning a model on data with completely 
shuffled labels. Therefore, the explanations created from 
such saliency maps are irrelevant to understanding the clas -
sifier’s decision. The results show that visual verification of 
an explanation alone cannot evaluate an explanation method.
5.6  Discussion
The security of XAI methods has mostly been investigated 
through the lens of an attacker. We surveyed 27 papers on 
the security of XAI, but only 6 of them described coun-
termeasures to a security problem. Additionally, most of 
them addressed the vulnerabilities of DNNs. The crafting of adversarial examples to evade classifiers has proven to 
be highly accessible in the computer vision field, and to 
some extent to other fields as well. The topic of fairness will 
become an important societal issue when automated deci-
sions are widely adopted. Existing works show the fragility 
of explanations, and attribute it to the high dimensionality 
and nonlinearities inherent to deep networks.
6  Discussion and future work
In the previous sections, we surveyed scientific publications 
that either employed explanation methods for cybersecurity 
use cases or directly investigated the security of explana-
tion methods. Most existing studies target the same specific 
topics; only a few have broadened their research scope. In 
this section, we discuss different research avenues that we 
believe constitute the future direction of secure explanation 
methods. These topics cover several requirements, such as 
legal, business efficiency, and performance evaluation.
6.1  From feature space to problem space
A challenge that was not addressed before is the reusability 
of XAI methods when applied to cybersecurity use cases. 
The type of cybersecurity data varies across different secu-
rity applications. Information regarding how security inci-
dents are triggered and attacks are orchestrated may be lost 
when processing raw security records through ML-based 
classification models. Pierazzi et al. [96] provided a formal 
definition of the transformation mapping the problem space 
to the feature space from the perspective of adversarial 
attacks against malware detection algorithms. Manipula-
tions over the feature space that successfully flip a classi-
fier’s decision output may violate the feasibility constraint 
posed by the problem space. For example, malware detec-
tion generally employs the term frequency-inverse document 
frequency (TF-IDF) vectors of n-grams of opcodes and/or 
dynamic analysis traces as feature representation. Modify -
ing the TF-IDF feature vector may easily change the clas-
sifier’s output. However, determining the changes in the 
raw opcodes/system calls that can cause variations in the 
TF-IDF feature representation remains a challenging task. 
This is intrinsically an ill-posed reverse problem. Further, 
the low-level codes/system calls of a malware sample are 
organized to deliver malicious functions. Blind modifica-
tion of any code segment might render the malware sample 
inexecutable. The feasibility constraints, i.e., coding syntax 
and code design of malware samples, implicitly limit the 
possible modifications in the problem and feature spaces. 
However, these constraints are not readily available and dif-
ficult to encode in a computable manner. In modern ML 
models, such as DNNs, mapping from the problem and