804 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812
1 3
Dombrovski et al. [28] showed that subtle modifications 
in images processed by NNs could yield arbitrary explana-
tions for saliency map methods, while keeping the network 
output constant. They orchestrated the attack by local opti-
mization, similar to classic adversarial attacks. The authors 
demonstrated that they could achieve this primarily owing to 
the use of the ReLU activation function. Indeed, the attacks 
were not distinguishable, creating piecewise linear bounda-
ries and a very large curvature. The authors proposed more 
robust explanations by replacing ReLU with SoftPlus only 
in the network that generated the explanations.
Galli et al. [37] analyzed the impact of adversary attacks 
on XAI methods. They used two perturbation attacks 
(IFGSM, DeepFool) on four CNNs to generate adversarial 
samples. Their experiments were performed on the Dog 
vs. Cat dataset [31] and the UIUC sports event dataset 
(Event8) [73 ]. Two methods of XAI (layered Grad-CAM 
and guided Grad-CAM) were used to detect adversarial 
attacks. However, the authors showed that the attack had no 
discernible impact on the interpretations produced by XAI 
to someone who is unaware of the attack, as the change 
was not detectable. Thus, relying on the explainability of 
results to detect the existence of adversarial attacks is not 
a rigorous approach.
Kuppa et al. [66] proposed a black-box attack on explain-
able models and evaluated the attack on three datasets. The 
attack had two possible targets: either the classifier alone or 
the classifier and interpreter. The attack focused on gradient-
based classifiers (i.e., NNs). The purpose of the attack was 
to identify relevant perturbations in an adversarial sample to 
compromise the system, while maintaining the explanation 
of the sample. The authors presented three cybersecurity-
related scenarios where the classifiers were variations of the 
perceptron. These scenarios targeted a perceptron tasked 
with detecting malicious PDF documents [45], a perceptron 
for Android malware classification [12], and an IDS using 
adversarial AEs [67]. They implemented these attacks using 
the datasets proposed by the original authors for each sce-
nario, which reinforced the validity and reusability of Kuppa 
et al.’s [66] results.
Kuppa et al. [65] proposed a general formalization of 
security problems in XAI. First, they highlighted the moti-
vation of their work by describing five real-life use cases: 
i) membership inference attacks (which involved determin-
ing if a sample belonged to the training data), ii) model 
extraction attacks  (which aimed at retrieving the actual 
parameters used in a model), iii) poisoning attacks (which 
targeted the classification performance by corrupting train-
ing data), iv) adversarial examples (which aimed to evade 
security classifiers), and v) counterfactual explanations  
(the goal of which was to find the input data points that 
shared similarities with other entry points but did not yield 
the same classification results).Although counterfactual explanations were similar to 
adversarial examples, they differed in purpose; the latter 
aimed to evade security classifiers, whereas the former 
facilitated understanding of a model by providing expla-
nations for it. The authors mathematically defined the 
attack model for these use cases as well as the explanation 
methods. They exploited three datasets: leaked passwords 
from multiple incidents, CIC-IDS2017 [110] for network 
traffic, and a malware dataset collected from Virusshare 
[129], combined with benign software collected from vari-
ous sources. They evaluated their implementation against 
multiple commercial tools and demonstrated the attacks’ 
ability to evade antivirus solutions.
Cantareira et al. [20] proposed a method for investigat-
ing models subjected to adversarial examples. The method 
used the visual analytic framework to explain adversarial 
attacks. This method explored layers and weights inside a 
model to determine which areas were triggered by adver -
sarial examples and allowed to compare data from training 
data and adversarial examples. The method is as follows. 
First, it trains two models with different datasets—small 
CNN for MNIST dataset and MobileNet V2 for ImageNet. 
Second, it generates adversarial data using projected gradi-
ent descent, while selecting random data from the training 
sample as the background data, to create an adversarial 
set. Third, it selects an image from the baseline, runs it 
through the models, and projects its output on a view 
with the adversarial counterpart. With this, we observed 
the change in their behavior at each layer of the models, 
though the effectiveness of the view depends on how rep-
resentative the background data is.
Zhang et al. [139] argued that DNN interpretations were 
vulnerable to adversarial attacks. They defined adversarial 
attacks as Adv2, which disrupted both the DNN and its 
interpretation, and succeeded in deliberately designating 
a prediction and its interpretation. Thus, they could gen-
erate adversarial samples, the predictions of which were 
interpreted as benign samples. Notably, the DNN and its 
interpretation are nonlinear, which allows an attacker to 
exploit both. Finally, they explored the possible counter -
measures to handle these attacks. They mathematically 
proved the effectiveness of their proposal, and demon-
strated it through experiments performed on the ImageNet 
[25] and ISIC 2018 challenge dataset [21].
5.3  Privacy
XAI methods can be used to violate the privacy of either 
the model or data. While several papers have explored the 
privacy issues of AI algorithms, few have focused on the 
privacy of XAI methods. Likewise, to protect the privacy of 
the model users, the explanation model should be unclon-
able. The literature contains a report on the cloning a model.