798 Annals of Telecommunications (2022) 77:789–812
1 3
Zolanvari et al. [143] proposed TRUSTXAI, a model-
agnostic, high-performance XAI model suitable for 
numerical applications. They used three different datasets: 
WUSTL-IIoT [142], NSL-KDD [126], and UNSW [88]. 
These are tabular traffic datasets for intrusion detection. 
The system works by modeling the statistical behavior of 
AI outputs. The input features are transformed into a set of 
latent variables using a factor analysis [93]. Subsequently, 
these variables are measured using the mutual informa-
tion concept. The most influential variables for the output 
are set as representatives of the class. Finally, the Gauss-
ian distribution is used to determine the likelihood of each 
sample’s class. Their experiment showed that TRUSTXAI 
successfully provided explanations for random samples with 
a 98% success rate. Six samples (three positives and three 
negatives) were randomly chosen from the test set. Com -
pared with LIME, TRUSTXAI was superior in performance, 
speed, and explainability. They claimed that the proposed 
model yields a more straightforward explanation than LIME, 
by modeling the output with a statistical measure, which is 
easy to understand. However, it has one main limitation; it 
tends to overfit due to the use of mutual information when 
picking class representatives.
Karn et al. [57] introduced an automated cryptomin-
ing pod detection in a Kubernetes cluster using a statisti-
cal explainability mechanism. They attempted to identify 
and classify any background malware executables that were 
running. For the explanation task, they implemented SHAP 
for XGboost, LIME for NN, and DT. The explanation justi-
fies any pod removal decision, implying a running process 
of cryptomining. Similarly, [123] proposed a hybrid ora-
cle–explainer approach to develop an explainable intrusion 
detection system (IDS), which combined an opaque clas-
sifier based on an artificial neural network (ANN) and an 
interpretable module using DT. During the inference phase, 
the ANN classification decision of a given input is explained 
by the DT’s decision on the same input, or the closest input 
in terms of the l2 (Euclidean) norm.
Guo et al. [45] proposed LEMNA, an explanation frame-
work for malware detection applications. LEMNA is the 
sole explanation method designed specifically for cyberse-
curity applications. They used a the PDF malware dataset 
from Smutz et al. [120 ]. LEMNA attempts to approximate 
a local area within a DL decision boundary using an inter -
pretable model. This model is designed to handle feature 
dependency and nonlinear local boundaries. The framework 
works by treating a DL model as a black-box and performing 
approximation using a mixture regression model boosted by 
a fused lasso. The fused lasso forces similar coefficients of 
neurons to be assigned to adjacent features within a small 
threshold, taking features as groups and making the learning 
algorithm learn a target model based on the feature groups. 
The mixture regression model is a combination of multiple LR models; Guo et al. employed it to avoid the nonlinear 
approximation problem.
4.1.2  Global explanations
An explainable IDS was proposed in [132], which combined 
local explanation (using original SHAP) and global expla-
nation (using modified SHAP). In particular, the value of 
each feature was divided into several intervals, each of which 
was measured with Shapley values. The Shapley values were 
then averaged, yielding a global explanation. While SHAP 
offers fast computation for explanation, the framework lacks 
capability for real-time updates.
In [11], an autoencoder (AE)-based anomaly detection 
scheme using SHAP is proposed. They examined the robust-
ness of the methodology by replacing one feature with noise 
and assuming that the noise feature should not explain an 
anomaly. If the selected feature contributed to the expla-
nation, they introduced a perturbation. The new instance 
should be less anomalous, and the anomaly score should 
then be reduced. They experimented with the KDD Cup 
1999 dataset (intrusion detection) from the UCI ML archive, 
revealing that SHAP outperformed LIME on reducing the 
reconstruction error.
SHAP was also used in [106] for explaining and interpret-
ing classification decisions of an ML-based network IDS. 
Two classifiers—a deep feedforward NN and an RF—were 
evaluated on several recent intrusion detection databases, 
namely CIC-IDS2018 [22], TON_IoT [87], and BoT–IoT 
[63]. Two feature sets of each database were considered: 
one set contained 83 features extracted via CICFlowMeter 
[71], while the other contained 43 features extracted from 
NetFlow [107]. The evaluations were focused on finding the 
most interesting features for each classifier. The results of 
explainability exhibited some similarities between the two 
classifiers with respect to the most influential features in 
different databases. The authors also noted that the influ-
ence and importance of each network feature varied with 
the dataset.
Alenezi et al. [8] designed an explainable ML framework 
for malware and malicious URL detection. They imple-
mented three XAI methods based on SHAP: TreeExplainer, 
KernalExplainer, and DeepExplainer. These XAI methods 
explained the prediction of common classifiers, such as RF 
and XGboost. They used a URL dataset, ISCX-URL2016 
[81], and an Android malware dataset, CICMalDroid 2020 
[80], both published by the Canadian Institute for Cyber -
security. They compared the performance of each method 
using different setups. The results showed no optimal uni -
versal setup for any one scenario.
Khan et al. [58] designed a timely detector for attack vec-
tors on the Internet of Medical Things networks. The model 
was developed using bidirectional simple recurrent units.