Information  2024 , 15, 656 10 of 24 
 
 • Maximum (max) 
• Probabilistic OR (probor) 
• Summation (sum, the sum of the rules aggregated sets). 
As shown in Figure 17, the aggregation of the rules’ output sets using the summation 
method is the shaded area of the Minor fuzzy set associated with the Severity of the acci-
dent as rule 2 does not affect the FIS output. 
 
Figure 17. Aggregated output membership functions following the implication operation (the 
green plot from 1% to 40% is associated with rule  1, the red line from 60% to 100% is associated 
with rule 2). 
Defuzzification element:  The output(s) of the FIS is crip  because the value(s) may need 
to be used to control a device or be interpreted numerically. The defuzzification process 
converts the aggregated fuzzy se t associated with each output to a crisp (numerical) value. 
There are multiple defuzzification methods that include [15]: 
• Centroid (centre of gravity) 
• Bisector 
• Middle of maximum (the average of th e maximum value of the output set), 
• Largest of maximum 
• Smallest of maximum. 
The centroid defuzzification method is wide ly used in numerous applications. It de-
termines the centre of the area under the aggregated fuzzy set. Its output ( y, i.e., the FIS 
output) for a non-smoot h aggregated set is 
𝑦=∑ఓ(௫೔)௫೔ ೔
∑ఓ(௫೔)೔  (13)
where 𝜇(𝑥௜) is the degree of membership value for point xi in U. 
2.4. Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System 
Although FIS is a valuable tool for performi ng reasoning in a linguistic form, it does 
not have the ability to learn from examples and thus automatically adapt its parameters. 
On the other hand, artificial neural networks (ANNs) have a learning capability through 
training but have a limitation that can behave like a black box, i.e., they do not provide 
transparent reasoning for their decisions. By combining the FIS and ANNs, the strengths 
of the two artificial intelligence techniques complement, resulting in a powerful tool called 
adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS ) [16]. For completeness, a brief introduc-
tion to ANNs is included to help understanding of ANFIS. A basic ANN architecture is 
the perceptron [17]. Like other ANNs, a perceptron consists of several interconnected 
nodes also known as processing elements or neurons. A node making up the perceptron 
is shown in Figure 18.