Information  2024 , 15, 656 20 of 24 
 
 prediction and an adaptive noise cancellation method. There are also several implemented 
applications of fuzzy c-means such as clustering quasi-random data. 
Developments in deep learning techniques  [102–104] have created opportunities for 
their integration with fuzzy logic [96], facilitating complex problems to be tackled effec-tively and opening opportunities for further research and development. 
5. Conclusions 
The operations of main fuzzy logic techniqu es, i.e., fuzzy infere nce system, adaptive 
neuro-fuzzy inference system and fuzzy c-means, were explained and an exploration of 
developments in the field was carried out. Approaches to implement fuzzy logic models 
were outlined. The article was prepared in such a way as to allow a broad readership. 
Although fuzzy logic is a well-established field, there remain numerous development 
and application opportunities. An exciting area  is hybrid systems, where fuzzy logic tech-
niques are combined with one or more other arti ficial intelligence techniques such as deep 
learning, robotics, and genetic algorithms, th us providing a greater problem-solving ca-
pability. There are also numerous opportunit ies to use fuzzy logic as part of embedded 
systems and devise solutions for their optimum adaptation to integrated circuits. 
Funding: This research received no external funding. 
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. 
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. 
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in the study are included in the 
article, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author. 
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest. 
Appendix A. Set Properties 
Given the definitions: 
• A, B and C: sets 
• ∅: Null set, i.e., a set without any member 
• 𝑈: Universal set (a set that has all elements  of other sets including its own elements) 
• c: Complement 
• ∪: Union 
• ∩: Intersection 
• ⊆: subset or equal ( ⊂: subset) 
• \: Complement 
• Min: minimum 
• Max: maximum 
The main operations and properties are: 
Union: 𝐴∪𝐵=𝜇 ஺(𝑥)∪𝜇 ஻(𝑥)=𝑚 𝑎 𝑥 ൫𝜇஺(𝑥),𝜇஻(𝑥)൯ 
Intersection: 𝐴∩𝐵=𝜇 ஺(𝑥)∩𝜇 ஻(𝑥)=𝑚 𝑖 𝑛 ൫𝜇஺(𝑥),𝜇஻(𝑥)൯ 
Complement: 𝐴஼=\𝐴 
Commutativity  𝐴∪𝐵=𝐵∪ 𝐴 
 𝐴∩𝐵=𝐵∩ 𝐴 
Associativity 𝐴∪(𝐵∪𝐶 )=(𝐴∪𝐵)∪𝐶 
 𝐴∩(𝐵∩𝐶 )=(𝐴∩𝐵)∩𝐶 
Distributivity: 𝐴∪(𝐵∩𝐶 )=(𝐴∪𝐵)∩(𝐴∪𝐶) 
 𝐴∩(𝐵∪𝐶 )=(𝐴∩𝐵)∪(𝐴∩𝐶) 
Impotency:  𝐴∪𝐴=𝐴 
 𝐴∩𝐴=𝐴 
Identity: 𝐴∪∅= 𝐴