Information  2024 , 15, 656 15 of 24 
 
 support system to determine the dew point te mperature [38]. Customer  services were op-
timised using fuzzy logic models [39]. 
An ANFIS model was developed to predict the free fatty acid (FFA) content in 
bleached and deodorized palm oil [40]. The ANFIS was effective in estimating the FFA quality for the palm oil refining process. Adaptivity in learning and facilitating mobility 
in the manner of learning was achieved by incorporating an ANFIS [41]. 
3.2. Fuzzy Logic Developments in Industrial Processes and Control 
Fuzzy logic applications in oil and gas indu stries included the development of high-
resolution geological models for flow simulations, pressure control systems, ranking hy-
drocarbon reservoirs, estimating the rate of dr ill bit penetration, esti mating rock strength, 
and chock size control [13]. A fuzzy logic model was integrated with a wireless sensor 
network to monitor essential soil parameters, including PH, temperature, humidity, elec-
trical conductivity, nitrogen, phosphorus, an d potassium [42]. The model proved effective 
in helping farmers to gather information about the soil quality of stevia crops. A review 
of applications of fuzzy logic control for refrigeration and air conditioning systems 
showed that fuzzy controllers can provide an  improved thermal efficiency as compared 
to classic controllers such as the proportional–integral–derivative (PID) and they reduce energy consumption [43]. A fuzzy logic controller was devised for a small-scale solar 
plant. The controller recognised the type of users according to their energy consumption 
and optimised the thermal load by switching among different operational modes [44]. The 
controller increased the overall electrical and thermal production. 
A fuzzy control was used as part of the sc heduling of feed rate  for computer numer-
ical control machine tools [45]. The controll er shortened the processing time, improved 
the cutting precision and provided a more stable machining. A methodology to adjust the 
parameters of a fuzzy logic controller of an  energy management system was devised [46]. 
The approach aimed to minimise the power peaks and fluctuations of a residential mi-
crogrid. A risk assessment and management model to improve understanding of safety in railway stations was devised using an ANFIS [47]. A hybrid ANFIS and genetic algo-
rithm system managed to optimise the operation of a piezoelectric cantilever–oscillator–
spring energy harvester [48]. Adsorption of re active orange 16 by hydrochar was assisted 
by an ANFIS [49]. There has been  a recent detailed survey of the applications of ANFIS to 
photovoltaic applications [50]. ANFIS has prov ed effective in multiple applications re-
lated to the construction industry [51,52]. 
3.3. Fuzzy Logic Developments in Data Communication, Telecommunication and Internet  
of Things 
Wireless mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs) communicate without reliance on a 
fixed infrastructure as the computer data can move through the network by hopping in-
termediate nodes till it reaches the destination. A fuzzy logic system was devised as part 
of a MANET to determine the transmission parameters resulting in an improved opera-
tional performance [53]. The manner the operatio nal load is shared ac ross the elements of 
a computer network is a factor in the overal l performance of the network. A sender-initi-
ated fuzzy-logic-based protoc ol was devised to improve th e performance of computer 
networks by appropriately balancing the operational load across the nodes [54]. A fuzzy 
neural network-based model was designed to de al with some of the problems associated 
with the Internet industry, e.g., runtime ambiguity, instability and large data volume [55]. The performance of computer networks can be  examined by considering their quality of 
service (QoS). However, to determine QoS, computer traffic info rmation based on the 
communicated data packets needs to be gather ed. As examining every transmitted packet 
is not practical due to their quantity, sampling of the data packets is required. A study 
utilised an adaptive fuzzy logic data packet sampling approach that proved more effective than the conventional non-adaptive approach es in representing the communicated traffic 
[56].