Information  2024 , 15, 656 17 of 24 
 
 software, e.g., in Python [87]. They were also  implemented on integrated circuit chips [88–
90]. There were numerous implementations of  fuzzy logic systems and models based on 
Matlab [91]. Matlab has a Fuzzy Logic ToolboxTM with a comprehensive user’s guide doc-
ument [92] providing detailed instructions on developing fuzzy logic systems and appli-cations. In this section, Matlab is used to  illustrate implementations of a basic Mamdani 
FIS-based model to determine a car accident’s severity (i.e., Figure 10). The example is 
kept deliberately simple to be general and focus on the implementation aspects rather 
than on a specific application. The rules are: 
Rule 1 : If Speed High AND Distance Small THEN Severity Major. 
Rule 2: If Speed Low AND Distance Large THEN Severity Minor. 
Rule 3:  If Speed Medium AND Distance Medium THEN Severity Moderate. 
For this purpose, the Matlab Fuzzy Logic Designer [92] was used as it allowed a 
graphic user interface (GUI) method of FIS impl ementation; however, it is also possible to 
implement fuzzy logic models using Matlab’s scripting and Simulink [92]. The Matlab Fuzzy Logic Designer has five GUI widows [92]: 
• Fuzzy Logic Designer’s Main Window : This window allows the overall FIS model to be 
viewed, its input(s) and output(s) to be named, their ranges specified, and the FIS operational parameters such as implication, aggregation, and defuzzification meth-
ods to be selected from a range of possible options. 
• Membership Function Editor : This window allows the types and parameters of the in-
put(s) and output(s) fuzzy sets to be defined by selecting amongst 13 different mem-
bership functions. 
• Rule Editor : This window provides an easy approach to defining the rules associated 
with the FIS model. The operators ‘AND’ and ‘OR’ are available to construct complex 
rules. It also allows the rules to have a we ighting to control the level of their signifi-
cance to the FIS output in relation to other rules. 
• Rule Viewer : This window allows the user to select  the values of the inputs to the FIS 
and determine and observe the FIS output(s). 
• Surface View : This window provides a 3-dimensional surface view relating any two 
selected inputs to the FIS and one of its outputs. 
The FIS can be implemented by typing ‘ fuzzy’ from the Matlab [6] command line. 
This results in the display of the Fuzzy Logic Designer  GUI window showing a FIS with a 
single input (called input1) and single ou tput (called output1). From this window 
• A single click on input1 allows its name to be changed to Speed. 
• From the window’s Edit menu, followed by Add variables , then Input , a second input 
can be added to the FIS model, and its name can be changed to Distance. 
• By clicking on output1, its na me can be changed to Severity. 
• The FIS parameters can be set as: 
• Operators for the rules: AND (Minimum, min), OR (Maximum, max) 
• Implication method: (Minimum, min) 
• Aggregation method: Sum 
• Defuzzification method: Centroid 
• FIS type: Mamdani 
From the Fuzzy Logic Designer  window, a double click on the input Speed opens the 
related Membership Function Editor
 window. The default member ship functions are trian-
gular. The range can be set as 1 to 60 (mph). By clicking the individual membership func-
tions, their names and parameters can be set to those shown in Figure 2. It is also possible 
to move the membership functions to the desired locations by pointing a mouse at them. 
The second input (Distance) and output (Sev erity) parameters can similarly be defined 
(following Figures 13 and 14, respectively) ex cept for the output trapezoidal membership 
functions should be selected. 
From the Fuzzy Logic Designer  window, by clicking on the  Edit  icon followed by Rules , 
the Rule Editor  window is displayed, and the associ ated rules can be entered. From the