Information  2024 , 15, 656 14 of 24 
 
 𝒗௝=∑ ఓ೔ೕ  × ೘௫೔ಿ
೔సభ
∑ ఓ೔ೕ೘ ಿ
೔సభ   j = 1, 2, ..., C (24)
ii. Update 𝜇௜௝ with 𝒗௝ 
𝜇௜௝=ଵ
∑ ቆቛ𝒙೔ష𝒗ೕቛ
ฮ𝒙೔ష𝒗ೖฮቇమ
೘షభ
಴
ೖసభ  i = 1, 2, …, N,  j = 1, 2, ..., C 
(25)
iii. Determine ‖𝜇௧−𝜇௧ିଵ‖, i.e., the magnitude of change in the degrees of membership 
between the current and previous iteration. 
iv. If ‖𝜇௧−𝜇௧ିଵ‖<𝜀, the algorithm iteration is terminated (i.e., training is completed) 
otherwise t is incremented by 1 and the iteration is continuous from step (i). 
3. Results 
Fuzzy logic has been applied to a broad ra nge of problems associated with process 
control, object recognition, image and signal processing, prediction, classification, deci-
sion-making, optimisation  and time series analysis [13]. In this section, an overview of 
some fuzzy logic developments is provided. Th e section also includes the implementation 
aspects of fuzzy logic models. 
3.1. Fuzzy Logic Developments in Decision Support 
An article has provided a review of the de velopments in fuzzy logic applications for 
decision support [24]. The topics  included in the article covered the roles of fuzzy logic in 
decision-making, evaluation methods, pred iction methods and decision-support algo-
rithms. Fuzzy logic has been applied to assess ships for search and rescue operations [25]. 
This proved helpful for the application as several parameters had to be compared to rank 
the ships according to the coordinator’s pref erences and as some related data could be 
missing, or incomplete. A framework that util ised FIS was devised to assist decision-mak-
ers in partitioning an urban area based on the presence and characteristics of the greenery, related to the built and social fabric [26]. 
A fuzzy logic decision support system that integrated bridge information modelling 
and cost estimation was devised [27]. The model could assist the relevant stakeholders to 
conceptually plan for concrete box–bridge construction projects. A study considered the 
ergonomic risks that modular construction workers are exposed to and devised a decision support system that could help practitioners au tomatically assess the risks [28]. A decision 
support system that adapted four fuzzy in ference systems was implemented to monitor 
the renal function by the level of proteinuria and the glomerular filtration rate [29]. Fuzzy 
logic was utilised to deal with the risk that could arise from a lack of information leading 
to uncertainty in auditing [30]. A fuzzy logic approach assisted in optimising display win-
dows in a clothes shop [31]. An intelligent st rategy with Q-learning (i.e., a model-free re-
inforcement learning algorithm) and a fuzzy control algorithm was proposed to improve 
decision-making in enterprise innovation [32]. A hybrid fuzzy multi-criteria decision-making model to open innovation partner evaluation was devised [33]. The fuzzy set the-
ory proved effective in measuring the commercial potential of new product ideas [34]. 
A multi-criteria fuzzy logic decision support  approach to assess possible alternatives 
for power generation in non-interconnected ar eas of Colombia was reported [35]. The ef-
fectiveness of this approach was demonstrated  using a real case study on the San Andrés 
energy-planning problem. A fuzzy inference model to facilitate decision support for sus-
tainable production planning has been develo ped and its effectiveness demonstrated in a 
case study [36]. A fuzzy logic-based tool to support decision-making in planning transport 
development was devised [37]. The tool allo wed assessment of the infrastructure devel-
opment projects in road and rail transpor tation. An ANFIS was applied in a decision