Information  2024 , 15, 656 3 of 24 
 
 where the symbol “+” in expression (1) is not a mathematical addition or logical OR but it 
represents an aggregation or collection  operation. For a finite continuous U, the fuzzy set 
A can be represented as 
𝐴=    ∫௑ఓಲ(௫)
௫ 𝑑(𝑥)   (2)
The contribution of this article is informative explorations of the main fuzzy logic 
concepts, combined with discussions of rece nt developments in the field, and system 
modelling implementation coverage. The manner of preparing this article was to ensure 
prior information about the field was not requir ed to be able to follow up and understand 
its contents. Membership functions play a central role in the field of fuzzy logic as they 
facilitate conversion between crip and fuzzy data. Therefore, the main membership func-
tions are presented, and their features are explained. Several fuzzy logic applications were based on fuzzy inference system (FIS), adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) 
and fuzzy c-means techniques. Therefore, th e operations of these techniques are ex-
plained. A discussion of recent fuzzy logic applications associated with industrial pro-
cesses and control, decision support, data and telecommunication, and signal and image 
processing are provided. Although the coverage of all publications in the fuzzy logic fields 
was not practical, the aim was to provide a representative coverage of the developments. 
In the following sections, a description of the main fuzzy logic concepts is provided and 
some of the developments in the field are ou tlined. A section on implementing fuzzy logic 
systems is included and the manner FIS could be implemented in Matlab [6] is illustrated 
through an example. 
2. Fuzzy Logic Concepts 
In this section, the main fuzzy logic concepts are explained. 
2.1. Membership Functions 
A design consideration in developing a fuzzy logic system is the types and parame-
ters of the membership functions as they characterise fuzzy sets. A study provided a re-view of issues associated with membership functions [7]. Some popular membership func-
tions are described in this section. In Figure  2, triangular membership functions are used 
to represent the fuzzy sets for different speeds.  As indicated in Figure 3, a triangular mem-
bership function is spec ified by the parameters 𝑎, b and c, where 𝑎 < b < c. 
 
Figure 3. A triangular membership function. 
The parameters 𝑎 and c indicate the starting and end points of base of the triangle 
and b corresponds to the point on the base of the triangle associated with its peak. The 
triangular membership function can be symmetric (as in Figure 3) or it can be asymmetric. 
It can be expressed as 
𝜇்௥௜௔௡௚௨௟௔௥ (𝑥) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ቀ𝑚𝑖𝑛 ቀ𝑥−𝑎
𝑏−𝑎,1 ,𝑐−𝑥
𝑐−𝑏ቁ,0ቁ (3)