Information  2024 , 15, 656 9 of 24 
 
 For an illustrative purpose, only two rules are considered: 
Rule 1: IF Speed Low AND Distance Large THEN Severity Minor. 
Rule 2: IF Speed High OR Distance Small THEN Severity Major. 
The minimum (min) and maximum (max) de scriptors are used to implement the 
AND and OR operators, respectively. It is possib le to give a unique weighing to each rule 
to indicate their significance to the overall FIS output(s) relative to the other rules. In this 
example, both rules have an equal weighting (i.e., weighting = 1). If a rule has a firing 
strength of 0, it does not affect the FIS output(s). Assuming the inputs to the FIS are Speed 
= 15 mph and Distance = 80 m, as shown in Figure 15, when rule 1 is executed, 𝜇௅௢௪(15)=
0.5 and 𝜇௅௔௥௚௘ (80)=0 . 8 . As the operator in the IF part  is AND, the minimum value be-
tween 0.5 and 0.8, i.e., 0.5 is selected. The valu e of 0.5 is then used to reshape the output 
fuzzy set for rule 1, i.e., the Minor fuzzy set. This operation is called implication. The re-shaped output fuzzy set is shown as a dashed read area in Figure 15. 
 
Figure 15. Determining rule 1 firing strength through the implication operation. 
To perform implication for rule 2, the operator in its IF part is OR. For speed = 15 
mph, 𝜇ு௜௚௛ (15)=0 and for distance=80 m, the 𝜇ௌ௠௔௟௟ (80)=0. As shown in Figure 16, 
the implication process results in the fuzzy set Major, associated with Severity of the car 
accident, to be reshaped to zero along the horizontal axis. Therefore, rule 2 does not affect 
the output of the FIS as the rule’s firing strength is zero. 
 
Figure 16. Determining rule 2 firing strength through the implication operation. 
The FIS decisions require consideration of all rules. This involves a process called 
aggregation whereby the output fuzzy sets following their implication process are com-
bined into a single fuzzy set. Thus, the inputs  of the aggregation process are the reshaped 
output membership functions returned after the implication process for each rule. Three 
possible aggregation methods are [14]: