39    increased our confidence that data augmentation for EEG, even though still nascent, is a promising venue for improving the classification accuracy of DL-based techniques for EEG.  4.6. Guidelines for reporting results in papers Some papers clearly explained their methodology with respect to DA (e.g., [115]). Unfortunately, these were the exception. Of the reviewed papers, 45% did not report the accuracy before DA and 38% did not report the parameters they modified in their DA method. It is also noteworthy that 41% did not mention the magnification factor they used. This made surveying and comparing the literature rather difficult.  Therefore, in order to improve the quality and reproducibility of the work in the field of DA on DL-based EEG, we recommend that authors follow the guidelines below when reporting their results in their studies.   • Clearly describe the data augmentation method they used Method, parameters they change in their method, Magnification factor • Clearly describe the dataset #subject, #trials, #classes • Test their proposed method on an existing dataset Compare model performance and evaluate their results on a public dataset • Clearly describe the architecture #layers, their widths, the activation functions used • Report the accuracy and results Report the accuracy before and after using DA, report the results when changing the parameters of DA • Share internal recording and reproducible code Whenever possible, including hyperparameter choices  5. Limitations One clear limitation of our study is the relatively small number of papers published so far on this topic. This precludes us from carrying out mode detailed analyses than the above. What is more, another obvious limitation of our methodology, already discussed above, is that our analysis is only as good as the data on which it is founded. When little information is provided about the DL or DA methods, it directly and immediately limits our ability to analyze those data, as discussed above.  In addition, although the search methodology we used to identify relevant studies is well-founded, it undeniably did not capture all of the existing literature on the topic. Since the field of DA for DL-based EEG is still young and the number of publications available at the time of writing this manuscript was limited, we decided to include all the papers we could find (note that some of the newer trends are more visible in repositories such as arXiv and bioRxiv, as those manuscripts may be going through the publication process). They have been adopted by the DL community to quickly disseminate results and encourage a fast research-iteration cycle. Our goal was to provide a transparent and objective analysis of the trends in DA for DL-based EEG.