26    of each class was challenging situation which caused biasedness of classification results and degraded accuracy. Therefore, they used overlapping technique to augment their dataset. The training set was 50% of the dataset included 7592 epochs (30s), however after DA, they had 24162 epochs (3s). They achieved to 93.55% accuracy for classification 6 classes of sleep stages. In addition, to evaluate the performance of the proposed DA, GAN was also implemented. However, according to their results, using GAN for the 6 sleep stages classification had achieved 72.33%, which is lower than overlapping window. Avcu et al. (2019) developed an end-to-end CNN for seizure detection [88]. They strove to minimize the number of channels used (just 2 channels—Fp1 and Fp2) and compared that to the result with all channels. EEG data of 29 pediatric patients diognosed with a typical absence seizure were included in this study. In total, the data contained 1037 minutes of EEG with 25 minutes of seizure data distributed among 120 seizure onsets. To overcome the imbalance in the dataset, they applied different overlapping proportions according to existence or absence of seizures. Namely, while shifting with 5 seconds (no overlapping) was implemented to create interictal class, 0.075 second shifting was used for ictal class to create balanced input for the CNN. The sensitivity for 2-channel was 93.3% and for 18-channel was 95.8%. However, the result of DA was not reported in this study.  Tayeb at al. (2019) developed three deep-learning models: LSTM, CNN, and RNN for decoding motor imagery [89]. This group used shifting window with 4s length to reflect the partial time invariance of the data and overcome the problem of overfitting. This cropping strategy increased the training dataset by a factor of 25. The CNN architecture showed better performance and achieved a mean accuracy higher than 84% over all the 20 participants. However, their result lacks more details about DA. Also, we found more papers which segmented the dataset to create more training data: Chambon et al. (2017) segmented the input data to 30s segment to create more dataset for each class of sleep stage [46]. Tsiouris et al. (2018) used LSTM for the prediction of epileptic seizure [90]. To overcome unbalance problem of rare seizure event, the EEG segment from the interictal class were split into smaller subgroups of equal size to the preictal class. Tang et al. (2017), proposed CNN for the failure prediction [91]. To avoid multiple instance learning issue for their CNN, they used segmentation window to have sufficient new training dataset. The length of each segment was found by adaptive Multi-scale sampling. Their result was improved from 70.9% (without DA) to 77.9% (with DA) on seizure dataset.  Although many studies used this method, there seems to be no consensus on the best overlapping percentage to use, e.g. the impact of using a sliding window with 10% overlap versus 90% overlap. Some studies tried different shifting length; but this issue still is not clear. For more information refer to Table 6.