33    3.7 Accuracy gains of data augmentation The application of DA for DL on EEG is still nascent, with relatively few studies having been conducted. What is more, many of those studies unfortunately do not report the gain in accuracy that the DA method brought about, or which parameters were used exactly (Table 6). Nevertheless, 29 of the 53 papers we surveyed included a measure of accuracy before and after DA. We therefore computed an improvement score on those for each DA analysis, 012312. Here, “H” stands for the accuracy of the model when trained on the augmented dataset and “I” stands for the accuracy on the initial, non-augmented dataset. Hence, an improvement score of J suggests that, by training also on the augmented dataset, a fraction J of the gap between initial accuracy and perfect accuracy was covered by the model trained on the augmented dataset. The overall improvement score was 0.29±0.08 (mean ± s.e.m.). Though the score varied among the different DA techniques—from 0.08 for recombination of segmentation to 0.36 for noise addition (Fig. 12A). For tasks, it varied from 0.14 for motor imagery to 0.56 for mental workload (Fig. 12B). The 95% confidence intervals for all tasks (except “visual task”) and DA techniques did not include 0. The above therefore suggests that various DA techniques for EEG signals of different tasks does improve the classification accuracy for various augmentation methods. It should be noted though that these statistics rely on relatively small number of analyses. And thus, more studies are required to establish reliable DA improvement score for different techniques and tasks.  
 Figure 12. (A) The improvement score, or the fraction of variance left unexplained by the original DL method that was explained when training the model using DA, for different DA techniques (mean ± 95% confidence intervals). Here’n’ is the number of studies everywhere except GAN, Sampling, and Other, where there were more than one analysis, with different accuracies, reported in each study; hence there ‘n’ is the number of accuracies. (B) Same as A but the improvement is over EEG tasks. Here “n” is the number of studies everywhere except “emotion recognition”, where there were 9 studies, 2 of which ran multiple DA