2    -Comparing with existing methods Percent of decoding accuracy explained by DA beyond unaugmented accuracy varied between 8% for recombination of segmentation and 36% for noise addition and from 14% for motor imagery to 56% for mental workload—29% on average.  -Conclusions DA increasingly used and considerably improved DL decoding accuracy on EEG. Additional publications—if adhering to our reporting guidelines—will facilitate more detailed analysis. Keywords: Electroencephalography, Deep learning, Data augmentation, Review 1. Introduction Electroencephalography (EEG) measures electric fluctuations in the brain. One use of EEG is to measure rhythmic oscillations, which reflect synchronized activity of substantial populations of neurons. Changes in these rhythmic oscillations during cognitive tasks correlate with task conditions, including perceptual, cognitive, motor, emotional, and other functional processes. This renders such task monitoring tractable using EEG [1]. Several reasons make EEG a useful tool for studying neurocognitive processes. First, it captures cognitive dynamics in the time scale at which cognition occurs—tens to hundreds of milliseconds. Second, EEG can directly measure complex patterns of neural activity within small fractions of a second after stimulus onset. Third, the EEG signal is multidimensional, comprising time and frequency, power, and phase, across many electrodes over the scalp. This multidimensionality facilitates specifying and testing hypotheses that are rooted both in neurophysiology and in psychology [2].  Nevertheless, EEG also suffers from several limitations. First, it is an aggregate signal emanating from the aggregated neuronal activity of millions or more cells, which has been transduced through several layers of tissue, fluid, bone, etc. EEG also suffers from low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [1-4]. Though various filtering and de-noising techniques strive to decrease the noise in favor of the underlying neural activity. What is more, EEG is a non-stationary signal—its statistics varying over time [1, 5, 6]. This is especially problematic for online, real-time analysis, where it is inherently models that were trained on past neural data that are used to decode present neural activity [7, 8]. Further, for complex machine-learning models, model training time might be lengthy. Hence, not only is it well outside the scope of real-time analysis, necessitating off-line training, but the statistics of the relevant brain activity may change considerably by the time the model is trained. There have been some attempts at adaptive machine-learning techniques to better track the changing statistics of the signal [9-11]. If that is not enough, EEG is generally recorded using tens to hundreds of electrodes recording simultaneously at hundreds or thousands of samples per electrode, whereas a typical dataset, at least in cognitive neuroscience when looking at discrete experimental events, contains only some hundred to a few thousand samples (i.e., experimental trials) at the most. Hence, the initial ratio of samples to features is low in such datasets. Due to the above, classifiers trained on EEG datasets tend to generalize poorly to data recorded at different times, even on the same individual.