32    effects of several DA methods of data augmentation on different classifiers were explored, combining noise addition, multiplication, frequency shift, and phase shift. These DA methods improved the average overall accuracy of the classifiers by 5.3%. Finally, Mokatren et al. (2019) applied the discrete-wavelet transform to extract energy and entropy of 4 frequency bands: theta, alpha, beta, and gamma in an emotion-recognition task [116]. A 3-D array of size KxKxB was created, where the first two dimensions represent an image of KxK pixels corresponding with the channels positioning over the scalp, while the third dimension represents the number of features: energy and entropy for 4 frequency bands(B=8). They used image augmentation techniques, such as horizontal and vertical shifting, to improve the accuracy of their CNN. Their classification accuracy on the DEAP dataset improved from 86.47% (without DA) to 90.87% (with DA) for Arousal and 88.34% (without DA) to 91.33% (with DA) for valence. This section shows that these authors tried to improve the accuracy of their classification method with different techniques but because we found just one case from each of this innovation, we grouped them together. Figure 10 displays the aggregated information on DA methods and DL architecture strategy. While there is no clear consensus when looking to all 53 studies together, studies that employed sliding window, sampling, and noise addition as DA method, mostly used CNN. We investigated the EEG task compared across different DA techniques Figure 11. Following our review, we conclude that, for seizure task, the sliding window method should be used. For Mental workload, noise addition achieved the best results. And for deciphering sleep stages, the sampling method is the best fit. In sum, we recommend that sliding windows should be used for seizure detection. We also found that noise addition works best for mental workload. And the sampling method appears optimal to classify sleep stages. 
 Figure 11. Number of papers for general EEG tasks compared across different DA techniques