38    signals and generated fake signals that are within the distribution. In this sense, it might be argued that it is not that different from adding noise to the original signals. In addition, whether we can treat a spectrogram as an image and simply apply image-based data augmentation techniques remains an open question. First, the “pixels” in spectrograms relay temporal and frequency information that images do not. Second, at least when using CNNs, the invariant filters that work well across images would often not be expected to work on the spectrograms. For example, there is no a priori reason to expect to find the same pattern in high gamma early in time and in theta at a later time. Third, when using real images, the developer of a GAN can rely on her visual system to judge how well the GAN works for generating fake images that are similar to the real ones on which it is based. However, the same cannot be said for a GAN developed for EEG. What is more, we know too little about the characteristic of EEG for specific tasks (certainly across subjects and variants of the task) to develop a method that would judge the quality of an EEG GAN. So, this technique should be used with proper caution.  Fourier transform was used in 2018 to augment EEG signals, very successfully. This method assumes linearity and stationarity of the EEG signals [106] . In 2019, Zhang and colleagues used these intrinsic features of EEG and decomposed the signal to its IMFs. By mixing IMFs, they generated new samples and decreased overfitting [42]. Sampling was used in many studies to better balance imbalanced datasets. Balancing the number of samples among classes may drastically improve the usefulness of a dataset. Figure 11 enables us to draw a few trends. We see that the sliding-window technique is used for the majority of papers that analyze seizure detection. Similarly, we found that noise addition is the most common technique for mental workload. And sampling methods appear most often for classifying sleep stages. To what extent the more popular techniques are also more optimal is still unclear given the relatively small number of papers so far. But how useful is DA for DL-based EEG analysis? How much does it improve classifier accuracy? Before delving into the numbers, it is also worth bearing in mind that publication bias might be driving these numbers up. Unsuccessful attempts at improving DL accuracy with DA may be less likely to be published. That said, on average, training on the DA dataset helped make up almost 3/10 of the gap that was left in accuracy between the original analysis and perfect accuracy. Though this improvement score varied widely among DA techniques and tasks (Fig. 12). Too few studies reported both accuracy before and after DA and the parameters of their DA method for us to be able to carry out more in-depth statistical analyses. Those will be possible with additional publications.  Given the above, and to further test the usefulness of DA for EEG, we ran our own EEG analysis of an open dataset (BCI IV-2a), based on what we learned from our review of the literature. We then compared the accuracy were able to obtain with DA to the best accuracy we could find in the literature on the same dataset (Dai and colleagues [111]) as well as to our technique without DA. We were able to explain 24% of the accuracy beyond that explained by Dai et al., which suggests that our analysis of the literature is useful in gaining insight into which DA techniques work well for EEG analysis. What is more, our DA-based EEG analysis was able to explain 41% of the accuracy that remained unexplained by the model without DA. These results therefore