1    Data Augmentation for Deep-Learning-Based Electroencephalography Elnaz Lashgari 1,2, Dehua Liang 1,2, Uri Maoz 1,2,3,4,5 1 Schmid College of Science and Technology, Chapman University 2 Institute for Interdisciplinary Brain and Behavioral Sciences, Chapman University  3 Crean College of Health and Behavioral Sciences, Chapman University  4Anderson School of Management, University of California Los Angeles 5Biology and Bioengineering, California Institute of Technology E-mail: Lashgari@chapman.edu Highlights • Data augmentation (DA) is increasingly used with deep learning (DL) on EEG  • It enhances decoding accuracy left unexplained by 29% on average on the datasets we review • We analyze which specific DA techniques appear to work best for which EEG tasks • We tested various DA techniques on an open motor-imagery task and compared the accuracy gains to demonstrate the usefulness of DA for DL-based EEG analysis • We propose guidelines for reporting parameters for different DA techniques  Abstract -Background Data augmentation (DA) has recently been demonstrated to achieve considerable performance gains for deep learning (DL)—increased accuracy and stability and reduced overfitting. Some electroencephalography (EEG) tasks suffer from low samples-to-features ratio, severely reducing DL effectiveness. DA with DL thus holds transformative promise for EEG processing, possibly like DL revolutionized computer vision, etc. -New method We review trends and approaches to DA for DL in EEG to address: Which DA approaches exist and are common for which EEG tasks? What input features are used? And, what kind of accuracy gain can be expected?  -Results DA for DL on EEG begun 5 years ago and is steadily used more. We grouped DA techniques (noise addition, generative adversarial networks, sliding windows, sampling, Fourier transform, recombination of segmentation, and others) and EEG tasks (into seizure detection, sleep stages, motor imagery, mental workload, emotion recognition, motor tasks, and visual tasks). DA efficacy across techniques varied considerably. Noise addition and sliding windows provided the highest accuracy boost; mental workload most benefitted from DA. Sliding window, noise addition, and sampling methods most common for seizure detection, mental workload, and sleep stages, respectively.