5    those may destroy time-domain features [28]. Also, while a human can easily decide whether an augmented dataset (e.g., of cats or other images) still resembles the original class, the same is not true of augmented EEG signals. In other words, correctly labeling augmented datasets can be difficult. Nevertheless, in recent years DA techniques have received widespread attention and achieved appreciable performance boosts when using DL on EEG signals.  We ran a systematic review on DA in EEG and collected all the papers that we were able to find up to and including 2019. The earliest paper we could find that specifically used the name “data augmentation” was in 2015. (Though it should be noted that this technique has been used before 2015 and went by other names, such as oversampling and in particular SMOTE [34-36].(see Methods) And a testament to the growing importance of DA for EEG is that 37 out of 53 papers we found (70%) were from 2018 and 2019 and 21 (40%) were from 2019 alone. This review paper strives to identify trends and highlight available approaches in DA for DL in EEG to address the following critical questions: (1) What DA approaches exist for EEG? (2) Which dataset and EEG classification tasks have been explored with DA? (3) Are there specific DA methods suitable for specific tasks measured by EEG? (4) Which of the input features in EEG are used for training the deep NNs with DA?   2. Methods 2.1. Search method for identification of related studies The search was conducted on 3rd January 2020 within the Google Scholar, Web of Science, and PubMed databases using the following group of keywords: (‘Data Augmentation’) AND (‘Deep Neural Network’ OR ‘Deep Learning’ OR ‘Deep Machine Learning’ OR ‘Deep Convolutional’ OR ‘Representation Learning’ OR ‘Deep Recurrent’ OR ‘Deep LSTM’) AND (‘EEG’ OR ‘Electroencephalography’). Only studies that met the inclusion criteria (Fig. 1) are included below. Further, duplicates among these databases were removed from the search results. The full texts of the remaining studies were then screened.  Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteria • EEG classification—This review focused solely on classification based on EEG signals.  • Deep learning—In this review, DL is defined as learning using a neural network with at least one hidden layer • EEG augmentation— This review focused on the augmentation of EEG signals. • English Journal and conference papers, as well as electronic preprints, published were chosen as the target of this review.  • Studies focusing only on EEG AND DL and DA • Other studies, such as power analysis and feature selection with no end classification, were excluded.  • review papers were excluded