36    4.1. Rationale The relatively small size of EEG datasets drastically decreases the effectiveness of DL. In the past few years, DA techniques have received widespread attention and achieved considerable performance gains for DL. Therefore, we focused our review on available DA methods for DL-based EEG. Such augmented datasets facilitate training more complex models, with more parameters, while at the same time potentially reducing overfitting. We only considered papers that focused on DA in DL-based analysis of EEG.  Previous review papers recommended that more targeted work be carried out to fully exploit the potential advantages of DL in EEG processing [1, 23]. It thus appears natural to explore the relation between performance and DA. Toward this goal, we carried out a systematic review of DA for DL-based EEG. Our goal was to address the following critical questions: (1) What DA approaches exist for EEG? (2) Which datasets and EEG classification tasks have been explored with DA? (3) Are specific DA approaches more suitable for particular tasks? (4) What input features are used for training deep networks with DA?  4.2. Data A lingering critical question in machine learning is “how much data is enough data?”, and it is of special relevance when applying sophisticated DL techniques on limited size EEG datasets. Naturally, the amount of data is critical in achieving high DL performance. But, needless to say, the quality of the data is also very important. To analyze this, we looked at dataset features such as the number of subjects, amount of EEG recorded (in trials or time), and the DA schemes used. We found that, for noise addition, the best results were obtained when a lower standard deviation was used. However, more generally, we did not find one specific, definitive answer to the data quantity question. That said, our analysis clearly suggests that DA techniques are typically successfully able to increase the performance of DL (Table 6).  4.3. EEG preprocessing Most studies used frequency-domain filters to limit the bandwidth of the EEG signals. This enabled them to focus on specific frequency ranges that were of interest (Figure 3). The filtered frequency ranges were organized by EEG task type. We found no studies that specifically tested the role of this filtering on NN. (This lacuna is discussed in other review papers [23].) The great majority of the reviewed papers preprocessed the EEG data before feeding it into NNs. Based on Figure 4, 49% of the reviewed papers used calculated features such as wavelet, entropy, spatial filter, or STFT as the input to NNs. On top of that, 36% simply used the raw EEG time-series signal as the only input to the NN. This is not surprising as a key motivation for using NN for EEG processing is to automatically learn features. An analysis of the sort that we carried out could in principle give some sense of which input types should be used for these purposes. But a complete answer depends on many factors, including the EEG task. And it is therefore difficult to draw definitive conclusions when only 53 studies using DL and DA are currently available. 4.4.  Deep-learning methodology Our analysis focused on architecture trends and input formulations for each architecture. However, the EEG task too is of importance, of course. Based on Figure 6, CNN was the most popular NN architecture—likely because it is well suited for end-to-end learning, scales well to