40    Also, in preclinical, experimental research and highly competitive environment for funding, researchers submit predominantly positive results for publication. Withholding negative results from publication — publication bias — could have major change in our analysis. We focused our analysis on the points that we thought would be most interesting, valuable, and impactful for the performance of DA on DL-based EEG. Therefore, we didn’t include normalization procedures, software toolboxes, loss function, training time etc., in this analysis. 6. Conclusions DL has been successfully applied to many EEG tasks such as: sleep stages, motor imagery, mental workload, and emotion recognition tasks. Applying DL to EEG has shown great promise in processing these complex signals due to its capacity to learn good feature representations from raw data through successive non-linear transformations. However, DL is inherently limited over EEG datasets because of their relative smaller size. DA, in turn, increases the available training data, facilitating the use of more complex DL models. It can also reduce overfitting and increase the accuracy and stability of the classifiers Looking at the inputs to the DL architectures, the most common technique is still to calculate features (49%) outside the NN and feed it into the network, though a sizable fraction of papers input the raw signals (36%) into the NN and let it extract features itself. In addition, while various architectures have been used successfully on EEG datasets, CNN is most often used (62%). Taking all of the above into account, our analysis of the literature suggests that DA was mainly used for seizure detection (24%) and motor imagery (21%). In particular, sliding windows are favored for seizure detection. Noise addition is most common for mental workload. And sampling methods are the procedures of choice to classify sleep stages. Our attempt to compare results between different studies highlighted for us the high degree of variability in how results were reported across studies. We therefore added our own analysis of an open dataset that provided clear evidence that DA leads to a gain in accuracy for DL-based analysis of EEG. We further made specific recommendations to ensure reproducibility and better comparison of the results when the authors use DA and DL. It is key to clearly describe the DA method, its parameters and their role in achieving the accuracy that the paper boasts. It is also critical to report the magnification factor as well as the accuracy before and after DA. In sum, we hope this review will constitute a good entry point for EEG researcher looking to apply DA for training DL algorithms on their datasets and will assist the field to produce high-quality, reproducible results.  6. Acknowledgements This publication was made possible in part through the support of a joint grant from the John Templeton Foundation and the Fetzer Institute, and Boston Scientific Corporation. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the John Templeton Foundation or the Fetzer Institute. This publication was also made possible in part by the support of Boston Scientific Investigator-Sponsored Research Program.