22    architecture had two fully connected layers and two convolutional layers for the generatoras well as three convolutional layers and two fully connected layers for the discriminator. The dataset that the paper used to train the cWGAN-GP was collected during the BCIT X2 Rapid Series Visual Presentation (RSVP) experiment, where subjects were asked to identify target images in an image stream presented at 5Hz [78]. The dataset contained EEG signals from 10 subjects, with 5 sessions and 1 hour of recording per session using a 256-channel BioSemi system. It had two classes, target and non-target, 967 samples each, which were pre-processed using the PREP pipeline [3]. The pipeline performed band-pass filtering from 0.1 to 55Hz, referencing, bad channel interpolation and baselining. One second of signal from each trial after image onset was extracted, down sampled to 64Hz and normalized using the mean and standard deviation from each epoch. The paper used three different methods to evaluate the performance of the data generated from the cWGAN-GP: visual inspection, log-likelihood distance from Gaussian mixture models (GMMs), and classifier performance. The visual inspection and GMM results both showed that the generated data was of high quality. In classifier performance evaluation, the synthetic data size was 3828, and it was added to the training dataset during training. The classifier trained with the synthetic data shows an improvement of 5.18% (from 50.02% to 55.2%) on cross subject evaluation and 3.12% (from 60.8% to 64.08%) on same subject evaluation using a CNN with 3 convolutional layers. Aznan et al. (2019) had subjects look at one of three different objects, each flickering at 10, 12, or 15 Hz (each at a different frequency). Their goal was to detect which object the subject was looking at using BCI technolgy and then direct a humanoid robot toward that object. They compared three different methods: Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Network (DCGAN) [79], gradient panelized Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN-GP) [77], and Variational Auto-encoder (VAE) [80]. They then used those methods to generate synthetic EEG data to improve the classification accuracy on their Steady State Visual Evoked Potential (SSVEP) based BCI system [81]. The SSVEP-based classifier was able to pick up the corresponding frequency from the EEG. The dataset used to train the generative models is the video-stimuli dataset [81] that contains 50 samples of EEG signals collected from offline videos played to one subject, referring to subject 1 in the NAO dataset [81]. The NAO dataset has two portions—offline and online—collected from tasks the same as in the Video-Stimuli dataset using a dry EEG device with 20 channels. The three generative models were trained only using the video-stimuli dataset, while the SSVEP classifier was tested on the NAO dataset. The generated EEG samples were used to pre-train the SSVEP classifier. The offline portion of the NAO dataset for each subject was fed into the pre-train model to fine tune for that particular subject. After the classifier was trained, the online portion of the NAO dataset was used to test the performance of the classifier. Different sizes of augmentation were empirically tested and compared. The result showed that for all three methods, a sample size of 500 resulted in the best classification accuracy. Table 3 shows the performances of different methods. Table 3 shows all the papers used GAN as their DA technique. By reporting the magnification factor and accuracy before and after DA, we think that GAN technique is trending to use as DA technique for EEG signal.