28    3.6.4.2. Subsampling Thodoroff et al. (2016), evaluated the capacity of a deep NN to learn robust features of EEG to automatically detect seizures [98]. They randomly subsampled the majority samples of the dataset to re-balance the ratio between seizure and non-seizure data (from 1000/1 to 80/20) which facilitate the training. However, because seizure manifestations on EEG are extremely variable both intra- and intra-patients, a second challenge was the overlack of data for each patient (average of 8 seizure per patient). They trained the CNN by using 0.5 s window instead on 1 s. Using transfer learning, the general representation of a seizure on other patients learned first and then they trained the model to the specific patient using the weights previously learned as initialization. Sengur et al. (2019) employed deep feature extraction for focal EEG signals [99]. The deep features were extracted from spectrogram images using the AlexNet, VGG16, VGG19, and ResNet50 CNN models. The FC6 and FC7 activation layers were used for feature extraction resulting in 4096 dimensional feature vectors. The obtained feature vectors were used as input to various k-NN classification models. Random subsampling was performed as the DA technique (no other details were provided about the parameters). See Table 6 for more details about these studies.  Note. There are various resampling strategies to solve this type of problem such as random under sampling, random oversampling and random under sampling with synthetic minority over-sampling technique(SMOTE) [100-102]. We could find some studies which used SMOTE on EEG but they didn’t satisfy our criteria [35, 103]. Beside resampling techniques, another way to deal with imbalanced data is cost sensitive learning [104]. Resampling strategies and cost sensitive learning can significantly improve the predictive evaluation of the models [105]. 3.6.5. Fourier Transform J. Schwabedal et al. (2018) proposed a new method for augmenting EEG signals when attempting sleep-stage classification [106]. They focused on imbalanced dataset in transitional sleep stages, such as S1 and S3, which are rare events with respect to more stable stages such as wakefulness or Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep. Cost-sensitive learning [45], oversampling of the minority class [92, 94, 107], and subsampling the majority class [98, 108] are common techniques to address imbalanced classes. But the overall performance using these approaches resulted in some biases in prediction and did not improve the accuracy [1]. Therefore, they used Fourier Transform Surrogates to augment the EEG data. The complex Fourier components of a signal x- can be decomposed into amplitudes a- and phases j-: x-=a-e./1 Under the assumptions of linearity and stationarity of the signal, they generated a new signal which is statistically independent from the original signal. This happened by randomizing the Fourier-transform phases [0, 2π] and then applying the inverse Fourier transform. The authors processed the CAPSLPDB sleep database, consisting of 101 overnight Polysomnographies (PSGs), using a CNN for 6 sleep stage classification. They then used the above method to