27    3.6.4. Sampling 3.6.4.1. Oversampling R. Manor et al. (2015), presented a CNN model for the use of single trial EEG classification in five category rapid serial visual tasks [92]. They used oversampling of the minor class (bootstrapping) to balance the dataset. They mentioned that although this method caused some overfitting on the minor class, however, it provided a more balanced classification performance in their experiment. Drouin-Picaro et al. (2016), proposed a CNN model to classify saccades from frontal EEG signals to aim cursor control without the need for a separate eye tracking device in provide brain-computer interfaces [93]. In order to have a balanced dataset, horizontal saccades were sampled from without replacement so that the number of horizontal saccades in the dataset was the same as the highest number of vertical saccade (either up or down). The other vertical direction was then augmented by sampling from it with replacement, to make the number of data points in each direction equal. Hence, the dataset contained roughly 3000 examples of each saccade direction.  Supratak et al. (2017), used a CNN model, named DeepSleepNet, for automatic sleep stage scoring based on raw single-channel EEG. They extracted time-invariant features and used LSTM to learn transition rules among sleep stages automatically [94]. By duplicating the minority sleep stages in the original training set such that all sleep stages have the same number of samples they avoided overfitting. Dong et al. (2017), proposed a Mixed NN for temporal sleep stage classification [95]. Because of the inherent imbalance in occurrence of the different sleep stages, the authors used oversampling to generate a new balance dataset which every sleep stage is equally presented. Sors et al. (2018) used a CNN on raw single-channel EEG signal for scoring 5 class sleep stage [45]. They mentioned their dataset (SHHS) has a very imbalanced class distribution. In order to account for this, they tried cost-sensitive learning or oversampling but the overall performance using this approach did not improve. Ruffini et al. (2019), randomly replicated subjects from the minority class to balance their classes [96]. Their proposed model helps for diagnosis derived from a few minutes of eye-close resting EEG signal collected at baseline idiopathic patients. They didn’t compare the result with and without DA.  Sun et al. (2019) scored the sleep stage automatically. This study presents a stage-classification method based on a two-stage neural network [97]. The first, feature learning stage can fuse network-trained features with traditional hand-crafted features. A second, RNN stage is fully utilized for learning temporal information between sleep epochs and obtaining classification results. Oversampling was used to solve a serious sample imbalance problem. Sadly, the result lacked more details about DA.