7    Data augmentation (DA) DA technique used to generate new samples Parameters for DA Magnification factor (m) Dataset Quantity of data, subjects, classes, channels Task information Task type Preprocessing Frequency range used for analysis EEG signal features Deep-learning strategy Main characteristics of NN, such as number of convolutional layers, hidden layers, activation function of hidden layers and output. Results Decoding accuracy  3. Results 3.1. Origin of the selected studies Our research methodology returned 26 journal papers,16 conference and workshop papers, and 11 preprints (arXiv or bioRxiv) that met our inclusion criteria. There were 4 papers in IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 3 papers in Biomedical Signal Processing and Control and the rest of the papers were each in a different journal (see Table 1 for details). Interestingly, we found no papers that fulfilled our search criteria before 2015. Further, testament to the growing importance of DA for EEG is the clear year-by-year rise in the number of papers answering our search criteria from 2015 to 2019 (Figure 2A). 3.2. EEG classification task The EEG tasks in these papers fell into 7 groups: seizure-detection (24%), motor imagery (21%), sleep stages (15%), emotion recognition (15%), mental workload (9%), motor task (8%), and visual task (8%) (Figure 2B). The following describes these EEG tasks (see Table 6 for more details): 3.2.1. Seizure-detection studies. A seizure is a sudden, uncontrolled disturbance in the electrical activity of the brain. For seizure detection in epilepsy, EEG signals are recorded during seizure and non-seizure periods. The goal of these studies is to detect upcoming seizure and preemptive notification to the patients [40, 41]. Seizure manifestations on EEG are extremely variable both inter- and intra-patient. Naturally, non-seizure events are easy enough to record. But seizures tend to be rare. DA has been successful at increasing the number of rare events (seizures) in the dataset and thus at increasing the accuracy of seizure-detection algorithms. 3.2.2. Motor imagery tasks. These studies instruct subjects to imagine moving their limbs, tongue, or other body parts. Motor imagery EEG decoding is an important method in brain-computer interfaces (BCI) that has the potential to help highly disabled people communicate with the outside world without relying on muscle activity (e.g. [42]). 3.2.3. Sleep stages scoring tasks. Studies on sleep-stage classification record the EEG signal of subjects overnight. These signals are then scored and classified to wakefulness (W) and then 4 stages of sleep based on the American Academy of Sleep Medicine(AASM) scoring manual: