37    large datasets, and can exploit hierarchical structure in natural signals. The number of hidden layers in the different NN architectures varied case by case. Given the relatively small number of papers so far, we were able to be aggregated information about DL architectures into a single figure (Fig. 7), which we hope would help our colleagues gain some intuition about this nontrivial issue. Thus Figure 7 shows that the input formulation for RNN is images while for SAE it is calculated features. For LSTM, there are two input categories: signal and calculated features. CNN and MLP studies included instances of all input formulations but the signal formulation was used most often for their inputs. There were also hybrid architectures that used a combination of two standard NN. The papers relying on such hybrid NNs commonly used calculated features and images as their inputs. 4.5. Data augmentation Figure 8 is a testament to the importance of DA for EEG processing with DL. DA techniques have received widespread attention and achieved appreciable performance boosts for DL techniques on EEG. However, more work is required to clearly assess their advantages as well as their potential disadvantages. Here we covered all the available DA techniques that we could systematically source and grouped them into 7 categories: noise addition, GAN, sliding window, sampling, Fourier transform, recombination of segmentation, and other. Sliding windows, at 24%, was the most common. Nevertheless, there seems to be no consensus on the best overlapping percentage to use between consecutive windows—e.g., the impact of using a sliding window with 10% versus 90% overlap. Some studies tried different shifting lengths [49] [84] , but this issue remains unsettled. We found two main approaches for adding noise to EEG signals for DA: (1) adding various types of noise (Gaussian, Poisson, salt and pepper, etc.) to the raw signal; (2) converting the EEG signals to sequences of images (spectrograms) and adding noise to these images. Though it has been reported that adding noise to the images did not improve the classification accuracy [50]. Unfortunately, some authors did not provide details about the accuracy before and after DA. In a similar vein, critical noise parameters (e.g., mean, standard deviation, the magnification factor of training dataset) were sometimes not reported. This made it more difficult to compare techniques and parameters across studies.  Since 2018, GAN has become very popular for generating EEG signals that mimic real ones. Though GAN and related DL algorithms were used and discussed more for generating synthetic images for image classification tasks. EEG can often be analyzed and visualized in the frequency domain over time as spectrograms (through a Fourier or wavelet transformation). These spectrograms can then be treated like any other image, and therefore data augmentation methods that were developed for images can, at least in the technical sense, be directly applied to them. The spectrograms generated via the DA process is then converted back to an EEG signal of course.  While GAN data augmentation for EEG shows some improvement of classification accuracy, it has still not been clearly demonstrated to be better than other, simpler methods—like noise addition. For example, from our results (Table 6), it appears that the mean increase in accuracy when using GANs is 5.7% (STD 5%) while for noise addition, the increase is 14.2% (STD 13%). The GANs that we covered here mostly learned the underlying distribution of the training EEG