14    Convert EEG signals to sequences of images and add noise to the images. Nine papers used noise addition method to increase training dataset. 
 Figure 8. DA across all studies. (A) Number of publications per domain of DA per year. (B) The percentage of different DA methods across all studies. Note that we only collected data until January 2020. In 2015, Bashivan et al. transformed EEG signals into a sequence of topology-preserving multi-spectral (2D feature images) in a specific time interval [50]. Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was performed on the mental load EEG signals to estimate the power spectrum of the signal in three frequency bands of theta (4-7Hz), alpha (8,13Hz), and beta (13-30Hz). A single image was constructed from spectral power within three prominent frequency band which is extracted from each electrode location.  The sequences of image representations fed into the LSTM and CNN for the EEG classification. For addressing the unbalanced ratio between number of samples and number of model parameters, they randomly added various noise level to the images. However, augmenting the dataset did not improve the classification performance and even for higher value of noise, the error rate increased. Z. Yin et al. (2017) proposed an adaptive DL model based on Stacked Denoising AutoEncoders (SDAE), which was designed for cross-session Mental Workload (MW) classification using EEG [51, 52]. They could increase the accuracy of their model by adding Gaussian white noise to the EEG feature vector (µ=0.01,m=2,3,4,5,6). This vector contains centroid frequency, log-energy entropy, mean, five power components, Shannon entropy, sum of energy, variance, zero-crossing rate of each channel and power differences between four selected channel pairs. Their classification accuracy on an independent dataset improved from 76.5% (without DA) to 85.5% (with DA). The highest classification accuracy was achieved with m=6 and the lowest with m=0 (without DA). They concluded that the number of samples (trials) in the original dataset was insufficient for training the NN. Wang et al. (2018) added Gaussian white noise to their training data (in the time domain) to obtain new samples for an emotion-recognition task [28]. In their experiments, EEG signals were recorded while subjects were watching emotionally loaded videos. They used differential entropy (DE) features to train their proposed classifiers. For EEG signals, the DE feature is equivalent to the logarithm of the energy spectrum in the delta (1–3 Hz), theta (4–7 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (14–30 Hz), and gamma (31–50 Hz) frequency bands. The authors opted for Gaussian noise due to concerns that adding some local noise (i.e., noise that affects EEG data locally) such as Poisson or salt-and-pepper may change the intrinsic features of EEG signals. The experimental