3    This problem is only exacerbated for datasets involving rare events (e.g., sleep transitions, seizures [1]). These result in datasets that are heavily imbalanced between events and non-events. It thus worth noting that methods have been developed to deal with such imbalanced data [12]. Unfortunately, there are additional challenges: inherent variabilities in brain anatomy, head size, cap placement, and dynamics across subjects considerably limit the generalizability of EEG analyses across individuals [1, 13]. In other words, even if a model is well trained on one experimental subject, it would tend to generalize poorly to other subjects. Thus, most EEG classifiers tend to be subject-specific. Yet, even for a single subject, many time-consuming experimental sessions must be gathered to train the machine-learning models well enough to be useful. To overcome some of the above-mentioned limitations, processing pipelines with domain-specific approaches are often used to clean, extract relevant features from, and then classify, EEG data.  Deep Learning (DL) is a subfield of machine learning that focuses on computational models that typically learn hierarchical representations of the input data through successive non-linear transformations—termed neural networks (NN) (because of their superficial resemblance to biological neural networks in the nervous system) [1, 14, 15]. In the past few years, DL has achieved breakthrough accuracies and discovered intricate structures in complex and high-dimensional data such as image classification [16-18], speech recognition [19-21], machine translation, and more [1]. The architecture of the neural networks, their training procedure, regularization, optimization, and hyper-parameter searches are all active research topics in DL, with advances often resulting in dramatic increases in decoding accuracy.  DL typically thrives on problems where (1) there is a lot of data, and (2) The basic unit of information (e.g., a pixel, a letter) has little overall meaning; but potentially complex, hierarchical combinations of such units are useful in understanding the sample. Successful machine-learning classification also at least has the potential to make considerable impact on EEG decoding, remarkably simplifying its processing pipelines for example. It could possibly enable automatic end-to-end learning of preprocessing, feature extraction, and classification modules, while also reaching competitive performance on the target task [22, 23]. However, DL models are typically complex—i.e., have many free parameters (or degrees of freedom) to fit. Thus, if we lack enough data on which to train, training such DL models risks overfitting those models to specific quirks of the training set, limiting the generalizability of the model to an independent test set. One solution to overfitting is therefore to reduce the complexity of the models—e.g., by reducing the number of free parameters or the range in which such parameters can be fit. This is termed “regularization”. Another approach is to increase the amount of data on which to train the model—for example using data augmentation, which will be detailed below.  DL has in particular shown some promise for inter-subject generalization [24], which is especially important when only little data is available per subject. Since individual differences in EEG are large (see above), it is not trivial to share classification models across people. We therefore often need to collect new labeled data to train personal models for new users. In some applications, we hope to acquire models for new subjects as fast as possible and reduce the demand for the amount of labeled data. To achieve this goal, transfer learning methods have been shown to be helpful [25]. In transfer learning, existing subjects are sources, and the new