4    subject is the target. The target data are divided into calibration sessions for training and subsequent sessions for testing. The first stage of the method is source selection, aimed at locating appropriate sources. The second is style transfer mapping, which reduces the EEG differences between the target and each source. We use few labeled data in the calibration sessions to conduct source selection and style transfer. It has been shown that inter-subject transfer learning techniques can help us avoid re-training DL networks, with is often time and energy consuming [26]. However, if the transfer learning ends up with decreased performance or accuracy for the new model, it is called negative transfer. Transfer learning only works if the initial and target problems of both models are similar enough. If the first round of training data required for the new task is too far from the data of the old task, then the trained models might perform worse than expected. And, regardless of how similar developers may think these two sets of training data are, algorithms may not always “agree” with them. No specific standards have thus far been developed for what tasks are related enough to facilitate transfer learning, which makes it challenging to find solutions to negative transfer.  Given the above, a critical question concerning the application of DL to EEG data is therefore “How much EEG data is enough for a desired accuracy level?” Unfortunately, high-grade EEG data collection requires relatively expensive hardware and a lot of participant time. At the same time, access to large, especially clinical, dataset is often limited by privacy and proprietariness concerns. Therefore, large, openly available EEG datasets are uncommon.  Data augmentation (DA) comprises the generation of new samples to augment an existing dataset by transforming existing samples. This holds the promise to increases the accuracy and stability of the classification, at least for EEG data. Exposing the classifiers to varied representations of its training samples makes the model less biased and more invariant and robust to such transformations when attempting to generalize the model to new datasets [27-29]. DA has proven effective in many fields, such as image processing and object recognition. It has even been demonstrated that it can give very deep neural networks a higher accuracy boost than the other standard approaches, which includes various regularization techniques [29] and in particular Dropout [30, 31]. Functional solutions such as dropout regularization, batch normalization, transfer learning, and pretraining have been developed to try to extend DL for application involving smaller datasets [32]. A good survey of regularization methods in DL has been compiled by Kukacka et al. [33]. In contrast to the regularization approach mentioned above, DA approaches overfitting from the root of the problem—the training dataset. This is done under the assumption that more information can be extracted from the original dataset through augmentation. Such augmentation artificially inflate the training dataset size by either data warping or oversampling [32]. New, augmented data is typically generated using two approaches. The first is by applying geometric transformations: translations, rotations, cropping, flipping, scaling, etc. The second is via the addition of noise to the existing training data. Note that increasing the size of the training set also facilitates training more complex models with additional parameters and/or reducing overfitting. However, unlike images, EEG is a collection of very noisy, somewhat correlated (in time and space), non-stationary time-series from different electrodes. And even if feature extraction is performed, geometric transformations are not directly suitable for EEG data because