29    balance and augment the database to achieve better generalization. They improved the mean F1-score by 7% for sleep-stage classification. Zhang et al. (2019), proposed a novel DL approach with DA to improve classification of motor imagery EEG signals [42]. They applied the empirical mode decomposition on the EEG frames and mixed their intrinsic mode functions to create new artificial EEG frames, followed by transforming all EEG signals into tensors as input for the NN by complex Morlet wavelet s. Complex Morlet wavelets transformation of the EEG signals has been proved effective in recent motor imagery researches, including tensor decomposition and wavelet-based combined feature vectors method. Their algorithm decomposes the original signals into a finite number of functions called intrinsic mode functions (IMFs). Each of these IMFs, represents a non-linear oscillation of the signal. Once the signal has been decomposed, it can be recovered by adding all IMFs and the residue without loss. The main idea in this study is that by mixing IMFs of the same class we can generate new samples from this class by preserving all intrinsic characteristics. This aims to decrease overfitting problem in training NN and eventually improves classification results. They used CNN and WNN (Wavelet Neural Networks) models to evaluate their results. They found that magnifying two times the original training sets had highest mean value and better stability in CNN. And as for the WNN, the highest magnification was achieved by 5. The average of the accuracy for CNN was better than WNN. They evaluated their method on BCI competition dataset. By magnification factor 5, the CNN accuracy was 77.9% without DA and 82.9% with DA and WNN reached 88% without DA and 84.3% with DA. The relatively low computational efficiency of the WNN was the limitation in their proposed work. This group worked very well on DA details. They used two more big motor imagery datasets to evaluate their methods. They found that WNN has better classification performance and smaller loss than the CNN. However, each iteration of the WNN model takes almost five times as long as the CNN. And they speculated that it’s because the WNN lacks the consideration of parallel computing. 3.6.6. Recombination of Segmentation Said et al. (2017) presented a joint compression and classification method for EEG and electromyogram (EMG) using a multimodal auto encoder [109]. They conducted their experiments on the DEAP dataset. It included the modalities of EEG, EMG, and multiple physiological signals recorded from 32 participants during 63 seconds at 128 Hz. During experiments, volunteers watched 40 music videos and rated them on a scale of 1 to 9 with respect to four criteria: likeness (dislike, like), valence (unpleasant to pleasant), arousal (uninterested or bored to excited) and dominance (helpless and weak feelings to empowered feelings). Signals were normalized and segmented into 6 seconds segments. EEG and EMG modalities contained 23040 samples of 896 features. They trained the multimodal auto encoder by adding zero values to one modality while keeping the original values for the other modality and vice-versa. Thus, one third of the training data was EEG only, another one third was EMG only, and the rest had both EEG and EMG data.  Zhang et al. (2019) used common spatial pattern (CSP) and CNN to detect seizures [110]. They first split each training EEG trial into three segments, and then generate new artificial trials as a