19     Figure 9 Diagram of Generative Adversarial Network The EEG signals were preprocessed before feeding them into the CNN. Only 5 out of the 9 seconds of EEG in each trial were selected for processing and only alpha (7-15 Hz) frequency components were extracted as time-frequency features. Using data generated from the cDCGAN, classification accuracy increased from 83% to 86%. The authors compare the accuracies for models trained using different proportions of artificial data. However, the largest dataset only doubles the original dataset in the experiment (i.e. m=2), while others have used larger augmentation. Piplani et al. (2018) used a GAN to generate more EEG data to increase the robustness of a “passthought authentication system” that uses the user’s EEG signals to securely log into devices [62]. The EEG signals were collected using a device with only a single channel at a sampling rate of 500Hz. The ‘negative’ samples were collected from 30 subjects who were asked to perform a series of mental task for 5 minutes while EEG was recorded. The ‘positive’ samples were collected from one subject while the subject was doing the same mental tasks for 5 mins and free to do any tasks for another 5 minutes. The dataset that trains the selected model, XGBoost, consists of 30,000 negative samples and 40,000 positive samples. Each sample is a segment of the EEG signal. These data were augmented with 10,000 artificial EEG signals that were generated from a GAN. This increased the accuracy of the model from 90.8% to 95.0%, which is noteworthy for such high accuracies.  Zhang et al. (2018) proposed a framework called Deep Adversarial Data Augmentation (DADA) for generating new data, allowing deep network classifiers to be trained on small datasets [63]. They further investigated and compared different traditional approaches for dealing with small datasets in DL applications—such as dimensionality reduction, semi-supervised learning, transfer learning, and data augmentation. DA was widely used for image data because images can be altered easily—maintaining their content on the one hand while increasing the variance of the representation of that content by rotating, cropping, scaling or just adding noise to the