15    results on SEED dataset showed that by augmenting training dataset 30 times, the accuracy of ResNet improved from 34.2% to 75%, better than LeNet (from 49.6% to 74.3%). R. Hussein et al. (2018) used another DL technique, using a recurrent neural network (RNN) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network. Their goal was automatic detection of epileptic seizures using EEG signals [53]. And they reported that they improved the robustness of their model by adding Gaussian white noise, muscle artifacts and eye-blinking. Though they did not give any specific details about white noise they used as DA methods and the model performance wasn’t compared for DA vs. non-DA. S. Kuanar et al. (2018) also used an LSTM with a convolutional neural network (CNN) to learn robust features and predict the levels of cognitive load from EEG recordings [47]. They transformed the EEG time-series into a sequence of multispectral images that carried spatial information—theta (4-7Hz), alpha (8-13Hz), and beta (13-30 Hz). The data was once again augmented by adding various Gaussian noise level to the images. Though they did not give any specific details about white noise they used as DA methods and the model performance wasn’t compared for DA vs. non-DA. E. Salama et al. (2018) generated the noisy EEG signals, by adding Gaussian noise with zero mean and unit variance to the original input EEG training dataset [54]. They set the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) between original EEG signal and the noisy to 5. The DA phase enhanced the performance of the proposed 3D-CNN on emotion recognition dataset. For valence and arousal classification, they achieved 79.11%(without DA) and 88.49%(with DA). For 4 combinations of valence and arousal —(low valence-low arousal), (low valence-high arousal),(high valence-low arousal) and (high valence-high arousal) they obtained 79.11%(without DA) and 87.44%(with DA).  Parvan et al. (2019) doubled the number of trials of BCI competition IV dataset 2b by adding gaussian noise with zero mean and a standard deviation of 0.15 to ovoid overfitting [55]. Their proposed CNN had 4 convolution layers as well as data augmentation and resulted in a 0.07 improvemnet in the kappa coefficient [55]. Y. Li et al. (2019) emphasized the fact that increasing depth of CNN causes a higher classification accuracy. However, doing so may aggravate the vanishing-gradient problem and substantially increase the number of trainable parameters to be tuned, and these models may tend to be overfitting easily [56]. For four-class motor imagery task, they exploit the standard deviation of Gaussian noise in the DA affects the classification result. The optimal standard deviation is 0.001with zero mean on 2 imagery task datasets (table). It is noticeable that for almost all subjects, the performance has been significantly improved after DA. Furthermore, by comparing confusion matrix before and after DA, they showed that for a specific imagery task, DA worked well except for one task(feet). Table 2 shows all the papers used noise addition as their DA technique. From this table, we can see that there is lack of information about noise addition parameters (!: mean, #: standard deviation), magnification factor (m) and reported accuracy before and after DA. Maybe this is because that their problem wasn’t DA topic and they wanted to increase just performance accuracy. Table 2. All reviewed papers that used noise addition as their DA technique