9    See Table 6 for more details. 3.4. Pre-processing and Feature extraction The analysis of EEG signals is typically carried out by one of two methods. The first is event-related potentials, which are fluctuations of the potentials over time that are locked to an event (e.g., to 'stimulus onset' or 'button press'). The second is spectral analysis of rhythmic oscillations, which reflect the synchronized activity of very large populations of neurons. Regardless of the analysis method, it is an aggregate signal emanating from the neuronal activity of millions or more brain cells, which has been transduced through several layers of tissue, fluid, bone, etc. It also potentially includes undesired electrophysiological signals, such as electromyograms (EMG) of muscle contractions specifically eye blinks, heart beats, and others. Therefore, the EEG signal is inherently noisy. Though various filtering and de-noising techniques strive to decrease the noise in favor of the underlying neural activity. In the 53 studies we found, 85% (45 studies) removed the artifacts manually—mainly using high, low, and band pass filtering. Importantly, this means that 15% of the studies (8 studies) did not remove artifacts manually. Of those 8 studies, 7 did not take any action to remove artifacts, and the remaining study did not address artifact removal. Most studies used frequency domain filters to limit the bandwidth of the EEG signals. This enabled them to focus on a certain frequency range that was of interest. Roughly, half of the reviewed papers low pass filtered the signal below low gamma band or 40 Hz. The filtered frequency ranges organized by task type (Figure 3). We found that there were no studies that specifically check the role of this filtering for NN [23].  Figure 3. Frequency range used in EEG analysis for each identified study, organized by EEG task type. 3.4.1. Input Formulation The inputs to the NNs in the studies that fulfilled our inclusion criteria, fell into three categories. The first included raw EEG signals (in the time domain) (36%). The second calculated features from the raw signals and used those as inputs (49%). And the third used spectrograms, processed as images (15%). The selection of input formulation heavily depended on the task type and deep-learning architecture. Thus, we can see that most of the studies used calculated features to train their proposed NNs. When attempting to find behavioral patterns, it is common to analyze specific frequency ranges of EEG signals. Wavelet, entropy, spatial filter, short-time Fourier transform (STFT), spatio-temporal features, and power spectral density were used in the reviewed papers to calculate the features of EEG the signals. Raw EEG values was another popular feature for training NN. It’s interesting that NNs can learn complicated features from large amount of raw data. Many NNs, especially RNN, used spectrogram and fast Fourier transform (FFT) to convert EEG signals to images (Figure 4). Hence, in general, studies run the