8    Rapid eye movements, or REM (R) and 3 non-REM stages (N1, N2, and N3) [43, 44]. The eventual application of this research focuses on sleep related disorders, such as sleep apnea, insomnia, and narcolepsy (e.g. [45, 46]). 
 Figure 2. EEG classification task. (A) Number of publications per domain of EEG task per year. (B)The percentage of different EEG classification task across all studies. 3.2.4. Emotion recognition tasks. Here subjects watch video clips, which have been categorized by experts as eliciting various emotions. Facial expressions and EEG signals are then recorded from the subjects. However, some subjects may hide their real emotions using misleading facial expressions. Therefore, EEG signals and emotion self-assessment typically follows. The result can be parsed into valence and arousal scales. Emotion recognition is a crucial problem in human-computer interaction (HCI) for example: virtual reality, video games, and educational systems (e.g. [28]). 3.2.5. Mental workload tasks. Subjects are here instructed to carry out different mental tasks of varying complexity. The results of these studies reflect the interaction between the human inner cognitive capacity and the level of task complexity. Research into mental workload has applications in BCI performance monitoring and in cognitive stress monitoring (e.g. [47]). 3.2.6. Motor tasks. Here, subjects are instructed to either rest or move some parts of their bodies. Researchers use such tasks to design, modify or improve classification methods for different applications (e.g. [48]).3.2.7. Visual tasks. These studies focus on the detection and classification of the intentions and decisions of subjects while they watch rapidly changing sequences of pictures or letters. This helps to improved non-verbal communication systems and BCI (e.g. [49]). 3.3. Data and Reproducibility We collected dataset information for 53 papers. This information included: • Data quantity: Amount of data in the study (total hours of recording or number of samples)  • Number of Channels: Number of channels recorded and which of them were used for analysis • Subjects: Number of recorded participants and which of them were analyzed • Dataset: Publicly available, proprietary, etc.