natural language inference, across six datasets. Our
key research ﬁndings are summarized as follows:
•The zero-shot performance of TAM inZERO-
GENframework signiﬁcantly surpasses its PLM
counterparts (which often serves as the teacher
models under the knowledge distillation context),
with only0.4% number of parameters (§4.2);
•In some low-resourced settings, TAM trained
with synthesized data even outperforms the same
model trained with human annotations in a fully
supervised manner (§4.3);
•The quality of the generated text by known
models and algorithms are well reﬂected in
downstream tasks’ performance, and decoding
strategies that encourage more diversity also
result in greater noise (§4.4);
•Prompt engineering is challenging – the perfor-
mance of more instructive or natural language
style prompts varies in different tasks (§4.5).
In conclusion, we argue that ZEROGENis a
viable and promising approach towards ﬂexible
and efﬁcient zero-shot learning in NLP. It also
has a great potential as a data-free model-agnostic
knowledge distillation and unreferenced text eval-
uation method. Our code can be found at https:
//github.com/HKUNLP/ZeroGen .
2 Preliminary: Prompt-based Zero-Shot
Learning
We start with preliminary knowledge about
prompt-based zero-shot learning framework
(named P ROMPTING ).
Giving a pre-trained language model (PLM) P
and a text classiﬁcation (TC) task D= (X;Y),
PROMPTING ﬁrst instantiates a prompt T()with
each input xi2X and outputs a natural language
sequence to be completed by P. For instance, we
show an example on sentiment analysis task in
Figure 1(a), where xiis "A deep and meaningful
ﬁlm." andT(xi)is "A deep and meaningful
ﬁlm. The sentiment of the movie review is ".
Furthermore, PROMPTING deﬁnes a verbalizer
M()that maps each label/class yito a word/words
inP’s vocabulary. For instance, " positive " and
"negative " represents the two classes. In this
way, PROMPTING models the probability of class
yi2Y forxias:
p(yijxi) =P(M(yi)jT(xi)): (1)During the whole process, the pre-trained weights
ofPare frozen and no training is required.
The vast linguistic (Jawahar et al., 2019; Gold-
berg, 2019; Tenney et al., 2019) and factual
(Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020b) knowledge
encoded in PLMs’ parameters is the key towards
PROMPTING ’s success. However, PROMPTING
fails to fully exert the capacity of PLMs and heavily
relies on gigantic PLMs during inference. This
motivates us to explore a more ﬂexible and efﬁcient
way of conducting zero-shot learning with PLMs.
3 Z EROGEN
In this work, we take the dataset generation method
to the extreme and study ZEROGEN, a ﬂexible and
efﬁcient zero-shot learning framework via dataset
generation. ZEROGENframework comprises three
sequential stages as shown in Figure 1(b):
1.The goal of the ﬁrst stage is to make use of
the generative power of PLMs to synthesize
a dataset to solve the downstream task. With
carefully designed prompts and a powerful
PLM, the generated dataset is believed to
incorporate rich task-speciﬁc knowledge.
2.Given pseudo dataset synthesized as above,
we then train a tiny taskmodel (TAM) to solve
the task. TAM can integrate with any task-
speciﬁc inductive bias and is also order-of-
magnitude smaller than PLMs.
3.Finally, we perform efﬁcient inference on
target task using the trained model. During
the whole process, no human annotations are
involved, thus the evaluation setting is purely
zero-shot.
Pseudo dataset generation For a single-
sentence classiﬁcation task D, we aim to generate
a pseudo datasetDg= (Xg;Yg)with the help of a
left-to-right PLMP. We ﬁrst sample a class label
ygfrom a uniform distribution:
ygU(y1; y2; : : : ; y k); (2)
where kis the number of classes. ygis then
wrapped up into a label-descriptive prompt T(yg)
to steer the generation of xg:
xgP (jT(yg)): (3)
Since the parameters of Pis frozen and the
generation xgfor each ygis deterministic, we can