ZEROGEN: Efﬁcient Zero-shot Learning via Dataset Generation
Jiacheng Ye}y, Jiahui Gaoy, Qintong Li, Hang Xu|, Jiangtao Feng},
Zhiyong Wu},Tao Yu~,Lingpeng Kong}
}Shanghai AI Laboratory|Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab~University of Washington
The University of Hong Kong
{carsonye,sumiler,qtli}@connect.hku.hk, xbjxh@live.com,
{fengjiangtao,wuzhiyong}@pjlab.org.cn, {tyu,lpk}@cs.hku.hk
Abstract
There is a growing interest in dataset gener-
ation recently due to the superior generative
capacity of large pre-trained language models
(PLMs). In this paper, we study a ﬂexible
and efﬁcient zero-short learning method, Z E-
ROGEN. Given a zero-shot task, we ﬁrst
generate a dataset from scratch using PLMs
in an unsupervised manner. Then, we train
a tiny task model (e.g., LSTM) under the
supervision of the synthesized dataset. This
approach allows highly efﬁcient inference as
the ﬁnal task model only has orders of mag-
nitude fewer parameters comparing to PLMs
(e.g., GPT2-XL). Apart from being annotation-
free and efﬁcient, we argue that Z EROGENcan
also provide useful insights from the perspec-
tive of data-free model-agnostic knowledge
distillation, and unreferenced text generation
evaluation. Experiments and analysis on dif-
ferent NLP tasks, namely, text classiﬁcation,
question answering, and natural language in-
ference, show the effectiveness of Z EROGEN.
1 Introduction
While generating training data with language
model is not new to natural language processing
(Anaby-Tavor et al., 2020; Puri et al., 2020; Kumar
et al., 2020), it has garnered enormous interests
recently due to the superior generative capacity of
large-scale pre-trained language models (PLMs).
Training examples created in such a manner have
been found effective in various scenarios via the
data augmentation procedure (Lee et al., 2021;
Schick and Schütze, 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Meng
et al., 2022, inter alia ).
In this paper, we study an extreme scenario of
such an approach, ZEROGEN. Given a downstream
task, we ﬁrst generate its training data from
scratch using a powerful PLM, whose generation is
steered by carefully designed task-speciﬁc prompts.
Work done while interning at Shanghai AI Lab.
yEqual Contribution.Then, we train a tiny t askmodel ( TAM ), which
has orders of magnitude fewer parameters than
PLMs, under the supervision of the synthesized
training data. Machine generated text is the only
medium that connects the PLMs to the ﬁnal task
models, and no human annotations are required
in the entire process. The TAM can be of any
choice (e.g., loglinear or neural), allowing efﬁcient
inference1and deployment. Besides, TAM can be
ﬂexibly designed with any task-speciﬁc strategies
(e.g., inductive bias or loss), which could provide
superior performance.
Apart from being annotation-free and efﬁcient,
we are also interested in ZEROGENfor the fol-
lowing reasons. First, ZEROGENcan be seen as
a variant of knowledge distillation (KD; Hinton
et al. (2015)) that provides some exciting new
features. Unlike conventional KD, ZEROGEN
does not require any human annotations during
distillation. Furthermore, ZEROGENmakes no
presumption on the architecture choice of student
models, thus we can incorporate any task-speciﬁc
inductive bias into the design of student models
conveniently. Second, ZEROGENcan serve as an
unreferenced evaluation method for text generation
(Guan and Huang, 2020; Pillutla et al., 2021): the
downstream tasks’ performance is dominated by
the quality of the synthesized text, thus can serve
as an indirect measure of the generation models
and algorithms. Third, ZEROGENsheds new lights
onprompt engineering (Petroni et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020) (i.e., the design of the prompts in
PLMs). As manual prompts reﬂect our essential
knowledge of speciﬁc tasks, an intriguing question
here is to what extend we can incorporate human
knowledge or instructions in these prompts.
We evaluate ZEROGENin three NLP tasks which
are text classiﬁcation, question answering, and
1Amazon estimates that 90% of production ML infrastruc-
ture costs are for inference , rather than training (Jain et al.,
2019).arXiv:2202.07922v2  [cs.CL]  22 Oct 2022