Task Prompt Sampled Generation
SST-2The movie review in positive sentiment for movie " The Spiderwick Chronicles
(Movie) " is: "It’s an action-adventure
movie about a crime
ﬁghter who must face an
even bigger foe, then the
end of the world, all in
a funny, attractive, and
moving way.
The movie review in negative sentiment for movie " Fist Fight " is: " The action scenes are
laughable, the characters
lack personality, and the
plot is boring.
QNLIInformation: " In September 1695, Captain Henry Every, an English pirate on board
the Fancy, reached the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, where he teamed up with ﬁve
other pirate captains to make an attack on the Indian ﬂeet making the annual
voyage to Mocha. " \n Question (answer inabove information): "Why did each of these
captains enter the Straits
of Bab-el-Mandeb?
Information: " Gaddaﬁ remained the government’s public face, with the identities
of the other RCC members only being publicly revealed on 10 January 1970. " \n
Question (answer not in above information): "Was the ﬁnancing received
from the international rev-
olution from Germany
(4)?
RTE"Today about 75% of people live in cities or towns. Art and culture are an
important part of France. " \n Based on the above description, the following sentence is
deﬁnitely correct : "Today about 75% of peo-
ple live in cities and towns.
"There are four identiﬁed subtypes of Ebola virus. Three of the four have caused
disease in humans: Ebola-Zaire, Ebola-Sudan, and Ebola-Ivory Coast. The fourth,
Ebola-Reston, has caused disease in non-human primates, but not in humans. " \n
Based on the above description, the following sentence is deﬁnitely wrong : "The most recently docu-
mented case was a Sierra
Leonean man who died in
2015.
SQuAD The context is: " On the other hand, in his study on nine of ¨the Bibles most widely
in use in the English-speaking world¨, Bible scholar Jason BeDuhn, Professor of
Religious Studies at the Northern Arizona University, wrote: ˘201cThe NW [New
World Translation] emerges as the most accurate of the translations compared. ˘201d
Although the general public and many Bible scholars assume that the differences
in the New World Translation are the result of religious bias on the part of its
translators, BeDuhn stated: ˘201cMost of the differences are due to the greater
accuracy of the NW as a literal, conservative translation of the original expressions
of the New Testament writers. ˘201d He added however that the insertion of the name
Jehovah in the New Testament ¨violate[s] accuracy in favor of denominationally
preferred expressions for God. " \n " Jehovah " is the answer to the following question:
"Who is the one and only
true God ?
Table 11: Generated examples for each task. We omit the example for IMDb and Adversarial QA tasks since we
use the exactly same prompt as SST-2 and SQuAD task, respectively. The input conditions in each prompt are
bolded .