Correctness Different from the vanilla genera-
tion scenario that ends with the generated text,
we use the generated text as training dataset
for another small model. Therefore, ZEROGEN
requires a more emphasis on the correctness of
generated text, i.e., whether the generated text
pertain to the corresponding class described in the
prompt. To access the correctness of a synthetic
dataset, we ﬁrst train a RoBERTa-Large (Liu
et al., 2019) model on the standard training dataset,
which is then used as a validator to evaluate the
synthetic dataset. In summary, we ﬁnd a tradeoff
between diversity and correctness, i.e., greater
diversity leads to lower correctness. We notice
even deteriorated outcomes by increasing k, while
greedy search achieves the highest performance
in terms of correctness. These results reﬂect
those of Massarelli et al. (2020) who also found
a tradeoff between factuality and diversity, i.e.,
while decoding strategies such as top-k and nucleus
sampling lead to less repetitive generations, they
also produce less veriﬁable text. Besides, among
different tasks, we ﬁnd the correctness on oracle
datasets are similar (i.e., all larger than 90%),
while that varies substantially on synthetic datasets
(i.e., up-to 94.46% on IMDb and merely 31.07%
on SQuAD). Compared with generating datasets
for single text classiﬁcation tasks (e.g., IMDb),
where the PLM only needs to consider a single
condition (i.e., label), generating for text-pair tasks
requires PLMs to consider multiple conditions
synchronously (e.g., answer and context when
generating question), which makes it more difﬁcult
to control the correctness of the generated sam-
ple. This possibly explains the observed variance
among tasks.
Human Evaluation We report the human evalu-
ation results in Table 4. The quality of generated
data is measured by the correctness andnaturalness
metrics. The correctness measures whether the
label is correct and the content is relevant to the
task topic (e.g. movie review for IMDb). The
naturalness measures whether the generated text is
ﬂuent and similar to human-generated text. We
invite 4 experts to participate in the evaluation
and each participant is randomly assigned 25
generated samples (100 samples in total) for
each decoding strategy. Table 4 report the mean
scores. The results show that greedy search
achieves the highest performance in terms of
correctness, which is consistent with the automaticMethod Correctness Naturalness ZEROGEN
Oracle 0.92 4.46 87.2
Greedy 0.91 3.55 74.4
Top k=40 0.72 3.75 83.7
Nucleus p=0.9 0.81 3.89 83.4
Table 4: Human evaluation on IMDb gold and synthetic
dataset using different decoding strategies. We also
show the TAM performance to show the ability of
ZEROGENas an evaluator.
evaluation using Roberta-Large. However, in terms
of naturalness/ﬂuency, the greedy search performs
the worst. The top-k and nucleus decoding
strategies can generate a more ﬂuent context.
4.5 Prompt Engineering in Z EROGEN
The design of prompts can have huge impact
onPROMPTING , as pointed by many previous
works (Mishra et al., 2021a; Wei et al., 2022). In
this section, we investigate how prompt design
instructs text generation and affects ZEROGEN’s
performance. We examine three commonly used
prompt types: (1) Control code (Keskar et al.,
2019), (2) Control code with task description , (3)
Natural language style . For SST-2 and IMDb,
example prompts and corresponding results can
be found in Table 5 (check Appendix A for other
tasks).
From Table 5, we ﬁrst observe that natural
language prompts are favored by both ZEROGEN
and PROMPTING , rather than prompts contain
control code. We hypothesize the reason being
that during the pre-training process, the majority
of text data fed to the PLMs are natural language
sentences, and therefore the PLMs do not contain
enough knowledge in control code. Moreover, we
observe that ZEROGENis more robust towards
different prompts than P ROMPTING : for P ROMPT -
ING, a minor change from P4toP5will lead to
a huge drop in accuracy (16.2% drop in IMDb);
forZEROGEN, applying the same prompt revision,
the decrement decreases to 9.4%. Compared with
PROMPTING which use prompt to directly instruct
label words, ZEROGENuse synthesized data as
medium to connect PLM and TAM, thus mitigating
the sharp change brought by prompts.
To further explore the potential of prompting,
we investigate the two-stage conditional prompt
inspired by (Schick and Schütze, 2021). In the
running example, based on the task characteris-
tic(to generate a movie review), we ﬁrst generate
movie name using prompt [Movie: "] and then