models (Anaby-Tavor et al., 2020; Puri et al.,
2020; Kumar et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021). They
ﬁrst ﬁne-tune the generative models using human
annotations, the generated data samples are then
combined with human annotations to train the
models in a semi-supervised fashion. Supervised
data generation methods are also studied for
building auxiliary tasks (Vu et al., 2021) and
dataset creation based on human and machine
collaboration (Liu et al., 2022). To reduce the
human efforts on data annotation, another line of
works explore data generation methods without
the need for human annotations. He et al. (2021)
uses unsupervised-trained unconditional generative
models to synthesize unlabeled data for semi-
supervised learning. Without any model training,
Wang et al. (2021) propose to directly use unlabeled
in-domain examples as prompts to synthesize high-
quality training data. Schick and Schütze (2021)
explore dataset generation method from scratch for
semantic textual similarity task. One concurrent
work (Meng et al., 2022) studies dataset generation
for text classiﬁcation and natural language infer-
ence tasks. In comparison, we take the dataset
generation framework to the extreme, i.e., consider
extremely tiny edge models (e.g., LSTM), explore
boarder NLP tasks including question answering,
and conduct extensive analysis such as decoding
strategies and quality evaluation.
6 Conclusion and Future Directions
In this paper, we study an extreme instance
of dataset generation via PLMs for zero-shot
learning. Without any human annotations, we
show that an small LSTM can surpass the zero-
shot performance of its PLM counterparts (e.g.,
GPT2-XL), and even outperform the same model
trained with human annotations. Despite the
demonstrated effectiveness, we discuss several
issues we observed when developing ZEROGEN
and reveal a substantial room of improvement in
future research.
Despite positive results on TC tasks, we ﬁnd the
stability regarding prompt choice of ZEROGENis
still far from satisfactory on NLI tasks. Future work
could include multi-task prompt-based pre-training
methods (Sanh et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021).
Furthermore, we observe noisy examples in
synthetic dataset on difﬁcult tasks such as NLI and
QA, this situation progressively deteriorates when
incorporating more diverse decoding strategy (e.g.,Nucleus Sampling). Better decoding strategies
are needed to ensure the label correctness while
preserving the dataset diversity (Massarelli et al.,
2020). Besides, methods that learn from noisy
labels can be integrated into the training of the tiny
task model (Song et al., 2020).
We hope this paper can provide contributions
for further exploiting dataset-generation-based
zero-shot learning with large pre-trained language
models.
Limitations
Although ZEROGENachieves promising perfor-
mance under zero-shot learning setting, this choice
does come with certain limitations. We ﬁnd the
stability regarding the prompt choice of ZEROGEN
is still far from satisfactory. ZEROGENunder-
performs PROMPTING in some certain selected
prompts, and prompt engineering is tough as it’s
shown a different preference on prompts across
various tasks. Future work may include multi-
task prompt-based pre-training methods (Sanh
et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021) to improve prompt
robustness.
We also observe noisy examples in the synthetic
dataset on difﬁcult tasks such as NLI and QA,
this situation progressively deteriorates when in-
corporating a more diverse decoding strategy (e.g.,
Nucleus Sampling). Better decoding strategies
are needed to ensure the label’s correctness while
preserving the dataset diversity (Massarelli et al.,
2020). Reciprocally, methods that learn from noisy
labels can be integrated into the training of the tiny
task model (Song et al., 2020).
Acknowledgement
We thank the anonymous reviewers whose sugges-
tions helped clarify this work. This work is partially
supported by the Shanghai Committee of Science
and Technology (Grant No. 21DZ1100100), and
the joint research scheme of the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) and the Re-
search Grants Council (RGC) under grant number
N_HKU714/21.
References
Ateret Anaby-Tavor, Boaz Carmeli, Esther Goldbraich,
Amir Kantor, George Kour, Segev Shlomov, Naama
Tepper, and Naama Zwerdling. 2020. Do not
have enough data? deep learning to the rescue!