like the robot to return as quickly as possible. If the robot goes dire ctly to
the pharmacy, goes behind the counter, grabs the drug, and ret urns home, it
will have succeeded and minimized execution time and resources (mon ey). We
would also say it robbed the pharmacy because it did not participate in the
social construct of exchanging money for the product.
One solution to avoiding commonsense goal failures is for intelligent sy stems
to possess commonsense knowledge. This can be any knowledge com monly
shared by individuals from the same society and culture. Commonsen se knowl-
edgecanbe declarative (e.g.,carsdriveontherightsideoftheroad)or procedural
(e.g., a waitperson in a restaurant will not bring the bill until it is reque sted).
While there have been several eﬀorts to create knowledge bases o f declara-
tive commonsense knowledge (CYC (Lenat, 1995), ConceptNet (L iu and Singh,
2004)), these eﬀorts are incomplete and there is a dearth of know ledge readily
available on procedural behavioral norms.
There are a number of sources from which intelligent systems might a cquire
commonknowledge,includingmachinevisionappliedtocartoons(Veda ntam et al.,
2015), images (Sadeghi et al., 2015), and video. Unsurprisingly, a lo t of com-
monsense knowledge can be inferred from what people write, includin g stories,
news, and encyclopedias such as Wikipedia (Trinh and Le, 2018). Sto ries and
writing can be particularlypowerful sources ofcommon knowledge; people write
what they know and social and cultural biases and assumptions can come out,
fromdescriptionsoftheproperprocedureforgoingtoarestaur antorweddingto
implicit assertions of right and wrong. Procedural knowledge in part icular can
be used by intelligent systems to better provide services to people b y predicting
their behavior or detect and respond to anomalous behavior. In th e same way
that predictive text completion is helpful, predicting broader patte rns of daily
life can also be helpful.
Combining commonsense procedural knowledge with behavior can yie ld in-
telligent agents that are safer. To the extent that it is impossible to enumer-
ate the “rules” of society—which is more than just the laws a society has—
commonsense procedural knowledge can help intelligent systems an d robots
follow social conventions. Social conventions often exist to help av oid hu-
mans avoid conﬂict with each other, even though they may inconven ience us.
Harrison and Riedl (2016) used the pharmacy scenario summarized above to
show that intelligent autonomous agents that use written stories a s training
demonstrations can implicitly learn to avoid behaviors that are socially unde-
sirable. This happens as a side eﬀect because stories are more ofte n than not
positive examples of behavior. Their system directly addresses the challenge
of commonsense goal failures by deriving reward information from f ollowing
commonly agreed-upon story progressions as close as possible. Th us the agent
learns not to steal the prescription drugs because most stories r efer to exchange
of money leading the agent to prefer that behavior even though it is faster
and less costly to do the opposite. The agent thus never has to be t old what
“stealing” is and why it should be avoided.
Commonsense knowledge, the procedural form of which can act as a basis
for theory of mind for when interacting with humans, can make huma n-AI
4