arXiv:1901.11184v1  [cs.AI]  31 Jan 2019Human-Centered Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Machine Learning
Mark O.Riedl
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract
Humansare increasingly comingintocontact withartiﬁcial intelligence
and machine learning systems. Human-centered artiﬁcial in telligence is a
perspective on AI and ML that algorithms must be designed wit h aware-
ness that they are part of a larger system consisting of human s. We lay
forth an argument that human-centered artiﬁcial intellige nce can be bro-
ken down into two aspects: (1) AI systems that understand hum ans from
a sociocultural perspective, and (2) AI systems that help hu mans under-
stand them. We further argue that issues of social responsib ility such as
fairness, accountability, interpretability, and transpa rency.
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is the study and design of algorithms that perform
tasks or behaviors that a person could reasonably deem to require intelligence
if a human were to do it. Broadly construed, an intelligent system can take
many forms: a system designed to be indistinguishable from humans; a speech
assistant such as Alexa, Siri, Cortana, or Google Assistant; a self- driving car; a
recommender in an online commerce site; or a non-player character in a video
game. We referto intelligent systems as agentswhen they are capableof making
some decisions on their own based on given goals. Machine learning (ML) is
a particular approach to the design of intelligent system in which the s ystem
adapts its behavior based on data. It is the success of machine lear ning algo-
rithms in particular that have lead to recent growth in commercializat ion of
artiﬁcial intelligence.
Humans are increasingly coming into contact with artiﬁcial intelligence and
machine learning systems. At times it is evident, as in the case of Siri, A lexa,
Cortana, or Google Assistant. It is also evident in the case of self-d riving cars
or non-player characters in computer games. At times it is less evide nt, as in
the case of algorithms that work behind the scenes to recommend p roducts,
1