and approve bank loans. Given the potential for intelligent system t o impact
people’s lives, it is important to design intelligent systems with this in mind .
There is a growing awareness that algorithmic advances to artiﬁcial intel-
ligence and machine learning alone are insuﬃcient when considering sys tems
designed to interact with and around humans. Human-centered artiﬁcial in-
telligence is a perspective on AI and ML that intelligent systems must be de-
signed with awareness that they are part of a larger system consis ting of hu-
man stake-holders, such as users, operators, clients, and othe r people in close
proximity. Some AI researchers and practitioners have started t o use the term
human-centered AI to refer to intelligent systems that are design ed with social
responsibility in mind, such as addressing issues of fairness, accoun tability, in-
terpretability, and transparency. Those are important issues. H uman-centered
AI can encompass more than those issues and in this desiderata we lo ok at
the broader scope of what it means to have human-centered artiﬁ cial intelli-
gence, including factors that underlie our need for fairness, inter pretability, and
transparency.
At the heart of human-centered AI is the recognitionthat the way intelligent
systems solve problems—especially when using machine learning—is fun damen-
tallyaliento humans without training in computer science or AI. We are used
to interacting with other people, and we have developed powerful a bilities to
predict what other people will do any why. This is sometimes referred to as
theory of mind —we are able to hypothesize about the actions, beliefs, goals, in-
tentions, and desires of others. Unfortunately, our theory of m ind breaks down
when interacting with intelligent systems, which do not solve problems the way
we do and can and come up with unusual or unexpected solutions eve n when
working as intended. This is further exacerbated if the intelligent sy stem is a
“black box.” Black box AI and ML refers to the situations wherein the user
cannot even know what algorithms it uses, or that the system is so c omplicated
as to defy easy inspection. Regardless of whether an intelligent sys tem is a
black box or not, we are seeing more interaction between intelligent s ystems
and people who are not experts in artiﬁcial intelligence or computing s cience.
How can we design intelligent systems that are capable of helping peop le un-
derstand their decisions? Must we design intelligent systems to solve problems
more like humans, or can we augment existing algorithms? What do peo ple
need to know about an intelligent system to be able to trust its decisio ns or
be comfortable working with an intelligent system? Can the intelligent s ystem
itself convey this information to its users in a meaningful and unders tandable
manner?
Human-centered AI is also in recognition of the fact that humans ca n be
equally inscrutable to intelligent systems. When we think of intelligent s ystems
understanding humans, we mostly think of natural language and sp eech pro-
cessingwhether an intelligent system can respond appropriately to utterances.
Natural languageprocessing, speech processing, and activity re cognitionare im-
portant challenges in building useful, interactive systems. To be tru ly eﬀective,
AI and ML systems need a theory of mind about humans. Just as we u se our
commonsensereasoningto interpret and predict the actions ofot hers, intelligent
2