systems can beneﬁt from having commonsense understanding of w hat people do
and why they do it in particular ways; we are unconsciously inﬂuenced by our
sociocultural beliefs. Intelligent systems, however, do not “grow up” immersed
in a society and culture in the way humans do. These sociocultural be liefs and
norms provide a context surrounding everything that people do. A n intelligent
system that can model sociocultural beliefs and norms may be able t o disam-
biguate human behavior and make more educated guesses on how to anticipate
and respond to human needs. At a minimum, intelligent systems that b etter un-
derstand the sociocultural underpinnings of human behavior may b e less likely
to make mistakes about subjects that people take for granted, m aking them
safer to use and safer for them to be in close proximity to people. It may also
be possible someday for intelligent systems to evaluate their own beh aviors for
consistency with ethical norms about fairness.
In the following sections lay out arguments that AI and ML systems t hat
are human-centered (1) have an understanding of human sociocu ltural norms
as part of a theory of mind about people, and (2) are capable of pro ducing
explanations that non-expert end-users can understand. Thes e are underlying
capabilities from which much of our need for AI that contributes to s ocial good
stems.
2 Understanding Humans
Manyartiﬁcialintelligence systems that will comeinto contact with hu mans will
need to understand how humans behave and what they want. This w ill make
them more useful and also safer to use. There are at least two way s in which
understanding humans can beneﬁt intelligent systems. First, the in telligent
systemmustinferwhatapersonwants. Fortheforeseeablefutu re, wewilldesign
AI systems that receive their instructions and goals from humans. However,
people dont always say exactly what they mean. Misunderstanding a person’s
intent can lead to perceived failure. Second, going beyond simply failin g to
understand human speech or written language, consider the fact that perfectly
understood instructions can lead to failure if part of the instructio ns or goals
are unstated or implicit.
Commonsense failure goals occur when an intelligent agent does not achieve
the desired result because part of the goal, or the way the goal sh ould have
been achieved, is left unstated (this is also referred to as a corrupted goal or
corrupted reward (Everitt et al., 2017)). Why would this happen? One reasonis
that humans are used to communicating with other humans who shar e common
knowledge about how the world works and how to do things. It is easy to fail
to recognize that computers do not share this common knowledge a nd can take
speciﬁcations literally. The failure is not the fault of the AI system—it is the
fault of the human operator.
It is trivial to set up commonsense failures in in robotics and autonom ous
agents. Considerthehypotheticalexampleofaskingarobottogo toapharmacy
and pick up a prescription drug. Because the human is ill, he or she wou ld
3