interaction more natural. Even though ML and AI decision-making alg orithms
operate diﬀerently from human decision-making, the behavior of th e system
is consequently more recognizable to people. It also makes interact ion with
people safer: it can reduce commonsense goal failures because th e agent ﬁlls
in an under-speciﬁed goal with commonsense procedural details; a nd an agent
that acts according to a persons expectations will innately avoid co nﬂict with
a person who is applying their theory of mind of human behavior to inte lligent
agents.
3 AI Systems Helping Humans Understand Them
Invariably, an intelligent system or autonomous robotic agents will m ake a mis-
take, fail, violate an expectation, or perform an action that confu ses us. Our
natural inclination is to want to ask: “Why did you do that?” Although people
will be responsible for providing goals to intelligent, autonomous syst ems, the
system is responsible for choosing and executing the details.
Neural networks, in particular, are often regardedas un-interpretable , mean-
ing that it takes a large amount of eﬀort to determine why the syste ms response
to a stimulus is what it is. We often speak of “opening the black box” to ﬁgure
out what was going on inside the autonomous system’s decision-makin gprocess.
A majority of the work to date is on visualizing the representations le arned by
neural networks (e.g., generating images that activate diﬀerent p arts of a neural
network (Zhang and Zhu, 2018)) or by tracing the eﬀects of diﬀer ent portions
of the input data on output performance. (e.g., removing or maskin g parts of
training data to see how performance is aﬀected (Ribeiro et al., 201 6)). Even
AI experts can have a hard time interpreting machine-learned mode ls and this
type of work is geared largely toward AI power-users, often for t he purposes of
debugging and improving a machine learning system.
However, if we want to achieve a vision of autonomous agents and ro bots
being used by end users and operating around people, we must cons ider non-
expert human operators. Non-experts have very diﬀerent need s when it comes
to interacting with autonomous agents and robots. Non-expert o perators are
likely not going to seek a detailed inspection of the inner workings of th e sys-
tem, but is more likely seeking remedy. Remedy is the concept that a user
should be able to correct or seek compensation for a perceived failu re. An in-
telligent agent did what it thought at the time was the right thing to do only
to have been mistaken or to appear to have made a mistake because the be-
havior violated user expectations. The ﬁrst step in remedy is gettin g enough
information to choose the appropriateremedial course ofaction. Was the failure
(or appearance of failure) due to sensor error, eﬀector error, incorrect model,
incomplete model, dataset bias, or other cause? In many cases the information
can be the remedy itself, in the form of an explanation that helps one revise
their theory of mind about the agent or as an admission of failure. Explana-
tionsare post-hoc descriptions of how a system came to a given conclusio n or
behavior. Explanations can be visual, as in highlighting the portions of sensory
5