input that contributed most to the output (Selvaraju et al., 2017 ), or through
natural language processing (Andreas et al., 2017).
The question of what makes a good explanation of the behavior of a m achine
learning system is an open question that has not been explored at de pth from
a human factors perspective. One option for natural language ex planation is to
generate a description of how the algorithm processes sensory inp ut. This can
be unsatisfactory because algorithms such as neural networksa nd reinforcement
learning defy easy explanation (e.g., “the action was taken because numerous
trials indicate that in situations similar to this the action has the highes t like-
lihood of maximizing future reward”).
Another option is to take inspiration from how humans respond to th e ques-
tion “why did you do that?”. Humans produce rationales —explanations after
the fact that plausibly justiﬁes their actions. People do not know ho w the exact
cascades of neural activation resulted in a decision; we invent a sto ry, consistent
with what we know about ourselves and with intent on being as informa tive as
possible. In turn, others accept these rationales knowing that th ey are not abso-
lutely accurate reﬂections on the cognitive and neural processes that produced
the behavior at the time. Rationale generation is thus the task of cr eating an
explanationcomparableto what ahuman wouldsayifhe orshe werepe rforming
the behavior that the agent was performing in the same situation. E hsan et al.
(2019) show that human-like rationales, despite being true reﬂect ions of the
internal processes of a black-box intelligent system, promote fee lings of trust,
rapport, familiarity, and comfort in non-experts operating auton omous systems
and robots.
Rationales are generated by ﬁrst collecting explanations of humans perform-
inga similartaskto that ofthe autonomoussystem. Aneuralnetwo rkistrained
to translate the internal state of an autonomous agent into the n atural language
explanations in the corpus. This results in automatically generated r ationales
that readlike humanrationales,including culturallyspeciﬁc idioms, ifpr esentin
the corpus. This leads to interesting open research questions. Wh en is explana-
tion generation by layering one black box on top of another appropr iate? How
do incorrect rationales and explanations aﬀect operator percept ions of trust?
Rationales are probably only one part of the solution—they address a high-level
need for explanation and cannot answer speciﬁc questions in which a n operator
asks for elaboration. Rationales may be used as one of a set of tech niques that
meet diﬀerent levels of need from diﬀerent types of users.
4 Conclusions
With these desiderata, we break human-centered artiﬁcial intellige nce into two
criticalcapacities: (1)understandinghumans,and(2)beingablet ohelphumans
understand the AI systems. There may be other critical capabilitie s that this
articledoesnot address. However,it seemsthatmanyoftheattr ibutes wedesire
inintelligentsystemsthatinteractwith non-expertusersandinsys temsthatare
designed for social responsibility can be derived from these two cap abilities. For
6