example, there is a growing awareness of the need for fairness and transparency
when it comes to deployed AI systems. Fairness is the requirement t hat all users
are treated equally and without prejudice. Right now, we make cons cious eﬀort
to collect data and build checks into our systems to prevent our sys tems from
prejudicial behavior. An intelligent system that has a model ofand c an reason
aboutsocial and cultural norms for the population it interacts with can achieve
the same eﬀect of fairness and avoid discrimination and prejudice in s ituations
not anticipated by the system’s developers. Transparency is abou t providing
some means of access to the datasets and workﬂowsinside a deploy ed AI system
to end-users. The ability to help people understand their decisions t hrough
explanations or other means accessible to non-experts will provide people with
greater sense of trust and make them more willing to continue the us e of AI
systems. Explanations may even be the ﬁrst step toward remedy, a critical
aspect of accountability.
Human-centered artiﬁcial intelligence does not mean that an artiﬁc ial intel-
ligence or machine learning algorithm must think like a human or be cognit ively
plausible. However,it doesrecognizethefactthatpeoplewhoaren on-expertsin
artiﬁcialintelligenceorcomputing science fall backona theoryofmin d designed
to facilitate their interaction with other people and draw on sociocult ural norms
that have emerged to avoid human-human conﬂict. Making intelligent systems
human-centered means building the intelligent systems to understa nd the (of-
ten culturally speciﬁc) expectations and needs of humans and to he lp humans
understand them in return. The pursuit of human-centered artiﬁ cial intelli-
gence presents a research agenda that will improve our scientiﬁc u nderstanding
of fundamental artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning while simulta neously
supporting the deployment of intelligent products and services tha t will interact
with people in everyday contexts.
References
Jacob Andreas, Anca D. Dragan, and Dan Klein. Translating neurale se. In
ACL, 2017.
UpolEhsan, PradyumnaTambwekar,LarryChan, BrentHarrison ,andMarkO.
Riedl. Automated rationalegeneration: a technique for explainableA I and its
eﬀects on human perceptions. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Intelligence User Interfaces , 2019.
Tom Everitt, Victoria Krakovna, Laurent Orseau, Marcus Hutter , and Shane
Legg. Reinforcement learning with a corrupted reward channel. In IJCAI,
2017.
Brent Harrison and Mark Riedl. Towards learning from stories: An ap proach
for interactive machine learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI’16 Workshop
on Symbiotic Cognitive Systems , 2016.
7