Figure 1: Diagrams depicting (i) Left: the proposed layout of a Transformer enhanced with language speciﬁc
adapters (ii) Right: the architecture of each residual adapter layer. While the ﬁgure depicts use of adapters for
multilingual NMT, the same formulation can be used for domain adaptation.
bility to adapt to tasks of varying complexity and
adaptation corpus sizes, within a single model.
In this work we propose using light-weight
adapter layers, which are transplanted between the
layers of a pre-trained network and ﬁne-tuned on
the adaptation corpus. Adapting only the light-
weight layers enables our approach to be param-
eter efﬁcient, and eases the scalability of the ap-
proach to large models. The capacity of these
adapters can be adjusted to match the requirements
of the target task, making them suitable for a va-
riety of adaptation tasks. By separating the pa-
rameters of the original network and each adapta-
tion task, our approach circumvents catastrophic
interference (McCloskey and Cohen, 1989) with
the original model parameters, and allows us to si-
multaneously adapt a single model to multiple do-
mains and languages, while retaining the quality
on the source languages and domains.
We make three major contributions in this work:
(i) we propose a formulation of adapter layers
for NMT adaptation that enables us to tune their
capacity according to the target task complex-
ity and corpus size, (ii) we evaluate our ap-
proach on domain adaptation, and demonstrate
that light-weight adapters match the performance
of full ﬁne-tuning based adaptation at a fraction
of the per-domain parameter cost, and (iii) we use
adapters to train a massively multilingual model
on 103 languages, and demonstrate that it is pos-
sible to train a single model that signiﬁcantly im-
proves transfer performance on low resource lan-guages, without huge regression on high resource
language pairs.
By demonstrating the effectiveness of adapters
on domain adaptation and massively multilingual
translation, we make progress towards a ﬂexible
universal translation model for all languages and
domains.
2 Related Work
Several approaches have been proposed in recent
literature that try to address the shortcomings of
full ﬁne-tuning when applied to domain adaptation
(Chu and Wang, 2018). Michel and Neubig (2018)
proposed a space efﬁcient approach to adaptation
that introduces domain-speciﬁc biases to the out-
put vocabulary, enabling extreme personalization
in settings where small amounts of data are avail-
able for a lot of different domains. Thompson
et al. (2018) ﬁne-tune selected components of the
base model architecture, in order to determine how
much ﬁne-tuning each component contributes to
the ﬁnal adaptation performance. Wuebker et al.
(2018) propose introducing sparse offsets from the
base model parameters for every domain, reduc-
ing the memory complexity of loading and unload-
ing domain speciﬁc parameters in real world set-
tings. Bapna and Firat (2019) train the base model
to utilize neighboring samples from the training
set, enabling the model to adapt to new domains
without the need for additional parameter updates.
Learning Hidden Unit Contribution (LHUC) (Vi-
lar, 2018) is perhaps closest to our work in spirit.