Figure 3: JRC-Acquis Adaptation performance vs
adapter capacity in terms of percentage of the base
model’s capacity. The range of model capacity plot-
ted here corresponds to adapter bottleneck dimensions
of 64, 128...2048 respectively.
Acquis, full model ﬁne-tuning (Full-FT columns
in Table 1) on in-domain data signiﬁcantly im-
proves translation performance compared to the
base, non-adapted Transformer Big by a huge mar-
gin, 3 BLEU points for IWSLT and 9 BLEU points
for JRC. LHUC also improves performance over
the base model, but lags behind a fully ﬁne-tuned
model for both domains and model capacities.
On IWSLT, adapters match the performance
of the ﬁne-tuning upper bound within error mar-
gins, while adding less than 0.11% of the origi-
nal model parameters. On JRC-Acquis adapters
recover around 90% of ﬁne-tuning improvements
without updating any existing parameters, while
adding around 13.5% additional parameters.
To demonstrate the ﬂexibility of our approach,
we quantify the trade-off between adapter capac-
ity and adaptation performance on both IWSLT
and JRC-Acquis. In Figures 2 and 3, we plot
the adaptation performance on IWSLT and JRC-
Acquis respectively, while varying adapter capac-
ity. On IWSLT, we notice that residual adapters
reach within 0.5 BLEU of the full ﬁne-tuning up-
per bound with just 0.03% of the model capac-
ity, corresponding to a hidden dimension of size
4. By increasing capacity further we were able
to improve over the full ﬁne-tuning baseline by
around 0.5 BLEU. On the other hand, on JRC-
Acquis, adapter capacity had to be increased up
to 13.5% of the total model capacity, correspond-
ing to a hidden dimension of size 2048, before we
were within 0.5 BLEU of the full ﬁne-tuning per-
formance. This highlights a key strength of the
approach: by varying adapter capacity it is possi-ble to adapt the same model to domains of varying
complexity and amounts of data.
Figure 4: IWSLT Adaptation performance vs frac-
tion of the in-domain training corpus used for adapta-
tion. The blue solid line plots the performance of ﬁne-
tuning. The red dotted line tracks the performance of
LHUC, while the yellow dashed line tracks the perfor-
mance of the proposed residual adapter based approach
with varying amounts of training data.
To evaluate the effectiveness of adapters when
adapting with small in-domain corpora, we fur-
ther compare the performance of adapters with
ﬁne-tuning on varying amounts of training data.
In Figure 6 we plot the adaptation performance
on IWSLT, when using different fractions of the
training corpus for adaptation. While LHUC is
competitive with full ﬁne-tuning and light-weight
adapters for extremely small fractions, the lack of
capacity limits the applicability of the approach
when larger quantities of adaptation data are avail-
able. On the other hand, by tuning the capacity of
adapters to match the requirements for the adap-
tation corpus size, we are able to match and out-
perform ﬁne-tuning on almost all evaluated data-
points.
In order to monitor the learning behavior of
light-weight adapters, we compare the validation
BLEU scores during the course of the ﬁne-tuning
process. Figure 5 illustrates the comparison of the
two approaches, full ﬁne-tuning and light-weight
adapters. We notice that for a reasonably small
adapter size, adapter performance gradually con-
verges to its peak and stays steady, with almost
no over-ﬁtting for a long enough period, easing
ﬁnal model selection. On the other hand, with
full ﬁne-tuning, optimal model selection becomes
challenging due to rapid over-ﬁtting on the adapta-
tion corpus. This, in fact, can be remedied by care-