Figure 6: Per language pair data distribution of the dataset used for our multilingual experiments (for 102 lan-
guages, 204 language pairs to and from English). The y-axis depicts the number of training examples available per
language pair on a logarithmic scale. Dataset sizes range from the order of 104for the lowest resource language
pairs to the order of 109for the largest.
and Richardson, 2018) vocabulary with 32k to-
kens. We tune different values of dropout (Srivas-
tava et al., 2014), depending on the dataset size
for each language pair. For most medium and
low resource languages we also experiment with
Transformer Base. All our models are trained with
Adafactor (Shazeer and Stern, 2018) with momen-
tum factorization, a learning rate schedule of (3.0,
40K), and a per-parameter norm clipping thresh-
old of 1.0. For Transformer Base models, we use
a learning rate schedule of (2.0, 8K). BLEU scores
are computed on the checkpoint with the best val-
idation performance, on true-cased output and ref-
erences.6
We now describe our approach for training the
multilingual models. Due to the large imbalance
in our training dataset (Figure 6), we ﬁrst design
a sampling strategy to simultaneously train a sin-
gle model on all 204 language pairs. Sampling
directly from the data distribution results in good
performance on high resource languages, but low
resource languages get starved. Sampling equally
from all language pairs results in huge boost in
low resource translation performance, but high re-
source languages perform signiﬁcantly worse than
their bilingual baselines.
To balance between high and low resource lan-
guage pairs, we use a temperature based sampling
strategy (Arivazhagan et al., 2019). For a given
6We used an in-house implementation of mteval-v13a.pl
from Moses to evaluate BLEU scores for our multilingual ex-
periments.language pair, l12, letDl12be the size of the avail-
able parallel corpus. Then if we sample from the
union of the datasets, the probability of the sample
being from language pair l12ispl12=Dl12
l12Dl12.
We set the probability of our sampled distribution
to be proportional to p1
T
l12, where Tis the sampling
temperature. Now, T= 1corresponds to true data
distribution and T= 100 corresponds to an (al-
most) equal number of samples for each language.
We use T= 5for our multilingual model.
We train a single Transformer Big simultane-
ously on all 204 language pairs (102 languages to
and from English), with the same hyper-parameter
settings as the bilingual model. However, we use
a shared SPM vocab with 64K tokens, generated
using the same sampling distribution ( T= 5 )
used during training. We additionally use char-
acter coverage of 0:999995 to ensure our vocab
contains most of the alphabets for all 103 lan-
guages. Please refer (Arivazhagan et al., 2019) for
additional training details for the base multilingual
model.
Following global pre-training on all language
pairs, we inject and ﬁne-tune language pair spe-
ciﬁc adapters. The ﬁne-tuning stage is performed
separately for each language pair to reduce the
device memory needed for the training process.
The ﬁne-tuned adapters can then be combined to-
gether into a single model after this stage. For
ﬁne-tuning, we use the same hyper-parameter used
during global pre-training, but reset our optimizer