They introduce domain speciﬁc gates that con-
trol the contribution of hidden units feeding into
the next layer. However, they introduce a lim-
ited amount of per-domain capacity which doesn’t
scale well when a lot of domain speciﬁc data is
available.
Residual Adapters were ﬁrst introduced for
adapting vision models in Rebufﬁ et al. (2017), but
their formulation used a single projection layer,
without any tunable hyper-parameters that could
be used to adjust capacity based on the target
domain. Houlsby et al. (2019) utilized a new
formulation of adapters to adapt BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018) to multiple tasks simultaneously. Our
formulation of adapters is motivated by theirs,
but differs in a few respects. Houlsby et al.
(2019) introduce adapters after every sub-layer
(self-attention, feed-forward) within a transformer
layer, and re-train existing layer normalization pa-
rameters for every new domain. We simplify this
formulation by leaving the parameters frozen, and
introducing new layer normalization parameters
for every task, essentially mimic-ing the structure
of the transformer feed-forward layer.
3 Approach
Our approach consists of two phases: (i) Train-
ing a generic base model, and (ii) adapting it
to new tasks with added small network modules.
We ﬁrst take a standard NMT model which is
trained on a large source corpus. Following con-
vergence,1all model parameters are frozen, pre-
serving the information learned during this pre-
training phase. Next, per-task light-weight adapter
layers (see Fig. 1 right pane) are introduced after
every layer in the encoder and the decoder (see
Fig. 1 left pane). We ﬁne-tune the parameters of
these task-speciﬁc adapters on the adaptation cor-
pus. This procedure can be followed for every ad-
ditional task, allowing us to train a single model
for all tasks simultaneously, with a small set of
task-speciﬁc adapters.
Adapter Modules Our design principles for
adapter modules are simplicity and ﬂexibility. We
propose a simple single hidden-layer feed-forward
network formulation for adapters, with a non-
linear activation function between the two projec-
tion layers. The inner dimension of these two pro-
1We leave the methodology for deﬁning convergence task
speciﬁc, e.g. early stopping on validation set accuracy or
number of training steps.jections is the only knob to tune. This allows us
to adjust the capacity of the adapter module eas-
ily, depending on the complexity of the target task
or domain. Additionally, we normalize the in-
put of the adapters, in order to make the module
plug-able into any part of the base network, ir-
respective of the variations in the activation pat-
terns/distributions. This parametrized normaliza-
tion layer allows the module to learn the activa-
tion pattern of the layer it’s injected into. Finally,
to allow the adapter module to represent a no-op if
necessary, we wrap it with a residual connection.
Formulation Letzibe the output of the i-th
layer, of dimension d. We ﬁrst apply layer-
normalization (Ba et al., 2016) to the inputs of the
adapter corresponding to task T.
~zT
i=LNT(zi): (1)
This is followed by a projection layer of dimen-
sionb. The dimension of the projection can be
tuned based on the task complexity and the size
of the adaptation corpus. This now allows us to
make it a bottleneck layer for compression, or
over-parametrize it with a dimension larger than
the input dimension.2
hT
i=relu(WT
bd~zT
i): (2)
Lastly, the inner representation is projection back
to the input dimension d, and combined with a
residual connection (He et al., 2015):
xT
i=WT
dbhT
i+zi: (3)
Our proposed formulation for adapters, and
their incorporation into Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017) is illustrated in Figure 1. This self-
contained adapter module can be injected between
any two layers of the network, without disrupting
the original operation.
4 Domain Adaptation
We ﬁrst compare the adaptation performance of
the light-weight residual adapters against full ﬁne-
tuning and LHUC (Vilar, 2018) on a large scale
English-French domain adaptation task.
2Following the wiring choices of Transformer feed-
forward network (Vaswani et al., 2017).