fully tuning the learning rate (and/or batch size)
during adaptation, but is not trivial and needs to
be done individually for every different domain,
model and corpus size, favoring the simplicity of
our proposed approach.
Figure 5: IWSLT dev performance vs number of
in-domain adaptation steps when adapting with ﬁne-
tuning vs adapters.
5 Massively Multilingual Machine
Translation
To stress test our adapters based approach, we
apply this to a massively multilingual translation
task on a real world dataset (Arivazhagan et al.,
2019). Most previous literature in multilingual
NMT focuses on improving the performance of
low resource languages (Zoph et al., 2016; Firat
et al., 2016; Neubig and Hu, 2018), often ignoring
the source language performance of the adapted
model. However, the goal of our work is to en-
able training a single model for all language pairs,
in order to get beneﬁts of transfer on low resource
language pairs, without losing performance in the
high resource setting.
5.1 Dataset
To highlight the ﬂexibility of an adapters based ap-
proach, we study multilingual NMT on a massive
scale, using a corpus generated by crawling and
extracting parallel sentences from the web. Our
corpus contains parallel documents for 102 lan-
guages, to and from English, containing a total
of 25 billion sentence pairs (Arivazhagan et al.,
2019).5The number of parallel sentences per lan-
guage in our corpus ranges from around 10s of
5Limited to approximately this amount for experimenta-
tion.thousands to almost 2 billion. Figure 6 illustrates
the data distribution across languages for all 102
languages studied in this paper.
5.2 Using Adapters for multilingual NMT
Our approach to using adapters for multilingual
NMT diverges from domain adaptation, owing to
the differences in the two tasks.
In the domain adaptation setting, while the in-
put and output distributions of the adaptation do-
main might differ from that of the base, the set
of inputs and outputs is pretty much the same. In
mathematical terms, both the base and adaptation
domain distributions, DSandDTrespectively, are
deﬁned on the same support set fX; Yg.
On the other hand, in multilingual NMT, the
support sets of different language pairs have very
little overlap. In this setting, adapting a model to
a new language pair without learning the embed-
dings and softmax parameters (which correspond
to the input and output support sets) would be an
extremely difﬁcult task. Following the approach
used for domain adaptation in Section 4.2 might
not be possible here. We modify our approach to
expand the input-output distribution of our initial
pre-trained model to all language pairs we are in-
terested in supporting, i.e. we can’t add any new
language pairs to the model during adaptation, but
we use the adaptation stage to improve perfor-
mance on languages learnt during pre-training.
For multilingual NMT, we follow the following
two step approach:
Global training: Train a fully shared model
on all language pairs, with the goal of maxi-
mizing transfer to low resource languages.
Reﬁnement: Fine-tuning language pair spe-
ciﬁc adapters for all high resource languages,
to recover lost performance during step 1.
This step can only be applied for language
pairs learned during global training.
5.3 Models and Hyper-parameters
We ﬁrst train dedicated bilingual models on all
language pairs to ground our multilingual analy-
ses. We perform all our experiments with variants
of the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al.,
2017). For most bilingual experiments, we use
a larger version of Transformer Big containing
375M parameters (Chen et al., 2018), and a shared
source-target sentence-piece model (SPM) (Kudo