Figure 7: Trendlines depicting translation performance improvement in multilingual models with residual adapters.
From left to right, languages are arranged in decreasing order of available training data. y-axis depicts the BLEU
score relative to the bilingual baseline trained on the corresponding language pair. The plots correspond to the
following models: (1.) Red: Multilingual model trained with sampling temperature, T= 5(2.) Blue: Multilingual
model + Small adapters, b= 2048 (3.) Pink: Multilingual model + Large adapters, b= 4096 .
Note: For adapter experiments, we choose the best performance between b= 0,b= 2048 andb= 4096 .
accumulators and restart from step 0. For our
experiments we use the same bottle-neck dimen-
sion, b= 2048 , for all language pairs. This was
meant to reduce the number of experiments given
the large number of language pairs in our setup.
For language pairs that were worse than their bilin-
gual models after adding adapters with b= 2048 ,
we re-run ﬁne-tuning with larger adapters, with
b= 4096 . In an ideal setting, the bottle-neck
could be larger for the highest resource languages
andb= 0(no adapters) for the smallest languages.
5.4 Results and Analysis
We plot the translation quality on different lan-
guage pairs in Figure 7. As we can see, the multi-
lingual model signiﬁcantly out-performs the bilin-
gual baselines in the extremely low resource set-
ting. These gains are even more ampliﬁed whentranslating into English, agreeing with previous
work in multilingual NMT (Neubig and Hu, 2018;
Aharoni et al., 2019). However, owing to the
huge training corpus, we observe signiﬁcant per-
formance deterioration in the high resource lan-
guages. We attribute this deterioration to two fac-
tors: (i) Languages compete for capacity given the
limited model size, and (ii) The model converges
much before it trains on signiﬁcant portions of the
high resource datasets.
As is apparent from Figure 7, performance on
high and medium resource languages improves
by huge margins after the second stage of train-
ing (adapter based reﬁnement). Fine-tuning with
adapters allows the model to see larger portions
of the training data for high resource languages,
and converges faster than training a model from
scratch since it only updates a very small frac-