tion of the model parameters (for most language
pairs, the second stage converges within 20-50k
steps, depending on the corpus size). For high re-
source languages, especially when translating into
English, we observe further performance improve-
ments when increasing adapter size. This again
highlights the ﬂexibility of adapters, it is possible
to adjust the adapter capacity to match the com-
plexity and resource size of the target task.
While adapters help us bridge most of the gap
between bilingual and multilingual models, we
still observe a minor regression for high resource
languages translating into English, compared to
the bilingual baselines. Although it might be pos-
sible to reduce this gap further by increasing the
adapter size beyond b= 4096 , there might be
more efﬁcient ways to approach this problem, in-
cluding more expressive network architectures for
adapters, joint ﬁne-tuning of adapters and global
model parameters, etc. However, we leave these
studies to future work.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we proposed light-weight adapters ,
a simple yet efﬁcient way for adapting large scale
neural machine translation models. Our proposed
approach, by injecting small task-speciﬁc adapter
layers between the frozen base model layers dur-
ing adaptation, enables the ﬁnal network to adapt
to multiple target tasks simultaneously, without
forgetting the original parameters.
We evaluate light-weight adapters on two differ-
ent adaptation tasks, domain adaptation and mul-
tilingual NMT. Experiments support the ﬂexibil-
ity and scalability of light-weight adapters , (i)
yielding comparable or better results when com-
pared with the standard full ﬁne-tuning or bilin-
gual baselines, (ii) without the need for any hyper-
parameter tuning across varying adaptation dataset
sizes and model capacities.
With a large set of globally shared parame-
ters and small interspersed task-speciﬁc layers,
adapters allow us to train and adapt a single model
for a huge number of languages and domains.
We hope that this work would motivate further
research into massively multitask and universal
translation models.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the Google Translate
and Lingvo development teams for their founda-tional contributions to this project. We would also
like to thank Neil Houlsby, Anjuli Kannan and
Yonghui Wu for helpful discussions early on in the
project, and Wolfgang Macherey, Markus Freitag,
Ciprian Chelba, Zhifeng Chen and the anonymous
EMNLP reviewers for their insightful comments.
References
Roee Aharoni, Melvin Johnson, and Orhan Firat. 2019.
Massively multilingual neural machine translation.
CoRR , abs/1903.00089.
Naveen Arivazhagan, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat,
Dmitry Lepikhin, Melvin Johnson, Maxim Krikun,
Mia Xu Chen, Yuan Cao, George Foster, Colin
Cherry, Wolfgang Macherey, Zhifeng Chen, and
Yonghui Wu. 2019. Massively multilingual neural
machine translation in the wild: Findings and chal-
lenges.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hin-
ton. 2016. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450 .
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473 .
Ankur Bapna, Mia Xu Chen, Orhan Firat, Yuan Cao,
and Yonghui Wu. 2018. Training deeper neural ma-
chine translation models with transparent attention.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07561 .
Ankur Bapna and Orhan Firat. 2019. Non-parametric
adaptation for neural machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol-
ume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 1921–1931.
Mia Xu Chen, Orhan Firat, Ankur Bapna, Melvin
Johnson, Wolfgang Macherey, George Foster, Llion
Jones, Niki Parmar, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen,
et al. 2018. The best of both worlds: Combining re-
cent advances in neural machine translation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.09849 .
Chenhui Chu and Rui Wang. 2018. A survey of domain
adaptation for neural machine translation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.00258 .
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing.arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .
Daxiang Dong, Hua Wu, Wei He, Dianhai Yu, and
Haifeng Wang. 2015. Multi-task learning for mul-
tiple language translation. In Proceedings of the
53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 1723–1732.