Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Journal of Real-Time Image Processing (2023) 20:5 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11554-023-01276-w
ORIGINAL RESEARCH PAPER
A new YOLO‑based method for real‑time crowd detection from video 
and performance analysis of YOLO models
Mehmet Şirin Gündüz1 · Gültekin Işık1
Received: 13 July 2022 / Accepted: 8 November 2022 / Published online: 30 January 2023 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2023
Abstract
As seen in the COVID-19 pandemic, one of the most important measures is physical distance in viruses transmitted from 
person to person. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), it is mandatory to have a limited number of people 
in indoor spaces. Depending on the size of the indoors, the number of persons that can fit in that area varies. Then, the size 
of the indoor area should be measured and the maximum number of people should be calculated accordingly. Computers 
can be used to ensure the correct application of the capacity rule in indoors monitored by cameras. In this study, a method is 
proposed to measure the size of a prespecified region in the video and count the people there in real time. According to this 
method: (1) predetermining the borders of a region on the video, (2) identification and counting of people in this specified 
region, (3) it is aimed to estimate the size of the specified area and to find the maximum number of people it can take. For 
this purpose, the You Only Look Once (YOLO) object detection model was used. In addition, Microsoft COCO dataset pre-
trained weights were used to identify and label persons. YOLO models were tested separately in the proposed method and 
their performances were analyzed. Mean average precision (mAP), frame per second (fps), and accuracy rate metrics were 
found for the detection of persons in the specified region. While the YOLO v3 model achieved the highest value in accuracy 
rate and mAP (both 0.50 and 0.75) metrics, the YOLO v5s model achieved the highest fps rate among non-Tiny models.
Keywords Real-time video processing · Person detection · People counting · Area estimation · Deep learning · YOLO
1 Introduction
According to the report published by the World Health 
Organization (WHO) [1 ], it has been revealed that the coro-
navirus disease (COVID-19) has infected millions of peo-
ple globally and caused deaths on a large scale. For a long 
time, countries stopped doing the daily activities on which 
their livelihood depended. Countries have started to carry 
out their daily life activities by applying the health proto-
cols prescribed by WHO. One of the health measures is to 
prevent people from crowding in indoor spaces. To achieve 
this, the maximum number of people that the indoor area can 
accommodate is determined according to its size. When the 
number of people per square meter is greater than a certain 
threshold, an action can be taken accordingly.It is difficult to manually control whether the maximum 
number of people has been reached in many places, such as 
banks, train stations, shopping malls, and schools. There-
fore, computers can be used to provide this control in indoor 
spaces monitored by cameras. For this reason, in this study, 
a region within the indoor area in the video recording was 
selected and the size of that region was estimated. A thresh-
old value was determined as one person per square meter. 
Then, the people in this area were counted. If there are more 
people than the capacity of the area, it is marked in red; 
otherwise, it is marked in green.
Deep learning is one of the popular topics in the field of 
machine learning. Deep learning algorithms have been suc-
cessfully applied in different modalities and fields. Image 
processing [ 2], machine translation [ 3], and natural language 
processing [4 ] are some of them. Deep learning is also used 
in other fields apart from these. For example, in recent years, 
deep learning algorithms are used for sound classification 
[5], language recognition [6 ], or cancer diagnosis [7 ] as well.
There are two types of methods for person detection: 
Region of Interest (ROI) and Line of Interest (LOI). In  * Gültekin Işık 
 gultekin.isik@igdir.edu.tr
1 Department of Computer Engineering, Igdir University, 
Igdir, Turkey