Journal of Real-Time Image Processing (2023) 20:5
1 3 5 Page 2 of 12
the ROI-based method, the number of people in a limited 
region is estimated. In the LOI-based method, on the other 
hand, the number of people crossing a predetermined line 
is estimated [8 ]. Deep learning-based models are used in 
the ROI-based system approach. Deep learning is frequently 
used in object detection and classification tasks. This situ-
ation encouraged researchers to use deep learning on peo-
ple counting problems, as well. In this study, deep learning 
methods were used with an ROI-based approach.
Object detection is made to locate objects within the 
image and classify each object. For this, the detected object 
is enclosed in a bounding box and the class of this object is 
tried to be estimated. The YOLO models use deep learning 
methods for object detection and the first version was devel-
oped by Redmon et al. [9 ].
Detecting and counting people in indoor spaces have been 
one of the important tasks of video surveillance systems 
[10]. Since this task has become important, an increase has 
been observed in studies conducted in recent years. YOLO 
models are frequently used to detect people, count them, 
and measure the distance between them. For example, Punn 
et al. [11] used the Deepsort [12] algorithm together with 
the YOLO v3 model for pedestrian detection and distance 
measurement. Compared to other object detection algo-
rithms, they demonstrated the success of YOLO v3 [13] and 
Deepsort algorithm. Rahim et al. [ 14] used YOLO v4 [ 15] 
for person detection in low-light situations and monitored 
social distance with motionless time of flight (ToF) cameras. 
Person detection from the top view was investigated with 
YOLO [16]. According to this study, with the YOLO v3 
model, people were detected and counted from the top view 
with an accuracy of up to 95%.
The YOLO v5 model [17] was used for crowd detection 
[18]. It has been observed that the YOLO v5 model gives 
good results in counting applications where there is no 
dense crowd. Ren et al. [19] proposed the YOLO-PC algo-
rithm, which is an advanced version of YOLO. They used 
YOLO, which has a high accuracy rate, to develop a people 
counting system. High accuracy rates were obtained with 
this proposed algorithm. Menon et al. [20] used INRIA and 
ShanghaiTech datasets to count pedestrians using the YOLO 
v3 model. While the tests performed on the INRIA dataset 
resulted in an accuracy of 96.1%, relatively less accuracy 
was obtained with 87.3% in the ShanghaiTech dataset.
In addition to these studies, crowd detection was per -
formed using image and sound features together, since 
feature extraction is difficult in low-quality images [21]. 
In this study, crowd counting is considered as a regression 
problem. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is used to 
extract image features and VGG network architecture is used 
for audio features. Also, in a different study [22], quantum 
feature extraction was performed in addition to the classical 
CNN architecture for crowd feature extraction.In this study, YOLO models were used (1) to detect and 
count the people, and (2) to estimate the area of the specified 
region of the indoor space. An algorithm is proposed to esti -
mate the area of a specified region where people are present 
and to determine the maximum number of people to settle 
in this area. For this proposed algorithm, YOLO v3, YOLO 
v4, YOLO v5s, YOLO v3-Tiny, and YOLO v4-Tiny models 
were used and performance analyses of these models were 
made. Accordingly, the YOLO v3, YOLO v5s, and YOLO 
v4 models detected persons within a specified region with 
96.89%, 96.12%, and 94.57% accuracy rates, respectively.
2  Materials and methods
In this study, it is focused on calculating the area of a region 
with predetermined borders in indoor spaces and determin-
ing the maximum number of people who can settle in this 
region. For this, cameras that observe indoor spaces are 
used. YOLO models were used to detect and count people 
inside the specified area. In this section, the YOLO models 
and dataset used are introduced.
2.1  YOLO models
YOLO (You Only Look Once) are models that perform 
object detection processes in real time, with high accuracy 
and quickly. YOLO is a single-stage Convolutional Neural 
Network (CNN)-based model. In the single-stage model, 
objects can be detected without the need for a preliminary 
stage. Examples of single-stage detectors are SSD [23] and 
YOLO models. YOLO applies a single Convolutional Neural 
Network model to the image and splits the image into grids. 
Each grid makes an estimation of the bounding boxes and 
the associated confidence score. According to the estimated 
confidence score, the class of the object in the bounding box 
is determined.
YOLO v3 uses a new network to perform feature extrac-
tion. This network is connected to the network used in 
YOLO v2 Darknet-19 [13]. YOLO v3, whose classifier net-
work is more successful than other versions of YOLO, is 
based on a pre-trained 53-layer Darknet-53 network with 
Imagenet [24] dataset [13]. This architecture consists of 
53 convolutional layers. It is slower than YOLO v2 as it 
has more layers. YOLO v3 contains five residual blocks. 
Each residual block consists of multiple residual units. The 
residual blocks found in YOLO v3 are not present in YOLO 
v2. There is a mixed approach between residual network 
(ResNet) elements.
This approach divides the network into consecutive 1 × 1 
and then 3 × 3 convolutional layers to perform feature extrac-
tion. 53 more layers are added on top of this for the detection