Journal of Real-Time Image Processing (2023) 20:5
1 3 5 Page 6 of 12
height and width of the people are adapted according to the 
camera resolution, changing the camera resolution will not 
adversely affect the operation of the algorithm. If the area 
in  pixels2 of the specified region remains the same, realistic 
results are obtained even if the video resolution changes. 
Because in videos of different resolutions, the height and 
width of persons detected vary according to the resolution.
3.2  Disadvantages
Height and width of persons are determined by bounding 
boxes. The height and width of the bounding box may turn 
out to be different than it should be, for example when the 
video resolution is bad or persons are not clearly visible. In 
such a case, the area calculation may be different.
4  Experimental study
In the study, Python programming language and OPENCV 
Library were used together. Deepsort algorithm [12] was 
used as the person tracking algorithm. The Deepsort algo-
rithm uses a CNN model for object classification. Thanks to the CNN model, the most distinctive feature of the object to 
be classified is determined and the classification process is 
performed. Each object detected by the deepsort algorithm is 
passed through the neural network and a vector is obtained. 
Two objects are associated using these vectors. This vector is 
called the appearance feature vector. Therefore, it takes into 
account previous and current frame information to estimate 
the current frame without needing to process the entire video 
at once. The convolutional neural network continues to be 
trained until satisfactory success is achieved.
In order for object tracking to be carried out, first object 
detection must be performed. The object detection process 
is the process of detecting objects using a bounding box. 
The location, type, and class of the detected object are deter -
mined. These determined features are assigned to YOLO as 
a class label. The class label used in this study is person. 
After YOLO learns the person’s characteristics, it divides the 
image into cells called grids and determines the bounding 
boxes in case there is a person in the cell. In case of more 
than one bounding box per person, it uses non-maximum 
suppression (NMS) to reduce the number of bounding boxes 
to one per person. Finally, the number of people is found 
using the number of bounding boxes in the image or video.
Fig. 5  Area calculation algorithm for a specified region in a video