Journal of Real-Time Image Processing (2023) 20:5
1 3 5 Page 8 of 12
4.2  Performance metrics
Different metrics are used in this study to measure the per -
formance of the proposed method to count the people in 
a specified region within the video and to estimate their 
accuracy.
4.2.1  Accuracy rate (Acc)
It shows how close the estimation values of the developed 
method are to the real values, and it is good if it is high. 
Accuracy rate formula is given in Eq.  6 (TP: True Positive, 
TN: True Negative, FP: False Positive, FN:  False Negative)
(6) Acc =TP + TN
T P+T N+F P+F N.4.2.2  Mean average precision
A common evaluation metric called Mean Average Precision 
(mAP) provides a single number as the mean of the Average 
Precision (AP) values for all classes. This makes it possible 
to assess a model’s performance using just a single number. 
As a result, mAP is the evaluation metric that object detec-
tion algorithms utilize the most frequently. It is calculated as
where Q represents the total number of queries in the set and 
q represents the average precision query.
Since there is only a “person” class in our study, the num -
ber of classes will be 1. mAP (0.5) means that the confidence 
threshold (IoU) is greater than 0.5 when calculating AP. If 
IoU ≥ 0.5, the prediction is considered correct
4.2.3  FPS
Inference speed (millisecond, ms) or frames per second 
(FPS) are the most popular metrics for real-time applica-
tions. Utilizing a trained deep learning algorithm to generate 
predictions is known as inference. FPS is the term used to 
describe how many images can be processed in a second. 
Real-time applications need low inference speeds or high 
FPS values.
5  Results and discussion
The areas of the specified regions in Fig.  7a and b are 72,600 
and 72,500  pixels2, respectively. Regions of the same size 
were determined in the same video frame and different (7) mAP =∑Q
q=1AveP(q)
Q,
(8) IoU =Area of Overlap
Area of Union.
Fig. 7  Samples taken from the experimental environment: a 1024 × 768 pixels and b 800 × 600 pixels
Fig. 8  a Number of persons detected in the region < The max capac-
ity. b Number of persons detected in the region > The max capacity. 
Note that the area at the top (a) is larger than the area at the bottom 
(b)