Yu and Zhu
Figure 20: Example of Web UI for NNI
ate the whole process, and the size of the subset must be carefully determined to ensure
accuracy. The direct application of a small dataset would denitely generate bias and low
delity. To solve the problem posed by a small data subset, a transfer series expansion
method was proposed on hyper-parameter tuning tasks to accelerate the evaluation with a
combination of a set of predictors (Hu et al., 2019).
In addition, an early stopping strategy saves training time, as was discussed in Section
6. With an early stopping strategy, the whole training process is divided into sections.
At each checkpoint, the model with a performance worse than a certain standard will be
terminated. As previously mentioned, median stopping and curve-tting are typical early
stopping methods that can be applied in combination with random search and Bayesian
methods among other. Multi-bandit-based algorithms and population-based algorithms are
essentially early stopping with dierent methods for determining checkpoints and judge-
ment criteria. They save training time by terminating poor models halfway, while it is still
possible that a models performance is worse during the early stage but improves more than
remaining ones with more training do. In this case, the model is killed too early to be good.
Early stopping is the most common method used to save resources, and it is implemented
in most AutoML frameworks.
Transfer learning uses knowledge from previous learning tasks to improve the learning
or save resources on a target task (Pan and Yang, 2009). The target model is supposed to
have a similar structure to the source model (Vanschoren, 2018; Yosinski et al., 2014); thus,
transfer learning is especially feasible for hyper-parameter tuning. Parameter reuse is the
most straightforward application of transfer learning in hyper-parameter tuning. The model
is initialized with parameters inherited from similar congurations, and is then ne-tuned
for further improvement in performance (Yosinski et al., 2014). Parameters inherited from
similar evaluated congurations could be a feasible initial value to save training time (Ben-
gio et al., 2007). The noise introduced by transfer learning is not as predictable as that
introduced by subsampling and early stopping. The model could be trapped in dierent
42