Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
local optima from dierent initializations, whereas a well-designed initialization performs
better with a similar training process (Sutskever et al., 2013). Transfer learning has been
approved to be workable for tasks with large image datasets, such as ImageNet (Sharif Raza-
vian et al., 2014). Furthermore, transfer learning is supported by Google Vizier to accelerate
the study of warm starting the model training with useful information from relevant stud-
ies (Yogatama and Mann, 2014). For a service based on Google Cloud, it is possible to
borrow results from other users experiments; however, most open-source AutoML frame-
works have not implemented a transfer learning module.
Meta learning is also applicable for directly predicting performance of a given model
with certain hyper-parameter congurations, by building a surrogate model with previous
congurations (Eggensperger et al., 2015; Baker et al., 2017). Surrogate models are approx-
imations for making a functional relationship between available data and dierent types of
delities (Fern andez-Godino et al., 2016). n early works, linear regression was the most
common surrogate model (Bensusan and Kalousis, 2001). With the development of com-
putational resources, more expensive models have also been developed. The curve-tting
method (Domhan et al., 2015) discussed in subsection 5.2.2 predicted the accuracy with a
weighted linear combination. In addition to the most straightforward linear regression, other
machine learning algorithms have also been applied as a surrogate model. Guerra made
the prediction using support vector machines (Guerra et al., 2008); Klein used Bayesian
neural networks to build the surrogate model (Klein et al., 2016); and Davis the MultiLayer
Perceptron to predict the performance of the model with a specic conguration (Davis
and Giraud-Carrier, 2018). This method is especially suitable for HPO among all AutoML
tasks because it is easy to use for quantication (Yao et al., 2018). The choice of surrogate
model may introduce bias because it determines the accuracy for prediction. The accuracy
of a surrogate model is in
uenced by sampling points available for model construction and
the accuracy of sampling data (Simpson et al., 2001).
6. Conclusion
This study is motivated by the increasing application of deep neural networks. In this
paper, we provided a systematic review on HPO approaches, especially on neural networks.
The research began with the introduction of important hyper-parameters for training and
structure, and then extended to state-of-the-art search algorithms and schedulers for auto-
mated HPO. In addition to outlining related algorithms, we covered services and open-source
frameworks, including their pros and cons and applications. Comparisons of algorithms and
evaluation methods were further discussed in terms of their feasibility for large models and
their consumption of computational resources. This study is dedicated to summarizing in-
formation on HPO as a reference for researchers and industrial users.
References
Hyperparameter: optimization methods and real world model management. URL
https://missinglink.ai/guides/neural-network-concepts/hyperparameters-optimization-
43