Yu and Zhu
algorithms can be applied in combination with a search algorithm or individually for both
searching and halting. The early-stopping algorithms for HPO are similar to that for neural
network training, but for neural network training, early stopping is applied to avoid over-
tting. This allows users to terminate a trial before nishing the whole training, thereby
freeing computational resources for trials with a promising hyper-parameter set.
3.2.1 median stopping
Median stopping is the most straightforward early termination policy, adapted by struc-
tured HPO frameworks such as Google Vizier (Golovin et al., 2017), Tune (Liaw et al., 2018),
and NNI (Microsoft, 2018). It is model-free and applicable to a wide range of performance
curves. Median stopping makes a decision based on the average of primary metrics (e.g.,
accuracy or loss) reported by previous runs. A trial Xis stopped at step Sif the best ob-
jective value by step Sis strictly worse than the median value of the running average of all
completed trials objective values reported at step S(Golovin et al., 2017). The median stop-
ping strategy is not a model, and thus no hyper-parameters need to be determined by users.
3.2.2 curve fitting
Curve tting is an LPA (learning, predicting, assessing) algorithm (Kohavi and John,
1995; Provost et al., 1999). It is applicable in the combinations of search algorithms men-
tioned in Section 2, supported by Google Vizier and NNI. This early stopping rule makes
a prediction of the nal objective value (e.g., accuracy or loss) with a performance curve
regressed from a set of completed or partially completed trials. A trial Xwill be halted at
step Sif the prediction of the nal objective value is suciently worse than the tolerant
value of the optimal in the trial history.
This algorithm has been commonly supported by Bayesian parametric regression (Swer-
sky et al., 2014; Golovin et al., 2017). A method is proposed (Domhan et al., 2015) that
used a weighted probability learning curve with a combination of 11 dierent increasing
saturated curves (Figure 13). The combination model can be expressed as:
fcomb(tj) =KX
k=1wkfk(tjk)
with new combined parameter vectors
= (w1;:::;wK;1;:::;K;2)
wherewKis the weight for each model k,Kis the individual model parameter, and 2is
the noise variance.
In general, there are three steps to determine whether to stop:
- Learning: The parameters of the curve are learned from current completed trials:
rst, t each curve with the least squares method and obtain parameter K. Then,
lter the curve and remove outliers. Finally, adjust the weight wKfor each curve
using the Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling method.
24