Yu and Zhu
The objective function is described as follows (Feurer and Hutter, 2019):
=argminorargmaxE (Dtrain;Dvalid)DV(L;A;Dtrain;Dvalid)
To maximize or minimize the V function using algorithm Aapplied for hyper-parameters,
the model is trained with dataset Dtrain and validated with dataset Dvalid.
The state-of-the-art algorithms for HPO can be classied into two categories: search
algorithms and trial schedulers. In general, search algorithms are applied for sampling
whereas trial schedulers mainly deal with the early stopping methods for model evaluation.
This section rst discusses popular search algorithms followed by state-of-the-art early stop-
ping strategies.
3.1 Search Algorithms
3.1.1 Grid Search
Grid search is a basic method for HPO. It performs an exhaustive search on the hyper-
parameter set specied by users. Users must have some preliminary knowledge on these
hyper-parameters because it is they who generate all candidates. Grid search is applicable
for several hyper-parameters with limited search space.
Grid search is the most straightforward search algorithm that leads to the most accu-
rate predictionsas long as sucient resources are given, the user can always nd the optimal
combination (Joseph, 2018). It is easy to run grid search in parallel because every trial runs
individually without the in
uence of time sequence. Results for one trial are independent of
those from other trials. Computational resources can be allocated in a highly 
exible manner
(Figure 9). However, grid search suers from the curse of dimensionality because the con-
sumption of computational resources increases exponentially when more hyper-parameters
are awaiting tuning. Of course, methods exist for dimensionality reduction (e.g., PCA), but
any method comes with a cost on the robustness of the model (Yiu, 2019). In addition, a
limited sampling range is acceptable for grid search because too many congurations are
not desirable. In practice, grid search is almost only preferable when users have enough
experience of these hyper-parameters to enable the denition of a narrow search space and
no more than three hyper-parameters need to be tuned simultaneously.
Although other search algorithms may have more favorable features, grid search is still
the most widely used method because of its mathematical simplicity (Bergstra and Bengio,
2012).
3.1.2 Random Search
Random search (Bergstra and Bengio, 2012) is a basic improvement on grid search. It
indicates a randomized search over hyper-parameters from certain distributions over pos-
sible parameter values. The searching process continues till the predetermined budget is
exhausted, or until the desired accuracy is reached. Random search is similar to grid search
but has been proven to create better results because of the following two benets (Mal-
adkar, 2018): rst, a budget can be assigned independently according to the distribution
16