Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
The major shortcoming of BOHB lies in the setting of budgets. Automatic adaption of
budgets may solve the problem especially for users with less experience. The application of
BOHB requires users to have some experience. In some extreme cases, either BO or the trail
schedule borrowed from HB could be a drawback for ecient searching. Compared with ran-
dom search, Bayesian methods may take longer to escape the local optimum (Biedenkapp,
2018). Another downside is inherited from bandit-based methods: users must dene a
proper budget that matches the required accuracy, but this is not an easy task because it
needs sucient experience of these algorithms. If a smaller budget is too noisy to make any
decision on the model performance, adjustments to the budget plan are necessary, which
is a time-consuming process. For this reason, BOHB could be several times slower than
vanilla TPE, and the rate is in
uenced by the nvs.B/n" problem. Setting a small budget
is risky if one is not fully familiar with the training process or tuning algorithms. When the
downside of bandit-based methods encounters the trap in the local optimum, BOHB may
be less ecient compared with other optimization methods; however, this only happens in
some extreme cases.
3.2.5 Population-Based Training
Population-based methods are essentially series of random search methods based on
genetic algorithms (Shiman et al., 2012), such as evolutionary algorithms (Simon, 2013;
Orive et al., 2014), particle swarm optimization (Eberhart and Shi, 1998; Lorenzo et al.,
2017), and covariance matrix adaption evolutionary strategy (Hansen, 2016). The most
important parts of genetic algorithms are initialization (random creation of a population),
selection (evaluation of the current population and selection of parents), and reproduction
(creation of the next generation). One of the most widely used population-based methods
is population-based training (PBT) (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019) proposed by
DeepMind. PBT is a conceptually simple but computationally eective method. It is a
unique method in two aspects: it allows for adaptive hyper-parameters during training and
it combines parallel search and sequential optimization. These features make PBT espe-
cially suitable for HPO in deep learning networks.
The process of PBT can be simply described as being similar to generic algorithms. First,
a population of trials with dierent hyper-parameter settings is initialized (Figure 16). The
size of the population is determined by the user (2040 has been suggested in a publication)
and all neural networks are trained in parallel. Then, for every miterations, all models are
evaluated with a certain metric, which could be loss or median accuracy. The paralleliza-
tion is inherited from traditional genetic algorithms. Finally, each trial uses the information
from the rest of the population to update the hyper-parameters through exploitation and
exploration; their balance is similar to the concepts of hand tuning and BO. Exploitation
of the best conguration is dened by replacing the current weights with weights that have
the best performance. This process is similar to inheritance and crossover in genetic al-
gorithms. Exploration is ensured by the random perturbation of hyper-parameters with a
noise dened by the user. This process is similar to mutation in generic algorithms, and
the noise can also be described as the mutation rate. Exploitation and exploration are
performed periodically, and training will continue with the described steps.
29