Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
ular variants is TPE, which is suitable for conditional hyper-parameters and natural for
parallelization. It is applied in hyper-parameter tuning for convolutional neural networks
and neural language modeling. BO and its variants are implemented in almost every auto-
tuning framework, and it is the default search algorithm for Google Vizier and Sagemaker.
This indicates that BO is still an active research area for HPO.
Multi-armed bandit algorithms: These could be a default choice for deep neural net-
works because of their eciency in computational resources. For a massive parallel system,
ASHA outperforms most SOTA algorithms for both language processing and model classi-
cation models. In sequential systems and distributed systems with decades of computing
units, BOHB could be the rst choice for tuning most neural networks and reinforcement
learning algorithms because of its eciency and accuracy. Multi-armed bandit algorithms
are implemented in both NNI and Tune.
PBT: This is suitable for computationally expensive models (e.g., generative adversarial
networks and transformers) and nonstationary hyper-parameters (e.g., LR). With tradi-
tional search algorithms, a model is trained to convergence with dierent hyper-parameter
sets, and then the set with the best performance is chosen. This process could be extremely
expensive for large models or large datasets, and PBT is ecient in this case because the
hyper-parameters are tuned during training. For nonstationary hyper-parameters, PBT
makes a schedule rather than a certain value for them, which is more practical than hand
tuning or a man-made schedule.
5.2 Evaluation of results
The previous section mainly discussed the search algorithms for hyper-parameter sets,
as well as their feasibility and eciency. For a large model, the evaluation method could be
more critical for saving computation time for unnecessary training because training is usu-
ally much more time-consuming compared with the sampling process. An ideal evaluator
is supposed be fast, accurate, and simple. However, the choice of evaluation is actually to
seek a balance between accuracy and speed (Figure 20). In case of deep neural networks,
the less time spent on training, the lower accuracy and higher variance there will be.
In the following paragraphs, we review several widely used methods and relevant algo-
rithms for coping with the acceleration of evaluation. The most straightforward and widely
used method is a direct evaluation on the target dataset. The direct method is used to
evaluate hyper-parameter sets by training a corresponding model to convergence and com-
paring the loss or accuracy between models. This method is inecient as it usually takes
a long time between two samplings, but it is without doubt the most accurate method.
Most users with limited resources cannot aord its expensive time costs, and thus faster
methods have been proposed. The most straightforward idea is to decrease the delity to
trade evaluation time (March and Willcox, 2012; Fern andez-Godino et al., 2016).
Furthermore, subsampling has been adapted to deal with time consumption caused by
a large training dataset. With this method, the model is trained with a subset of original
training data. However, dierent datasets tend to have dierent hyper-parameter choices
for optimum performance (Kohavi and John, 1995); therefore, subsampling is risky in terms
of the potential to introduce more noise and uncertainty. A smaller dataset will acceler-
41