Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
terface to write a new algorithm. In NNI, all algorithms related to HPO are generally
called Tuners or Advisors, and Assessors contain two early stopping algorithms. Actually,
there are two groups of algorithms. Tuner is similar to search algorithms, as mentioned
in Section 4.1, including grid search, random search, TPE, and their variants. The other
group refers to the schedulers mentioned in Section 4.2, including HB and BOHB. Almost
all state-of-the-art algorithms (except PBT) are built into NNI. If a user wishes to explore
the eciency of dierent algorithms, NNI is a convenient choice. Tuners can be applied in
combination with Assessors. Advisors already have their own early stopping strategy, and
thus Assessors are not applicable. All congurations for Tuners, Assessors, and Advisors
are set in the cong.yml le.
In addition, NNI is designed with high extensibility. As well as the built-in Tuners and
Assessors, researchers can test new self-designed algorithms. They only need to inherit the
base Tuner/Assessor, implement related functions, and congure the new algorithm into
thecong.yml le.
NNI is able to be deployed in all kinds of infrastructure, including local machines, re-
mote servers, and Kubernetes-based Dockers. It is extensible to implement more machine
learning frameworks, both by users and developers of NNI. In addition, NNI is compati-
ble with most popular deep learning frameworks and libraries, including PyTorch, Keras,
TensorFlow, MXNet, Scikit-learn, and XGBoost. There are also extensible points for new
platforms in NNI.
When an HPO experiment is initialized, its process and intermediate results can be
monitored through a visualization interface named Web UI (Figure 19). Web UI displays
almost all information in need of AutoML and HPO, including the status of the experiment
and each trial, search space and conguration information, log, intermediate results, plots
between metrics and hyper-parameters, plots showing relations between hyper-parameters,
and comparisons between dierent trials. TensorBoard and TensorBoardX are also compat-
ible with NNI. Compared with Web UI, plots are created by command lines in TensorBoard,
which is more 
exible but also requires more knowledge.
Documents and examples are helpful for starters. Examples for all search algorithms,
frameworks, and hardware platforms are prepared to lower the technical threshold. NNIs
developers are still working on the implementation of more algorithms and platforms, which
guarantees that it will be updated for SOTA development in AutoML.
However, NNI still has some downsides. Most AutoML/HPO tools are designed for a
specic algorithm (e.g., TPE) or certain tasks (e.g., image classication). The advantage is
that users only need to provide labeled data, and then the model training will be performed
by tools. The complexity of the model is wrapped up using HPO tools, and therefore knowl-
edge for model training is not a must. Compared with most existing tools and services, NNI
is universal for all training and optimization tasks, with any machine learning framework
on any platform. This is denitely an advantage, but could be a drawback for beginners
because model training experience is a prerequisite.
Furthermore, the function of Web UI could be extended. Compared with Google Vizier,
NNI only displays the status and results of experiments with no interactive function. Nei-
ther the hyper-parameter setting, choice of algorithm, or conguration of resources can be
adjusted from Web UI.
35