Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Advantage DisadvantageApplicability
for DNN
Grid
Search- Simple
- Parallelism- curse of dimensionality- Applicable if only a
few HPs to tune
Random
search- Parallelism
- Easy to combine with
early stopping methods- Low eciency
- Cannot promise an
optimum- Convenient for early
stage
Bayesian
optimization- Reliable and promising
- Foundation of many
other algorithms- Dicult for parallelism
- Conceptually complex- Default algorithm for
tools
- Variants of BO could be
more applicable (TPE)
Multi-bandit
methods- Conceptually simple
- Computationally ecient- Balance between budget
and number of trials- Could be a default
choice
- Implemented by open-
sourced libraries.
PBT
methods- Combine HPO and model
training
- Parallelism- Constant changes to
computation graph
- Not extendable to
advanced evolution- For computationally
expensive models
Table 5: Comparison between major HPO algorithms
been conducted to t this method into the HPO task for deep neural networks.
Multi-armed bandit algorithms: These are actually a series of algorithms based on the
non-stochastic innite-armed bandit problem, including SHA, HB, BOHB, and ASHA. They
are dierent from the abovementioned search algorithms because they introduce an early
stopping method to balance the performance and training time. The core schedule for trials
is the same for these algorithms: rst assign all trials a given initial budget, remove the
worse half or a certain percentage, adjust the budget for the remaining trials according to
the drop percentage, and repeat until only one trial is left. Trials with poor performance
will be terminated halfway instead of trained to convergence to save computation time.
These algorithms are more computationally ecient for dealing with increasingly complex
models and increasing data size for deep learning networks. Furthermore, they are easy to
deploy in parallel.
PBT: This is unique in that it combines hyper-parameter tuning and model trainings.
It is a hybrid of random search (parallel optimization) and hand tuning (sequential opti-
mization). PBT starts with several networks trained in parallel, drops trials with the worst
performance, and adapts the model by rening hyper-parameters with a certain ratio and
inheriting them from the model with good performance. With PBT, a model is trained to
have nonstationary hyper-parameters at dierent stages, with warm start instead of waiting
to convergence. Among all the algorithms and schedules, PBT is the most ecient because
the parameters and hyper-parameters are trained simultaneously.
-In the meantime, every method has its shortcomings when applied in deep neural net-
works.
39