Yu and Zhu
Grid search: The number of function evaluations grows exponentially with dimension-
ality and search space. Grid search will quickly become infeasible if the hyper-parameters
cannot be limited in a very narrow range.
Random search: Low eciency occurs, especially when the performance is close to the
optimum. Random search only guarantees better results with more resources; it cannot
promise to obtain the optimal results, which is consistent with the Monte Carlo method.
BO: The most fatal drawback of the Bayesian method is its deployment in a distributed
system. As mentioned previously, parallelism is especially necessary for deep learning, while
the feature of borrowing ideas from precious results prevent Bayesian method from direct
parallelization. Many recent developments have solved this problem, but it is still not as
natural as random search. The conceptual complexity makes the application or improve-
ment of this algorithm challenging.
Multi-armed bandit algorithms: These have their native shortcomings in sampling, but
such problems are gradually overcome with the evolution of algorithms. SHA must deal
with the tradeo between budget and number of trials, and drops half every time; HB xes
the rst problem by testing several combinations of budgets and trial numbers, and users
can determine the scale to drop; and BOHB replaces random search in HB with BO, thereby
ensuring both strong anytime performance with early stopping and strong nal performance
with guided search algorithms. ASHA improves the distributed implementations, and trials
can be deployed asynchronously as soon as machines free up. Another unsolved problem is
the design of budgets, which is a tricky task in need of user experience of network training
and model tuning.
The limitation of PBT lies in the constant changes made to the computation graph. If
the model is trained with a pre-dened graph, this process could be complicated. Users
can never obtain the best hyper-parameter set or a constant value for any hyper-parameter,
because neither of them will be stationary during training. The evolutional algorithm is
comparatively simple for the original version of PBT; however, it is not quite extendable to
advanced evolutional decisions.
-Applicable for deep learning networks?
Grid search: Theoretically, grid search is not a good method unless only a few hyper-
parameters within a narrow spectrum are searched. However, it is still quite popular in
practical terms because users tend to narrow down the search space with their knowledge
of some hyper-parameters, such as LR. In this case, only several potential values must be
tested. In a recent study, the structural parameters determining the width and depth of
EcientNet were achieved using the grid search method (Tan and Le, 2019), which indi-
cated the applicability of this straightforward method.
Random search: Random search is convenient to use for early stages of HPO, especially
when combined with an early stopping strategy. When users have no experience in hyper-
parameters, they need to narrow down the search space at the rst step. The combination
of random search and early stopping is ecient in this case because it will explore the whole
search space with similar cost to more complicated algorithms. When the search space is
narrowed down, random search is not the best choice for a nonguided method.
BO: Many improved versions have been made based on the vanilla BO method for deep
neural networks, mainly in the parallelism and conguration spaces. One of the most pop-
40