Yu and Zhu
with model design, algorithm design, and corresponding hyper-parameter selection, which
means that the application of neural networks comes at a great price. Based on experience is
generally the most widely used method, which means a practicable set of hyper-parameters
requires researchers to have experience in training neural networks. However, the credibil-
ity of empirical values is weakened because of the lack of logical reasoning. In addition,
experiences generally provide workable instead of optimal hyper-parameter sets.
The no free lunch theorem suggests that the computational cost for any optimiza-
tion problem is the same for all problems and no solution oers a shortcut (Wolpert and
Macready, 1997; Igel, 2014).A feasible alternative for computational resources is the pre-
liminary knowledge of experts, which is ecient in selecting in
uential parameters and
narrowing down the search space. To save the rare resource of experts experience, auto-
mated machine learning (AutoML) has been proposed as a burgeoning technology to design
and train neural networks automatically, at the cost of computational resources (Feurer
et al., 2015; Katz et al., 2016; Bello et al., 2017; Zoph and Le, 2016; Jin et al., 2018).Hyper-
parameter optimization (HPO) is an important component of AutoML in searching for
optimum hyper-parameters for neural network structures and the model training process.
Hyper-parameter refers to parameters that cannot be updated during the training of
machine learning. They can be involved in building the structure of the model, such as
the number of hidden layers and the activation function, or in determining the eciency
and accuracy of model training, such as the learning rate (LR) of stochastic gradient de-
scent (SGD), batch size, and optimizer (hyp).The history of HPO dates back to the early
1990s (Ripley, 1993; King et al., 1995),and the method is widely applied for neural net-
works with the increasing use of machine learning. HPO can be viewed as the nal step of
model design and the rst step of training a neural network. Considering the in
uence of
hyper-parameters on training accuracy and speed, they must carefully be congured with
experience before the training process begins (Rodriguez, 2018). The process of HPO auto-
matically optimizes the hyper-parameters of a machine learning model to remove humans
from the loop of a machine learning system. As a trade of human eorts, HPO demands
a large amount of computational resources, especially when several hyper-parameters are
optimized together. The questions of how to utilize computational resources and design an
ecient search space have resulted in various studies on HPO on algorithms and toolkits.
Conceptually, HPOs purposes are threefold (Feurer and Hutter, 2019): to reduce the costly
menial work of articial intelligence (AI) experts and lower the threshold of research and
development; to improve the accuracy and eciency of neural network training (Melis et al.,
2017); and to make the choice of hyper-parameter set more convincing and the training re-
sults more reproducible (Bergstra et al., 2013).
In recent years, HPO has become increasingly necessary because of two rising trends
in the development of deep learning models. The rst trend is the upscaling of neural
networks for enhanced accuracy (Tan and Le, 2019).Empirical studies have indicated that
in most cases, more complex machine learning models with deeper and wider layers work
better than do those with simple structures (He et al., 2016; Zagoruyko and Komodakis,
2016; Huang et al., 2019).The second trend is to design a tricky lightweight model to pro-
vide satisfying accuracy with fewer weights and parameters (Ma et al., 2018; Sandler et al.,
2018; Tan et al., 2019). In this case, it is more dicult to adapt empirical values because
of the stricter choices of hyper-parameters. Hyper-parameter tuning plays an essential role
2