Yu and Zhu
Figure 14: Budget allocation with successive halving (Bissuel, 2018)
2013). SHA converts HPO into a nonstochastic best-arm identication to allocate more
computational resources to more promising hyper-parameter sets. Bandit processes are a
special type of Markov Decision Process with several possible choices (Kaufmann and Gariv-
ier, 2017), and they have a long history of stochastic setting. K-armed bandit is an ecient
tool for dealing with sequential decisions over time with uncertainty (Slivkins et al., 2019)
and stopping rules based on the Gittins index theorem (Gittins, 1974).The SHA model was
built upon the multi-armed bandit formulation (Agarwal et al., 2012; Sparks et al., 2015).
The SHA algorithm can be described as follows: users need to set an initial nite bud-
getBand the number of trials n, uniformly query all hyper-parameter sets for a portion
of initial budget, evaluate the performance of all trials, drop the worse performing half,
double the budget for the remaining half, and repeat the whole pipeline until only one trial
remains (Figure 14). For training a deep learning network, the budget could be the number
of iterations or the total training time.
Compared with BO, SHA is theoretically easier to understand and more computation-
ally ecient. Instead of evaluating models when they are fully trained to convergence, SHA
evaluates the intermediate results to determine whether to terminate it. The major draw-
back of SHA is the allocation of resources. Given a certain budget, a tradeo will occur
between total budget Band the number of trials n(the nvs.B/n" problem), which are
both decided by users in advance. With an overlarge n, each trial will be given a small
budget that may result in premature termination, while an insucient nwould not be able
to provide enough optional choices. Furthermore, too large a budget may lead to a waste
of choice, and too small a value may not promise an optimum.
HyperBand (HB) (Li et al., 2017) s an extension of SHA, mainly designed to solve the n
vs.B/n" problem by considering several possible nvalues with a xed B. Similar to SHA,
it also formulates the HPO into a pure-exploration, nonstochastic, innite-armed bandit
problem. HB has two improvements because it adds an out loop over the routine of SHA.
The rst modication is on the allocation of resources B. n out loop iterates over dierent
26