Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
in both cases: a model with a complex structure indicates more hyper-parameters to tune,
and a model with a carefully designed structure implies that every hyper-parameter must
be tuned to a strict range to reproduce the accuracy. For a widely used model, tuning its
hyper-parameters by hand is possible because the ability to tune by hand depends on ex-
perience and researchers can always borrow knowledge from previous works. This is similar
for models at a small scale. However, for a larger model or newly published models, the
wide range of hyper-parameter choices requires a great deal of menial work by researchers,
as well as much time and computational resources for trial and error.
In addition to research, the industrial application of deep learning is a crucial practice in
automobiles, manufacturing, and digital assistants. However, even for trained professional
researchers, it is still no easy task to explore and implement a favorable model to solve
specic problems. Users with less experience have substantial needs for suggested hyper-
parameters and ready-to-use HPO tools. Motivated by both academic needs and practical
application, automated hyper-parameter tuning services (Golovin et al., 2017; Amazon,
2018)and toolkits (Liaw et al., 2018; Microsoft, 2018)provide a solution to the limitation of
manual deep learning designs.
This study is motivated by the prosperous demand for design and training deep learning
network in industry and research. The diculty in selecting proper parameters for dierent
tasks makes it necessary to summarize existing algorithms and tools. The objective of this
research is to conduct a survey on feasible algorithms for HPO, make a comparison on lead-
ing tools for HPO tasks, and propose challenges on HPO tasks on deep learning networks.
Thus, this remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 begins with a dis-
cussion of key hyper-parameters for building and training neural networks, including their
in
uence on models, potential search spaces, and empirical values or schedules based on pre-
vious experience. Section 3 focuses on widely used algorithms in hyper-parameter searching,
and these approaches are categorized into searching algorithms and trial schedulers. This
section also evaluates the eciency and applicability of these algorithms for dierent ma-
chine learning models. Section 4 provides an overview of mainstream HPO toolkits and
services, compares their pros and cons, and presents some practical and implementation de-
tails. Section 5 more comprehensively compares existing HPO methods and highlights the
ecient methods of model evaluation, and nally, Section 6 provides the studys conclusions.
The contribution of this study is summarized as follows:
- Hyper-parameters are systematically categorized into structure-related and training-
related. The discussion of their importance and empirical strategies are helpful to
determine which hyper-parameters are involved in HPO.
- HPO algorithms are analyzed and compared in detail, according to their accuracy,
eciency and scope of application. The analysis on previous studies is not only
committed to include state-of-the-art algorithms, but also to clarify limitations on
certain scenarios.
- By comparing HPO toolkits, this study gives insights of the design of close-sourced
libraries and open-sourced services, and claries the targeted users for each of them.
3