Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
- Momentum beta, for RMSprop etc.
- Mini-batch size, as in our discussion above, which is critical for all mini-batch GD.
- Number of hidden layers, which is a hyper-parameter related to model structure.
- LR decay, as in our discussion above.
- Regularization lambda, which is used to reduce variance and avoid overtting.
- Activation functions, which is used to add nonlinear elements.
- Adam1,2and, as in our discussion above.
We can notice that hyper-parameters included in the list are not only related to training,
but also determine the structure of model. , And therefore in the next section, we only talk
about the number of hidden layers, regularization lambda, and activation function.
2.3 Model Design-Related Hyper-Parameters
The number of hidden layers( d) is a critical parameter for determining the overall struc-
ture of neural networks, which has a direct in
uence on the nal output (Hinton et al., 2006).
Deep learning networks with more layers are likely to obtain more complex features and
relatively higher accuracy. Upscaling the neural network by adding more layers is a regular
method of achieving better results. In this way, a baseline structure is repeated to increase
the receptive eld. For example, users can choose ResNet-18 to ResNet-200 according to
their need for accuracy (He et al., 2016). This study (Tan and Le, 2019) created a series of
neural networks with sets of depth and width hyper-parameters, obtaining high accuracy
with low computational resources and a limited number of parameters.
The number of neurons in each layer( w) must also be carefully considered. Too few neu-
rons in the hidden layers may cause undertting because the model lacks complexity (Op-
permann, 2019). By contrast, too many neurons may result in overtting and increase the
training time. The suggestions (Heaton) could be a good start for tuning the number of
neurons:
winput< w < w output
w=2
3winput +woutput
w < 2woutput
wherewinput is the number of neurons for the input layer, and woutput is the number of
neurons for the output layer.
In contrast to adding layers or neurons in each layer, regularization is applied to re-
duce the complexity of neural network models, especially those with insucient training
data. Overtting usually occurs in complex neural networks with many layers and neurons,
and the complexity can be reduced using regularization methods. A regularization term
is added to avoid overtting and address feature selections. The general expression of the
11