Yu and Zhu
Figure 18: Structure of Neural Network Intelligence (Microsoft, 2018)
4.3 Automatic model tuning in Amazon SageMaker
Automatic model tuning is a module of Amazon SageMaker, a machine learning en-
vironment for simplifying the process of model building and deployment. As a service, it
is similar to Google Vizier with the support of Amazon Web Services (AWS). The most
attractive feature is also its ease-to-use: only a model and related training data are required
for a HPO task. It supports optimization for complex models and datasets with parallelism
on a large scale. The involvement of Jupyter simplies the conguration for optimization
and visualization of results. The HPO process and status of trials can be viewed with the
Amazon Sagemaker console, which supports early stop and warm start. Search algorithms
are limited to random search and BO, but users are provided with enough freedom to add
their own algorithms. Amazon SageMakers automatic model tuning shares most of the
advantages and limits of Google Vizier because both of them are cloud-based services. The
major dierence is that Amazon SageMaker, as a fully managed service, integrates every
step of training a neutral network; HPO is just a module of this service. It is not necessary
to switch to dierent tools to build, train, and tune a model.
4.4 Neural Network Intelligence
Neural Network Intelligence (NNI) is an open-source toolkit for both automated ma-
chine learning (AutoML) and HPO released by Microsoft. Compared with the abovemen-
tioned closed-source services, NNI provides not only a framework to train a model and tune
hyper-parameters but also more freedom for customization (Figure 18). This toolkit can
be deployed in dierent environments such as local machines, remote servers, and Dock-
ers. The support from Microsoft provides promising maintenance and update potential. In
general, it is more suitable for researchers with some knowledge of machine learning if they
are willing to (a) perform the deployment job by themselves; (b) test more algorithms or
networks in a dierent environment; and (c) involve HPO or AutoML in the NNI platform.
This section discusses the main advantages and drawbacks of NNI. NNI implements
more search algorithms than Google Vizier and SageMaker, and provides an extensible in-
34