Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms
and Applications
Tong Yu yutong01@inspur.com
Department of AI and HPC
Inspur Electronic Information Industry Co., Ltd
1036 Langchao Rd, Jinan, Shandong, China
Hong Zhu zhuhongbj@inspur.com
Department of AI and HPC
Inspur (Beijing) Electronic Information Industry Co., Ltd
2F, Block C, 2 Xinxi Rd., Shangdi, Haidian Dist, Beijing, China
Editor:
Abstract
Since deep neural networks were developed, they have made huge contributions to peoples
everyday lives. Machine learning provides more rational advice than humans are capable
of in almost every aspect of daily life. However, despite this achievement, the design and
training of neural networks are still challenging and unpredictable procedures that have
been alleged to be alchemy. To lower the technical thresholds for common users, automated
hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) has become a popular topic in both academic and
industrial areas. This paper provides a review of the most essential topics on HPO. The
rst section introduces the key hyper-parameters related to model training and structure,
and discusses their importance and methods to dene the value range. Then, the research
focuses on major optimization algorithms and their applicability, covering their eciency
and accuracy especially for deep learning networks. This study next reviews major services
and tool-kits for HPO, comparing their support for state-of-the-art searching algorithms,
feasibility with major deep-learning frameworks, and extensibility for new modules designed
by users. The paper concludes with problems that exist when HPO is applied to deep
learning, a comparison between optimization algorithms, and prominent approaches for
model evaluation with limited computational resources.
Keywords: Hyper-parameter, auto-tuning, deep neural network
1. Introduction
In the past several years, neural network techniques have become ubiquitous and in
u-
ential in both research and commercial applications. In the past 10 years, neural networks
have shown impressive results in image classication (Szegedy et al., 2016; He et al., 2016),
objective detection (Girshick, 2015; Redmon et al., 2016), natural language understand-
ing (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Vaswani et al., 2017), and industrial control sys-
tems (Abbeel, 2016; Hammond, 2017).However, neural networks are ecient in applications
but inecient when obtaining a model. It is thought to be a brute force method because a
network is initialized with a random status and trained to an accurate model with an ex-
tremely large dataset. Moreover, researchers must dedicate their eorts to carefully coping
1arXiv:2003.05689v1  [cs.LG]  12 Mar 2020