Yu and Zhu
- The potential research direction regarding to existing problems are suggested on al-
gorithms, applications and techniques.
2. Major Hyper-Parameters and Search Space
Considering the computational resources required, hyper-parameters with greater im-
portance receive preferential treatment in the process of HPO. Hyper-parameters with a
stronger eect on weights during training are more in
uential for neural network train-
ing (Ng, 2017). It is dicult to quantitatively determine which of the hyper-parameters
are the most signicant for nal accuracy. In general, there are more studies on those with
higher importance, and their importance has been decided by previous experience.
Hyper-parameters can be categorized into two groups: those used for training and those
used for model design. A proper choice of hyper-parameters related to model training al-
lows neural networks to learn faster and achieve enhanced performance. Currently, the most
adopted optimizer for training a deep neural network is stochastic gradient descent (Rob-
bins and Monro, 1951) with momentum (Qian, 1999) as well as its variants such as Ada-
Grad (Duchi et al., 2011), RMSprop (Hinton et al., 2012a), and Adam (Kingma and Ba,
2014). In addition to the choice of optimizer, corresponding hyper-parameters (e.g., mo-
mentum) are critical for certain networks. During the training process, batch size and LR
draw the most attention because they determine the speed of convergence, the tuning of
which should always be ensured. Hyper-parameters for model design are more related to
the structure of neural networks, the most typical example being the number of hidden
layers and width of layers. These hyper-parameters usually measure the models learning
capacity, which is determined by the complexity of function (Agrawal, 2018).
This section provides an in-depth discussion on hyper-parameters of great importance
for model structures and training, as well as introduce their eect in models and provide
suggested values or schedules.
2.1 Learning Rate
LR is a positive scalar that determines the length of step during SGD (Goodfellow
et al., 2016). In most cases, the LR must be manually adjusted during model training,
and this adjustment is often necessary for enhanced accuracy (Bengio, 2012).An alternative
choice of xed LR is a varied LR over the training process. This method is referred to as
the LR schedule or LR decay (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Adaptive LR can be adjusted in
response to the performance or structure of the model, and it is supported by a learning
algorithm (Smith, 2017; Brownlee, 2019).
Constant LR, as the simplest schedule, is often set as the default by deep learning
frameworks (e.g., Keras). It is an important but tricky task to determine a good value
for LR. With a proper constant LR, the network is able to be trained to a passable but
unsatisfactory accuracy because the initial value could always be overlarge, especially in
the nal few steps. A small improvement based on the constant value is to set an initial
rate as 0.1, for example, adjusting to 0.01 when the accuracy is saturated, and to 0.001 if
necessary (nachiket tanksale, 2018).
Linear LR decay is a common choice for researchers who wish to set a schedule. It
changes gradually during the training process based on time or step. The basic mathematical
4