Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
Figure 9: Grid search on dropout rate and learning rate in a parallel concurrent execu-
tion (Harrington, 2018)
of search space, whereas in grid search the budget for each hyper-parameter set is a xed
valueB1=N, Where Bis the total budget and Nis the number of hyper-parameters. There-
fore, random search may perform better especially when some hyper-parameters are not
uniformly distributed. In this search pattern, random search is comparatively more likely
to nd the optimal conguration than grid search (Figure 10). Second, although obtaining
the optimum using random search is not promising, it is quite certain that greater time
consumption will lead to a larger probability of nding the best hyper-parameter set. This
logic is known as Monte Carlo techniques, which is popular when deal with large volume
datasets in multi-dimensional deep learning scenarios (Harrison, 2010). By contrast, for
grid search, a longer search time cannot guarantee better results. Easy parallelization and

exible resource allocation are also dominant advantages of random search (Krivulin et al.,
2005).
In most cases, random search is more eective than grid search, but it is still a com-
putationally intensive method. The use of random search is suggested in the early stage of
HPO to rapidly narrow down the search space, before using a guided algorithm to obtain
a ner result (from a coarse to ne sampling scheme) (Ng, 2017). Random search is often
applied as the baseline of HPO to measure the eciency of newly designed algorithms.
Random search generally takes more time and computational resources than other guided
search methods.
3.1.3 Bayesian Optimization and Its Variants
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a traditional algorithm with decades of history. It was
raised by Mockus (Mo ckus, 1975; Mockus et al., 1978), and later became popular when it
was applied to the global optimization problem (Jones et al., 1998). BO is a typical method
for almost all types of global optimization, and is aimed at becoming less wrong with more
data (Koehrsen, 2018). It is a sequential model-based method aimed at nding the global
optimum with the minimum number of trials. It balances exploration and exploitation (Sil-
ver, 2014) to avoid trapping into the local optimum. Exploitation is the process of making
17