Yu and Zhu
wheren(x)>0,() and () are the standard normal probability density function and
cumulative standard normal distribution function; and n(x) is the best observed value
thus far (Jones et al., 1998). In addition to improvement-based policies, knowledge gra-
dient function (Frazier et al., 2009), entropy search function (Hennig and Schuler, 2012),
and predictive entropy search function (Hern andez-Lobato et al., 2014) have recently been
developed to enhance performance over dierent applications. A portfolio with acquisition
functions was also proposed to cope with dierent strategies. It could be designed based
on the hedge algorithm, using which the acquisition function was chosen with past perfor-
mance (Homan et al., 2011). An entropy search portfolio (Shahriari et al., 2014) selects
the acquisition function using the information gained toward optimization.
BO is ecient because it selects the next hyper-parameter set in a guided manner. With
BO, users will make fewer calls to the objective function. For a machine learning model, BO
is more ecient at nding the optimum hyper-parameter compared with grid or random
search. However, there are some downsides of the vanilla Bayesian method. The most promi-
nent problem is that BO is a sequential process in which a trial is proposed using experience
from previous trials. Some solutions have been raised to solve the parallelism problem. A
method was proposed based on the batch input of current results (Ginsbourger et al., 2011).
As GP+EI is the most popular combination for Bayesian optimization, improvements based
on EI (Ginsbourger et al., 2010; Snoek et al., 2012) and GP-UCB (Hutter et al., 2012; De-
sautels et al., 2014) Parallelization on other acquisition functions (e.g. information-based
function) and the combination of BO with other algorithms (Falkner et al., 2018) are also
feasible solutions.
Another drawback of BO is the greater consumption of computational resources com-
pared with grid search and random search. This especially draw our attention when it is
applied to deep learning networks. Memory consumption, training time, and power con-
sumption are problems for training a neural network. Therefore, the search algorithm not
only needs to be fast but also resource-ecient. A straightforward method for solving this
problem is to set a boundary and determine whether a certain trial is still worthy of train-
ing. This boundary could be the loss function or average accuracy in the neural network.
Domhan roposed a predictive termination method that can be combined with the Bayesian
method. This idea can be combined with search algorithms other than BO (Domhan et al.,
2015).Freeze-thaw Bayesian optimization (Swersky et al., 2014) utilizes a forecast curve
to determine whether to freeze a current trial or thaw a previous one. Currently, BO
has been applied for hyper-parameter tuning in deep learning networks, which has led to
achievements in both image classication (Snoek et al., 2015) and natural language pro-
cessing (Melis et al., 2017).
Bayesian methods were originally not applicable for integers, categorical values, or a
conditional search space. However, in reality, hyper-parameters for deep learning could be
in any data type. For vanilla Bayesian, kernel function and optimization process must be
adapted to involve integers (e.g., batch size) and categorical data (Hutter, 2009; Garrido-
Merch an and Hern andez-Lobato, 2017). Conditional variables may only in
uence the results
with some other variable taking certain values. This is common in deep learning networks,
for example, hyper-parameters related to certain optimizers. Models with a tree-based struc-
ture have been designed to solve this problem. In addition to GP, random forests (Hutter
22