Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
4. Toolkits for Hyper-parameter Optimization
Hyper-parameter training is a time-consuming process, especially for deep learning net-
works. It may take decades of GPU days to nish the whole process because training a
single neural network to convergence will take a whole day. A toolkit for HPO builds a
bridge between network training and hyper-parameter tuning. The combination of tuning
algorithm, scheduler for trials, and compatibility with major deep learning toolkits expe-
dites the optimization process and lowers the threshold for research & development.
This section provides a general comparison of contemporary open source toolkits and
services, and discusses the most integrated ones in detail. The frameworks are assessed
by their ability to handle resources, support state-of-the-art optimization algorithms, and
schedule for trials.
4.1 Overview
Generally, there are two types of toolkits for HPO: open source tools and services that
rely on cloud computing resources, and each of which are described in this subsection.
Multiple open-source libraries have been created to cater to the demand for dierent
tasks in automatic model design, including model construction, feature engineering, and
HPO. Some of them were designed for the application of the proposed algorithm. For ex-
ample, HyperOpt is specically designed for asynchronous BO (TPE) based on Gaussian
processes and regression trees. HpBandSter features in the implementation of BOHB, al-
though it also provides random search and HB. Xcessive outperforms other libraries with
an interactive graphical user interface (GUI) that is beginner-friendly. Users are able to
manage the training, optimization, and evaluation of models through the GUI. However,
Xcessive only supports automated hyper-parameter search through Bayesian methods, and
it is also inconvenient for training deep learning networks. Scikit-Optimize is a compre-
hensive library cited by many later frameworks. It contains Bayesian methods, random
search, random forest, and some other reliable optimization algorithms. All aforementioned
methods have downsides in common: their implementation on search algorithms, their sup-
port for deep learning training frameworks, and their application schedule for trials. These
inhibit ecient search for hyper-parameters for deep neural networks.
In addition, Google Cloud and Amazon Web Services (AWS) provide model selection
and HPO. These services are supported by massive computational resources, applicable for
thousands of parallel training processes and evaluations. However, they are a closed-source
infrastructure and users must pay for the service.
The tools for HPO are designed to satisfy the following considerations: ease of use, state
of the art, availability, scalability, and 
exibility (Golovin et al., 2017). Table 3 displays a
general comparison of the open source tools and services in regard to the abovementioned
considerations. More details are discussed in the following subsections.
31