Hyper-Parameter Optimization: A Review of Algorithms and Applications
is scalable to millions of experiments and billions of trials with dierent hyper-parameter
sets. All jobs are partitioned across Google data centers and processed by Googles load-
balancing infrastructure. The whole system with a strong error-correcting ability will
pause a trial if it fails and prevent it from aecting the stability of the whole job.
A third benet is the implementation of transfer learning, which helps users to accelerate
their tuning processes but rarely implemented in an open-source library. This strategy, built
with GP regression, is based on previous jobs submitted by millions of users. Instead of
trained from scratch, the model submitted by user will be ne-tuned with provided dataset.
Transfer learning is often more valuable for deep learning networks because it is expensive
to train.
In addition, Google Vizier provides a benchmarking suite to measure the eciency of
algorithms with performance-over-time metrics.
Additional reason to choose Vizier is the GUI, which is applicable for both monitor-
ing the status and changing the setting for an experiment. There is almost no technical
threshold for common users because they are not even required command lines to create an
experiment or request a new suggestion.
Vizier does not outperform in search algorithms and early stopping strategies. Similar
to most open-source libraries, Google Vizier supports 
oat, integer, discrete, and categori-
cal parameters at a logarithmic scale. Grid and random search are involved, while batched
Gaussian process bandit optimization (Desautels et al., 2014) is the default mode for most
scenarios. Mat ern kernel with an automatic relevance determination (Rasmussen, 2003)
and expected improvement acquisition function (Mockus et al., 1978) are applied. The
early stopping algorithms are Curve Stopping Rule (refer to 4.2.2) and Median Stopping
Rule (refer to 4.2.1). In a recent study by DeepMind (Li et al., 2019), Vizier was imple-
mented with a PBT framework. This work indicated the feasibility of implementing new
optimization algorithms in Vizier, and the support of Viziers infrastructure was helpful
in accelerating the tuning process. The suggested search algorithm and default values for
hyper-parameters makes it friendlier for users with less experience, whereas with most open-
source frameworks users must make decisions based upon their own experience.
In general, Vizier is a forerunner of a comprehensive HPO service. The key design goal
is the signicant reduction of setup eorts. As a beginner in hyper-parameter tuning, one
can start and monitor an experiment with the dashboard, suggested with an ecient search
algorithm and early stopping strategy, use the allocation of Google Cloud, and nally check
the results on the UI. Very little eort is required if one is willing to use the default set-
tings provided by Vizier. Advanced users are able to replace the algorithm with their own
design, but they may still perceive a lack of 
exibility. All in all, if deploying a framework
and setting up an experiment generate no problems, one may not deem paying for these
features to be worthwhile.
Advisor is an open-source version of Google Vizier (adv, 2018) that attempts to realize
all of Viziers features without the support of Google Cloud. Grid search, random search,
and BO are also supported in Advisor, as are early stop algorithms. Advisor even realizes
an interactive GUI, allowing users to easily start and stop an experiment. However, the
open-source version will never reproduce the extremely high scalability of Vizier because it
is limited by the availability of computational resources.
33