Yu and Zhu
by web services. Users cannot avoid deployment and conguration work, and they can-
not expect to run thousands of trials simultaneously because of the limitation of resources.
Moreover, neither has an interactive GUI; users must use command lines to start adjusting
an HPO experiment.
Nevertheless, Tune and NNI are still the most convenient toolkits for hyper-parameter
training. In general, they are more suitable for developers with some experience of model
training.
5. Discussion and Extensions
This section concludes the paper with a discussion on the comparison between algo-
rithms (Section 5.1) and evaluations of HPO (Section 5.2).
The concept of HPO has a history of over 20 years (Kohavi and John, 1995), and it is
a widely used mature technique. In the last few years, with the prosperous development of
deep learning, automatic HPO has also become a potential tool to adjust a model for certain
applications. Given the scale of deep learning models and their set of hyper-parameters,
the key challenges concerning automatic HPO are as follows:
- Many classical search algorithms (e.g., grid search, random search, and Bayesian meth-
ods) have become infeasible because of the large number of hyper-parameters and
complex conguration space.
- Evaluation of models with a certain structure or certain choice of hyper-parameters
could be extremely expensive.
- Parallelism will dramatically reduce the total training time. It is a must for HPO
tasks, especially for deep models.
- All in all, computational eciency is extremely crucial.
5.1 Comparability between dierent algorithms
This section makes a brief comparison between major algorithms, including their ad-
vantages for saving computational resources, disadvantages in accuracy and eciency, and
their applicability (Table 5).
-Eorts made by algorithms to save computational resources
Random search: For deep neural networks, the most important feature of random search
is computational parallelism. In addition, it is easy to combine with early stopping strate-
gies, and such combination will largely improve the eciency for narrowing down the search
space.
BO: This is the classical method for optimization addressing the experience of prior
search. It is a guided search method with surrogate model and acquisition functions, bal-
ancing the exploration and exploitation processes. Bayesian optimization and its variants
are the most reliable and convincing methods for optimization. Many recent studies have
38