Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 2 of 16
artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) has increased enormously [ 4,5]. In contrast to traditional
approaches, ANNs can model non-linear connections between input and output variables.
Artiﬁcial network-based techniques are used in several scientiﬁc and technical do-
mains and applications, such as non-linear systems modelling, adaptive learning control,
and pattern recognition strategies [ 6–9]. Various neural network topologies are available
due to their adaptability and extensive parameter-tuning options. RBFNN algorithms
have been widely utilized for modelling and controlling non-linear systems owing to their
universal computation capability and structural elegance [ 10]. It has been demonstrated
that the RBFNN approach can simulate any continuous function given adequate RBF neu-
rons [ 11]. Standard RBFNN learning-based algorithms can address problems in predicting
network sizes (the degree of RBF neurons) and updating hyperparameters (i.e., RBF center
coordinates, RBF neuron widths, and output weights) to attain the required approximation
precision [12,13].
Error back-propagation (BP) is one of the most used methods for modifying the
RBFNN architecture [ 14]. However, the BP approach results in a poor global search
experience and the problem of a prolonged convergence rate. Several studies have been
conducted to determine the local minimum. Recursive least squares (RLS) may yield a
more optimal convergence rate and heightened accuracy than the BP solution [ 15]. This
enhancement necessitates a set of very complex mathematical expressions and greater use
of computing resources. The RBFNN size has a substantial effect on its performance and it
is important to improve RBFNN size for overall performance enhancement. The adaptive
growth and pruning method [ 16] is used to develop a recurrent neural network, with the
hyperparameters ﬁne-tuned to enhance the network’s performance. The self-organizing
RBFNN network is then trained, while simultaneously modifying the network size and
features using forward and backward selection techniques [17].
Evolutionary algorithms (EA) have been used to boost the performance of networks.
Xiao et al. [ 18], and Sheng et al. [ 19] introduced evolutionary algorithms to develop an
RBFNN approach. Feng et al. [ 20] employed PSO to overcome the widespread convergence
time problem encountered while training RBFNNs, resulting in a PSO-based self-generating
RBFNN. Alexandridis et al. [ 21] proposed a new approach based on fuzzy means and PSO
algorithms for training RBFNNs. Abdi at al. [ 22] developed an RBFNN model using a
non-linear time-varying evolutionary PSO (NTVE-PSO) technique. An NTVE-PSO method
was used to assess the RBFNN’s optimal hyperparameters and network size concurrently
for time-series prediction problems. Other EA approaches, including the ant colony search
algorithm [ 23], genetic algorithms [ 24] and artiﬁcial immune systems [ 25] have been applied
to prediction problems.
From the perspective of evolutionary approaches, the PSO algorithm has a relatively
quick approximation speed for optimal outcomes, enabling it to optimize system param-
eters efﬁciently [ 26–28]. The PSO method continuously updates the particle’s position
using the particle’s current position, global extremum, and individual extremum. The
PSO algorithm can meet the challenge of continually optimizing functions. However, con-
verging in advance is more manageable (especially when dealing with highly non-linear
optimization problems) because the local optimization potential is restricted. The core
formula for position updates must balance exploration and exploitation throughout the
probe operation. This might impair the efﬁcacy of the accompanying algorithms. Moreover,
the current PSO-based algorithms need not fully use existing optimum solution data to
steer the search space.
To address these obstacles, a unique global optimization strategy, namely hybrid PSO
combined with a spiral-shaped mechanism (HPSO-SSM) [ 29,30], is proposed to design
RBFNNs with enhanced performance in the application of non-linear-system modelling and
prediction. The proposed HPSO-SSM-based RBF neural network (HPSO-SSM-RBFNN) has
dual advantages. Firstly, the logistic map sequence is employed in the original PSO method
to boost the search strategy’s variety. A unique position-updating model is incorporated for