Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 3 of 16
enhancing position quality and a spiral-shaped process. Second, the suggested HPSO-SSM
technique optimizes the RBFNN parameters and size.
The key contributions of the present study are as follows:
• To alleviate the limitations of PSO, such as sluggish convergence, eliminate the local
minimum dilemma and boost the quality of PSO outcomes, a hybrid HPSO-SSM
algorithm is developed.
• Three signiﬁcant improvements are made to the original PSO: First, a logistic map
sequence is used to adjust the inertial weight w, which provides sufﬁcient variety and
facilitates the avoidance of optimal solutions throughout the selection process.
• Second, a signiﬁcantly improved update equation for creating the next-generation
position is proposed, which can more effectively integrate exploration and exploitation.
• Third, a spiral-shaped mechanism (SSM) is coupled to the original PSO as a local
search strategy for the known optimum solution.
• Finally, the proposed HPSO-SSM approach is applied to optimize the network RBFNN
parameters and size. Two non-linear benchmark functions, namely, (1) Lorenz time-
series, (2) non-linear system identiﬁcation and (3) the total phosphorus (TP) modelling
problem in a waste water treatment process (WWTP), were tested. Simulation results
of the RBFNN trained by HPSO-SSM were obtained to assess its performance with
respect to the root mean squared error (RMSE). The presented HPSO-SSM-RBFNN is
designed to enable greater solution precision with smaller network size. The ﬁndings
indicate that this model is superior to other RBFNN models.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 explains the operational principles of the
RBF neural network. In Section 3 particle swarm optimization (PSO), the hybrid method
HPSO-SSM models and the new implementation strategy for HPSO-SSM-RBFNN are
described. Section 4 presents the ﬁndings for evaluation of several optimization techniques
applied to a variety of benchmark situations. The norms obtained are relevant to non-
linear structural analysis, time-series prediction of the Lorenz system, and TP estimation
in WWTP . These ﬁndings are compared to data for existing approaches. Finally, Section 5
highlights and summarizes the study’s results.
2. Methods and Materials
A uniﬁed hybrid approach is proposed for optimizing the hyperparameters and size
of RBFNNs. Optimization of neural networks remains a difﬁcult endeavour in the ﬁeld
of machine learning. Traditional training methods are often susceptible to local optima
and premature convergence, rendering them inefﬁcient for datasets containing multiple
attributes. However, EC-based training algorithms have become more widely considered
because of their robustness in overcoming the constraints of traditional methods. In the
present study, three benchmark datasets are used to investigate an integrated training
algorithm that combines particle swarm optimization (PSO) with a spiral-shaped mech-
anism (SSM). The proposed logistic map sequence boosts the search process diversity to
overcome the conventional PSO algorithm’s limitations, such as slow convergence, the
local minimum problem, and low-quality results. In addition, an updated algorithm and
spiral-shaped method are implemented to enhance the position features.
A novel machine-learning-based algorithm is proposed to handle imbalanced datasets,
which can be misleading when training algorithms during the classiﬁcation task. The
proposed approach contributes to improving algorithm performance and reducing the
problems of over-ﬁtting and under-ﬁtting. A strategy for creating a master feature vec-
tor (MFV) is also presented, which avoids the unfavourable effects of the classiﬁcation
scheme caused by data inconsistencies, missing values, and classiﬁcation-related issues.
The proposed MFV achieves high prediction performance scores, while addressing data
inconsistencies, issues related to missing values, and data imbalance problems. The primary
purpose of the present study is to boost data quality by introducing a cutting-edge approach
to impute missing thresholds and enrich the predictive performance of algorithms.