Citation: Ahmad, Z.; Li, J.;
Mahmood, T. Adaptive
Hyperparameter Fine-Tuning for
Boosting the Robustness and Quality
of the Particle Swarm Optimization
Algorithm for Non-Linear RBF
Neural Network Modelling and Its
Applications. Mathematics 2023 ,11,
242. https://doi.org/10.3390/
math11010242
Academic Editors: António Lopes,
Omid Nikan and Zakieh Avazzadeh
Received: 4 December 2022
Revised: 26 December 2022
Accepted: 28 December 2022
Published: 3 Jaunary 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
mathematics
Article
Adaptive Hyperparameter Fine-T uning for Boosting the
Robustness and Quality of the Particle Swarm Optimization
Algorithm for Non-Linear RBF Neural Network Modelling and
Its Applications
Zohaib Ahmad1, Jianqiang Li1,2
and Tariq Mahmood3,*
1Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100024, China
2Beijing Engineering Research Center for IoT Software and Systems, Beijing 100124, China
3Faculty of Information Sciences, Vehari Campus, University of Education, Vehari 61100, Pakistan
*Correspondence: tmsherazi@ue.edu.pk
Simple Summary: A radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) is proposed for identifying
and diagnosing non-linear systems. The neural network developed was optimized not only for
RBFNN output layer parameters, including centers, width, and weights, but also for network size
(the count of neurons stored in the hidden layer). Two optimization methods, namely, particle swarm
optimization (PSO) and hybrid PSO coupled with a spiral-shaped mechanism (HPSO-SSM), were
used to train the RBFNN hyperparameters and network size. Simulation results showed that the
suggested technique outperformed other current approaches with respect to prediction precision and
network compactness.
Abstract: A method is proposed for recognizing and predicting non-linear systems employing a
radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) and robust hybrid particle swarm optimization (HPSO)
approach. A PSO is coupled with a spiral-shaped mechanism (HPSO-SSM) to optimize the PSO
performance by mitigating its constraints, such as sluggish convergence and the local minimum
dilemma. Three advancements are incorporated into the hypothesized HPSO-SSM algorithms to
achieve remarkable results. First, the diversity of the search process is promoted to update the
inertial weight wbased on the logistic map sequence. Then, two distinct parameters are trained in
the original position update algorithm to enhance the work efﬁciency of the successive generation.
Finally, the proposed approach employs a spiral-shaped mechanism as a local search operator inside
the optimum solution space. Moreover, the HPSO-SSM method concurrently improves the RBFNN
parameters and network size, building a model with a compact conﬁguration and higher precision.
Two non-linear benchmark functions and the total phosphorus (TP) modelling issue in a waste water
treatment process (WWTP) are utilized to assess the overall efﬁcacy of the creative technique. The
results of testing indicate that the projected HPSO-SSM-RBFNN algorithm performed very effectively.
Keywords: RBFNN; non-linear system modelling; time-series prediction; HPSO
MSC: 68T20
1. Introduction
It is widely recognized that many real-world problems can be addressed by employing
a non-linear model.
Hence, non-linear system modelling has been a consistent focus of research [ 1]. Several
novel methods have been used for the development of non-linear modelling systems,
including non-linear regression, multivariate statistical methods, and neural network-
based architectures [ 2,3]. Due to their efﬁcient approximation abilities, research interest in
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242. https://doi.org/10.3390/math11010242 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/mathematics