Paper —Arabic Sign Language Recognition Through Deep Neural Networks Fine -Tuning  
 
Fig. 4.  The fine -tuning process  
Following th e construction of the models, the Arabic Sign gestures images dataset 
was used to further train the network, dividing the images such as 80% of the images 
were used for training and the remaining 20% for testing. The training process included 
running 100 e pochs, passing through the network using the whole dataset, where in 
each epoch, multiple batches of the image dataset were passed through the network, 
while correspondingly computing the loss function through categorical cross -entropy 
between predictions and targets, and running a Stochastic Gradient Descent updates, 
passing the learning rate of 0.0001, which controlled the size of the update steps, and 
momentum of 0.9 as parameters. For each epoch, processing runtime, training and val-
idation loss, and  the training and validation accuracy are recorded and examined.  
4 Experiments, Results, and Analysis  
With the established success of the previously mentioned models, the VGG16 and 
the ResNet152 networks were chosen for the fine -tuning process as described i n the 
preceding section, the dataset used for training consisted of 25,600 images, distributed 
on 32 classes of Arabic Sign Language gestures with a unified format. The dataset was 
split into a training set and a validation set with the training set having  80% of the data 
and 20% was left for the validation set. The full proposed technique would then have 
the following steps: we begin by under -sampling the data to even out the classes, then 
the data is inputted into the fine tuning process, where iterations \ epochs are run through 
the required model (VGG16 \ ResNet152) with data augmentation applied at the begin-
ning of each iteration, and accuracy values being provided at the end of each iteration. 
Finally, after the final training epoch has been run, the fi nal accuracy is displayed and 
the training process is finished. The process can be seen in Fig. 5.  
 
Fig. 5.  The proposed methodology  
The experimentation started with the VGG16 model, as the data was used in running 
100 epoch, passing through the model with our ow n data and displaying a step -by-step 
output for each epoch. The model was able to reach a 99% validation accuracy at the 
40th epoch, while the highest accuracy of 99.45% was reached at the 92nd epoch. The 
78
http://www.i-joe.org