Paper —Arabic Sign Language Recognition Through Deep Neural Networks Fine -Tuning  
the area of gesture recognition  using more traditional approaches that did not employ 
machine or deep learning methods. For example, in 2013, Singha and Das presented an 
approach for identifying different alphabets of Indian Sign Language, through a pro-
posed system that comprised of thr ee stages, first, a preprocessing stage, then feature 
extraction and finally classification. The preprocessing stage consisted of skin filtering 
and histogram matching. The feature extraction was implemented through Eigen values 
and Eigen Vectors, and fina lly Eigen value weighted Euclidean distance was used for 
classification. 24 different alphabets were considered and a 96 .25% success rate was 
obtained [ 12]. Other researchers such as Nachmai  used a special algorithm called SIFT 
(Scale Invariant Feature Transform) aimed at  recognizing English alphabets [ 13]. The 
novelty of their approach is that, it is a space, size, illumination, and rotation invariant. 
Other approaches to sign language recog nition are based on the Hidden Markov Models 
such as the work done by Youssif in 2011 which recognizes Arabic Sign Language with 
an accuracy reaching up to 82.22% [ 14]. Another work that employed the Hidde n Mar-
kov Models can be seen in [ 15], while in [ 16] a five stages process was presented for 
an Arabic sign language translator, focusing on feature extraction of translation, scale, 
and rotation invariant, and presenting accuracy of 91.3%.  
The use of special sensors such as the Microsoft Kinect and Leap Mot ion Sensors 
were used by Almasre and Al -Nuaim for data acquisition in their hand -gesturing model 
with the purpose of recognizing 28  Arabic Sign Language gestures [ 17]. Chuan and 
Guardino, on the other hand, used only a Leap Motion Sensor with k -nearest nei ghbor 
and support vector machine algorithms in order to classify the 26 letters of the English 
alphabet in American Sign Language [ 18]. ElBadawy in 2015 also used a Leap Motion 
Sensor in combination with two digital cameras to capture the data, where 20 si gns for 
different words were inputted into a feature extraction and sign language translation 
algorithm for classification  and reproduction of text data [ 19]. 
The recent advancements in machine learning and deep learning, and the outstanding 
results obtain ed from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) in image classification 
and prediction, paved the way for researchers to apply them in hundreds of applications 
including sign language recognition. For example, Kang in 2015 used data provided by 
the Microsoft K inect with CNN and presented a methodology for recognizing finger-
spelling, and tested their technique  on the American Sign Language [ 20]. The data con-
sisted of 31 alphabets and numbers, where the proposed system was inputted the depth 
maps of the Kinect an d was able to reach a maximum accuracy of 85.5%. Another 
example for the use of Kinect de pth maps and CNNs was shown in [ 21], where the 
technique was applied on Italian Sign Language dataset consisting of 20 gestures. The 
technique presented two main model s, one for upper -body features extraction and an-
other for hand features extraction, where results were merged and inputted into a neural 
network classifier. The proposed technique achieved an accuracy of 91.7%.  
Priyadharsini and Rajeswari, in 2017 used CNN s with a dataset of 26 Indian alphabet 
images for sign language recognition, achieving  an accuracy that reached 100% [ 22]. 
Convolutional Neural Networks were also used with a new model for recognizing 10 
Korean words taken from video frames, the model was created in three different stages 
and was capable of acquiring accuracy up to 84.5% [ 23]. 
iJOE ‒ Vol. 16, No. 5, 2020
73