Paper —Arabic Sign Language Recognition Through Deep Neural Networks Fine -Tuning  
Recent work relating to Arabic sign lan guage recognition was shown in [ 24], where 
different CNNs were built and fed with data from a depth sensor which included not 
only height and width, but also the depth of objects. The data then is passed through a 
CNN depending on the frame rate of the depth video, which also controls how deep the 
network is. For lower frame rates, lower depth is used, while higher frame rate mean s 
more depth. The proposed approach acquired accuracy of up to 98%.  
Hayani in 2019 presented a new model for Arabic Sign Language Recognition 
through the use of Convolutional Neural Networks for recognizing 28 Arabic letters 
and numbers from 0 to 10 using an image dataset containing a total of 7869 images. 
The proposed model contained 7 layers, and was trained multiple times on different 
training -testing variations, with highest accuracy being 90.02% with a training set size 
of 80% of images, finally the au thors presented a comparison with other techniques 
showin g the proposed model advantage [ 25]. 
A combination of Convolutional Neural Networks and Long -Term M emory network 
was presented in [ 26], the goal was to recognize Chinese sign language gestures col-
lected as frames from videos, and the proposed technique provided an accuracy of 95% 
for recognizing 40 words.  
While Convolutional Neural Networks seems to work very well with image recog-
nition, one of its drawbacks is the large amounts of data  required to train the network, 
thus requiring excessive amount of time and processing capabilities. In order to reduce 
the size of the data set, and processing time, researchers employed Fine -Tuning tech-
niques and Transfer Learning, relying on previously trained networks with large scale 
datasets (general concepts), and fine tune the network with a small scale and more spe-
cific dataset in order to achieve high accuracy rates.  
A comparison between the use and non -use of fine tuning in imag e recognition was 
presented by [ 6]. The AlexNet model was implemented as an example of a well -known 
model that can be used with or without fine tuning. The authors focused on medical 
images to present a challenge as normally pre -trained networks are trained on natural 
image s. The paper provided evidence showing how fine tuning can help in maximizing 
accuracy without the need for large datasets and training from scratch, also, the paper 
showed how fine tuning several layers could provide different accuracy for different 
types  of images.  
A plant recognition model which used fine -tuning with CNNs was presented by [ 27]. 
The proposed model was pre -trained on a dataset of 1.2 million images for a set of 
1,000 objects classes, then, the model was fine -tuned to recognize 1,000 types of plants, 
showing how using transfer learning can be a solution to transfer the recognition capa-
bilities of a general domain to a specific one.  
Yanai and Kawano, 2015 utilized fine -tunin g in a food recognition system [ 28], with 
a pre -trained network that was firstly trained on the ImageNet dataset, then fine -tuned 
using a relatively small dataset of food images. The presented experiment delivered 
recognition accuracy of 78% and 67% where the authors concluded that more data shall 
increase accuracy much gre atly. 
Another example on the use of a CN N and fine -tuning was shown in [ 29], imple-
menting a CNN loaded with pre -trained weights and training the model with different 
74
http://www.i-joe.org