Paper —Arabic Sign Language Recognition Through Deep Neural Networks Fine -Tuning  
Arabic Sign Language Recognition through Deep Neural 
Networks Fine -Tuning  
https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v16i05.13087  
Yaser Saleh  (), Ghassan F. Issa  
University of Petra, Amman, Jordan  
Yaser.Saleh@uop.edu.jo  
Abstract—Sign Language is considered the main communication tool for 
deaf or hearing -impaired  people. It is a visual language that uses hands and other 
parts of the body to provide people who are in need to full access of communica-
tion with the world. Accordingly, the automation of sign language recognition 
has become one of the important applications in the areas of Artificial Intelli-
gence and Machine learning. Specifically speaking, Arabic sign language recog-
nition has been studied and applied using various intelligent and traditional ap-
proaches, but with few attempts to improve the process using deep learning net-
works. This paper utilizes transfer learning and fine tuning deep convolutional 
neural networks (CNN) to improve the accur acy of recognizing 32 hand gestures 
from the Arabic sign language. The proposed methodology works by creating 
models matching the VGG16 and the ResNet152 structures, then, the pre -trained 
model weights are loaded into the layers of each network, and finall y, our own 
soft-max classification layer is added as the final layer after the last fully con-
nected layer. The networks were fed with normal 2D images of the different Ar-
abic Sign Language data, and was able to provide accuracy of nearly 99%.  
Keyw ords —Arab ic Sign Language Recognition, Deep Learning, Fine tuning, 
Convolutional neural network.  
1 Introduction  
According to the World Health Organization in 2019, the number of people with 
hearing disability is around 466 million with 34  million of these are childre n [1]. It is 
also estimated that this number is expected to double in the next 30 years. These num-
bers show the importance of sign language as a tool for communication between hearing 
impaired people and the rest of the world. Sign Language has been improved an d stand-
ardized by many different countries and different cultures resulting in different stand-
ards such as the American Sign Language (ASL), British Sign Language (BSL), Arabic 
Sign Language, and others. Unfortunately, there is no universal sign language. As this 
paper focuses on Arabic sign language, we found that there is no one standard Arabic 
sign language, but instead many variations as many as the Arabic -speaking countries. 
Luckily enough, these different Arabic sign languages share the same signs for  alpha-
bets [2]. 
iJOE ‒ Vol. 16, No. 5, 2020
71