Paper —Arabic Sign Language Recognition Through Deep Neural Networks Fine -Tuning  
 
Fig. 2.  ResNet152 model structure  
3.2 Data preparation  
To evaluate the two mentioned models above, a dataset of images (ArASL) pre-
sented in [ 10] was utilized. The dataset originally contained 54,049 images distributed 
around 32 classes of Arabic Signs, the images dimensions are unified on 64 x 64, and 
many variations of images were presented through the use of different lighting and 
backgrounds. A sample of the dataset can be seen in Fig. 3. One issue that must be 
noted in the above dataset is that the number of images per each class is not the same. 
In order to solve this problem of imbalance, Under -sampling technique is applied and 
is described below:  
Under -sampling : When a dataset consists of classes that are of different  size in 
terms of data items, a problem of class imbalance occurs resulting in a bias towards the 
majority class (one having most data items), which negatively affects the performance 
of the classification. To solve this problem, re -sampling is applied to the data to fix the 
imbalance and reduce the bias. Under -sampling is one technique of re -sampling that is 
used to reduce the size of the majority class.  
Table 1 which contains some samples of the ArASl dataset, shows for example that 
one gesture (AIN) cons ists of 2014 images, while the (YAA) gesture has only 1293 
images. Accordingly, Random Under -sampling was applied to the dataset before the 
use the fine -tuning process. Since the images are not evenly distributed on the classes, 
random images were discarde d from the experiment to even the weight of each class, 
which also helped in showing the advantage of the use of fine -tuning with smaller da-
tasets. The final dataset included 25,600 images, distributed evenly on 32 classes, giv-
ing each class 800 images.  
Augmentation : Data Augmentation is a process in which new sets of data are cre-
ated using existing ones, thus increasing the data diversity for the training process.  
As the survey presented by Shorten and Khoshgoftaar have shown, the use of data 
augmentation  can help build a more robust classification network, and can give a boost 
to the accuracy of the network itself, the authors presented how different types of aug-
mentation can affect the process of training deep convolutional neural networks, start-
ing with  how data augmentation provides a reasonable solution for overfitting, which 
can occur when the training dataset is very small, and how different augmentation tech-
niques can be applied with deep networks to assist the network in achieving better re-
sults th an when no data augmentation is ap plied [ 31]. 
76
http://www.i-joe.org