Paper —Arabic Sign Language Recognition Through Deep Neural Networks Fine -Tuning  
datasets of Bangali sign language static images, the datasets included 37 gestures and 
was able to provide an accuracy of 96.33%.  
3 Proposed Procedure  
This section presents the neural network models employed including the data collec-
tion, under sampling, augmentation, and the fine -tuning process.  
3.1 Utilized models  
A convolutional neural network (CN N) works by allowing an image to pass through 
as input, then to go through a set of layers containing convolutions, pooling and other 
fully connected layers, to finally provide an output of a single class of a set of possible 
classes for the image. This se ction of the paper briefly introduces two well -known CNN 
architectures that have been used with our experiment on the Arabic Sign Language 
dataset.  
One of the already published models with training parameters  that has been widely 
used in recent years is the VGGNet model architecture, which was able to win the 
ImageNet Challenge in 2014. The VGGNet model architecture  was capable of consist-
ing fewer layers than the published state -of-the-art while still providing consider ably 
good results with an error of 7.3% on the overall accuracy [5]. The VGGNet models 
are also published and widely distributed on the Internet for various deep learning 
frameworks, making it the preferred model to work with  by other researchers . The con-
volutional layer parameters are denoted as “ conv ( receptive field size)  - (number of 
channels)” the structure of the used (16 layers) model can be described as seen in Fig. 
1. 
 
Fig. 1.  VGG16 model structure  
A year after the introduction of the VGGNet, a new networ k model called Residual 
Network (ResNet) was presented by [30]. This model was created with different varia-
tions of depth, from 32 layers to 152 showing the increase of accuracy with the increase 
of depth. The network’s structure was combined with a residu al function reformulating 
the layers and providing capabilities for improvement with larger yet less complex net-
works, the model structure can be seen in Fig. 2. The presented models were able to 
achieve 3.57% error on the ImageNet test set winning the 1st  place in the ImageNet 
competition in 2015.  
iJOE ‒ Vol. 16, No. 5, 2020
75