Paper —Arabic Sign Language Recognition Through Deep Neural Networks Fine -Tuning  
It is worth mentioning here, that research on sign language recognition requires dif-
ferent areas of expertise including sign extraction, sign feature representation, sign clas-
sification, and much more [3]. This is in addition to the fact th at there is no single uni-
versal sign language [4].  
The motivation of the work presented in this paper is to engage in the efforts to find 
viable solutions for the automation of sign language recognition, thus reducing the need 
for human intervention durin g the interpretation. The core of the work presented here 
is to be able to recognize sign language through feeding a convolutional neural network 
(CNN) with images of hand gestures in different lighting conditions and different ori-
entations. The use of dee p neural networks has recently boosted many research areas in 
image classification, such as medical images classification, objects recognition, face 
and ID recognition, and much more [5, 6]. Looking at the ImageNet challenge results 
in the first five years  of the competition;  one can easily see the progress in the reduction 
of classification error rates using different models of deep neural netwo rks [7]. 
With the recent developments in Convolutional Neural Networks, improvements on 
the overall capabilities of multiple image processing areas displayed great results. One 
of the top leading network models  for the ImageNet challenge was the Inception -v4 
model architecture, which was able to achieve 3.08% top error on the ImageNet chal-
lenge thr ough using 75 train able layers [ 8], overcoming the ResNet and GoogleNet that 
were the previous champions in image class ification [ 9]. However, one of the main 
downsides of latest state of the art is the increasing training run time, and the very large 
datasets required for t raining and testing.  
The proposed method in this paper is created to be suitable to operate on image data 
of Arabic sign language gestures captured in different lighting conditions and different 
backgrounds [10]. The objective of this paper is to utilize a  dataset of 32 different Ara-
bic signs images, and to present how fine tuning can help in training a network with a 
batch of images, and provide higher accuracy compared to other existing techniques.  
This paper is divided as follows: Section 1 contains the introduction, Section 2 com-
ments on some related work, Section 3 explains the CNN used, and the procedure of 
the experiments, Section 4 discusses the results, and finally Section 5 presents the con-
clusion.  
2 Related Work  
Nowadays, the modern society is a wit ness to the power of machine learning tech-
nology that ranges from web searches to recommendations on e -commerce websites. 
The machine learning systems that are developed everyday provide help in object iden-
tification of images, speech transcription, and ev en in the se lection of results of a search 
[11]. The use of deep learning has made it possible to transfer the benefits of the ma-
chine learning technology to provide better solutions for the Arabic sign language prob-
lem. 
One of the key features in sign lan guage has been hand gestures recognition, where 
research provided different ideas regarding reading the input of the gestures, starting 
with the use of digital imaging and digital cameras. Many researchers have worked on 
72
http://www.i-joe.org