tion of these) present in the research literature: 1) System
Design: ones that propose a system useful in the context
of HRI (direct application; e.g., Karami et al. (2020)), 2)
Observational: ones that detail a study designed to elicit
dierent features of HRI systems (to understand system
behavior; e.g., Podevijn et al. (2016)) and 3) Algorith-
mic Design: ones that present computational research, in-
cluding algorithms, models and frameworks to solve the
decision-making problems in HRI systems (e.g., Dahiya
et al. (2022)). In this survey we include all three kinds of
studies from the multi-agent HRI literature.
Our inclusion/exclusion criteria: Papers included
in this survey article, dierent from systematic reviews,
were found using online search through issues and proceed-
ings of various journals and conferences related to the HRI
research. The search was further expanded using the cita-
tions of the papers found in the rst step. To be included,
the research work must have an interaction aspect (either
real or synthetic interactions) between at least three agents
1with at least one human and one robot, and the intended
application should be in human-robot interaction. This
means we excluded some human-agent interaction studies
which may be, for example, psychology-oriented. We also
exclude studies where humans are used merely for data
collection, or where the agent is merely a computational
entity without any direct application to the human-robot
interaction aspect, e.g., studies on learning from demon-
stration, or intelligent recommendation systems.
In this survey, we identify ve attributes through which
multi-agent HRI systems can be characterized and com-
pared with each other. These attributes stem from three
core aspects of multi-agent HRI systems: the team struc-
ture/architecture, interaction style, and computational
characteristics (Section 2). Subsequent sections introduce
the resulting categorizations in detail and provide exam-
ples of human-robot interaction systems from the current
literature (Sections 3-5). Several images of multi-agent
HRI systems from the literature are also shown to illustrate
dierent categories23. Key observations regarding each
categorization are listed at the end of the corresponding
section. In Section 6, we comment on interactions between
dierent core aspects and discuss what kind of systems are
commonly seen in the literature, and how that may change
in the future. The survey concludes with a discussion on
main challenges currently being faced in multi-agent HRI
research on various fronts and our insight on possible di-
rections of future research in this eld (Section 7).
1This article does include a few studies with dyadic systems in
order to discuss relevant details.
2It is important to note that one can only show images of systems
where it is possible to capture all agents in a single frame. However,
the scope of multi-agent HRI systems goes far beyond what can
be shown in gures, e.g., systems where interactions are separated
spatially or temporally.
3Images used in the gures of this article are used with permission
from respective copyright holders (publishers/authors).2. Multi-Agent Human-Robot Interaction
In order to formally dene multi-agent Human-Robot
Interaction systems, we rst need to dene `interaction'.
The American Psychological Association (APA, Dictio-
nary of Psychology) denes a social interaction as a process
that involves reciprocal stimulation or response between
two or more individuals. In the context of multi-agent
HRI, however, reciprocity is not a necessary requirement
and an interaction can be dened as: information 
ow be-
tween two or more agents occurring as a result of commu-
nication, action or mere presence of any of those agents .
This information 
ow results in change in actions, behav-
ior or mental state of the agents on the receiving end.
Using this denition, we can express a multi-agent HRI
system using an interaction graph (Fig. 1). The gure
shows a multi-agent HRI system and the corresponding
interaction graph. Each agent is depicted as a node in a
directed graph in which each edge represents interaction
between two agents and points towards the direction of
information 
ow. We use this interaction graph structure
to dene multi-agent HRI systems:
Multi-agent Human-Robot Interaction systems
are the ones for which the interaction graph con-
tains three or more nodes (agents), with at least
three nodes connected via interaction edges, in-
cluding at least one interaction edge between a
human node and a robot node.
The information exchange can happen by means of
verbal/non-verbal communication or through an interac-
tion interface. The agents may be homogeneous in their
roles and identities, or they can be heterogeneous and con-
tribute dierently in the system. Moreover, these agents
can be located in separate environments interacting over
virtual channels or they can share same physical space. In
this survey, we consider the literature on multi-agent HRI
systems and try to characterize them based on dierent
properties.
Interactions in multi-agent human-robot systems do
bear similarities with interactions in human-only groups.
As we discuss in later sections, several studies in the liter-
ature try to apply understanding of human-only groups to
multi-agent human-robot systems (e.g., by using concepts
of human group interactions from social sciences). When
compared to robot-only groups, interactions in human-
robot systems come with a higher uncertainty of outcome,
and studies emphasize making human response to an inter-
action more predictable (e.g. by increasing human's trust
in robots or by making robots' intentions clearer). In this
paper, we also discuss how research from human-only and
robot-only groups can help multi-agent HRI, and open new
avenues for future research.
Human-Robot Interactions among multiple agents,
when compared to dyadic interactions, introduce a num-
ber of changes and complexities in the system. With mul-
tiple agents present, multi-agent interactions and indirect
3