Figure 2: The dierent categorizations for multi-agent Human-Robot Interactions originating from the three core aspects: the team structure,
the interaction style and the computational characteristics. These aspects bring forth several attributes of systems, each with its own features
and applications.
interactions can emerge in the system. It also becomes
possible to have humans interacting with other humans
and robots with other robots. These Human-Human Inter-
actions (HHI) and Robot-Robot Interactions (RRI) then
ultimately aect (or are aected by) interactions between
humans and robots. The presence of multiple agents also
require advanced communication modalities and interfaces
to enable eective interaction among all agents. As the
number of agents grow in the system, modelling their be-
havior and controlling their actions becomes increasingly
challenging. We look at each of these aspects of multi-
agent HRI systems separately.
We propose that multi-agent HRI systems can be char-
acterized and compared to one another based on three
core aspects: 1) Team structure, 2) Interaction style and
3) Computational characteristics. These aspects represent
the way a system is set up, and the way interactions take
place and methods by which agents are controlled in that
system.
Team Structure: The rst aspect relates to agents
that constitute the human-robot system. This includes
parameters such as the number and types of agents (both
humans and robots) present in the system, and homogene-
ity among dierent agents. Homogeneity is a measure of
similarities in roles, capabilities, embodiment and the au-
thorities granted to each of the agents (deciding who can
initiate an interaction, give commands, request assistance
etc.).
Interaction Style: The second aspect of multi-agent
HRI systems describes how the agents interact with each
other. This includes factors such as modality of communi-
cation happening among the agents and interaction models
being implemented. This tells us the way in which interac-
tions take place in the system (through a screen or speechetc.) and the agents involved (between two or among mul-
tiple agents).
Computational Characteristics: The third aspect
looks into the software part of HRI systems and describes
how the behavior of dierent agents is controlled or in-

uenced. This includes robot task planning algorithms,
model-based/model-free controllers and other ways of de-
ciding robots' actions in the system, and the ways in which
they are used to in
uence human behavior.
These three aspects provide us a way to establish dis-
tinctions and comparisons among multi-agent HRI sys-
tems. For instance, consider a system where a human op-
erator is supervising a team of remote mobile robots (e.g.,
(Swamy et al., 2020; Rosenfeld et al., 2017)). We can char-
acterize this system as one with a single human interacting
with multiple robots (team size), and one where all robots
are similar to one another (homogeneity). The human
might be able to give high-level commands to the robot
group or control them individually (interaction model),
using a screen-based interface (communication modality).
The robot control can be made adaptive to actions of
the operator or designed to optimize some utility function
(computational characteristics).
Under these core aspects, we can characterize HRI sys-
tems based on ve dierent attributes as shown in Fig. 2.
It should be noted that these core aspects are not inde-
pendent of each other and a system attribute under one
aspect can in
uence other system attributes. This inter-
action is discussed in Section 6. Also note that these core
aspects are not meant to be exhaustive or the only way of
distinguishing multi-agent HRI systems. The aspects are
chosen such that they allow for a taxonomy that is both
broad enough to be applicable to multi-agent HRI systems
from dierent areas of research, and detailed enough to
4