Figure 1: Left: HRI system for robot-assisted tower construction task where the robot allocates tower pieces between two human teammates
(Jung et al., 2020). Right: The corresponding interaction graph representation of the system. In the graph, each human and robot is denoted
by a node. Each arrow represents an interaction and its direction signies the direction of information 
ow. When information 
ow between
two nodes is present in both directions, a bi-directional arrow is used. In this system, human behavior is dependent on robot's actions while
the robot's actions are independent of its human teammates (thus the uni-directional arrows). Both humans can potentially discuss their
next actions with the other human teammate (denoted by the bi-directional arrow).
2020). In this article, we use the term multi-agent to re-
fer to any human-robot system containing more than one
human (multi-human) and/or more than one robot (multi-
robot). Robots assisting humans in an industrial task, a
group of humans and robots doing a social activity, and hu-
man operators controlling multiple robots are some exam-
ples of multi-agent HRI systems. Such systems are shown
in Figures 4(b), 6(b) and 6(c) respectively. This article
frequently refers to related work on dierent multi-agent
HRI systems and illustrates the work in the subsequent
sections. Figure 1, as an example of a multi-agent HRI
system, shows a system with two humans being assisted
by a robot arm in a tower construction task.
In the literature, we nd several studies and articles that
review research in the eld of HRI and Collaboration, e.g.
(Selvaggio et al., 2021; Bartneck et al., 2020; Sheridan,
2016; Thomaz et al., 2016). There are also studies present-
ing taxonomies and classication criteria for HRI systems
in general, and reviewing the work done in dierent so-
cial and industrial applications of HRI, e.g. (Wang et al.,
2017; Yanco and Drury, 2004). Lewis (2013) reviews the
literature on human supervision of multiple robots that
are situated remotely, and analyses such systems under
the notion of command complexity . Thomaz et al. (2016)
present a detailed review of the computational aspects of
HRI studies, covering topics such as algorithms, modelling
and computational framework design. Human-Swarm In-
teraction (HSI) is another subset of multi-agent systems
where a small number of humans (commonly one) interact
with a group of robots that coordinate among themselves
and often act as an unied entity. Kolling et al. (2015)
present a comprehensive survey of Human-Swarm interac-
tion systems and discuss core concepts for their design. In
the multi-agent HRI literature, Sebo et al. (2020) present
a review of studies involving robots' interactions with a
group or team of people, and explores characteristics ofsuch systems. The article discusses the role a robot plays
in a group of humans and the in
uence it has in such
groups. The main focus of their article is on human-robot
systems consisting of multiple humans irrespective of the
number of robots. In Oliveira et al. (2021), the authors
discuss methodological and transversal issues in research
on HRI in small groups from the perspective of social psy-
chology.
To extend the existing multi-agent HRI literature, in
this paper, we expand the scope of existing surveys and
reviews discussed above by including systems having mul-
tiple robots interacting with either a single human or a
group of humans, in and out of a social setting. We also
consider systems built around interactions among multiple
humans and multiple robots simultaneously. In addition,
we also include studies on the theoretical/computational
research, where actual robots or humans are not present,
but which still contain crucial aspects of an HRI system
(e.g., scheduling when to collaborate (Hari et al., 2020;
IJtsma et al., 2019), optimizing collaborative manipula-
tion (Liu et al., 2021) etc.). These systems are a valuable
part of multi-agent HRI literature and provide useful in-
sight into implementation of real systems.
Research in Human-Robot Interaction has a wide scope,
and includes various aspects of robot decision-making, hu-
man behavioral modelling and system analysis. This re-
search area includes any system where robot(s) and hu-
man(s) co-exist, in or out of a team setting, and working
towards shared or distinct objectives. This co-existence
can either be in the same physical environment, resulting
in co-located interactions, or it can emerge in a system
where remotely present agents are connected through a
virtual interface. In addition, work on developing capable
and ecient algorithms to improve interaction between
humans and robots also has an important place in HRI
research. There are three kinds of studies (or a combina-
2