Figure 5: Example of a one-to-one interaction model in a single-human { multi-robot system (Yedidsion et al., 2019). Multiple robots
connected via a network to guide a human user who interacts with the robots located in dierent locations.
illustrate dierences between human-to-robot and robot-
to-human interactions.
Note: These models, in their basic form (Fig. 1), do not
describe many aspects of the complete system (e.g., they
don't show embodiment, roles or heterogeneity among
agents and modes of communication etc.). However, it is
possible to add some of this information with slight mod-
ications. In Table 1, we show one such additional infor-
mation, i.e., whether an interaction is direct or indirect
using solid and dashed arrows respectively.
As observed from Table 1, interactions between dier-
ent pairs of agents in a system can be implemented using
dierent models (one-to-one, one-to-many etc.). It is also
possible that the interaction model varies with the type of
agents involved, i.e. dierent models for human-to-robot,
robot-to-human, robot-to-robot and human-to-human in-
teractions. For instance, a human may be able to give com-
mands to a single robot at a time (one-to-one) but may
observe behavior and receive messages/information from
all robots at once (one-to-many). (Swamy et al., 2020;
Khasawneh et al., 2019). These models are discussed be-
low under three categories denoting how many agents are
connected at each end of the communication channel.
4.1.1. One-to-one
The one-to-one interaction model is similar to the one
found in dyadic human-robot systems, where one robot is
interacting with one human teammate at any given time,
even though there may be other agents present in the en-
vironment. This form of interaction is commonly seen in
systems where one can aord the commands/instructions
for an agent to be independent from others (e.g., in sys-
tems where coordination among agents is not required).
A common application is seen in systems where a human
operator manages a team of multiple robots by giving each
of them separate commands. While a 
eet of autonomous
robots acts in separate environments, a human operator
can monitor their states remotely, and can intervene to
help a robot via teleoperation when the robot encounters
a challenging state (Swamy et al., 2020; Rosenfeld et al.,
2017).
Human commands to a robot swarm can be imple-mented both with a one-to-one and a one-to-many inter-
action model. One common strategy under the one-to-one
model is the leader-follower approach where human users
directly control the leader robots, and the control signals
for rest of the swarm are governed by the leaders' motions
(Setter et al., 2015). Human-swarm interaction can also
be designed to follow a one-to-many interaction model as
discussed later in Sec. 4.1.2.
One can easily identify the interaction model by check-
ing if an interactive action of an agent is targeted at one
or multiple agents. For instance, in the system shown in
Fig. 1, even though the robot interacts with multiple hu-
mans throughout the duration of its task, at any given
point the robot's actions are directed towards a single hu-
man (Jung et al., 2020). Figure 4(b) shows a system con-
sisting of two robots with a human co-worker. In this sys-
tem, the human interacts with each robot separately and
none of the interactions involve all three agents at once
(Karami et al., 2020). We also see examples of such HRI
systems in an oce setting, where even though multiple
humans or robots are present, each interaction is between
a single human and a single robot. An example can be
a system with a robot going around in an oce asking
help from human users at dierent times (Rosenthal et al.,
2012). In Fig. 5, we see a person being guided from one
robot to another by an indoor guidance system, where the
human interacts with only a single robot at a time (Yedid-
sion et al., 2019).
In settings where agents are located in the same environ-
ment, the system also has indirect interactions, occurring
when an agent observes other agents and interactions are
happening between those agents. These indirect interac-
tions are still following a one-to-one model as information

ow from each agent is directed towards the observer.
4.1.2. One-to-many
The one-to-many interaction model can be seen in situa-
tions where one robot is directly interacting with multiple
humans at once (Nanavati et al., 2020; Correia et al., 2018;
Alves-Oliveira et al., 2019), and where one human is si-
multaneously interacting with multiple robots (Lim et al.,
2018; Guo et al., 2009; Arkin and Ali, 1994; Jones and
10