aect human behavior in a group setting (Rios-Martinez
et al., 2015; Yamaoka et al., 2009).
When the agents are located in the same environment,
it is also likely that interaction between any two agents
has an eect on behavior and future interactions of other
agents. This is an example of indirect/implicit communi-
cation between agents. Thus, Human-Human Interactions
can be aected by Human-Robot Interactions (Joshi and
Sabanovi c, 2019; Short et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2013). Like-
wise, Robot-Robot Interactions can also impact future hu-
man interactions with the robots (Yang and Kwon, 2012;
Tan et al., 2019), or can aect a human's psychological
state (Erel et al., 2021a). Moreover, the embodiment or
mere presence of a robot may in
uence human behavior
and their perception of the robots (Druckman et al., 2021;
Shiomi et al., 2020).
Communication modalities can also vary depending on
the agents involved and the direction of communication.
For instance, Berg et al. (2019) present an interaction sys-
tem where the human to robot communication channel is
realized through gestures and eye tracking while the in-
formation from the robot to the human is communicated
using a projection. In the system presented by Rosenthal
et al. (2012), the robot communicates its queries using
speech and receives human input using a visual interface
on a laptop. Also, it is common to see dierent commu-
nication modalities between Human-Robot and Human-
Human Interactions (Kruij et al., 2014).
4.3. Key Observations
In the surveyed literature, we looked into dierent forms
of interaction styles present in multi-agent human-robot
systems. In terms of interaction models, a couple of trends
are noticed. Even with multiple agents present in the sys-
tem, the one-to-one interaction model is the most preva-
lent, signifying that agents mostly interact with only one
other agent at a given time. The one-to-many interaction
model has also gained popularity and has been useful to
enable more ecient interactions in multi-agent systems.
Such systems are mostly seen in the area of social robotics
and co-located settings. In order to realize more natu-
ral and smooth interactions among humans and robots, a
many-to-many model is desirable. We are beginning to see
such implementations and hopefully this will mature into
a strong interaction model in human-robot systems.
In regards to communication modalities, the systems
where humans are interacting with multiple robots, using
a screen-based interaction interface is the most common
(and possibly the most practical) one. With the advent of
Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) tech-
nologies, the future multi-agent Human-Robot Interac-
tion systems may shift from conventional two-dimensional
screen-based interfaces to more immersive ones. It is still
unclear whether using VR and AR will improve system us-
ability in diverse settings and more research is required to
investigate the applicability of these technologies in multi-
agent HRI systems for dierent applications. In co-locatedand social settings, multi-modal communication is becom-
ing more popular and can enable more natural and safer
interactions between humans and robots, without the need
of enforcing physical separation.
5. Computational Characteristics: Robot Control
So far in this article, we have discussed the perceptible
aspects of an HRI system, which describe `who is present
in the system and who is interacting with whom'. Now, we
look into computational aspects of the system, specically
how system designers can choose to in
uence/control the
behavior of dierent agents in the system. In an HRI sys-
tem, behavior and actions of robots are controlled directly,
either governed by an optimization-based action-policy or
via predened/rule-based methods, or a combination of
both. On the other hand, human behavior can only be in-

uenced indirectly using robots|via robots' actions, their
interactions with the humans, other robots or the environ-
ment, or by explicit communication. Some systems make
use of human behavioral models to decide robots' actions
while others take a model-free approach.
In this article, our main focus is on multi-agent sys-
tems instead of the particulars of a study. Therefore, even
though both human behavior and robot control are rele-
vant attributes under the aspect of computational charac-
teristics, in this section we primarily discuss robot control,
and only include a discussion of human behavior where re-
quired. Specically, we look into the two principal types of
robot control implemented in multi-agent HRI systems: 1)
Optimization-based control, and 2) Pre-dened and Rule-
based control. We also discuss the dierences that the
presence of multiple agents brings to the system.
5.1. Optimization-based control
Optimization-based control refers to a framework
of computing robot actions to optimize one or more
performance-dening parameters established for the sys-
tem. The performance parameters often represent factors
like time of task completion (Hari et al., 2020), cost in-
curred (resources spent) (Dahiya et al., 2022) and reward
earned (value produced) (Swamy et al., 2020). In the
multi-agent HRI literature, to pose the mathematical opti-
mization problem, we nd examples of systems being mod-
eled in the form of time-series (Wang et al., 2014), outcome
probabilities (Dahiya et al., 2022; Sellner et al., 2006) or
Dynamic Bayesian Network (Fooladi Mahani et al., 2020).
Machine-learning and other data-driven methods are also
some of the tools used in optimization-based control, e.g.,
Nam et al. (2019); Swamy et al. (2020); Li et al. (2021).
Such system models are often motivated by literature from
dierent areas of behavioral study such as psychology, eco-
nomics and social sciences. For example, Shannon et al.
(2016) present the Pew model from psychology, Swamy
et al. (2020) make use of the Luce Choice model from eco-
nomics, and Bera et al. (2018a) use entitativity related
psychology research in their system.
14