to even determine if such an ideal conguration exists. For
instance, even though screen-based interfaces are prevalent
in systems with multiple robots so far, researchers have
started exploring VR and AR-based interfaces as poten-
tially more immersive and better options. As the litera-
ture in this eld grows, in future one might be able to tell
whether these existing congurations can be considered as
guidelines for designing multi-agent HRI systems, or as
opportunities to explore new congurations.
7. Challenges and Direction for Future Work
In this section, we discuss the main challenges faced in
the research of multi-agent HRI systems. We also note
some of the gaps in the existing literature and identify
avenues for future research which are important to full
the vision of a society where robots operate safely and
seamlessly among humans. To do this, we have divided
this section into two parts: discussing agent-related factors
and task-related factors.
7.1. Agent-related Factors
Throughout this survey, we saw that human behavior in
an HRI system is aected by the robots' actions, the in-
teractions they have with other agents and the mere pres-
ence of other agents in the environment. Understanding
how human behavior changes/adapts as a function of all
these parameters can facilitate achieving the system's goal,
whether it is to maximize a performance metric or to elicit
a particular interaction outcome. Having multiple agents
in the system not only expands the possibilities of such
behavioral in
uence but also brings some additional chal-
lenges when compared to the dyadic systems. Below, we
discusses the challenges and prospects of research focused
on agent-specic factors: both robot-related factors like
physical appearance, level of autonomy and embodiment,
and human-related factors like trust, situational awareness
and workload:
1.Human behavior in groups : Our understanding
of how humans behave in a group of multiple robots and
humans is still limited, and thus the systems that make use
of this understanding are also not commonly seen in the
HRI literature. Therefore, HRI research will benet from
studies that investigate how human behavior changes due
to the addition of other agents in the environment. Simi-
larly, it is also interesting to explore if the same robot ac-
tions can result in dierent outcomes based on the number
of agents in the system. More importantly, it is imperative
that we understand how to accurately model human-robot
interactions in a group/team setting. We expect to see
signicant advances in such HRI systems resulting from
multidisciplinary research between the robotics research
community and those who study human interactions: e.g.
sociologists, psychologists and cognitive scientists. In a re-
cent work, Abrams and Rosenthal-von der P utten (2020)
present a framework to understand group dynamics in HRIbased on ingroup identication, cohesion and entitativity
concepts from social sciences. However, we are yet to see
implementation of such group-based behavioral concepts
in fully functioning multi-agent HRI systems.
2.Workload and Situational Awareness : In the
literature, we nd ample research on how robot control
can aect parameters like perceived human workload and
situational awareness. However, most of this research (in
multi-agent HRI) is done in teams consisting of a single hu-
man working with multiple robots (Wong and Seet, 2017).
There is a clear lack of research on how these human-
related parameters are aected when working in a mixed
team of multiple humans and robots. Gombolay et al.
(2015) studied the eects of shared decision-making au-
thority in mixed human-robot teams (a human subject
working with a robot and another human). More research
is required to investigate how the presence of other hu-
mans in dierent roles and with dierent authorities aect
each human user and how these eects change with an
increasing number of agents in the system.
3.Level of Autonomy : It is well studied how the
level of robot autonomy in the system can aect factors
like system performance, human trust and workload (Beer
et al., 2014). When multiple robots are present, an HRI
system may include robots with varied levels of autonomy,
and it might not be possible to assign a single autonomy
level to the whole system. In addition, dierent agents can
exhibit dierent roles, performance and identities. The
implication is that the relationship between a robot pa-
rameter and its in
uence on the HRI becomes much more
complicated to study, especially for the human-related and
interaction-related variables (see Beer et al. (2014)). For
example, human trust has been investigated in a multi-
agent setting in several studies, e.g. (Williams et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2018). However, there is still work to be done
in understanding how trust is aected when robots dier
in levels of autonomy, and exhibit varied performance and
failure rates. Notably, we do nd some recent works to-
wards this direction (Reig et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2019)
and expect to see more research done on this topic.
4.Human Predictability : Having multiple humans
brings a signicant increase in the complexity of robot con-
trol and challenges faced. A higher number of humans in
the system often results in a decrease in system observabil-
ity and predictability of its next states. Since all human
users are dierent from one another, the robots in the sys-
tem may need to adapt their actions according to each hu-
man and remember those dierences and individual inter-
action styles. Developing multi-agent systems where the
robot decision-making is aware of individual human team-
mates in relation to the whole group, can help make the
human behavior more controllable and predictable (Mar-
tins et al., 2017).
5.Partner Selection : In a proximate/co-located set-
ting, it may also be crucial for the robots to dynamically
17