meaningfully characterize and compare those systems. In
the following sections, we consider the above three aspects
and the associated attributes in more detail, and present
the categorizations that arise under these attributes. Un-
der each category, we include examples from recent litera-
ture to understand its application, and analyze strengths
and limitations of dierent types of systems.
3. Team Structure
The most perceptible feature of a multi-agent HRI sys-
tem is the size and composition of the human-robot team.
Depending on the application, a human-robot system can
take advantage of more than one human and/or more than
one robot in the team. The task at hand may also require
to utilize a team of agents with dierent capabilities and
roles. Both number and type of robots in a group can
have signicant eects on human's perceptions and emo-
tions towards the robots (Fraune et al., 2015). Since hu-
mans and robots usually have dierent ways of acting in a
collaborative setting and interacting with their partners,
the team structure decides various other aspects of the sys-
tem including the way in which dierent agents interact,
how they can share information and how their actions are
planned (Fincannon et al., 2013, 2011). Based on team
structure, multi-agent systems can dier from dyadic sys-
tems in two (quite apparent) ways:
1. There can be several possibilities of having dierent
numbers of agents (both humans and robots) in the
team,
2. There exists a notion of homogeneity/heterogeneity
among the agents.
Therefore, we discuss in the following two factors under
team structure: Team size, and Team composition.
3.1. Team Size
Team size in an HRI system refers to the number of
humans and robots present in the system. Including single-
human { single-robot systems, the HRI systems can be
grouped into the following categories based on their team
size:
3.1.1. Single-human { single-robot
These are the conventional systems containing a single
human interacting with a single robot and are the most
common type of systems studied in HRI. This article,
however, focuses mainly on systems with a higher num-
ber of agents and we refer the readers to other articles
available in the literature for a review of single-human {
single-robot systems, and HRI in general (Bartneck et al.,
2020; Breazeal et al., 2016; Goodrich and Schultz, 2008;
Bauer et al., 2008).3.1.2. Single-human { multi-robot
These systems comprise teams with a single human in-
teracting or collaborating with multiple robots through
the task. Such systems have found their utility in appli-
cations where the task is primarily executed by a number
of (semi)autonomous robots requiring intermittent inter-
ventions/assistance from a human operator or supervisor,
either in event of a fault (Swamy et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2014) or to further increase performance of the multi-robot
team in areas like large-scale assembly (Sellner et al., 2006)
and search-and-rescue (Khasawneh et al., 2019; Wang and
Lewis, 2008). These systems are also employed in Human-
Swarm Interaction (Kolling et al., 2015) where multiple
robots coordinate among themselves while receiving inputs
from the human teammate. Many studies have also been
conducted to increase our understanding of such systems,
by providing measures for predicting the team's perfor-
mance (Lewis, 2013; Sycara and Lewis, 2012; Zheng et al.,
2011; Crandall et al., 2003).
A dierent structure of single-human { multi-robot sys-
tems is one where the human user is not in the role of
operator or supervisor. For instance, a team of robots can
be used to provide navigation instructions to the human
user (Yedidsion et al., 2019), cooperatively navigate with
them in potentially dangerous situations (Penders et al.,
2011; Saez-Pons et al., 2011), or eciently guide them in
an indoor environment (Tan et al., 2019; Khandelwal et al.,
2015). Another application of this team size is seen in
studies like Emotional Storytelling in the Classroom (Leite
et al., 2015), where multiple robots team up to execute a
storytelling task in front of a student. Several systems
have employed a team of robot actors to have more ef-
fective storytelling or drama (Swaminathan et al., 2021;
Murphy et al., 2011).
3.1.3. Multi-human { single-robot
Collaborative systems with multiple human teammates
interacting with a single robot have traditionally been used
in applications like search and exploration and operat-
ing unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) where several hu-
mans collaborate among themselves to manage a robot
(Bruemmer et al., 2005; Murphy, 2004). In such settings,
humans take dierent roles (e.g., pilots, sensor operators
etc.) and manage separate components of the robot's op-
eration (Murphy et al., 2008; Drury et al., 2006). These
applications have been important in scenarios when a sin-
gle human is unable to manage the robot, or when robot
failure can result in critical degradation of human's abil-
ity to supervise multiple robots (McCarley and Wickens,
2005). There are also several systems in which a robot is
deployed in an environment with multiple humans it can
interact with, either to assist them (Claure et al., 2020;
Carlson et al., 2015) or to get assistance itself (Rosen-
thal et al., 2012). Another interesting application of such
team size is seen in systems where a robot is used as a re-
source distribution agent within a team of multiple humans
(Jung et al., 2020; Claure et al., 2020), or as a moderator
5