Snyder, 2001). Note that while some works distinguish be-
tween many-to-one and one-to-many models based on the
direction of control commands (e.g., (Lim et al., 2018)), in
this article all such systems are discussed together under
a one-to-many model.
A simple way of implementing this interaction model is
to use verbal communication or gestures to issue group
commands to multiple agents at once, e.g., Kim et al.
(2020). Consequently, interactions under this model are
common in social settings where it naturally nds its util-
ity as the robots and humans are co-present in the same
environment. Studies such as (Nanavati et al., 2020; Cor-
reia et al., 2018) present systems where robots' actions
and behavioral cues are directed towards the whole group
of human teammates. Another similar application of this
model is seen in classroom settings where a robot acts as
a teacher/tutor for a group of students to promote group-
based learning (Leite et al., 2015; Alves-Oliveira et al.,
2019; Belpaeme et al., 2018). A robot interacting with hu-
mans in public space also naturally calls for a one-to-many
model (Fortunati et al., 2018).
In industrial or military-oriented applications, where hu-
mans and robots might be located in separate environ-
ments, interactions with one-to-many model are usually
implemented using a group command node (see interac-
tion graphs in Table 1; shown as node (G)). This group
command node is an interpreter { an interface or an al-
gorithm { that converts communication from one or more
agents to information required for each individual agent
before relaying that information to its recipient(s). For ex-
ample, when controlling multiple ground or aerial robots,
a human operator can simply give group commands to
the 
eet instead of telling each robot what to do, while
the interpreter converts this group command to required
actions for each robot (Lim et al., 2018; Ayanian et al.,
2014). As mentioned earlier, implementation of human
interactions with a swarm can also make use of one-to-
many model. In order to make human control ecient, a
group command node is usually implemented to convert
human intentions/commands into control signals for all
robots (Kolling et al., 2015; Podevijn et al., 2013).
4.1.3. Many-to-many
In multi-human { multi-robot systems, it is also possi-
ble to have multiple one-to-many interactions taking place
among dierent agents, resulting in a many-to-many inter-
action model. This is the most unconstrained interaction
model that can be implemented in a human-robot system.
Although it is not very common to nd such interaction
models in the literature, studies by Patel et al. (2021);
Zhang and Vaughan (2016); Tews et al. (2003) have pre-
sented interaction interfaces to facilitate many-to-many in-
teractions.
A common way of enabling interactions among the
agents in such systems is through a proxy architecture
aimed at facilitating collaboration of humans and robots
with varying levels of autonomy (Mostafa et al., 2019;Ramchurn et al., 2015; Freedy et al., 2008). Under this
setting, each agent interacts with a proxy, which can be
part of a centralized proxy architecture or connected to a
network of proxies. Such proxies are usually responsible
for receiving inputs from dierent agents, interpreting the
messages/commands and then relaying the relevant infor-
mation to other agents. Augmented Reality (AR) based
interfaces have also been used for making such interactions
more user-friendly by providing easier methods of giving
commands. For example, the system shown in Fig. 6(c)
uses an AR interface on separate tablets to enable multi-
ple users interact with multiple robots (Patel and Pinciroli,
2020). Without such proxies, the human user in the sys-
tem must resolve any con
icts (in commands/decisions)
by themselves and work out a common strategy (Hwang
and Wu, 2014).
Looking at the interaction graphs in Table 1, many-
to-many interactions can be represented as a group node
(G) having multiple incoming and multiple outgoing edges.
For example, in Table 1(e), a central computational entity
{ shown as group node (G) { collects data from multiple
robots and relays allocation information to multiple hu-
man operators. In Table 1(f), the interface enables mul-
tiple users to input control commands and then decides
actions for individual robots. A many-to-many model pro-
vides a natural and ecient interaction setup in a multi-
agent system as there are minimal constraints on when
agents are allowed to communicate with each other, and
information from multiple agents can be relayed to respec-
tive recipients simultaneously.
4.2. Communication Modalities and Interfaces
Communication modalities refer to the modes through
which dierent agents interact in the system (e.g., speech,
haptics, screen etc.). Similar to the conventional dyadic
HRI systems, a multi-agent system can have agents com-
municate through verbal or non-verbal modes, or a com-
bination of multiple modes at once. The chosen modes
of communication depend on the environment, applica-
tion of the system, proximity of dierent agents and their
interaction capabilities. Each modality has its own advan-
tages, implementation requirements and limitations. As
we note below, proximity has a major in
uence on which
communication modalities are feasible in a system to en-
able ecient communication among humans and robots.
Therefore, to discuss the dierent types of communication
modalities used in multi-agent systems, we nd it useful to
group the communication modalities based on proximity
of the agents.
4.2.1. Remote communication
For the systems designed to operate in environments
that can be potentially dangerous or inaccessible to hu-
mans, a screen-based interface is ubiquitous for enabling
remote communication among humans and robots. Hu-
man control of a 
eet of UAVs (Nam et al., 2017; Drury
12