choose their interaction partner(s), especially for a large
team size. In the literature we nd limited studies on
partner selection in human-robot teams, investigating how
humans choose their robotic partners (Correia et al., 2019)
and how robots can choose their human partners (Hasnain
et al., 2012). In addition to partner selection, it may also
be important to assess and improve the strength of inter-
action between the interacting partners (Lemaignan et al.,
2016). Advancing this research will help making robots'
interactions with human teammates more seamless and
natural, particularly in social settings.
6.Con
ict Resolution : With increases in the amount
of computational research being conducted in the develop-
ment of control policies in a multi-agent setting, we expect
to see an increase in real-world implementations of multi-
robot { multi-human systems in the near future. However,
this requires us to overcome challenges of establishing vi-
able interaction models among all the agents and resolving
any con
icts in roles and authority that may arise (Patel
and Pinciroli, 2020). Moreover, in systems where a high
degree of coordination is required among robots, human
performance suers drastically with an increasing number
of robots that are not coordinating autonomously (Lewis,
2013).
7.2. Task-related Factors
In this part, we discuss the challenges faced on the im-
plementation front of multi-agent HRI research. These
challenges can be specic to particular tasks or to the
choice of implementation of a particular system:
1.Safety : In tasks where humans and robots share
the environment, safety of human users becomes a criti-
cal requirement. Most of the existing work on safety of
robot navigation in a shared environment propose solu-
tion frameworks built around avoiding the humans, e.g.,
Sathyamoorthy et al. (2020); Aroor et al. (2018). There
is a need to expand the work on safe robot operation to
include systems where humans and robots are working col-
laboratively on a task, e.g., handling the same objects,
sharing workspaces (and not just the environment)| like
in physical-HRI. This requirement forces the robots to op-
erate safely while working with the humans instead of try-
ing to avoid them.
2.Scalability : In tasks where agents' decisions have to
be computed online or where the control policy depends
on a large number of parameters, one important consider-
ation is the scalability, i.e., how well the robot control and
decision-making technique scale with an increasing num-
ber of humans and robots in the system. In the literature,
we nd a number of studies that address the issue of scala-
bility by proposing ecient algorithms based on heuristics
or approximations (e.g., (Dahiya et al., 2022; Hari et al.,
2020)). However, the existing research on this topic is
mostly done under a theoretical setup, and we do not seeimplementations of these proposed solutions in real sys-
tems with actual robots and humans (though there are
a limited number of studies that conduct testing on real
systems, e.g., (Rosenfeld et al., 2017)). This is important
because with real-world implementations of HRI systems,
one also needs to consider a multitude of practical factors,
and many assumptions initially made might no longer be
valid and/or applicable.
3.Transparency : In HRI, transparency is another
crucial area of research that includes the topics of mo-
tion legibility, intention recognition and decision explain-
ability, along with several other technical, ethical and le-
gal aspects (Felzmann et al., 2019). Transparency aims to
provide humans with a better understanding of robots' de-
cisions and foster human trust in the system. An increase
in transparency is shown to improve task performance
in multi-agent (especially multi-robot) systems (Mercado
et al., 2016). However, this area is still under-explored and
research has mostly been tested in situations where the
teams consist of either a single robot or only homogeneous
robots (see Table 2 in (Felzmann et al., 2019)). Although
transparency has been studied in dyadic systems, it is not
well known how those results translate to multi-agent sys-
tems. Exceptions are recent related work on legibility of
multi-robot teams (Kim and Follmer, 2021; Capelli et al.,
2019) and the use of a situational awareness-based trans-
parency framework to improve team eectiveness (Chen
et al., 2018). We believe that more research in this area
will benet mixed teams of multiple humans and robots,
particularly in direct interaction scenarios.
8. Conclusion
In this article, we surveyed Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI) literature for systems comprising multiple agents,
be it humans or robots. Future robots are envisioned to
operate in the same environment as humans, and interact
and collaborate as equal partners. To full this vision, it
is crucial to promote research in multi-agent HRI systems.
Such multi-agent systems have started to gain popularity
among researchers, and are enabling more realistic and
practical scenarios in which humans and robots interact.
These systems do come with their own challenges, on top of
the challenges that dyadic human-robot systems have, and
should be considered in the development of future human-
robot systems.
Through this survey, we provide the readers with a way
to compare the diverse research works that exist in the
eld of multi-agent Human-Robot Interaction. This sur-
vey has helped us recognize key trends in the existing re-
search, and discuss the challenges that must be overcome.
Understanding the dynamics of Human-Robot Interaction
in a multi-agent setting, and development of modelling
and control strategies for such systems are crucial steps
towards fullling the vision of the society where humans
and robots exist together and interact seamlessly with each
18