to-many systems (single-human { multi-robot and multi-
human { single-robot), while systems with both multiple
humans and multiple robots are emerging (mainly in the
planning and task scheduling literature). As collaborative
robots are envisioned to work together with and among
humans, it is essential to further the research that facilitate
robots' interactions in systems with a larger number of
humans.
Under all types of team sizes, we nd systems where hu-
mans play dierent roles in reference to the robots; from
supervisors of multiple robots to peers in a social group
to information seekers in a public setting. Robots also
show such variety of roles themselves. In the past, mul-
tiple humans were required to control a single unmanned
vehicle, especially in safety-critical settings (e.g., military
use). However, with advancements in robot autonomy,
such systems are fading away from the literature and more
systems have emerged where a single human is able to
supervise a large number of robots. Human supervision
of multiple robots has its own challenges, such as limited
human cognitive capabilities, increased workload and de-
creased situational awareness. In later sections, we discuss
several studies working towards addressing these issues, in-
cluding designing of decision support systems, improving
robots' motion legibility and predictability, and building
intuitive interaction interfaces. We expect more such stud-
ies to emerge as HRI systems with large number of agents
are becoming increasingly popular. Even though we nd
many examples of research on systems with heterogeneous
robots, implementation of such systems in a social setting
or in human-assisting applications is still limited.
4. Interaction Style
In the context of human-robot systems, interaction style
is a broad term that can be used to refer to dierent as-
pects of interaction such as the modes of communication
among agents (Feine et al., 2019), interaction models (For-
tunati et al., 2018) and the interaction interface (Gromov
et al., 2016; Rule and Forlizzi, 2012). Interaction style
also includes the method of communication (verbal/non-
verbal) (Mavridis, 2015; Stiefelhagen et al., 2004), expres-
sion of aect (Schermerhorn and Scheutz, 2011) and spa-
tial relationship (Chen et al., 2007; H uttenrauch et al.,
2006).
Interactions in multi-agent human-robot systems dier
from those in dyadic systems in three ways:
1) First, with multiple agents present, it is possible to have
interactions within a group of agents, viz. Human-Human
Interactions, e.g., Kruij et al. (2014) and Robot-Robot
Interactions, e.g., Williams et al. (2015).
2) Second, in addition to the one-to-one interactions seen
between humans and robots in dyadic HRI systems, one-
to-many interactions are also realizable in multi-agent HRI
systems, e.g., Fortunati et al. (2018).
3) Third, in multi-agent systems, there are additional
types of interactions possible among the agents. Patelet al. (2021) discussed the dierences between `direct' and
`indirect' interactions between two humans in a system in
which they can communicate either via verbal communi-
cation or through the interface. Che et al. (2020) investi-
gated the role of `explicit' and `implicit' communication in
social navigation. Abrams and Rosenthal-von der P utten
(2020) used the terms `the group' and `the observer' to dis-
tinguish the two perspectives of measuring group cohesion
in a multi-agent HRI setting.
Such distinctions of interaction types are useful to bet-
ter understand HRI systems and can be applied to improve
the interaction outcome. In the context of multi-agent HRI
systems, we nd it useful to distinguish `direct' and `indi-
rect' interactions. Direct interaction between a sender and
recipient occurs when the sender actively (i.e., intention-
ally and explicitly) communicates to the recipient using
any mode, verbal or non-verbal. A third party may also re-
ceive information from this direct communication, and we
refer to this \eavesdropping" as indirect interaction. Tak-
ing the example of a study presented in Tan et al. (2019), a
robot trying to transfer task information to another robot
(e.g., through speech) is an example of direct interaction,
whereas a human observing the robots interacting with
each other is an example of indirect interaction.
Making this distinction can help us understand if and
how much the agents in the system are actively trying to
communicate with each other, or if they are primarily just
co-existing in the same environment while observing each
other. Modelling the indirect interactions is necessary to
understand how direct interactions between any two agents
can aect the behavior of others, e.g., Rinski et al. (2021);
Tan et al. (2019); Short and Mataric (2017).
Examples of systems with dierent types of interactions
are given in Table 1. In the remainder of this section,
we discuss the above-mentioned dierences under two key
aspects of interaction style: 1) Interaction model present,
and 2) Communication modalities used in the system.
4.1. Interaction Models
The presence of multiple agents doesn't necessarily
mean that each interaction in the system also involves
multiple agents. Interactions in a multi-agent HRI sys-
tem can be implemented using dierent-sized communica-
tion channels (i.e., number of agents connected via a single
interaction). In a multi-agent system, an agent has the ca-
pability of interacting with one or multiple agents at the
same time, resulting in one-to-one or one-to-many interac-
tion models (Fortunati et al., 2018). Examples of several
multi-agent HRI systems with dierent interaction models
are shown in Table 1 using the interaction graph struc-
ture dened in Section 2. These interaction models are
an extension of the interaction types presented in Yanco
and Drury (2004). The presented models are able to in-
clude a variety of interaction models that are possible in
multi-agent HRI systems, especially in social interactions.
In addition, these models let us specify the direction of
information 
ow between agents in the system and can
8