(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 7: Examples of interface design for control of multiple robots: a) Interface of a search-and-rescue task with multiple robots (Rosenfeld
et al., 2017). Such screen-based interface designs are common in applications where a human user controls multiple remote robots. b) A
mixed-reality based multi-robot control framework. The gure shows relation of coordinate frames of main entities of the system, including
one human and three robots (Ostanin et al., 2021). c) Teleoperation of multiple mobile robots using a joystick and a haptic device (Hong
et al., 2017).
et al., 2006), supervision during search and rescue tasks
(Khasawneh et al., 2019; Scholtz et al., 2004; Murphy,
2004) and teleoperation of underwater robots (Wang et al.,
2014) are some of the applications that make use of remote
communication techniques.
Remotely interacting with robots is shown to result in
higher cognitive workload in human users (Gittens, 2021)
that increases further with an increasing number of robots
(Fincannon et al., 2013; Adams, 2009). Furthermore,
communicating plans to team supervisors and maintain-
ing their situational awareness are important challenges
faced while collaborating with remote robots (Hastie et al.,
2019). Therefore, the development of interaction interfaces
that enable ecient and reliable human interaction with
multiple remote robots is an important area of research in
remote HRI (Rold an et al., 2017; Rule and Forlizzi, 2012;
Driewer et al., 2007). In systems with a disproportion-
ately high number of robots compared to human opera-
tors/supervisors, it becomes dicult for the human users
to interact with all robots eciently due to challenges re-
lated to perception, workload and situational awareness
(Fincannon et al., 2013). Therefore, intelligent interface
designs are required that can mitigate these challenges
(Hussein et al., 2018). So far, the literature mostly con-
sists of screen-based interface designs as they are most
convenient to implement in such systems as seen in many
of the studies discussed in 3.1.2. Conventionally, many
of the multi-robot interfaces have several common design
features such as camera feeds of multiple robots in small
cards along the screen edge, an enlarged view of one se-
lected robot and a map, or an overview, of all robots in
the environment (Rosenfeld et al., 2017; Chien et al., 2018)
as shown in Fig. 7(a). Recently, immersive interfaces us-
ing Virtual Reality (VR) or Augmented Reality (AR) have
gained popularity in multi-robot systems (Ostanin et al.,
2021; Rold an et al., 2017), and have been shown to im-
prove operator's situational awareness and decreases work-
load (Frank et al., 2017). Some systems also augment the
interaction interface with multiple communication modes
(e.g., haptics) to improve interaction outcome (Hong et al.,2017) (Fig. 7(c)).
4.2.2. Proximate communication
In systems where humans and robots are located in the
same environment, many more options are available to sys-
tem designers in terms of choosing modes of communica-
tions. These include communication via auditory channels
(speech and non-speech audio), visual channels (gestures,
facial expressions, body postures and gaze), and physical
channels (touch and force). The human guidance system
presented by Yedidsion et al. (2019) (shown in Fig. 5) uses
simple verbal instructions to communicate with the hu-
man. Figure 6 shows a human user controlling a robot
swarm using gestures (Kim et al., 2020).
It is also possible to use multiple modes at once,
resulting in a multi-modal communication architecture.
Pourmehr et al. (2014) present a system that uses a com-
bination of haptic and verbal inputs from a human user to
control multiple UAVs. In the system presented by Gro-
mov et al. (2016), a human user can communicate with
robots using speech and gestures, while robots provide vi-
sual and verbal feedback to the user.
Proximate communications are more commonly seen
(and naturally present) in social robotics as it facilitates
more personal interactions required in a social setup. This
is expected as the meaning conveyed through an inter-
action signicantly depends on social cues (verbal and
non-verbal), and not solely on the concrete message be-
ing communicated (Feine et al., 2019). When humans
and robots are co-located in the same environment, the
role of non-verbal communications becomes important to
consider. For example, the robot shown in Fig. 4(c) is
used to enhance Human-Human Interaction using only
gestures, without interfering with the interaction (Erel
et al., 2021b). There have been several other studies that
investigate dierent cues (expressions and movements) as
a mode of communicating a robot's intent, emotions and
information more clearly in a group (Correia et al., 2018;
Faria et al., 2017). Moreover, the spatial placement of
agents, in relation to each other and the environment, also
13