Optimization-based control is seen in studies where the
system behaviour can be modelled reliably using existing
theories, or where researchers are trying to validate a new
approach for the same. These systems also require that
there exist quantiable and measurable parameters that
can be used as optimizing metrics (such as task complet-
ing time, error rate, etc.). When implementing such robot
control in multi-agent systems, there are a few consider-
ations to handle. When multiple agents are present in
the system, the required information access and the possi-
bility of interactions may increase exponentially with the
number of agents. This problem has motivated a whole
segment of research on the development of computation-
ally ecient decision-making and control techniques for
multi-agent HRI systems. Among other applications, this
research is seen in systems enabling a robot in
uence a
team of multiple humans (Li et al., 2021), enabling mul-
tiple robots safely navigate among other robots and hu-
mans (Bajcsy et al., 2019), predicting human behavior
while supervising multiple heterogeneous unmanned vehi-
cles (Boussemart and Cummings, 2011), and nding task
allocation and sequencing for multiple robots travelling to
collaborate with humans (Hari et al., 2020). When deal-
ing with a large number of robots, human users' ability
to maintain awareness of the system's state might be in-
sucient (Olsen Jr and Wood, 2004; Chien et al., 2013)
and thus the users may benet from a decision support
system (DSS). Applications of such DSSs are seen in sys-
tems enabling a human operator to assist multiple remote
robots (Swamy et al., 2020), and in allocating operators to
multiple navigating robots (Dahiya et al., 2022; Rosenfeld
et al., 2017; Malvankar-Mehta and Mehta, 2015). There
are also several studies on human supervision of 
eets or
swarms of remote robots. Lewis (2013) presents a review
of systems enabling such supervision under the construct
of command complexity, while Kolling et al. (2015) review
research on human control of robot swarms.
5.2. Predened and rule-based control
The predened and rule-based control methods pro-
vide a convenient way of implementing robot control in
an HRI system without the use of computational mod-
els or data. This includes techniques like Wizard of Oz,
expert knowledge-based if...then rules or pre-specied se-
quences of actions. These methods help simplifying the
robot's decision-making and allow the researchers to fo-
cus on other aspects of Human-Robot Interaction that the
system is designed to investigate, e.g., the outcome of a
controlled interaction (Tan et al., 2019; Yang and Kwon,
2012).
In some systems, direct use of an optimization-based
control is not possible (e.g., due to lack of a numerical
model), and a subjective interpretation of system events is
required based on expert knowledge. Such systems often
have robot action policies implemented as if...then rules
instead of numerically computed conditions. For exam-
ple, Correia et al. (2018) present an algorithm to generaterobot emotions given system events, based on knowledge
from psychology. Rule-based control is more commonly
seen in studies that deal with subjective metrics of out-
come (e.g., human perception of robots, workload, etc.). It
is to be noted that the optimization-based and rule-based
control methods are not mutually exclusive. It is possible
to implement a combination of an optimizing policy with
an expert knowledge-based model. For example, in the
system shown in Fig. 6(b), the robot's behavior is decided
by a hybrid controller that combines manually-encoded
behavioral rules and a machine learning-based mapping
function Alves-Oliveira et al. (2019).
While the use of a rule-based control can enable a sys-
tem to decide the robot's behavior based on some feedback
from the environment, it is also possible to pre-specify
robot behavior without any decision-making component.
This robot control method facilitates studies to manipu-
late dierent test conditions where feedback from the en-
vironment is not required. Such implementation is com-
monly seen in studies which investigate the eects of spe-
cic robot's behaviors on human users, e.g., users' percep-
tion of robots (Fraune et al., 2017), knowledge acquisition
(Fern andez-Llamas et al., 2020), group emotions (Bera
et al., 2018b) and perceived legibility (Faria et al., 2021).
Referring back to the interaction graphs dened in Sec-
tion 2, this type of robot control results in unidirectional
edges from robots to humans.
Under predened and rule-based control methods, the
Wizard of Oz (WoZ) is a common technique of implement-
ing human-assisted robot control in multi-agent (mainly
multi-human) systems. In this technique, a hidden human
`Wizard' (teleoperator) controls some or all of the robots'
actions, speech, gestures and behavior, unknown to other
human users in the system (Riek, 2012). Depending on the
level of robot autonomy, the Wizard can be used to replace
certain parts of the robots' perception or cognitive capa-
bilities (e.g., Johansson et al. (2013); Shiomi et al. (2009)),
thus overcoming the robots' limitations. It is also possi-
ble to have a mixed-initiative approach where either the
robots or the human user can take control of the robots'
actions (e.g., Jiang and Arkin (2015); Khasawneh et al.
(2019); Wang et al. (2014)).
Note on Group/Individual behavioral parame-
ters: Regardless of the type, robot control in multi-agent
systems can be implemented in two ways: either based on
parameters of individual agents or based on the group as
a whole. Taking the parameter of trust as an example in a
system with a single human and multiple robots, one can
either plan robots' actions by considering trust of the hu-
man in each individual robot (Wang et al., 2018), or one
can consider the human's trust in the whole robot team
(Liu et al., 2019). Other examples of robot control based
on individual parameters can be seen in studies with pa-
rameters like engagement (Leite et al., 2016) and attention
(Yang and Kwon, 2012). Such individual modelling pro-
vides a simple method to expand dyadic HRI research to
the multi-agent setting, and to test any dierences between
15