Study Interaction Graph Remarks
(a) Short and Mataric
(2017); Jung et al.
(2020)
Robot actions are independent of human teammates.
Humans decide their actions based on robot's actions
and potential discussion with the other human team-
mate.
(b) Claure et al. (2020)
 Robot actions are independent of human teammates.
Humans decide their actions based on robot's ac-
tions, and observing actions of the other human
teammate (without an explicit communication).
(c) Tan et al. (2019)
 A human user directly interacts with one of the two
robots, which then conveys the required information
to the second robot while the user observes the two
robots.
(d) Swamy et al. (2020);
Rosenfeld et al. (2017)
A human operator controls each robot individually.
Human's selection of robot is decided either by ob-
servation of robots' states or based on the suggestion
shown by the interface (G).
(e) Dahiya et al. (2022)
 A central computational entity (G) collects data of
all robots and then allocates each human operator to
the robots that need assistance. Operators directly
assist each robot individually. Operators are allo-
cated only by the central computational entity and
not by any direct interaction from the robots.
(f) Patel and Pinciroli
(2020)
Commands of multiple human operators are con-
verted to actions required by individual robots. Op-
erators observe each robot directly and can also in-
teract with each other to resolve con
icts.
(g) Correia et al. (2018)
 Two teams, each consisting of one human and one
robot, play a competitive card game. Each agent de-
cides on their actions based on observations of other
agents' actions. The only direct communication in
the system occurs when a robot speaks to its part-
ner to convey its emotions.
Table 1: Examples of multi-agent human-robot systems with respective interaction graphs. The orange solid arrows signify direct interactions
between agents (e.g., explicit communication), while dashed blue arrows denote the indirect interactions (observational). A maximum of two
humans and robots are shown in the gures but interaction graphs can be drawn for larger number of agents in a similar way. Note that this
table only shows examples of possible interaction graphs and is not an exhaustive list.
9