A Survey of Multi-Agent Human-Robot Interaction Systems
Abhinav Dahiyaa,, Alexander M. Aroyoa, Kerstin Dautenhahna,b, Stephen L. Smitha
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
bDepartment of Systems Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Abstract
This article presents a survey of literature in the area of Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), specically on systems
containing more than two agents (i.e., having multiple humans and/or multiple robots). We identify three core aspects of
\Multi-agent" HRI systems that are useful for understanding how these systems dier from dyadic systems and from one
another. These are the Team structure, Interaction style among agents, and the system's Computational characteristics.
Under these core aspects, we present ve attributes of HRI systems, namely Team size, Team composition, Interaction
model, Communication modalities, and Robot control. These attributes are used to characterize and distinguish one
system from another. We populate resulting categories with examples from the recent literature along with a brief
discussion of their applications. We also analyze how these attributes in multi-agent systems dier from the case of
dyadic human-robot systems. Through this survey, we summarize key observations from the current literature, and
identify challenges and promising areas for future research in this domain. In order to realize the vision of robots being
part of the society and interacting seamlessly with humans, there is a need to expand research on multi-human { multi-
robot systems. Not only do these systems require coordination among several agents, they also involve multi-agent and
indirect interactions which are absent from dyadic HRI systems. Adding multiple agents in HRI systems requires more
advanced interaction schemes, behavior understanding and control methods to allow natural interactions among humans
and robots. In addition, research on human behavioral understanding in mixed human-robot teams also requires more
attention. This will help formulate and implement eective robot control policies in HRI systems with large numbers of
heterogeneous robots and humans; a team composition re
ecting many real-world scenarios.
Keywords: Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), Multi-Agent System, Robots in Groups, Human-Robot Teams
1. Introduction
Research in Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) has facil-
itated the introduction of robots in human spaces, and
has gained signicant momentum in the past two decades.
Existing literature indicate that the vast majority of past
research pertains to dyadic systems where a single human
interacts with a single robot. However, this trend is chang-
ing now. With the improvement in physical and computa-
tional capabilities of robotic systems, we see robots work-
ing in teams of more than two, moving beyond the typ-
ical dyadic HRI systems. Even though multi-agent HRI
systems are built on similar infrastructure as dyadic sys-
tems, there are several dierences. Multi-agent HRI sys-
tems require more complex control strategies to coordi-
nate several agents that may be dissimilar to one another
?This research is supported in part by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), in part by the
Innovation for Defence Excellence and Security (IDEaS) Program
of the Canadian Department of National Defence through grant
CFPMN2-037, and in part by funding from the Canada 150 Research
Chairs Program.
Corresponding author.
Email address: abhinav.dahiya@uwaterloo.ca(in roles, communication modes etc.), can involve inter-
actions that connect more than two agents at once, and
need special attention to address any con
icts that may
arise from their interactions. These dierences mean that
control strategies developed for dyadic systems are either
not applicable to multi-agent systems or they do not work
as intended. Therefore, in the research literature, we see
numerous studies addressing one or more aspects of multi-
agent HRI systems specically. Through this survey we
aim to organize the existing work, and suggest a structure
through which researchers can compare and contrast the
existing and future research.
A human-robot system can have a varied number of
agents, both humans and robots, interacting with each
other. Even though any human-robot system is technically
a multi-agent system (comprised of at least one human and
one robot), in the HRI literature, the terminology is used
dierently. In HRI literature, dyadic systems refer to the
ones built around interactions between exactly one robot
and one human. Triadic systems have three agents, with
either two humans and a robot, or two robots and a hu-
man (Gvirsman et al., 2020; Gombolay et al., 2015). For
systems with three or more agents, terms such as teams or
groups are used (Abrams and Rosenthal-von der P utten,
Preprint submitted to Robotics and Autonomous Systems December 13, 2022