the two. Group-based robot control has its own benets.
Often, the humans in the system are not working inde-
pendently of other agents. So, one may nd it useful to
decide robot control as a function of group-based parame-
ters, something not possible in dyadic systems. Such con-
trol is particularly useful in systems where agents act as a
coordinating team, or in applications where performance
or behavior of the whole group is central. For example,
a robot can express group-based emotions to increase its
likability among human teammates (Correia et al., 2018),
or use audio features to aect group entitativity (Savery
et al., 2021). Figure 3(a) shows a system where the robot
determines the best way of approaching a group of humans
by extracting social cues shown by the group (Tseng et al.,
2016).
5.3. Key Observations
In this section, we looked at two types of robot control,
one that aims to optimize a performance parameter and
another that is dened using expert knowledge.
Regarding the implementation of robot control, the Wiz-
ard of Oz technique is still the most widely used control
method for studies designed to evaluate a human's re-
sponse to a particular type of interactions with a single
robot (or a limited number of robots). The prevalence of
the Wizard of Oz technique is an indicator that a majority
of the research in multi-agent Human-Robot Interaction
pertains to investigating human behavior in such systems.
Optimization-based robot control has mainly been a
part of computational research in HRI and has enabled
the development of ecient algorithms for large systems.
Even though we nd a good amount of papers implement-
ing such optimizing control policies on real systems, most
of the work in computational research in multi-agent HRI
is still seen in theoretical studies. This is expected, as
real world implementations and testing of large systems
require signicantly more resources. However, we hope
that as robotic systems become more accessible, the com-
putational research in multi-agent HRI will gain traction
with real systems.
We also discussed how robot control in multi-agent sys-
tems can be based on parameters of either individual
agents or of the group as a whole. While individual agent-
based control enables the extension of dyadic research to
the multi-agent case, group-based control allows to study
and in
uence behavior of the whole group without requir-
ing exact specications for individual agents. Group-based
control has also enabled more natural robot operation
when interacting with a group of humans. In the domain
of social robots, studies are becoming popular which try
to improve understanding of behavioral parameters of the
team/group as a whole. Future work in this area is essen-
tial in normalizing robot presence in human society.6. Interactions between the Core Aspects and At-
tributes
Looking at the multi-agent HRI literature under the
three core aspects in Sections 3-5, one can observe that
system attributes chosen by researchers under one core as-
pect are somewhat in
uenced by attributes under other
aspects. To understand the interaction between these core
aspects, we consider a particular set of attributes under
each core aspect as the \conguration" of the system. For
example, the team structure is dened by its size and com-
position. The categorizations under dierent core aspects
are chosen such that the conguration of each core aspect
can be set separately while designing the system, i.e, one
can choose any attribute from each column of the table
in Figure 2 to build a multi-agent HRI system4. This
means, in a viable system, we can have a system with any
of the three congurations for team size, with either ho-
mogeneous or heterogeneous agents, following one-to-one
or one-to-many interaction models, using either proximate
or remote modes of communication, and with the robot(s)
in the system following either optimization-based or rule-
based control.
However, the conguration of one core aspect can in
u-
ence how another core aspect of the system should ideally
be congured. For example, if the team size is large, then a
one-to-many communication model may be more ecient,
especially in co-located settings, e.g., Kim et al. (2020).
It is also common that systems with a large number of
robots have a group command node to ensure coordination
among the robots, as it may be dicult for the human(s)
to communicate with all the robots in the system. This
interaction model and robot control is therefore common
in Human-Swarm Interaction (Kolling et al., 2015).
Similarly, the Wizard of Oz control technique is preva-
lent in systems with a limited number of robots because
of its ease of implementation (Riek, 2012). However, this
technique may limit the scalability of such systems and
restrict the researchers to use homogeneous or a limited
number of robots. This highlights the need of develop-
ing ecient tools for implementing robot decision-making
in order to facilitate HRI research in large systems. In
addition, a system requiring a human Wizard to closely
monitor the agent(s) can be a cognitively demanding and
time consuming task. The choice of conguration is also
in
uenced by the target application and objective of the
study. As seen in Section 4, systems intended for social
settings are more likely to have a one-to-many interaction
model. When a human operator is required to supervise
multiple robots, a simple screen-based model is a popular
choice of system designers.
Having said that, we would like to emphasize that re-
search in multi-agent HRI is still not mature enough to
provide a guide to an ideal conguration for a system, or
4With the exception that having a many-to-many interaction
model requires both multiple humans and multiple robots.
16