Focus  
 
XAI - Explainable Artificial Intelligence  
 
David Gunning1, Mark Stefik, Jaesik Choi, Timothy Miller, Simone Stumpf, Guang -Zhong Yang  
Explanations are essential for users to effectively understand, trust, and manage powerful artificial intelligence 
applications.  
 
1. Introduction  
Recent successes in machine learning (ML) have led to a new wave of artificial intelligence (AI) 
applications that offer extensive benefits to a diverse range of fields. However, many of these systems 
are not able to explain their autonomous decisions and actions to human users. Explanations may not 
be essential for certain AI applications, and some AI re - searchers argue that the emphasis on expla - 
nation is misplaced, too difficult to achieve, and perhaps unnecessary. However, for many critical 
applicatio ns in defense, medicine, finance, and law, explanations are essential for users to understand, 
trust, and effectively manage these new, artificially intelligent partners [see recent reviews ( 1–3)].  
Recent AI successes are largely attributed to new ML tech niques that construct models in their internal 
representations. These in - clude support vector machines (SVMs), ran - dom forests, probabilistic 
graphical models, reinforcement learning (RL), and deep learning (DL) neural networks. Although these 
models exh ibit high performance, they are opaque in terms of explainability. There may be in - herent 
conflict between ML performance (e.g., predictive accuracy) and explainability. Often, the highest 
performing methods (e.g., DL) are the least explainable, and the m ost explainable (e.g., decision trees) 
are the least accurate. Figure 1 illustrates this with a notional graph of the performance - explainability 
tradeoff for some of the ML techniques.  
 
 
                                                           
1 David Gunning  – Defense Advanced Research Agency (DARPA), 675 N. Randolph St., Arlington VA 22201, now at Facebook AI Research, 770 Broadway,  
New York, NY 10003, E -mail: dgunning@fb.com . Mark Stefik  –  Palo Alto Research Center, 3 333 Coyote Hill Road, Palo Alto, CA 94304. E -mail: 
stefik@parc.com . Jaesik Choi  - Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, Republic of 
Korea, 44919. E -mail: jaesik@unist.ac.kr . Timothy Miller  - School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne,  Victoria 3010 
Australia, E-mail:  tmiller@unimelb.e du.au . Simone Stumpf  - Centre for HCI Design, School of Mathematics, Computer Science and Engineering. City, 
University of London, London EC1V 0HB, UK. E -mail: Simone.Stumpf.1@city.ac.uk  . Guang -Zhong Yang  – The Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College London, 
London SW7 2AZ, also The Institute of Medical Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, E -mail: g.z.yang@imperial.ac.uk