Figure 1.  Learning techniques and explainability. Concept adapted  from ( 9). (B) Interpretable models: ML AQ4 
techniques that learn more structured, interpretable, or causal models. Early examples included Bayesian rule  
lists, Bayesian program learning, learning models of causal relationships, and using stochastic gramma rs to  
learn more interpretable structure. Deep learning: Several design choices might produce more explainable 
representations (e.g., training data selection, architectural layers, loss functions, regularization, optimization 
techniques, and training seque nces). Model agnostic: Techniques that experiment with any given ML model, as a 
black box, to infer an approximate explainable model.  
 
2.  What is XAI  
The purpose of an explainable AI (XAI) sys - tem is to make its behavior more intelligible to humans by 
providing explanations. There are some general principles to help create effective, more human -
understandable AI systems: The XAI system should be able to explain its capabilities and understandings; 
explain what it has done, what it is doing now, and what will happen next; and dis - close the salient 
information that it is acting on ( 4).  
However, every explanation is set within a context that depends on the task, abilities, and expectations 
of the user of the AI system. The definitions of interpretability and ex - plainability are, thus, domain 
dependent and may not be defined independently  from a domain. Explanations can be full or partial. 
Models that are fully interpretable give full  
and completely transparent explanations. Models that are partially interpretable reveal important 
pieces of their reasoning process. Interpretable models ob ey “interpretability constraints” that are 
defined according to the domain (e.g., monotonicity with respect to certain variables and correlated 
variables obey particular relationships), whereas black box or unconstrained models do not neces - sarily 
obey th ese constraints. Partial expla - nations may include variable importance measures, local models 
that approximate global models at specific points and saliency maps.  
3.  XAI – Expectation from users  
XAI assumes that an explanation is provided to a n “end user” who depends on the decisions, 
recommendations, or actions produced by an AI system yet there could be many different kinds of 
Neural Nets
Deep
Learning
Statistical 
ModelsAOGs
SVMsGraphical
Models
Bayesian 
BeliefNets
SRL
CRFs     HBNs
MLNs
Markov 
ModelsEnsemble
Methods
Random
Forests
Decision
TreesLearning TechniquesLearning Performance
ExplainabilityFuture Techniques
Interpretable Models
Techniques to learn more structured, 
interpretable, causal models
Deep Learning
Improved deep learning techniques to 
learn explainable features
Model Agnostic
Techniques to infer an explainable model 
from any model as a black box