users, often at different time points in the development and use of the system  (5). For example, a type 
of user might be an intelligence analyst, judge or an operator. However, other users who demand an 
explanation of the system might be a developer or test operator who needs to understand where there 
might be areas of improvements. Yet another user might be policy -makers , who are trying to assess the 
fairness of the system.  Each user group may have a preferred ex - planation type that is able to 
communicate information in the most effective way. An effective explanation will take the target user 
group of the system into ac count, who might vary in their background knowledge and needs for what 
should be explained.  
4.  Explainability  - Evaluation and Measurement  
A number of ways of evaluating and measuring the effectiveness of an explanation have been proposed, 
however, there is currently no common means of measuring  if an XAI system is more intelligible to a 
user than a non -XAI system. Some of these measures are subjective measures from the user’s point of 
view, such as user satisfaction which can be measured through a subjective rating of the clarity and 
utility of an explanation. More objective measures for an explanation’s effectiveness might be task 
performanc e, i.e. , does the explanation improve the user’s decision -making.   Reliable and consistent 
measurement of the effects of explanations is still an open research question.  Evaluation and measure - 
ment for XAI systems include evaluation frameworks, common gro und [different think - ing and mutual 
understanding ( 6)], common sense, and argumentation [why ( 7)].  
5.  XAI – Issues and Challenges  
There remain  many active issues and challenges at the intersection of machine learning and explanation. 
These include  but are not limited to : 
1) Starting from computers versus starting from people ( 8). Should XAI systems tailor explanations to 
particular users? Should they consider the knowledge that users lack? How can we exploit explanations 
to aid interactive and huma n-in-the-loop learning, including enabling users to interact with explanations 
to provide feedback and steer learning?  
2) Accuracy versus interpretability. A major thread of XAI research on explanation explores techniques 
and limitations of interpretabili ty. Interpretability needs to consider tradeoffs involving accuracy and 
fidelity and to strike a “sweet spot” between accuracy, interpretability, and tractability.  
3) Using abstractions to simplify explanations. High -level patterns are the basis for descr ibing big plans 
in big steps. Automating the discovery of abstractions has long been a challenge, and understanding the 
discovery and sharing of abstractions in learning and explanation are at the frontier of XAI research 
today.  
4) Explaining competencies  versus explaining decisions. A sign of mastery by highly qualified experts is 
that they can reflect on new situations. It is necessary to help end users to understand the competencies 
of the AI systems in terms of what co mpetencies a particular AI system has, how the competencies 
should be measured, and whether an AI system has blind spots; that is, are there classes of solutions it 
can never find?