Page 2 of 23 Biswas et al. Journal of Big Data           (2023) 10:30 
work presented in [5] by authors Lv et al. as the most potential one and extended our 
research in the same direction. This paper presents a solution using Distance Correla -
tion Analysis Technique and showcases our results. We compared our results with the 
results of [5] and subsequently established the supremacy of our method.
Data privacy protection
Data privacy has been a topic of concern for a long time. The concern grew among 
researchers with the data’s increase in size and dimensionality. The classical data pri -
vacy algorithms are k-anonymity [6, 7], l-diversity [7, 8], t-closeness [9] and differential 
privacy [10, 11]. Figure  1 briefly describes the traditional data privacy algorithms. Most 
of the research regarding data privacy primarily revolves around DP . It is due to its wide -
spread use in this field. Researchers have observed and studied many threats to data pri -
vacy over the years. Among them, the existence of data correlation within the data is one 
of the potential causes of privacy leakages [12–14].
Initial research around data privacy ignored data correlation and considered data 
as IID. A piece of data is said to be IID, i.e., Independent and Identically Distributed, 
when it does not hold any relation with other data of the dataset and its distribution 
is identical throughout the dataset. In other words, there exists no correlation among 
data within the dataset. But suppose a correlation exists among such data and during the 
application of data privacy algorithms. In that case, if it gets ignored, then such assump -
tions can lead to potential privacy leakages [5, 15, 16]. This threat increases with the size 
and dimensionality of data. Hence, one can conclude that data correlation is a more sig -
nificant threat to big data [17]. Big data privacy often gets compromised by ignoring the 
data correlation within the data.
Fig. 1 Pros and cons of classical data privacy algorithms