Page 3 of 23
 Biswas et al. Journal of Big Data           (2023) 10:30 
 
The work presented in this research paper outlines all the related results where data 
correlation threatens data privacy and big data privacy. This work also suggests a meth -
odology to deal with the mentioned problem. The proposed approach initially offers to 
realize the correlation amongst data using the Distance Correlation analysis method. 
Then, using this correlation as a parameter, clustering is performed over the dataset and 
divided into blocks. After that, data sensitivity gets calculated concerning the individual 
blocks instead of Global Sensitivity (GS). The last step is to use the calculated sensitiv -
ity to apply differential privacy for the data blocks. The Distance correlation analysis 
method applied at the first step ensures proper recognition and consideration of data 
correlation in the big dataset. The divide and conquer approach is adopted to handle 
the high dimensionality of the data. Calculating sensitivity ensures that noise of lower 
magnitude gets added to increase the data utility. The Pyspark technology is adopted to 
manage the processing of big data. Finally, we compare the observations extracted from 
the performed experiment with the results of [5] to establish its effectiveness.
Data privacy and data utility
Data utility means that we should maintain the availability of the data when conduct -
ing privacy preservation [18]. More clearly, data utility means the ease of using noisy 
data for data mining and other analysis, maintaining the correctness and accuracy of the 
analytical result drawn from the noisy data [18]. The most common metric to measure 
data utility is Information Loss. The more the information loss, the less the utility of data 
[18]. Data privacy also has a relationship with data utility. The privacy performance of 
the data decreases with the increase in data utility, and it creates a trade-off between 
data utility and data privacy. Figure  2 is a graphical representation of the same. To plot 
the graph between data privacy and data utility, we have calculated data privacy as the 
Fig. 2 Data utility and data privacy trade off