Page 21 of 23
 Biswas et al. Journal of Big Data           (2023) 10:30 
 
4. Experimental results showed that distance correlation offered the required privacy 
protection of correlated data and maximum data utility. 
5. The proposed work utilized the big data framework, ‘PySpark, ’ to handle Big Data 
efficiently. The researchers of the cdp-method used no such technology.
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Author contributions
SB conducted the literature review process, proposed the novel approach, wrote the manuscript, extracted the results 
of the experiments and arranged them in a presentable manner. AF helped with the presentation of the manuscript, 
performing the experiments and preparation of the figures. NK has helped with his technical expertise throughout the 
research work. He has been a constant guide from the beginning to the end. PA has helped with the final formatting of 
the paper and preparation of several tables. All the authors reviewed the manuscript.
Authors’ information
Sreemoyee Biswas is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in Computer Science and Engineering from Maulana Azad National 
Institute of Technology, Bhopal, India. Her field of research is “Big Data Privacy.” Other areas of specialization include Data 
Privacy, Information Security, and Machine Learning. She has about two years of experience as an Assistant Professor. Her 
Educational Qualification is M.Tech & B.E. in Computer Science and Engineering. Ms. Sreemoyee Biswas has publications 
in SCI indexed journals, Scopus indexed journals & National Conference.
Anuja Fole has completed her Mtech in Advanced Computing specialization under Computer Science branch from 
Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology.She is currently working as Data Scientist. Her areas of specialization are 
Machine Learning, Big data and Data privacy. Currently her interest of research is “Big Data” . She has two years of industry 
experience as Associate Software Engineer. Her educational qualification is B.E in Information Technology.
Nilay Khare is working as Professor in MANIT Bhopal. He has more than 21 years of experience. His Educational Qualifica-
tion is a Ph.D. in Computer Science & Engineering. Dr. Nilay Khare’s areas of Specialization are Big Data, Big Data Privacy & 
Security, Wireless Networks, Theoretical computer science. He has publications in 54 International and National Confer -
ences and International Journal. He is a Life Member of ISTE.
Pragati Agrawal is working as Assistant Professor in MANIT Bhopal. She has more than five years of experience. Her 
Educational Qualification is a Ph.D. in Computer Science & Engineering. Dr. Pragati Agrawal’s areas of Specialization are 
Theoretical Computer Science, Energy Efficiency. Dr. Pragati Agrawal’s publications are in International and National 
Conferences and International Journal. She is a Life Member of IEEE and ACM.DataUtility(ConventionalDP )<DataUtility(cdp −method )<DataUtility(d −method )
Fig. 12 Datasize versus MAE trend for the different datasets