Page 4 of 23 Biswas et al. Journal of Big Data           (2023) 10:30 
number of attributes that has been anonymized and to calculate data utility we have 
used Information Gain. In the presented work, we aim to provide enhanced data utility 
while maintaining the required data privacy levels. Thus, the measurement of data utility 
is crucial for the proposed methodology.
Data correlation and data privacy
Before 2011, when researchers talked about data privacy algorithms, they considered 
that there existed no correlation among data. But soon, in 2011, researchers started stud -
ying the potential of data correlation as a privacy threat to data and have given enough 
instances to support it [4]. Many privacy leakages became evident with the existence of 
data correlation among data. The privacy leakages were caused due to the homogeneity 
attack, background knowledge attack, and linkage attack. The main contributing factor 
to these attacks was unnoticed data correlation. If one ignored the existence of data cor -
relation, these privacy leakages would also go unnoticed and cause a reduction in the pri -
vacy commitments of the data privacy algorithms. The pioneer in this was Gehrke et al. 
[19], who considered the case of social networks where users and their data are highly 
correlated, and even the strong privacy guarantee provided by Differential Privacy could 
not assure privacy for Social Network settings. Then in the subsequent years, research -
ers worked over the same lines and with various data to study the privacy threats associ -
ated with data correlation and proposed solutions. Table  2 gives a summary of all such 
works. Also, the following section provides a deeper insight into the same.
Another problem associated with the existence of data correlation is sensitivity. Cor -
related data causes a higher value of sensitivity of the data. While applying differential 
privacy algorithm, a higher sensitivity value will cause higher noise to be added to the 
original data. It adversely affects the data utility and causes its reduction. This is an 
undesirable effect and may render the privatized data useless.
Correlated big data privacy
As stated initially, data correlation poses a big threat to data privacy, and it causes pri -
vacy leakages that go unnoticed and causes unexpected compromises in data privacy. 
The real-world datasets are often large and accompanied by high dimensionality, which 
in turn causes high data correlation [4], which causes a potential threat to big data pri -
vacy. Given the massive amount of data and the combination of structured and unstruc -
tured data, some new Big Data models are a need to improve privacy and protection [4].
Organisation of the paper
This paper suggests a mechanism that deals with three main problems—Processing high 
dimensional big datasets, ensuring privacy protection of correlated data while using DP 
as the main privacy algorithm, and maintaining data utility while enhancing data privacy. 
The organization of the remaining paper is as follows: “Literature review ” section pre -
sents a brief literature review of the topic. “Basic principles and theories” section gives a 
short description of the basic principles and theories used. Whereas “Proposed method -
ology ” section discusses the proposed solution for the privacy protection of correlated 
big data and submits the model algorithm to implement it. “Experiment and analysis”