Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
AND THE BITGOES DOWN : REVISITING THE QUAN-
TIZATION OF NEURAL NETWORKS
Pierre Stock1,2, Armand Joulin1, R´emi Gribonval2, Benjamin Graham1, Herv ´e J´egou1
1Facebook AI Research,2Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we address the problem of reducing the memory footprint of con-
volutional network architectures. We introduce a vector quantization method that
aims at preserving the quality of the reconstruction of the network outputs rather
than its weights. The principle of our approach is that it minimizes the loss recon-
struction error for in-domain inputs. Our method only requires a set of unlabelled
data at quantization time and allows for efﬁcient inference on CPU by using byte-
aligned codebooks to store the compressed weights. We validate our approach by
quantizing a high performing ResNet-50 model to a memory size of 5MB ( 20
compression factor) while preserving a top-1 accuracy of 76:1%on ImageNet ob-
ject classiﬁcation and by compressing a Mask R-CNN with a 26factor.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
There is a growing need for compressing the best convolutional networks (or ConvNets) to sup-
port embedded devices for applications like robotics and virtual/augmented reality. Indeed, the
performance of ConvNets on image classiﬁcation has steadily improved since the introduction
of AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). This progress has been fueled by deeper and richer ar-
chitectures such as the ResNets (He et al., 2015) and their variants ResNeXts (Xie et al., 2017)
or DenseNets (Huang et al., 2017). Those models particularly beneﬁt from the recent progress made
with weak supervision (Mahajan et al., 2018; Yalniz et al., 2019; Berthelot et al., 2019). Compres-
sion of ConvNets has been an active research topic in the recent years, leading to networks with a
71% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet object classiﬁcation that ﬁt in 1MB (Wang et al., 2018b).
In this work, we propose a compression method particularly adapted to ResNet-like architectures.
Our approach takes advantage of the high correlation in the convolutions by the use of a structured
quantization algorithm, Product Quantization (PQ) (J ´egou et al., 2011). More precisely, we exploit
the spatial redundancy of information inherent to standard convolution ﬁlters (Denton et al., 2014).
Besides reducing the memory footprint, we also produce compressed networks allowing efﬁcient
inference on CPU by using byte-aligned indexes, as opposed to entropy decoders (Han et al., 2016).
Our approach departs from traditional scalar quantizers (Han et al., 2016) and vector quantiz-
ers (Gong et al., 2014; Carreira-Perpi ˜n´an & Idelbayev, 2017) by focusing on the accuracy of the
activations rather than the weights. This is achieved by leveraging a weighted k-means technique.
To our knowledge this strategy (see Section 3) is novel in this context. The closest work we are
aware of is the one by Choi et al. (2016), but the authors use a different objective (their weighted
term is derived from second-order information) along with a different quantization technique (scalar
quantization). Our method targets a better in-domain reconstruction, as depicted by Figure 1.
Finally, we compress the network sequentially to account for the dependency of our method to
the activations at each layer. To prevent the accumulation of errors across layers, we guide this
compression with the activations of the uncompressed network on unlabelled data: training by dis-
tillation (Hinton et al., 2014) allows for both an efﬁcient layer-by-layer compression procedure and
a global ﬁne-tuning of the codewords. Thus, we only need a set of unlabelled images to adjust the
codewords. As opposed to recent works by Mishra & Marr (2017), Lopes et al. (2017), our distilla-
tion scheme is sequential and the underlying compression method is different. Similarly, Wu et al.
(2016) use use Vector Quantization (VQ) instead PQ and do not ﬁnetune the learned codewords.
Contrary to our approach, they do not compress the classiﬁer’s weights and simply ﬁnetune them.
1Code and compressed models: https://github.com/facebookresearch/kill-the-bits .
1arXiv:1907.05686v5  [cs.CV]  9 Nov 2020