Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
in-domain
Figure 1: Illustration of our method. We approximate a binary classiﬁer 'that labels images as
dogs or cats by quantizing its weights. Standard method : quantizing 'with the standard objective
function (1) promotes a classiﬁer b'standard that tries to approximate 'over the entire input space
and can thus perform badly for in-domain inputs. Our method : quantizing 'with our objective
function (2) promotes a classiﬁer b'activations that performs well for in-domain inputs. Images lying in
the hatched area of the input space are correctly classiﬁed by 'activations but incorrectly by 'standard .
We show that applying our approach to the semi-supervised ResNet-50 of Yalniz et al. (Yalniz
et al., 2019) leads to a 5 MB memory footprint and a 76:1%top-1 accuracy on ImageNet object
classiﬁcation (hence 20 compression vs. the original model). Moreover, our approach generalizes
to other tasks such as image detection. As shown in Section 4.3, we compress a Mask R-CNN
(He et al., 2017) with a size budget around 6 MB ( 26compression factor) while maintaining a
competitive performance.
2 R ELATED WORK
There is a large body of literature on network compression. We review the works closest to ours and
refer the reader to two recent surveys (Guo, 2018; Cheng et al., 2017) for a comprehensive overview.
Low-precision training. Since early works like those of Courbariaux et al. (2015), researchers
have developed various approaches to train networks with low precision weights. Those approaches
include training with binary or ternary weights (Shayer et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2016; Li & Liu,
2016; Rastegari et al., 2016; McDonnell, 2018), learning a combination of binary bases (Lin et al.,
2017) and quantizing the activations (Zhou et al., 2016; 2017; Mishra et al., 2017). Some of these
methods assume the possibility to employ specialized hardware that speed up inference and improve
power efﬁciency by replacing most arithmetic operations with bit-wise operations. However, the
back-propagation has to be adapted to the case where the weights are discrete.
Quantization. Vector Quantization (VQ) and Product Quantization (PQ) have been extensively
studied in the context of nearest-neighbor search (Jegou et al., 2011; Ge et al., 2014; Norouzi & Fleet,
2013). The idea is to decompose the original high-dimensional space into a cartesian product of
subspaces that are quantized separately with a joint codebook. To our knowledge, Gong et al. (2014)
were the ﬁrst to introduce these stronger quantizers for neural network quantization, followed by
Carreira-Perpi ˜n´an & Idelbayev (2017). As we will see in the remainder of this paper, employing this
discretization off-the-shelf does not optimize the right objective function, and leads to a catastrophic
drift of performance for deep networks.
Pruning. Network pruning amounts to removing connections according to an importance criteria
(typically the magnitude of the weight associated with this connection) until the desired model
size/accuracy tradeoff is reached (LeCun et al., 1990). A natural extension of this work is to prune
structural components of the network, for instance by enforcing channel-level (Liu et al., 2017)
or ﬁlter-level (Luo et al., 2017) sparsity. However, these methods alternate between pruning and
re-training steps and thus typically require a long training time.
2