Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Julieta Martinez for pointing out small discrepancies in the compressed sizes of
the semi-supervised ResNet-50 and the Mask R-CNN.
REFERENCES
David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ian Goodfellow, Nicolas Papernot, Avital Oliver, and Colin
Raffel. Mixmatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.02249 , 2019.
Miguel ´A. Carreira-Perpi ˜n´an and Yerlan Idelbayev. Model compression as constrained optimization,
with application to neural nets. part ii: quantization, 2017.
Yu Cheng, Duo Wang, Pan Zhou, and Tao Zhang. A survey of model compression and acceleration
for deep neural networks. CoRR , 2017.
Yoojin Choi, Mostafa El-Khamy, and Jungwon Lee. Towards the limit of network quantization.
CoRR , 2016.
Matthieu Courbariaux, Yoshua Bengio, and Jean-Pierre David. Binaryconnect: Training deep neural
networks with binary weights during propagations. CoRR , 2015.
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical
Image Database. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2009.
Emily L Denton, Wojciech Zaremba, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, and Rob Fergus. Exploiting linear
structure within convolutional networks for efﬁcient evaluation. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 27 . 2014.
Tiezheng Ge, Kaiming He, Qifa Ke, and Jian Sun. Optimized product quantization. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , 2014.
Yunchao Gong, Liu Liu, Ming Yang, and Lubomir Bourdev. Compressing deep convolutional net-
works using vector quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6115 , 2014.
Yunhui Guo. A survey on methods and theories of quantized neural networks. CoRR , 2018.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J. Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks
with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2016.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. CoRR , 2015.
Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2017.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. NIPS
Deep Learning Workshop , 2014.
Andrew Howard, Mark Sandler, Grace Chu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Bo Chen, Mingxing Tan, Weijun
Wang, Yukun Zhu, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Quoc V . Le, and Hartwig Adam. Searching
for mobilenetv3. arXiv e-prints , 2019.
Gao Huang, Zhuang Liu, Laurens van der Maaten, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. Densely connected
convolutional networks. Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2017.
Forrest Iandola, Song Han, Matthew W. Moskewicz, Khalid Ashraf, William Dally, and Kurt
Keutzer. Squeezenet: Alexnet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and ¡0.5mb model size.
CoRR , 2016.
Herve Jegou, Matthijs Douze, and Cordelia Schmid. Product quantization for nearest neighbor
search. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2011.
9