In general, RNNs have multiple types: one input to many
outputs, many inputs to many outputs, and many inputs to one
output. In this work, we only consider RNNs that produce oneoutputy=(y
1,y2,....,y T)which is the probability of the next
element of a sequence while its previous inputs are given. Thesequence probability can be decomposed as following:
p(x
1,...,x T)=p(x1)p(x2|x1)p(x3|x1,x2)...
p(xT|x1,...,x T−1)(2)
in which each conditional probability distribution is modeled:
p(xt|x1,...x t−1)=σ(ht) (3)
wherehtis calculated using Equation 1.
One of the common problems of RNNs is called ”vanishing
gradients” which happens when the information about theinput or gradient passes thorough a lot of layers, it will vanishand wash out by the time when it reaches to the end orbeginning layer. This problem makes it hard for RNNs tocapture the long-term dependencies, and as such the trainingof RNNs will be extremely challenging. Another problem ofRNNs, which rarely happens, is called “ exploding gradients,”
which refers to the cases in which information about the inputor gradient passes thorough a lot of layers, it will accumulateand result in a very large gradient when it reaches to the endor beginning layer. This problem makes RNNs hard to train.
Gradient, which is mathematically deﬁned as partial deriva-
tive of output of a function with respect to its inputs, essen-tially measures how much the output of a function changeswith respect to the changes occurred to its inputs. In the”vanishing gradients” problem, the RNN training algorithmassigns smaller values to the weight matrix (i.e., a matrix thatis used in the process of RNN training) and thus the RNNmodel stops learning. On the other hand, in the exploding
gradients problem , the training algorithm assigns higher
values to the weight matrix without any reasons. This problemcan be solved by truncating/squashing the gradients [12].
B. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Models
As mentioned earlier, RNNs have difﬁculties in learning
long-term dependencies. The LSTM-based models are an
extension for RNNs, which are able to address the vanishinggradient problem in a very clean way. The LSTM modelsessentially extend the RNNs’ memory to enable them keepand learn long-term dependencies of inputs. This memoryextension has the ability of remembering information over alonger period of time and thus enables reading, writing, anddeleting information from their memories. The LSTM memoryis called a “gated” cell, where the word gate is inspired bythe ability to make the decision of preserving or ignoringthe memory information. An LSTM model captures importantfeatures from inputs and preserves this information over along period of time. The decision of deleting or preserving theinformation is made based on the weight values assigned tothe information during the training process. Hence, an LSTMmodel learns what information worth to preserve or remove.In general, an LSTM model consists of three gates: forget,
input, and output gates. The forget gate makes the decision ofpreserving/removing the existing information, the input gatespeciﬁes the extent to which the new information will be addedinto the memory, and the output gate controls whether theexisting value in the cell contributes to the output.
I) F orget Gate. A sigmoid function is usually used for
this gate to make the decision of what information needsto be removed from the LSTM memory. This decision isessentially made based on the value of h
t−1andxt. The
output of this gate is ft, a value between 0and1, where 0
indicates completely get rid of the learned value, and 1implies
preserving the whole value. This output is computed as:
ft=σ(Wfh[ht−1],W fx[xt],bf) (4)
wherebfis a constant and is called the bias value.
II) Input Gate. This gate makes the decision of whether or
not the new information will be added into the LSTM memory.This gate consists of two layers: 1) a sigmoid layer, and 2) a
“tanh” layer. The sigmoid layer decides which values needsto be updated, and the tanh layer creates a vector of new
candidate values that will be added into the LSTM memory.The outputs of these two layers are computed through:
i
t=σ(Wih[ht−1],W ix[xt],bi) (5)
c˜
t= tanh(W ch[ht−1],W cx[xt],bc) (6)
in which itrepresents whether the value needs to be updated
or not, and c˜
tindicates a vector of new candidate values that
will be added into the LSTM memory. The combination of
these two layers provides an update for the LSTM memory inwhich the current value is forgotten using the forget gate layerthrough multiplication of the old value (i.e., c
t−1) followed by
adding the new candidate value it∗c˜
t. The following equation
represents its mathematical equation:
ct=ft∗ct−1+it∗c˜
t (7)
whereftis the results of the forget gate, which is a value
between0and1where0indicates completely get rid of the
value; whereas, 1implies completely preserve the value.
III) Output Gate. This gate ﬁrst uses a sigmoid layer to make
the decision of what part of the LSTM memory contributes
to the output. Then, it performs a non-linear tanh function
to map the values between −1and1. Finally, the result is
multiplied by the output of a sigmoid layer. The followingequation represents the formulas to compute the output:
o
t=σ(Woh[ht−1],W ox[xt],bo) (8)
ht=ot∗tanh(c t) (9)
whereotis the output value, and htis its representation as a
value between −1and1.
C. Deep Bidirectional LSTMs (BiLSTM)
The deep-bidirectional LSTMs [25] are an extension of the
described LSTM models in which two LSTMs are appliedto the input data. In the ﬁrst round, an LSTM is applied
3287
Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on August 25,2020 at 16:04:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.