The Performance of LSTM and BiLSTM in
Forecasting Time Series
Sima Siami-Namini
Department of Math and Statistics
Texas Tech University
Email: sima.siami-namini@ttu.eduNeda Tavakoli
Department of Computer Science
Georgia Institute of Technology
Email: neda.tavakoli@gatech.eduAkbar Siami Namin
Department of Computer Science
Texas Tech University
Email: akbar.namin@ttu.edu
Abstract —Machine and deep learning-based algorithms are
the emerging approaches in addressing prediction problems in
time series. These techniques have been shown to produce moreaccurate results than conventional regression-based modeling.It has been reported that artiﬁcial Recurrent Neural Networks(RNN) with memory, such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM),are superior compared to Autoregressive Integrated MovingA verage (ARIMA) with a large margin. The LSTM-based modelsincorporate additional “gates” for the purpose of memorizinglonger sequences of input data. The major question is thatwhether the gates incorporated in the LSTM architecture alreadyoffers a good prediction and whether additional training of datawould be necessary to further improve the prediction.
Bidirectional LSTMs (BiLSTMs) enable additional training
by traversing the input data twice (i.e., 1) left-to-right, and 2)right-to-left). The research question of interest is then whetherBiLSTM, with additional training capability, outperforms regularunidirectional LSTM. This paper reports a behavioral analysisand comparison of BiLSTM and LSTM models. The objectiveis to explore to what extend additional layers of training ofdata would be beneﬁcial to tune the involved parameters. Theresults show that additional training of data and thus BiLSTM-based modeling offers better predictions than regular LSTM-based models. More speciﬁcally, it was observed that BiLSTMmodels provide better predictions compared to ARIMA andLSTM models. It was also observed that BiLSTM models reachthe equilibrium much slower than LSTM-based models.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Forecasting is an essential but challenging part of time
series data analysis. The type of time series data along with
the underlying context are the dominant factors effectingthe performance and accuracy of time series data analysisand forecasting techniques employed. Some other domain-dependent factors such as seasonality, economic shocks, unex-pected events, and internal changes to the organization whichare generating the data also affect the prediction.
The conventional time series data analysis techniques often
utilize 1) linear regressions for model ﬁtting, and then 2)moving average for the prediction purposes. The de facto stan-dard of such techniques is “Auto-Regressive Integrated MovingAverage”, also known as ARIMA. This linear regression-basedapproach has been evolved over the years and accordinglymany variations of this model have been developed such asSARIMA (or Seasonal ARIMA), and ARIMAX (or ARIMAwith Explanatory V ariable). These models perform reasonablywell for short-term forecasts (i.e., the next lag), but theirperformance deteriorates severely for long-term predictions.
Machine learning and more notably deep learning-based
approaches are emerging techniques in AI-based data anal-ysis. These learning and AI-based approaches take the dataanalytical processes into another level, in which the modelsbuilt are data-driven rather than model-driven. With respect tothe underlying application domain, the best learning model canbe trained. For instance, a convolution-based neural networks(CNNs) is suitable for problems such as image recognition;whereas, the recurrent neural networks (RNNs) better ﬁt tomodeling problems such as time series data and analysis.
There are several variations of RNN-based models. Most
of these RNN-based models differ mainly because of theircapabilities in remembering input data. In general, a vanillaform of RNN does not have the capability of rememberingthe past data. In terms of deep learning terminologies, thesemodels are feed forwarding-based learning mechanisms. A
special type of RNN models is the Long Short-Term Memory(LSTM) networks, through which the relationships betweenthe longer input and output data are modeled. These RNN-based models, called feedback-based models, are capable of
learning from past data, in which several gates into theirnetwork architecture are employed in order to remember the
past data and thus build the prospective model with respect tothe past and current data. Hence, the input data are traversedonly once (i.e., from left (input) to right (output)).
It has been reported that the deep learning-based models
outperform conventional ARIMA-based models in forecastingtime series and in particular for the long term predictionproblems [20]. Even though the performance of LSTM hasbeen shown to be superior to ARIMA, an interesting questionis whether its performance can be further improved by incor-porating additional layers of training data into the LSTM.
To investigate whether incorporating additional layers of
training into the architecture of an LSTM improves its pre-diction, this paper explores the performance of BidirectionalLSTM (BiLSTM). In an BiLSTM model the given input datais utilized twice for training (i.e., ﬁrst from left to right, andthen from right to left). In particular, we would like to performa behavioral analysis comparing these two architectures whentraining their models. To do so, this paper reports the results of
978-1-7281-0858-2/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data)
978-1-7281-0858-2/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE 3285
Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on August 25,2020 at 16:04:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.