TABLE III: Descriptive statistics of loss values for the LSTM
and BiLSTM-based models (the IBM stock Data).
Model Min Max SD #Batches
LSTM Epoch =1 0.014 0.061 0.007 42
BiLSTM Epoch =1 0.026 0.087 0.012 71
LSTM Epoch =2 ( Round 1) 0.013 0.048 0.005 41
BiLSTM Epoch =2 ( Round 1) 0.025 0.184 0.02 75
LSTM Epoch =2 ( Round 2) 0.01 0.23 0.004 42
BiLSTM Epoch =2 ( Round 2) 0.022 0.135 0.013 73
for the loss values achieved for both unidirectional LSTM andBiLSTM models when Epoch=1 is0.007 and0.012, re-
spectively. This indicates that the unidirectional LSTM modelreaches the equilibrium faster compared to its counterpart,BiLSTM. The primary reason seems to be directly related tothe training the underlying time series processes (ﬁrst fromleft-to-right and then right-to-left). As a result, the BiLSTM-based learning model needs to fetch additional data batches totune its parameters.
B. Loss vs. Batch Steps (Epoch =2 )
The authors also compared the behavioral training of both
BiLSTM and LSTM when Epoch=2 . Figures 3(c)-(f)
illustrate the changes observed in the loss values after fetching
each batches of data for the IBM data.
First the ﬁrst rounds of Epoch for both BiLSTM and LSTM
are compared. Figures 3(c)-(d) illustrate the changes in the lossvalues for round 1 of training when Epoch=2. We observe
similar trends that we obtained for Epoch=1 (Figures 3(a)-
(b)) for both LSTM and BiLSTM models for round 1 ofEpoch=2 . More speciﬁcally, in round 1 of Epoch=2
of the LSTM model, the loss value starts with 0.048 and after
fetching the 3rd batches is starts to be stabilized, where theloss value is 0.019. Whereas, for BiLSTM, the loss value
starts with 0.184 and then the loss values start to stabilize
after fetching the 8-th batches for BiLSTM, where the loss
value is0.044.
Table III list the descriptive statistics for both LSTM and
BiLSTM for round 1 of Epoch=2 . As the table reports,
a trend similar to Epoch=1 is observed for round 1 of
Epoch=2 , a large standard deviation in the calculated loss
values is an indication that BiLSTM requires more data tooptimally tune the parameters.
The most intriguing observation is about the changes of
loss values in round 2 of Epoch=2 . Figures 3(e)-(f)
demonstrate the trends of changes for loss for both LSTMand BiLSTM. For LSTM, the loss demonstrates a stabilizedtrend. The loss value starts with 0.015, remains stable, and
after fetching all the batches of data stays at 0.0237, which
shows an insigniﬁcant increase. A closer look at Figure 3(c)with 3(e) indicates that the LSTM model has already reachedthe equilibrium during the ﬁrst round and during the secondround of Epoch nothing valuable is learned.
On the other hand, the trend for round 2 of BiLSTM for
Epoch=2 does not exhibit a trend similar as observed
for the LSTM. As Figure 3(f) illustrates, the training modelstill keeps continue learning from the data and tuning theparameters. The loss value starts at 0.135 and then quickly fallsinto0.026 and
after a minor ﬂuctuation, it becomes stabilized
after fetching the 9-th batch, where the loss value reaches
0.0295. A comparison of Figures 3(d) and 3(f) indicates that
the BiLSTM model keeps training its parameters after thesecond round; whereas, the LSTM model stops learning andtuning parameters after the ﬁrst round. The numerical valuesand descriptive statistics are reported in Table III, where thestandard deviations for LSTM and BiLSTM are reported as0.004 and0.013, respectively. Indicating the training needed
for optimizing the BiLSTM model in comparison to LSTM.
C. Batch Sizes
The last column of Table III reports an interesting phe-
nomenon through which the number of batches, which are
considered for the same data by each training model, isreported. According to the experimental data, the LSTM modeldivided the data into 41 - 42 batches (larger chunks); whereas,the BiLSTM model divided the same data into 71 - 75 batches(smaller chunks). A rational to explain this behavior is thelimitation associated with LSTM models in general. Eventhough these models are capable of “remembering” sequencesof data, LSTM-based models have limitations in rememberinglong sequences. Through a regular LSTM model, since theinput data are traversed only once from left to right, a certainnumber of input items can be fed into the training model. Onthe other hand, in an BiLSTM model, the training networkneeds to train not only the input data from left to right, butalso from right to left. As a result, the length of training datathat can be handled through each batch is almost half of theamount of data learned through each batch by regular LSTM.
VIII. C
ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper reported the results of an experiment, through
which the performance and accuracy as well as behavioraltraining of ARIMA, unidirectional LSTM (LSTM), and bidi-rectional LSTM (BiLSTM) models were analyzed and com-pared. The research question targeted by the experiment wasprimarily focusing on whether training of data from an oppo-site direction (i.e., right to left), in additional to regular formof training of data (i.e., left to right) had any positive andsigniﬁcant impact on improving the precision of time seriesforecasting. The results showed that the use of additional layerof training would help in improving the accuracy of forecastby37.78% percent on average and thus it is beneﬁcial for
modeling. We also observed an interesting phenomenon whenconducting the behavioral analysis of unidirectional LSTM andBiLSTM models. We noticed that training based on BiLSTMis slower and it takes fetching additional batches of data toreach the equilibrium. This observation indicates that thereare some additional features associated with data that might becaptured by BiLSTM but unidirectional LSTM models are notcapable of exposing them, since the training is only one way(i.e., from left to right). As a result, this paper recommendsusing BiLSTM instead of LSTM for forecasting problem intime series analysis. This research can be further expanded toforecasting problems for multivariate and seasonal time series.
3291
Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on August 25,2020 at 16:04:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.