an experiment in which the performance and behavior of these
two RNN-based architectures are compared. In particular, weare interested in addressing the following research questions:
1) Is the prediction improved when the time series data
are learned from both directions (i.e., past-to-future andfuture-to-past)?
2) How different these two architectures (LSTM and BiL-
STM) treat input data?
3) How fast these two architectures reach the equilibrium?
To address these questions, this paper conducts a series of
experiments and reports the results. In particular, this paper
makes the following key contributions:
– Investigate whether additional layers of training improve
prediction in the ﬁnancial time series context.
– Provide a performance analysis comparing the predic-
tion’s accuracy of the uni-LSTM and its extension, BiL-STM. The analysis shows that BiLSTM models outper-form LSTMs by 37.78% reduction in error rates.
– Conduct a behavioral analysis of learning processes in-
volved in training the LSTM and BiLSTM-based models.According to the results, BiLSTMs train their modelsdifferently than LSTMs by fetching smaller batches ofdata for training. It was also observed that, the BiLSTMmodels reach the equilibrium slower than uni-LSTMs.
This paper is structured as follows: Section II reviews
the related works. The essential background and mathemat-ical formulations are given in Section III. The procedurefor experimental setup, data collection, and preparation ispresented in Section IV. Section V presents the pseudo-codeof the developed algorithms. The results of the experimentsare reported through Section VI. Section VII discusses theperformance of the algorithms while factors are controlled.The conclusion of the paper and the possible future researchdirections are provided in Section VIII.
II. R
ELA TED WORKS
Traditional approaches to time series analysis and forecast-
ing are primarily based on Autoregressive Integrated MovingAverage (ARIMA) and its many variations such as SeasonalARIMA (SARIMA) and ARIMA with Explanatory variables(ARIMAX) [6]. These techniques have been used for a longtime in modeling time series problems [1], [2], [17]. Whilethese moving averaged-based approaches perform reasonablywell, they also suffer from some limitations [8]:
– Since these models are regression-based approaches to
the problem, they are hardly able to model data withnonlinear relationships between parameters.
– There are some assumptions about data when conducting
statistical tests that need to be held in order to have ameaningful model (e.g., constant standard deviation).
– They are less accurate for long-term predictions.
Machine and deep learning-based approaches have intro-
duced new avenue to analyze time series data. Krauss etal. [19] used various forms of forecasting models such asdeep learning, gradient-boosted trees, and random forests tomodel S&P 500 constitutes. Krauss et al. also reported thattraining neural networks and consequently deep learning-basedalgorithms was very difﬁcult. Lee and Y oo [21] introduced anRNN-based approach to predict stock returns. The idea was tobuild portfolios by adjusting the threshold levels of returns byinternal layers of the RNN built. A similar work is performedby Fischera et al. [9] for ﬁnancial data prediction.
The most similar papers in which the performance of LSTM
and its bi-directional variation is compared are [7], [18].Kim and Moon report that Bi-directional Long Short-TermMemory model based on multivariate time-series data outper-forms uni-directional LSTM. Cui et al. [7] proposed stackingbidirectional and unidirectional LSTM networks for predict-ing network-wide trafﬁc speed. They report that the stackedarchitecture outperforms both BiLSTM and uni-LSTMs.
This article is based on the authors previous research work
where the performance of ARIMA-based models with theLSTM-based models was compared in the context of predict-ing economics and ﬁnancial time series and parameter tuning[20], [26]. The paper takes an additional step in comparingthe performance of three time series modeling standards:ARIMA, LSTM, and BiLSTM. While traditional predictionproblems (such as building a scheduler [27] and predictingvulnerabilities in software systems [22]) can beneﬁt largelyfrom bi-directional training, it is unclear whether learning timeseries data, and in particular ﬁnancial and economic data, fromboth sides is beneﬁcial for the purpose of learning. This paperexplores this research problem.
III. B
ACKGROUND
A. Recurrent Neural Networks
The Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are an extension
of the conventional Feed-Forward neural networks with theability of managing variable-length sequence inputs. Unlikethe conventional Feed-Forward neural networks, which are notgenerally able to handle sequential inputs and all their inputs(and outputs) must be independent of each others, the RNNsmodels provide some gates to store the previous inputs andleverage sequential information of the previous inputs. Thisspecial RNNs memory is called recurrent hidden states and
gives the RNNs the ability to predict what input is comingnext in the sequence of input data. In theory, RNNs areable to leverage previous sequential information for arbitrarylong sequences. In practice, however, due to RNNs’ memorylimitations, the length of the sequential information is limitedto only a few steps back. To give a formal deﬁnition of RNNs,lets assume x=(x
1,x2,x3,....,x T)represents a sequence of
lengthT, andhtrepresents RNN memory at time step t,a n
RNN model updates its memory information using:
ht=σ(Wxxt+Whht−1+bt) (1)
whereσis a nonlinear function (e.g., logistic sigmoid, a
hyperbolic tangent function, or rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU)),W
xandWhare weight matrices that are used in deep learning
model, and btis a constant bias.
3286
Authorized licensed use limited to: Texas Tech University. Downloaded on August 25,2020 at 16:04:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.