feedback and discuss within the wider group. We present the
conclusions in the form of guidelines to inform future AI4SG
initiatives and ground our recommendations in practical exam-
ples of successful AI4SG collaborations.
G1 Expectations of what is possible with AI need to be well-grounded.
G2 There is value in simple solutions.
G3 Applications of AI need to be inclusive and accessible, and reviewed
at every stage for ethics and human rights compliance.
G4 Goals and use cases should be clear and well-de ﬁned.
G5 Deep, long-term partnerships are required to solve large problems
successfully.
G6 Planning needs to align incentives, and factor in the limitations of
both communities.
G7 Establishing and maintaining trust is key to overcoming
organisational barriers.
G8 Options for reducing the development cost of AI solutions should be
explored.
G9 Improving data readiness is key.
G10 Data must be processed securely, with utmost respect for human
rights and privacy.
These guidelines summarise what we see as key principles for
successful AI4SG collaborations and should therefore be applic-
able across different types of organisations aiming to utilise AI for
sustainable development. These guidelines pertain to the overall
use of AI technology ( G1,G2,G3), applications ( G4,G5,G6,G7,
G8) and data handling ( G9,G10). The list is by no means
exhaustive and we expect there to be notable differences in how
each of the guidelines is implemented in practice, depending on
the data readiness of each organisation and the theory of change
underpinning the projects. The recent report from the Google AI
Impact Challenge identi ﬁes NGOs in particular as having a low
rate of utilising AI in their existing projects, which is why we feel
they might be the ones to bene ﬁt the most from the guidelines
provided here42.
The fast pace of AI research may sometimes make it dif ﬁcult
for organisations outside the ﬁeld to correctly assess the applic-
ability of the current state of the art. It is therefore important to
set expectations early ( G1), to distinguish between short-term and
long-term opportunities and help select projects accordingly.
Despite the apparent appeal of using the latest ML methods,
these may require large quantities of high-quality training data.
AI4SG projects may sometimes bene ﬁt from simpler solutions43,
aiming to solve the problem at hand with minimum overall
complexity ( G2). Such solutions tend to be faster to implement,
easier to maintain, interpret and justify —and are sometimes
sufﬁcient to solve valuable practical problems, as demonstrated by
the winning solution in a recent food safety predictive chal-
lenge44. Data analysis and visualisation can be a useful tool in
informing practical decision-making and can potentially deliver
value to organisations.
AI systems need to be fair, inclusive and accessible ( G3).
Fairness in particular should be explicitly accounted for, to avoid
reinforcing existing societal biases re ﬂected in the data used for
model development45–47. Unfairness may result in violations of
the right to equality, manifesting as inequity in model perfor-
mance and associated outcomes across race, ethnicity, age, gen-
der, etc. Fairness of AI applications should be deeply anchored in
existing international human rights standards, guiding all prac-
tical decisions. Ethics compliance should be appropriately for-
malised and involve setting up internal and external processes to
review sensitive decisions and design choices.
To be actionable, practical problems need to be translated into
concrete, well-de ﬁned goals ( G4) that can be addressed by tech-
nical solutions. For example, water shortages in case of droughtcould be addressed by a use case of predicting water demand
based on ﬂow data48. Alternatively, one could approach the
problem by providing better weather predictions or tracking
water supply and reservoir levels or helping individual consumersreduce their daily water usage. For each goal, it is crucial to
provide the correct metric for measuring the desired effect, as well
as de ﬁne the minimum viable performance for a solution to be
adding value to its stakeholders.
We recognise the critical role of focused short-term initiatives
like workshops and hackathons in gathering momentum and
bringing application-domain experts together with AI researchers
to deepen their mutual understanding of opportunities for
achieving SDGs. Yet, we believe that for achieving sustained
impact, it is necessary to establish long-term collaborations ( G5)
between application-domain experts and AI researchers and form
deep integrated partnerships that allow for enough time to reach
good practical solutions
49.
In interdisciplinary collaborations with a large set of stake-
holders, it is important to closely align organisational incentives
towards the common goals ( G6). Taking the involvement of
academic researchers as an example, measures of academic suc-
cess should explicitly take into account the wider societal impact
of the work50, as citations are known to be a poor proxy for
measuring real-world impact51.
In some cases, AI4SG collaborations may need to overcome
existing organisational barriers to adoption of technology and
investment in high-tech solutions ( G7). Scepticism towards AI is
partially rooted in depictions of AI in mainstream media, as well
as prior examples of technological solutions that failed to live up
to the expectations52. Failed attempts to utilise technology for
social good come with an associated opportunity cost, given the
limited resources available. For effective applications of AI, these
barriers will need to be overcome through establishing trust and
long-term equal partnerships dedicated to delivering lasting
impact.
AI4SG solutions should aim to be cost-effective ( G8) and this
needs to be taken into account early on in the solution designprocess. There are several ways in which the development cost of
AI solutions can potentially be reduced. Skills-based volunteering
is a framework through which businesses can enable researchers
to offer pro-bono services to NGOs and volunteer for causes that
they are passionate about. Hackathons and platforms for crowd-
sourcing technical solutions are equally promising, as well as the
use of AutoML tools
53for automating low-level tasks. Some of
AI4SG development costs can be covered by grants, for example
those offered by the Google AI Impact Challenge42or the 2030
Vision54aiming to support projects aligned with SDGs.
It is important to be conscious of the different levels of data
readiness55across organisations ( G9) and how they map onto
potential ML solutions. Deep learning approaches tend to require
large quantities of high-quality data, whereas smaller and noisier
datasets may be amenable to exploratory data analysis. Transfer
learning and zero-shot learning approaches should be considered
in cases where existing trained models can be re-purposed for the
relevant use case56,57. In the absence of bespoke high-quality data,
model development process might bene ﬁt from utilising external
open datasets like satellite imagery or the existing language cor-
pora and concept ontologies.
Secure data storage, data anonymisation and restricted data
access are required to ensure that sensitive data are handled with
utmost care ( G10)58. Research data should only include minimal
information required to deliver the solution. Responsible infor-
mation governance should be deeply rooted in respect for human
rights, and combined with a high level of physical data security.
Data should be encrypted both at rest and in transit. Collabora-
tions should aim to implement existing data governanceNATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15871-z PERSPECTIVE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2020)11:2468 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15871-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3