simulations2,3, and is being increasingly applied to a wide range
of practical problems, including speech recognition4and self-
driving cars5. These commercial applications often have indirect
positive social impact by increasing the availability of informationthrough better search and language-translation tools, providing
improved communication services, enabling more ef ﬁcient
transportation, or supporting more personalised healthcare
6.
With this interest come a lot of questions regarding social impact,
malicious uses, risks, and governance of these innovations, which
are of foremost importance7,8.
Targeted applications of AI to the domain of social good have
recently come into focus. This ﬁeld has attracted many actors,
including charities like DataKind (established in 2012)9, academic
programmes such as the Data Science for Social Good (DSSG)
programme at the University of Chicago (established in 2013)10,
the UN Global Pulse Labs11, AI for Social Good workshops in
conferences such as the 2018 and 2019 NeurIPS conference12,13,
the 2019 ICML conference14and the 2019 ICLR conference15,
along with corporate funding programmes such as Google AI for
Good Grants16, Microsoft AI for Humanity17, Mastercard Center
for Inclusive Growth and the Rockefeller Foundation ’s Data
Science for Social Impact18, amongst several others.
Results from several recent studies hint at the potential bene ﬁts
of using AI for social good. Amnesty International and Ele-
mentAI demonstrated how AI can be used to help trained human
moderators with identifying and quantifying online abuse against
women on Twitter19. The Makerere University AI research group
supported by the UN Pulse Lab Kampala developed automated
monitoring of viral cassava disease20, and this same group col-
laborated with Microsoft Research and other academic institu-
tions to set up an electronic agricultural marketplace in Uganda21.
Satellite imagery was used to help predict poverty22and identify
burned-down villages in con ﬂict zones in Darfur23, and colla-
borative efforts between climate and machine learning scientists
initiated the ﬁeld of climate informatics24,25that continues to
advance predictive and interpretive tools for climate action.
Future improvements in both data infrastructure and AI tech-nology can be expected to lead to an even more diverse set of
potential AI4SG applications.
This wealth of projects, sometimes isolated, has led to several
meta-initiatives. For example, the Oxford Initiative on
AIxSDGs
26, launched in September 2019, is a curated database of
AI projects addressing SDGs that indexes close to 100 projects.
Once publicly accessible, it should support a formal study of such
projects ’characteristics, success factors, geographical repartition,
gaps, and collaborations. Attempts at similar repositories include
the ITU AI Repository27. Another growing initiative, focused on
networking AI4SG and making their blueprints easily accessible
and reproducible by anyone, is the AI Commons knowledge
hub28backed by 21 supporting organisations and 71 members.
These meta-initiatives can help aggregate the experience and
transfer knowledge between AI4SG projects, as well as establish
connections between teams and organisations with com-
plementary aims.
Despite the optimism, technical and organisational challenges
remain that make successful applications of AI/ML hard to
deliver within the ﬁeld and that make it dif ﬁcult to achieve lasting
impact. Some of the issues are deeply ingrained in the tech culture
that involves moving fast and breaking things while iterating
towards solutions, and a lack of familiarity with the non-technical
aspects of the problems29. There is also a long history of tech for
good, including 30 years of Information and Communication
Technology for Development (ICT4D). Not all applications of
technology aimed at delivering positive social impact manage to
achieve their goals30, leaving us with important experiences from
which we must learn. Importantly, technology should not beimagined as a solution on its own31, outside of the context of its
application: it merely aligns with human intent and magni ﬁes
human capacity32. It is therefore critical to put it in service of
application-domain experts early, through deep partnerships withtechnical experts.
To achieve positive impact, AI solutions need to adhere to
ethical principles and both the European Commission
33as well as
OECD34have put together guidelines for developing innovative
and trustworthy AI. Related principles are encoded in the Mon-
treal Declaration for Responsible AI35and the Toronto
Declaration36. The European Commission states that AI needs to
be lawful, ethical and robust, to avoid causing unintended harm.
OECD Principles on AI state that AI should be driving inclusive
growth and sustainable development; designed so as to respect
the rule of law, human rights, democratic values and diversity;
transparent, so that people can understand AI outcomes; robust,
safe and secure; deployed with accountability, so that organisa-
tions can be held responsible for AI systems they develop and use.
Proper ethical design and governance of AI systems is a broad
research topic of fundamental importance, and has been
the focus of institutions and initiatives like the AI Now Insti-
tute37and the ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability and
Transparency38.
Also, it is important to recognise the interconnectedness of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and of efforts to achieve
them. The UN stresses that each goal needs to be achieved so that
no one is left behind. Yet, an intervention with a positive impact
on one SDG could be detrimental to another SDG and its targets.
Awareness of this interconnectedness should also be a driving
principle for fair and inclusive AI for social good: AI applications
should aim to maximise a net positive effect on as many SDGs as
possible, without causing avoidable harm to other SDGs. There-
fore, while being careful to avoid the pitfalls of analysis paraly-
sis39, both application-domain experts and AI researchers should
aspire to measure the effects, both positive and negative, of their
AI for social good applications across the ﬁve areas of people,
planet, prosperity, peace and partnerships, which are the targetsof the sustainable development agenda.
A recent UN report
40details how over 30 of its agencies and
bodies are working towards integrating AI within their initiatives.
According to the report, AI4SG projects need to be approached as
a collaborative effort, bringing communities together to carefully
assess the complexities of designing AI systems for SDGs. These
initiatives should aim to involve NGOs, local authorities, busi-
nesses, the academic community, as well as the communities
which these efforts support. The report highlights the vast
potential of the technology across a wide spectrum of applica-
tions, while recognising the need for improving data literacy and
a responsible approach to AI research and deployment. Our own
efforts to put these considerations into practice have led us to put
forward in the next section a set of guidelines with which to
approach AI4SG, which we then exemplify with a set of case
studies before concluding with a call to action for technical
communities and their important role in supporting the success
of our social and global goals.
Guidelines for AI4SG collaborations
To address the challenges involved with setting up successful
collaborations between AI researchers and application-domain
experts working on SDGs, we facilitated a series of structured
multidisciplinary discussions at a dedicated seminar41bringing
together experts from both communities to identify key aspects of
successful partnerships, and potential obstacles. This process
involved setting up focused working groups around key topics
and repeatedly coming together to disseminate the results, obtainPERSPECTIVE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15871-z
2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2020)11:2468 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15871-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications