frameworks for humanitarian action59and consider established
standards like the European Union ’s General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) and the United States ’Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
Case studies
Here we highlight three case studies to re ﬂect on how AI4SG
collaboration guidelines can be incorporated in mature projects
(Troll Patrol), new projects that are just being initiated (Shaqo-
doon), as well as community-wide initiatives within the AI
community aiming to use AI for sustainable development (Deep
Learning Indaba).
Troll Patrol . Having women working in the heart of our
democracy is an important step towards achieving gender
equality (SDG 5) and strong institutions (SDG 16). This involves
creating and protecting inclusive spaces for discussing important
political issues. Social media have become an integral part of these
conversations and represent an important way of sharing ideas
and disseminating information. For women to be equally repre-
sented on these digital platforms, they need to be able to share
their opinions without fear of abuse.
In Troll Patrol60,61, Amnesty International partnered with
Element AI ’s former AI for Good team to utilise computational
statistics and natural language processing methods for quantify-
ing abuse against women on Twitter, based on crowd-sourcing
that involved participation of over 6500 volunteers who sorted
through 288,000 tweets sent to 778 women politicians and
journalists in the UK and USA in 2017. The results of the study
have revealed worrying patterns of online abuse, estimating 1.1
million toxic tweets being sent to women in the study across the
year, black women being 84% more likely than white women to
experience abuse on the platform. The core of the analysis wasbased on using machine learning approaches to pre- ﬁlter the data,
followed by applying computational statistics methods. The team
has additionally evaluated the feasibility of using a ﬁne-tuned
deep learning model for automatic detection of abusive tweets
61.
The evaluation suggests that AI could potentially be used to
enrich the work of trained human moderators and make abusive
tweet detection easier, despite not being ready to be used without
human supervision.
The project involved a deep partnership ( G5) between an NGO
and an AI team, using established methods ( G1, G2 ) for a well-
deﬁned goal of identifying abusive tweets ( G4) in order to make
digital platforms more inclusive ( G3). To perform the study,
obtaining labelled data was key ( G9). Given the sensitivity of the
data and possibility of increasing exposure to abuse, all study
participants were asked if they wanted to remain anonymous in
the reports ( G10). The AI technology developed in the project is
not bespoke to tracking abuse against women, making it reusable
and of long-lasting value for the team involved in the
development ( G6). Amnesty International having previously
engaged with the team on other AI projects helped build trust to
make the collaboration possible ( G7), and brought their deep
domain expertise that the quantitative study had complemented.
In terms of technical project execution, using a pretrained model
from a larger dataset helped reduce the minimum sample size
needed for a performant AI abuse detection system, reducing
overall costs ( G8).
Shaqodoon: AI for improving citizen feedback . Citizens play a
pivotal role both in helping deliver on SDGs as well as holding
development actors accountable by keeping track of their pro-
gress. It is especially important to actively involve communities
that may not have the means of making their voice heard.Shaqodoon62is an NGO aiming to improve citizen feedback in
Somalia by hosting an interactive voice response platform
allowing the citizens to leave feedback on infrastructural projects
that affect them. Given that an estimated 65% of the Somalipopulation does not read or write
63, voice recordings provide
an inclusive way of aiming to involve everyone in the conversa-
tion ( G3).
Manually extracting relevant feedback from voice recordings is
a laborious process, and Shaqodoon has been looking at ways of
using AI for automating the labelling of incoming responses in
order to ef ﬁciently identify complaints.
Early on in this process, Shaqodoon estimated that there might
be up to 80,000 voice recordings available for model development,
until a subsequent analysis revealed that only 72 voice recordings
had high-quality labels available in an accessible format. This was
insufﬁcient for developing an AI solution, making it necessary to
reset expectations ( G1) and improve data readiness ( G9) through
better data collection practices, increasing the number of high-
quality labels in a machine-readable format. Shaqodoon worked
jointly with ML experts towards identifying the minimum viable
AI solution for automated triaging of voice recordings ( G2) under
a formal speci ﬁcation of categories of interest ( G4), while keeping
in mind the privacy of the callers ( G10). Through this
collaboration, Shaqodoon managed to accelerate the project
towards the stage where working on AI automation was feasible.
The project was selected to be among the ﬁnalists of the MIT
Solve Challenge64, an opportunity for Shaqodoon to obtain
resources for model development ( G6, G8 ).
Deep Learning Indaba . Successful implementation of each of our
ten guidelines (see Box) relies on bridge-builders who bring
disparate AI4SG stakeholders together. These bridge-builders are
people who are embedded within local communities, understand
development or humanitarian work, and/or have strong technical
skills in data science and AI. Our third case study looks at the
Deep Learning Indaba65, a grassroots organisation that aims to
build strong and locally led capacity in arti ﬁcial intelligence and
its applications across Africa. Such organisations can support the
realisation of the Sustainable Development Goals by building
strong partnerships (SDG 17) and by fostering innovation (SDG
9). Of particular relevance to supporting successful AI4SG out-
comes is the ability of such organisations to support greater
diversity and inclusion within the ﬁeld of AI, and in technical
communities more generally. Such inclusivity is the best guar-
antee that AI applications will effectively work towards
social good.
The Deep Learning Indaba was established with the mission to
strengthen machine learning and AI in Africa, and towards
greater self-ownership and self-con ﬁdence in AI by pan-African
developers and communities. Over the last 3 years, with
leadership driven by Africans within their countries and abroad,
they contributed to a positive shift in the visibility and ability of
Africans in AI. The Indaba, through the critical mass of African
AI researchers and engineers it brings together, supports a
growing number of AI4SG efforts, including helping to create
new datasets like those of African masks66, developing new
research for language translation67, creating new continent-wide
distributed research groups to develop on natural language tools
for African languages that are often considered ‘low-resourced ’68,
improving outcomes for malaria69and in addressing conserva-
tion challenges70. The Snapshot Serengeti Challenge70was done
in partnership with DeepMind and had involved using thousands
of geo-located, time-stamped and labelled images from camera
traps in the Serengeti, to develop AI solutions for tracking
migration and activity patterns of potentially endangered animalPERSPECTIVE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15871-z
4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2020)11:2468 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15871-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications