mon sense knowledge and abstract reasoning that
BERT and other language models learn. Talmor
et al. (2019) show that there is a large gap between
BERT and RoBERTa with regard to their inference
abilities. For instance, since RoBERTa is trained
on signiﬁcantly more data, it can determine which
person is older based on their ages or dates of birth,
while BERT cannot. Interestingly, however, even
RoBERTa is shown to rely on the range of examples
seen at training time, as it is not able to generalize
to the ages of people who are not born between
1920s and 2000s. This suggests that there is a need
for a more abstract reasoning ability in models
such as BERT, which does not seem to be solved
by an increased size of the training set. Finally, Ju
et al. (2019) show that even for the RoBERTa-based
abstractive model, which reached state-of-the-art
results on CoQA at the time, questions with numer-
ical answers account for a disproportionately large
fraction of errors.
Based on the studies conducted so far, one gen-
eral trend appears to be pertinent. That is, while
many studies have explored the linguistic knowl-
edge of BERT, it is still not clear whether BERT
is able to infer compositional structures from text
as opposed to relying on biases. In addition, to the
best of our knowledge, no probing tasks have been
performed on BERT in the conversational ques-
tion domain, which is ﬁtting for analyzing BERT’s
behaviour in complex reasoning and inference. Fi-
nally, while larger models such as RoBERTa yield
gains in performance, they still lack in generaliza-
tion ability. Thus, this paper aims to shed light on
the less scrutinized aspects of BERT’s linguistic
capabilities.
3 Dataset
The CoQA dataset2is used as a case study in this
paper. It covers several domains and amounts to
127,000+ samples including a story, a QApair and
the dialogue history. The answers to the questions
are based on the context document, however they
can be paraphrases. The training data also contains
rationales , which are the spans of the background
text containing both the answer and the context re-
quired to determine the answer. The test set is com-
posed of the Reddit and Science domains, while
the rest of the domains are split between train, de-
velopment and test (see Table 1). Covering various
domains makes CoQA diverse with regard to style
2https://stanfordnlp.github.io/coqa/and content of the dataset, whereas the addition of
the dialogue history makes the dataset interesting in
that it combines different language modes - a writ-
ten paragraph and a conversation. Such diversity
allows for a robust analysis of linguistic relations
since it gives access to negation in questions as
well as statements, ﬁctional settings of unusually
ﬂipped semantic roles, counting of any abstract or
concrete objects, etc. The state-of-the-art models
on this dataset (Ju et al., 2019) use RoBERTa, while
the dataset has not received much attention with
smaller or distilled models such as DistilBERT.
#Passages # QA Passage #Turns
Domain pairs Length per passage
Childrens Stories 750 10.5k 211 14.0
Literature 1,815 25.5k 284 15.6
School exams 1,911 28.6k 306 15.0
News 1,902 28.7k 268 15.1
Wikipedia 1,821 28.0k 245 15.4
Reddit 100 1.7k 361 16.6
Science 100 1.5k 251 15.3
Total 8,399 127k 271 15.2
Table 1: CoQA dataset details (Reddy et al., 2019).
4 Baseline Models
The input to the model is a concatenation of the
background story, the latest dialogue history of 64
tokens, and the current question. The length of
the input is limited to 512 tokens. We build the
baseline RoBERTa, BERT and DistilBERT base
models for CoQA as extractive models, within the
framework of Wolf et al. (2019) and following Wu
et al. (2019), who produce the highest results with
a BERT-based extractive model on CoQA. An ex-
tractive model does not generate the answer as an
abstractive model would, but selects the span in the
document that best matches the gold answer. In
order to train our extractive models, the substrings
of the rationales which are most similar to the gold
answers (as measured by F1) are selected as the
training labels.
Following a standard procedure, a linear classi-
ﬁer head is added on top of BERT with ReLU acti-
vation which classiﬁes every token in the input se-
quence as start or end of the answer span. Another
linear classiﬁer predicts whether each token in the
input span falls within the rationale span or outside
of it. Finally, one more classiﬁer predicts whether
the example is FREEFORM , has a YES/NOanswer or