Figure 1: Illustration of the order of semantic roles in a CoQA example.
also beneﬁcial as the model can be applied to other
test sets without the overhead of extracting the lin-
guistic knowledge from the new set.
6.2 Surprising Word Substitution
One more enhanced model is produced by augment-
ing the training data by means of surprising word
substitution ( surprisal# ). Supplementary data sam-
ples are produced by substituting surprising entities
in the CoQA training set with entities that would be
very likely to take their place, according to BERT.
In order to ensure that the sentence structure is not
affected and an entity is substituted with another
entity, the substituting word was only selected if
the new word was also tagged as a proper noun in
the newly produced sentence. This procedure leads
to 5880 additional samples for training. The reason
behind adding these items on top of the training
set instead of substituting the surprising examples
is the intention to provide rare entities with better
context instead of ignoring them. Many models in
NLP suffer from strong social biases and therefore
this approach attempts to level the playing ﬁeld
for rare entities by introducing them in the same
contexts as the common entities. Such a method
could potentially also be applied to larger datasets
and the more early stages such as pretraining.
Finally, the enhanced models are combined into
anensemble in order to combine the strongest
points of each model. In order to use the special-
ized knowledge from each model where it is rele-
vant, the ensemble is created by selecting the model
with the highest conﬁdence for each prediction.
7 Enhanced Model Results
The results of all the enhanced models on all QA
classes on the development set are presented in
Table 3. BERT and RoBERTa gain most in terms of
F1 with the counting model on counting questions
(base# on1-5), while DistilBERT only improves
on these questions remarkably with the ensemble
model, requiring more auxiliary resources than the
larger models for this level of abstraction.
Moreover, BERT appears to learn formal aspects
of semantics in the multitask setting. The nega-tion# model improves the results on the answers
that require interpreting negation ( NEG and NO)
while the srl#model improves on the QAclass with
semantic roles in a different order in the question
and the answer ( SRL-). In the meantime RoBERTa
does not improve on either. One might say that
RoBERTa has learnt the abstract linguistic repre-
sentations already, however its base results show
that it makes many of the same mistakes as BERT
and DistilBERT on NEG and SRL-. In fact, BERT
outperforms RoBERTa on the NEG class when en-
hanced with the explicit information about negation
(the negation# model). This, combined with the
fact that RoBERTa gets a big improvement on NEG
only when the various linguistic features are com-
bined into an ensemble , suggests that RoBERTa
mostly relies on better lexical representations for
its higher scores, which is only outweighed when
many compositional semantics cues are provided.
Similarly, DistilBERT only gains a small boost over
the baseline on NEG and NO QA classes with nega-
tion# and also requires an ensemble to improve on
SRL-.
On the other hand, BERT and DistilBERT im-
prove on the HUM and LOC classes with the ensem-
blemodels, demonstrating an ability to improve its
lexical representations. RoBERTa does not yield
an improvement in this case, however even its base
model performs relatively well on these classes.
Furthermore, BERT and DistilBERT do not get
a boost in the cases of pragmatics, namely senti-
ment# andorder# . In contrast, RoBERTa gets a
boost over the ANT class from the sentiment# , and
gains the largest increases across almost all classes
from order# . It appears that RoBERTa can im-
prove on its already high score on items containing
antonymy relying on more pragmatic aspects of
lexical semantics, and also is the most receptive to
the pragmatic aspects of dialogue in CoQA.
Moreover, the model trained on the dataset
which was augmented through surprising word sub-
stitution ( surprisal# ) improves over base# on the
class with surprising entities ( SURP ) with BERT
and DistilBERT. This shows that the method helps
the models generalize better to cover new examples