Compositional and Lexical Semantics in RoBERTa, BERT and
DistilBERT: A Case Study on CoQA
Ieva Stali ¯unait ˙eand Ignacio Iacobacci
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, London, United Kingdom
fieva.staliunaite,ignacio.iacobacci g@huawei.com
Abstract
Many NLP tasks have beneﬁted from transfer-
ring knowledge from contextualized word em-
beddings, however the picture of what type of
knowledge is transferred is incomplete. This
paper studies the types of linguistic phenom-
ena accounted for by language models in the
context of a Conversational Question Answer-
ing (CoQA) task. We identify the problematic
areas for the ﬁnetuned RoBERTa, BERT and
DistilBERT models through systematic error
analysis - basic arithmetic (counting phrases),
compositional semantics (negation and Seman-
tic Role Labeling), and lexical semantics (sur-
prisal and antonymy). When enhanced with
the relevant linguistic knowledge through mul-
titask learning, the models improve in perfor-
mance. Ensembles of the enhanced models
yield a boost between 2.2 and 2.7 points in F1
score overall, and up to 42.1 points in F1 on the
hardest question classes. The results show dif-
ferences in ability to represent compositional
and lexical information between RoBERTa,
BERT and DistilBERT.
1 Introduction
It has recently been recognized in the research com-
munity that neural network models generally do
not exploit the compositionality of language, of-
ten relying on superﬁcial features1. Composition-
ality refers to the fact that linguistic constituents
combine into phrases hierarchically to compose
meaning. Contextualized word embeddings (BERT,
Devlin et al., 2018; RoBERTa, Liu et al., 2018; Dis-
tilBERT, Sanh et al., 2019; etc.) can be expected
to be limited in their ability to learn such complex
aspects of language, since the models are usually
trained with cloze ﬁlling and next sentence pre-
1https://2020.ieeeicassp.
org/program/plenary-speakers/
deep-representation-learning/diction objectives, and are not directly exposed to
semantic relations between phrases.
While larger models yield higher performance,
they still lack generalization ability (Talmor et al.,
2019) and are computationally expensive, which
has led to an increasing interest in reducing model
size. For instance, DistilBERT is built using the
knowledge distillation technique (Bucil ˘a et al.,
2006; Hinton et al., 2015) on BERT, which leads
to a lighter and faster model that does not lose
much in performance on the majority of the tested
tasks. On the other hand, state-of-the-art models
use vast amounts of training data - 16GB for BERT,
10 times more for RoBERTa.
This study tackles the question of what type of
linguistic knowledge is missing from contextual-
ized word embeddings, comparing models on the
basis of their training set size (BERT vs. RoBERTa)
as well as their model size (BERT vs. DistilBERT).
The tasks of machine reading comprehension
(MRC) and dialogue are particularly ﬁtting for this
purpose, due to the fact that they require a sys-
tem to interpret language within a context and per-
form semantic and pragmatic inference between
sentences. The task in the Conversational Question
Answering dataset (Reddy et al., 2019, CoQA) is
MRC combined with dialogue - the input to the
system is a context document and a dialogue of
questions and answers about that text, which lead
up to the question that the system is required to
answer. An example from CoQA follows.
Background: [...] At the time, the name did not
describe a single political entity ora distinct popu-
lation of people [...]
Question n-1: Did the name describe a political
body?
Answer n-1: No
Question n: Did it describe a people group ?
Answer n: NoarXiv:2009.08257v1  [cs.CL]  17 Sep 2020