In order to answer question nwithout relying on
superﬁcial features, one needs to be able to inter-
pret the logical operators “ and” and “ or” (under-
lined), and their scopes, as well as determine that
the italicized phrases are synonymous. This study
tackles such cases with linguistically enhanced
models. Our assumption in this paper is that if
a model performs poorly on the classes of question-
answer ( QA) pairs that require certain linguistic
knowledge X(e.g. negation, disjunction and syn-
onymy in the example above) for their solutions,
and if its performance boosts when it explicitly
learns X(e.g. through a multitask setting with an
auxiliary linguistic task), it can be considered ev-
idence for the original model’s lack of linguistic
representations of X.
2 Related Work
There has recently been much interest in diagnostic
analysis of BERT, studying what type of linguistic
representations it learns. Rogers et al. (2020) pro-
vide an overview of such papers under the name
of BERTology, showing what types of linguistic
phenomena cause difﬁculty for BERT.
Some such studies focus on compositional se-
mantics in the form of negation, Negative Polarity
Items (NPIs) and Semantic Role Labeling (SRL).
In testing NPI licensing, Warstadt et al. (2019) per-
form a cloze task and compare whether BERT pre-
dicts a higher probability for an NPI in a licensed
context or outside of such a span. They show that
while BERT is capable of detecting NPI licensors
(e.g. “ don’t ”) and NPIs themselves (e.g. “ ever”), it
only does so successfully in cases where the span
of the NPI appears in the canonical position with
regard to its licensor. This suggests that the model
relies on word order instead of parsing the syntactic
dependencies.
When it comes to interpreting negation, Ettinger
(2020) analyzes whether BERT predicts a higher
probability for sentences such as “ Robin is not a
tree” and “ Robin is a bird ” than “ Robin is a tree ”
and “ Robin is not a bird ”, and conclude that BERT
is not very sensitive to negation. This test, how-
ever, relies strongly on BERT’s ability to represent
lexical semantics of the nouns and the lack of in-
tersection of their typical meanings. It could be
argued that it therefore is not a reliable test to tell
whether BERT can make logical deductions based
on negation. Instead, we argue that it should be
tested in a context where “ Robin ” can be anything,including a name of a tree, so that it can be deter-
mined whether BERT can infer that in such a case
“Robin ” would not be a bird.
Similarly, Ettinger (2020) has also addressed
the question of whether BERT has the knowledge
required to infer semantic roles from a text. For
example, she tests BERT’s ability to assign a higher
probability to the word “ served ” in a statement such
as “the restaurant owner forgot which customer the
waitress had served ” than in “ the restaurant owner
forgot which waitress the customer had served ”.
This test is analogous to the previous example with
a Robin, in the sense that it tests the model’s abil-
ity to learn biases of common semantic roles that
certain nouns manifest. The model can simply rely
on the fact that one of these two word orders is
more likely than the other, however this does not
provide evidence that BERT can make inferences
about semantic roles. Thus, it remains to be veri-
ﬁed whether BERT can abstract the semantic roles
from any range of naturally occurring sentences,
some of which exhibit uncommon semantic role
occurrences (e.g. customers serving waiters).
In a similar vein, previous research has shown
that the embeddings of antonyms in models such
as BERT are not clearly distinguishable (Talmor
et al., 2019). This, similarly to issues with negation,
shows that BERT is not good at representing non-
intersecting denotations.
What is more, Richardson et al. (2019) show that
BERT performs poorly on artiﬁcially constructed
diagnostic items which test the model’s ability
to perform logical inference. Nonetheless, they
demonstrate that it is possible for BERT to extrap-
olate the relevant linguistic phenomena quickly by
ﬁnetuning the model on the same artiﬁcial data.
Pragmatics also plays a role in determining re-
lations between sentences, however this ﬁeld has
been less explored with regard to contextualized
word embeddings. Some research has probed
BERT on its capabilities to infer pragmatic phe-
nomena related to negation, such as factives, con-
ditionals and questions (Jiang and de Marneffe,
2019). For instance, one has to make the pragmatic
inference that a speaker would only utter “ not a
one of them realized I was not human ” if their lack
of humanity was already established as common
knowledge. Jiang and de Marneffe (2019) show
that BERT takes longer to learn such complex rea-
soning than negation, for example.
In contrast, some studies research what com-