14
a)
1
 0 1 2
Total angular momentum [kgm2/s]010Latent activation b)
Figure 7. Collision under conservation of angular momentum. In a classical mechanics scenario where the total angular
momentum is conserved, the neural network learns to store this quantity in the latent representation. (a) Physical setting.
A body of mass mrotis xed on a rod of length r(and of negligible mass) and rotates around the origin with angular velocity
!. A free particle with velocity vfreeand massmfreecollides with the rotating body at position q= (0;r). After the collision,
the angular velocity of the rotating particle is !0and the free particle is de
ected with velocity v0
free.(b) Representation
learned by SciNet .Activation of the latent neuron as a function of the total angular momentum. SciNet learns to store the
total angular momentum, a conserved quantity of the system.
Box 3: Representation of pure one- and two-qubit states (Section E 3)
Problem:: Predict the measurement probabilities for any binary projective measurement !2C2non a puren-qubit
state 2C2nforn= 1;2.
Physical model:: The probability p(!; ) to measure 0 on the state  2C2nperforming the measurement !2C2n
is given by p(!; ) =jh!; ij2:
Observation:: Operational parameterization of a state  :o= [p(i; )]i2f1;:::;n 1gfor a xed set of random binary
projective measurements M1:=f1;:::;n1g(n1= 10 for one qubit, n1= 30 for two qubits).
Question:: OperationalFparameterization of a measurement !:q= [p(i;!)]i2f1;:::;n 2gfor a xed set of random
binary projective measurements M2:=f1;:::;n2g(n2= 10 for one qubit, n2= 30 for two qubits).
Correct answer:: acorr(!; ) =p(!; ) =jh!; ij2.
Implementation:: Network depicted in Figure 1 with varying numbers of latent neurons (see Table II and Table I for
the details).
Key ndings::
SciNet can be used to determine the minimal number of parameters necessary to describe the state  (see Figure 8)
without being provided with any prior knowledge about quantum physics.
SciNet distinguishes tomographically complete and incomplete sets of measurements (see Figure 8).
generate tomographically incomplete data, we choose the
measurements in M1randomly from a subset of all bi-
nary projective measurements. Specically, the quan-
tum states corresponding to measurements in M1are
restricted to random reallinear superpositions of kor-
thogonal states, i.e., to a (real) k-dimensional subspace.
For a single qubit, we use a two-dimensional subspace; for
two quibts, we consider both two- and three-dimensional
subspaces.
Given tomographically incomplete data about a state
 , it is not possible for SciNet to predict the outcome of
the nal measurement perfectly regardless of the num-
ber of latent neurons, in contrast to the tomographically
complete case (see Figure 8). Hence, we can deduce fromSciNet's output thatM1is an incomplete set of mea-
surements. Furthermore, this analysis provides a qual-
itative measure for the amount of information provided
by the tomographically incomplete measurements: in the
two-qubit case, increasing the subspace dimension from
two to three leads to higher prediction accuracy and the
required number of latent neurons increases.
4. Heliocentric model of the solar system
All the details about this example were already given
in the main text and are summarized in Box 4.