4
a)
 b)
E
0
2
M
0
2
Latent activation 1
0.2
0.00.2
E
0
2
M
0
2
Latent activation 2
0.2
0.00.2 c)
Figure 3. Heliocentric model of the solar system. SciNet is given the angles of the Sun and Mars as seen from Earth at
an initial time t0and has to predict these angles for later times. (a) Recurrent version of SciNet for time-dependent
variables. Observations are encoded into a simple representation r(t0) at timet0. Then, the representation is evolved in time
tor(t1) and a decoder is used to predict a(t1), and so on. In each (equally spaced) time step, the same time evolution network
and decoder network are applied. (b) Physical setting. The heliocentric angles EandMof the Earth and Mars are
observed from the Sun; the angles SandMof the Sun and Mars are observed from Earth. All angles are measured relative
to the xed star background. (c) Representation learned by SciNet .The activations r1;2(t0) of the two latent neurons at
timet0(see Figure 3a) are plotted as a function of the heliocentric angles EandM. The plots show that the network stores
and evolves parameters that are linear combinations of the heliocentric angles.
vector in a Hilbert space).
If the reference measurements are tomographically
complete, meaning that they are sucient to reconstruct
a complete representation of the underlying quantum sys-
tem, the plots in Figure 2 show a drop in prediction er-
ror when the number of latent neurons is increased up
to two and six for the cases of one and two qubits, re-
spectively [37]. This is in accordance with the number
of degrees of freedom required to describe a one- or a
two-qubit state in our current theory of quantum me-
chanics. For the case where the set of measurements is
tomographically incomplete, it is not possible for SciNet
to predict the outcome of the nal measurement perfectly
regardless of the number of latent neurons. This means
that purely from operational data, we can make a state-
ment about the tomographic completeness of measure-
ments and about the number of degrees of freedom of
the underlying unknown quantum system.
Enforcing a simple time evolution. As mentioned
above, if the physically relevant parameters can change,
we can enforce a representation that has a simple up-
date rule. For illustration, we will consider time evolu-
tion here, but more general update rules are possible. To
accomodate changing physical parameters, we need to
extend the latent representation as shown in Figure 3a.
Instead of a single latent represetation with a decoder
attached to it, we now have many latent representations
that are generated from the intial representation by a
time evolution network. Each representation has a de-
coder attached to it to produce an answer to a question.
Because we only want the parameters, but not the phys-
ical model, to change in time, all time evolution steps
and decoders are identical, i.e., they implement the same
function. The encoder, time evolution network, and de-
coder are trained simultaneously. To enforce parameters
with a simple time evolution, we restrict the time evolu-
tion network to implementing very simple functions, such
as addition of a constant [38].Heliocentric solar system. In the 16th century,
Copernicus used observations of the positions of dier-
ent planets on the night sky (Figure 3b) to hypothesize
that the Sun, and not the Earth, is at the centre of our so-
lar system. This heliocentric view was conrmed by Ke-
pler at the start of the 17th century based on astronomic
data collected by Brahe, showing that the planets move
around the Sun in simple orbits. Here, we show that
SciNet similarly uses heliocentric angles when forced to
nd a representation for which the time evolution of the
variables takes a very simple form, a typical requirement
for time-dependent variables in physics.
The observations given to SciNet are anglesM(t0) of
Mars andS(t0) of the Sun as seen from Earth at a start-
ing timet0(which is varied during training). The time
evolution network is restricted to addition of a constant
(the value of which is learned during training). At each
time stepi,SciNet is asked to predict the angles as seen
from Earth at the time tiusing only its representation
r(ti). Because this question is constant, we do not need
to feed it to the decoder explicitly.
We train SciNet with randomly chosen subsequences of
weekly (simulated) observations of the angles MandS
within Copernicus' lifetime (3665 observations in total).
For our simulation, we assume circular orbits of Mars
and Earth around the Sun. Figure 3c shows the learned
representation and conrms that SciNet indeed stores
a linear combination of heliocentric angles . We stress
that the training data only contains angles observed from
Earth, but SciNet nonetheless switches to a heliocentric
representation.
Conclusion. In this work, we have shown that SciNet
can be used to recover physical variables from experi-
mental data in various physical toy settings. The learnt
representations turned out to be the ones commonly used
in physics textbooks, under the assumption of uncorre-
lated sampling. In future work we plan to extend our ap-
proach to data where the natural underlying parameters