2
a)
 b)
Figure 1. Learning physical representations. (a) Human learning. A physicist compresses experimental observations
into a simple representation ( encoding ). When later asked any question about the physical setting, the physicist should be able
to produce a correct answer using only the representation and not the original data. We call the process of producing the answer
from the representation decoding . For example, the observations may be the rst few seconds of the trajectory of a particle
moving with constant speed; the representation could be the parameters \speed v" and \initial position x0" and the question
could be \where will the particle be at a later time t0?"(b) Neural network structure for SciNet .Observations are
encoded as real parameters fed to an encoder (a feed-forward neural network , see Appendix D), which compresses the data into
a representation ( latent representation ). The question is also encoded in a number of real parameters, which, together with the
representation, are fed to the decoder network to produce an answer. (The number of neurons depicted is not representative.)
cists' interactions with the physical world take the
form of experimental observations (e.g. a time series
(ti;x(ti))i2f1;:::;Ngdescribing the motion of a particle at
constant speed). The models physicists build do not deal
with these observations directly, but rather with a rep-
resentation of the underlying physical state of the ob-
served system (e.g. the two parameters initial position
and speed , (x0;v)). Which parameters are used is an im-
portant part of the model, and we will give suggestions
about what makes a good representation below. Finally,
the model species how to make predictions (i.e., answer
questions) based on the knowledge of the physical state
of the system (e.g. \where is the particle at time t0?").
More formally, this physical modelling process can be re-
garded as an \encoder" E:O !R mapping the set
of possible observations Oto representations R, followed
by a \decoder" D:RQ!A mapping the sets of all
possible representations Rand questionsQto answers
A.
Network structure. This modelling process can be
translated directly into a neural network architecture,
which we refer to as SciNet in the following (Figure 1b).
The encoder and decoder are both implemented as feed-
forward neural networks. The resulting architecture, ex-
cept for the question input, resembles an autoencoder
in representation learning [30, 31], and more specically
the architecture in [33]. During the training, we provide
triples of the form ( o;q;a corr(o;q)) to the network, where
acorr(o;q)2A is the correct reply to question q2Q
given the observation o2O. The learned parameteriza-
tion is typically called latent representation [30, 31]. To
feed the questions into the neural network, they are en-
coded into a sequence of real parameters. Thereby, the
actual representation of a single question is irrelevant as
long as it allows the network to distinguish questions that
require dierent answers.
It is crucial that the encoder is completely free tochoose a latent representation itself, instead of us im-
posing a specic one. Because neural networks with at
least one hidden layer composed of suciently many neu-
rons can approximate any continuous function arbitrarily
well [34], the fact that the functions EandDare imple-
mented as neural networks does not signicantly restrict
their generality. However, unlike in an autoencoder, the
latent representation need not describe the observations
completely; instead, it only needs to contain the infor-
mation necessary to answer the questions posed.
This architecture allows us to extract knowledge from
the neural network: all of the useful information is stored
in the representation, and the size of this representation
is small compared to the total number of degrees of free-
dom of the network. This allows us to interpret the learnt
representation. Specically, we can compare SciNet's la-
tent representation to a hypothesized parameterization
to obtain a simple map from one to the other. If we do
not even have any hypotheses about the system at hand,
we may still gain some insights solely from the number
of required parameters or from studying the change in
the representation when manually changing the input,
and the change in output when manually changing the
representation (as in e.g. [32]).
Desired properties for a representation. For
SciNet to produce physically useful representations, we
need to formalize what makes a good parameterization
of a physical system, i.e., a good latent representation.
We stress that this is not a property of a physical system,
but a choice we have to make. We will give two possible
choices below.
Generally, the latent representation should only store
the minimal amount of information that is sucient to
correctly answer all questions in Q. For minimal suf-
cient uncorrelated representations , we additionally re-
quire that the latent neurons be statistically independent
from each other for an input sampled at random from