3
0 1 2 3 4
Number of latent neurons0.00.10.20.3Error of predictionsTom. complete
Tom. incomplete
a) One qubit
0123456789
Number of latent neurons0.00.10.2Error of predictionsTom. complete
Tom. incomplete b) Two qubits
Figure 2. Quantum tomography. SciNet is given tomo-
graphic data for one or two qubits, as shown in part a) and
b) of the gure, respectively, and an operational description
of a measurement as a question input and has to predict the
probabilities of outcomes for this measurement. The plots
show the root mean square error of SciNet's measurement
predictions for test data as a function of the number of la-
tent neurons. In the tomographically complete case, SciNet
recovers the number of (real) degrees of freedom required to
describe a one and a two qubit state (which are two and six,
respectively). Tomographically incomplete data can be recog-
nized, since the prediction error remains high as one increases
the number of latent neurons.
the training data, re
ecting the idea that physically rel-
evant parameters describe aspects of a system that can
be varied independently and are therefore uncorrelated
in the experimental data. Under this independence as-
sumption, the network is then motivated to choose a rep-
resentation that stores dierent physical parameters in
dierent latent neurons. We formalize these demands in
Appendix C and show, using techniques from dierential
geometry, that the number of latent neurons equals the
number of underlying degrees of freedom in the training
data that are needed to answer all questions Q. To imple-
ment these requirements in a neural network, we use well-
established methods from representation learning, specif-
ically disentangling variational autoencoders [32, 35] (see
Appendix D 1 for details).
Alternatively, for situations where the physically rele-
vant parameters can change, either over time or by some
time-independent update rule, we might prefer a repre-
sentation with a simple such update rule. We explain
below how this requirement can be enforced.
Results. To demonstrate that SciNet helps to re-
cover relevant concepts in physics by providing the rele-
vant physical variables, both in quantum- and classical-
mechanical settings, we consider four toy examples from
dierent areas of physics. In summary, we nd: (i) given
a time series of the positions of a damped pendulum,
SciNet can predict future positions with high accuracy
and it uses the relevant parameters, namely frequency
and damping factor, separately in two of the latent neu-
rons (and sets the activation of unnecessary latent neu-
rons to zero); (ii) SciNet nds and exploits conserva-
tion laws: it uses the total angular momentum to predict
the motion of two colliding particles; (iii) given measure-
ment data from a simple quantum experiment, SciNetcan be used to determine the dimension of the under-
lying unknown quantum system and to decide whether
a set of measurements is tomographically complete, i.e.,
whether it provides full information about the quantum
state; (iv) given a time series of the positions of the Sun
and Mars as observed from Earth, SciNet switches to a
heliocentric representation | that is, it encodes the data
into the angles of the two planets as seen from the Sun.
The results show that SciNet nds, without having been
given any prior information about the specic physical
systems, the same quantities that we use in physics text-
books to describe the dierent settings. We also show
that our results are robust against noise in the exper-
imental data. To illustrate our approach, we will now
describe two of these settings in some depth. For de-
tailed descriptions of the four dierent settings, the data
generation, interpretation and additional background in-
formation, we refer to Appendix E.
In all our examples, the training data we use is op-
erational and could be generated from experiments, i.e.,
the correct answer is the one observed experimentally.
Here, we use simulations instead because we only deal
with classical and quantum mechanics, theories whose
predictions are experimentally well tested in the rele-
vant regimes. One might think that using simulated data
would restrict SciNet to rediscovering the theory used for
data generation. However, in particular for quantum me-
chanics, we are interested in nding conceptually dier-
ent formulations of the theory with the same predictions.
Quantum state tomography. In quantum mechan-
ics, it is not trivial to construct a simple representation of
the state of a quantum system from measurement data,
a task called quantum tomography [36]. In the follow-
ing, we will show that SciNet nds representations of
arbitrary (pure) one- and two-qubit states. To ensure
that no prior knowledge about quantum physics is re-
quired to collect the measurement data, we assume an
operational setting in which we have access to two de-
vices in a lab, where one device can create (many copies
of) a quantum system in a certain state depending on
the chosen parameters of the device. The other device
performs binary measurements on the quantum system.
The input to SciNet consists of the outcome probabili-
ties of a random xed set of \reference measurements"
on quantum systems in the unknown quantum state  .
As a question input, we provide a parameterization of a
measurement !(one may think of the setting of the dials
and buttons of the measurement device). SciNet has to
predict the outcome probability of the measurement !on
a quantum system in the state  . We train SciNet with
dierent pairs ( !; ) for one and two qubits. The results
are shown in Figure 2. Training dierent networks with
dierent numbers of latent neurons, we can observe how
the quality of the predictions (after training has been
completed) improves as we allow for more parameters in
the representation of  . This allows us to gain relevant
information, without previous hypotheses about the na-
ture of this representation (for example, whether it is a