5
are correlated in the training distribution. The separa-
tion of these parameters in the representation found by
SciNet requires the development of further operational
criteria for disentangling latent variables. In more com-
plex scenarios, the methods introduced here may lead
to entirely novel representations, and extracting human
physical insight from such representations remains chal-
lenging. This could be addressed using methods from
symbolic regression [39] to obtain analytical expressions
for the encoder and decoder maps, or for a map between
a hypothesized and the actual representation. Alterna-
tively, methods such as the ones presented in [40, 41]
could help to improve the interpretability of the repre-
sentation. Following this direction, it might eventually
become possible for neural networks to produce insights
expressed in our mathematical language.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank Alessan-
dro Achille, Serguei Beloussov, Ulrich Eberle, Thomas
Frerix, Viktor Gal, Thomas H aner, Maciej Koch-Janusz,
Aurelien Lucchi, Ilya Nemenman, Joseph M. Renes,
Andrea Rocchetto, Norman Sieroka, Ernest Y.-Z.
Tan, Jinzhao Wang and Leonard Wossnig for helpful
discussions. We acknowledge support from the Swiss
National Science Foundation through SNSF project
No. 200020 165843, the Swiss National Supercomputing
Centre (CSCS) under project ID da04, and through the
National Centre of Competence in Research Quantum
Science and Technology (QSIT). LdR and RR further-
more acknowledge support from the FQXi grant Physics
of the observer . TM acknowledges support from ETH
Z urich and the ETH Foundation through the Excellence
Scholarship & Opportunity Programme .
The source code and the training data are avail-
able at: https://github :com/eth-nn-physics/
nnphysical concepts . See also Appendix A for the
implementation details. SciNet worked well on all tested
examples, i.e., we did not post-select examples based on
whether SciNet worked or not.
Appendix A: Implementation
The neural networks used in this work are specied
by the input size for question and observation input, the
output size, the number of latent neurons, and the sizes
of encoder and decoder. The number of neurons in the
encoder and decoder are not expected to be important for
the results, provided the encoder and decoder are large
enough to not constrain the expressivity of the network
(and small enough to be eciently trainable). The train-
ing is specied by the number of training examples, the
batch size, the number of epochs, the learning rate and
the value of the parameter (see section D 1). To test
the networks, we use a number of previously unseen test
samples. We give the values of these parameters for theexamples presented in the main text (and described in
detail in Section E) in Table I and Table II.
The source code, all details about the network struc-
ture and training process, and pre-trained SciNets are
available at
https://github :com/eth-nn-physics/
nnphysical concepts .
The networks were implemented using the Tensor
ow li-
brary [42]. For all examples, the training process only
takes a few hours on a standard laptop.
Appendix B: Detailed comparison with previous
work
Neural networks have become a standard tool to tackle
problems where we want to make predictions without fol-
lowing a particular algorithm or imposing structure on
the available data (see for example [44{46]) and they have
been applied to a wide variety of problems in physics. For
example, in condensed matter physics and generally in
many-body settings, neural networks have proven partic-
ularly useful to characterize phase transitions (see [3] and
references therein) and to learn local symmetries [47].
In quantum optics, automated search techniques and
reinforcement-learning based schemes have been used to
generate new experimental setups [48, 49]. Projective
simulation [50] is used in [49] to autonomously discover
experimental building blocks with maximum versatility.
Closer to our work, neural networks have also been
used to eciently represent wave functions of particular
quantum systems [51{65]. In particular, in [52], varia-
tional autoencoders are used to approximate the distri-
bution of the measurement outcomes of a specic quan-
tum state for a xed measurement basis and the size of
the neural network can provide an estimate for the com-
plexity of the state. In contrast, our approach does not
focus on an ecient representation of a given quantum
state and it is not specically designed for learning repre-
sentations of quantum systems. Nevertheless, SciNet can
be used to produce representations of arbitrary states of
simple quantum systems without retraining. This allows
us to extract information about the degrees of freedom
required to represent any state of a (small) quantum sys-
tem.
Another step towards extracting physical knowledge
in an unsupervised way is presented in [66]. The authors
show how the relevant degrees of freedom of a system
in classical statistical mechanics can be extracted under
the assumption that the input is drawn from a Boltz-
mann distribution. They make use of information theory
to guide the unsupervised training of restricted Boltz-
mann machines, a class of probabilistic neural networks,
to approximate probability distributions.
A dierent line of work has focused on using neural
networks and other algorithmic techniques to better un-