12
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0
t [s]0.5
0.00.51.0x [m]True time evolution
Predicted time evolution
a)
 b)
Figure 6. Damped pendulum .SciNet is fed a time series of the trajectory of a damped pendulum. It learns to store
the two relevant physical parameters, frequency and damping, in the representation, and makes correct predictions about the
pendulum's future position. (a) Trajectory prediction of SciNet .Here, the spring constant is = 5kg/s2and the damping
factor isb= 0:5kg/s. SciNet's prediction is in excellent agreement with the true time evolution. (b) Representation learned
bySciNet .The plots show the activations of the three latent neurons of SciNet as a function of the spring constant and
the damping factor b. The rst two neurons store the damping factor and spring constant, respectively. The activation of the
third neuron is close to zero, suggesting that only two physical variables are required. On an abstract level, learning that one
activation can be set to a constant is encouraged by searching for uncorrelated latent variables, i.e., by minimizing the common
information of the latent neurons during training.
by physicists. The third latent neuron is nearly constant
and does not provide any additional information | in
other words, SciNet recognized that two parameters suf-
ce to encode this situation.
2. Conservation of angular momentum
One of the most important concepts in physics is that
of conservation laws, such as conservation of energy and
angular momentum. While their relation to symmetries
makes them interesting to physicists in their own right,
conservation laws are also of practical importance. If
two systems interact in a complex way, we can use con-
servation laws to predict the behaviour of one system
from the behaviour of the other, without studying the
details of their interaction. For certain types of ques-
tions, conserved quantities therefore act as a compressed
representation of joint properties of several systems.
We consider the scattering experiment shown in Fig-
ure 7 and described in Box 2, where two point-like parti-
cles collide. Given the initial angular momentum of the
two particles and the nal trajectory of one of them, a
physicist can predict the trajectory of the other using
conservation of total angular momentum.
To see whether SciNet makes use of angular mo-
mentum conservation in the same way as a physicist
would do, we train it with (simulated) experimental
data as described in Box 2, and add Gaussian noiseto show that the encoding and decoding are robust.
Indeed, SciNet does exactly what a physicist would do
and stores the total angular momentum in the latent
representation (Figure 7b). This example shows that
SciNet can recover conservation laws, and suggests that
they emerge naturally from compressing data and asking
questions about joint properties of several systems.
3. Representation of qubits
Quantum state tomography is an active area of re-
search [36]. Ideally, we look for a faithful representation
of the state of a quantum system, such as the wave func-
tion: a representation that stores all information neces-
sary to predict the probabilities of the outcomes for arbi-
trary measurements on that system. However, to specify
a faithful representation of a quantum system it is not
necessary to perform all theoretically possible measure-
ments on the system. If a set of measurements is sucient
to reconstruct the full quantum state, such a set is called
tomographically complete .
Here we show that, based only on (simulated) exper-
imental data and without being given any assumptions
about quantum theory, SciNet recovers a faithful rep-
resentation of the state of small quantum systems and
can make accurate predictions. In particular, this allows
us to infer the dimension of the system and distinguish
tomographically complete from incomplete measurement