Discovering physical concepts with neural networks
Raban Iten,Tony Metger,Henrik Wilming, L dia del Rio, and Renato Renner
ETH Z urich, Wolfgang-Pauli-Str. 27, 8093 Z urich, Switzerland.
(Dated: January 24, 2020)
Despite the success of neural networks at solving concrete physics problems, their use as a general-
purpose tool for scientic discovery is still in its infancy. Here, we approach this problem by
modelling a neural network architecture after the human physical reasoning process, which has
similarities to representation learning. This allows us to make progress towards the long-term goal
of machine-assisted scientic discovery from experimental data without making prior assumptions
about the system. We apply this method to toy examples and show that the network nds the
physically relevant parameters, exploits conservation laws to make predictions, and can help to gain
conceptual insights, e.g. Copernicus' conclusion that the solar system is heliocentric.
Theoretical physics, like all elds of human activity,
is in
uenced by the schools of thought prevalent at the
time of development. As such, the physical theories we
know may not necessarily be the simplest ones to explain
experimental data, but rather the ones that most natu-
rally followed from a previous theory at the time. Both
general relativity and quantum theory were built upon
classical mechanics | they have been impressively suc-
cessful in the restricted regimes of the very large and very
small, respectively, but are fundamentally incompatible,
as re
ected by paradoxes such as the black hole infor-
mation loss [1, 2]. This raises an interesting question:
are the laws of quantum physics, and other physical the-
ories more generally, the most natural ones to explain
data from experiments if we assume no prior knowledge
of physics? While this question will likely not be an-
swered in the near future, recent advances in articial
intelligence allow us to make a rst step in this direc-
tion. Here, we investigate whether neural networks can
be used to discover physical concepts from experimental
data.
Previous work. The goal of using machines to help
with discovering the physical laws underlying experimen-
tal data has been pursued in several contexts (see Ap-
pendix B for a more detailed overview and [3{6] for re-
cent reviews). A lot of early work focused on nding
mathematical expressions describing a given dataset (see
e.g. [7{9]). For example, in [8] an algorithm recovers
the laws of motion of simple mechanical systems, like a
double pendulum, by searching over a space of mathe-
matical expressions on given input variables. More re-
cently, signicant progress was made in extracting dy-
namical equations from experimental data [10{18]. These
methods are highly practical and they were successfully
applied to complex physical systems, but require prior
knowledge on the systems of interest, for example in the
form of knowing what the relevant variables are or that
dynamics should be described by dierential equations.
In certain situations one might not have such prior knowl-
edge or does not want to impose it to allow the machine
These two authors contributed equally.to nd entirely dierent representations of the physical
system.
Over the last few years, neural networks have become
the dominant method in machine learning and they have
successfully been used to tackle complex problems in clas-
sical as well as quantum physics (see Appendix B for fur-
ther discussions). Conversely, neural networks may also
lead to new insights into how the human brain devel-
ops physical intuition from observations [19{25]. Very
recently, physical variables were extracted in an unsu-
pervised way from time series data of dynamical systems
in [26].
Our goal in this work is to minimize the extent to
which prior assumptions about physical systems impose
structure on the machine learning system. Eliminating
assumptions that may not be satised for all physical
systems, such as assuming that particles only interact in
a pairwise manner, is necessary for the long-term goal
of an articial intelligence physicist (see [27] for recent
progress in this direction) that can be applied to any
system without a need for adaptions and might eventu-
ally contribute to progress in the foundations of physics.
Very recently, neural networks were used in this spirit
to detect dierences between observed data and a refer-
ence model [28, 29]. However, there is a tradeo between
generality and performance, and the performance of the
machine learning system proposed here | based on au-
toencoders [30{32] | is not yet comparable to more es-
tablished approaches that are adapted to specic physical
systems.
Modelling the physical reasoning process. This
work makes progress towards an interpretable articial
intelligence agent that is unbiased by prior knowledge
about physics by proposing to focus on the human phys-
ical modelling process itself, rather than on specic physi-
cal systems. We formalize a simplied physical modelling
process, which we then translate into a neural network
architecture. This neural network architecture can be ap-
plied to a wide variety of physical systems, both classical
and quantum, and is 
exible enough to accommodate
dierent additional desiderata on representations of the
system that we may wish to impose.
We start by considering a simplied version of the
physical modelling process, pictured in Figure 1a. Physi-arXiv:1807.10300v3  [quant-ph]  23 Jan 2020