Accepted to International Conference on Interdisciplinary Applications of  
Artificial Intelligence (ICIDAAI)  2021 Exploring Transformers in Natural Language 
Generation: GPT, BERT, and XLNet  
 
M. Onat Topal  
Graduate School of Social Sciences, 
Middle East Technical University  
Ankara , Turkey  
onat.topal@metu.edu.tr  Anil Bas  
Dept.  of Computer  Engineering, Faculty  
of Technology,  Marmara  University  
Istanbul, Turkey  
anil.bas@marmara.edu.tr  Imke van Heerden  
Dept. of Comparative Literature,  
CSSH,  Koç University  
Istanbul, Turkey  
ivanheerden@ku.edu.tr  
 
 
Abstract—Recent years have seen a proliferation of attention 
mechanisms and the rise of Transformers in Natural Language 
Generation (NLG). Previously, state -of-the-art NLG 
architectures such as RNN and LSTM ran into vanishing 
gradient problems; as sentences grew larger, distance between 
positions remained linear, and sequential computation hindered 
parallelization since sent ences were processed word by word. 
Transformers usher in a new era. In this paper, we explore three 
major Transformer -based models, namely GPT, BERT, and 
XLNet, that carry significant implications for the field. NLG is 
a burgeoning area that is now bolster ed with rapid 
developments in attention mechanisms. From poetry generation 
to summarization, text generation derives benefit as 
Transformer -based language models achieve groundbreaking 
results.  
Keywords —Transformer, Attention Mechanism, GPT, BERT, 
XLNet, N atural Language Generation  
I. INTRODUCTION  
Natural Language Generation (NLG) is a domain within 
Artificial Intelligence that seeks to produce intelligible text 
[1]. Attention was initially proposed in Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) [2], and is increasingly used in neural 
architectures such as in speech recognition [3,4] and 
recommendations [5,6]. As Galassi et al. [7] observe, 
development in new attentional models and attentive 
architectures is immensely fast -paced and remains important 
to map.  This paper examines the rising significance of 
attention mechanisms and the emergence of Transformers in 
NLG. We analyze the implications of three key Transformer -
based models —GPT -3, BERT, and XLNet —that exemplify 
rapidly accelerating developments and appl ications in this 
field. Although Gatt and Krahmer [8] provide a stellar 
overview of methods in NLG, they only cover developments 
until 2018, i.e. prior to Transformers. Chaudhari et al. [9] 
investigate general developments in attention models, but 
their fo cus on Transformers is limited and does not include 
GPT -3 or XLNet.  
II. ATTENTION AND TRANSFORMERS IN NATURAL 
LANGUAGE GENERATION  
Attention is a far -reaching concept that is relevant to 
diverse areas, from neuroscience to Artificial Intelligence 
[10]. For NLG, the seminal paper “Attention Is All You Need” [11] introduces a novel architecture for sequence -to-
sequence modeling by utili zing attention mechanisms. The 
proposed architecture, called Transformer (shown in Fig. 1), 
eliminates recurrence and convolutions.  
As Fig. 1 demonstrates, the Transformer is also an 
encoder -decoder architecture [12]. However, recurrent neural 
networks (RNNs) [13] and related models, which were state -
of-the-art until recently, have significant difficulty with 
longer sequences as a result of th e vanishing gradient 
problem [14]. The same problem occurs with long short -term 
memory (LSTM) architectures [15]. As the sentence gets 
longer, the probability of maintaining context from a word 
that is further away from the word that is being processed 
decreases exponentially [16].  
Parallelization becomes more feasible and enables 
training on larger datasets. The Transformer is rapidly 
becoming the dominant architecture for NLG, as the model 
expands with data and architecture size, enables parallel 
trainin g, and captures longer sequence features, making way 
for much more comprehensive and effective language models 
[17].  
 
 
Fig. 1.  The Transformer architecture [11].  
This paper has been produced benefiting from the 2232 International 
Fellowship for Outstanding Researchers Program of TÜBİTA K (Project No: 
118C285). However, the entire responsibility of the paper belongs to the 
owner of the paper. The financial support received from TÜBİTAK does not 
mean that the content of the publication is approved in a scientific sense by 
TÜBİTAK.