III. GPT -N 
GPT -3 is the latest in the Generative Pre -trained 
Transformer series [18]. It is an autoregressive language 
model that was trained with 175 billion parameters to produce 
human -like text, rendering it the largest language model by a 
large distance.  
GPT -3 shows that scaling up language models this way 
provides great improvements in task -agnostic, few -shot 
performances [18]. Even without gradient updates or fine -
tuning, GPT -3 maintains strong performance on various NLG 
tasks. Human accuracy in identifying whe ther short 
(approximately 200 word) news articles are model generated 
was only 52%. Table 1 exemplifies GPT -3’s question -
answering ability and natural language conversation 
(generated via private beta access).  
TABLE I.  GPT -3 DIALOGUE EXAMPLES  
Subject  Text Generated  
Prompt by Human, Response by GPT -3 
Human:  Would you like to be my friend?  
GPT -3: I would love to be your friend!  
Human:  How can I become friends with an AI?  
GPT -3: Sure! First we could have breakfast together. Then, we might 
get lunch. We will go on an adventure to the mountains and go 
camping together. We will travel around the world and have 
dinner with lots of people. Finally, we can dance on top of a 
hot air balloon as the sun goes down. I can show you some 
magic tricks!  
GPT -2 [19] is the precursor to GPT -3 and the successor 
to the first -released GPT, and trained on 1.5 billion 
parameters retrieved from 8 million web pages [20]. It is a 
scaled -up version of GPT with more than ten times the 
parameters and amount of data. Despit e the typical approach 
of supervised learning on specific datasets for specific tasks, 
it demonstrates that language models can learn tasks without 
explicit supervision [19].  
IV. BERT -BASED MODELS  
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from 
Transformers  (BERT)  [21] can be defined as a powerful NLP 
pre-training technique that is built upon work in contextual 
representations [22]. The key difference of BERT from other 
models is that it is the first deeply bidirectional, unsupervised 
language re presentation [22].  
Context -free models produce a single word embedding 
representation for each word in the vocabulary [22]. To 
illustrate, “test” in “test cricket” and “Turkish language test” 
would have equal representation in models like word2vec 
[23] and  GloVe [24]. BERT, on the other hand, takes context 
from both directions into account. For instance , in the 
sentence “I accessed the bank account”, BERT represents 
“bank” by using preceding (“I access the”) as well as 
subsequent (“account”) contexts.  
This provides significant ease and feasibility to fine -
tuning and creating various NLG applications with merely 
one extra output layer. Table 2 shows examples of BERT’s 
masked language modeling using the Hugging Face 
implementation [25].   
DistilBERT is a system atic approach to pre -train a smaller 
and general -purpose language model [26]. It utilizes 
distillation, where the large model (the teacher) is 
compressed into a smaller model (the student), and is trained on large batches and leverage gradient accumulation  with 
dynamic masking. It is 40% lighter, 60% faster, and retains 
97% of its language understanding capabilities while using 
the same data as original BERT.  
Technical improvements on BERT are attempted with 
various models like ALBERT [27], BART [28], and f ine-
tuned models like DocBERT [29]. Facebook’s RoBERTa 
shows hyperparameter choices play an important role, and 
suggests that BERT is undertrained [30]. Niche models are 
also present, such as BioBERT [31] for biomedical text 
mining.  
TABLE  II. BERT  MASKED WORD PREDICTION EXAMPLES  
Masked 
sequence  The purpose of art is to [MASK]  
the depths of the human soul.  
Prediction 
(score)  explore 
(0.324)  reveal 
(0.087)  express 
(0.080)  show 
(0.044)  reach 
(0.035)  
Masked 
sequence  Istanbul is the city that is located in both Asia and [MASK].  
Prediction 
(score)  europe  
(0.843)  africa 
(0.129)  oceania 
(0.012)  asia 
(0.003)  turkey 
(0.001)  
Masked 
sequence  Artificial Intelligence can [MASK] the world.  
Prediction 
(score)  change  
(0.402)  improve 
(0.0075)  control  
(0.068)  shape 
(0.050)  transform 
(0.040)  
V. XLN ET 
XLNet [32] builds on and addresses the shortcomings of 
BERT and GPT. This unsupervised learning method employs 
Transformer -XL [33] as its core architecture. According to 
XLNet, given the ability to model bidirectional contexts, 
BERT achieves better performance than pre -training 
approaches based on autoregressive language modeling; yet, 
it neglects dependency between the masked positions and 
relies on corrupting input with masks [32].  
In this context, XLNet  can learn bidirectional contexts by 
maximizing expected likelihood, and uses autoregressive 
formulation —as it integrates Transformer -XL into pre -
training—to overcome BERT’s limitations [32].  
VI. CONCLUS ION 
In this paper, we address three Transformer -based 
language models that carry significant implications for the 
field. The first, GPT -3, is by far the largest language model, 
with 175 billion parameters. It demonstrates that the size and 
scale of a Transformer -based language model creates a 
significant impact even when it is not fine -tuned for specific 
tasks. The second, BERT, is currently utilized by Google in 
its search algorithm and the first to deeply utilize 
bidirectionality with highly effective results. The third, 
XLNet, attempts to improve on BERT and i ntegrates 
Transformer -XL to the model.  
There are many ways in which the work can be extended. 
The advent of Transformers opens many areas in text 
generation to further exploration, including novel, poetry as 
well as scientific writing, customer service, qu estion -
answering, summarization, and virtual assistance. Attention 
mechanisms and Transformers herald a new era as they 
transform the standards for NLG.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
We would like to thank OpenAI for providing us with 
academic access to the GPT -3 API.