Figure 15: DRL implementation for Image segmentation. The state consists of the image to
be segmented along with a user hint for t=0 or the segmentation mask by the previous itera-
tions. The DRL agent performs actions by labeling each pixel as foreground and background
to maximize the improvement in IOU over the iterations.
Surgical gesture recognition is a very important yet challenging task in the computer
vision eld. It is useful in assessing surgical skills and for ecient training of surgeons. A
DRL method for surgical gesture classication and segmentation was proposed by [228]. The
proposed method could work on features extracted by video frames or kinematic data frames
collected by some means along with the ground truth labels. The problem of classication
and segmentation was considered as an MDP, where the state was a concatenation of TCN
[195][199] features of the current frame, 2 future frames a specied number of frames later,
transition probability of each gesture computed from a statistical language model [311] and
a one-hot encoded vector for gesture classes. The actions could be divided into two sub-
actions, One to decide optimal step size and one for choosing gesture class, and the reward
was adopted in a way that encouraging the agent to adopt a larger step and also penalizes the
agent for errors caused by the action. The authors used Trust Region Policy Optimization
(TRPO) [326] for training the policy and a spacial CNN [196] to extract features.
Earlier approaches for video object segmentation required a large number of actions to
complete the task. An Improvement was proposed by [124], where authors used an RL
method for object segmentation in videos. They proposed a reinforcement cutting-agent
learning framework, where the cutting-agent consists of a cutting-policy network (CPN)
and a cutting-execution network (CEN). The CPN learns to predict the object-context box
pair, while CEN learns to predict the mask based on the inferred object-context box pair.
The authors used MDP to solve the problem in a semi-supervised fashion. For the state of
CPN the authors used the input frame information, the action history, and the segmentation
mask provided in the rst frame. The output boxes by CPN were input for the CEN. The
actions for CPN network included 4 translation actions (Up, Down, Left, Right), 4 scaling
47