•Step 4: Compute critic gradient: 5critic=@L
@!.
•Step 5: Compute actor gradient: 5actor=1
BP
T5log(atjst)A(st;at)
Asynchronous Advantage Actor Critic (A3C) Besides A2C, there is another strategy
to implement an Actor-Critic agent. Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) [263]
approach does not use experience replay because this requires a lot of memory. Instead, A3C
asynchronously executes dierent agents in parallel on multiple instances of the environment.
Each worker (copy of the network) will update the global network asynchronously. Because
of the asynchronous nature of A3C, some workers (copy of the agents) will work with older
values of the parameters. Thus the aggregating update will not be optimal. On the other
hand, A2C synchronously updates the global network. A2C waits until all workers nished
their training and calculated their gradients to average them, to update the global network.
In order to update the entire network, A2C waits for each actor to nish their segment of
experience before updating the global parameters. As a consequence, the training will be
more cohesive and faster. Dierent from A3C, each worker in A2C has the same set of
weights since and A2C updates all their workers at the same time. In short, A2C is an
alternative to the synchronous version of the A3C. In A2C, it waits for each actor to nish
its segment of experience before updating, averaging over all of the actors. In a practical
experiment, this implementation is more eectively uses GPUs due to larger batch sizes. The
structure of an actor-critic algorithm can be divided into two types depending on parameter
sharing as illustrated in Fig.10.
In order to overcome the limitation of speed, GA3C [16] was proposed and it achieved
a signicant speedup compared to the original CPU implementation. To more eectively
train A3C, [141] proposed FFE which forces random exploration at the right time during a
training episode, that can lead to improved training performance.
4.2 Model-Based Algorithms
We have discussed so far model-free methods including the value-based approach and pol-
icy gradient approach. In this section, we focus on the model-based approach, that deals
with the dynamics of the environment by learning a transition model that allows for sim-
ulation of the environment without interacting with the environment directly. In contrast
to model-free approaches, model-based approaches are learned from experience by a func-
tion approximation. Theoretically, no specic prior knowledge is required in model-based
RL/DRL but incorporating prior knowledge can help faster convergence and better-trained
model, speed up training time as well as the number of training samples. While using raw
data with pixel, it is dicult for model-based RL to work on high dimensional and dynamic
environments. This is addressed in DRL by embedding the high-dimensional observations
into a lower-dimensional space using autoencoders [95]. Many DRL approaches have been
based on scaling up prior work in RL to high-dimensional problems. A good overview of
model-based RL for high-dimensional problems can be found in [297] which partition model-
based DRL into three categories: explicit planning on given transitions, explicit planning on
19