actions to include or discard a frame from the summary set that is later used by the summa-
rization network to predict video summary. Each research paper propose their own reward
function for this application, for example [429] and [430] used diversity representativeness
reward function and [233] used a combination of various reward functions.
11 Others Applications
Object manipulation refers to the task of handling and manipulating an object using a robot.
A method for deformable object manipulation using RL was proposed by [250], where the
authors used a modied version of Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG) [224]. They
used the simulator Pybullet [63] for the environment where the observation consisted of a
84843 image, the state consists of joint angles and gripper positions and action of four
dimensions: rst three for velocity and lasts for gripper velocity was used. The authors used
sparse reward for the task that returns the reward at the completion of the task. They used
the algorithm to perform tasks such as folding and hanging cloth and got a success rate of
up to 90%.
Visual perception-based control refers to the task of controlling robotic systems using a
visual input. A virtual to real method for control using semantic segmentation was proposed
by [142], in which the authors combined various modules such as, Perception module, con-
trol policy module, and a visual guidance module to perform the task. For the perception
module, the authors directly used models such as DeepLab [46] and ICNet [424], pre-trained
on ADE20K [428] and Cityscape [61], and used the output of these model as the state for the
control policy module. They implemented the control policy module using the actor-critic
[262] framework, where the action consisted of forward, turn right, and turn left. In their im-
plementation, a reward of 0.001 is given at each time step. They used the Unity3D engine for
the environment and got higher success and lower collision rate than other implementations
such as ResNet-A3C and Depth-A3C.
Automatic tracing of structures such as axons and blood vessels is an important yet chal-
lenging task in the eld of biomedical imaging. A DRL method for sub-pixel neural tracking
was proposed by [65], where the authors used 2D grey-scale images as the environment. They
considered a full resolution 11px 11px window and a 21px 21px window down-scaled to
11px11px as state and the actions were responsible for moving the position of agent in 2D
space using continuous control for sub-pixel tracking because axons can be smaller then a
pixel. The authors used a reward that was calculated using the average integral of intensity
between the agent's current and next location, and the agent was penalized if it does not
move or changes directions more than once. They used an Actor-critic [262] framework to
estimate value and policy functions.
An RL method for automatic diagnosis of acute appendicitis in abdominal CT images
was proposed by [8], in which the authors used RL to nd the location of the appendix and
then used a CNN classier to nd the likelihood of Acute Appendicitis, nally they dened
a region of low-entropy (RLE) using the spatial representation of output scores to obtain
optimal diagnosis scores. The authors considered the problem of appendix localization as
56