learned transitions, and end-to-end learning of both planning and transitions. In general,
DRL targets training DNNs to approximate the optimal policy together with optimal
value functions VandQ. In the following, we will cover the most common model-based
DRL approaches including value function and policy search methods.
4.2.1 Value function
We start this category with DQN [264] which has been successfully applied to classic Atari
and illustrated in Fig.7. DQN uses CNNs to deal with high dimensional state space like
pixels, to approximate the Q-value function.
Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) MCTS [62] is one of the most popular methods to
look-ahead search and it is combined with a DNN-based transition model to build a model-
based DRL in [9]. In this work, the learned transition model predicts the next frame and
the rewards one step ahead using the input of the last four frames of the agent's rst-person-
view image and the current action. This model is then used by the Monte Carlo tree search
algorithm to plan the best sequence of actions for the agent to perform.
Value-Targeted Regression (UCRL-VTR) Alex, et al. proposed model-based DRL for
regret minimization [167]. In their work, a set of models, that are `consistent' with the data
collected, is constructed at each episode. The consistency is dened as the total squared
error, whereas the value function is determined by solving the optimistic planning problem
with the constructed set of models
4.2.2 Policy search
Policy search methods aim to directly nd policies by means of gradient-free or gradient-
based methods.
Model-Ensemble Trust-Region Policy Optimization (ME-TRPO) ME-TRPO [190]
is mainly based on Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) [327] which imposes a trust
region constraint on the policy to further stabilize learning.
Model-Based Meta-Policy-Optimization (MB-MPO) MB-MPO [58] addresses the
performance limitation of model-based DRL compared against model-free DRL when learn-
ing dynamics models. MB-MPO learns an ensemble of dynamics models, a policy that can
quickly adapt to any model in the ensemble with one policy gradient step. As a result, the
learned policy exhibits less model bias without the need to behave conservatively.
A summary of both model-based and model-free DRL algorithms is given in Table 2.
In this Table, we also categorized DRL techniques into either on-policy or o-policy. In
on-policy RL, it allows the use of older samples (collected using the older policies) in the
calculation. The policy kis updated with data collected by kitself. In o-policy RL, the
data is assumed to be composed of dierent policies 0;0;:::;k. Each policy has its own
data collection, then the data collected from 0,1, ...,kis used to train k+1.
20