DRL has also demonstrated to be an eective alternative for solving dicult optimization
problems, including tuning parameters, selecting augmentation strategies, and neural archi-
tecture search (NAS). However, most approaches, that we have reviewed, assume a stationary
environment, from which observations are made. Take landmark detection as an instance,
the environment takes into account the image itself, and each state is dened as an image
patch consisting of the landmark location. In such a case, the environment is known while
the RL/DRL framework naturally accommodates a dynamic environment, that is the en-
vironment itself evolves with the state and action. Realizing the full potential of DRL for
computer vision requires solving several challenges. In this section, we would like to discuss
the challenges of DRL in computer vision for real-world systems.
•Reward function: In most real-world applications, it is hard to dene a specied
reward function because it requires the knowledge from dierent domains that may
not always be available. Thus, the intermediate rewards at each time step are not
always easily computed. Furthermore, a reward function with too long delay will make
training dicult. In contrast, assigning a reward for each action requires careful and
manual human design.
•Continuous state and action space: Training an RL system on a continuous state
and action space is challenging because most RL algorithms, i.e. Q learning, can only
deal with discrete states and discrete action space. To address this limitation, most
existing works discretize the continuous state and action space.
•High-dimensional state and action space : Training Q-function on a high-dimensional
action space is challenging. For this reason, existing works use low-dimensional param-
eterization, whose dimensions are typically less than 10 with an exception [184] that
uses 15-D and 25-D to model 2D and 3D registration, respectively.
•Environment is complicated: Almost all real-world systems, where we would want
to deploy DRL/RL, are partially observable and non-stationary. Currently, the ap-
proaches we have reviewed assume a stationary environment, from which observations
are made. However, the DRL/RL framework naturally accommodates dynamic envi-
ronment, that is the environment itself evolves with the state and action. Furthermore,
those systems are often stochastic and noisy (action delay, sensor and action noise) as
compared to most simulated environments.
•Training data requirement: RL/DRL requires a large amount of training data or
expert demonstrations. Large-scale datasets with annotations are expensive and hard
to come by.
More details of challenges that embody diculties to deploy RL/DRL in the real world
are discussed in [82]. In this work, they designed a set of experiments and analyzed their
eects on common RL agents. Open-sourcing an environmental suite, realworldrl-suite [83]
is provided in this work as well.
63