The objective of the partial policy is to obtain multiple simple policies on the projections
of the actual action space, where the projected policies can reconstruct the policy on the
original action space.
Based on the hypothesis that the position of all anatomical landmarks is interdependent
and non-random within the human anatomy and this is necessary as the localization of dif-
ferent landmarks requires learning partly heterogeneous policies, [377] concluded that one
landmark can help to deduce the location of others. For collective gain, the agents share
their accumulated knowledge during training. In their approach, the state is dened as RoI
centered around the location of the agent. The reward function is dened as the relative
improvement in Euclidean distance between their location at time tand the target land-
mark location. Each agent is considered as Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) [107] and calculates its individual reward as their policies are disjoint. In or-
der to reduce the computational load in locating multiple landmarks and increase accuracy
through anatomical interdependence, they propose a collaborative multi-agent landmark de-
tection framework (Collab-DQN) where DQN is built upon a CNN. The backbone CNN is
shared across all agents while the policy-making fully connected layers are separate for each
agent.
Table 3: Comparing various DRL-based landmark detection meth-
ods. The rst group on Single Landmark Detection (SLD) and the
second group for Multiple Landmark Detection (MLD)
Approaches Year Training
Tech-
niqueActions Remarks Performance Datasets and
source code
SLD [105] 2017 DQN 6 action:
2 per axisState: an axis-
aligned box cen-
tered at the voxel-
position. Action:
move from ~ ptto
~ pt+1. Reward:
distance-based
feedbackAverage accuracy in-
crease 20-30%. Lower
distance error than
other techniques such
as SADNN [104] and
3D-DL [427]3D CT Scan
SLD [10] 2019 DQN,
DDQN,
Duel
DQN
and
Duel
DDQN6 action:
2 per axisEnvironment: 3D
input image. State:
3D RoI centered
around the target
landmark. Re-
ward: Euclidean
distance between
predicted points and
groundtruth points.Duel DQN performs
the best on Right
Cerebellum (FS),
Left Cerebellum (FS,
MS) Duel DDQN is
the best on Right
Cerebellum (MS)
DQN performs the
best on Cavum Sep-
tum Pellucidum(FS,
MS)Fetal head, ul-
trasound scans
[219].
Available code
24