aordances technique the training was broken into two phases, The rst phase included
using a Resnet18 [133] encoder to predict the state of various environment variables such
as trac light, pedestrians, position with respect to the center lane, etc., and the output
features were used as a state for the RL agent, For which a modied version of Rainbow-IQN
Ape-X [136] was used. CARLA simulator accepts actions in form of continuous steering and
throttle values, so to make it work with Rainbow-IQN which supports discrete actions, the
authors sampled steering values into 9 or 27 discrete values and throttle into 4 discrete values
(including braking), making a total of 36(9 4) or 108(274) actions.
Racial discrimination has been one of the hottest topics of the 21st century. To mitigate
racial discrimination in facial recognition, [382] proposed a facial recognition method using
skewness-aware RL. According to the authors, the reason for racial bias in facial recognition
algorithms can be either due to the data or due to the algorithm, so the authors provided
two ethnicity-aware datasets, BUPT-Globalface and BUPT-Balancedface along with an RL
based race balanced network (RL-RBN). In their implementation, the authors formulated
an MDP for adaptive margin policy learning where the state consisted of three parts: the
race group (0: Indian, 1: Asian, 2: African), current adaptive margin, and bias or the
skewness between the race group and Caucasians. A DQN was used as a policy network
that performed three actions (staying the same, shifting to a larger value, and shifting to a
smaller value) to change the adaptive margin, and accepted reward in form of change in the
sum of inter-class and intra-class bias.
Attention mechanisms are currently gaining popularity because of their powerful ability
in eliminating uninformative parts of the input to leverage the other parts having a more
useful information. Recently, attention mechanism has been integrated into typical CNN
models at every individual layer to strengthen the intermediate outputs of each layer, in
turn improving the nal predictions for recognition in images. This model is usually trained
with a weakly supervised method, however, this optimization method may lead to sub-
optimal weights in the attention module. Hence, [212] proposed to train attention module
by deep Q-learning with an LSTM model is trained to predict the reward, the whole process
is called Deep REinforced Attention Learning (DREAL).
Various works specied here have been summarised and compared in Table 9 and general
implementation of a DRL method to control an agents movement in an environment has
been shown in g 17 where state consists of an image frame provided by the environment,
the DRL agent predicts actions to move the agent in the environment providing next state
and the reward is provided by the environment, for example, [142].
12 Future Perspectives
12.1 Challenge Discussion
DRL is a powerful framework, which has been successfully applied to various computer
vision applications including landmark detection, object detection, object tracking, image
registration, image segmentation, video analysis, and other computer vision applications.
62