Deep Reinforcement Learning in Computer Vision:
A Comprehensive Survey
Ngan LeVidhiwar Singh RathourKashu Yamazaki
Khoa Luu Marios Savvides
August 27, 2021
Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning augments the reinforcement learning framework and
utilizes the powerful representation of deep neural networks. Recent works have demon-
strated the remarkable successes of deep reinforcement learning in various domains in-
cluding nance, medicine, healthcare, video games, robotics, and computer vision. In
this work, we provide a detailed review of recent and state-of-the-art research advances
of deep reinforcement learning in computer vision. We start with comprehending the
theories of deep learning, reinforcement learning, and deep reinforcement learning. We
then propose a categorization of deep reinforcement learning methodologies and discuss
their advantages and limitations . In particular, we divide deep reinforcement learning
into seven main categories according to their applications in computer vision, i.e. (i)
landmark localization (ii) object detection; (iii) object tracking; (iv) registration on
both 2D image and 3D image volumetric data (v) image segmentation; (vi) videos
analysis; and (vii) other applications. Each of these categories is further analyzed with
reinforcement learning techniques, network design, and performance. Moreover, we
provide a comprehensive analysis of the existing publicly available datasets and exam-
ine source code availability. Finally, we present some open issues and discuss future
research directions on deep reinforcement learning in computer vision.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a machine learning technique for learning a sequence of ac-
tions in an interactive environment by trial and error that maximizes the expected reward
[351]. Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is the combination of Reinforcement Learning
andDeep Learning (DL) and it has become one of the most intriguing areas of articial intel-
ligence today. DRL can solve a wide range of complex real-world decision-making problems
with human-like intelligence that were previously intractable. DRL was selected by [316],
[106] as one of ten breakthrough techniques in 2013 and 2017, respectively.
The past years have witnessed the rapid development of DRL thanks to its amazing
achievement in solving challenging decision-making problems in the real world. DRL has
1arXiv:2108.11510v1  [cs.CV]  25 Aug 2021