on the variance of gradient estimation, the variance reduction technique was proposed to
address naive REINFORCE's limitations by adding a term that reduces the variance without
aecting the expectation.
4.1.3 Actor-Critic DRL algorithm
Both value-based and policy gradient algorithms have their own pros and cons, i.e. policy
gradient methods are better for continuous and stochastic environments, and have a faster
convergence whereas, value-based methods are more sample ecient and steady. Lately,
actor-critic [182] [262] was born to take advantage from both value-based and policy gradient
while limiting their drawbacks. Actor-critic architecture computes the policy gradient using
a value-based critic function to estimate expected future reward. The principal idea of actor-
critic is to divide the model into two parts: (i) computing an action based on a state and (ii)
producing the Q values of the action. As given in Fig.9, the actor takes as input the state
stand outputs the best action at. It essentially controls how the agent behaves by learning
the optimal policy (policy-based). The critic, on the other hand, evaluates the action by
computing the value function (value-based). The most basic actor-critic method (beyond the
tabular case) is naive policy gradients (REINFORCE). The relationship between actor-critic
is similar to kid-mom. The kid (actor) explores the environment around him/her with new
actions i.e. tough re, hit a wall, climb a tree, etc while the mom (critic) watches the kid
and criticizes/compliments him/her. The kid then adjusts his/her behavior based on what
his/her mom told. When the kids get older, he/she can realize which action is bad/good.
Figure 9: Flowchart showing the structure of actor critic algorithm.
Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) [263] consist of two neural
networks i.e. actor network (atjst) representing for policy and critic network V
!with
parameters !approximately estimating actor's performance. In order to determine how
much better, it is to take a specic action compared to the average, an advantage value is
17