been successfully applied into many domains including games, robotics, autonomous driving,
healthcare, natural language processing, and computer vision. In contrast to supervised
learning which requires large labeled training data, DRL samples training data from an
environment. This opens up many machine learning applications where big labeled training
data does not exist.
Far from supervised learning, DRL-based approaches focus on solving sequential decision-
making problems. They aim at deciding, based on a set of experiences collected by interacting
with the environment, the sequence of actions in an uncertain environment to achieve some
targets. Dierent from supervised learning where the feedback is available after each system
action, it is simply a scalar value that may be delayed in time in the DRL framework. For
example, the success or failure of the entire system is re
ected after a sequence of actions.
Furthermore, the supervised learning model is updated based on the loss/error of the output
and there is no mechanism to get the correct value when it is wrong. This is addressed by
policy gradients in DRL by assigning gradients without a dierentiable loss function. This
aims at teaching a model to try things out randomly and learn to do correct things more.
Many survey papers in the eld of DRL including [13] [97] [414] have been introduced
recently. While [13] covers central algorithms in DRL, [97] provides an introduction to
DRL models, algorithms, and techniques, where particular focus is the aspects related to
generalization and how DRL can be used for practical applications. Recently, [414] introduces
a survey, which discusses the broad applications of RL techniques in healthcare domains
ranging from dynamic treatment regimes in chronic diseases and critical care, an automated
medical diagnosis from both unstructured and structured clinical data, to many other control
or scheduling domains that have inltrated many aspects of a healthcare system. Dierent
from the previous work, our survey focuses on how to implement DRL in various computer
vision applications such as landmark detection, object detection, object tracking, image
registration, image segmentation, and video analysis.
Our goal is to provide our readers good knowledge about the principle of RL/DRL and
thorough coverage of the latest examples of how DRL is used for solving computer vision
tasks. We structure the rest of the paper as follows: we rst introduce fundamentals of
Deep Learning (DL) in section 2 including Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), Autoencoder,
Deep Belief Network, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs). Then, we present the theories of RL in section 3, which starts with the Markov
Decision Process (MDP) and continues with value function and Q-function. In the end of
section 3, we introduce various techniques in RL under two categories of model-based and
model-free RL. Next, we introduce DRL in section 4 with main techniques in both value-
based methods, policy gradient methods, and actor-critic methods under model-based and
model-free categories. The application of DRL in computer vision will then be introduced
in sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 corresponding respectively to DRL in landmark detection,
DRL in object detection, DRL in object tracking, DRL in image registration, DRL in im-
age segmentation, DRL in video analysis and other applications of DRL. Each application
category rst starts with a problem introduction and then state-of-the-art approaches in the
eld are discussed and compared through a summary table. We are going to discuss some
2