•Imitation Learning: Imitation learning is close to learning from demonstrations
which aims at training a policy to mimic an expert's behavior given the samples col-
lected from that expert. Imitation learning is also considered as an alternative to
RL/DRL to solve sequential decision-making problems. Besides inverse DRL, an im-
itation learning approach as aforementioned, behavior cloning is another imitation
learning approach to train policy under supervised learning manner. Bradly et al.
[347] presented a method for unsupervised third-person imitation learning to observe
how other humans perform and infer the task. Building on top of Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradients and Hindsight Experience Replay, Nair et al. [272] proposed behavior
cloning Loss to increase imitating the demonstrations. Besides Q-learning, Generative
Adversarial Imitation Learning [364] proposes P-GAIL that integrates imitation learn-
ing into the policy gradient framework. P-GAIL considers both smoothness and causal
entropy in policy update by utilizing Deep P-Network [365].
Conclusion
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is nowadays the most popular technique for an arti-
cial agent to learn closely optimal strategies by experiences. This paper aims to provide a
state-of-the-art comprehensive survey of DRL applications to a variety of decision-making
problems in the area of computer vision. In this work, we rstly provided a structured
summarization of the theoretical foundations in Deep Learning (DL) including AutoEncoder
(AE), Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), and Recur-
rent Neural Network (RNN). We then continued to introduce key techniques in RL research
including model-based methods (value functions, transaction models, policy search, return
functions) and model-free methods (value-based, policy-based, and actor-critic). Main tech-
niques in DRL were thirdly presented under two categories of model-based and model-free
approaches. We fourthly surveyed the broad-ranging applications of DRL methods in solv-
ing problems aecting areas of computer vision, from landmark detection, object detection,
object tracking, image registration, image segmentation, video analysis, and many other ap-
plications in the computer vision area. We nally discussed several challenges ahead of us in
order to realize the full potential of DRL for computer vision. Some latest advanced DRL
techniques were included in the last discussion.
65