algorithm's goal was to estimate a transformation function that could align moving images
to a xed image by maximizing a similarity function between the xed and moving image.
A large number of convolution and pooling layer were used to extract high-level contextual
information, batch normalization and concatenation of feature vector from last convolution
layer with action history vector was used to solve the problem of oscillation and closed loops,
and Double DQN architecture for updating the network weights was used.
Previous methods for image registration fail to cope with large deformations and variabil-
ity in appearance. To overcome these issues [184] proposed a robust non-rigid agent-based
method for image registration. The method involves nding a spatial transformation Tthat
can map the xed image with the 
oating image using actions at each time step, that is
responsible for optimizing . If theis a d dimensional vector then there will be 2d possi-
ble actions. In this work, a DQN was used as an agent for value estimation, along with a
reward that corresponded to the change in distance between ground truth and predicted
transformations across an action.
An improvement to the previous methods was proposed by [349], where the authors used
a recurrent network with RL to solve the problem. Similar to [221], they considered the
two images as a reference/xed and 
oating/moving, and the algorithm was responsible
for predicting transformation on the moving image to register it on a xed image. In the
specied work an LSTM [139] was used to encode past hidden states, Actor-critic [262] for
policy estimation, and a reward function corresponding to distance between ground truth
and transformed predicted landmarks were used.
Various methods in the eld of Image registration have been summarized and compared
in Table 6, and a basic implementation of image registration using DRL has been shown in
Fig. 14. The gure illustrates a general implementation of image registration using DRL
where the state consists of a xed and 
oating image. The DRL agent predicts actions in
form of a set of transformations on a 
oating image to register it onto the xed image hence
forming a new state and accepts reward in form of improvement in distance error between
ground truth and predicted transformations with iterations as described by [349],[184],[221].
9 DRL in Image Segmentation
Image segmentation is one of the most extensively performed tasks in computer vision,
where the algorithm is responsible for labeling each pixel position as foreground or back-
ground corresponding to the object being segmented in the image. Image segmentation has
a wide variety of applications in medical, robotics, weather, etc. One of the earlier attempts
with image segmentation includes [125]. With the improvement in detection techniques and
introduction of CNN, new methods are introduced every year for image segmentation. Mask
R-CNN [132] extended the work by Faster R-CNN [309] by adding a segmentation layer
after the Bounding box has been predicted. Some earlier works include [109], [127], [128]
etc. Most of these works give promising results in image segmentation. However, due to
the supervised nature of CNN and R-CNN, these algorithms need a large amount of data.
In elds like medical, the data is sometimes not readily available hence we needed a way to
42