Figure 17: A general DRL implementation for agent movement with visual inputs. The state
is provided by the environment based on which the agent performs movement actions to get
a new state and a reward from the environment.
Painting using an algorithm is a fantastic yet challenging task in the computer vision
eld. An automated painting method was proposed by [149], where the authors introduced
a model-based DRL technique for this task. The specied work involved using a neural
renderer in DRL, where the agent was responsible for making a decision about the position
and color of each stroke, and making long-term decisions to organize those strokes into a
visual masterpiece. In this work, GANs [113] were employed to improve image quality at
pixel-level and DDPG [224] was utilized for determining the policy. The authors formulated
the problem as an MDP, where the state consisted of three parts: the target image I,
the canvas on which actions (paint strokes) are performed Ct, and the time step. The
actions corresponding to a set of parameters that controlled the position, shape, color, and
transparency of strokes, and for reward the WGAN with gradient penalty (WGAN-GP) [117]
was used to calculate the discriminator score between the target image Iand the canvas Ct,
and the change in discriminator score across an action (time-step) was used as the reward.
The agent that predicted the stroke parameters was trained in actor-critic [262] fashion with
backbone similar to Resnet18 [133], and the stroke parameters by the actor were used by
the neural renderer network to predict paint strokes. The network structure of the neural
renderer and discriminator consisted of multiple convolutions and fully connected blocks.
A method for guiding medical robots using Ultrasound images with the help of DRL
was proposed by [129]. The authors treated the problem as an MDP where the agent takes
the Ultrasound images as input and estimates the state hence the problem became Partially
observable MDP (POMDP). They used Double-DQN and Duel-DQN for estimating Q-Values
and ResNet18 [133] backbone for extracting feature to be used by the algorithm along with
Prioritized Replay Memory. In their implementation the action space consisted of 8 actions
(up, down, left, right, and stop), probe position as compared to the sacrum was used as the
state and the reward was calculated by considering the agent position as compared to the
target (Move closer: 0.05, Move away: -0.1, Correct stop: 1.0, Incorrect stop: -0.25). In
60