for robust interactive segmentation through RL. With the image and initial seed points, the
algorithm is capable of generating additional seed points and image segmentation results.
The implementation included Random Walk (RW) [114] as the segmentation algorithm and
DQN for value estimation by considering the problem as an MDP. They used the current
binary segmentation mask and image features as the state, the actions corresponded to se-
lecting seed points in a sparse matrix of size 20 20(800 dierent actions were possible), and
the reward consisted of the change in IOU across an action. In addition, the authors used
an exponential IOU model to capture changes in IOU values more accurately.
Most of the previous work for image segmentation fail to produce satisfactory results
when it comes to 3D medical data. An attempt on 3D medical image segmentation was done
by [222], where the authors proposed an iteratively-rened interactive multi-agent method
for 3D medical image segmentation. They proposed a method to rene an initial course
segmentation produced by some segmentation methods using RL, where the state consisted of
the image, previous segmentation probability, and user hint map. The actions corresponded
to adjusting the segmentation probability for renement of segmentation, and a relative
cross-entropy gain-based reward to update the model in a constrained direction was used.
In simple words, it is the relative improvement of previous segmentation to the current one.
The authors utilized an asynchronous advantage actor-critic algorithm for determining the
policy and value of the state.
Table 7: Comparing various DRL-based image segmentation meth-
ods
Approaches Year Training
TechniqueActions Remarks Backbone Performance Datasets
Semantic
Segmen-
tation for
indoor
scenes[310]2016 DQN 2 ac-
tions per
object:
object,
back-
groundStates: current
probability
distribution.
Reward: pixel-
wise frequency
weighted Jac-
card index.
Conditional
Random Field
Framework
(CRF) and lo-
gistic regression
version of Ad-
aBoost [140] for
classication.Not
Speci-
edPixel-wise
percentage
jaccard index
comparable to
Gupta-L [121]
and Gupta-P
[120].NYUD V2
dataset [338]
44