of actions. Utilizing an RL framework the states consisted of feature vector and historical
actions concatenated together, and a total of 8 actions for Bounding box transformation
(left, right, up, down, bigger, smaller, fatter, and taller) were used. For reward the authors
used the change in IOU between actions, the reward being 0 for an increase in IOU and -1
otherwise. For terminal action, however, the reward was 8 for IOU greater than 0.5 and -8
otherwise. The authors in the paper used DQN with multitask learning for localization and
divided terminal action and 8 transformation actions into two networks and trained them
together.
An improvement for the Region proposal networks that greedily select the ROIs was
proposed by [295], where they used RL for the task. The authors in this paper used a
two-stage detector similar to Fast and Faster R-CNN But used RL for the decision-making
Process. For the reward, they used the normalized change in Intersection over Union (IOU).
Instead of learning a policy from a large set of data, [15] proposed a method for bounding
box renement (BAR) using RL. In the paper, once the authors have an inaccurate bounding
box that is predicted by some algorithm they use the BAR algorithm to predict a series of
actions for renement of a bounding box. They considered a total of 8 actions (up, down,
left, right, wider, taller, fatter, thinner) for bounding box transformation and considered
the problem as a sequential decision-making problem (SDMP). They proposed an oine
method called BAR-DRL and an online method called BAR-CB where training is done on
every image. In BAR-DRL the authors trained a DQN over the states which consisted of
features extracted from ResNet50 [133] [354] pretrained on ImageNet [72] [320] and a history
vector of 10 actions. The Reward for BAR-DRL was 1 if the IOU increase after action and -3
otherwise. For BAR-CB they adapted the LinUCB [216] algorithm for an episodic scenario
and considered The Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) for the state to capture the
outline and edges of the object of interest. The actions in the online method (BAR-CB) were
the same as the oine method and the reward was 1 for increasing IOU and 0 otherwise.
For both the implementations, the authors considered as terminal IOU.
An improvement to sequential search strategy by [251] was proposed by [367], where
they used a framework consisting of two modules, Coarse and ne level search. According to
the authors, this method is ecient for object detection in large images (dimensions larger
than 3000 pixels). The authors rst performed a course level search on a large image to
nd a set of patches that are used by ne level search to nd sub-patches. Both ne and
coarse levels were conducted using a two-step episodic MDP, where The policy network
was responsible for returning the probability distribution of all actions. In the paper, the
authors considered the actions to be the binary action array (0,1) where 1 means that the
agent would consider acquiring sub-patches for that particular patch. The authors in their
implementation considered a number of patches and sub-patches as 16 and 4 respectively
and used the linear combination of Racc(detection recall) and Rcostwhich combines image
acquisition cost and run-time performance reward.
Table 4: Comparing various DRL-based object detection methods
28