clicks generated by the game player.
Action recognition is an important task in the computer vision eld which focuses on
categorizing the action that is being performed in the video frame. To address the problem
a deep progressive RL (DPRL) method for action recognition in skeleton-based videos was
proposed by [357]. The authors proposed a method that distills the most informative frames
and discards ambiguous frames by considering the quality of the frame and the relationship
of the frame with the complete video along with a graph-based structure to map the human
body in form of joints and vertices. DPRL was utilized to lter out informative frames in a
video and graph-based CNNs were used to learn the spatial dependency between the joints.
The approach consisted of two sub-networks, a frame distillation network (FDNet) to lter a
xed number of frames from input sequence using DPRL and GCNN to recognize the action
labels using output in form of a graphical structure by the FDNet. The authors modeled the
problem as an MDP where the state consisted of the concatenation of two tensors FandM,
whereFconsisted of global information about the video and Mconsisted of the frames that
were ltered, The actions which correspond to the output of FDNet were divided into three
types: shifting to left, staying the same and shifting to the right, and the reward function
corresponded to the change in probability of categorizing the video equal to the ground truth
clipped it between [-1 and 1] and is provided by GCNN to FDNet.
Video summarization is a useful yet dicult task in the computer vision eld that involves
predicting the object or the task that is being performed in a video. A DRL method for
unsupervised video summarisation was proposed by [429], in which the authors proposed a
Diversity-Representativeness reward system and a deep summarisation network (DSN) which
was capable of predicting a probability for each video frame that specied the likeliness of
selecting the frame and then take actions to form video summaries. They used an encode-
decoder framework for the DSN where GoogLeNet [355] pre-trained on ImageNet [320] [72]
was used as an encoder and a bidirectional RNNs (BiRNNs) topped with a fully connected
(FC) layer was used as a decoder. The authors modeled the problem as an MDP where
the action corresponded to the task of selecting or rejecting a frame. They proposed a
novel Diversity-Representativeness Reward Function in their implementation, where diversity
reward corresponded to the degree of dissimilarity among the selected frames in feature space,
and representativeness reward measured how well the generated summary can represent the
original video. For the RNN unit they used an LSTM [139] to capture long-term video
dependencies and used REINFORCE algorithm for training the policy function.
An improvement to [429] was proposed by [430], where the summarisation network was
implemented using Deep Q-learning (DQSN), and a trained classication network was used
to provide a reward for training the DQSN. The approach included using (Bi-GRU) bidirec-
tional recurrent networks with a gated recurrent unit (GRU) [50] for both classication and
summarisation network. The authors rst trained the classication network using a super-
vised classication loss and then used the classication network with xed weights for the
classication of summaries generated by the summarisation network. The summarisation
network included an MDP-based framework in which states consisted of a sequence of video
frames and actions re
ected the task of either keeping the frame or discarding it. They used
54