9-dimensional vector( move right, move left, move up, move down, scale-up, scale down, as-
pect ratio change fatter, aspect ratio change taller and stop), also a reward function similar
to [168] was used.
Various works in the eld of object tracking have been summarized in Table 5, and a
basic implementation of object tracking using DRL has been shown in Fig. 13. The gure
illustrates a general implementation of object tracking in videos using DRL, where the state
consists of two consecutive frames ( Ft;Ft+1) with a bounding box for the rst frame produced
by another algorithm for the rst iteration or by the previous iterations of DRL agent. The
actions corresponds to the moving the bounding on the image to t the object in frame Ft+1,
hence forming a new state with frame Ft+1and frame Ft+2along with the bounding box
for frameFt+1predicted by previous iteration and reward corresponds to whether IOU is
greater then a given threshold as used by [118],[308],[45], [84],[307],[168],[169].
Figure 13: DRL implementation for object tracking. Here the state consists of two consecu-
tive frames with bounding box locations for the rst frame that is predicted by some object
detection algorithm or by the previous iteration of DRL, the actions move the bounding box
present in the rst frame to t the object in the second frame to maximize the reward which
is the whether the IOU is greater than a given threshold or not.
8 DRL in Image Registration
Image registration is a very useful step that is performed on 3D medical images for the
alignment of two or more images. The goal of 3D medical image registration is to nd a
correlation between two images from either dierent patients or the same patients at dierent
times, where the images can be Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI), or Positron Emission Tomography (PET). In the process, the images are brought to
the same coordinate system and aligned with each other. The reason for image registration
being a challenging task is the fact that the two images used may have a dierent coordinate
system, scale, or resolution.
Many attempts have been made toward automated image registration. A multi-resolution
strategy with local optimizers to perform 2D or 3D image registration was performed by
39