Figure 14: DRL implementation for image registration. The state consists of xed and

oating image and the actions in form of transformations are performed on the 
oating
image so as to maximize reward by minimizing distance between the ground truth and
predicted transformations.
train algorithms to perform a given task when there are data constraints. Luckily RL tends
to shine when the data is not available in a large quantity.
One of the rst methods for Image segmentation through RL was proposed by [324],
where the authors proposed an RL framework for medical image segmentation. In their
work, they used a Q-Matrix, where the actions were responsible for adjusting the threshold
values to predict the mask and the reward was the normalized change in quality measure
between action steps. [325] also used a similar technique of Tabular method.
To overcome the constraints of the previous method for segmentation, [310] proposed a
method for indoor semantic segmentation through RL. In their paper, the authors proposed
a sequential strategy using RL to combine binary object masks of dierent objects into a
single multi-object segmentation mask. They formulated the binary mask in a Conditional
Random Field Framework (CRF), and used a logistic regression version of AdaBoost [140] for
classication. The authors considered the problem of adding multiple binary segmentation
into one as an MDP, where the state consisted of a list of probability distributions of dier-
ent objects in an image, and the actions correspond to the selection of object/background
segmentation for a particular object in the sequential semantic segmentation. In the RL
framework, the reward was considered in terms of pixel-wise frequency weighted Jaccard
Index computed over the set of actions taken at any stage of an episode.
Interactive segmentation is the task of producing an interactive mask for objects in an
image. Most of the previous works in this eld greatly depend on the distribution of inputs
which is user-dependent and hence produce inadequate results. An improvement was pro-
posed by [343], where the authors proposed SeedNet, an automatic seed generation method
43