Figure 16: DRL implementation for video summarization. For state a sequence of consecutive
frames are used and the DRL agent decided whether to include the frame in the summary
set that is used to predict video summary.
a structure similar to Duel-DQN where value function and advantage function are trained
together. In their implementation, the authors considered 3 dierent rewards: Global Recog-
nisability reward using the classication network with +1 as reward and -5 as punishment,
Local Relative Importance Reward for rewarding the action of accepting or rejecting a frame
by summarisation network, and an Unsupervised Reward that is computed globally using
the unsupervised diversity-representativeness (DR) reward proposed in [429]. The authors
trained both the networks using the features generated by GoogLeNet [355] pre-trained on
ImageNet [72].
A method for video summarization in Ultrasound using DRL was proposed by [233], in
which the authors proposed a deep summarisation network in an encoder-decoder fashion
and used a bidirectional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) [150] for sequential modeling. In their implemen-
tation, the encoder-decoder convolution network extracted features from video frames and
fed them into the Bi-LSTM. The RL network accepted states in form of latent scores from
Bi-LSTM and produced actions, where the actions consist of the task of including or discard-
ing the video frame inside the summary set that is used to produce video summaries. The
authors used three dierent rewards Rdet,RrepandRdivwhereRdetevaluated the likelihood
of a frame being a standard diagnostic plane, Rrepdened the representativeness reward and
Rdivwas the diversity reward that evaluated the quality of the selected summary. They used
Kernel temporal segmentation (KTS) [298] for video summary generalization.
Various works associated with video analysis have been summarised and compared in
Table 8 and a basic implementation of video summarization using DRL has been shown in
Fig. 16, where the states consist of a sequence of video frames. The DRL agent performs
55