4.3 Good practices
Inspired by Deep Q-learning [264], we discuss some useful techniques that are used during
training an agent in DRL framework in practices.
Experience replay Experience replay [417] is a useful part of o-policy learning and is
often used while training an agent in RL framework. By getting rid of as much information
as possible from past experiences, it removes the correlations in training data and reduces
the oscillation of the learning procedure. As a result, it enables agents to remember and
re-use past experiences sometimes in many weights updates which increases data eciency.
Minibatch learning Minibatch learning is a common technique that is used together with
experience replay. Minibatch allows learning more than one training sample at each step,
thus, it makes the learning process robust to outliers and noise.
Target Q-network freezing As described in [264], two networks are used for the training
process. In target Q-network freezing: one network interacts with the environment and
another network plays the role of a target network. The rst network is used to generate
target Q-values that are used to calculate losses. The weights of the second network i.e.
target network are xed and slowly updated to the rst network [224].
Reward clipping A reward is the scalar number provided by the environment and it aims
at optimizing the network. To keep the rewards in a reasonable scale and to ensure proper
learning, they are clipped to a specic range (-1 ,1). Here 1 refers to as positive reinforcement
or reward and -1 is referred to as negative reinforcement or punishment.
Model-based v.s. model-free approach Whether the model-free or model-based ap-
proaches is chosen mainly depends on the model architecture i.e. policy and value function.
5 DRL in Landmark Detection
Autonomous landmark detection has gained more and more attention in the past few years.
One of the main reasons for this increased inclination is the rise of automation for evaluating
data. The motivation behind using an algorithm for landmarking instead of a person is that
manual annotation is a time-consuming tedious task and is prone to errors. Many eorts
have been made for the automation of this task. Most of the works that were published for
this task using a machine learning algorithm to solve the problem. [64] proposed a regression
forest-based method for detecting landmark in a full-body CT scan. Although the method
was fast it was less accurate when dealing with large organs. [101] extended the work of [64]
by adding statistical shape priors that were derived from segmentation masks with cascade
regression.
In order to address the limitations of previous works on anatomy detection, [105] re-
formulated the detection problem as a behavior learning task for an articial agent using
MDP. By using the capabilities of DRL and scale-space theory [226], the optimal search
strategies for nding anatomical structures are learned based on the image information at
multiple scales. In their approach, the search starts at the coarsest scale level for capturing
global context and continues to ner scales for capturing more local information. In their
22