action (Horizontal shrink, Vertical shrink, Horizontal zoom, Vertical zoom), and 1 terminal
action (Stop), and the reward corresponded to the change in IOU across an action. For the
network architecture, a Fully-Convolutional DenseNet56 [166] was used as a backbone along
with DQN as the agent for CPN and down-sampling followed by up-sampling architecture
for CEN.
Unsupervised video object segmentation is an intuitive task in the computer vision eld.
A DRL method for this task was proposed by [111], where the authors proposed a motion-
oriented unsupervised method for image segmentation in videos (MOREL). They proposed
a two-step process to achieve the task in which rst a representation of input is learned to
understand all moving objects through unsupervised video object segmentation, Then the
weights are transferred to the RL framework to jointly train segmentation network along
with policy and value function. The rst part of the method takes two consecutive frames
as input and predicts a number of segmentation masks, corresponding object translations,
and camera translations. They used a modied version of actor-critic [262][329][371] for the
network of rst step. Following the unsupervised fashion, the authors used the approach
similar to [375] and trained the network to interpolate between consecutive frames and used
the masks and translations to estimate the optical 
ow using the method that was proposed
in Spatial Transformer Networks [159]. They also used structural dissimilarity (DSSIM)
[388] to calculate reconstruction loss and actor-critic [262] algorithm to learn policy in the
second step.
A DRL method for dynamic semantic face video segmentation was proposed by [387],
where Deep Feature Flow [431] was utilized as the feature propagation framework and RL
was used for an ecient and eective scheduling policy. The method involved dividing
frames into key ( Ik) and non-key ( Ii), and using the last key frame features for performing
segmentation of non-key frame. The actions made by the policy network corresponded to
categorizing a frame as IkorIiand the state consisted of deviation information and expert
information, where the deviation information described the dierence between current Iiand
lastIkand expert information encapsulated the key decision history. The authors utilized
FlowNet2-s model [156] as an optical 
ow estimation function, and divided the network into
feature extraction module and task-specic module. After policy network which consisted
of one convolution layer, 4 fully connected layers and 2 concatenated channels consisting of
KAR (Key all ratio: Ratio between key frame and every other frame in decision history) and
LKD (Last key distance: Distance between current and last key frame) predicted the action,
If the current frame is categorized as key frame the feature extraction module produced
the frame features and task-specic module predicted the segmentation, However if the
frame is categorized as a non-key frame the features from the last key frame along with
the optical 
ow was used by the task-specic module to predict the segmentation. The
authors proposed two types of reward functions, The rst reward function was calculated by
considering the dierence between the IOU for key and non-key actions. The second reward
function was proposed for a situation when ground truth was not available and was calculated
by considering the accuracy score between segmentation for key and non-key actions.
48