Generalized Scalable Optimal Sparse Decision Trees
los, 1973). Of the more recent attempts at this challenging
problem, Garofalakis et al. (2003) use a dynamic program-
ming method for ﬁnding an optimal subtree within a pre-
deﬁned larger decision tree grown using standard greedy
induction. Their trees inherit suboptimality from the induc-
tion procedure used to create the larger tree. The DL8 al-
gorithm (Nijssen & Fromont, 2007) performs dynamic pro-
gramming on the space of decision trees. However, without
mechanisms to reduce the size of the space and to reduce
computation, the method cannot be practical. A more prac-
tical extension is the DL8.5 method (Nijssen et al., 2020),
which uses a hierarchical upper bound theorem to reduce
the size of the search space. However, it also uses bucketi-
zation preprocessing, which sacriﬁces optimality; without
this preprocessing or other mechanisms to reduce compu-
tation, the method suffers in computational speed.
The CORELS algorithm (Angelino et al., 2017; 2018;
Larus-Stone, 2017), which is an associative classiﬁcation
method rather than an optimal decision tree method, breaks
away from the previous literature in that it is a custom
branch-and-bound method with custom bounding theo-
rems, its own bit-vector library, specialized data structures,
and an implementation that leverages computational reuse.
CORELS is able to solve problems within a minute that,
using any other prior approach, might have taken weeks, or
even months or years. Hu et al. (Hu et al., 2019) adapted
the CORELS philosophy to produce an Optimal Sparse
Decision Tree (OSDT) algorithm that leverages some of
CORELS’ libraries and its computational reuse paradigm,
as well as many of its theorems, which dramatically reduce
the size of the search space. However, OSDT solves an ex-
ponentially harder problem than that of CORELS’ rule list
optimization, producing scalability challenges, as we might
expect.
This work addresses two fundamental limitations in ex-
isting work: unsatisfying results for imbalanced data and
scalability challenges when trying to fully optimize over
continuous variables. Thus, the ﬁrst contribution of this
work is to massively generalize sparse decision tree opti-
mization to handle a wide variety of objective functions,
including weighted accuracy (including multi-class), bal-
anced accuracy, F-score, AUC and partial area under the
ROC convex hull. Both CORELS and OSDT were de-
signed to maximize accuracy, regularized by sparsity, and
neither were designed to handle other objectives. CORELS
has been generalized (A ¨ıvodji et al., 2019; Chen & Rudin,
2018) to handle some constraints, but not to the wide va-
riety of different objectives one might want to handle in
practice. Generalization to some objectives is straightfor-
ward (e.g., weighted accuracy) but non-trivial in cases of
optimizing rank statistics (e.g., AUC), which typically re-
quire quadratic computation in the number of observations
in the dataset. However, for sparse decision trees, this timeis much less than quadratic, because all observations within
a leaf of a tree are tied in score, and there are a sparse num-
ber of leaves in the tree. Taking advantage of this permits
us to rapidly calculate rank statistics and thus optimize over
them. The second contribution is to present a new repre-
sentation of the dynamic programming search space that
exposes a high degree of computational reuse when mod-
elling continuous features. The new search space represen-
tation provides a useful solution to a problem identiﬁed in
the CORELS paper, which is how to use “similar support”
bounds in practice. A similar support bound states that if
two features in the dataset are similar, but not identical,
to each other, then bounds obtained using the ﬁrst feature
for a split in a tree can be leveraged to obtain bounds for
the same tree, were the second feature to replace the ﬁrst
feature. However, if the algorithm checks the similar sup-
port bound too frequently, the bound slows the algorithm
down, despite reducing the search space. Our method uses
hash trees that represent similar trees using shared subtrees,
which naturally accelerates the evaluation of similar trees.
The implementation, coupled with a new type of incremen-
tal similar support bound, is efﬁcient enough to handle a
few continuous features by creating dummy variables for
all unique split points along a feature. This permits us to
obtain smaller optimality gaps and certiﬁcates of optimal-
ity for mixed binary and continuous data when optimizing
additive loss functions several orders of magnitude more
quickly than any other method that currently exists.
Our algorithm is called Generalized and Scalable Optimal
Sparse Decision Trees (GOSDT, pronounced “ghost”). A
chart detailing a qualitative comparison of GOSDT to pre-
vious decision tree approaches is in Appendix A.
2. Notation and Objectives
We denote the training dataset as f(xi;yi)gN
i=1, where
xi2 f0;1gMare binary features. Our notation uses
yi2f0;1g, though our code is implemented for multiclass
classiﬁcation as well. For each real-valued feature, we cre-
ate a split point at the mean value between every ordered
pair of unique values present in the training data. Follow-
ing notation of Hu et al. (2019), we represent a tree as a set
of leaves; this is important because it allows us notto store
the splits of the tree, only the conditions leading to each
leaf. A leaf set d= (l 1;l2;:::;lHd)containsHddistinct
leaves, where liis the classiﬁcation rule of the leaf i, that
is, the set of conditions along the branches that lead to the
leaf, andleafy^iis the label prediction for all data in leaf i.
For a treed, we deﬁne the objective function as a combina-
tion of the loss and a penalty on the number of leaves, with
regularization parameter :
R(d;x;y) =`(d;x;y) +Hd: (1)