Generalized and Scalable Optimal Sparse Decision Trees
Jimmy Lin* 1Chudi Zhong* 2Diane Hu2Cynthia Rudin2Margo Seltzer1
Abstract
Decision tree optimization is notoriously difﬁ-
cult from a computational perspective but essen-
tial for the ﬁeld of interpretable machine learn-
ing. Despite efforts over the past 40 years, only
recently have optimization breakthroughs been
made that have allowed practical algorithms to
ﬁnd optimal decision trees. These new tech-
niques have the potential to trigger a paradigm
shift where it is possible to construct sparse deci-
sion trees to efﬁciently optimize a variety of ob-
jective functions without relying on greedy split-
ting and pruning heuristics that often lead to sub-
optimal solutions. The contribution in this work
is to provide a general framework for decision
tree optimization that addresses the two signiﬁ-
cant open problems in the area: treatment of im-
balanced data and fully optimizing over contin-
uous variables. We present techniques that pro-
duce optimal decision trees over a variety of ob-
jectives including F-score, AUC, and partial area
under the ROC convex hull. We also introduce
a scalable algorithm that produces provably op-
timal results in the presence of continuous vari-
ables and speeds up decision tree construction by
several orders of magnitude relative to the state-
of-the art.
1. Introduction
Decision tree learning has served as a foundation for in-
terpretable artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning for
over half a century (Morgan & Sonquist, 1963; Payne &
Meisel, 1977; Loh, 2014). The major approach since the
1980’s has been decision tree induction, where heuris-
tic splitting and pruning procedures grow a tree from the
top down and prune it back afterwards (Quinlan, 1993;
Breiman et al., 1984). The problem with these methods
*Equal contribution1University of British Columbia,
2Vancou-
ver, Canada Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
Correspondence to: Cynthia Rudin <cynthia@cs.duke.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).is that they tend to produce suboptimal trees with no way
of knowing how suboptimal the solution is. This leaves
a gap between the performance that a decision tree might
obtain and the performance that one actually attains, with
no way to check on (or remedy) the size of this gap–and
sometimes, the gap can be large.
Full decision tree optimization is NP-hard, with no
polynomial-time approximation (Laurent & Rivest, 1976),
leading to challenges in proving optimality or bounding the
optimality gap in a reasonable amount of time, even for
small datasets. It is possible to create assumptions that re-
duce hard decision tree optimization to cases where greedy
algorithms sufﬁce, such as independence between features
(Klivans & Servedio, 2006), but these assumptions do not
hold in reality. If the data can be perfectly separated with
zero error, SAT solvers can be used to ﬁnd optimal decision
trees rapidly (Narodytska et al., 2018); however, real data
is generally not separable, leaving us with no choice other
than to actually solve the problem.
Decision tree optimization is amenable to branch-and-
bound methods, implemented either via generic mathe-
matical programming solvers or by customized algorithms.
Solvers have been used from the 1990’s (Bennett, 1992;
Bennett & Blue, 1996) to the present (Verwer & Zhang,
2019; Blanquero et al., 2018; Nijssen et al., 2020; Bertsi-
mas & Dunn, 2017; Rudin & Ertekin, 2018; Menickelly
et al., 2018; Vilas Boas et al., 2019), but these generic
solvers tend to be slow. A common way to speed them
up is to make approximations in preprocessing to reduce
the size of the search space. For instance, “bucketization”
preprocessing is used in both generic solvers (Verwer &
Zhang, 2019) and customized algorithms (Nijssen et al.,
2020) to handle continuous variables. Continuous variables
pose challenges to optimality; even one continuous variable
increases the number of possible splits by the number of
possible values of that variable in the entire database, and
each additional split leads to an exponential increase in the
size of the optimization problem. Bucketization is tempt-
ing and seems innocuous, but we prove in Section 3 that it
sacriﬁces optimality.
Dynamic programming methods have been used for vari-
ous decision tree optimization problems since as far back
as the early 1970’s (Garey, 1972; Meisel & Michalopou-