Generalized Scalable Optimal Sparse Decision Trees
5. Experiments
We present details of our experimental setup and datasets
in Appendix I. GOSDT’s novelty lies in its ability to op-
timize a large class of objective functions and its ability to
efﬁciently handle continuous variables without sacriﬁcing
optimality. Thus, our evaluation results: 1) Demonstrate
our ability to optimize over a large class of objectives (AUC
in particular), 2) Show that GOSDT outperforms other ap-
proaches in producing models that are both accurate and
sparse, and 3) Show how GOSDT scales in its handling
of continuous variables relative to other methods. In Ap-
pendix I we show time-to-optimality results.
Optimizing Many Different Objectives: We use the Four-
Class dataset (Chang & Lin, 2011) to show optimal deci-
sion trees corresponding to different objectives. Figures 2
and 3 show the training ROC of decision trees generated
for six different objectives and optimal trees for accuracy,
AUC and partial area under ROC convex hull. Optimizing
different objectives produces different trees with different
FPandFN. (No other decision tree method is designed
to fully optimize any objective except accuracy, so there is
no comparison to other methods.)
Figure 2. Training ROC of FourClass dataset ( = 0:01). A/B in
the legend at the bottom right shows the objective and its param-
eters/area under the ROC.
Figure 3. Trees for different objectives. A/B in the leaf node rep-
resents the number of positive/negative samples amongst the total
samples captured in that leaf.
Binary Datasets, Accuracy vs Sparsity: We compare
Figure 4. Training accuracy achieved by BinOCT, CART, DL8.5,
GOSDT, and OSDT as a function of the number of leaves.
models produced from BinOCT (Verwer & Zhang, 2019),
CART (Breiman et al., 1984), DL8.5 (Nijssen et al., 2020),
OSDT (Hu et al., 2019), and GOSDT. For each method, we
select hyperparameters to produce trees of varying num-
bers of leaves and plot training accuracy against sparsity
(number of leaves). GOSDT directly optimizes the trade-
off between training accuracy and number of leaves, pro-
ducing points on the efﬁcient frontier. Figure 4 and 5 show
(1) that GOSDT typically produces excellent training and
test accuracy with a reasonable number of leaves, and (2)
that we can quantify how close to optimal the other meth-
ods are. Learning theory provides guarantees that training
and test accuracy are close for sparse trees; more results are
in Appendix I.
Continuous Datasets, Slowdown vs Thresholds: We pre-
processed by encoding continuous variables as a set of bi-
nary variables, using all possible thresholds. We then re-
duced the number of binary variables by combining sets
ofkvariables for increasing values of k. Binary variables
were ordered, ﬁrstly, in order of the indices of the contin-
uous variable to which they correspond, and secondly, in
order of their thresholds. We measure the slow-down intro-
duced by increasing the number of binary variables relative