Generalized Scalable Optimal Sparse Decision Trees
Figure 5. Test accuracy achieved by BinOCT, CART, DL8.5,
GOSDT, and OSDT as a function of the number of leaves.
to each algorithm’s own best time. Figure 6 shows these
results for CART, DL8.5, GOSDT, and OSDT. As the num-
ber of features increases (i.e., kapproaches 1), GOSDT
typically slows down less than DL8.5 and OSDT. This rel-
atively smaller slowdown allows GOSDT to handle more
thresholds introduced by continuous variables.
Appendix I presents more results including training times
several orders of magnitude better than the state-of-the-art.
An implementation of our experiments is available at:
https://github.com/Jimmy-Lin/TreeBenchmark.
6. Discussion and Future Work
GOSDT (and related methods) differs fundamentally from
other types of machine learning algorithms. Unlike neural
networks and typical decision tree methods, it provides a
proof of optimality for highly non-convex problems. Un-
like support vector machines, ensemble methods, and neu-
ral networks again, it produces sparse interpretable mod-
els without using convex proxies–it solves the exact prob-
lem of interest in an efﬁcient and provably optimal way.
As usual, statistical learning theoretic guarantees on test
error are the tightest for simpler models (sparse models)
Figure 6. Training time of BinOCT, CART, DL8.5, GOSDT, and
OSDT as a function of the number of binary features used to en-
code the continuous dataset ( = 0.3125 or max depth = 5).
with the lowest empirical error on the training set, hence
the choice of accuracy, regularized by sparsity (simplicity).
If GOSDT is stopped early, it reports an optimality gap,
which allows the user to assess whether the tree is sufﬁ-
ciently close to optimal, retaining learning theoretic guar-
antees on test performance. GOSDT is most effective for
datasets with a small or medium number of features. The
algorithm scales well with the number of observations, eas-
ily handling tens of thousands.
There are many avenues for future work. Since GOSDT
provides a framework to handle objectives that are mono-
tonic inFPandFN, one could create many more objec-
tives than we have enumerated here. Going beyond these
objectives to handle other types of monotonicity, fairness,
ease-of-use, and cost-related soft and hard constraints are
natural extensions. There are many avenues to speed up
GOSDT related to exploration of the search space, garbage
collection, and further bounds.
References
A¨ıvodji, U., Ferry, J., Gambs, S., Huguet, M.-J., and