tivity by exhausting bandwidth, network resources, or router processing capacity or (ii) disrupt services of 29
a legitimate user’s by exhausting the server resources such as CPU, memory, disk/database bandwidth and 30
I/O bandwidth. 31
State-of-the-art studies [24, 25, 26] lack in providing accurate detection of real-world new types of Dis- 32
tributed Denial of Service (DDoS) cyberattacks and identify the type of DDOS attack. (i.e., NTP, UDP). The 33
DIDDOS improves the detection and identiﬁcation of real-world new types of Distributed Denial of Service 34
(DDoS) using customized GRU as well as addresses the limitation of limited attack samples (imbalanced 35
data) in the dataset by improving the representation of minority class. 36
The main contributions to this paper are: 37
Propose an approach named DIDDOS to detect a real-world Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) 38
cyberattacks and identify the type of DDOS attack. 39
Evaluate the effectiveness of the DIDDOS using conventional machine learning classiﬁers (i.e., Na ¨ıve 40
Bayes (NB), Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO)) and deep learning approaches by using Gated 41
Recurrent Units (GRU) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). 42
Present a comparative analysis with state-of-the-art studies and conventional approaches (i.e., Recur- 43
rent Neural Networks (RNN), Naive Bayes (NB), Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO)). 44
Experimental results conclude that GRU provides efﬁcient detection and identiﬁcation rate than RNN, 45
other conventional algorithms, and state-of-the-art studies. 46
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy covers the related work and recent 47
advancements on DDOS attack detection and identiﬁcation. Section 3 provides extensive discussion on 48
the selected dataset. Section 4 presents the proposed approach DIDDOS for DDoS attack detection and 49
identiﬁcation. The experimental setup and results are articulated in Section 5. Section 6 presents the 50
comparative analysis with state-of-the-art studies and conventional machine learning algorithms and overall 51
discussion. Section 7 concludes the paper and leads towards future work. 52
2. Related Work 53
The number of DDoS attacks is increasing every year and from statistics [27] of Cisco Visual Network- 54
ing Index (VNI) in 2017, it is conﬁrmed that DDoS attacks are anticipated to double to 14:5million by 2022. 55
3