This shows that DDoS attacks are increasing at a very unpleasant rate. However, this is a very challenging 56
task to update the detection techniques up to the current DDoS attacks. The authors in [28] proposed the 57
dataset ”DDoS Attack 2007” containing the trafﬁc traces for one whole hour stored in the pcap format and 58
details of attack trafﬁc to the victim, as well as responses to the attack from the victim. In 2004, the authors 59
Mirkovic and Reiher et. al. [23] introduced classiﬁcations of different DDoS attacks and conceivable guard 60
components. The attacks were classiﬁed as automation, vulnerability, source address validity, attack rate 61
dynamics, characterization, the persistence of agents, victim, and impact on the victim. In automation- 62
based techniques, the machine is checked for vulnerability. In this research, the activity feed is checked to 63
access the DDoS resistance mechanism. The authors in [29] performed a study that proposes a classiﬁcation 64
dependent on the degree of automation, architecture, impact, vulnerability, attack rate dynamics, scanning 65
strategy, propagation strategy, and packet content. They also categorize the data into prevention and detec- 66
tion groups and claim that this classiﬁcation is the best to detect where was the attack originated. The study 67
also proposed a framework that can detect any DDoS attack using the K-means algorithm. However, no 68
experiments are being conducted to validate the proposed classiﬁcation. 69
In 2016, the study [30] concentrated on DDoS Taxonomy in the cloud computing paradigm. The authors 70
propose the classiﬁcation for the different potential DDoS attacks as a degree of automation, vulnerability, 71
attack rate dynamics, and attack impact. Some resembling work was researched by [23] but it was unique 72
because of DDoS attack classiﬁcation features which include real-time response, throughput, request, re- 73
sponse time, and zero-day attack detection ability. The research by Masdari and Jalali [31] concentrated 74
on the analysis of DDoS attacks in cloud computing. In their study, they showed that different DDoS at- 75
tacks by showing how these attacks violated the vulnerabilities. Lastly, the study also characterized the 76
DDoS attacks dependent on some modules like virtual machines, cloud scheduler, hyper-visor, web service, 77
cloud clients, IaaS, and SaaS-based attacks [32]. The most effective cloud computing attacks have been 78
recognized as bandwidth attacks, connectivity attacks, resource exhaustion, limitation exploitation, process 79
disruption, data corruption, and physical disruption. The primary features of the researches are discussed in 80
Table 1. 81
Modi et al.[34] proposed a NIDS that integrates the Naive Bayes classiﬁer and Snort. In their study, 82
they showed that Snort signature-based detection system ﬁlters the captured packets. The captured packets 83
will be divided into two sets: intrusion packets and non-intrusion packets. The intrusion packets will be 84
logged and denied by the system. Meanwhile, the non-intrusion packets will be pre-processed and fed 85
4