1. Introduction 1
Internet security is one of the paramount challenges and primary concern of Information Technology 2
(IT) speciﬁcally for the Internet of Things (IoT), Mobile devices, and Medical data [1, 2, 3, 4]. As the 3
demand for IT services is increasing, similarly potential cyberattacks are increasing rapidly [5, 6, 7, 8, 4
9]. Among the many existing cyberattacks (i.e., DDOS, phishing, zero-days, rootkits, drive-by, password, 5
SQL injection, ransomware), the Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack can be utilized to breach the 6
intranet and Internet resources of a particular organization or online business [10, 11, 12, 13]. Usually, 7
in this attack, legitimate users are deprived of using web-based services provided by a large number of 8
compromised machines that are highly vulnerable. DDoS attacks attempt to make a machine or network 9
resource unavailable to its intended users. DDoS attacks are sent by two or more persons, or bots [14, 15], 10
while DoS attacks are sent by one person or system. A bot is a compromised device created when a 11
computer is penetrated by software from a malware code [16]. In this paper, the main focus is to keep 12
an eye on DDoS attacks. These can be implemented in network, transport, and application layers using 13
different protocols, such as TCP, UDP, ICMP, and HTTP. Furthermore, a DDoS attack [17, 18, 19] can 14
be a large-scale coordinated attack on the provision of services of a victim system or network resources, 15
launched indirectly through a large number of compromised computer agents on the internet [20, 13, 21]. 16
Before applying an attack the attacker takes a large number of computer machines under his control over 17
the internet and these computers are vulnerable machines. The attacker exploits these computer weaknesses 18
by inserting malicious code or some other hacking technique so that they become operational under his 19
command. 20
DDoS attacks are constantly evolving as the nature of the technology used and the motivations of the 21
attackers are changing. Even today, perpetrators are being caught and charged with DDoS attacks launched 22
via botnets that cause tens of thousands of dollars of damage to the victims. Last year’s massive attack 23
on Estonian Government web sites bought this attack method squarely into the public eye [22]. DDoS at- 24
tacks on the Internet can be launched using two techniques. In the ﬁrst technique, the attacker sends some 25
malicious packets to the victim to confuse a protocol or an application running on it (i.e., vulnerability at- 26
tack [23]). The Second technique essentially includes the network/transport-level/application-level ﬂooding 27
attacks [23], in which an attacker to do one or both of the following: (i) interrupt a legitimate user’s connec- 28
Khaliq), syedibrahimimtiaz@gmail.com (Syed Ibrahim Imtiaz), aamir.rasool.au@gmail.com (Amir Rasool),
srsshafiq@gmail.com (Muahmmad Shaﬁq), abdulrehman.cs@au.edu.pk (Abdul Rehman Javed),
zunera.jalil@mail.au.edu.pk (Zunera Jalil), dr.alikashif.b@ieee.org (Ali Kashif Bashir)
2