Table 9: Generated tweets by the ThreshAug model. The method is able to find synonyms and also alternative spellings.
Method Initial Sentence Augmented version
ThreshAug these people should get out of my country these people ought to get out of My nation
ThreshAug you be confused as shit you be bewildered as sh_ *_t
Table 10: Generated tweets by the GenAug model. We note
that the generated samples may lack in syntactical and
grammatical correctness.
Tweet Class
I hate rooms full of white people they are trash Hate
The south is full faggot Hate
bitch what the hell lmfaooo Offensive
retweet: I swear I love my friends with these hoes Offensive
np me else wins trust in the bbc Neutral
I just accidentally ate the pot brownie Neutral
Another limitation to the findings of this work is imposed by the
subjectivity of the topic, as different people have different beliefs
about what is offensive and what is hate speech. This subjectivity is
reflected by the high annotator disagreement in the HON database.
As each sample was labelled by at least three people, different coders
have differing opinions on what the true label of a sample should
be. The fact that even amongst humans there is a relatively high
annotator disagreement (81 % of samples of the hate speech class
did not exhibit consensus with respect to the annotations) indicates
that by attempting to model samples assuming they are properly
labelled might introduce errors due to label noise due to the lack of
an objective definition.
7 CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK
In summation, in this paper we set out to work on the problem of
online hate speech detection in short text format, motivated by the
scarcity of previous studies that address the class imbalance problem
in online platforms and as such, relevant databases used in research,
as well as the scarcity of data augmentation techniques for text.
We first attempted to maximise, as far as possible, the performance
of a deep network topology, making sure to examine the recall
on the minority classes. We have shown that the utilisation of
pre-trained neural embeddings on large corpora (especially the
Word2Vec and GloVe models pre-trained on the Google News and
Common Crawl corpora, respectively, were the best fit for the
embedding layer) introduces word context that is outside a limited
task-specific database. Most importantly, we found that we can
utilise these pre-trained embeddings in a vector similarity based
word replacement technique in order to augment the database
within the deep text classification framework such that the class
imbalance proportions are decreased and also the deep model is
encouraged to capture the patterns/context of hate speech instead
of learning to associate ‘loaded’ words with the hate speech label.
We have achieved an absolute total of 5.7 %increase in macro-F1
score and up to 30 % in hate speech class recall in the largest online
hate speech database. In order to encourage reproducibility we have
described the means by which one can get access to all databasesand pre-trained neural embeddings and uploaded all code in the
GitHub page of the project13.
As for future work on data augmentation for text, we believe that
there are several avenues worth exploring. For example, we believe
that the replacement methods could be automated further, e. g.,
by training a model that predicts which words should be replaced
and to also learn word specific similarity thresholds instead of a
global one. Even though the generative method we proposed in this
paper was not the best performing data augmentation method, we
believe that the exploration of generative adversarial networks for
data augmentation (e. .g, see [ 1]) for text can be very promising, as
is research in defence against adversarial attacks [ 12]. For future
research, it would be interesting to see how the data augmentation
techniques we have proposed perform on longer text inputs or to
Natural Language Processing tasks other outside the domain of
online hate speech detection. On another matter, we have seen
that pre-trained neural embeddings on large corpora for data aug-
mentation can be very helpful in providing synonyms, alternative
spellings and misspellings to the words present in a sample short
text. Even though FastText was not the best performing word em-
bedding in our comparative study, we believe that sub-word level
neural embeddings as in [ 22] are worth exploring in the short-text
hate speech detection task. Finally, we also consider addressing the
fact that there is also high annotator disagreement present in the
annotation of the samples by utilising Bayesian neural networks
(e. g., see [14]) to model this label variance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the UK Economic & Social Research
Council through the research Grant No. HJ-253479 (ACLEW). Geor-
gios Rizos was funded by the Imperial College President’s PhD
Scholarship scheme. The authors would also like to thank Siyuan
Shen for his help on testing and debugging.
REFERENCES
[1]Antreas Antoniou, Amos Storkey, and Harrison Edwards. 2017. Data augmenta-
tion generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04340 (2017).
[2]Pinkesh Badjatiya, Shashank Gupta, Manish Gupta, and Vasudeva Varma. 2017.
Deep learning for hate speech detection in tweets. In Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on World Wide Web Companion. International World
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 759–760.
[3]Berit Brogaard. 2016. The number of hate crimes rose in 2016.
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-superhuman-mind/201612/
hate-crimes-spurned-group-based-hatred. [Accessed: 2018-06-05].
[4]Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2016. En-
riching Word Vectors with Subword Information. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04606
(2016).
[5]Eric Brill. 1992. A simple rule-based part of speech tagger. In Proceedings of the 3rd
conference on Applied natural language processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 152–155.
[6]Thomas Davidson, Dana Warmsley, Michael Macy, and Ingmar Weber. [n. d.].
Automated Hate Speech Detection and the Problem of Offensive Language. In
Proceedings of the 11th International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.
13https://github.com/glam-imperial/TextAugSession: Long - Mining in Emerging Applications II CIKM ’19, November 3–7, 2019, Beijing, China
999