Table 8: Confusion Matrix for the GloVe+CNN+LSTM model
on the HON database (without data augmentation).
Predicted
H O NActualH 0.20 0.68 0.12
O0.02 0.95 0.03
N0.01 0.12 0.87
6.2 Data Augmentation Tailored to Short Text
The three of the short text data augmentation methods we proposed
perform in a varying way across different deep architectures and
databases in both Macro-F1 and minority class recall. PosAug was
by far the best performing method in the HON dataset and Thre-
shAug yielded slight improvement that was orthogonal to PosAug,
as the combination of the two methods has given the best results.
Moreover, the alignment of pre-trained neural embeddings in both
the deep model and the replacement method is vital for letting
ThreshAug perform as best as it can. It is important, then, that the
entire system has the same internal model of language.
Data augmentation did not only improve the accuracy, but also
made the training of the model less prone to being dominated by
the majority class samples. By augmenting the minority class with
more samples, hate speech patterns can be extracted more easily.
We applied our methods on two other Twitter, multi-class (‘racism’,
‘sexism’ and ‘neutral’), hate speech datasets. Both datasets also had
much stronger class imbalance (see Table 1 making them a good fit
for validating the techniques. The results show that the framework
is not yet able to generalise in cases of such degree of imbalance in
two out of three classes or perhaps in higher resolution hate speech
sub-modelling (i. e., racism and sexism) and further work needs to
be performed to identify the reason.
We also performed a parameter sensitivity comparison for the
combination of PosAug andThreshAug and we saw that for small
degrees of augmentation (i. e., high threshold parameter) there is
noticeable improvement over the baseline. We also note that there
is a slightly decreasing trend in performance for values both lower
and higher than the optimal. It is important to understand the
implications of this phenomenon: When the threshold is very low,
we may be able to create a large number of new samples (many
replacement words will exceed the threshold), but the samples may
be semantically different (high quantity, low quality). On the other
hand, if the threshold is too high, the new samples created will
most likely be semantically similar (high quality), but too few to
achieve the highest possible improvement (not enough quantity).
6.3 Data Augmentation Samples
In Table 9 we show some samples generated using the ThreshAug
based synonym-replacement for data augmentation. The exam-
ples show that the grammatical structure of the sentence does not
change because we check for POS-tag equality and as such it is
mostly a word-for-word replacement of true synonyms (e. g., ‘con-
fused’ to ‘bewildered’, interchangeable due to being adjectives of
the same POS tag). Most importantly, a multitude of similar hate
speech words or phrases (e. g., ‘white trash’, ‘out of my country’, etc.)
are present in the generated tweets, which is very important in orderfor the rest of the neural architecture to learn hate speech patterns.
Turning to generative augmentation, we show in Table 10 some
sample tweets for each class generated with GenAug.
The lightly worse performance of GenAug compared to Thre-
shAug may be caused by the fact that many of the created samples
do not actually make sense from a semantic (or even syntactic)
point of view. This is because the samples are completely artifi-
cially generated, utilising only a minimal priming for the RNN (as
opposed to the substitution methods which provide variations of
the original sentences, with similar contexts). For example, one
sample that was created for the neutral class was ‘just trash away
from season man’. Although this sentence could be considered as
grammatically and syntactically acceptable in an online short-text
publication platform such as Twitter, it does not make sense, which
may lead to the subsequent modelling of unnecessary patterns by
our network if a lot of similar quality samples are created. That
being said, we do not expect all actual instances of (hate speech)
content found in online short-text platforms to be prime examples
of high syntactic (or even semantic) quality standards, which is the
reason we believe GenAug was a sensible hypothesis to test.
Regarding the augmentation performed by PosAug, even though
the new samples do not resemble actual sentences found in the
wild, we consider them to be the same as the original, albeit shifted
and warped in a uniform way within the available sequence length.
Early experiments on varying the length of the sequence did not
indicate a difference in the results.
6.4 Limitations
The generative augmentation technique is limited by the quality
of the data, because the generation of new samples can only be as
good as the initial dataset. For example, if there are only a hundred
samples in the initial training set that trains the GenAug weights,
this technique is likely to perform relatively poorly. Therefore, we
pose that the generative technique should only be attempted when
there are relatively large sample sizes available. In any case, as the
generative approach generates completely new sequence samples
instead of variations of the original samples with slightly altered
contexts it does not exploit what we propose is the main strength
of the embedding-based replacement augmentation methods: the
fact that by training on slight variations of original samples, we let
the model learn the pattern of hate speech utterances, instead of
focusing on single words that may be associated with an offensive
context (but may not be part of hate speech). Another limitation
of our conception of GenAug is that it requires training one gener-
ative model per class and as such the class imbalance problem is
inherited here as well. One possible idea for improvement would
be to train one model on all available data with vector-based input
conditioning.
The current implementation of the synonym replacement data
augmentation technique is relatively slow. For each word, the pro-
gram has to search through the entire vocabulary to find its most
similar words, which is an expensive operation. This is not a lim-
itation to the results, but limits the ability to perform extensive
parameter optimisation with any confidence for the threshold re-
placement method, because one would need to fully re-augment the
full dataset for each threshold level and then re-train the models.Session: Long - Mining in Emerging Applications II CIKM ’19, November 3–7, 2019, Beijing, China
998