it yields. In [ 45], the same holds with many choices for additive
noise (similar to dropout) on neural embedding vectors where, in
fact, the performance occasionally deteriorates. Looking into data
augmentation methods that generate new samples before inputting
them into a learning model, the closest text-based data augmen-
tation method to the ones we designed for this study is the one
proposed in [ 46] in which existing words in a sentence are selected
based on a geometric distribution and replaced with a suggested
external thesaurus synonym. Although this technique is shown to
be effective, there is a major problem in using it in a hate speech
context. As lexical approaches are likely to miss common collo-
quial alternative spellings and misspellings and are expected to
have many out-of-vocabulary words, this makes this method hard
to replicate in a meaningful manner. Our proposed substitution
method replaces words based on very specific criteria based on
neural word embedding similarity (such as Word2Vec [ 23]) and are
aware of POS-tags [ 5] in order to preserve, as much as possible, the
semantics of the original sentence.
3 HATE SPEECH DATA
In our experiments we utilise three Twitter databases, all of which
treat the problem of online hate-speech detection as being multi-
class and furthermore exhibit high class imbalance. Throughout the
paper we refer to these as: a) HON [6], b)RSN-1 [44] and c) RSN-2
[42]. The HON database makes the separation between hate speech,
offensive language and a neutral class. The latter two (RSN-1 and
RSN-2 ) include a different axis of hate-speech differentiation by
making a distinction between racist and sexist comments, and a
neutral class. In the case of RSN-2, there were also comments that
were annotated as both racist and sexist, but in this study, we
simplify this multi-label problem into a multi-class problem in
order to homogenise our experimental setup across databases and
as such, work only with samples from the racism, sexism and neutral
classes. A summary of the database sizes and class proportions is
included in Table 1. In the cases of RSN-1 andRSN-2 the number of
samples reported corresponds to the number of tweets that were
still available at the time we attempted to fetch them using the
Twitter API3, as the authors of the papers in which they were
introduced provide a list of tweet ids.
The HON database comprises around 25,000 labeled tweets,
which were obtained using the hatebase4lexicon to filter tweets for
common abusive terms, and then pulling all the tweets from all the
users selected (approximately 85 million). The 25,000 tweets were
a random sample taken from the overall pool of tweets and were
labeled using CrowdFlower5. The database is available online6.
In order to validate the generalisability of our framework, we
opted to also perform experiments on the RSN-1 andRSN-2 databases
as well. We used the Twitter API in order to fetch the tweets corre-
sponding to the tweet ids provided by the authors of [ 42,44]. The
annotation was performed using CrowdFlower for the RSN-1 and
manually by a mix of professional and amateur annotarors for the
3https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs.html
4https://www.hatebase.org/connect_api
5https://www.figure-eight.com
6https://github.com/t-davidson/hate-speech-and-offensive-languageTable 1: Overview of datasets. Class names are Hate,
Offensive and Neither for the first database and Racism,
Sexism and Neither for the other two.
Dataset Class (in %) No. Samples
H O N
HON [6] 5.7 77.4 16.7 24,783
Class (in %) No. Samples
R S N
RSN-1 [44] 0.3 26.1 73.4 11,299
RSN-2 [42] 1.3 11.8 86.3 6,310
RSN-2 database. The tweet ids and corresponding labels of these
databases are both available online7.
4 SHORT TEXT DATA AUGMENTATION
Since we cannot use the data augmentation techniques that are used
in non-NLP domains, we want to develop new ones that ideally
satisfy three desiderata - they must:
•change the input to the neural network (new sample).
•be class-conditional, such that no manual labeling is required
(same class).
•produce perturbed versions of the original sentence samples
(same meaning - see Figure 1).
The methods we propose in Sub-Section 4.1 satisfy all three,
whereas the method described in Sub-Section 4.3 only the first two.
4.1 Substitution Based Augmentation
In order to make relevant substitutions of words with synonyms
without using tools external to neural networks (e. g., a thesaurus
as in [ 46]) we make use of pre-trained neural word embeddings
because they allow us to determine the relative similarity between
each word in the vocabulary space of a text corpus. We assume we
are given a training sequence of words {wt}with corresponding
embedding vectors {vt},∀t∈{1 :T}. For each center word wt, we
predict the surrounding context words wowithin a radius m. For
example, for Word2Vec [ 23] we want to maximise the probability
of any context word given the current center word wˆo, while min-
imising the probability of a random word from the vocabulary (i. e.,
negative sampling):
Jt(θ)=logσ(vt⊺vo)+Õ
ˆo∼P(w)logσ(−vt⊺vˆo), (1)
where P(w)is a distribution that places higher sampling probabil-
ities on less frequent words, θis the entire array of embedding
vectors and σa nonlinear scoring function. This representation
tends to become more precise the larger the training corpus, as
different words would have been seen in a broader range of con-
texts. The utilisation of neural embeddings is not only useful in
substitution based data augmentation, as it is a central part of the
main deep prediction model.
7https://github.com/zeerakw/hatespeechSession: Long - Mining in Emerging Applications II CIKM ’19, November 3–7, 2019, Beijing, China
993