IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. , NO. , MONTH YEAR 2
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3
Ratio of selected features00.20.40.60.81Error rate on validation setNSGA-II
SPEA2
SMS-EMOA
EAG-MOEA/D
SFS
Fig. 1. Solution sets obtained by NSGA-II, SPEA2, SMS-EMOA, EAG-
MOEA/D, and SFS (a greedy approach) on a feature selection problem
with 617 decision variables. Although the four MOEAs consume more
runtime than SFS, SFS signiﬁcantly outperforms the four MOEAs in
terms of both error rate and ratio of selected features.
multi-objective optimization, training neural network is
usually regarded as a bi-objective MOP, i.e., minimizing
both training error and model complexity [18]. Therefore,
the Pareto optimal solutions will be sparse if the weights
of the neural network are directly encoded in solutions.
Although sparse MOPs widely exist in many popular
applications, such type of MOPs has not been exclusively
investigated before. In fact, few MOEAs are dedicated
to solving sparse MOPs, while most work only adopts
general MOEAs to solve them [19], [20]. As reported
in the literature, many existing MOEAs encounter dif-
ﬁculties in dealing with sparse MOPs, especially when
the number of decision variables is large [21], [22]. For
example, Fig. 1 plots the solution sets obtained by four
MOEAs (i.e., NSGA-II [23], SPEA2 [24], SMS-EMOA
[25], and EAG-MOEA/D [26]) and a greedy approach
(i.e., sequential forward selection, SFS [27]) on a fea-
ture selection problem with 617 decision variables. It
is obvious that the solutions obtained by the MOEAs
are worse than those obtained by the greedy approach,
even though the MOEAs consume more runtime than
the greedy approach. Some algorithms with customized
search strategies have been proposed for solving speciﬁc
sparse MOPs [21], [28], but they cannot be employed to
solve other sparse MOPs directly. On the other hand,
although some MOEAs have been tailored for large-scale
MOPs [29]–[31], they cannot be applied to large-scale
sparse MOPs with binary variables since these MOEAs
are based on decision variable division and only effective
in solving MOPs with real variables.
Existing MOEAs are ineffective for large-scale sparse
MOPs mainly because they do not consider the sparse
nature of Pareto optimal solutions when evolving the
population. For example, most existing MOEAs ran-
domly initialize the population and make each decision
variable be 0 or 1 with the same probability. However,
since most decision variables of the Pareto optimal so-
lutions for sparse MOPs are 0, the initial population
generated by existing MOEAs is far away from the
Pareto set, and many computational resources shouldbe consumed for approximating the Pareto set in a large
decision space. For the bitwise mutation used in existing
MOEAs, each decision variable has the same probability
to be ﬂipped, so the decision variables of offsprings are
expected to have the same number of 0 and 1. Therefore,
the bitwise mutation is likely to pull the offsprings away
from the Pareto set of sparse MOPs.
Since many sparse MOPs are pursued based on a
large dataset, the objective functions of them contain a
large number of decision variables and are computation-
ally expensive, which poses stiff challenges to existing
MOEAs to obtain satisfactory solutions within a tight
budget on computational cost. To address this issue,
this paper proposes an MOEA for solving large-scale
sparse MOPs. The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows.
1)We propose an MOEA for solving large-scale
sparse MOPs. The proposed algorithm ensures the
sparsity of solutions by a new population initial-
ization strategy and genetic operators, which are
veriﬁed to be effective in approximating sparse
Pareto optimal solutions.
2)We design a multi-objective test suite for assessing
the performance of the proposed algorithm, which
contains eight benchmark problems with adjustable
sparsity of Pareto optimal solutions.
3)We perform experiments on the proposed test suite
and four application examples. The statistical re-
sults verify that the proposed algorithm exhibits
signiﬁcantly better performance than seven exist-
ing MOEAs in solving large-scale sparse MOPs.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II introduces sparse MOPs in applications and existing
MOEAs for sparse MOPs. Section III details the proposed
algorithm for large-scale sparse MOPs, and Section IV
presents the proposed sparse multi-objective test suite.
The experimental results on the proposed test suite and
the applications are given in Sections V and VI. Finally,
conclusions are drawn in Section VII.
II. S PARSE MULTI-OBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATION
PROBLEMS
A. Sparse MOPs in Large-Scale Optimization Problems
There exist many real-world optimization problems
containing a large number of decision variables, which
are known as large-scale optimization problems (LOPs).
Due to the exponentially increased search space of LOPs,
they cannot be easily solved by general evolutionary
algorithms, hence some novel techniques have been
adopted to tackle speciﬁc types of LOPs, such as variable
interaction analysis [32]–[34], linkage learning [35], and
random embedding based Bayesian optimization [36],
[37]. For the LOPs in many important ﬁelds including
machine learning [18], data mining [10], and network
science [11], many problems contain sparse optimal solu-
tions. However, no technique has been tailored for sparse
problems before.