IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. , NO. , MONTH YEAR 4
is to recommend the matching items to the customer, by
means of mining the best pattern from all the historical
shopping lists. In [21], the pattern mining problem is
regarded as an MOP for maximizing both the frequency
and completeness, where the frequency of a pattern
indicates the ratio of transactions it occurs in, and the
completeness of a pattern indicates its occupancy rate in
the transactions it occurs in.
The critical node detection problem. Given a graph G=
(V; E), the critical node detection problem [11] is to select
a point set x⊆V, the deletion of which minimizes
pairwise connectivity in the remaining graph G[V\x].
In order to select fewer points for larger destruction
to the graph, both the number of selected points and
the pairwise connectivity in the remaining graph should
be minimized. As a result, the critical node detection
problem is also a subset selection MOP, and has been
tackled by some MOEAs [40], [41].
The neural network training problem. Evolutionary al-
gorithms have been deeply studied for training artiﬁ-
cial neural network, such as optimizing topology [42],
weights [43], and hyperparameters [20] of the network.
Regarding multi-objective approaches, various objectives
have been considered in training neural network [18],
[44], [45]. In order to control the complexity of neural
network, in this paper we adopt the deﬁnition suggested
in [18], i.e., optimizing the weights of a feedforward
neural network for minimizing the complexity and error.
Although the above four MOPs are from different
ﬁelds and contain different objectives, they can be
grouped into the same category of MOPs since the Pareto
optimal solutions of them are sparse. For the problems
of feature selection, critical node detection, and neural
network training, the sparsity of solution is deﬁned as
an objective to be optimized directly, hence the Pareto
optimal solutions are certainly sparse. While for the
pattern mining problem which does not explicitly control
the sparsity of solution, the Pareto optimal solutions
are also sparse due to the deﬁnition of the objectives.
In general, the number of items in each transaction is
much fewer than the total number of items in the dataset,
hence the items in each Pareto optimal solution should
account for a small portion of all the items, otherwise
the solution will not occur in any transaction.
C. MOEAs for Sparse MOPs and Large-Scale MOPs
For the above sparse MOPs, most work solves them
via existing MOEAs like NSGA-II [23], SMS-EMOA [25],
and MOEA/D [46], and some work also enhances the
performance by adopting customized search strategies.
For example, Gu et al. [47] modiﬁed the competitive
swarm optimizer and embedded it in a wrapper ap-
proach for feature selection, Zhang et al. [21] suggested
a novel population initialization strategy in NSGA-II
to solve the pattern mining problem, Aringhieri et al.
[28] made use of appropriate greedy rules in genetic
operators to improve the quality of offsprings for criticalnode detection, and Sun et al. [48] assumed a set of
orthogonal vectors to highly reduce the number of deci-
sion variables in training an unsupervised deep neural
network. However, it is worth noting that these cus-
tomized search strategies cannot be employed to solve
other sparse MOPs directly, since they are related to the
objective functions and the structure of dataset, which
can only solve a speciﬁc type of sparse MOPs.
On the other hand, many MOEAs tailored for large-
scale MOPs cannot be applied to the feature selection
problem, the pattern mining problem, and the critical
node detection problem with binary variables, since most
of these MOEAs are based on decision variable division.
For example, MOEA/DVA [29] and LMEA [30] divided
the decision variables by control property analysis and
variable clustering, respectively, both of which perturbed
every decision variable in the continuous decision space.
WOF [31] divided the decision variables into several
groups, and optimized a weight vector instead of all the
decision variables in the same group. As a result, these
MOEAs can only solve MOPs with real variables. Be-
sides, a large number of function evaluations should be
consumed for dividing the decision variables, which is
inefﬁcient for solving sparse MOPs with a large dataset.
To address the above issues, this paper proposes an
MOEA for large-scale sparse MOPs. The proposed al-
gorithm does not need to know the objective functions
or the dataset, and it can solve both MOPs with real
variables and MOPs with binary variables.
III. A NEVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHM FOR SPARSE
MULTI-OBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATION PROBLEMS
A. Framework of the Proposed SparseEA
As shown in Algorithm 1, the proposed evolutionary
algorithm for large-scale sparse MOPs, called SparseEA,
has a similar framework to NSGA-II [23]. First of all, a
population Pwith size Nis initialized, and the non-
dominated front number [49] and crowding distance
[23] of each solution in Pare calculated. In the main
loop, 2Nparents are selected by binary tournament
selection according to the non-dominated front number
and crowding distance of each solution in P. Then N
offsprings are generated (i.e., two parents are used to
generate one offspring) and combined with P. After-
wards, the duplicated solutions in the combined pop-
ulation are deleted, and Nsolutions with better non-
dominated front number and crowding distance in the
combined population survive to the next generation.
In short, the mating selection and environmental selec-
tion in SparseEA are similar to those in NSGA-II, while
SparseEA uses new strategies to generate the initial
population and offsprings, which can ensure the sparsity
of the generated solutions. The population initialization
strategy and genetic operators in SparseEA are elabo-
rated in the next two subsections respectively.