IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. , NO. , MONTH YEAR 1
An Evolutionary Algorithm for Large-Scale
Sparse Multi-Objective Optimization Problems
Ye Tian, Xingyi Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE , Chao Wang, and Yaochu Jin, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —In the last two decades, a variety of different
types of multi-objective optimization problems (MOPs) have
been extensively investigated in the evolutionary computa-
tion community. However, most existing evolutionary algo-
rithms encounter difﬁculties in dealing with MOPs whose
Pareto optimal solutions are sparse (i.e., most decision vari-
ables of the optimal solutions are zero), especially when the
number of decision variables is large. Such large-scale sparse
MOPs exist in a wide range of applications, for example,
feature selection that aims to ﬁnd a small subset of features
from a large number of candidate features, or structure op-
timization of neural networks whose connections are sparse
to alleviate overﬁtting. This paper proposes an evolutionary
algorithm for solving large-scale sparse MOPs. The proposed
algorithm suggests a new population initialization strategy
and genetic operators by taking the sparse nature of the
Pareto optimal solutions into consideration, to ensure the
sparsity of the generated solutions. Moreover, this paper also
designs a test suite to assess the performance of the proposed
algorithm for large-scale sparse MOPs. Experimental results
on the proposed test suite and four application examples
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed algorithm over
seven existing algorithms in solving large-scale sparse MOPs.
Index Terms —Large-scale multi-objective optimization,
evolutionary algorithm, sparse Pareto optimal solutions, fea-
ture selection, evolutionary neural network
I. INTRODUCTION
MULTI-objective optimization problems (MOPs) re-
fer to those having multiple objectives to be op-
timized simultaneously [1]. For example, the portfolio
Manuscript received –. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61672033,
61822301, 61876123, and U1804262, in part by the State Key Laboratory
of Synthetical Automation for Process Industries under Grant PAL-
N201805, and in part by the Anhui Provincial Natural Science Founda-
tion under Grant 1808085J06 and 1908085QF271. (Corresponding author:
Xingyi Zhang)
Y. Tian is with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and
Signal Processing of Ministry of Education, Institutes of Physical
Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei 230601,
China. (email: ﬁeld910921@gmail.com)
X. Zhang and C. Wang are with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of Education, School of
Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei 230601,
China. (email: xyzhanghust@gmail.com; wangchao8@ahu.edu.cn)
Y. Jin is with the Department of Computer Science, University
of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH, U.K.. He is also with the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern Uni-
versity of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China. (email:
yaochu.jin@surrey.ac.uk)optimization problem is to maximize return and mini-
mize risk [2], the next release problem is to maximize
customer satisfaction and minimize cost [3], and the
community detection problem is to maximize intra-link
density and minimize inter-link density [4]. Since the
objectives of an MOP are usually conﬂicting with each
other, there does not exist a single solution simultane-
ously optimizing all objectives; instead, a number of
solutions can be obtained as trade-offs between different
objectives, known as Pareto optimal solutions. All the
Pareto optimal solutions for an MOP constitute the
Pareto set, and the image of the Pareto set in objective
space is called the Pareto front.
Since the ﬁrst implementation of a multi-objective
evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) [5], a variety of different
types of MOPs have been considered for evolutionary
algorithms [6]. In many real-world applications, there
exists a type of MOPs whose Pareto optimal solutions
are sparse, i.e., most decision variables of the optimal
solutions are zero. For example, the feature selection
problem in classiﬁcation [7] aims to choose a small num-
ber of relevant features to achieve the best classiﬁcation
performance, by means of minimizing both the number
of selected features and classiﬁcation error. In general,
the features in Pareto optimal solutions account for a
small portion of all candidate features [8]. Therefore, if
binary encoding is adopted (i.e., each binary decision
variable indicates whether one feature is selected or not),
most decision variables of the Pareto optimal solutions
will be zero, in other words, the Pareto optimal solutions
are sparse. Such subset selection problems with sparse
Pareto optimal solutions are commonly seen in many
other applications, for instance, sparse regression [9],
pattern mining [10], and critical node detection [11].
The Pareto optimal solutions of some MOPs with
real variables are also sparse, such as neural network
training [12], sparse reconstruction [13], and portfolio
optimization [2]. For instance, in order to alleviate over-
ﬁtting as well as improve the interpretability of the
learned network, training neural network should not
only consider the approximation performance, but also
control the complexity of the model [14]. For this aim,
many approaches such as lasso [15], sparse coding [16],
and dropout [17] have been proposed, which can be
regarded as a feature selection and model construction
process done simultaneously. From the perspective of
0000–0000/00$00.00 c⃝0000 IEEE