IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. , NO. , MONTH YEAR 6
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Ratio of selected features0.20.250.30.350.40.45Error rate on validation setThe proposed initialization strategy
Random initialization strategy
Fig. 3. Two populations generated by the proposed initialization
strategy and by random initialization strategy, where each population
contains 50 solutions for a feature selection problem (i.e., FS4 in
Table II) .
on the following two considerations. First, the proposed
score assignment strategy works very efﬁciently, which
consumes only Dfunction evaluations. Second, the bi-
nary vector mask is generated by binary tournament
selection according to the scores of decision variables,
where the randomness in binary tournament selection
is helpful for the effectiveness of the score assignment
strategy.
On the other hand, some existing algorithms also use
a real value to represent the probability of a variable
being 0 or 1 [51], [52], but the score in SparseEA is
completely different. To be speciﬁc, the probability of
each variable being 0 or 1 is directly encoded in the
solutions of existing algorithms, which will be optimized
during the evolutionary process. By contrast, the score
of each variable in SparseEA is estimated beforehand,
which is used to guide the optimization of solutions.
After calculating the scores of decision variables, the
initial population Pis generated. For each solution in
P, each element in the real vector decis set to a random
value, and each element in the binary vector mask is set
to 0. Then, rand ()×Delements are selected from mask
via binary tournament selection according to the scores
of decision variables (the smaller the better) and set to
1, where rand ()denotes a uniformly distributed random
number in [0;1]. Fig. 3 plots a population generated
by SparseEA and a randomly generated population in
objective space, where each population contains 50 solu-
tions for a feature selection problem. It can be observed
that the population generated by SparseEA has better
convergence and diversity than the randomly generated
population, hence the effectiveness of the proposed pop-
ulation initialization strategy is veriﬁed.
C. Genetic Operators of SparseEA
Algorithm 3 details the genetic operators in SparseEA,
where two parents pandqare randomly selected from
P′to generate an offspring oeach time. The binary
vector mask ofois ﬁrst set to the same to that of p,
then either the following two operations is performedAlgorithm 3: V ariation (P′; Score )
Input :P′(a set of parents), Score (scores of decision
variables)
Output :O(a set of offsprings)
1O←∅;
2while P′is not empty do
3 [p;q]←Randomly select two parents from P′;
4 P′←P′\{p;q};
//Generate the mask of offspring o
5 o:mask←p:mask ;//p:mask denotes the
binary vector mask of solution p
//Crossover
6 ifrand ()<0:5then
7 [m; n ]←Randomly select two decision variables
from the nonzero elements in p:mask∩q:mask ;
8 ifScore m> Score nthen
9 Set the m-th element in o:mask to 0;
10 else
11 Set the n-th element in o:mask to 0;
12 else
13 [m; n ]←Randomly select two decision variables
from the nonzero elements in p:mask∩q:mask ;
14 ifScore m< Score nthen
15 Set the m-th element in o:mask to 1;
16 else
17 Set the n-th element in o:mask to 1;
//Mutation
18 ifrand ()<0:5then
19 [m; n ]←Randomly select two decision variables
from the nonzero elements in o:mask ;
20 ifScore m> Score nthen
21 Set the m-th element in o:mask to 0;
22 else
23 Set the n-th element in o:mask to 0;
24 else
25 [m; n ]←Randomly select two decision variables
from the nonzero elements in o:mask ;
26 ifScore m< Score nthen
27 Set the m-th element in o:mask to 1;
28 else
29 Set the n-th element in o:mask to 1;
//Generate the decof offspring o
30 ifthe decision variables are real numbers then
31 o:dec←Perform simulated binary crossover and
polynomial mutation based on p:dec andq:dec;
32 else
33 o:dec←Vector of ones;
34 O←O∪{o};
35return O;
with the same probability: selecting an element from
the nonzero elements in p:mask ∩q:mask via binary
tournament selection according to the scores of decision
variables (the larger the better), and setting this element
in the mask ofoto 0; or selecting an element from
the nonzero elements in p:mask ∩q:mask via binary
tournament selection according to the scores of decision
variables (the smaller the better), and setting this element
in the mask ofoto 1. Afterwards, the mask ofois