IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, VOL. , NO. , MONTH YEAR 5
Algorithm 1: Framework of the proposed SparseEA
Input :N(population size)
Output :P(ﬁnal population)
1[P; Score ]←Initialization (N);//Algorithm 2
2[F1; F2; : : :]←Do non-dominated sorting on P;
3CrowdDis←CrowdingDistance (F);
4while termination criterion not fulﬁlled do
5 P′←Select 2Nparents via binary tournament
selection according to the non-dominated front
number and CrowdDis of solutions in P;
6 P←P∪V ariation (P′; Score );//Algorithm 3
7 Delete duplicated solutions from P;
8 [F1; F2; : : :]←Do non-dominated sorting on P;//Fi
denotes the solution set in the i-th
non-dominated front
9 CrowdDis←CrowdingDistance (F);
10 k←argmin i|F1∪: : :∪Fi|≥N;
11 Delete|F1∪: : :∪Fk|−Nsolutions from Fkwith the
smallest CrowdDis ;
12 P←F1∪: : :∪Fk;
13return P;
B. Population Initialization Strategy of SparseEA
The proposed SparseEA are designed for solving
sparse MOPs with real variables and binary variables. To
this end, a hybrid representation of solution is adopted
to integrate the two different encodings, which has been
widely used for solving many problems such as neural
network training [43] and portfolio optimization [50].
Speciﬁcally, a solution xin SparseEA consists of two
components, i.e., a real vector decdenoting the decision
variables and a binary vector mask denoting the mask.
The ﬁnal decision variables of xfor calculating objective
values are obtained by
(x1; x2; : : :) = (dec1×mask 1; dec2×mask 2; : : :):(1)
For instance, for a real vector dec= (0:5;0:3;0:2;0:8;0:1)
and a binary vector mask = (1 ;0;0;1;0), the decision
variables are (0:5;0;0;0:8;0). During the evolution, the
real vector decof each solution can record the best
decision variables found so far, while the binary vector
mask can record the decision variables that should be
set to zero, thereby controlling the sparsity of solutions.
Note that the real vector decis always set to a vector
of ones if the decision variables are binary numbers,
so that the ﬁnal decision variables can be either 0 or
1 depending on the binary vector mask . In SparseEA,
thedecand mask of each solution are generated and
evolved by different strategies.
The population initialization strategy of SparseEA
is presented in Algorithm 2, which consists of two
steps, i.e., calculating the scores of decision variables
and generating the initial population. To begin with, a
population Qwith Dsolutions is generated, where D
denotes the number of decision variables. Speciﬁcally,
the elements in the real vector decof each solution are
set to random values, while the elements in the binary
vector mask are set to 0, except that the i-th element in
themask of the i-th solution is set to 1. Therefore, theAlgorithm 2: Initialization (N)
Input :N(population size)
Output :P(initial population), Score (scores of decision
variables)
//Calculate the scores of variables
1D←Number of decision variables;
2ifthe decision variables are real numbers then
3 Dec←D×Drandom matrix;
4else if the decision variables are binary numbers then
5 Dec←D×Dmatrix of ones;
6Mask←D×Didentity matrix;
7Q←A population whose i-th solution is generated by
thei-th rows of Dec andMask according to (1);
8[F1; F2; : : :]←Do non-dominated sorting on Q;
9fori= 1toDdo
10 Score i←k, s.t.Qi∈Fk;//Qidenotes the i-th
solution in Q
//Generate the initial population
11ifthe decision variables are real numbers then
12 Dec←Uniformly randomly generate the decision
variables of Nsolutions;
13else if the decision variables are binary numbers then
14 Dec←N×Dmatrix of ones;
15Mask←N×Dmatrix of zeros;
16fori= 1toNdo
17 forj= 1torand ()×Ddo
18 [m; n ]←Randomly select two decision varaibles;
19 ifScore m< Score nthen
20 Set the m-th element in the i-th binary vector
inMask to 1;
21 else
22 Set the n-th element in the i-th binary vector
inMask to 1;
23P←A population whose i-th solution is generated by
thei-th rows of Dec andMask according to (1);
24return PandScore ;
binary vectors mask of all the solutions in Qconstitute a
D×Didentity matrix. Then, the population Qis sorted
by non-dominated sorting, and the non-dominated front
number of the i-th solution is regarded as the score of
thei-th decision variable. As a consequence, the score
of a decision variable indicates the probability that it
should be set to zero, where a smaller score can indicate
a lower probability that the decision variable should be
set to zero, since a lower non-dominated front number
indicates a better quality of solution. The scores of de-
cision variables will be involved in both the population
initialization strategy and genetic operators in SparseEA,
where the elements in mask to be ﬂipped are selected
by binary tournament selection according to the scores
of decision variables.
It is worth noting that more precise score assignment
strategy can be adopted for the decision variables, e.g.,
by considering the interaction between variables [35] and
updating the scores during the evolution. Nevertheless,
the proposed score assignment strategy is empirically
veriﬁed to be effective in solving sparse MOPs, and we
use this score assignment strategy in SparseEA based