Imitation Learning: Progress, Taxonomies and Challenges 11
Algorithm 1 Basic behavioural cloning method
1:Collect expert demonstration into dataset D;
2:Select policy representation 𝜋𝜃and loss functionL;
3:UseDto optimize the loss function Lbased on policy representation 𝜋𝜃;
4:return optimized policy representation 𝜋𝜃;
and induced distribution 𝑞(𝜋), i.e.
𝜋∗=argmin
𝜋𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑞(𝜋𝐸)∥𝑞(𝜋)).
BC could be subdivided into model-free BC and model-based BC methods. The main difference
is whether the method learns a forward model to estimate the system dynamics. Since model-free
BC methods take no consideration on the context, model-free BC methods perform well in industry
applications where accurate controllers are available and experts could control and modify the
robot joints. However, model-free BC methods typically are hard to predict future states and could
not guarantee the output’s feasibility under the environment that an accurate controller is not
available. Under this kind of “imperfect" environment, the agent would have limited information
of system dynamics and usually gets stuck into the unseen scenarios due to the “compounding
error"[ 55]. While model-based BC methods leverage the environment information and learn the
dynamics iteratively to produce feasible output, the trade-off is that model-based BC methods
usually have greater time-complexity since the iterative learning involvement process.
One of the significant BC method is DAgger, which is a model-free BC method proposed by
Ross et al.[ 57] and the idea is to use dataset aggregation to improve the generalization on unseen
scenario. Algorithm 2 presents the abstract process of DAgger. DAgger adopts iterative learning
process and mixes a new policy ˆ𝜋𝑛+1with probability 𝛽to construct the next policy. The mixing
parameter is a set of {𝛽𝑖}that satisfies1
𝑁Í𝑁
𝑖=1𝛽𝑖→0. The start-up policy is learned by BC and
records the trajectory into the dataset. Since a small difference can lead to compounding error,
new unseen trajectories will be recorded combining with the expert’s corrections. In this case, the
algorithm gradually updates the possible state and fully leverages the presence of expert. Later
research like[ 29,38,56,67,73,75] were proposed to make improvements on DAgger. This method
alleviates the problem that traditional BC methods perform poorly on the unseen scenario and
achieve data-efficiency comparing with previous methods like SMILe[ 55]. However, it does have
drawbacks, such as DAgger involves frequent interaction with the expert which might not be
available and expensive in some cases (e.g., enquiring expert correction could be expensive in
interdisciplinary tasks). Recent methods such as[ 13,25] successfully alleviate this problem. Another
problem of DAgger could be that cost of each action is ignored. Since DAgger is evaluated on video
games where the actions have equal cost, the cost of implementing each action is not obvious like
tasks such as navigation tasks. This problem is solved later by Ross and Bagnell[56].
5.2 Inverse Reinforcement Learning
Inverse reinforcement learning was firstly proposed by Russell[ 58]. Unlike BC, the IRL agent is
recovering and evaluating the reward function from expert demonstrations iteratively instead
of establishing a mapping from states to actions. The choice of choosing BC or IRL depends on
the problem settings. When the problem setting weights more on system dynamics and future
prediction is necessary, choosing IRL methods can be more likely to evaluate the given context
iteratively and provide a more accurate prediction. On the other hand, when an accurate controller
October 2022.