Imitation Learning: Progress, Taxonomies and Challenges
BOYUAN ZHENG, SUNNY VERMA, JIANLONG ZHOU, IVOR TSANG, and FANG CHEN, Uni-
versity of Technology Sydney, Autralia
Imitation learning aims to extract knowledge from human experts’ demonstrations or artificially created
agents in order to replicate their behaviours. Its success has been demonstrated in areas such as video games,
autonomous driving, robotic simulations and object manipulation. However, this replicating process could be
problematic, such as the performance is highly dependent on the demonstration quality, and most trained
agents are limited to perform well in task-specific environments. In this survey, we provide a systematic
review on imitation learning. We first introduce the background knowledge from development history and
preliminaries, followed by presenting different taxonomies within Imitation Learning and key milestones of
the field. We then detail challenges in learning strategies and present research opportunities with learning
policy from suboptimal demonstration, voice instructions and other associated optimization schemes.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: datasets, neural networks, gaze detection, text tagging
Reference Format:
Boyuan Zheng, Sunny Verma, Jianlong Zhou, Ivor Tsang, and Fang Chen. 2022. Imitation Learning: Progress,
Taxonomies and Challenges. (October 2022), 21 pages.
1 INTRODUCTION
Imitation learning (IL), also known as learning from demonstration, makes responses by mimicking
behavior in a relatively simple approach. It extracts useful knowledge to reproduce the behavior in
the environment which is similar to the demonstrations’. The presence of IL facilitates the research
on autonomous control system and designing artificially intelligent agents, as it demonstrates good
promise in real-world scenario and efficiency to train a policy. Recent developments in machine
learning field like deep learning, online learning and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)[ 23]
make further improvement on IL, not only alleviating existing problems like dynamic environment,
frequent inquiries and high-dimensional computation, but also achieving faster convergence,
more robust to the noise and more sample-efficient learning process. These improvements of IL
promote the applications in both continuous and discrete control domains. For example, in the
continuous control domain, imitation learning could be applied to autonomous vehicle manipulation
to reproduce appropriate driving behavior in a dynamic environment[ 11,13,14,22,31,52,53,80].
In addition, imitation learning is also applied to robotic, ranging from basic grabbing and placing to
surgical assistance[ 21,37,43,46,48,49,67,79]. In the discrete control domain, imitation learning
makes contribution to fields like game theory[ 5,19,24,55], navigation tasks[ 28,62,76], cache
management[38] and so on.
It is worth noting that the demonstrations could be gathered either from human experts or
artificial agents. In most cases, the demonstration is collected from human experts, but there are
also some studies that obtain the demonstration through another artificial agent. For example, Chen
et al.[ 13] proposed a teacher-student training structure, they train a teacher agent with additional
information and use this trained agent to teach a student agent without additional information.
This process is not redundant, using the demonstration from other agent benefits the training
process as student agents can rollout their own policy by frequently querying trained agents and
learn policies from similar configurations while classic IL needs to overcome the kinematic shifting
problem.
Authors’ address: Boyuan Zheng, 14055661@student.uts.edu.au; Sunny Verma; Jianlong Zhou; Ivor Tsang; Fang Chen,
University of Technology Sydney, PO Box 123, Sydney, New South Wales, Autralia, 2007.
Published in The IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems .
October 2022.arXiv:2106.12177v2  [cs.LG]  21 Oct 2022