2 Boyuan et. al.
IL has a close relationship with Reinforcement Learning (RL). Both IL and RL commonly solve the
problem under Markov Decision Process, and improvements like TRPO[ 60] in RL could benefit IL as
well, but they reproduce the behavior in a different manner. In comparing to RL, IL is more efficient ,
accessible , and human-interactive . In terms of efficiency , comparing with trial and error, the IL agents
usually spend less time to produce the desired behavior by using the demonstrations as guidance.
In terms of accessibility , achieving autonomous behavior in the RL approach requires human
experts who are familiar with the problem setting, together with hard-coded reward functions
which could be impractical and non-intuitive in some settings. For example, people learn to swim
and walk almost from demonstration instead of math functions, and it is hard to formulate these
behavior mathematically. IL also prompts interdisciplinary integration, experts who are novice to
programming can contribute to the design and evaluating paradigms. In terms of human-interaction ,
IL highlights human’s influence through providing demonstration or preference to accelerate the
learning process, which efficiently leverages and transfers the experts’ knowledge. Although IL
presents the above merits, it also faces challenges and opportunities, and this content will be
detailed in the following sections.
This survey is organized as follows:
•Systematic review This survey presents research in imitation learning under categories
behavioural cloning vs. inverse reinforcement learning andmodel-free vs. model-based . It then
summarizes IL research into two new categories namely low-level tasks vs. high-level tasks
andBC vs. IRL vs. Adversarial Structured IL , which are more adapted to the development of IL.
•Background knowledge A comprehensive description of IL’s evolution is presented in
Section 2, followed by fundamental knowledge in Section 3 and the most common learning
framework in Sections 5.
•Future direction This survey presents the remaining challenges of IL, like learning diverse
behavior, leveraging various demonstration and better representation. Then we discuss the
future directions with respect to methods like transfer learning and importance sampling.
2 BACKGROUND
One of the earliest well-known research on IL is the Autonomous Land Vehicle In a Neural Network
(ALVINN) project at Carnegie Mellon University proposed by Pomerleau[ 52]. In 1998, a formal defi-
nition of Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) was proposed by Russell[ 58]. Inverse reinforcement
learning aims to recover reward function from demonstrations. A year after, a formal definition
of another important category – Behavioural Cloning (BC) was proposed in[ 6]. BC works in a
supervised learning fashion and seeks to learn a policy that builds a direct mapping between states
and actions, then output a control strategy for control tasks. Although BC demonstrates significant
advantage in efficiency, it also suffers from various problems. In 2010, SMiLe[ 55] was proposed,
it mixed a new policy ˆ𝜋𝑛+1with a fixed probability 𝛼as next policy, this method promotes the
development of IL and set up the foundation for the later proposed DAgger[ 57]. DAgger was
proposed by Ross et al. and it updates the dataset in each iteration and trains a new policy in
the subsequent iteration based on the updated dataset. Compared with previous methods like
SMILe [ 55] and SEARN [ 16], DAgger alleviates the problem on the unseen scenario and achieve
data-efficiency. Later research like[ 38,56,67] were proposed to make improvements on DAgger.
Besides DAgger and its derivatives, other BC methods also make contribution to the development
of IL like MMD-IL[ 32], LOLS[ 12]. As for applications, one of the notable applications of BC was
proposed by Abbeel et al.[ 1], a model-free BC method on autonomous helicopter project, devel-
oped an open-loop iterative learning control. Another famous BC application was an autonomous
surgical knot-tying robotic proposed by Osa et al.[ 49], which achieved online trajectory planning
October 2022.