Imitation Learning: Progress, Taxonomies and Challenges 9
Table 3. Categorization of IL: Low-level Tasks vs. High-level Tasks
Classes Examples and Publications
Low-level manipulationSurgical assistance[49, 68]
Vehicle manipulation[80]
Robotic arm[61]
VR teleoperation[79]
High-level tasks2D gameplay[59]
3D gameplay[4]
Navigation[28]
Sports analysis[78]
independent category in IL, the true reason making it distinguishable is that GAIL is not belongs to
either BC or IRL. Although adversarial structured IL has close connection with IRL, most adversarial
structured IL does not recover the reward function. In this case, the taxonomy of IL could be more
specific. GAIL and its derivations are separated from the traditional IRL category and classified as
adversarial structured IL in this survey. Compared with the traditional taxonomies, the proposed
new taxonomy is more adapted to the development of IL and eliminates the vagueness of classifying
these adversarial structured methods.
Figure 5 roughly evaluate the proposed three classes through two kinds of aspects which are
commonly compared between research. Since different methods evaluate on various tasks, the
overall performance is hard to quantify and rank, in this case, we evaluate three classes from
Efficiency and Robustness from an empirical perspective.
In terms of Efficiency, we mainly focus on environmental interaction, computation, and expert
interaction. BC methods commonly take advantage of interaction with expert while have less
interaction in the environment, and due to these characteristics, the computational cost for BC
is more likely to be the lowest; IRL methods commonly have abundant interaction with the
environment in their inner-loop, and the evaluation on system dynamic makes IRL suffers from
high computational cost, but IRL methods hardly enquiry the expert during training; Adversarial
structured IL methods also involve frequent interaction with the environment when they iteratively
update the policy parameter and discriminator parameter, and get rid of the interaction with expert.
As adversarial structured IL methods are commonly model-free, in the evaluation of computational
efficiency, we rank it as the second.
In terms of Robustness, we mainly focus on robustness in high-dimensional space, robustness
when demonstrations are suboptimal (includes the consideration on noise in demonstration),
and robustness in dynamic system. BC methods commonly have better performance in high-
dimensional space so that they are widely evaluation on robotics, while the performance in dynamic
environment and suboptimal dataset are limited; IRL methods optimize the parameter in their
inner-loop, which becomes a burden limiting their performance in high-dimensional space, but
the recovered reward function would benefit the agent to do prediction in dynamic system. Since
adversarial structured IL methods commonly derive from GAIL, they inherit the merits of GAIL:
robustness in high-dimensional space and when changes occur in distribution. Because recent
research such as[ 9,17,84] in both IRL and Adversarial structured IL make progress in suboptimal
October 2022.