4 Boyuan et. al.
the development of IL. Figure 1 shows some featured approaches and annual publication numbers
for each class and focuses on the research after 2016, it shows that the class of BC(Behavioural
Cloning) has maintained a stable increment in publications, while the research in the class of
Adversarial Structured IL and IRL(Inverse Reinforcement Learning) have grown rapidly due to the
recent advance in other research fields like deep learning.
3 PRELIMINARY KNOWLEDGE
This section provides some basic concepts for better understanding of the IL methodology.
In IL, the demonstrated trajectories are commonly represented as pairs of states 𝑠and actions
𝑎, sometimes other parameters such as high-level commands and conditional goals will also be
included to form the dataset. The way to collect the dataset could be either online or offline. Offline
IL prepares the dataset in advance and obtains policies from the dataset while involves fewer
interactions with the environment. This could be beneficial when interacting with the environment
is expensive or risky. Contrary to offline learning, online learning assumes the data would be
accessible in sequence and uses this updated data to learn the best predictor for future data.
This method facilitates imitation learning to be more robust in a dynamic system. For example,
in[48,49,57], online learning is used in surgical robotics. The online learning agent will provide
a policy in iteration n, then the opponent will choose a loss function 𝑙𝑛based on current policy
and the new observed loss will affect the choice of next iteration 𝑛+1’s policy. The performance is
measured through regret, i.e.
𝑁∑︁
𝑛=1𝑙𝑛(𝜋𝑛)−min
𝜋∈Π𝑁∑︁
𝑛=1𝑙𝑛(𝜋),
and the loss function could vary from iteration to iteration. One of the most common ways to
calculate loss is Kullback-Leibler (KL) Divergence. KL Divergence measures the difference between
2 probability distribution, i.e.,
𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑝(𝑥)∥𝑞(𝑥))=∫
𝑝(𝑥)ln𝑝(𝑥)
𝑞(𝑥)𝑑𝑥.
KL divergence is not symmetric, i.e., 𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑝(𝑥)∥𝑞(𝑥))≠𝐷𝐾𝐿(𝑞(𝑥)∥𝑝(𝑥)). Many algorithms
such as[ 8,60] use KL divergence as the loss function as it could be useful when dealing with the
stochastic policy learning problem.
For many methods, especially those under the class of IRL and Adversarial structured IL, the
environment is modeled as Markov Decision Process(MDP). MDP is the process satisfying the
property that the next state 𝑠𝑡+1only depends on the current state 𝑠𝑡at any time𝑡. Typically, a MDP
is defined as a tuple ( S,A,P,𝛾,D,R), whereSis the finite set of states, Ais the corresponding set
of actions,Pis the set of state transition probabilities and the successor states 𝑠𝑡+1is drawn from
this transition model, i.e. 𝑠𝑡+1=𝑃(·|𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡),𝛾∈[1,0)is the discount factor, Dis the set of initial
state distribution and Ris the reward function S↦→R, and in IL setting, the reward function is
not available. The Markov property assists imitation learning to simplify the input since the earlier
state is helpless to determine the next state. The use of MDP inspires research to make use of other
MDP variants to solve various problems, for example, Partially Observable MDP is used to model
the scheduling problem in [75] and Markov games is used in multi-agent scenario[63].
The learning process of IL could be either on-policy or off-policy (there exists research using a
hierarchical combination of these two[ 13]). On-policy learning estimates the return and updates
the action using the same policy, the agent adopting on-policy will pick actions by themselves and
rollout their own policy while training; Off-policy learning estimates the return and chooses the
action using different policy, the agent adopting off-policy will update their policy greedily and
October 2022.