Imitation Learning: Progress, Taxonomies and Challenges 7
Fig. 3. Prevalent Tasks in IL. Top-left: HalfCheetah in Mujoco; Top-mid: CARLA simulator; Top-right: Minecraft
scenario in MineRL dataset; Bottom-left: FetchPickAndPlace-v1 in OpenAI Gym; Bottom-mid: Driving scenario
in Xi’an [80]; Bottom-right: Atari game–MontezumaRevenge
4.3 Low-Level Tasks vs. High-Level Tasks
This subsection introduces a novel taxonomy, which divides IL into manipulation tasks and high-
level tasks according to their evaluation approach. The idea is inspired by a control diagram (See
Figure 4) in[ 47]. Although some IL benchmark systems are proposed, such as[ 34], there is still no
widely accepted one. In this case, the evaluation approaches and focus could vary from method to
method, ranging from performance in sparse reward scenario to the smoothness of autonomous
driving in dynamic environment. This taxonomy could draw clearer boundary and might alleviate
the difficulty of designing appropriate benchmark from performance perspective.
The low-level manipulator tasks could be either real-world or virtual, and are not limited to
robotics and autonomous driving problems. The robotic task can be object manipulation by robotic
arm like PR2, KUKA robot arm, and simulation tasks commonly experimented on OPEN AI gym,
MuJoCo simulation platform and so on. For real-world object manipulation tasks, the tasks could
be push the object to the desired area, avoiding obstacles and operation soft object like rope. The
autonomous driving tasks commonly implemented by simulation, and which is more related to
the high-level planning. There are two widely-used benchmark system for simulation: CARLA
CoRL2017 and NoCrash benchmark system, these two benchmark systems mainly focus on the
urban scenario under various weather condition while the agent is evaluated on whether it can
reach the destination on time, but CARLA CoRL2017 ignores the collision and traffic rules violation.
Besides simulation, there are also some research doing experiment in real-world using cars[ 80] and
smaller remote-controlled cars[ 14], but other kinds of equipment are also used like remote control
helicopter[ 1]. As for the high-level controller, the tasks could be navigation tasks and gameplay. The
navigation tasks are mainly route recommendation and in-door room-to-room navigation. Most of
the evaluated games are 2D Atari games on OpenAI Gym, such as MontezumaRevenge is commonly
October 2022.