16 Boyuan et. al.
combined with the loss of VAE reconstruction and the loss of time alignment, i.e.
L=∑︁
(𝑖,𝑗)(L𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠+𝜆1L𝑟𝑒𝑐+𝜆2L𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛),
where𝜆1and𝜆2are the hyperparameter predetermined in advance. The output reward function
consists of two parts, the first one is deviation penalty on squared Euclidean distance, which
measures the difference between the encoded learner’s observation feature and translated expert
observation feature in learner’s context, i.e.
ˆ𝑅𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡(0𝑙
𝑡)=−∥𝐸𝑛𝑐 1(𝑜𝑙
𝑡)−1
𝑛𝑇∑︁
𝑡=0𝑇(𝑜𝑖
𝑡,𝑜𝑙
0)∥2
2
The second part is the penalty which ensures the current observation keeping similar with translated
observations, i.e.
ˆ𝑅𝑖𝑚𝑔(0𝑙
𝑡)=−∥𝑜𝑙
𝑡−1
𝑛𝑇∑︁
𝑡=0𝑀(𝑜𝑖
𝑡,𝑜𝑙
0)∥2
2,
where M is the full observation translation model. The proposed reward function could be ap-
plied into the any reinforcement learning algorithm, Liu et al. uses TRPO[ 60] for the simulation
experiments.
After IfO being proposed, measuring observation distance to replace the ground truth action
becomes a prevalent setting in imitation learning. In Table 5, we present some of the research
advocate this new insight and apply this idea into various domain. Both BC, IRL and GAIL start to
adopt this setting to simplify the input. For example, in[ 5], raw unaligned YouTube videos are used
for imitation to reproduce the behavior for games. YouTube videos are relatively noisy and varying
in settings like resolution. The proposed method successfully handled these problems by using a
novel self-supervised objective to learn a domain-invariant representation from videos. Similarly,
in[61], multi-viewpoint self-supervised IL method Time-Contrastive Network (TCN) was proposed.
Different viewpoints introduce a wide range of contexts about the task environment and the goal
is to learn invariant representation about the task. By measuring the distance between the input
video frames and “looking at itself in the mirror", the robot could learn its internal joint to learn
the mapping and achieve imitating demonstration.
6 CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Although improvements like integrating novel techniques, reducing human interaction during
training and simplifying inputs alleviate difficulties in learning behaviour, there are still some open
challenges for IL:
Diverse behavior learning: Current IL methods commonly use task-specific training datasets
to learn to reproduce single behavior. Research like[ 76] presented diverse behavior learning by
combining adversarial structure and variational autoencoder, but this is still an open challenge.
Other methods could be adopted to optimize IL, such as transfer learning might help the agent to
learn from similar tasks so that the training process could be more efficient.
Sub-optimal demonstration for training: Current IL methods generally require a high-
quality set of demonstrations for training. However, the number of high-quality demonstrations
could be limited and expensive to obtain. Existing research like[ 9,17,64] have shown the possibility
to use sub-optimal demonstration for training, but performance can be improved by extracting
common intent from the dataset.
Imitation not just from observation: Current IfO methods commonly use raw videos and
the deviation of observations to recover the reward function. But the video is not just observation,
October 2022.