12 Boyuan et. al.
Algorithm 2 DAgger [57]
1:InitializeD←∅ ;
2:Initialize ˆ𝜋1to any policy in Π;
3:for𝑖=1→𝑁do
4: Let𝜋𝑖=𝛽𝑖𝜋∗+(1−𝛽𝑖)ˆ𝜋𝑖.
5: Sample T-step trajectory using 𝜋𝑖.
6:Get datasetD𝑖={(𝑠,𝜋∗(𝑠))}of visited states by 𝜋𝑖
and action given by expert.
7: Aggregate datasetD←DÐD𝑖.
8: Train classifier ˆ𝜋𝑖+1onD.
9:end for
10:return best ˆ𝜋𝑖on validation.
Algorithm 3 Classic feature matching IRL method
Require: The set of demonstrated trajectories D;
1:Initialize reward function parameter 𝜔and policy parameter 𝜃;
2:repeat
3:Evaluate current policy 𝜋𝜃state-action visitation
frequency𝑢;
4:Evaluate loss function Lw.r.t.𝑢and the datasetD
distribution;
5:Update the reward function parameter 𝜔based on
the loss function;
6:Update the policy parameter 𝜃in the inner loop RL
method using the updated reward parameter 𝜔;
7:until
8:return optimized policy representation 𝜋𝜃;
and abundant demonstrations are available, choosing BC methods usually takes less time and
performs better.
IRL commonly assumes that the demonstrations are under Markov Decision Process setting
and since the reward Ris unknown, the set of states is used to estimate the feature vector (i.e.
𝜙:X↦→[ 0,1]𝑘) instead of the true reward function (i.e. X↦→ R). The process of classic IRL
method (see Algorithm 3) is based on iteratively update the reward function parameter 𝜔and policy
parameter𝜃. The reward function parameter 𝜔is updated after the state-action visitation frequency
𝑢are evaluated, and the way that 𝜔is updated could vary, for example, Ziebart et al.[ 82] updated
𝜔by maximizing the likelihood of the demonstration over maximum entropy distribution, i.e.
𝜔∗=argmax𝜔Í
𝜏∈𝐷log𝑃(𝜏∥𝜔). On the other hand, the policy parameter 𝜃is updated in the inner
loop reinforcement learning process. This iterative and embedded structure can be problematic:
the learning process could be time-consuming and impractical for high-dimensional problems like
the high Degree Of Freedom (DOF) robotic problem. Another significant problem is “ill-posed"
which means the many different cost functions could lead to the same action. In this case, the good
IRL methods need to have more expressive power and a more efficient framework. Research such
as[9,15,21,30,41,50,54] was proposed to alleviate the above problems by using more expressive
models like neural network and optimizing the input like ranking the demonstration in advance.
October 2022.