8 Boyuan et. al.
Fig. 4. Control diagram adapted from [47]
evaluated for performance on hard expolration and sparse reward scenario. Others are evaluated
on 3D games like GTAV or Minecraft for evaluation. This taxonomy could be meaningful since it
clearly reflects the target domain of the proposed algorithm, as the variance on their evaluation
methods could be smaller, this may help to design a unified evaluation metric for IL. Figure 3
provides various popular evaluation tasks in IL.
From the Figure 4, the target of imitation could be either learning a policy for high-level controllers
while assuming the low-level manipulator is working correctly or learning a policy to reproduce the
simpler behavior on the low-level controller. Generally speaking, the high-level controller learns a
policy to plan a sequence of motion primitives, such as [ 49]. As for the low-level controller, it learns
a policy to reproduce the primitive behavior, such as [ 61], this forms the hierarchical structure of IL.
Although some of the methods propose general frameworks which are evaluated on both domains,
most of them are presenting “bias" on selecting tasks to demonstrate their improvement in either
higher-level or low-level domain. For example, in [ 10], the proposed algorithm is evaluated on both
Atari and Mujoco environments, but the amount of the evaluated tasks in each environment is
obviously unequal. In this case, the ambiguity of classifying these general methods could be simply
eliminated based on their tendency on evaluation tasks.
Table 3 lists some of the recent research under this taxonomy. The majority of current imitation
methods tend to use low-level manipulation tasks to evaluate the proposed method, since rein-
forcement learning performs acceptably in high-level controller tasks like games, and commonly
performs poorly on the low-level manipulation tasks where the reward function might be impracti-
cal to obtain. Nevertheless, IL in the high-level controller tasks is non-trivial, since for the 3D tasks
or hard exploration games, reinforcement learning can be time-consuming on the huge state and
action space.
4.4 BC vs. IRL vs. Adversarial Structured IL
This taxonomy is extended from the first taxonomy (BC vs. IRL). This new taxonomy divides
IL into three categories: Behavioural Cloning (BC), Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) and
adversarial structured IL. With the recent development of IL, adversarial structured IL brings new
insights for researchers and alleviate problems existing in previous work, such as high-dimensional
problem. Inspired by the presence of GAIL, many recent papers adopt this adversarial structure,
and inevitably, GAIL becomes baseline for comparison. But this is not enough to establish an
October 2022.