Introduction
The growth of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has been gradually
shifting the healthcare paradigms over the last decade.
According to most technical experts in biomedical
informatics, AI will revolutionize many medical ﬁelds in the
near future (Bohr and Memarzadeh, 2020; Kohane, Drazen, &
Campion, 2012). In subspecialties such as radiology, AI
technologies have outperformed clinicians ( 1), and AI is
getting more ef ﬁcient at performing clinical tasks beyond
diagnosis and early detection. In 2020, the US Food and Drug
Administration approved an AI software that provides real-
time guidance to medical professionals and thus enabling
them to perform cardiac ultrasound imaging without
specialized training ( 2). Another study proposed a deep
learning model that could precisely predict patients ’needs in
the critical care department ( 3). Given the research trend and
investment in AI research, AI technology, in the future, islikely to become an integral part of the healthcare ecosystem,
where clinicians and AI should work in a systematic
collaboration.
There is much evidence indicating the positive impact of AI
on healthcare. However, whether clinicians (the end-user) will
adopt or use the technology is an ongoing concern. Not just
the fears of being replaced by AI technologies, several other
factors such as myths, reliability, resilience, the inexplicability
of AI, and unfamiliarity with the technology might determine
clinicians ’intent to use AI. Many recent studies have been
dedicated to addressing the technical challenges of AI, mainly
developing the explainability and reliability of the technology
(4). Still, not much work has been invested in understanding
how these technologies are perceived by clinicians, mainly
existing AI users, and do they want to use them ?(5) Medical
professionals often consider the potential of AI to be limited
(6), and their perceptions can impact their intent to use or
adopt AI in medicine. Therefore, it is important to
understand the human factors that in ﬂuence clinicians ’intent
to use AI; otherwise, AI would remain underused, keeping the
healthcare industry bene ﬁting from the technology.
Theory and related work
Patients and medical professionals are the most important
and potential users of AI-based applications. They often
express concerns about implementing AI-based tools in the
care services ( 7,8). In our study, the concerned AI (the Blood
Utilization Calculator-BUC) is a clinician-facing clinical
decision support system directly impacting patient outcomes.
Therefore, clinicians are concerned about the impact it may
have on them. Clinicians ’perceptions regarding the BUC may
signiﬁcantly steer the adoption and use of the technology.Researchers need to explore the current challenges of AI use
and adoption from a human factor standpoint. One way to do
so is by analyzing the antecedents of risk beliefs and
expectancies associated with using AI-based devices (BUC)
from the clinician ’s perspective ( Figure 1 ). There is a lack of
evidence showing risk beliefs and individuals ’withdrawal
from using AI clinical devices ( 9). But studies examining the
impact of expectancy and general perception of AI on intent
to use BUC, mainly when mediated by perceived risk, from
consumers ’(AI users) perspectives, have not been investigated.
Nevertheless, several studies analyzing healthcare AI
systems from human factors standpoint leverages various
acceptance models not limited to the technology acceptance
model (TAM), the uni ﬁed theory of acceptance and use of
technology (UTAUT) ( 10), and the value-based adoption
model, stating that consumer behaviors (clinicians) towards
new technology (BUC) rely on their perceptions of that
technology (AI) in general (Chung and Koo, 2015). TAM
captures the mediating role of perceived ease of use andperceived usefulness between system characteristics and its
use. Studies have leveraged TAM to explain users ’behavior
toward technology. Studies using the UTAUT primarily
explored the effects of four core factors (performance
expectancy, effort expectancy, social in ﬂuence, and facilitating
conditions) on user acceptance of a technology and usage
behavior. However, existing studies have not captured the
impact of value perceptions (bene ﬁt and risk beliefs) or the
general perception of clinicians associated with BUC, which
may in ﬂuence their perception of risk and intention to use
the technology ( 11). Thus, in our study, we hypothesized that
the general perception of AI would in ﬂuence clinicians ’
perceived risk of BUC –Hypothesis 1 .
Expectancy theory states that individuals have choices (for
clinicians, it is whether to develop their reasoning or accept
BUC recommendations), and their decisions are driven by the
way they perceive that a particular action (intent to use BUC)
will lead to the best outcome (minimal risk to themselves and
their patients) ( 12). Similarly, the Theory of Planned Behavior
(TPB) and the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) capture the
importance of users ’beliefs regarding the outcome, normative
expectations, possible hindrances, and the ability to control
the process, in determining their behavior ( 13). We bring
effort expectancy and performance expectancy together as a
second-order latent construct for expectancy. We also
included perceived risks together in a theoretical synthesis.
These concepts interact with expectancy and
perception of AI
in ways that help shape BUC users ’behavioral intention and
hypothesized that BUC expectancy would negatively in ﬂuence
its perceived risk –Hypothesis 2 .
The perception of risk regarding any system can decrease
the utility attached to the technology ( 14). Being a complex
and developing technology, AI-based devices (BUC) are notyet an integral component of the healthcare system or medicalChoudhury 10.3389/fdgth.2022.920662
Frontiers in Digital Health 02 frontiersin.org