training, and the ambiguity about the safety and risks that an AI
can impose ( 15) on patients are still decisive factors that
facilitate users ’intention to use the technology. Similarly,
clinicians will typically support and use AI technologies ifthey believe that they will augment healthcare delivery and
patient safety outcomes without undermining their values. In
other words, the perceived bene ﬁts of AI technologies will
motivate clinicians to use them in the future ( 8).
Well-established theories like the Task Technology-Fit
(TTF) state that a user will only adopt a given technology
when it ﬁts their need and consecutively improves their
performance ( 16). Many studies have leveraged TTF to
explain the technology adoption ( 17). That being said, if
clinicians perceived AI as a technology that would augmenttheir clinical practice and meet their requirements, thelikelihood of AI adoption in healthcare would increase.Several studies have showcased the promising potential of AI
applications within the healthcare system, creating a positive
perception of AI in society ( 18–22). The perception of risks
and safety can in ﬂuence a clinician ’s intention to use AI
systems ( 8). External in ﬂuences and uncertainty associated
with AI use can create biases among clinicians, which may
encourage or keep them from using AI technologies in thefuture. In this study, we use the variable “risk”as a mediating
construct and hypothesized that perceived risk would mediate
the effect of expectancy on the use of BUC –Hypothesis 3 and
will also mediate the effect of perception of AI on the use of
BUC –Hypothesis 4 .Problem statement
Healthcare AI can be a promising medium to expedite
effective care and ful ﬁll the global shortage of medical
resources. However, we still lack suf ﬁcient empirical evidence
and human factors perspective capturing clinicians ’
perceptions of medical AI. As an emerging technology,
effective and safe integration of AI into the existing healthcare
system depends on numerous technological challenges and
whether the medical professionals are willing to use it. As
acknowledged by Davenport and Kalakota, “the greatest
challenge to AI in these healthcare domains is not whether the
technologies will be capable enough to be useful, but rather
ensuring their adoption in daily clinical practice ”(6).
The AI technology studied in this research is a Blood
Utilization Calculator (BUC), a module of an electronic
decision support program known as the Digital Intern
(iVMD). This AI system is a proprietary computer-based
algorithm that retrieves patient information from the
electronic medical record and delivers data-driven
personalized recommendations for the number of packed red
blood cells to transfuse for a given patient ( 23). The AI is
developed to optimize blood transfusion and protect patients
from infectious agents and alloimmunization, which may
occur due to excessive blood transfusion ( 23,24). According
to prior studies, BUC was more consistent than clinicians
(24); however, clinicians only accepted about 49% of BUC
recommendations ( 25), deterring its use in the hospital.
FIGURE 1
Conceptual framework.Choudhury 10.3389/fdgth.2022.920662
Frontiers in Digital Health 03 frontiersin.org