Therefore, to understand the factors in ﬂuencing clinicians ’
intention to use BUC or accept BUC recommendations, we
implemented human factors approach and explored clinicians ’
(BUC users) perception of BUC. We speci ﬁcally aimed to
understand how the perception of AI, risk, and expectancy
inﬂuences clinicians ’intention to use BUC. To explore the
intended effects, we analyze the conceptual model as
illustrated in Figure 1 and test the following four hypotheses:
H1.The general perception of AI will have a negative effect on
the perceived risk of BUC.
H2. The expectancy of BUC will have a negative effect on its
perceived risk.
H3.Perceived risk of BUC will mediate the effect of expectancy
on the intent to use BUC.
H4.Perceived risk of BUC will mediate the effect of perception
of AI on the intent to use BUC.
Material and method
The study was conducted at a university hospital in
Wisconsin, US. Before the study began, all participants
(clinicians) were briefed on the in-depth study intent. All
methods were carried out following relevant guidelines and
regulations. The study obtained ethical approval from the
University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA (IRB ID 2020-1110).
It was determined to meet the criteria for exempting human
subjects ’research per the category(ies) de ﬁned under 45
CFR 46.
Data collection / recruitment
The study targeted medical professionals who use BUC. We
distributed a mass email to the list servers of clinicians who
worked in the hospital. The email described the purpose of
the study, a description of BUC, and a link to the online
survey. Interested clinicians participated with consent. The
survey was distributed between February 2021 and July 2021.
We used RedCap to collect survey responses. The survey
contained a screening question asking whether they have ever
used the BUC system (with an explanation and picture of
BUC). Only BUC users were asked to complete the survey.
We discarded incomplete and duplicate responses. Each
participant completing the survey was given a $20 gift card.
No participant identi ﬁers were obtained during the study.
Participants
We received 273 individual responses in total. One hundred
nineteen healthcare professionals were BUC users (said Yes to
the screening question) and completed the entire survey. The
remaining 154 were not BUC users and did not complete therest of the questions in the survey. About 73.9% of
respondents were Caucasian Americans, and 81.5% were
physician residents (they were the primary users of the BUC),
followed by 11.8% attending physicians and 6.7% nurses. We
also note that 68.9% used BUC for up to two years, and
29.4% used BUC for three to ﬁve years. The majority of the
participants were female (53.8%). About 90% of the
participants were aged between 25 and 35 yrs.
Instrumentation
The study adapted validated questions from the modi ﬁed,
extended uni ﬁed theory of acceptance and use of technology
(UTAUT-2) model ( 26,27), as shown in Supplementary
Appendix A . The UTAUT 2 is a theoretical framework
derived from the Theory of Planned Behavior and the
Technology Acceptance Model ( 28). According to this
framework, an individual ’s intention to use a technology
depends on factors such as the performance expectancy (i.e.,
the degree to which the technology is perceived to be useful)
and effort expectancy (i.e., the degree to which using the
technology is perceived to be easy to use) ( 29). Our survey
questions were intended to measure expectancy, risk, and
intention of using BUC. We de ﬁne expectancy as a second-
order latent construct consisting of effort expectancy and
performance expectancy. Perception of risk indicated the
likelihood that patient health will deteriorate if exposed to an
event [decision based on wrong BUC recommendation] ( 30).
We also included a question to measure clinicians ’overall
perception of AI, mainly how clinicians think an AI [for
instance, BUC] will improve patient outcomes. All questions
were modi ﬁed from their original form to ﬁt the context of
this research focusing on AI (BUC) and medical professionals.
Statistical analyses
We calculated descriptive statistics of the survey responses
and Pearson correlations to show the related variables. We
then conducted a discriminant validity test to ensure the
square roots of AVEs do not exceed the correlation
coefﬁcients of paired latent constructs. We also calculated the
Variance In ﬂation Factor (VIF) and tolerance values for the
predictor variables and checked for multicollinearity. Since
self-reported surveys are often prone to biases, we used
Harman ’s single factor test to test for common method bias.
All analyses about correlation, discriminant validity, biases,
and multicollinearity tests were performed in SPSS Version 27.
The con ﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) was performed
using a structural equations approach to the survey measures
to analyze the psychometric properties of “effort expectancy, ”
“performance expectancy, ”“perception of AI, ”and “perceivedChoudhury 10.3389/fdgth.2022.920662
Frontiers in Digital Health 04 frontiersin.org