solution (BUC) used by clinicians at a single hospital. It also
consists of two single-item measures (Perception of AI and
Intent to use BUC). Since the predictive validity of single-item
measures, when used in conjunction with multi-item scales,
depends on particular conditions, our ﬁndings cannot be
generalized across other AI technologies; (b)Although sample
size suf ﬁciency for the estimation of structural equation
modeling (SEM), suggests at least 100 observations, the
robustness of estimates should be interpreted keeping in mind
the limited sample size of this study ( 53);(c)We also
identi ﬁed the presence of common method bias in the survey
responses.
Conclusion
The rapid advances in AI technologies will inevitably shape
the healthcare system, health communications, and clinical
work ﬂow. The maximum bene ﬁts of AI technologies in
healthcare can be realized when there is a safe and systematic
implementation of AI devices. Thus far, several research has
documented the power and potential of AI technologies
within healthcare institutions. However, the integration of
advanced systems such as AI in healthcare mandates a sound
understanding of the technology and the human factors
responsible for hindering technology acceptance among
clinicians. In an inpatient setting, clinicians are one of the
most critical stakeholders of AI technologies. Our model
suggests that a clinician ’s perception of risk is a crucial factor.
Due to the nature of healthcare services, the implementation
of AI should be performed with speci ﬁc considerations.
In summary, this study demonstrated that signi ﬁcant and
indirect in ﬂuences of expectancy and perception of AI on the
use of the BUC were mediated via perceived risk. AI
developers need to emphasize the bene ﬁts of AI technology,
ensure ease of use (effort expectancy), clarify the system ’s
potential (performance expectancy), and minimize the risk
perceptions by improving the overall design. Future research
and management policies should encourage the participatory
involvement of clinicians (all stakeholders) and ensure de ﬁned
accountability and responsibility of healthcare professionals
while using AI technology, as these measures can potentially
minimize risk perception and improve their intent to use the
technology. Identifying the factors that determine clinicians ’
intent to use AI-based decision support systems can help
improve technology adoption and use in the healthcare
domain. Enhanced and safe adoption of AI can uplift the
overall care process and help standardize clinical decisions
and procedures. An improved AI adoption in healthcare will
help clinicians share their everyday clinical workload and
make critical decisions. Not only in blood transfusion-related
tasks, AI acceptance and safe integration will also improveoverall care quality and facilitate timely intervention. If
appropriately designed and used, AI can also augment home
care and self-diagnosis for certain ailments. However, further
research is needed to con ﬁrm the effectiveness when primarily
used by patients during home care or self-care.
Data availability statement
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will
be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
Ethics statement
The studies involving human participants were reviewed
and approved by The University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA
(IRB ID 2020-1110). Written informed consent for
participation was not required for this study in accordancewith the national legislation and the institutional requirements.
Author contributions
AC conceptualized and designed the study. AC conducted
the data collection and analysis, prepared the ﬁgures, and
wrote the main manuscript. All authors contributed to the
article and approved the submitted version.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential con ﬂict of interest.
Publisher ’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their
afﬁliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors
and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this
article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not
guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fdgth.
2022.920662/full#supplementary-material .Choudhury 10.3389/fdgth.2022.920662
Frontiers in Digital Health 08 frontiersin.org