indirect in ﬂuence on the clinician ’s intent to use BUC (a
particular AI system). Although no prior studies have
captured the exact interaction for direct comparisons, the
notion that injunctive social in ﬂuence (referring to what
clinicians think about AI technologies in general) could
inﬂuence technology use was established in the Theory of
Reasoned Action ( 42).
Most clinicians in our study perceived BUC as a low-risk
technology. We also note that perception of risk is a
signiﬁcant mediator. In other words, perceived risk was a
signiﬁcant in ﬂuencer of the intent to use BUC and mediated
the effects of expectancy and perception of AI. In the same
line, a 2014 study stated that risk factors are crucial in mobile
services, and the higher the risk of using new technology, the
lower the willingness to use ( 43). A 2011 study showed that
perceived risk signi ﬁcantly in ﬂuences users ’attitudes towards
technology acceptance ( 44). In 2018, a study argued that
perceived risk could signi ﬁcantly reduce intent to use a
technology ( 45). To our knowledge, most related studies have
examined perceived risk as an external factor in ﬂuencing the
external variables of the UTAUT model ( 46), and no prior
studies have examined perceived risk as a mediating factor
between expectancy, perception of AI, and intent to use AI.
Few studies have used the human factors approach and
inspected various AI-based systems across different domains
(11); there is still a lack of understanding of how clinicians ’
perception of AI-based decision support systems and their
expectancies in ﬂuence their risk perception and intent to use
the technology. Previous studies have primarily investigated
non-users ’intention to use AI using technology acceptance
theories, including TAM and UTAUT ( 47,48). Our study
captures the perception of AI users. This is important because
the perception of AI might change with time and job
sensitivity (when patient health is at stake), as the AI-
generated recommendations in ﬂuence patient health
outcomes. Different people de ﬁne AI differently and have
different expectations of AI.
Measuring AI perception of individuals who never used AI
cannot re ﬂect their experiences with the technology, but their
biases and opinions formed by external factors such as news
media or the experimental setup of a particular study. Most
technology acceptance models were developed for the non-
intelligent systems ( 49) and often oversee the effect of
different human factors on the perception of risk. In the
context of healthcare AI technologies, clinicians are very likely
to prioritize the risk factor, i.e., whether an AI-based decision
support system is safe for their patients and can deliver good
quality recommendations. Thus, there is a need for AI
developers to understand the potential factors that caninﬂuence users ’perception of AI risk. Due to the speci ﬁcity of
the healthcare ﬁeld, we proposed the perception of risk as a
mediating factor. Our study also has practical implications. Inthis study, clinicians ’positive perceptions toward BUC
expectancy can lead to a lower perception of risk and, in turn,
result in a higher intention to use BUC. Emphasizing the
potential bene ﬁts such as (a) rapid calculation to determine
the required units of blood needed for a transfusion, (b)
accuracy of recommendation, (c) reliability of data analysis,
and (d) consistency with the clinical requirements may
increase clinicians ’intention to use the technology.
Moreover, the concerns and challenges associated with BUC
risk perception substantially negatively impact the intention to
use BUC. If clinicians cannot reduce risk concerns, they may
prefer traditional human-human interaction and calculate
their own decisions over AI. We also found that clinicians ’
perception of AI, in general, determines their risk perception
towards BUC in particular and consequently reduces their
intention to use BUC. Therefore, when hospitals want to
incorporate a speci ﬁc AI system into their work ﬂow, they
should ensure that the potential users of the technology are
aware of the system (BUC) and its functioning. Managementshould also ensure that clinicians are not in ﬂuenced by
unscienti ﬁc news regarding AI (myths and hypes). Within
healthcare, addressing the concerns contributing to risk beliefs
about AI is a priority.
Future studies should focus on the ethical and regulatory
considerations associated with AI technologies ( 50).
Accountability can also be a signi ﬁcant in ﬂuencing factor in
the acceptance of AI. In the context of our study, clinicians
(the stakeholder) should be informed about the accountability
and regulations in cooperation with healthcare institutions.
The concerned management should develop a handbook
clearly stating how AI-based BUC was designed, how it abides
by the ethical principles (such as fairness and health equity),
and the potential risks. The BUC should be more transparent
to the clinicians from a human factor standpoint. Timely
external validation of the BUC can also help clinicians
understand the risks and bene ﬁts of BUC. Basic training of
the clinicians regarding the functioning of the BUC (without
violating the proprietary norms) should be encouraged by the
management. In line with the literature ( 51,52), we also
suggest that future studies should measure clinicians ’intent to
use AI technology over a more extended period as their
attitudes and perception of AI may change with the change of
experience. We believe that when clinicians are more aware of
the BUC or AI decision support systems in general, external
inﬂuences (perception of available AI technologies),
impractical expectations from the technology, or wrong
perceptions of risks will not hinder their willingness to use
them BUC. The intention of whether to use BUC (AI) will
only be a function of its effectiveness and impact on patient
outcomes.
There are three limitations of this study that must be
acknowledged. (a)This study focuses on a particular AIChoudhury 10.3389/fdgth.2022.920662
Frontiers in Digital Health 07 frontiersin.org