risk.”To ensure the ﬁto f “expectancy ”as a single construct
consisting of “effort and performance expectancy, ”we
conducted second-order CFA. The ﬁt and reliability of the
constructs to the data were determined as acceptable as
indicated by Composite reliability (CR), average variance
extracted (AVE), Guttman ’s lambda 6, and coef ﬁcient omega
(for second-order CFA of expectancy). The SEM encompasses
multiple regression analysis that allows a simultaneous
estimate of the direct and indirect causal relationships
between variables; therefore, it is preferred in cognitive
modeling and behavior analysis (Lowry and Gaskin, 2014).
Theﬁnal structural model was evaluated using indicators such
as the Goodness of Fit Index (GFI), Comparative Fit Index
(CFI), and Tucker Lewis index (TLI). We also conducted a
mediation modeling using structural equation modeling
(SEM), controlling for “age, ”“race, ”“clinical experience, ”and
“experience with BUC ,”to capture the predictive relationships
between “expectancy ”and “use of BUC, ”mediated by “trust. ”
The control variables were included as covariates in the modelpredicting “perceived risk ”and “intent to use BUC. ”No
signiﬁcant effects of age, race, and experiences were found
and therefore were dropped to improve model ﬁt.
All con ﬁrmatory factor analysis and structural equation
modeling were performed using “lavaan ”and “psych ”
packages in RStudio version 1.4.1717. The reproducible code
for the con ﬁrmatory factor analysis and SEM is available in
the zenodo repository ( 31).
Results
Clinicians agreed that AI systems could improve patient
outcomes (mean 3.97, max 5) and disagreed that the use of
BUC can put them or their patients at risk (mean 1.95 and
1.83, respectively). Clinicians also perceived BUC as an easy-
to-use AI system (mean 3.76); they agreed that learning how
to use BUC and becoming skillful at it was easy (mean 3.81
and 3.82, respectively). Most of the clinicians neither agreed
nor disagreed with the question asking if the BUC increased
their chances of achieving/ful ﬁlling important clinical tasks
(mean 3.33). However, most of them agreed that BUC
improved their pace (mean 3.36) and effectiveness at blood
transfusion (mean 3.64).
Common bias method
and multicollinearity
We also conducted Harman ’s one-factor test to check for
common method bias ( 32). All factors together explained
51.28% of the total variance (greater than 50%), and we
acknowledge common method bias as a limitation of our
study ( 33,34). We calculated the Variance In ﬂation Factor(VIF) and tolerance values for the predictor variables to check
for multicollinearity. All VIFs were below the cutoff value of 5
and ranged between 1.4 and 1.6. The tolerances were also
higher than the recommended threshold of 0.1 and ranged
between 0.6 and 0.9 ( 35). Thus, no multicollinearity was
observed in this research.
Conﬁrmatory factor analysis and
discriminant validity
As shown in Supplementary Appendix B , the con ﬁrmatory
factor analysis assesses the adequacy of latent constructs
involved in this study. The proposed measurement model ﬁt
the data adequately well (chi-square = 23.56, CFI = 0.99, TLI =
0.98, RMSEA = 0.05, and p-value = 0.13). All factor loadings
were signi ﬁcant and greater than 0.70, indicating acceptable
loadings. The obtained measures meet the requirements of
(36) and ( 37), showing evidence of convergent validity. All
reported AVE values were greater than 0.5, satisfying the
minimum requirement ( 38).
We also tested for discriminant validity and leveraged the
Heterotrait-Monotrait Ratio (HTMT) Technique. The HTMT
technique indicates the similarities between different latentvariables. HTMT of less than 0.85 indicates a reliable
discriminant validity ( 39). In our study, HTMT was noted to
be 0.48, ensuring discriminant validity.
The structural equation model
The ﬁnal structural model ﬁt evaluated using indicators
such as the GFI, CFI, and TLI indicated a marginal ﬁt (>0.80
and <0.90). Figure 2 illustrates the standardized path
coefﬁcients of the structural model under investigation. The
structural model was assessed by examining path coef ﬁcients.
We also calculated the signi ﬁcance of each path. The results
of hypotheses testing (direct and indirect effects) are
summarized in Table 1 . The ﬁndings support hypothesis 1 by
showing a signi ﬁcant negative relationship (ß = −0.23,
p< 0.001). Similarly, expectancy signi ﬁcantly affected risk
(ß =−0.49, p< 0.001) and supports hypothesis 2. We also
noted a signi ﬁcant negative impact of Risk on the Intent to
use BUC (ß = −0.34, p< 0.001). Regarding the indirect effect
of expectancy on the intent to use BUC, the ﬁndings support
hypothesis 3 by showing a signi ﬁcant positive impact on the
intent to use BUC when mediated by risk (ß = 0.17,
p= 0.004). Hypothesis 4, which posits that risk will mediate
the relationship between perception of AI and intent to use
BUC, was also supported. We noted a signi ﬁcant positive and
indirect effect of perception of AI on the intent to use BUC
when mediated by risk (ß = 0.08, p= 0.027)Choudhury 10.3389/fdgth.2022.920662
Frontiers in Digital Health 05 frontiersin.org