time and memory requirements become the primary concern.
4.2 Closed-loop interactive learning
The special feature of interactive learning is the need to explore . In this section we rst
use bandits (i.e., MDPs with a single state) to illustrate the need for exploration, both in
online and active learning. Next, we discuss active learning in MDPs. This is followed by a
discussion of algorithms available for online learning in MDPs.
4.2.1 Online learning in bandits
Consider an MDP that has a single state. Let the problem be that of maximizing the return
while learning. Since there is only one state, this is an instance of the classical bandit problems
(Robbins, 1952). A basic observation then is that a bandit learner who always chooses the
action with the best estimated payo (i.e., who always makes the greedy choice) can fail to
nd the best action with positive probability, which in turn leads to a large loss. Thus, a
good learner must take actions that look suboptimal, i.e., must explore . The question is then
how to balance the frequency of exploring and exploiting (i.e., greedy) actions.
A simple strategy is to x ">0 and choose a randomly selected action with probability ",
and go with the greedy choice otherwise. This is the so-called "-greedy strategy. Another
simple strategy is the so-called \Boltzmann exploration" strategy, according to which, given
the sample means, ( Qt(a);a2A), of the actions at time t, the next action is drawn from
the multinomial distribution ( (a);a2A), where
(a) =exp(Qt(a) )P
a02Aexp(Qt(a0) ):
Here > 0 controls the greediness of action selection ( !1 results in a greedy choice).
The dierence between Boltzmann exploration and "-greedy is that "-greedy does not take
into account the relative values of the actions, while Boltzmann exploration does. These
algorithms extend easily to the case of unrestricted MDPs provided that some estimates of
the action-values is available.
If the parameter of "-greedy is made a function of time and the resulting sequence is appro-
priately tuned, "-greedy can be made competitive with other, more sophisticated algorithms.
However, the best choice is problem dependent and there is no known automated way of
obtaining good results with "-greedy (Auer et al., 2002). The same holds for the Boltzmann
exploration strategy.
A better approach might be to implement the so-called optimism in the face of uncertainty
(OFU) principle due to Lai and Robbins (1985), according to which the learner should choose
47