leading to tree-based methods. The border between parametric and nonparametric methods
is blurry. For example, a linear predictor when the number of basis functions is allowed to
change (i.e., when new basis functions are introduced as needed) becomes a nonparametric
method. Thus, when one experiments with dierent feature extraction methods, from the
point of view of the overall tuning process, we can say that one really uses a nonparametric
technique. In fact, if we take this viewpoint, it follows that in practice \true" parametric
methods are rarely used if they are used at all.
The advantage of nonparametric methods is their inherent 
exibility. However, this comes
usually at the price of increased computational complexity. Therefore, when using non-
parametric methods, ecient implementations are important (e.g., one should use k-D trees
when implementing nearest neighbor methods, or the Fast Gaussian Transform when imple-
menting a Gaussian smoother). Also, nonparametric methods must be carefully tuned as
they can easily overt orundert . For example, in a k-nearest neighbor method if kis too
large, the method is going to introduce too much smoothing (i.e., it will undert), while if
kis too small, it will t to the noise (i.e., overt). Overtting will be further discussed in
Section 3.2.4. For more information about nonparametric regression, the reader is advised
to consult the books by H ardle (1990); Gy or et al. (2002); Tsybakov (2009).
Although our discussion below will assume a parametric function approximation method
(and in many cases linear function approximation), many of the algorithms can be extended
to nonparametric techniques. We will mention when such extensions exist as appropriate.
Up to now, the discussion implicitly assumed that the state is accessible for measurement.
This is, however, rarely the case in practical applications. Luckily, the methods that we
will discuss below do not actually need to access the states directly, but they can perform
equally well when some \suciently descriptive feature-based representation" of the states
is available (such as the camera images in the robot-arm example). A common way of
arriving at such a representation is to construct state estimators (or observers, in control
terminology) based on the history of the observations, which has a large literature both in
machine learning and control. The discussion of these techniques, however, lies outside of
the scope of the present paper.
3.2.1 TD( ) with function approximation
Let us return to the problem of estimating a value function Vof a Markov reward process
M= (X;P0), but now assume that the state space is large (or even innite). Let D=
((Xt;Rt+1);t0) be a realization of M. The goal, as before, is to estimate the value
function ofMgivenDin an incremental manner.
Choose a smooth parametric function-approximation method ( V;2Rd) (i.e., for any
2Rd,V:X ! Ris such thatrV(x) exists for any x2X). The generalization of
29