2.2 Markov Decision Processes
For ease of exposition, we restrict our attention to countable MDPs and the discounted total
expected reward criterion. However, under some technical conditions, the results extend to
continuous state-action MDPs, too. This also holds true for the results presented in later
parts of this book.
A countable MDP is dened as a triplet M= (X;A;P0), whereXis the countable non-
empty set of states, Ais the countable non-empty set of actions. The transition probability
kernelP0assigns to each state-action pair ( x;a)2XA a probability measure over XR,
which we shall denote by P0(jx;a). The semantics of P0is the following: For UX R,
P0(Ujx;a) gives the probability that the next state and the associated reward belongs to the
setUprovided that the current state is xand the action taken is a.2We also x a discount
factor 0
1 whose role will become clear soon.
The transition probability kernel gives rise to the state transition probability kernel ,P, which,
for any (x;a;y )2XAX triplet gives the probability of moving from state xto some
other state yprovided that action awas chosen in state x:
P(x;a;y ) =P0(fygRjx;a):
In addition toP,P0also gives rise to the immediate reward function r:XA! R,
which gives the expected immediate reward received when action ais chosen in state x: If
(Y(x;a);R(x;a))P 0(jx;a), then
r(x;a) =E
R(x;a)
:
In what follows, we shall assume that the rewards are bounded by some quantity R>0:
for any (x;a)2XA ,jR(x;a)jR almost surely.3It is immediate that if the random
rewards are bounded by Rthenkrk1= sup(x;a)2XAjr(x;a)jR also holds. An MDP is
called nite if bothXandAare nite.
Markov Decision Processes are a tool for modeling sequential decision-making problems
where a decision maker interacts with a system in a sequential fashion. Given an MDP M,
this interaction happens as follows: Let t2Ndenote the current time (or stage), let Xt2X
2The probabilityP0(Ujx;a) is dened only when Uis a Borel-measurable set. Borel-measurability is a
technical notion whose purpose is to prevent some pathologies. The collection of Borel-measurable subsets
ofXRinclude practically all \interesting" subsets XR. In particular, they include subsets of the form
fxg[a;b] and subsets which can be obtained from such subsets by taking their complement, or the union
(intersection) of at most countable collections of such sets in a recursive fashion.
3\Almost surely" means the same as \with probability one" and is used to refer to the fact that the
statement concerned holds everywhere on the probability space with the exception of a set of events with
measure zero.
8