A number of individuals have read various versions of the manuscript, full or in parts and
helped me to reduce the number of mistakes by sending corrections. They include Dimitri
Bertsekas, G abor Bal azs, Bernardo Avila Pires, Warren Powell, Rich Sutton, Nikos Vlassis,
Hengshuai Yao and Shimon Whiteson. Thank You! Of course, all the remaining mistakes
are mine. If I have left out someone from the above list, this was by no means intentional.
If this is the case, please remind me in an e-mail (better yet, send me some comments or
suggestions). Independently of whether they have contacted me before or not, readers are
encouraged to e-mail me if they nd errors, typos or they just think that some topic should
have been included (or left out). I plan to periodically update the text and I will try to
accommodate all the requests. Finally, I wish to thank Remi Munos, and Rich Sutton, my
closest collaborators over the last few years, from whom I have learned and continue to learn
a lot. I also wish to thank all my students, the members of RLAI group and all researchers
of RL who continue to strive to push the boundaries of what we can do with reinforcement
learning. This book is made possible by you.
A The theory of discounted Markovian decision pro-
cesses
The purpose of this section is to give a short proof of the basic results of the theory of
Markovian decision processes. All the results will be worked out for the discounted expected
total cost criterion. First, we give a short overview of contraction mappings and Banach's
xed-point theorem. Next, we show how this powerful result can be applied to proof a
number of basic results about value functions and optimal policies.
A.1 Contractions and Banach's xed-point theorem
We start with some basic denitions which we will need in the rest of this section.
Denition 1 (Norm) .LetVbe a vector space over the reals. Then f:V!R+
0is a norm
onVprovided that the following hold:
1. Iff(v) = 0 for some v2Vthenv= 0;
2. For any 2R,v2V,f(v) =jjf(v);
3. For any v;u2V,f(v+u)f(v) +f(u).
A vector space together with a norm is called a normed vector space .
74