Algorithm 14 The function implementing one iteration of the tted Q-iteration algorithm.
The function must be called until some criterion of convergence is met. The methods pre-
dict andregress are specic to the regression method chosen. The method predict (z;)
should return thepredicted value at the input zgiven the regression parameters , while
regress (S), given a list of input-output pairs S, should implement a regression algorithm
that solves the regression problem given by Sand returns new parameters that can be used
inpredict .
function FittedQ (D;)
Input:D= ((Xi;Ai;Ri+1;Yi+1);i= 1;:::;n ) is a list of transitions, are the regressor
parameters
1:S [] .Create empty list
2:fori= 1!ndo
3:T Ri+1+ maxa02Apredict ((Yi+1;a0);) .Target at (Xi;Ai)
4:S append (S;h(Xi;Ai);Ti)
5:end for
6: regress (S)
7:return
is a non-expansion, the algorithm implements an incremental approximate version of value
iteration, with the underlying operator being a contraction. This is because a non-expansion
applied after a contraction or a contraction applied after a non-expansion is a contraction.
The idea of using non-expansions has rst appeared in the works of Gordon (1995) and
Tsitsiklis and Van Roy (1996) in the study of tted value iteration.
FittedQ-iteration FittedQ-iteration implements tted value iteration with action-value
functions. Given the previous iterate, Qt, the idea is to form a Monte-Carlo approximation
to (TQt)(x;a) at selected state-action pairs and then regress on the resulting points using
one's favorite regression method. Algorithm 14 shows the pseudocode of this method.
It is known that tted Q-iteration might diverge unless a special regressor is used (Baird,
1995; Boyan and Moore, 1995; Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1996). Ormoneit and Sen (2002)
suggest to use kernel averaging, while Ernst et al. (2005) suggest using tree based regressors.
These are guaranteed to converge (say, if the same data is fed to the algorithm in each
iteration) as they implement local averaging and as such results of Gordon (1995); Tsitsiklis
and Van Roy (1996) are applicable to them. Riedmiller (2005) reports good empirical
results with neural networks, at least when new observations obtained by following a policy
greedy with respect to the latest iterate are incrementally added to the set of samples used
in the updates. That the sample is changed is essential if no good initial policy is available,
i.e., when in the initial sample states which are frequently visited by \good" policies are
underrepresented (a theoretical argument for why this is important is given by Van Roy
(2006) in the context of state aggregation).
61