compose according to
P(x;a;y ) =PA(f(x;a);y); x;y2X;a2A:
Heref:XA ! Zis some known transition function and PA:ZX ! [0;1] is
an appropriate probability kernel. Function fdetermines the deterministic \eect" of the
actions, whilePAcaptures their stochastic eect. Many operations research problems enjoy
this structure. For example, in the inventory control problem (Example 1), f(x;a) = (x+
a)^M. Further examples are given by Powell (2007). Note that Sutton and Barto (1998)
calls post-decision states \afterstates".
If a problem admits post-decision states, learning the immediate reward function (if it is not
known) and the so-called post-decision state optimal value function, V
A:Z!R, dened by
V
A(z) =X
y2XPA(z;y)V(y); z2Z;
might be both more economical and ecient than learning an action-value function. Update
rules and action selection strategies can be derived based on the identity Q(x;a) =r(x;a)+

V
A(f(x;a)), which follows immediately from the denitions.
To see another potential advantage of using post-decision state value functions, assume that
we have access to the transition probabilities. In such a case, we might be tempted to
approximate the state-value function instead of approximating the action-value function.
Then, in order to compute the greedy action (which is necessary in many algorithms), we
need to compute argmaxa2Ar(x;a) +
P
y2XP(x;a;y )V(y). This is a so-called stochastic
optimization problem (the modier \stochastic" refers to that the optimization objective is
dened with an expectation). This problem might be computationally challenging when the
number of next states is large, and/or the number of actions is large (e.g., if Ais a large or
innite subset of a Euclidean space), and/or Pdoes not enjoy a nice structure. On the other
hand, if one uses a post-decision state value function VA, then computing a greedy action
reduces to nding argmaxa2Ar(x;a) +
VA(f(x;a)). Thus, the expectation is avoided, i.e.,
no stochastic optimization problem needs to be solved. Further, with a judiciously chosen
approximation architecture (such as piecewise linear, concave, separable), the optimization
problem might be tractable even for large (or innite) action spaces. Thus, post-decision
state value functions might be advantageous as they allow one to avoid another layer of
complexity. Of course, the same applies to using action-value functions, but, as discussed
previously, post-decision state value functions may require less storage and potentially require
fewer samples to learn than action-value functions. For further details, ideas and examples
consult (Powell, 2007).
58