state representation will easily be in the range of millions, yet the intrinsic dimensionality
will still be 12. In fact, the more cameras we have, the higher the dimensionality will be.
A simple-minded approach, which aims for minimizing the dimensionality would suggest to
use as few cameras as possible. But more information should not hurt! Therefore, the quest
should be for clever algorithms and function approximation methods that can deal with
high-dimensional but low complexity problems.
Possibilities include using strip-like tilings combined with hash functions, interpolators that
use low-discrepancy grids (Lemieux, 2009, Chapter 5 and 6), or random projections (Das-
gupta and Freund, 2008). Nonlinear function approximation methods (examples of which
include neural networks with sigmoidal transfer functions in the hidden layers or RBF net-
works where the centers are also considered as parameters) and nonparametric techniques
also hold great promise.
Nonparametric methods In a nonparametric method , the user does not start with a
xed nite-dimensional representation, such as in the previous examples, but allows for the
representation to grow and change as needed. For example, in a k-nearest neighbor method
for regression, given the data Dn= [(x1;v1);:::; (xn;vn)], wherexi2Rk,vi2R, the value
at location xis predicted using
V(k)
D(x) =nX
i=1viK(k)
D(x;xi)
k;
whereK(k)
D(x;x0) is one when x0is closer to xthan thekthclosest neighbor of xinDand is
zero otherwise. Note that k=Pn
j=1K(k)
D(x;xj). Replacing kin the above expression with
this sum and replacing K(k)
D(x;) with some other data based kernel KD(e.g., a Gaussian
centered around xwith standard deviation proportional to the distance to the kthnearest
neighbor), we arrive at nonparametric kernel smoothing :
V(k)
D(x) =nX
i=1viKD(x;xi)Pn
j=1KD(x;xj);
which should be compared to its parametric counterpart (20). Other examples include meth-
ods that work by nding an appropriate function in some large (innite dimensional) function
space that ts an empirical error. The function space is usually a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
space which is a convenient choice from the point of view of optimization. In special cases,
we get spline smoothers (Wahba, 2003) and Gaussian process regression (Rasmussen and
Williams, 2005). Another idea is to split the input space recursively into ner regions using
some heuristic criterion and then predict with some simple method the values in the leafs,
28