with MDPs, must spend enough time here before moving on because the rest of the book
builds heavily on the results and ideas presented here.
The remaining two parts are devoted to the two basic RL problems (cf. Figure 1), one part
devoted to each. In Section 3, the problem of learning to predict values associated with
states is studied. We start by explaining the basic ideas for the so-called tabular case when
the MDP is small enough so that one can store one value per state in an array allocated in
a computer's main memory. The rst algorithm explained is TD( ), which can be viewed
as the learning analogue to value iteration from dynamic programming. After this, we
consider the more challenging situation when there are more states than what ts into a
computer's memory. Clearly, in this case, one must compress the table representing the
values. Abstractly, this can be done by relying on an appropriate function approximation
method. First, we describe how TD( ) can be used in this situation. This is followed by the
description of some new gradient based methods (GTD2 and TDC), which can be viewed
as improved versions of TD( ) in that they avoid some of the convergence diculties that
TD() faces. We then discuss least-squares methods (in particular, LSTD( ) and-LSPE)
and compare them to the incremental methods described earlier. Finally, we describe choices
available for implementing function approximation and the tradeos that these choices come
with.
The second part (Section 4) is devoted to algorithms that are developed for control learning.
First, we describe methods whose goal is optimizing online performance. In particular,
we describe the \optimism in the face of uncertainty" principle and methods that explore
their environment based on this principle. State of the art algorithms are given both for
bandit problems and MDPs. The message here is that clever exploration methods make
a large dierence, but more work is needed to scale up the available methods to large
problems. The rest of this section is devoted to methods that aim at developing methods
that can be used in large-scale applications. As learning in large-scale MDPs is signicantly
more dicult than learning when the MDP is small, the goal of learning is relaxed to
learning a good enough policy in the limit. First, direct methods are discussed which aim at
estimating the optimal action-values directly. These can be viewed as the learning analogue
of value iteration of dynamic programming. This is followed by the description of actor-
critic methods, which can be thought of as the counterpart of the policy iteration algorithm
of dynamic programming. Both methods based on direct policy improvement and policy
gradient (i.e., which use parametric policy classes) are presented.
The book is concluded in Section 5, which lists some topics for further exploration.
6