state. Problems with these characteristics are best described in the framework of Markovian
Decision Processes (MDPs). The standard approach to `solve' MDPs is to use dynamic
programming, which transforms the problem of nding a good controller into the problem
of nding a good value function. However, apart from the simplest cases when the MDP has
very few states and actions, dynamic programming is infeasible. The RL algorithms that
we discuss here can be thought of as a way of turning the infeasible dynamic programming
methods into practical algorithms so that they can be applied to large-scale problems.
There are two key ideas that allow RL algorithms to achieve this goal. The rst idea is to
use samples to compactly represent the dynamics of the control problem. This is important
for two reasons: First, it allows one to deal with learning scenarios when the dynamics is
unknown. Second, even if the dynamics is available, exact reasoning that uses it might
be intractable on its own. The second key idea behind RL algorithms is to use powerful
function approximation methods to compactly represent value functions. The signicance
of this is that it allows dealing with large, high-dimensional state- and action-spaces. What
is more, the two ideas t nicely together: Samples may be focused on a small subset of the
spaces they belong to, which clever function approximation techniques might exploit. It is
the understanding of the interplay between dynamic programming, samples and function
approximation that is at the heart of designing, analyzing and applying RL algorithms.
The purpose of this book is to allow the reader to have a chance to peek into this beautiful
eld. However, certainly we are not the rst to set out to accomplish this goal. In 1996,
Kaelbling et al. have written a nice, compact survey about the approaches and algorithms
available at the time (Kaelbling et al., 1996). This was followed by the publication of the book
by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996), which detailed the theoretical foundations. A few years
later Sutton and Barto, the `fathers' of RL, published their book, where they presented their
ideas on RL in a very clear and accessible manner (Sutton and Barto, 1998). A more recent
and comprehensive overview of the tools and techniques of dynamic programming/optimal
control is given in the two-volume book by Bertsekas (2007a,b) which devotes one chapter
to RL methods.1At times, when a eld is rapidly developing, books can get out of date
pretty quickly. In fact, to keep up with the growing body of new results, Bertsekas maintains
an online version of his Chapter 6 of Volume II of his book, which, at the time of writing
this survey counted as much as 160 pages (Bertsekas, 2010). Other recent books on the
subject include the book of Gosavi (2003) who devotes 60 pages to reinforcement learning
algorithms in Chapter 9, concentrating on average cost problems, or that of Cao (2007) who
focuses on policy gradient methods. Powell (2007) presents the algorithms and ideas from an
operations research perspective and emphasizes methods that are capable of handling large
1In this book, RL is called neuro-dynamic programming or approximate dynamic programming. The
term neuro-dynamic programming stems from the fact that, in many cases, RL algorithms are used with
articial neural networks.
4