control spaces, Chang et al. (2008) focuses on adaptive sampling (i.e., simulation-based
performance optimization), while the center of the recent book by Busoniu et al. (2010) is
function approximation.
Thus, by no means do RL researchers lack a good body of literature. However, what seems
to be missing is a self-contained and yet relatively short summary that can help newcomers
to the eld to develop a good sense of the state of the art, as well as existing researchers to
broaden their overview of the eld, an article, similar to that of Kaelbling et al. (1996), but
with an updated contents. To ll this gap is the very purpose of this short book.
Having the goal of keeping the text short, we had to make a few, hopefully, not too trou-
bling compromises. The rst compromise we made was to present results only for the total
expected discounted reward criterion. This choice is motivated by that this is the criterion
that is both widely used and the easiest to deal with mathematically. The next compro-
mise is that the background on MDPs and dynamic programming is kept ultra-compact
(although an appendix is added that explains these basic results). Apart from these, the
book aims to cover a bit of all aspects of RL, up to the level that the reader should be
able to understand the whats and hows, as well as to implement the algorithms presented.
Naturally, we still had to be selective in what we present. Here, the decision was to focus
on the basic algorithms, ideas, as well as the available theory. Special attention was paid to
describing the choices of the user, as well as the tradeos that come with these. We tried
to be impartial as much as possible, but some personal bias, as usual, surely remained. The
pseudocode of almost twenty algorithms was included, hoping that this will make it easier
for the practically inclined reader to implement the algorithms described.
The target audience is advanced undergaduate and graduate students, as well as researchers
and practitioners who want to get a good overview of the state of the art in RL quickly.
Researchers who are already working on RL might also enjoy reading about parts of the RL
literature that they are not so familiar with, thus broadening their perspective on RL. The
reader is assumed to be familiar with the basics of linear algebra, calculus, and probability
theory. In particular, we assume that the reader is familiar with the concepts of random
variables, conditional expectations, and Markov chains. It is helpful, but not necessary,
for the reader to be familiar with statistical learning theory, as the essential concepts will
be explained as needed. In some parts of the book, knowledge of regression techniques of
machine learning will be useful.
This book has three parts. In the rst part, in Section 2, we provide the necessary back-
ground. It is here where the notation is introduced, followed by a short overview of the
theory of Markov Decision Processes and the description of the basic dynamic programming
algorithms. Readers familiar with MDPs and dynamic programming should skim through
this part to familiarize themselves with the notation used. Readers, who are less familiar
5