nonparametric techniques (Keller et al., 2006; Parr et al., 2007) or using a combination
of numerical analysis and nonparametric techniques (Mahadevan, 2009). These methods,
however, do not attempt to control the tradeo between the approximation and estimation
errors. To account for this deciency, other researchers explore nonparametric techniques
originating at supervised learning. Examples of this line of research include the use of
regression trees (Ernst et al., 2005), or \kernelizing" the value estimation algorithms (e.g.,
Rasmussen and Kuss, 2004; Engel et al., 2005; Ghavamzadeh and Engel, 2007; Xu et al., 2007;
Taylor and Parr, 2009). These approaches implicitly or explicitly regularize the estimates
to control the loss. Kolter and Ng (2009) designed an algorithm inspired by LASSO that
uses`1-regularization to implement feature selection in the context of LSTD. Although the
approaches above are inspired by principled methods of supervised learning, not much is
known about their statistical properties. Recently, Farahmand et al. (2009, 2008) have
developed another regularization-based approach that comes with statistical guarantees.
The diculty of using (some) nonparametric techniques is that they are computationally ex-
pensive. As a result, when the algorithms are used for planning and a fast simulator is used
to generate data (so that the cost of generating new data is negligible), it might be better
to use an appropriate fast incremental method and a simple linear function-approximation
method with many features than to use a sophisticated but computationally expensive non-
parametric method. Computational eciency is less important if a limited amount of data is
available only and the quality of the solutions is the primary concern, or when the problem
is complex enough so that tuning the function approximation is necessary, but hand-tuning
is infeasible.
4 Control
We now turn to the problem of learning a (near-)optimal policy. We start by discussing
the various forms of control learning problems (Section 4.1), followed by a discussion of
interactive learning (Section 4.2). In the last two sections (Sections 4.3 and 4.4), the learning
counterparts of the classical methods of dynamic programming are discussed.
4.1 A catalog of learning problems
Figure 4.1 shows the basic types of control learning problems. The rst criterion that the
space of problems is split upon is whether the learner can actively in
uence the observations.
In case she can, then we talk about interactive learning , otherwise one is facing a non-
45