and the action space is A= [0;1].5We dene
Xt+1= (1 +St+1At)Xt^w; (5)
when 0Xt< wand makewa terminal state: Xt+1=XtifXt=w. The immediate
reward is zero as long as Xt+1<wand is one when the state reaches wfor the rst time:
Rt+1=8
<
:1; Xt<wandXt+1=w;
0;otherwise:
If we set the discount factor to one, the total reward along any trajectory will be one or
zero depending on whether the wealth reaches w. Thus, the expected total reward is just the
probability that the gambler's fortune reaches w.
Based on the two examples presented so far, the reader unfamiliar with MDPs might believe
that all MDPs come with handy nite, one-dimensional state- and action-spaces. If only this
was true! In fact, in practical applications the state- and action-spaces are often very large,
multidimensional spaces. For example, in a robot control application, the dimensionality
of the state space can be 3|6 times the number of joints the robot has. An industrial
robot's state space might easily be 12|20 dimensional, while the state space of a humanoid
robot might easily have 100 dimensions. In a real-world inventory control application, items
would have multiple types, the prices and costs would also change based on the state of
the \market", whose state would thus also become part of the MDP's state. Hence, the
state space in any such practical application would be very large and very high dimensional.
The same holds for the action spaces. Thus, working with large, multidimensional state- and
action-spaces should be considered the normal situation, while the examples presented in this
section with their one-dimensional, small state spaces should be viewed as the exceptions.
2.3 Value functions
The obvious way of nding an optimal behavior in some MDP is to list all behaviors and
then identify the ones that give the highest possible value for each initial state. Since, in
general, there are too many behaviors, this plan is not viable. A better approach is based on
computing value functions. In this approach, one rst computes the so-called optimal value
function, which then allows one to determine an optimal behavior with relative easiness.
The optimal value ,V(x), of statex2X gives the highest achievable expected return when
the process is started from state x. The function V:X ! Ris called the optimal value
5Hence, in this case the state and action spaces are continuous. Notice that our denition of MDPs is
general enough to encompass this case, too.
12