Alber et al.
Keywords: Articial neural networks, deep learning, analyzing classiers, explaining
classiers, computer vision
1. Introduction
In recent years deep neural networks have revolutionized many domains, e.g., image recog-
nition, speech recognition, speech synthesis, and knowledge discovery (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; LeCun et al., 2012; Schmidhuber, 2015; LeCun et al., 2015; Van Den Oord et al.,
2016). Due to their ability to naturally learn from structured data and exhibit superior
performance, they are increasingly used in practical applications and critical decision pro-
cesses, such as novel knowledge discovery techniques, autonomous driving or medical image
analysis. To fully leverage their potential it is essential that users can comprehend and ana-
lyzethese processes. E.g., in neural architecture (Zoph et al., 2018) or chemical compound
searches (Montavon et al., 2013; Sch utt et al., 2017) it would be extremely useful to know
which properties help a neural network to choose appropriate candidates. Furthermore for
some applications understanding the decision process might be a legal requirement.
Despite these arguments neural networks are often treated as black boxes, because their
complex internal workings and the basis for their predictions are not fully understood. In
the attempt to alleviate this shortcoming several methods were proposed, e.g., Saliency
Map (Baehrens et al., 2010; Simonyan et al., 2013), SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al., 2017), In-
tegratedGradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017), Deconvnet (Zeiler and Fergus, 2014), Guid-
edBackprop (Springenberg et al., 2015), PatternNet and PatternAttribution (Kindermans
et al., 2018), LRP (Bach et al., 2015; Lapuschkin et al., 2016a,b, 2019; Montavon et al.,
2018), and DeepTaylor (Montavon et al., 2017). Theoretically it is not clear which method
solves the stated problems best, therefore an empirical comparison is required (Samek et al.,
2017; Kindermans et al., 2017). In order to evaluate these methods, we present iNNvesti-
gate which provides a common interface to a variety of analysis methods.
In particular, iNNvestigate contributes:
A common interface for a growing number of analysis methods that is applicable to a
broad class of neural networks. With this instantiating a method is as uncomplicated
as passing a trained neural network to it and allows for easy qualitative comparisons of
methods. For quantitative evaluations of (image) classication task we further provide
an implementation of the method \perturbation analysis" (Samek et al., 2017).
Support of all methods listed above|this includes the rst reference implementation
for PatternNet and PatternAttribution and an extended implementation for LRP|
and an open source repository for further contributions.
A clean and modular implementation, casting each analysis in terms of layer-wise
forward and backward computations. This limits code redundancy, takes advantage
of automatic dierentiation, and eases future integration of new methods.
iNNvestigate is available at repository: https://github.com/albermax/innvestigate .
It can be simply installed as Python package and contains documentation for code and ap-
plications. To demonstrate the versatility of iNNvestigate we provide examples for the
analysis of image classications for a variety of state-of-the-art neural networks.
2