Alber et al.
2.1. Details
Modular implementation: All of the methods have in common that they perform a back-
propagation from the model outputs to the inputs. The core of iNNvestigate is a set of
base classes and functions that is designed to allow for rapid and easy development of such
algorithms. The developer only needs to implement specic changes to the base algorithm
and the library will take care of the complex and error-prone handling of the propagation
along the graph structure. Further details can be found in the repositories documentation.
Another advantage of the modular design is that one can extend any analyzer with
a given set of wrappers. One application of this is the smoothing of the analysis results
by adding Gaussian noise to the copies of the input and averaging the outcome. E.g.,
SmoothGrad is realized in this way by combining a smoothing wrapper with a gradient
analyzer.
Training: PatternNet and PatternAttribution (Kindermans et al., 2018) are two novel
approaches that condition their analysis on the data distribution. This is done by identifying
the signal and noise direction for each neuron of a neural network. Our software scales
favorably, e.g., one can train required patterns for the methods on large data sets like
Imagenet (Deng et al., 2009) in less than an hour using one GPU. We present the rst
reference implementation of these methods.
Quantitative evaluation: Often analysis methods for neural networks are compared by
qualitative (visual) inspection of the result. This is can lead to subjective evaluations and
one approach to create a more objective and quantitative comparison of analysis algorithms
is the method \perturbation analysis" (Samek et al., 2017, also known as \PixelFlipping").
The intuition behind this method is that perturbing regions which are recognized as im-
portant for the classication task by the analyzing method, will impact the classication
most. This allows to assess which analysis method best identies regions that matter for a
specic task and neural network. iNNvestigate contains an implementation of this method.
Installation & license: iNNvestigate is published as open-source software under the BSD-
2-license and can be downloaded from: https://github.com/albermax/innvestigate . It
is built as a Python 2 or 3 application on top of the popular and established Keras (Chollet
et al., 2015) framework. This allows to use the library on various platforms and devices
like CPUs and GPUs. At the time of publication only the TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016)
Keras-backend is supported. The library can be simply installed as Python package.
3. Conclusion
We have presented iNNvestigate , a library that makes it easier to analyze neural networks'
predictions and to compare dierent analysis methods. This is done by providing a common
interface and implementations for many analysis methods as well as making tools for training
and comparing methods available. In particular it contains reference implementations for
many methods (PatternNet, PatternAttribution, LRP) and example application for a large
number of state-of-the-art applications. We expect that this library will support the eld of
analyzing machine learning and facilitate research using neural networks in domains such
as drug design or medical image analysis.
4