robustness beneﬁts from V AE’s latent stochastic sampling; 3) Global State Alignment . While the
V AE can help the agent to correct its trajectory to some extent, the agent may still occasionally enter
states that are far away from demonstrations, where the V AE has no clue how to correct it. So we
have to add a global constraint to align the states in demonstration and imitation. Inspired by GAIL
that uses reward to align the distribution of state-action pairs, we also formulate an IRL problem
whose maximal cumulative reward is the Wasserstein Distance between states of demonstration and
imitation. Note that we choose not to involve state-action pairs as in GAIL(Ho & Ermon, 2016),
or state-state pairs as in an observation-based GAIL (Torabi et al., 2018a), because our state-only
formulation imposes weaker constraints than the two above options, thus providing more ﬂexibility
to handle different agent dynamics; 4) Regularized Policy Update . We combine the prior for next
state learned from V AE and the Wasserstein distance-based global constraint from IRL in a uniﬁed
framework, by imposing a Kullback-Leibler divergence based regularizer to the policy update in the
Proximal Policy Optimization algorithm.
To empirically justify our ideas, we conduct experiments in two different settings. We ﬁrst show that
our approach can achieve similar or better results on the standard imitation learning setting, which
assumes the same dynamics between the expert and the imitator. We then evaluate our approach
in the more challenging setting that the dynamics of the expert and the imitator are different. In a
number of control tasks, we either change the physics properties of the imitators or cripple them by
changing their geometries. Existing approaches either fail or can only achieve very low rewards, but
our approach can still exhibit decent performance. Finally, we show that even for imitation across
agents of completely different actuators, it is still possible for the state-alignment based method to
work. Surprisingly, a point mass and an ant in MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) can imitate each other
to navigate in a maze environment.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
Propose to use a state alignment based method in the imitation learning problems where
the expert’s and the imitator’s dynamics are different.
Propose a local state alignment method based on -V AE and a global state alignment
method based on Wasserstein distance.
Combine the local alignment and global alignment components into a reinforcement learn-
ing framework by a regularized policy update objective.
2 R ELATED WORK
Imitation learning is widely used in solving complicated tasks where pure reinforcement learning
might suffer from high sample complexity, like robotics control (Le et al., 2017; Ye & Alterovitz,
2017; Pathak et al., 2018), autonomous vehicle (Fu et al.; Pomerleau, 1989), and playing video game
(Hester et al., 2018; Pohlen et al., 2018; Aytar et al., 2018a). Behavioral cloning (Bain & Sommut,
1999) is a straight-forward method to learn a policy in a supervised way. However, behavioral
cloning suffers from the problem of compounding errors as shown by (Ross & Bagnell, 2010), and
this can be somewhat alleviated by interactive learning, such as DAGGER (Ross et al., 2011b).
Another important line in imitation learning is inverse reinforcement learning (Russell, 1998; Ng
et al., 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008; Fu et al.), which ﬁnds a cost function under
which the expert is uniquely optimal.
Since IRL can be connected to min-max formulations, works like GAIL, SAM (Ho & Ermon, 2016;
Blond ´e & Kalousis, 2018) utilize this to directly recover policies. Its connections with GANs (Good-
fellow et al., 2014) also lead to f-divergence minimization (Ke et al., 2019; Nowozin et al., 2016)
and Wasserstein distance minimization (Xiao et al., 2019). One can also extend the framework from
matching state-action pairs to state distribution matching, such as Torabi et al. (2018a); Sun et al.
(2019); Schroecker & Isbell (2017). Other works (Aytar et al., 2018b; Liu et al., 2018; Peng et al.,
2018) also learn from observation alone, by deﬁning reward on state and using IRL to solve the
tasks. Works like (Lee et al., 2019; Lee et al.) also use state-based reward for exploration. Torabi
et al. (2018b); Edwards et al. (2018) will recover actions from observations by learning an inverse
model or latent actions. However, our work aims to combine the advantage of global state distribu-
tion matching and local state transition alignment, which combines the advantage of BC and IRL
through a novel framework.
3 B ACKGROUNDS
Variational Autoencoders Kingma & Welling (2013); Rezende et al. (2014) provides a frame-
work to learn both a probabilistic generative model p(xjz)as well as an approximated posterior
2