Figure 3 demonstrates the superiority of our methods over all the baselines. Our approach is the
most stable in all the 6 environments and shows the leading performance in each of them. GAIL
seems to be the most sensitive to dynamics difference. AIRL, which is designed to solve imitation
learning for actors of different dynamics, can perform on par with our method in two swimmer-
based environments (DisabledSwimmer and HeavySwimmer) that have relatively lower dimensional
action space (2D for swimmer versus 8D for ants).
Interestingly, the stability and performance of vanilla behavior cloning are quite reasonable in 4 of
the environments, although it failed to move about in the DisabledAnt and HeavyAnt environments.
For these two tasks, the agent will reach dangerous states by cloning actions, yet our method will
not approach these states by using state-based imitation. In the other four games, BC agents do not
die but just move less efﬁciently, so they have a sub-optimal yet still reasonable score.1
5.1.2 A CTORS OF HETEROGENEOUS ACTION DYNAMICS
We consider an extremely challenging setting that the imitator and demonstrator are functionally
different. One typical example of expert/imitator pair in practice would be a human and a humanoid
robot. We consider a much simpliﬁed version but with similar nature – a Point and an Ant in
MuJoCo. In this task, even if the state space cannot be exactly matched, there are still some shared
dimensions across the state space of the imitator and the actor, e.g., the location of the center of
mass, and the demonstration should still teach the imitator in these dimensions.
We use the same setting as many hierarchical RL papers, such as HIRO and Near-Optimal RL
(Nachum et al., 2018a;b). The agent need to reach a goal position in a maze, which is represented
by (x,y) coordinates. We also know that the ﬁrst two dimensions of states are the position of the
agent. The prior knowledge includes: (1) the goal space (or the common space that need to be
matched) (2) the projection from the state space to the goal space (select the ﬁrst two dimensions of
the states).
(a) Original Ant
 (b) Disabled Ant
 (c) PointMaze
 (d) AntMaze
Figure 4: Imitation Learning of Actors with Heterogeneous Action Dynamics.
The ﬁrst task is that the Ant should reach the other side of the maze from several successful demon-
strations of a Point robot. As shown in Figure 4(c) and Figure 4(d), the maze structure for the ant
and point mass is exactly the same.
To solve this problem, we ﬁrst pre-train an V AE on the demonstrations, and use this V AE to propose
the next “subgoal” for the Ant. This V AE is trained on the goal space (i.e. the ﬁrst two dimensions)
of the Point robot’s trajectory. Then we train an inverse model for Ant, which will generate an action
based on the Ant’s current state (high dimensional) and goal predicted by V AE (2 dimensional).
Our performance is shown in Figure 5(c). After 1M training steps, the agent has success rate of 0.8
to reach the other side of the maze.
5.2 A CTORS OF THE SAME DYNAMICS (STANDARD IMITATION LEARNING )
We also evaluate our algorithm on 6 non-trivial control tasks in MuJoCo: Swimmer, Hopper, Walker,
Ant, HalfCheetach, and Humanoid. We ﬁrst collect demonstration trajectories with Soft Actor-
Critic, which can learn policies that achieve high scores in most of these environments2. For com-
1For LightSwimmer 3(e), AIRL meets MuJoCo numerical exception for several trials.
2We collect near-optimal demonstration on Swimmer using TRPO due to the limited performance of SAC.
7