STATE ALIGNMENT -BASED IMITATION LEARNING
Fangchen Liu Zhan Ling Tongzhou Mu Hao Su
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
ffliu,z6ling,t3mu,haosu g@eng.ucsd.edu
ABSTRACT
Consider an imitation learning problem that the imitator and the expert have differ-
ent dynamics models. Most of the current imitation learning methods fail because
they focus on imitating actions. We propose a novel state alignment based imita-
tion learning method to train the imitator to follow the state sequences in expert
demonstrations as much as possible. The state alignment comes from both lo-
cal and global perspectives and we combine them into a reinforcement learning
framework by a regularized policy update objective. We show the superiority of
our method on standard imitation learning settings and imitation learning settings
where the expert and imitator have different dynamics models.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Learning from demonstrations (imitation learning, abbr. as IL) is a basic strategy to train agents for
solving complicated tasks. Imitation learning methods can be generally divided into two categories:
behavior cloning (BC) and inverse reinforcement learning (IRL). Behavior cloning (Ross et al.,
2011b) formulates a supervised learning problem to learn a policy that maps states to actions using
demonstration trajectories. Inverse reinforcement learning (Russell, 1998; Ng et al., 2000) tries to
ﬁnd a proper reward function that can induce the given demonstration trajectories. GAIL (Ho &
Ermon, 2016) and its variants (Fu et al.; Qureshi et al., 2018; Xiao et al., 2019) are the recently
proposed IRL-based methods, which uses a GAN-based reward to align the distribution of state-
action pairs between the expert and the imitator.
Although state-of-the-art BC and IRL methods have demonstrated compelling performance in stan-
dard imitation learning settings, e.g. control tasks (Ho & Ermon, 2016; Fu et al.; Qureshi et al., 2018;
Xiao et al., 2019) and video games (Aytar et al., 2018b), these approaches are developed based on
a strong assumption: the expert and the imitator share the same dynamics model; speciﬁcally, they
have the same action space, and any feasible state-action pair leads to the same next state in proba-
bility for both agents. The assumption brings severe limitation in practical scenarios: Imagine that a
robot with a low speed limit navigates through a maze by imitating another robot which moves fast,
then, it is impossible for the slow robot to execute the exact actions as the fast robot. However, the
demonstration from the fast robot should still be useful because it shows the path to go through the
maze.
We are interested in the imitation learning problem under a relaxed assumption: Given an imita-
tor that shares the same state space with the expert but their dynamics may be different, we train
the imitator to follow the state sequence in expert demonstrations as much as possible. This is a
more general formulation since it poses fewer requirements on the experts and makes demonstra-
tion collection easier. Due to the dynamics mismatch, the imitator becomes more likely to deviate
from the demonstrations compared with the traditional imitation learning setting. Therefore, it is
very important that the imitator should be able to resume to the demonstration trajectory by itself.
Note that neither BC-based methods nor GAIL-based IRL methods have learned to handle dynamics
misalignment and deviation correction.
To address the issues, we propose a novel approach with four main features: 1) State-based . Com-
pared to the majority of literature in imitation learning, our approach is state-based rather than
action-based. Not like BC and IRL that essentially match state-action pairs between the expert and
the imitator, we only match states. An inverse model of the imitator dynamics is learned to recover
the action; 2) Deviation Correction . A state-based -V AE (Higgins et al., 2017) is learned as the
prior for the next state to visit. Compared with ordinary behavior cloning, this V AE-based next state
predictor can advise the imitator to return to the demonstration trajectory when it deviates. The
1arXiv:1911.10947v1  [cs.LG]  21 Nov 2019