Better Exploration with Optimistic Actor-Critic
Kamil Ciosek
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK
kamil.ciosek@microsoft.comQuan Vuong∗
University of California San Diego
qvuong@ucsd.edu
Robert Loftin
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK
t-roloft@microsoft.comKatja Hofmann
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK
katja.hofmann@microsoft.com
Abstract
Actor-critic methods, a type of model-free Reinforcement Learning, have been
successfully applied to challenging tasks in continuous control, often achieving
state-of-the art performance. However, wide-scale adoption of these methods in
real-world domains is made difﬁcult by their poor sample efﬁciency. We address
this problem both theoretically and empirically. On the theoretical side, we identify
two phenomena preventing efﬁcient exploration in existing state-of-the-art algo-
rithms such as Soft Actor Critic. First, combining a greedy actor update with a
pessimistic estimate of the critic leads to the avoidance of actions that the agent
does not know about, a phenomenon we call pessimistic underexploration . Sec-
ond, current algorithms are directionally uninformed , sampling actions with equal
probability in opposite directions from the current mean. This is wasteful, since
we typically need actions taken along certain directions much more than others. To
address both of these phenomena, we introduce a new algorithm, Optimistic Actor
Critic, which approximates a lower and upper conﬁdence bound on the state-action
value function. This allows us to apply the principle of optimism in the face of
uncertainty to perform directed exploration using the upper bound while still using
the lower bound to avoid overestimation. We evaluate OAC in several challenging
continuous control tasks, achieving state-of the art sample efﬁciency.
1 Introduction
A major obstacle that impedes a wider adoption of actor-critic methods [ 31,40,49,44] for control
tasks is their poor sample efﬁciency. In practice, despite impressive recent advances [ 24,17], millions
of environment interactions are needed to obtain a reasonably performant policy for control problems
with moderate complexity. In systems where obtaining samples is expensive, this often makes the
deployment of these algorithms prohibitively costly.
This paper aims at mitigating this problem by more efﬁcient exploration . We begin by examining
the exploration behavior of SAC [ 24] and TD3 [ 17], two recent model-free algorithms with state-
of-the-art sample efﬁciency and make two insights. First, in order to avoid overestimation [ 26,46],
SAC and TD3 use a critic that computes an approximate lower conﬁdence bound2. The actor then
adjusts the exploration policy to maximize this lower bound. This improves the stability of the
updates and allows the use of larger learning rates. However, using the lower bound can also seriously
inhibit exploration if it is far from the true Q-function. If the lower bound has a spurious maximum,
the covariance of the policy will decrease, causing pessimistic underexploration , i.e. discouraging
∗Work done while an intern at Microsoft Research, Cambridge.
2See Appendix C for details.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.