has a maximum at the mean µofπcurrent , the policy πcurrent has a small standard deviation. This is
suboptimal since we need to sample actions far away from the mean to ﬁnd out that the true critic Qπ
does not have a maximum at µ. We include evidence that this problem actually happens in MuJoCo
Ant in Appendix F.
The phenomenon of underexploration is speciﬁc to the lower as opposed to an upper bound. An
upper bound which is too large in certain areas of the action space encourages the agent to explore
them and correct the critic, akin to optimistic initialization in the tabular setting [ 42,43]. We include
more intuition about the difference between the upper and lower bound in Appendix I. Due to
overestimation, we cannot address pessimistic underexploration by simply using the upper bound in
the actor [ 17]. Instead, recent algorithms have used an entropy term (4)in the actor update. While
this helps exploration somewhat by preventing the covariance from collapsing to zero, it does not
address the core issue that we need to explore more around a spurious maximum. We propose a more
effective solution in section 4.
Directional uninformedness. Actor-critic algorithms that use Gaussian policies, like SAC [ 25]
and TD3 [ 17], sample actions in opposite directions from the mean with equal probability. However,
in a policy gradient algorithm, the current policy will have been obtained by incremental updates,
which means that it won’t be very different from recent past policies. Therefore, exploration in both
directions is wasteful, since the parts of the action space where past policies had high density are
likely to have already been explored. This phenomenon is shown in Figure 1b. Since the policy
πcurrent is Gaussian and symmetric around the mean, it is equally likely to sample actions to the left
and to the right. However, while sampling to the left would be useful for learning an improved critic,
sampling to the right is wasteful, since the critic estimate in that part of the action space is already
good enough. In section 4, we address this issue by using an exploration policy shifted relative to the
target policy.
4 Better Exploration with Optimism
Optimistic Actor Critic (OAC) is based on the principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty [ 50].
Inspired by recent theoretical results about efﬁcient exploration in model-free RL [ 28], OAC obtains
an exploration policy πEwhich locally maximizes an approximate upper conﬁdence bound of Qπ
each time the agent enters a new state. The policy πEis separate from the target policy πTlearned
using (5)and is used only to sample actions in the environment. Formally, the exploration policy
πE=N(µE,ΣE), is deﬁned as
µe,ΣE= argmax
µ,Σ:
KL(N(µ,Σ),N(µT,ΣT))≤δEa∼N(µ,Σ)/bracketleftbig¯QUB(s,a)/bracketrightbig
. (6)
Below, we derive the OAC algorithm formally. We begin by obtaining the upper bound ¯QUB(s,a)
(section 4.1). We then motivate the optimization problem (6), in particular the use of the KL constraint
(section 4.2). Finally, in section 4.3, we describe the OAC algorithm and outline how it mitigates
pessimistic underexploration anddirectional uninformedness while still maintaining the stability of
learning. In Section 4.4, we compare OAC to related work. In Appendix B, we derive an alternative
variant of OAC that works with deterministic policies.
4.1 Obtaining an Upper Bound
The approximate upper conﬁdence bound ¯QUBused by OAC is derived in three stages. First, we
obtain an epistemic uncertainty estimate σQabout the true state-action value function Q. We then use
it to deﬁne an upper bound ˆQUB. Finally, we introduce its linear approximation ¯QUB, which allows
us to obtain a tractable algorithm.
Epistemic uncertainty For computational efﬁciency, we use a Gaussian distribution to model
epistemic uncertainty. We ﬁt mean and standard deviation based on bootstraps [ 16] of the critic. The
mean belief is deﬁned as µQ(s,a) =1
2/parenleftBig
ˆQ1
LB(s,a)+ˆQ2
LB(s,a)/parenrightBig
,while the standard deviation is
σQ(s,a) =/radicalbigg
/summationtext
i∈{1,2}1
2/parenleftBig
ˆQi
LB(s,a)−µQ(s,a)/parenrightBig2
=1
2/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleˆQ1
LB(s,a)−ˆQ2
LB(s,a)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle. (7)
4