Figure 3: OAC versus SAC, TD3, DDPG on 5 Mujoco environments. The horizontal axis indicates
number of environment steps. The vertical axis indicates the total undiscounted return. The shaded
areas denote one standard deviation.
learning methods thet involve uncertainty [ 18,15,12] are very computationally expensive due to
the need of learning a distribution over environment models. OAC may seem superﬁcially similar
to natural actor critic [ 5,29,37,38] due to the KL constraint in (6). In fact, it is very different.
While natural actor critic uses KL to enforce the similarity between inﬁnitesimally small updates to
the target policy, OAC constrains the exploration policy to be within a non-trivial distance of the
target policy. Other approaches that deﬁne the exploration policy as a solution to a KL-constrained
optimization problem include MOTO [ 2], MORE [ 4] and Maximum a Posteriori Policy optimization
[3]. These methods differ from OAC in that they do not use epistemic uncertainty estimates and
explore by enforcing entropy.
5 Experiments
Our experiments have three main goals. First, to test whether Optimistic Actor Critic has performance
competitive to state-of-the art algorithms. Second, to assess whether optimistic exploration based
on the bootstrapped uncertainty estimate (24), is sufﬁcient to produce a performance improvement.
Third, to assess whether optimistic exploration adversely affects the stability of the learning process.
MuJoCo Continuous Control We test OAC on the MuJoCo [ 45] continuous control benchmarks.
We compare OAC to SAC [ 25] and TD3 [ 17], two recent model-free RL methods that achieve
state-of-the art performance. For completeness, we also include a comparison to a tuned version of
DDPG [ 31], an established algorithm that does not maintain multiple bootstraps of the critic network.
OAC uses 3 hyper-parameters related to exploration. The parameters βUBandβLBcontrol the amount
of uncertainty used to compute the upper and lower bound respectively. The parameter δcontrols the
maximal allowed divergence between the exploration policy and the target policy. We provide the
values of all hyper-parameters and details of the hyper-parameter tuning in Appendix D. Results in
Figure 3 show that using optimism improves the overall performance of actor-critic methods. On
Ant, OAC improves the performance somewhat. On Hopper, OAC achieves state-of the art ﬁnal
performance. On Walker, we achieve the same performance as SAC while the high variance of results
on HalfCheetah makes it difﬁcult to draw conclusions on which algorithm performs better.5.
State-of-the art result on Humanoid The upper-right plot of Figure 3 shows that the vanilla
version of OAC outperforms SAC the on the Humanoid task. To test the statistical signiﬁcance of our
result, we re-ran both SAC and OAC in a setting where 4 training steps per iteration are used. By
exploiting the memory buffer more fully, the 4-step versions show the beneﬁt of improved exploration
5Because of this high variance, we measured a lower mean performance of SAC in Figure 3 than previously
reported. We provide details in Appendix E.
7