Figure 4: Impact of the bootstrapped uncertainty estimate on the performance of OAC.
Figure 5: Left ﬁgure: individual runs of OAC vs SAC. Right ﬁgure: sensitivity to the KL constraint δ.
Error bars indicate 90% conﬁdence interval.
more clearly. The results are shown in the lower-right plot in Figure 3. At the end of training, the 90%
conﬁdence interval6for the performance of OAC was 5033±147while the performance of SAC was
4586±117. We stress that we did not tune hyper-parameters on the Humanoid environment. Overall,
the fact that we are able to improve on Soft-Actor-Critic, which is currently the most sample-efﬁcient
model-free RL algorithm for continuous tasks shows that optimism can be leveraged to beneﬁt sample
efﬁciency. We provide an explicit plot of sample-efﬁciency in Appendix J.
Usefulness of the Bootstrapped Uncertainty Estimate OAC uses an epistemic uncertainty esti-
mate obtained using two bootstraps of the critic network. To investigate its beneﬁt, we compare the
performance of OAC to a modiﬁed version of the algorithm, which adjusts the exploration policy to
maximize the approximate lower bound, replacing ˆQUBwithˆQLBin equation (9). While the modiﬁed
algorithm does not use the uncertainty estimate, it still uses a shifted exploration policy, preferring
actions that achieve higher state-action values. The results is shown in Figure 4 (we include more plots
in Figure 8 in the Appendix). Using the bootstrapped uncertainty estimate improves performance on
the most challenging Humanoid domain, while producing either a slight improvement or a no change
in performance on others domains. Since the upper bound is computationally very cheap to obtain,
we conclude that it is worthwhile to use it.
Sensitivity to the KL constraint OAC relies on the hyperparameter δ, which controls the maxi-
mum allowed KL divergence between the exploration policy and the target policy. In Figure 5, we
evaluate how the term√
2δused in the the exploration policy (9)affects average performance of OAC
trained for 1 million environment steps on the Ant-v2 domain. The results demonstrate that there is a
broad range of settings for the hyperparameter δ, which leads to good performance.
Learning is Stable in Practice Since OAC explores with a shifted policy, it might at ﬁrst be
expected of having poorer learning stability relative to algorithms that use the target policy for
exploration. While we have already shown above that the performance difference between OAC and
SAC is statistically signiﬁcant and not due to increased variance across runs, we now investigate
stability further. In Figure 5 we compare individual learning runs across both algorithms. We
conclude that OAC and SAC are similarly stable, avoiding the problems associated with stabilising
deep off-policy RL [43, 47].
6Due to computational constraints, we used a slightly different target update rate for OAC. We describe the
details in Appendix D.
8