Bit-
widthMethod Model Error rate
increaseNote
Binary QNN [84] GoogLeNet,
AlexNet>10% Binary weights & activations
during training and testing
XNOR-net
[81]AlexNet,
ResNet,
GoogLeNet-
variation>10% Binary weights & input to con-
volutional layers
BWN [81] AlexNet,
ResNet,
GoogLeNet-
variation<10% Binary weights in forward &
backward pass
DoReFa-Net
[83]AlexNet around
10%Binary weights & 2-bit activa-
tions & 6-bit gradients
Ternary TWN [86] ResNet <5% Ternary weights in forward &
backward pass
Table 5: Representation Reduction Methods (ImageNet).
utilize the second order information, which makes it
prohibitive in practice for deep large neural networks.
Therefore, more emphasis has been put on how to ap-
proximate the Hessian matrices, which consists of the
second-order derivatives for simplicity [153].
7.2.2. Data for Training
According to the update amount of data, there are
three variants of the algorithms, which are batch, mini-
batch, and online. The batch method uses whole dataset
to update the gradient in one iteration. The mini-batch
uses randomly picked small amount of data to update
the gradient while the online method uses new incom-
ing subset of data once to update the gradient and stops
at any time.
For batch gradient decent, it is guaranteed to con-
verge to the global minimum for convex surfaces. But it
can be very slow and requires very large memory stor-
age. The mini-batch can avoid redundant gradient com-
putation using shu ed examples. As a result, it usu-
ally shoots the minimum faster than the batch gradient.
With delicate picked learning rate, its ﬂuctuation per-
formance decreases. The online method can be used for
designing a light-weight algorithm in terms of memory
and speed for handling a stream of data. Since the data
is updated frequently, it can be used to predict the most
recent state of the trend. But as data is discarded after
gradient update, online method is considered to be more
dicult and unreliable [154].7.2.3. Asynchronous Updating
Asynchronous training algorithms help improve the
eciency on large-scale clusters of machines for dis-
tributed training and inference. Proposed asynchronous
stochastic gradient decent algorithms such as Downpour
SGD and AASGD help improve neural network perfor-
mance in classiﬁcation problems with a large amount of
high dimensional data. But more attention is needed on
communication among di erent workers in the clusters,
since suboptimal communication can result in parame-
ters diverging [155, 156].
7.2.4. From Frequency Perspective
Table 6 summarizes methods of FFT based CNNs.
The concept of implementing CNN in frequency is to
replace convolution operation in time domain with mul-
tiplication in frequency domain. It takes time to trans-
form back and forth. As a result, it performs well on
large feature maps. Development is made to suit for
small feature maps such as training network directly in
frequency domain. Compared with other algorithms,
FFT method requires additional memory for padding
the ﬁlters to the same size of the input and storing fre-
quency domain intermediate results. This leads to a
trade-o for hardware implementation. On one hand, it
can take use of power in GPU parallelism to speedup
convolution computation dramatically. On the other
hand, more delicate GPU memory allocation is required
due to limit memory.
15