OUTPUT F6 C5 S4 C3 S2 C1Figure 1: Illustration of LeNet-5.
cludes Verilog and C-model for the chip, Linux drivers,
test suites, and kernel and user based software with de-
velopment tools [11]. Intel’s Nervana Neural Network
Processor (NNP) has been announced recently for deal-
ing with neural network matrix multiplications and con-
volutions. The memory architecture is designed for ef-
ﬁcient operations and data movements without cache
hierarchy, which improves the training performance of
deep learning [12].
In this paper, we review many recent works and sum-
marize acceleration methods not only in structure level
and algorithm level, but also in implementation level.
This paper di ers from other deep neural network re-
view papers in three aspects. 1) Topic: Some review pa-
pers summarize the relevant work regarding deep neu-
ral networks in di erent applications such as computer
vision, natural language processing and acoustic sig-
nal processing, among which CNN is only a compo-
nent [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. They make systematic
introduction for various kinds of neural networks that
are ﬁt for speciﬁc applications and provide a guide for
people who want to implement deep neural networks in
their ﬁelds. However, few of them mention acceleration
methods, while our paper focuses on CNN and its accel-
eration methods. 2) Time: Recent deep learning review
papers are mostly historical [19, 20, 21]. They usually
trace back the origins through over ﬁfteen years to form
a big picture of the neural network development, which
is very inspiring to think over the origins. Our paper
focuses on researches recently when hardware becomes
limited and e ciency becomes the priority. 3) Taxon-omy: There are no reviews that incorporate hardware
into algorithms since they are di erent disciplines. In
this paper, we talk about the acceleration methods in
three levels, because they are interwoven and highly de-
pendent.
This survey paper is organized as following. In Sec-
tion 2, an overview of modern CNN structure is given
with di erent typical layers that the improvement is
focused on. In Section 3 we present our taxonomy
for recent CNN acceleration methods followed by the
overview in three categories, including CNN compres-
sion in Section 4, algorithm optimization in Section 5,
and hardware-oriented acceleration in Section 6. After
that, in Section 7 a discussion is given on these meth-
ods from di erent perspectives. Finally, Section 8 con-
cludes this paper with some future challenges.
2. Convolutional Neural Network
The modern convolutional neural networks proposed
by LeCun [22] is a 7-layer (excluding the input layer)
LeNet-5 structure. It has the following structure C1,
S2, C3, S4, C5, F6, OUTPUT as shown in Figure 1,
where C indicates convolutional layer, S indicates sub-
sampling layer, and F indicates fully-connected layer.
There are many modiﬁcations regarding the structure of
CNNs in order to handle more complicated datasets and
problems, such as AlexNet (8 layers) [23], GoogLeNet
(22 layers) [27], VGG-16 (16 layers) [25], and ResNet
(152 layers) [26]. Table 1 summarizes the state-of-the-
art CNNs. In this table, Feature column summarizes the
2