ture map share the same parameters, which reduces dra-
matically the total number of parameters. In di erent
spatial location, input may have some same features
such as edges, points, angles, etc. Weight sharing makes
the CNN less sensitive to location and shifting. On the
other hand, since each convolution operation is targeted
for a small patch of input, the extracted features remain
intrinsic topology of the input that helps recognize pat-
terns.
c) Subsampling Layer (pooling layer): Convolu-
tional layers are usually followed by subsampling layers
to reduce the feature map resolution. The amount of pa-
rameters and computation are also reduced accordingly.
More formally,
Zj=down( Xj); (3)
where down() represents a subsampling method.
Maximum operation and average operation are two
typical subsampling methods and have been imple-
mented in CNNs. In spite of max pooling and average
pooling, some methods that work better in mitigating
overﬁtting problems in CNN are proposed such as Lp
pooling [38], stochastic pooling [39], and mixed pool-
ing [40]. He et al . propose a pooling method called
spatial pyramids pooling (SPP) that can output a ﬁxed-
length feature map and therefore can deal with various
input image sizes [41]. Spectral pooling is a pooling
method to reduce dimensionality in frequency, which
preserves more information than spacial domain, and
can be implemented in Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
based CNNs [42]. While multi-scale orderless pooling
proposed by Gong et al. outperforms other methods in
highly variable scene matching [43].
Dierent from convolution kernels, subsampling ker-
nels are often hand-picked and remain unchanged dur-
ing training and inference. There are two main reasons
for subsampling. One is that by maximizing or aver-
aging over the previous feature map, the size of feature
map reduces. The other one is that by subsampling, the
output feature map is more robust to distortions and er-
rors of individual neuron units [44].
d) Fully-connected Layer: After several layers,
high-level features are extracted and require mapping to
labels. In fully-connected layer, neuron units are trans-
formed from 2D into 1D. Each unit in the current layer
is connected to all the units in the previous layer such
like regular neural networks. It not only extracts fea-
tures in a more complex way in order to dig deep for
more information, but patterns in di erent locations are
connected as well.
e) Output Layer: As a feed-forward neural network,
the output layer neuron units are ﬁxed. They are usuallylinked with previous neurons in a fully-connected way
and they are the ﬁnal threshold for predicting.
In general, CNNs have gained a lot of interest in re-
searching the meaning behind the combination of those
dierent layers. The advantages brought by the struc-
ture of CNNs include reduced number of parameters
and translation invariance.
3. Acceleration Method Taxonomy
Our taxonomy is shown in Figure 3. The philos-
ophy behind the taxonomy is the order from design-
ing, to training a CNN and ﬁnally to implementing it
on hardware. For the CNN structure, there is redun-
dancy in both weights and the number of bits for rep-
resentation. For the redundancy in weights, layer de-
composition, network pruning, block-circulant projec-
tion and knowledge distillation methods can be applied.
For the redundancy in representation, using ﬁxed-point
representation is the mainstream. Once the structure is
decided, CNN adopts training algorithms that are gen-
erally used in other neural networks for training pro-
cess. The most popular training method is gradient de-
cent based back-propagation algorithm. By propagat-
ing errors back from output to input and by adjusting
weights wired in the network, errors can be reduced to
an acceptable degree. The criterion for algorithm op-
timization is convergence speed with proper stability.
Considering that convolutional layers are computation-
ally intensive, we are also interested in the convolution
operation complexity. Therefore, we also summarize
some e cient convolution methods that are adopted in
the CNN. As for the implementation level, the main-
stream GPU, FPGA, ASIC are discussed. Recently,
people see a promising future for fast implementation
of CNN as neuromorphic engineering develops. Some
new devices are also presented in this paper. The accel-
eration approaches of each level is orthogonal and can
be combined with those in other levels. By researching
such a wide range of methods, we expect to provide a
general idea on CNN acceleration, especially for deep
CNN, from the perspectives of structure, algorithm, and
hardware.
4. Structure Level
Many training and inference process can be accel-
erated by reducing redundancy in network structures.
There is redundancy both in weights and in the way how
weights are represented. Two perspectives of accelera-
tion methods will be summarized as follows in terms
5