Some of them are in their theoretical demonstration
state for training deep neural networks. For example,
Gokmen and Vlasov from IBM research center propose
a resistive processing unit (RPU) device, which can both
store and compute parameters in this unit. It has ex-
tremely high processing speed with 30000 higher than
state-of-the-art microprocessors (84000 GigaOps /s/W)
[136]. As neuromorphic engineering develops, more
new devices emerge to handle high frequency and high
volume information transformation through synapses.
Some are in theoretical state that have not been imple-
mented on neural networks for classiﬁcation and recog-
nition, such as nano-scale phase change device [137]
and ferroelectric memristors [138].
Resistive memories are treated as one of the promis-
ing solutions for deep neural network accelerations due
to its nonvolatility, high storage density, and low power
consumption [139]. Its architecture mimics neural net-
works, where weight storage and computation can be
done simultaneously [140, 141]. As CMOS memo-
ries become larger, its scale becomes limited. There-
fore, besides the main stream CMOS based memory,
nonvolatile memory becomes more popular in stor-
ing weights, such as resistive random access memory
(RRAM) [142, 143, 144, 145] and spin-transfer torque
random access memory (STT-RAM) [146].
Memristor crossbar array structures can deal with
computational expensive matrix multiplication and have
been explored in CNN hardware implementations. For
example, Hu et al. develop a Dot-Product Engine (DPE)
utilizing memristor crossbar, which achieves 1000 to
10;000speed-e ciency product compared with a dig-
ital ASIC [147]. Xia et al . address energy consump-
tion problem between crossbars and ADC /DAC and can
save more than 95% energy with similar accuracy of
CNN [148]. Ankit et al. propose a hierarchical recon-
ﬁgurable architecture with memristive crossbar arrays
called RESPARC, which is 15 more energy e cient
and has 60more throughput for deep CNNs [149].
In general, for any CNN hardware implementation,
there are a lot of potential solutions to be explored in
design space. It is not trivial to design a general hard-
ware architecture that can be applied to every CNN, es-
pecially when limitations on computation resource and
memory bandwidth are considered.
7. Discussion
Researches have di erent ﬂavors over dataset, model,
and implementation platforms. Many datasets and mod-
els are treated as benchmarks based on previous re-
searches. But di erent benchmarks and their combi-nations make it di cult to compare the method in one
level with one in other levels. In the following discus-
sion, we constrain our comparison and analysis within
each level.
7.1. Structure Level
We have summarized methods of layer decomposi-
tion and pruning in Table 3. Some of the layer de-
composition and pruning methods focus on inference,
because pre-trained CNNs are required before apply-
ing the corresponding methods. It is a limitation com-
paring to other acceleration methods. For example,
some large scale networks still need training for weeks
or months before layer decomposition method imple-
mentation [47, 48]. Pruning by sparsiﬁed weights and
their connections require pre-training on the original
full model and ﬁne-tuning [150, 151].
Many layer decomposition and pruning methods are
layer-wised and optimized for speciﬁc layer when they
are ﬁrst time proposed. For example, Sainath et
al. demonstrate signiﬁcant reduction in parameters in
the output softmax layer [46]. Mariet et al. successfully
prune 25% of the parameters with good performance in
the fully connected layer [62]. Denton et al. success-
fully reduce a large magnitude number of parameters in
the convolutional layer [48]. As these methods focus
on di erent types of layers, there is exploration space
about how to combine them for further acceleration.
After reducing redundancy in representation, the size
of neural networks can reduce dramatically. However,
speciﬁc hardware is required to achieve a speedup in
training and testing, since currently most GPUs are im-
proved to suit for ﬂoating-point performance. For ex-
ample, using BinaryConnect method [152] to train a
Torch7 frame ConvNet on GPU takes more time. The
time complexity can be reduced theoretically by 60% if
using dedicated hardware.
We have summarized methods of reducing redun-
dancy in representation in Table 4 and Table 5. The
Note column in these two tables provide important in-
formation that needs to be distinguished among di er-
ent methods. Low-bit representation methods are tar-
geted for both large and small models. Various bit-width
representation results in di erent performance depen-
dent on di erent models and datasets. Many experi-
ments are conducted based on small datasets with low
resolution (e.g. 32 32) such as CIFAR10, and usually
achieve less than 5% error rate increase. For image clas-
siﬁcation at large scale (e.g. ImageNet), low-bit repre-
sentation method is di cult to achieve the same perfor-
mance as that for small dataset.
13