IMPLEMENTATION LEVELExplore 
Hardware 
CharacteristicsExtend Memory
Explore Parallelism
Reduce Data MovementGPU
FPGA
ASIC
New DeviceSTRUCTURE LEVELReduce
RedundancyRedundancy
In Weights
Redundancy
In Representation Fixed-point Representation
ALGORITHM LEVEL Improve Training 
 and Inference SpeedGradient Decent 
Algorithm
Efficient 
Convolution
FFTim2col-based  Algorithms
Winograd AlgorithmLayer decomposition
Pruning
Block-circulant Projection
Knowledge Distillation
Distributed Gradient Decent
Adaptive Learning Rates
Momentum FactorsHybrid Variants
Partial GradientsFixed-point RepresentationFixed-point RepresentationFigure 3: Taxonomy of CNN acceleration methods.
of redundancy in weights and redundancy in represen-
tations.
4.1. Redundancy In Weights
There is signiﬁcant redundancy in the parameteri-
zation of some neural networks. As Denil et al . and
Sainath et al. observe that some weights learned in net-
works are correlated with each other, they demonstrate
that some of the weights can either be predicted or be
unnecessary to learn [45, 46].
4.1.1. Layer Decomposition
Low-rank approximation can be adopted to reduce
redundancy in weights [47]. For one layer, the input-
output relationship can be described by
y=g(xW); (4)
where Wis the weight matrix with size mn.Wcan be
replaced by the product of two full rank matrices UV
with size mrandrnrespectively. The number of
parameters in Wcan be reduced to 1 =dif the following
inequality holds, d(mr+rn)<mn. An e cient low-rank
approximation of kernels can be applied in ﬁrst few con-
volutional layers of CNN to exploit the linear structure
of the over-parameterization within a ﬁlter. For exam-
ple, Denton et al. reduce the computation work for re-
dundancy within kernels. It achieves 2 2:5speedupwith less than 1% drop in classiﬁcation performance
for a single convolutional layer. It uses singular value
decomposition method to exploit the approximation of
kernels with assumptions that the singular values of the
kernels decay rapidly so that the size of the kernels can
be reduced signiﬁcantly [48].
Instead of treating kernel ﬁlters as di erent matri-
ces, kernels in one layer can be treated as a 3D ten-
sor with two spatial dimensions and the third dimen-
sion representing channels. Lebedev et al . use CP-
decomposition for convolutional layers, which achieves
8:5CPU speedup at the cost of 1% error increase [49].
Taiet al. utilize tensor decomposition to remove the re-
dundancy in the convolution kernels, which achieves
twice more e ciency of inference for VGG-16 [50].
Wang et al. propose to use group sparse tensor decom-
position for each convolutional layer, which achieves
6:6speed-up on PC and 5 :91speed-up on mobile de-
vice with less than 1% error rate increase [51]. Tucker
decomposition is also used recently to decompose pre-
trained weights with ﬁne-tuning afterwards [52, 53].
Weight matrix decomposition method can not only be
applied to convolutional layers, but also fully-connected
layers. Applying the low-rank approximation to the
fully-connected layer weight can achieve a 30 50%
reduction of number of parameters with little loss in
accuracy, which is roughly an equivalent reduction in
6