6.2. FPGA
There are many parallelism levels in hardware accel-
eration, such as coarse-grain, medium-grain, ﬁne-grain,
and massive [121]. FPGA outperforms in terms of its
ﬁne grain and coarse grain reconﬁguration ability and
its hierarchical storage structure and scheduling mech-
anism can be optimized ﬂexibly. Flexible hierarchical
memory systems can support complex data access mode
of CNN. It is often used to improve the e ciency of on-
chip memory and to reduce the energy consumption.
Peemen et al. experiment on Virtex 6 FPGA board
and show that the accelerator design can achieve 11 
speedup with very complicated address mapping of data
access [122]. Zhang et al. take data reuse, parallel pro-
cessing, and o -chip memory bandwidth into consid-
eration in FPGA accelerator. The accelerator achieves
17:42faster speed than CPU in AlexNet CNN archi-
tecture [123]. Martnez et al . take advantage of the
FPGA reconﬁguration characteristics by unfolding the
loop execution on di erent cascading stages. As the
number of multipliers for convolution increases, the
proposed method can achieve 12 GOPS at most [124].
A hardware acceleration method for CNN is proposed
by combining ﬁne grain in operator level parallelism
and coarse grain parallelism. Compared with 4xIntel
Xeon 2.3 GHz, 1.35 GHz C870, and a 200 MHz FPGA,
the proposed design achieves a 4 to 8speed boost
[125]. Wang et al. propose an on-chip memory design
called Memsqueezer that can be implemented on FPGA.
They shrink the memory size by compressing data,
weights, and intermediate data from the perspectives of
hardware, which achieves 80% energy reduction com-
pared with conventional bu er designs [126]. Zhang
et al . design an FPGA accelerator engine called Caf-
feine that decreases underutilized memory bandwidth.
It reorganizes the memory access according to their
proposed matrix-multiplication representation applied
to both convolutional layers and fully-connected layers.
Caeines implementation on Xilinx KU060 and Virtex
7690t FPGA achieves very high peak performance of
365 GOPS and 636 GOPS respectively [127]. Rahman
et al. present a 3D array architecture, which can beneﬁt
all layers in CNNs. With optimization of on-chip bu er
sizes for FPGAs, it can outperform the state-of-the-art
solutions by 22% in terms of MAC [128]. Alwani et
al. explore the design space of dataﬂow across multi-
ple convolutional layers, where a fused layer accelerator
is designed that reduces feature map data transfer from
and to o -chip memory [129].6.3. ASIC
For ASIC design, despite of using methods in struc-
ture level such as block-circulant projection in Section
4.1.3 and SC in Section 4.2, to improve the design in im-
plementation level, memory can be expanded and local-
ity can be increased to reduce data transporting within
systems for deep neural network accelerating. Tensor
Processing Unit (TPU) is designed for low precision
computation with high e ciency. It uses a large on-chip
memory of 28MiB to execute the neural network appli-
cations, which can achieve at most 30 faster speed than
an Nvidia K80 GPU [10]. TETRIS is an architecture
using 3D memory proposed by Gao et al. It saves more
area for processing elements and leaves more space for
accelerator design [130].
Luo et al . create an architecture of 64-chip system
that minimizes data moving between synapses and neu-
rons by storing them closely. It reduces the burden on
external memory bandwidth and achieves a speedup of
450over a GPU with 150 energy reduction [131].
Wang et al. propose to group adjacent process engines
(PEs) into dual-channel PEs called Chain-NN to miti-
gate huge amount of data movements. They simulate it
under TSMC 28nm process and achieve a peak through-
put of 806:4 GOPS in AlexNet [132]. Single instruction
multiple data (SIMD) processors are used on a 32-bit
CPU to design a system targeted for ASIC synthesis to
perform real-time detection, recognition and segmen-
tation of mega-pixel images. They optimize the oper-
ation in CNN with available parallelism in hardware.
The ASIC implementations outperform the CPU con-
ventional methods in terms of frames /s [133].
Recently, some ASIC designs target at sparse net-
works with irregularity. For example, Zhang et al. pro-
pose an accelerator called Cambricon-X that can reach
544 GOP /s in 6:38mm2[134]. It consists an Indexing
Module, which can e ciently schedule processing el-
ements that store irregular and compressed synapses.
Kwon et al. design a reconﬁgurable accelerator called
MAERI to adapt various layer dataﬂow patterns. They
can e ciently utilize compute resources and provides
6:9speedup at 50% sparsity [135]. Network prun-
ing could induce sparsity and irregularity as discussed
in Section 4.1.2. With such designs, better performance
is expected to achieve when combined.
6.4. New Devices
As new device technology and circuits arise, deep
convolutional neural networks can be potentially accel-
erated by orders of magnitude. In terms of new de-
vice, very large scale integration systems are explored
to mimic complex biological neuron architectures.
12