SERVER
Replica of CNNTraining Data
Mini-batch 1Average 
Gradient 1
Updated 
Parameters 
Based on All 
Gradients
Core n
Subset n
of NeuronsCore 1
Subset 1
of NeuronsReplica of CNNTraining Data
Mini-batch 2Average 
Gradient 2
Updated 
Parameters 
Based on All 
Gradients
Core n
Subset n
of NeuronsCore 1
Subset 1
of NeuronsReplica of CNNTraining Data
Mini-batch mAverage 
Gradient m
Updated 
Parameters 
Based on All 
Gradients
Core n
Subset n
of NeuronsCore 1
Subset 1
of NeuronsFigure 5: Illustration of CNN distributed system.
consumption on GPU [111, 112]. Winograd’s minimal
ﬁltering algorithms can help reduce convolution com-
putation at the expense of memory bandwidth. Xiao
et al. utilize Winograd’s minimal ﬁltering theory com-
bined with heterogeneous algorithms for a fusion archi-
tecture to mitigate memory bandwidth problem [113].
Based on the experiment that FFT can be applied in
MLP to accelerate the ﬁrst layer inference [114], Math-
ieuet al. ﬁrst apply FFT on weights of CNN and achieve
good performance and speedup for large perceptive ar-
eas [115]. For using FFT in CNN, it is necessary to
transform back and forth between time domain and fre-
quency domain, which consumes a lot of resources and
takes time. Therefore, it needs delicate balance between
the beneﬁts of computation in frequency domain and
the drawbacks of transforming back and forth. Large
perception areas have better performance, which results
in limitation in the neural network with small convolu-
tion ﬁlters. In order to solve this problem, one of the
solutions is to train weights directly in frequency do-
main [116]. Ko et al . train the CNNs entirely in the
frequency domain with approximate frequency-domain
nonlinear operations, sinc interpolation and Hermitian
symmetry. By eliminating Fourier transforms at each
layer, they achieve signiﬁcantly training time reduction
for CIFAR-10 recognition [117].
6. Implementation Level
Neural networks regain their vigor due to high per-
formance hardware recently. CPU used to be the main
stream for implementing machine learning algorithms
about twenty years ago, because matrix multiplica-
tion and factorization techniques were not popular backthen. Nowadays, GPU, FPGA, and ASIC are utilized
for accelerating training and predicting process. Be-
sides, much new device technology is proposed to meet
requirement for very large models and large training
datasets. In the following, hardware based accelera-
tors are summarized in terms of GPU, FPGA, ASIC and
frontier new device that is promising for accelerating
deep convolutional neural networks.
6.1. GPU
In terms of GPU, clusters of GPUs can accelerate
very large neural networks with over one billion pa-
rameters in a parallel way. The mainstream of GPU
cluster neural networks usually work with distributed
SGD algorithms as illustrated in Section 5.1. Many
researches further exploit the parallelism and make ef-
forts on communication among di erent clusters. For
example, Baidu Heterogeneous Computing Group uses
two types of parallelism called model-data parallelism
and data parallelism to extend CNN architectures to 36
servers, each with 4 NVIDIA Tesla K40m GPUs and
12GB memory. The strategies include butterﬂy syn-
chronization and lazy update, which makes good use of
overlapping in computation and communication [118].
Coates et al. propose a clustering of GPU servers us-
ing Commodity O -The-Shelf High Performance Com-
puting (COTS HPC) technology and high-speed com-
munication infrastructure for parallelism in distributed
gradient decent algorithm, which reduces 98% number
of machines used for training [119]. In terms of non-
distributed SGD algorithms, Imani et al. propose a near-
est content addressable memory block called NNCAM,
which stores highly frequent patterns for reusing. It ac-
celerates CNNs over general purpose GPU with 40%
speedup [120].
11