teristic reduces the computation complexity.
4.2. Redundancy in Representations
Many weights in neural networks have very small
values. For example, the ﬁrst non-zero digit of many
weights occurs in the eighth decimal place, which re-
quires more precise way to record them. Most arith-
metic operations in neural networks use 32-ﬂoating
point representation in order to achieve a good accuracy.
As a trade-o , that increases the computation workload
and memory size for the neural networks. However,
arithmetic operations in ﬁxed-point instead of ﬂoating-
point can achieve enough good performance for neu-
ral networks [77]. A 16-bit ﬁxed-point representation
method is proposed by using stochastic rounding for
training CIFAR-10 dataset [78]. A further compression
of 10-bit dynamic ﬁxed-point is also explored [79]. Han
et al. quantize pruned CNNs to 8-bit and achieve further
storage reduction with no loss of accuracy [60].
For now, representation in one bit is the simplest
form. In terms of binarization, there can be three forms,
binary input, binary weights of the network, and bi-
nary operations. Courbariaux et al . propose a Bina-
ryConnect method to use 1-bit ﬁxed-point weights to
train a neural network [80]. Rastegari et al. come up
with a XNOR-Nets with binary weights and binary in-
put fed to convolutional layers [81]. It results in 58 
speedup of convolutional operations. Kim et al . pro-
pose a Bitwise Neural Network, which takes everything
as binary such as weights, bias terms, input, output,
and basic logic operations instead of ﬂoating or ﬁxed-
point arithmetic operations [82]. Zhou et al . propose
to train CNN using binary and stochastically quantized
low bit-width gradients and achieve comparable perfor-
mance as 32-bit counterparts [83]. Hubara et al. pro-
pose training methods for quantized neural networks
that use low precision including 1-bit weights and ac-
tivations, and replace most arithmetic operations with
bit-wise operations [84]. Kim et al . compress binary
weight CNNs by decomposing kernels into sub-kernels
with common parts. They reduce the operation of each
image by 47 :7% [85]. Ternary CNNs are proposed re-
cently as a more expressive method comparing to binary
CNNs, which seeks to achieve a balance between binary
networks and full precision networks in terms of com-
pression rate and accuracy [86, 87, 88].
Stochastic computing (SC) is a type of technique that
simpliﬁes numerical computations into bit-wise opera-
tions by representing continuous values with random bit
streams. It provides many beneﬁts for neural networks
such as low computation footprint, error tolerance, sim-
ple implementation in circuits and better trade-o be-tween time and accuracy [89]. Many works contribute
to exploring potential space in optimization and in deep
belief networks [90, 91, 92]. Recently it starts to gain at-
tentions in CNN ﬁeld and regarded as a promising tech-
nique for deep CNN implementation on ASIC (Section
6.3) and on embedded portable devices as it can signiﬁ-
cantly reduce resource consumption with high accuracy.
SC is ﬁrst adopted in deep CNN by Ren et al. with
proposed method called SC-DCNN. They design both
function blocks and feature extraction blocks that help
SC eciently implemented in deep CNN. It success-
fully achieves the lowest resource consumption of
LeNet5 with optimized conﬁgurations among many
state-of-the-art software and hardware platforms [93].
Liet al. further improve SC based DCNN by introduc-
ing normalization in the hardware implementation and
dropout in DCNN software training. They design the
stochastic normalization circuit by decoupling complex
normalization into three units, namely, square and sum-
mation, activation and division. Their proposed method
improves the SC-based DCNN with 3 :26% top-1 accu-
racy and 3:05% top-5 accuracy [94].
Although errors may accumulate due to representa-
tion approximation, its hardware implementation can
achieve a much faster speed and lead to less energy con-
sumption.
5. Algorithm Level
In the training process, gradient-based method is
widely used in multi-layer feedforward neural networks
(FNN), while some other models use analytically de-
termined methods to minimize the cost function [95].
In the forward pass, the output of CNN is calculated,
while in the backward pass, weights and bias are ad-
justed. By reducing the number of iterations to con-
verge, training time can be decreased. Therefore, opti-
mizing gradient decent algorithm is very important for
improving the performance in training. For CNN, con-
volution computation reduces the amount of weights
dramatically because it focuses on a local perception
ﬁeld. But repeated mathematic addition and multipli-
cation increase the computation intensity. Therefore, in
the forward process, convolution operation workloads
are computationally intensive and become constrained
for implementation. In the following, we discuss the al-
gorithm optimization of the two directions of data ﬂow,
which are gradient-based backward training methods
and convolution-based forward inference methods. We
summarize distributed gradient descent methods, hybrid
variants of the gradient decent and the improvement in
9