Recent Advances in Convolutional Neural Network Acceleration
Qianru Zhanga, Meng Zhanga,, Tinghuan Chenb, Zhifei Suna, Yuzhe Mab, Bei Yub
aNational ASIC System Engineering Technology Research Center, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
bDepartment of Computer Science &Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Abstract
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown great performance in various ﬁelds such as image
classiﬁcation, pattern recognition, and multi-media compression. Two of the feature properties, local connectivity and
weight sharing, can reduce the number of parameters and increase processing speed during training and inference.
However, as the dimension of data becomes higher and the CNN architecture becomes more complicated, the end-
to-end approach or the combined manner of CNN is computationally intensive, which becomes limitation to CNN’s
further implementation. Therefore, it is necessary and urgent to implement CNN in a faster way. In this paper, we ﬁrst
summarize the acceleration methods that contribute to but not limited to CNN by reviewing a broad variety of research
papers. We propose a taxonomy in terms of three levels, i.e. structure level, algorithm level, and implementation level,
for acceleration methods. We also analyze the acceleration methods in terms of CNN architecture compression,
algorithm optimization, and hardware-based improvement. At last, we give a discussion on di erent perspectives
of these acceleration and optimization methods within each level. The discussion shows that the methods in each
level still have large exploration space. By incorporating such a wide range of disciplines, we expect to provide a
comprehensive reference for researchers who are interested in CNN acceleration.
Keywords: Convolutional neural network, Model compression, Algorithm optimization, Hardware acceleration
1. Introduction
Convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures
have been around for over two decades. Compared with
other neural network models such as multiple layer per-
ceptron (MLP), CNN is designed to take multiple arrays
as input and then process the input using convolution
operator within a local ﬁeld by mimicking eyes perceiv-
ing images. Therefore, it shows excellent performance
in solving computer vision problems such as image clas-
siﬁcation, recognition and understanding [1, 2, 3]. It is
also e ective for a wide range of ﬁelds such as speech
recognition that requires correlated speech spectral rep-
resentations [4], VLSI physical design [5], multi-media
compression [6] comparing with the traditional DCT
transformation and compressive sensing methods [7, 8],
and cancer detection from a series of condition changing
images [9]. Moreover, many top players have been in a
fever to play Go match with alphaGo recently, which
has CNN implemented.
Corresponding author
Email address: zmeng@seu.edu.cn (Meng Zhang)However, in order to receive good performance of
prediction and accomplish more di cult goals, CNN
architecture becomes deeper and more complicated. At
the same time, more pixels are packed into one image
thanks to high resolution acquisition devices. As a re-
sult, CNN training and inference are very computation-
ally expensive and become limited for implementation
due to its slow speed. Although acceleration and op-
timization for CNN have been explored since it was
brought up, recently this seems to be keener as it has
such good industrial impact.
Some companies have unveiled accelerators for deep
learning inference that can be extensively used for
CNN. Google’s second generation Tensor Processing
Unit (TPU) is designed for TensorFlow framework
that has the increased performance of 92TFLOPS in
peak and on-chip memory of 28MiB. It not only
supports integers but also ﬂoating point calculations,
which makes it more powerful in deep learning training
[10]. NVIDIA launches an open source project called
NVIDIA Deep Learning Accelerator (NVDLA) along
with an open license that is ready for people who are
interested in data intensive automotive products. It in-
Preprint submitted to Neurocomputing July 24, 2018arXiv:1807.08596v1  [cs.LG]  23 Jul 2018