2
robot to learn to navigate towards its destination through a
ﬁxed-sized learning model, even in large-scale environments,
thus ensuring scalability of the approach.
We present a novel reward structure that provides dense
rewards, while not requiring the robot to strictly follow the
global guidance at every step, thus encouraging the robot
to explore all potential solutions. In addition, our reward
function is independent of the environment, thus enabling
scalability as well as generalizability across environments.
We provide an application of our approach to multi-robot
path planning, whereby robot control is fully distributed and
can be scaled to an arbitrary number of robots.
Experimental results show that our single-robot path plan-
ning approach outperforms local and global re-planning
methods, and that it maintains consistent performance across
numerous scenarios, which vary in map types and number
of obstacles. In particular, we show that our application to
multi-robot path planning outperforms current state-of-the-
art distributed planners. Notably, the performance of our
approach is shown to be comparable to that of centralized
approaches, which, in contrast to our approach, assume
global knowledge (i.e., trajectories of all dynamic objects).
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Traditional path planning approaches. Path planning can
be divided into two categories: global path planning and local
path planning [12]. The former approach includes graph-based
approaches (for example, Dijkstra and A* [13]) and sampling-
based approaches (for example, RRT and its variant [14]), in
which all the environmental information is known to the robot
before it moves. For local path planning, at least a part or
almost all the information on the environment is unknown.
Compared to global path planners, local navigation methods
can be very effective in dynamic environments. However, since
they are essentially based on the fastest descent optimization,
they can easily get trapped in a local minimum [15]. A
promising solution is to combine the local planning with
global planning, where the local path planner is responsible
for amending or optimizing the trajectory proposed by the
global planner. For instance, [16] proposed a global dynamic
window approach that combines path planning and real-time
obstacle avoidance, allowing robots to perform high-velocity,
goal-directed, and reactive motion in unknown and dynamic
environments. Yet their approach can result in highly sub-
optimal paths. The authors in [17] adopt multi-policy decision
making to realize autonomous navigation in dynamic social
environments. However, in their work, the robots trajectory
was selected from closed-loop behaviors whose utility can be
predicted rather than explicitly planned.
Learning based approaches. Beneﬁting from recent ad-
vances in deep learning techniques, learning-based approaches
have been considered as a promising direction to address
path planning tasks. Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been
implemented to solve the path planning problem successfully,
where the robot learns to complete the task by trial-and-error.
Traditionally, the robot receives the reward after it reaches
the target location [9]. As the environment grows, however,the robot needs to explore more states to receive rewards.
Consequently, interactions become more complex, and the
learning process becomes more difﬁcult. Other approaches
apply Imitation Learning (IL) to provide the robot dense
rewards to relieve this issue [6], [7], [18]. However, basing
the learning procedure on potentially biased expert data may
lead to sub-optimal solutions [19], [20]. Compounding this
issue, the robot only receives rewards by strictly following
the behavior of expert demonstrations, limiting exploration to
other potential solutions. Also, over-ﬁtting remains a problem.
This is clearly exempliﬁed in [10], where the robot follows the
previously learned path, even when all obstacles have been
removed from the environment.
III. P ROBLEM DESCRIPTION
Environment representation . Consider a 2-dimensional dis-
crete environment WR2with sizeHWand a set of Ns
static obstaclesCs=fs1;:::;s Nsg, wheresiW denotes the
ithstatic obstacle. The free space WnC sis represented by
a roadmapG=hCf;Ei, whereCf=fc1;:::;c Nfg=WnC s
represents the set of free cells and eij= (ci;cj) E
represents the traversable space between free cells ciandcj
that does not cross any other cell (the minimum road segment).
The set of dynamic obstacles Cd(t) =fd1(t);:::;d Nd(t)g
denotes the position of Nddynamic obstacles at time t, where
8i;j;t ,di(t)Cf,(di(t);di(t+1))E ordi(t) =di(t+1),
anddi(t)6=dj(t). In addition, if di(t+ 1) =dj(t), then
dj(t+ 1)6=di(t), i.e., any motion conﬂict should be avoided.
Global guidance . Atraversable pathG=fg(t)gis deﬁned
by the following rules: 1) the initial location g(0) =cstart and
there is a time step tfthat8ttf,g(t) =cgoal. Note that,
cstart;cgoal2Cf; 2)8t,g(t)2Cf,(g(t);g(t+ 1))2E. The
global guidanceGis the shortest traversable path, deﬁned as
G= arg min tfG, between the initial location cstart and the
goalcgoal. Note that the global guidance may not be unique—
in this paper, we randomly choose one instance.
Assumptions . We assume that the robot knows the infor-
mation of all the static obstacles and calculates the global
guidance at the start of each run. Note that the global guidance
is only calculated once and remains the same. During robot
motion, we assume that the robot can obtain its global location
in the environment and acquire global guidance information.
However, we do not assume that the trajectories of dynamic
obstacles are known to the robot. The robot can only obtain
the current location of dynamic obstacles when they are within
its local ﬁeld of view.
Local observation . The robot has a local ﬁeld of view (FOV)
within which it observes the environment. More speciﬁcally,
at each time step t, the robot collects the local observation
Ot=fof
t;os
t;od
tgwhich is a collection of the location of free
cellsof
t, static obstacles os
tand dynamic obstacles od
t, within
the local FOV with the size of HlWl. In addition, we also
deﬁne a local segment of the global guidance Gas the local
path segmentG
t, which is located within the robot’s local
FOV . BothOtandG
tare considered as input information at
each time step t.
Robot action . The robot action set is deﬁned as A=
fUp;Down;Left;Right;Idleg, i.e., at each time step, the