1
Mobile Robot Path Planning in Dynamic
Environments through Globally Guided
Reinforcement Learning
Binyu Wang, Zhe Liu, Qingbiao Li, Amanda Prorok, Member, IEEE
Abstract —Path planning for mobile robots in large dynamic
environments is a challenging problem, as the robots are required
to efﬁciently reach their given goals while simultaneously avoiding
potential conﬂicts with other robots or dynamic objects. In
the presence of dynamic obstacles, traditional solutions usually
employ re-planning strategies, which re-call a planning algo-
rithm to search for an alternative path whenever the robot
encounters a conﬂict. However, such re-planning strategies often
cause unnecessary detours. To address this issue, we propose
a learning-based technique that exploits environmental spatio-
temporal information. Different from existing learning-based
methods, we introduce a globally guided reinforcement learning
approach (G2RL), which incorporates a novel reward structure
that generalizes to arbitrary environments. We apply G2RL to
solve the multi-robot path planning problem in a fully distributed
reactive manner. We evaluate our method across different map
types, obstacle densities, and the number of robots. Experimental
results show that G2RL generalizes well, outperforming existing
distributed methods, and performing very similarly to fully
centralized state-of-the-art benchmarks.
Index Terms —Hierarchical path planning, mobile robots, re-
inforcement learning, scalability.
I. I NTRODUCTION
PATH planning is one of the fundamental problems in
robotics. It can be formulated as: given a robot and a
description of the environment, plan a conﬂict-free path be-
tween the speciﬁed start and goal locations. Traditionally, there
are two different versions: off-line planning, which assumes
static obstacles and perfectly known environments, and on-line
planning, which focuses on dealing with dynamic obstacles
and partially known environments [1]. Traditional off-line
planning algorithms [2] cannot be directly utilized for solving
on-line path planning tasks as they assume that the obstacles
are static. One strategy is to plan an initial path and invoke re-
planning whenever its execution becomes infeasible [3]. How-
ever, re-planning will suffer from time inefﬁciency (frequent
re-planning) and path inefﬁciency (oscillating movements and
detours) due to the absence of motion information of dynamic
obstacles. Furthermore, re-planning strategies may fail in the
presence of robot deadlocks. Instead of re-planning, some
This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council (grant EP/S015493/1), and ARL DCIST CRA W911NF-
17-2-0181.
B. Wang is with the Department of Mechanical and Automation En-
gineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail:
zbwby819@sina.com). Z. Liu, Q. Li and A. Prorok are with the Department
of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB3 0FD, U.K. (e-mail: fzl457, ql295, asp45 g@cam.ac.uk). Corresponding
author: Z. Liu.methods include an extra time dimension to avoid potential
conﬂicts [4]. However, this approach increases the number of
states to be searched, and additionally requires the knowledge
of the future trajectories of dynamic obstacles. If the future
movements of obstacles are unknown, one may attempt to
model the behavior of dynamic obstacles and predict their
paths [5]. Yet, separating the navigation problem into disjoint
prediction and planning steps can lead to the ‘freezing robot’
problem. In that case, the robot will fail to ﬁnd any feasible
action as the predicted paths could mark a large portion of the
space as untraversable.
Recently, learning-based approaches have been studied to
address on-line planning in dynamic environments [6], [7].
This is popularized by the seminal work [8], which utilized
deep neural networks for the function estimation of value-
based reinforcement learning (RL). Although RL has demon-
strated outstanding performance in many applications, several
challenges still impede its contribution to the path planning
problem. First of all, when the environment is extremely large,
the reward becomes sparse, inducing an increased training
effort and making the overall learning process inefﬁcient [9].
Another challenge is the over-ﬁtting issue. The robot is often
limited to training environments and shows poor generaliz-
ability to unseen environments [10]. Most recent approaches
still show difﬁculties in scaling to arbitrarily large multi-
robot systems [7], as the sizes of the robot state, joint action,
and joint observation spaces grow exponentially with the
number of robots [11]. Thus, the efﬁciency, generalizability,
and scalability of existing RL-based planners can still not
fulﬁll the requirements of many applications.
In order to overcome the above challenges, we develop a
hierarchical path-planning algorithm that combines a global
guidance and a local RL-based planner . Concretely, we ﬁrst
utilize a global path planning algorithm (for example, A*)
to obtain a globally optimal path, which we refer to as the
global guidance . During robot motion, the local RL-based
planner generates robot actions by exploiting surrounding
environmental information to avoid conﬂicts with static and
dynamic obstacles, while simultaneously attempting to follow
the ﬁxed global guidance. Our main contributions include:
We present a hierarchical framework that combines global
guidance and local RL-based planning to enable end-to-end
learning in dynamic environments. The local RL planner
exploits both spatial and temporal information within a local
area (e.g., a ﬁeld of view) to avoid potential collisions and
unnecessary detours. Introducing global guidance allows thearXiv:2005.05420v2  [cs.RO]  11 Sep 2020