JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 17
lection bias, etc. For instance, Hao et al. [114] present a
reconstruction-based pretext task to pre-train GNNs on the
cold-start users and items. S2-MHCN [115] and DHCN
[116] employ contrastive tasks for hypergraph representa-
tion learning for social- and session- based recommenda-
tion, respectively. Liu et al. [117] overcome the message
dropout problem and reduce the selection bias in GNN-
based recommender system by introducing a graph con-
trastive learning module with a debiased loss. PMGT [118]
utilizes two generation-based tasks to capture multimodal
side information for recommendation.
Anomaly Detection . Graph anomaly detection is often
performed under an unsupervised scenario due to the
lack of annotated anomalies, which is naturally consistent
with the setting of SSL [119]. Hence, various works apply
SSL to graph anomaly detection problem. To be concrete,
DOMINANT [120], SpecAE [121] and AEGIS [122] employ
hybrid SSL frameworks that combine structure and feature
generation to capture the patterns of anomalies. CoLA [119]
and ANEMONE [123] utilize contrastive learning to detect
anomalies on graphs. SL-GAD [124] applies hybrid graph
SSL to anomaly detection. HCM [125] introduces an auxil-
iary property classiﬁcation task that predicts the hop-count
of each node pair for graph anomaly detection.
Chemistry . In the domain of chemistry, researchers usually
model molecules or compounds as graphs where atoms and
chemical bonds are denoted as nodes and edges respec-
tively. Note that GROVER [10] and Hu et al. [16] also focus
on graph SSL for molecule data, which have been reviewed
before. Additionally, MolCLR [126] and CKGNN [127] learn
molecular representations with graph-level contrast-based
pretext tasks. Besides, GraphMS [128] and MIRACLE [129]
employ contrastive learning to solve the drug–target and
drug-drug interaction prediction problems.
10 F UTURE DIRECTIONS
In this section, we analyze existing challenges in graph SSL
and pinpoint a few future research directions aiming to
address the shortcomings.
Theoretical Foundation . Despite its great success in various
tasks and datasets, graph SSL still lacks a theoretical foun-
dation to prove its usefulness. Most existing methods are
mainly designed with intuition and evaluated by empirical
experiments. Although MI estimation theory [65] supports
some of the works on contrastive learning, the choice of the
MI estimator still relies on empirical studies [14]. Setting
up a solid theoretical foundation for graph SSL is urgently
needed. It is desirable to bridge the gap between empirical
SSL and fundamental graph theories, including the graph
signal processing and spectral graph theory.
Interpretability and Robustness . Graph SSL applications
may be risk-sensitive and privacy-related ( e.g., fraud detec-
tion), an explainable and robust SSL framework is of great
signiﬁcance to adapt to such learning scenarios. However,
most existing graph SSL methods only aim to reach a higher
performance on downstream tasks with black-box models,
ignoring the explainability of learned representations and
predicted results. Moreover, except for a few pioneering
works [17], [18] that consider the robustness problem, most
graph SSL methods assume input data is perfect, despite
the fact that real-world data is often noisy and GNNsare vulnerable to adversarial attacks [18]. It would be an
interesting and practical direction to explore explainable
and robust graph SSL methods in future.
Pretext Tasks for Complex Types of Graphs . Most cur-
rent works concentrate on SSL for attributed graphs, and
only a few focus on complex graph types, e.g., heteroge-
neous or spatial-temporal graphs. For complex graphs, the
main challenge is how to design pretext tasks to capture
unique data characteristics of these complex graphs. Some
existing methods use MI maximization [13] for complex
graph learning, which is limited in its ability to leverage
rich information from data, e.g., the temporal dynamics in
spatial-temporal/dynamic graphs. A future opportunity is
to produce various SSL tasks for complex graph data, where
speciﬁc data characteristics are the main focus. Furthermore,
extending SSL to more ubiquitous graph types ( e.g., hyper-
graphs) would be a feasible direction for further exploration.
Augmentation for Graph Contrastive Learning . In con-
trastive learning for CV [24], a large amount of augmen-
tation strategies (including rotation, color distort, crop, etc.)
provide diverse views of image data, maintaining the repre-
sentation invariance during contrastive learning. However,
due to the nature of graph-structured data ( e.g., complex
and non-Euclidean structure), data augmentation schemes
on graphs are not well explored and thus compromise
the effectiveness of graph augmentation-based approaches
as discussed in Section 6.1. Most of the existing graph
augmentations consider uniformly masking/shufﬂing node
features, modifying edges, or other alternative ways like
subgraph sampling and graph diffusion [76], which pro-
vides limited diversity and uncertain invariance when gen-
erating multiple graph views. To bridge the gaps, adap-
tively performing graph augmentations [69], automatically
selecting augmentations [70] or jointly considering stronger
augmented samples [67] by mining the rich underlying
structural and attributive information would be interesting
directions for further investigation.
Learning with Multiple Pretext Tasks . Most existing graph
SSL approaches learn representations by solving one pretext
task, while only a few hybrid methods explore the combi-
nation of multiple pretext tasks. As shown in previous NLP
pre-training models [28] and the reviewed hybrid methods,
the integration of diverse pretext tasks can provide different
supervision signals from various perspectives, which facili-
tates graph SSL methods to produce more informative rep-
resentations. Therefore, more advanced hybrid approaches
that consider a diverse and adaptive combination of multi-
ple pretext tasks deserve further studies.
Broader Scope of Applications . Graphs are ubiquitous data
structures in numerous domains; nevertheless, acquiring
manual labels is often costly in most application ﬁelds.
In that case, graph SSL has a promising prospect on a
wide range of applications, especially those that highly
depend on domain knowledge to annotate data. However,
most current practical applications merely concentrate on a
few areas ( e.g., recommender systems, anomaly detection,
and chemistry), indicating that graph SSL holds untapped
potential for most application ﬁelds. It is promising to
extend graph SSL to more expansive ﬁelds of applications,
for instance, ﬁnancial networks, cybersecurity, community
detection [130], and federated learning.