JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 18
11 C ONCLUSION
This paper conducts a comprehensive overview of self-
supervised learning on graphs. We present a uniﬁed frame-
work and further provide a systematic taxonomy that
groups graph SSL into four categories: generation-based,
auxiliary property-based, contrast-based, and hybrid ap-
proaches. For each category, we provide mathematical sum-
mary, up-to-date review, and comparison between methods.
More importantly, we collect abundant resources including
datasets, evaluation methods, performance comparison and
open-source codes for graph SSL approaches. A wide range
of practical applications of graph SSL are also introduced in
our paper. Finally, we suggest open challenges and promis-
ing research directions of graph SSL in the future.
APPENDIX A
TIMELINE OF GRAPH SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING
Fig. 9 provides a timeline of some of the most representative
graph SSL methods since 2014. A group of early works is the
random walk-based node embedding methods including
DeepWalk [30], LINE [79], and node2vec [31]. Another line
of early works is the graph autoencoder-based generation
methods, i.e. GAE/VGAE [32], MGAE [44], ARGA [48],
and SIG-VAE [47]. In 2019, a representation contrast-based
work, DGI [13], was proposed, bringing the ﬂourishing
development of graph contrastive learning. In 2020, more
types graph SSL methods were introduced, containing the
ﬁrst auxiliary property-based method (M3S [40]) and hybrid
method (GMI [41]). In 2021, more advanced techniques are
integrated with graph SSL, such as adaptive augmentation
(GCA [69]), automatic machine learning (JOAO [70]), and
adversarial augmentation (AD-GCL [75]).
APPENDIX B
NOTATIONS AND DEFINITIONS
B.1 Notations
Throughout this paper, we use bold uppercase letters (e.g.
X), bold lowercase letters (e.g. x), and calligraphic fonts
(e.g.V) to denote matrices, vectors and sets, respectively.
Unless speciﬁed otherwise, the notations used in this paper
are summarized in Table 6.
B.2 Dynamic and Heterogeneous Graphs
Deﬁnition 3 (Dynamic Graph). A dynamic graph indicates
a graph where nodes and edges change with respect to
time, i.e.,G(t)= (V(t);E(t)), which denotes a dynamic
graph at time t2R+that consists of a node set V(t)and
an edge setE(t)indexed by time. In practice, a dynamic
graph is also known as temporal dependency interaction
graph, where an interaction at time tis represented as
ei;j;t2 E(t), where node vi2 V(t)andvj2 V(t).
For an attributed dynamic graph with node and edge
features, we can also let G(t)= (A(t);X(t)
node;X(t)
edge),
where the adjacency matrix A(t)2Rnn, node feature
matrix X(t)
node2Rndnode and edge feature matrix
X(t)
edge2Rndnode are evolving with respect to time.TABLE 6: Commonly used notations with explanations.
Notation Explanation
jj The length of a set.
 Hadamard product.
G A graph.
V The set of nodes in a graph.
E The set of edges in a graph.
vi A node in the node set V.
ei;j An edge in the edge set E.
n The number of nodes in a graph.
m The number of edges in a graph.
A2RnnThe adjacency matrix of a graph.
d,dnode The dimension of node features.
dedge The dimension of edge features.
X,Xnode2RndThe node feature matrix of a graph.
Xedge2Rmdedge The edge feature matrix of a graph.
xi= [X]vi The node feature of vi.
dr The dimension of node representation.
H2Rndr The node representation matrix of a graph.
hi= [H]vi The node representation vector of vi.
hG The graph representation vector of a graph.
Y Manual label set of downstream task.
C Pseudo label set of pretext task.
y Manual label of downstream task.
c Pseudo label of pretext task.
~G Augmented/Perturbed graph.
f() Encoder parameterized by .
p() Pretext decoder parameterized by .
q () Downstream decoder parameterized by  .
L() Loss function.
R() Readout function.

() Auxiliary property mapping function.
MI(;) Mutual information function.
Special type :Spatial-temporal graph can be regarded as an
special type of attributed dynamic graph with ﬁxed graph
adjacency and dynamic features at different time steps.
Concretely, at each time step t, the dynamic feature matrix
is denoted as X(t)2Rnd.
Deﬁnition 4 (Heterogeneous Graph). A heterogeneous graph
denotes a graph consisting of different types of nodes
and/ or edges. For a heterogeneous graph G= (V;E),
each node vi2 V and each edge ei;j2 E are as-
sociated with a corresponding mapping function, i.e.,
v(vi) :V ! Svande(ei;j) :E ! Se.SvandSe
are the node types and link types, respectively, and they
satisfyjSvj+jSej>2.
Special types :Bipartite graph and multiplex graph can be
viewed as two special types of heterogeneous graphs.
Speciﬁcally, a bipartite graph is a heterogeneous graph with
two types of nodes ( jSvj= 2) and a single type of edge
(jSej= 1); a multiplex graph has one type of node ( jSvj= 1)
and multiple types of edges ( jSej>1).
B.3 Graph Neural Networks and Readout Layers
A general deﬁnition of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) is
represented as:
Deﬁnition 5 (Graph Neural Networks). Given an attributed
graphGwith its feature matrix Xwhere xi=X[i;:]T
is ad-dimensional feature vector of the node vi, a GNN
learns a node representation hifor each node vi2V
with two core functions: the aggregation function and