JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3
acquired automatically from data by machines without any
human knowledge. In general, pseudo labels require lower
acquisition costs than manual labels so that they have ad-
vantages when manual labels are difﬁcult to obtain or the
amount of data is vast. In self-supervised learning settings,
speciﬁc methods can be designed to generate pseudo labels,
enhancing the representation learning.
Downstream Tasks Versus Pretext Tasks. Downstream tasks
are the graph analytic tasks used to evaluate the quality
or performance of the feature representation learned by
different models. Typical applications include node classiﬁ-
cation and graph classiﬁcation. Pretext tasks refer to the pre-
designed tasks for models to solve ( e.g., graph reconstruc-
tion), which helps models to learn more generalized rep-
resentations from unlabeled data, and thus beneﬁts down-
stream tasks by providing a better initialization or more ef-
fective regularization. In general, solving downstream tasks
needs manual labels, while pretext tasks are usually learned
with pseudo labels.
Supervised Learning, Unsupervised Learning and Self-
Supervised Learning. Supervised learning refers to the learn-
ing paradigm that leverages well-deﬁned manual labels
to train machine learning models. Conversely, unsupervised
learning refers to the learning paradigm without using any
manual labels. As a subset of unsupervised learning, self-
supervised learning indicates the learning paradigm where
supervision signals are generated from data itself. In self-
supervised learning methods, models are trained with pre-
text tasks to obtain better performance and generalization
on downstream tasks.
2.2 Notations
We provide important notations used in this paper (which
are summarized in Appendix B.1) and the deﬁnitions of
different types of graphs and GNNs in this subsection.
Deﬁnition 1 (Plain Graph). A plain graph2is represented
asG= (V;E), whereV=fv1;:::;vng(jVj=n) is
the set of nodes and E(jEj=m) is the set of edges,
and naturally we have E VV . The neighborhood
of a nodeviis denoted asN(vi) =fvj2Vjei;j2Eg .
The topology of the graph is represented as an adjacency
matrix A2Rnn, where Ai;j= 1 meansei;j2E, and
Ai;j= 0 meansei;j=2E.
Deﬁnition 2 (Attributed Graph). An attributed graph refers
to a graph where nodes and/or edges are associated with
their own features (a.k.a attributes). The feature matrices
of nodes and edges are represented as Xnode2Rndnode
andXedge2Rmdedge respectively. In a more common
scenario where only nodes have features, we use X2
Rndto denote the node feature matrix for short, and
denote the attributed graph as G= (V;E;X).
There are also some dynamic graphs and heterogeneous
graphs whose deﬁnitions are given in Appendix B.2.
Most of the reviewed methods leverage GNNs as back-
bone encoders to transform the input raw node features X
into compact node representations Hby leveraging the rich
underlying node connectivity, i.e., adjacency matrix A, with
2. A plain graph is an unattributed, static, and homogeneous graph.
Graph Self-supervised Learning
Feature Generation
Structure Generation
Clustering-based
Pair Relation-based
Generation-based
Auxiliary Property-based
Contrast-based
Hybrid
Auxiliary Property Classification
Auxiliary Property Regression
Same-ScaleContrast
Node-Level
Graph-Level
Cross-Scale Contrast
Patch-Global
Context-GlobalFig. 2: Categorization of graph SSL methods.
learnable parameters. Furthermore, readout functions R()
are often employed to generate a graph-level representation
hGfrom node-level representations H. The formulation of
GNNs and readout functions are introduced in Appendix
B.3. Besides, in Appendix B.4, we formulate the commonly
used loss functions in this survey.
3 F RAMEWORK AND CATEGORIZATION
In this section, we provide a uniﬁed framework of graph
SSL, and further categorize it from different perspectives,
including pretext tasks, downstream tasks, and the combi-
nation of both (i.e., self-supervised training schemes).
3.1 Uniﬁed Framework and Mathematical Formulation
of Graph Self-Supervised Learning
We construct an encoder-decoder framework to formalize
graph SSL. The encoder f(parameterized by ) aims to
learn a low-dimensional representation (a.k.a. embedding)
hi2Hfor each node vifrom graphG. In general, the
encoderfcan be GNNs [13], [33], [38] or other types
of neural networks for graph learning [30], [31], [39]. The
pretext decoder p(parameterized by ) takes Has its input
for the pretext tasks. The architecture of pdepends on
speciﬁc downstream tasks.
Under this framework, graph SSL can be formulated as:
;= arg min
;Lssl(f;p;D); (1)
whereDdenotes the graph data distribution that satisﬁes
(V;E)D in an unlabeled graph G, andLsslis the SSL
loss function that regularizes the output of pretext decoder
according to speciﬁc crafted pretext tasks.
By leveraging the trained graph encoder f, the gen-
erated representations can then be used in various down-
stream tasks. Here we introduce a downstream decoder q 
(parameterized by  ), and formulate the downstream task
as a graph supervised learning task:
; = arg min
; Lsup(f;q ;G;y); (2)
whereydenotes the downstream task labels, and Lsupis the
supervised loss that trains the model for downstream tasks.
In the following subsections, we specify four graph
SSL variants based on Equation (1) in Section 3.2, three
graph self-supervised training schemes in Section 3.3 by
combining Equations (1) and (2) differently, and three types
of downstream tasks based on Equation (2) in Section 3.4.