JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6
Encoder!!
Perturbed GraphRepresentations
Reconstructed Features
Input Graph
Feature MaskingMSE LossFeature Reconstruction Decoder""
Encoder!!
Perturbed GraphRepresentations
Reconstructed Structure
Input Graph
Edge Masking
Neg.Samp.Reconstruction TargetCE Loss++--Structure Reconstruction Decoder""
(a) Graph Completion is a representative approach of feature
generation-based graph SSL. The features of certain nodes are
masked and then fed into the model, and the learning target is to
reconstruct the masked features. An MSE loss is used to recover
the features.
Encoder!!
Perturbed GraphRepresentations
Reconstructed Features
Input Graph
Feature MaskingMSE LossFeature Reconstruction Decoder""
Encoder!!
Perturbed GraphRepresentations
Reconstructed Structure
Input Graph
Edge Masking
Neg.Samp.Reconstruction TargetCE Loss++--Structure Reconstruction Decoder""(b) The objective of Denoising Link Reconstruction is to rebuild
the masked edges. A binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss is employed
to train the model where existing edges are the positive samples
and the unrelated node pairs are the negative samples. A negative
sampling (Neg. Samp.) strategy is used to balance the classes.
Fig. 5: Examples of two categories of generation-based methods: Graph Completion and Denoising Link Reconstruction.
the property of each graph. Based on Equation (2), we
provide the speciﬁc deﬁnitions of downstream decoders q ,
downstream objectives Lsup, and downstream task labels y
of three types of tasks, which are detailed in Appendix C.
4 G ENERATION -BASED METHODS
The generation-based methods aim to reconstruct the input
data and use the input data as their supervision signals.
The origin of this category of methods can be traced back to
Autoencoder [42] which learns to compress data vectors into
low-dimensional representations with the encoder network
and then try to rebuild the input vectors with the decoder
network. Different from generic input data represented in
vector formats, graph data are interconnected. As a result,
generation-based graph SSL approaches often take the full
graph or a subgraph as the model input, and reconstruct
one of the components, i.e. feature or structure, individually.
According to the objects of reconstruction, we divide these
works into two sub-categories: (1) feature generation that
learns to reconstruct the feature information of graphs,
and (2) structure generation that learns to reconstruct the
topological structure information of graphs. The pipelines
of two example methods are given in Fig. 5, and a summary
of the generation-based works is illustrated in Table 1.
4.1 Feature Generation
Feature generation approaches learn by recovering feature
information from the perturbed or original graphs. Based
on Equation (3), the feature generation approaches can be
further formalized as:
;= arg min
;Lmse
p
f
~G
;^X
; (9)
wherep()is the decoder for feature regression (e.g., a
fully connected network that maps the representations to
reconstructed features), Lmse is the Mean Squared Error
(MSE) loss function, and ^Xis a general expression of various
kinds of feature matrices, e.g., node feature matrix, edge
feature matrix, or low-dimensional feature matrix.
To leverage the dependency between nodes, a repre-
sentative branch of feature generation approaches follows
the masked feature regression strategy, which is motivated
by image inpainting in CV domain [20]. Speciﬁcally, the
features of certain nodes/edges are masked with zero orspeciﬁc tokens in the pre-processing phase. Then, the model
tries to recover the masked features according to the un-
masked information. Graph Completion [17] is a representa-
tive method. It ﬁrst masks certain nodes of the input graph
by removing their features. Then, the learning objective is
to predict the masked node features from the features of
neighboring nodes with a GCN [1] encoder. We can consider
Graph Completion as an implement of Equation (9) where
^X=Xand~G= (A;~X). Similarly, AttributeMask [43] aims
to reconstruct the dense feature matrix processed by Princi-
ple Component Analysis (PCA) [52] ( ^X=PCA (X)) instead
of the raw features due to the difﬁculty of rebuilding high-
dimensional and sparse features. AttrMasking [16] rebuilds
not only node attributes but also the edge one, which can be
written as ^X= [X;Xedge].
Another branch of methods aims to generate features
from noisy features. Inspired by denoising autoencoder [53],
MGAE [44] recovers raw features from noisy input features
with each GNN layer. Here we also denote ~G= (A;~X)
but here ~Xis corrupted with random noise. Proposed
in [45], Corrupted Features Reconstruction and Corrupted
Embeddings Reconstruction aim to reconstruct raw features
and hidden embeddings from corrupted features.
Besides, directly rebuilding features from the clean data
is also an available solution. GALA [46] trains a Laplacian
smoothing-sharpening graph autoencoder model with the
objective that rebuilds the raw feature matrix according to
the clean input graph. Similarly, autoencoding [45] recon-
structs the raw features from clean inputs. For these two
methods, we can formalize that ~G= (A;X)and^X=X.
4.2 Structure Generation
Different from the feature generation approaches that re-
build the feature information, structure generation ap-
proaches learn by recovering the structural information. In
most cases, the objective is to reconstruct the adjacency
matrix, since the adjacency matrix can brieﬂy represent the
topological structure of graphs. Based on Equation (3), the
structure generation methods can be formalized as follows:
;= arg min
;Lssl
p
f
~G
;A
; (10)
wherep()is a decoder for structure reconstruction, and A
is the (full or partial) adjacency matrix.