JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2
[MASK] is impossible.
Nothingis impossible.
I’m going outside.
I’ll be back soon.
I got up late.
(a) SSL pretext tasks
in CV: image coloriz-
ing (upper) and im-
age contrastive learn-
ing (bottom).
[MASK] is impossible.
Nothingis impossible.
I’m going outside.
I’ll be back soon.
I got up late.
(b) SSL pretext tasks
in NLP: masked
language modeling
(upper) and next
sentence prediction
(bottom).
[MASK] is impossible.
Nothingis impossible.
I’m going outside.
I’ll be back soon.
I got up late.
(c) SSL pretext tasks in
graph analytics: masked
graph generation (upper)
and node contrastive
learning (bottom).
Fig. 1: Toy examples of different SSL pretext tasks in CV ,
NLP and graph analytics. In generative tasks, graph SSL
should consider the topological structure in an irregular grid
as well as node features, while SSL in CV/NLP just needs to
recover the information in 2D/1D grid space. In contrastive
tasks, the dependency between nodes is non-negligible in
graph SSL, while the samples in CV/NLP are independent.
CV (image) and NLP (text) are often independent. Hence,
how to deal with such dependency in graph SSL becomes
a challenge for pretext task designs. Fig. 1 illustrates such
differences with some toy examples. Considering the signif-
icant difference between SSL in graph analytics and other
research areas, exclusive deﬁnitions and taxonomies are
required for graph SSL.
The history of graph SSL goes back to at least the
early studies on unsupervised graph embedding [30], [31]
1. These methods learn node representations by maximizing
the agreement between contextual nodes within truncated
random walks. A classical unsupervised learning model,
graph autoencoder (GAE) [32], can also be regarded as a
graph SSL method that learns to rebuild the graph structure.
Since 2019, the recent wave of graph SSL has brought about
various designs of pretext tasks, from contrastive learning
[13], [33] to graph property mining [10], [17]. Considering
the increasing trend of graph SSL research and the diversity
of related pretext tasks, there is an urgent need to construct a
uniﬁed framework and systematic taxonomy to summarize
the methodologies and applications of graph SSL.
To ﬁll the gap, this paper conducts a comprehensive and
up-to-date overview of the rapidly growing area of graph
SSL, and also provides abundant resources and discussions
of related applications. The intended audiences for this
article are general machine learning researchers who would
like to know about self-supervised learning on graph data,
graph learning researchers who want to keep track of the
most recent advances on graph neural networks (GNNs),
and domain experts who would like to generalize graph
SSL approaches to new applications or other ﬁelds. The core
contributions of this survey are summarized as follows:
Uniﬁed framework and systematic taxonomy. We
propose a uniﬁed framework that mathematically
formalizes graph SSL approaches. Based on our
framework, we systematically categorize the existing
1. A timeline of milestone works are summarized in Appendix A.works into four groups: generation-based, auxiliary
property-based, contrast-based, and hybrid methods.
We also build the taxonomies of downstream tasks
and SSL learning schemes.
Comprehensive and up-to-date review. We conduct
a comprehensive and timely review for classical and
latest graph SSL approaches. For each type of graph
SSL approach, we provide ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation,
mathematical description, detailed comparison, and
high-level summary.
Abundant resources and applications. We col-
lect abundant resources on graph SSL, including
datasets, evaluation benchmark, performance com-
parison, and open-source codes. We also summarize
the practical applications of graph SSL in various
research ﬁelds.
Outlook on future directions. We point out the
technical limitations of current research. We further
suggest six promising directions for future works
from different perspectives.
Comparison with related survey articles. Some existing sur-
veys mainly review from the perspectives of general SSL
[34], SSL for CV [19], or self-supervised contrastive learning
[35], while this paper purely focuses on SSL for graph-
structured data. Compared to the recent surveys on graph
self-supervised learning [36], [37], our survey has a more
comprehensive overview on this topic and provides the
following differences: (1) a uniﬁed encoder-decoder frame-
work to deﬁne graph SSL; (2) a systematical and more
ﬁne-grained taxonomy from a mathematical perspective;
(3) more up-to-date review; (4) more detailed summary
of resources including performance comparison, datasets,
implementations, and practical applications; and (5) more
forward-looking discussion for challenges and future direc-
tions.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section 2 deﬁnes the related concepts and provides nota-
tions used in the remaining sections. Section 3 describes the
framework of graph SSL and provides categorization from
multiple perspectives. Section 4-7 review four categories of
graph SSL approaches respectively. Section 8 summarizes
the useful resources for empirical study of graph SSL,
including performance comparison, datasets, and open-
source implementations. Section 9 surveys the real-world
applications in various domains. Section 10 analyzes the
remaining challenges and possible future directions. Section
11 concludes this article in the end.
2 D EFINITION AND NOTATION
In this section, we outline the related term deﬁnitions of
graph SSL, list commonly used notations, and deﬁne graph-
related concepts.
2.1 Term Deﬁnitions
In graph SSL, we provide the following deﬁnitions of related
essential concepts.
Manual Labels Versus Pseudo Labels. Manual labels , a.k.a.
human-annotated labels in some papers [19], indicate the
labels that human experts or workers manually annotate.
Pseudo labels , in contrast, denote the labels that can be