JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5
Graph for Fine-tuning
10110101Label
Encoder𝑓!
Pretext Decoder𝑝"
Downstream Decoder𝑞#
10110101
Encoder𝑓!
Stage 1: Pre-training
Stage 2: Fine-tuningParam Transfer
Graph for Pre-training
(a) Pre-training and Fine-tuning (PF). First, the encoder is pre-
trained with pretext tasks in an unsupervised manner. Then, the
pre-trained parameters are leveraged as the initial parameters in
the ﬁne-tuning phase where encoder is trained by downstream
tasks independently.
Input Graph
10110101Label
Pretext Decoder𝑝!
Downstream Decoder𝑞"
10110101
Encoder𝑓#
(b) Joint Learning (JL). The model is trained with pretext and
downstream tasks in a multi-task learning manner.
Input Graph
10110101Label
Encoder𝑓!
Pretext Decoder𝑝"
Downstream Decoder𝑞#
10110101
Encoder𝑓!(Freeze Param)
Stage 1: Unsupervised Learning
Stage 2: Downstream Task LearningParam Transfer
(c) Unsupervised Representation Learning (URL). It ﬁrst trains
encoder with pretext tasks, and uses the ﬁxed representations to
learn the downstream decoder in Stage 2.
Fig. 4: Three types of learning schemes for SSL.
maximize the MI between positive pairs (e.g., augmented
instances of the same object) and minimize the MI between
negative samples (e.g., instances derived from different
objects), which is implicitly included in Lssl. Representa-
tive works include cross-scale methods (e.g., DGI [13]) and
same-scale methods (e.g., GraphCL [38] and GCC [15]).
Hybrid Methods take advantage of previous categories and
consist of more than one pretext decoder and/or training
objective. We formulate this branch of methods as the
weighted or unweighted combination of two or more graph
SSL schemes based on formulas from Equation (3) to (5).
GMI [41], which jointly considers edge-level reconstruction
and node-level contrast, is a typical hybrid method.
Discussion. Different graph SSL methods have different
properties. Generation-based methods are simple to imple-
ment since the reconstruction task is easy to build, but some-
times recovering input data is memory-consuming for large-
scale graphs. Auxiliary property-based methods enjoy the
uncomplicated design of decoders and loss functions; how-
ever, the selection of helpful auxiliary properties often needs
domain knowledge. Compared to other categories, contrast-
based methods have more ﬂexible designs and boarder
applications. Nevertheless, the designs of contrastive frame-
works, augmentation strategies, and loss functions usu-
ally rely on time-consuming empirical experiments. Hybridmethods beneﬁt from multiple pretext tasks, but a main
challenge is how to design a joint learning framework to
balance each component.
3.3 Taxonomy of Self-Supervised Training Schemes
According to the relationship among graph encoders, self-
supervised pretext tasks, and downstream tasks, we in-
vestigate three types of graph self-supervised training
schemes: Pre-training and Fine-tuning (PF), Joint Learn-
ing (JL), and Unsupervised Representation Learning (URL).
Brief pipelines of them are given in Fig. 4.
Pre-training and Fine-tuning (PF). In PF scheme, the en-
coderfis ﬁrst pre-trained with pretext tasks on pre-
training datasets, which can be viewed as an initialization
for the encoder’s parameters. After that, the pre-trained
encoderfinitis ﬁne-tuned together on ﬁne-tuning datasets
(with labels) with a downstream decoder q under the
supervision of speciﬁc downstream tasks. Note that the
datasets for pre-training and ﬁne-tuning could be the same
or different. The formulation of PF scheme is deﬁned as
follows:
;= arg min
;Lssl(f;p;D);
;= arg min
; Lsup(p;q ;G;y):(6)
Joint Learning (JL). In JL scheme, the encoder is jointly
trained with the pretext and downstream tasks. The
loss function consists of both the self-supervised and
downstream task loss functions, where a trade-off hyper-
parametercontrols the contribution of self-supervision
term. This can be considered as a kind of multi-task learning
where the pretext task is served as a regularization of the
downstream task:
;; = arg min
;; h
Lssl(f;p;D)+Lsup(f;q ;G;y)i
:
(7)
Unsupervised Representation Learning (URL). The ﬁrst
stage of the URL scheme is similar to that of PF. The
differences are: (1) In the second stage, the encoder’s pa-
rameters are frozen (i.e., ) when the model is trained
with the downstream task; (2) The training of two stages
is performed on the same dataset. The formulation of URL
is deﬁned as:
;= arg min
;Lssl(f;p;D);
 = arg min
 Lsup(f;q ;G;y):(8)
Compared with other schemes, URL is more challenging
since there is no supervision during the encoder training.
3.4 Taxonomy of Downstream Tasks
According to the scale of prediction target, we divide
downstream tasks into node-, link-, and graph-level tasks.
Speciﬁcally, node-level tasks aim to predict the property of
nodes in graph(s) according to node representations. Link-
level tasks infer the property of edges or pairs of nodes,
where downstream decoders map the embeddings of two
nodes into link-level predictions. Besides, graph-level tasks
learn from a dataset with multiple graphs and forecast