2
Raw Data Classification
Statistical Pattern Recognition:
•Dimension Reduction: PCA, LDA, ICA, ISOMAP , LLE …
•Feature Selection: Wrapper s, Filters, Embedded … 
•Bayes Decision Theory: Gaussian, Parzen, KNN, Mixture …
•Neural Network: MLP , RBF,  Polynomial … 
•Decision Tree: ID3, C4.5, CART, Random Forests …
•Kernel Method: Support Vector Machine …
•Ensemble Method: Bagging, Boosting …
•Clustering:  K-means, Hierarchical, Spectral …
•…Feature Space
Domain-Specific Feature Representation:
•Preprocessing 
•Feature Extraction
•Reducing Within-class Variance
•Enlarging Between-class VarianceEnd-to-end Deep Learning:
•Auto-encoder
•Restricted Boltzmann Machine
•Convolutional Neural Network
•Recurrent Neural Network
•...
Figure 1. A brief overview of pattern recognition methods.
in isolation, but instead, usually appear with rich contextual
information. Learning from the dependencies between patterns
to improve the robustness of decision making is an important
problem in pattern recognition [102].
Most pattern recognition systems are actually data-hungry,
and their high accuracies rely highly on both the quantity and
quality of the training data. Any disturbances on the number
or the labeling condition of the data will usually lead to great
changes on the ﬁnal performance. However, in real applica-
tions, it is usually difﬁcult to collect large databases and pro-
duce accurate manual labeling. Therefore, the few-shot [152]
or even zero-shot [154] learning abilities of pattern recognition
systems are of great value for real applications. On the other
hand, in order to reduce the dependence on data quality, the
pattern recognition system should be robust and learnable with
noisy data [72]. Moreover, besides supervised training, other
strategies like unsupervised [13], self-supervised [58], and
semi-supervised [190] learning are also valuable for pattern
recognition systems to learn from abundant unlabeled data and
easily-obtained surrogate supervisory signals.
Based on the above observations, the problem of pattern
recognition is far from being solved when considering different
requirements in real applications. Besides accuracy, more
attention should be paid on improving the robustness of pattern
recognition. There are many previous works on robust pattern
recognition (see Section III), however, most of them are driven
from a single view point of robustness. Currently, there is
no clear deﬁnition on robust pattern recognition. In order
to give a comprehensive understanding of robustness, and
more importantly, reduce the gap between pattern recognition
research and the requirements of real applications, in this paper
we study and review different perspectives that are crucial for
robust pattern recognition.
Actually, most pattern recognition models are derived from
three implicit assumptions: closed-world assumption ,indepen-
dent and identically distributed assumption , and clean and
big data assumption . These assumptions are reasonable ina controlled laboratory environment and will simplify the
complexity of the problem, therefore, they are fundamental
for most pattern recognition models. However, in real-world,
these assumptions are usually not satisﬁed, and in most cases,
the performance of models built under these assumptions will
deteriorate signiﬁcantly. Therefore, to build robust systems for
real environments, we should try to break these assumptions
and develop new models and algorithms by reconsidering the
essentials of pattern recognition.
In the rest of this paper, we ﬁrst give a brief overview
of pattern recognition methods in Section 2. After that, we
deﬁne robustness for pattern recognition in Section 3. Then,
we present detailed overviews on different attempts trying to
break the three basic assumptions in Sections 4, 5 and 6,
respectively. Lastly, we draw concluding remarks in Section 7.
For readers who want to acquire some background knowledge
before reading this paper, please refer to the appendix.
II. A B RIEF OVERVIEW OF PATTERN RECOGNITION
METHODS
As shown in Fig. 1, pattern recognition methods can be
divided into two main categories: two-stage and end-to-end.
Most traditional methods are two-stage, i.e., with cascaded
handcrafted feature representation and pattern classiﬁcation.
The feature representation is to transform the raw data to a fea-
ture space with the property of within-class compactness and
between-class separability. Preprocessing (like removing noise
and normalizing data) is ﬁrstly applied to reduce within-class
variance, while feature extraction further enlarges between-
class variance, and this procedure is usually domain-speciﬁc.
Actually, for solving new pattern recognition problems, the
ﬁrst thing is the design of feature representation, and a good
feature will signiﬁcantly reduce the burden on subsequent clas-
siﬁer learning. This kind of efforts can be found in different
applications like iris recognition [265], gait recognition [296],
action recognition [295], and so on.