14
澻濴澼澳瀆瀌瀁濶濻瀅瀂瀁瀂瀈瀆濠瀂濷濴濿濼瀇瀌澳濄
濠瀂濷濴濿濼瀇瀌澳濾濠瀂濷濴濿濼瀇瀌澳濅瀖
澻濵澼澳濴瀆瀌瀁濶濻瀅瀂瀁瀂瀈瀆濧濴瀆濾澳濄
濧濴瀆濾澳瀁濧濴瀆濾澳濅瀖 濙瀈瀆濼瀂瀁濠瀂濷濴濿濼瀇瀌澳濄
濠瀂濷濴濿濼瀇瀌澳濾濠瀂濷濴濿濼瀇瀌澳濅瀖濧濴瀆濾澳濄
濧濴瀆濾澳濾濧濴瀆濾澳濅瀖
Figure 9. Two types of multi-modal multi-task learning.
aligned space, for example, the maximum correlated space
by canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [5], the semantic
preserved space by joint embedding [75], and so on. The
embedded space enables cross-modal matching tasks, such
as retrieving the images that are relevant to a given textual
query [94], deciding which face image is the speaker given
an audio clip of someone speaking [197], and so on. A
more difﬁcult problem is cross-modal alignment for ﬁnding
correspondences between sub-items of instances from multiple
modalities [9]. For example, aligning the steps in a recipe to
a video showing the dish being made [180], aligning a movie
to the script or the book chapters [341]. According to [9], the
cross-modal alignment can be achieved either explicitly like
using dynamic time warping and CCA, or implicitly like using
the attention mechanism in deep neural networks. Another
task cross-modal generation , which seeks a mapping from
one modality to another, has become very popular with an
emphasis on language and vision [9], for example, generat-
ing the text description of an input image [309], inversely
generating the image given a text description [229], and so
on. The difﬁculty is increasing from matching, alignment, to
generation, requiring much better understanding and high-level
capture of the interaction and relationship between modalities.
3) Multi-modal multi-task learning: The last case we shall
discuss is the multi-modal multi-task learning (Fig. 6d), which
can be partitioned into two types as shown in Fig. 9. The ﬁrst
and also much simpler setting is the the synchronous case,
where all the modalities are available for solving each task.
In this case, a fused representation of all modalities can be
learned efﬁciently during joint training multiple related tasks,
which is widely used in different applications such as disease
diagnosis [318], trafﬁc sign recognition [177], autonomous
driving [44], emotion recognition [38], and so on. As shown
in Fig. 9b, the second and also more challenging setting is
theasynchronous case, where different tasks may only rely
on their own modalities. For example, image classiﬁcation
works on image, speech recognition deals with sound waves,
while machine translation handles text data. Intuitively, it
is hard to consider these problems jointly, since both their
inputs and outputs are different. Moreover, it is also not clear
about the common knowledge shared among these seemingly
unrelated problems, and how much beneﬁt we can get from
combining them. An interesting work named “ one model to
learn them all ” [129] shows us such possibility and potential,
where a single deep neural network to learn multiple tasks
from various modalities is designed using modality-speciﬁc
encoders, I/O mixer, and task-speciﬁc decoders. The jointtraining of diverse tasks with asynchronous image, speech, and
text modalities is shown to beneﬁt from shared architecture
and parameters. Amazingly, although seemed to be unrelated,
incorporating image classiﬁcation in training would help to
improve the performance of language parsing, indicating that
some computational primitives can be shared between different
modalities and even unrelated tasks [129].
4) Discussion: There are many practical problems that can
beneﬁt from multi-modal learning. In biometric applications,
a person can be identiﬁed by face, ﬁngerprint, iris, or voice.
Although each modality is already distinguishable, their com-
bination will improve both the accuracy and robustness. In
autonomous driving, the fusion of multiple sensors (radar,
camera, LIDAR, GPS, and so on) is necessary and important
to make robust decisions. Multi-modal analysis will also
make the decision making to be more explainable [211].
Moreover, the human brain is essentially both a multi-modal
and a multi-task system: it continuously receives stimuli from
various modes of the surrounding world and performs various
perceptual and cognitive tasks. For a pattern recognition sys-
tem, multi-modal perception increases the diversity on input
while multi-task improves the diversity on output, and usually
diversity will bring robustness. Therefore, joint multi-modal
multi-task learning will be an inspiring and important future
direction.
VI. B REAKING CLEAN AND BIGDATA ASSUMPTION
Pattern recognition systems usually have strong abilities to
memorize training data. As shown in [317], even if we ran-
domly change the labels of data completely, neural networks
can still achieve near zero training error, indicating the strong
capacity to ﬁt training data. This is valuable if we have a clean
(well-labeled) and large-enough (covering different variations)
dataset, and ﬁtting the training data in this case will usually
also lead to good generalization performance. However, this
assumption is hard to satisfy in real applications. Actually,
clean data and big data are contradictory : it is easy to collect
a well-labeled small dataset, but it is impossible to manually
label a big dataset without any error. Therefore, in order to
improve the robustness on both the quality and quantity of
data, ﬁrst of all, the training process should be robust to
noisy data, and second, particular learning strategies should be
considered to reduce the dependence on large amounts of data.
To reach this goal, we present discussions and summarizations
from the following four perspectives.
A. Supervised Learning with Noisy Data
In supervised learning, the noises in data can be partitioned
into three types: (1) label noise : the sample is valid but
the label is wrong due to mislabeling; (2) sample noise (or
attribute noise): the sample is noisy but the label is valid, for
example, samples caused by corruption, occlusion, distortion,
and so on; (3) outlier noise : both the sample and label are
invalid, for example, samples from a new not-care class or
a totally noisy signal, but still labeled as one of the classes
to be classiﬁed. To deal with noisy data, different approaches
have been proposed in the literature. Frenay and Verleysen [72]