13
it needs intensive experiments to ﬁnd the optimal split position
for shared and task-speciﬁc layers. Another approach is the
soft parameter sharing in Fig. 8b, where each task has its
own parameters which are regularized with some constraints
to encourage similarity between them, like minimizing their
`2distances [64] or with some partially shared structure [30].
Other than using ﬁxed sharing mechanism, another strategy is
learning to share . For example, the cross-stitch network [188]
proposes to learn an optimal combination of shared and
task-speciﬁc representations as shown in Fig. 8c. The above
approaches are based on sharing features among tasks, and the
decision-making processes of each task are still independent.
However, the solution of one task may be useful for solving
other related tasks, indicating that we need task feedback to
update the representation as shown in Fig. 8d. In this way, the
performance of different tasks can be improved recurrently by
utilizing the solutions (not only features) from other tasks [17].
3) Task relationship learning: Finding the relationship be-
tween different tasks will make information sharing among
tasks to be more selective and smooth. A straightforward
strategy is using task clustering [277] to partition multiple
tasks into several clusters, and the tasks in the same cluster
are assumed to be similar to each other. It is also possible to
dynamically widen a thin neural network in a greedy manner
to create a tree-like deep architecture for clustering similar
tasks in the same branch as shown in [178]. Besides task
clustering, many studies have also tried to learn both the per-
task model parameters and the inter-task relationships simul-
taneously, where the task relationship can be formulated to be
a matrix [196], tensor [3], or a nonlinear structure [45]. This
topic has attracted much attention in the research community,
and the work of taskonomy [316] has won the CVPR2018 best
paper award. The taskonomy (task taxonomy) is a directed
hyper-graph that captures the transferability among tasks: an
edge between two tasks represents a feasible transfer, while
the weight is the prediction of the transfer performance. With
task relationship, the transfer learning performance would be
improved, due to better transfer path from most related tasks
to a target task, which can not only reduce the computational
complexity of using all tasks but can also avoid the phe-
nomenon of negative transfer caused by dissimilar tasks [316].
4) Discussion: When multiple related tasks can be deﬁned
naturally, multi-task learning will signiﬁcantly improve the
performance for many problems like computer vision [58]
and natural language processing [47]. However, this requires
labeled data for each task. A more efﬁcient strategy is to use
some auxiliary tasks where data can be collected without man-
ual labeling (to be discussed in Section VI-B). When multiple
tasks are learned jointly, how to balance their loss functions
becomes the key problem. A dominant approach is to assign
each task a pre-deﬁned weight. However, the optimal weight is
expensive and time-consuming to ﬁnd empirically. Therefore,
Kendall et al. [135] propose to learn the optimal weights
automatically for multiple loss functions by considering the
homoscedastic uncertainty of each task. Furthermore, gradient
normalization [40] can also be used to automatically balance
training in deep multi-task models by dynamically tuning the
gradient magnitudes.D. Multi-modal Learning
The world surrounding us involves multiple modalities: we
see objects, hear sounds, feel texture, smell odors, and taste
ﬂavors [9]. Different from multi-task learning (Fig. 6b) where
multiple tasks are performed with the same input, the purpose
ofmulti-modal learning is to utilize the supplementary and
complementary information in different modalities to complete
a shared task (Fig. 6c) or multiple related tasks (Fig. 6d).
1) Multi-modal representation and fusion: In multi-modal
learning, each instance can be viewed by multiple modalities,
which can be fused at different levels. The ﬁrst approach we
can consider is signal-level fusion , for example, the pansharp-
ening of multi-resolution satellite images [133]. However,
different modalities usually have different data structures with
different sizes or dimensions such as images, sound waves
and texts, making them hard to be fused at raw-data level.
Therefore, we must design some modality-wise representa-
tions, which could be either handcrafted features or learned
with deep neural networks. For example, 2D/3D convolutional
neural networks can be used for spatial structured signals like
image, CT, fMRI, video, and so on, while recurrent neural
networks can be used for temporal data like speech and text.
With modality-wise feature extractions, different modalities
are transformed into a uniﬁed space, and a straightforward
fusion strategy is therefore feature-level fusion , for example,
the modality-wise representations can be concatenated into a
longer representation or averaged (with learnable modality-
wise weights) to a new representation [171]. After that,
any traditional model can be learned on the fused feature
representation for a given task. Another common strategy is
decision-level fusion which is widely-investigated in multiple
classiﬁer systems [111]. This fusion strategy is often favored
because different models are used on different modalities,
making the system more ﬂexible and robust to modality-
missing as the predictions are made independently. Recently,
due to the development of deep learning which learns hierar-
chical representations, the intermediate-level fusion [223] is
used to dynamically integrate modalities at different levels
with an automatically learned and optimized fusion structure.
Moreover, another important strategy is the learning-based
fusion , for example, using cross weights to gradually learn
interactions of modalities [225], using multiple-kernel learning
to learn optimal feature fusion [85], learning sharable and
speciﬁc features for different modalities [294], and so on.
A widely-occurring problem in multi-modal learning is
modality-missing, i.e., some modalities are unaccessible for
some instances during inference. The generative model such
as deep Boltzmann machine [259] can be used to handle
modality-missing by sampling the absent modality from the
conditional distribution. We can also apply the modality-wise
dropout [199] during training to improve the generalization
performance for modality-missing.
2) Cross-modal matching, alignment, and generation: Be-
sides fusing multiple modalities to make accurate and robust
predictions, another vibrant research direction causing increas-
ing attentions is the cross-modal learning [9]. In this case,
different modalities are embedded into a coordinated and well-