8
of the associated labels. Although this approach is simple, it
is very effective to produce augmented samples spreading not
only within the same class but also between different classes,
and therefore, the open space near decision boundaries is
well handled with these augmented samples. Similar approach
is also adopted in a work of between-class learning [278].
Although a mixture of two examples may not make sense for
humans visually, it will make sense for machines as suggested
by [278], and it is shown by [319] that this can not only
improve the generalization performance but can also increase
the robustness to adversarial examples.
4) Discussion: As shown in Fig. 4a, another related concept
isfooling examples [200] which are produced to be completely
unrecognizable to human eyes but the pattern recognition
system will still classify them into particular classes with high
conﬁdence. This is different from adversarial examples shown
in Fig. 4b. Actually, the phenomenon of fooling examples is
the result of outliers with closed-world assumption which is
discussed in Section IV-B. It is shown by [200] that retraining
of the system by viewing fooling examples as a newly added
class is not sufﬁcient to solve this problem, and a new batch
of fooling images can be produced to fool the new system
even after many retraining iterations. This is because there
are massive open spaces for outliers and it is impossible to
model them completely. Contrarily, augmenting training data
with adversarial examples was shown to signiﬁcantly increase
the robustness even with only one extra epoch [193], this is
because the open spaces near decision boundaries are limited
and constrained, and therefore giving us possibility to model
them. Since many people continue to propose new attack
methods for producing adversarial examples, the research
of novel defense strategy becomes particularly important to
guarantee the safety of pattern recognition.
D. Unknown Unknown: Open Class Risk
As shown in Fig. 3d, the last case in open space is “ unknown
unknown ”: situations where a lot of unknown samples (out
of this world) are grouping into different unknown (unseen)
categories. In this case, we should not simply mark them as
a single and large category of unknown (like Section IV-B),
but also need to identify the newly emerged categories in a
ﬁne-grained manner. This is a common situation in real appli-
cations, where the datasets are dynamic and novel categories
must be continuously detected and added, which is denoted as
open world recognition in [11] and class-incremental learning
in [227].
1) Deﬁnition of the problem: During continuous use of a
pattern recognition system, abundant or even inﬁnite test data
will come in a streaming manner. As shown in Fig. 5, the
open-world recognition process can be decomposed into three
steps. The ﬁrst step is detecting unknown samples and placing
them in a buffer, which requires the system to reject samples
from unseen classes and keep high accuracy for seen classes.
The second step is labeling unknown samples in the buffer
into new categories, which can be either ﬁnished by humans
or automatically implemented. The last step is then updating
the classiﬁer with augmented categories and samples, which
濞瀁瀂瀊瀁
濖濿濴瀆瀆濼濹濼濸瀅
濡濸瀊澳
濖濴瀇濸濺瀂瀅瀌濨瀁濾瀁瀂瀊瀁濢瀈瀇濿濼濸瀅濟濴濵濸濿
濕瀈濹濹濸瀅濦濴瀀瀃濿濸 濦瀇濸瀃澳濄
濦瀇濸瀃澳濅
濦瀇濸瀃澳濆Figure 5. Open-world recognition with class-incremental learning.
requires the classiﬁer to be efﬁciently trainable in a class-
incremental manner where different classes occur at different
times. Step 1 has already been discussed in Section IV-B,
therefore, this section focuses on steps 2 and 3.
2) Labeling unknown samples: A simple and accurate
approach for step 2 is seeking help from human beings [11],
either in a batch manner when the buffer size reaches some
threshold, or immediately when the users encounter some
strange outputs from the system and then try to give some
feedback. Moreover, a strategy to make this process more
efﬁcient is using active learning [120] to reduce the labeling
cost by selecting the most valuable data to query their labels.
On the contrary, a more challenging task is automatic new
class discovery [35] without human labeling. Unsupervised
clustering [184] is an efﬁcient and effective solution for ﬁnding
new classes. A cluster can be seen as a new category if the
number of samples falling in this cluster is large enough, and
otherwise, it should only be viewed as an outlier and ignored.
However, a difﬁculty for this approach is the model selection
problem, i.e., how many novel classes are contained in the
data? To deal with this, the clustering algorithms should have
the ability of automatic model selection [163].
3) Class incremental learning: The solution of step 3
requires us to rethink the relationship between discriminative
andgenerative models. A pattern recognition system usually
contains class-independent feature extraction (x)and class-
speciﬁc decision function gi(x).2The classiﬁcation is then:
x2arg maxigi(x). In discriminative model, all the decision
functionsgi(x);8iare trained jointly (like hinge loss, softmax
loss, and so on), which can be viewed as the competition
between different classes to adjust decision boundaries. On
the contrary, in generative model, gi(x)is usually used to
model each class independently (like negative log-likelihood
loss for some distribution). Discriminative model usually has
higher accuracy, however, since g1(x);:::;gk(x)are coupled
in training, adding a new class gk+1(x)will affect others,
requiring retraining of them with all data available. Contrarily,
in generative model, class-incremental learning will become
much simpler, since the training of gk+1(x)is independent
of other classes. However, the drawback is that generative
model usually leads to lower accuracy. Therefore, hybrid
discriminative and generative models become necessary: (x)
is discriminative while gi(x)is generative. Actually, many
recent works are already using this principle.
2For example, in deep learning, the (x)is a multi-layer neural network,
andgi(x)is usually a linear function on (x)likegi(x) =w>
i(x) +bi.