18
and then regularizing with the manifold for a more favorable
state of class separation. Another interesting approach of
learning by association [98] considers global consistency from
a different perspective: imagine a walker from labeled data
to unlabeled data according to the similarity calculated from
latent representation, and then the walker will go back from
unlabeled data to labeled data. Correct walks that start and
end at the same class are encouraged, and wrong walks that
end at a different class are penalized. The cycle-consistent
association from labeled data to unlabeled ones and back can
be efﬁciently modeled using transition probabilities [98], and
therefore is an effective strategy to pursue global consistency
in SSL.
6) Discussion: In SSL, the massive unlabeled data and
the scarce labeled data reveal the underlying manifold of
the entire dataset, and by letting the predictions for all sam-
ples to be smooth on the manifold, more accurate decision
boundary can be obtained compared to purely supervised
learning. Reconstruction-based methods can learn a better
representation from unlabeled data, while pseudo labels can be
used for iterative training on unlabeled data. Recently, a new
trend is using GAN to model the distribution of labeled and
unlabeled data for SSL. Moreover, perturbation-based methods
utilize the randomness in deep neural network to seek local
consistency on unlabeled data, and how to effectively consider
global consistency in deep learning based SSL still needs more
exploration.
D. Few-shot and Zero-shot Learning
In human intelligence, we can instantly learn a novel
concept by observing only a few examples from a particular
class. However, the state-of-the-art approaches in machine
intelligence are usually highly data-hungry. This difference
has inspired an important research topic of few-shot learning
(FSL) [152]. In FSL, we have a many-shot dataset Mand
few-shot datasetF(usuallyk-shotn-way :klabeled samples
for each of the nclasses, and kis small like 1 or 5). The
samples inMhave disjoint label space with F. The purpose
of FSL is to extract transferrable knowledge from Mto help
us perform better on F, as illustrated in Fig. 11.
1) Metric learning: Under the principle that test and train-
ing conditions must match, the episode based training [292] is
used to mimic the k-shotn-way setting. Speciﬁcally, in each
training iteration, an episode is formed by randomly selecting
nclasses with ksamples per class from Mto act as the
support setS=f(xi;yi)gkn
i=1, and meanwhile a fraction of
the remainder samples from those nclasses are selected as the
query set. This support/query split is designed to simulate the
real application situation on F. The purpose now is to deﬁne
the probability P(yjx;S). Although the underlying classes are
different betweenMandF, the learned P(yjx;S)is hoped
to be transferable between them, which can be viewed as
a point-to-set metric. For example, in [292], a deep neural
network embedded space is learned to calculate such a metric.
To learn a better embedding (or metric), a memory module can
be used [29] to explicitly encode the whole support set Sinto
memory for deﬁning P. Moreover, different criteria can be
class݉ଵ
class݉ଶ
class݉௡
...class݂ଵ
class݂ଶ
class݂ଷ?
?classݖଵ
classݖଶTransfer with 
few samples:/g135Metric
/g135Meta-learning
/g135ImaginationTransfer with side 
information:/g135Attribute
/g135Class name
/g135Text descriptionFew-shot                        Many-shot                          Zero-shotFigure 11. From many-shot to few-shot and zero-shot learning.
used to learn the metric like the mean square error [266] and
the ranking loss [279]. Since each support set Sis designed to
be few-shot, the metric learned in this way can be transferred
to unseen categories which also have few examples.
2) Learning to learn (meta-learning): Thelearning to learn
ormeta-learning is to train another learner at a higher level
for guiding the original learner. In [302], the meta-learner
is deﬁned as the transformation from the model parameters
learned from few samples to the model parameters learned
from large enough samples, which can be viewed as a model-
model regression . Another approach [145] instead uses the
sample-model regression as the meta-learner by transforming
each single sample directly to the classiﬁer parameters. Denote
original model as '(x;W)whereWrepresents the parameters
to be learned, instead of learning Wdirectly, a meta-learner
!(x;W0)is used in [16] to map xtoW. Now, the model
becomes'(x;!(x;W0))and the task is changed to learn W0.
The meta-learner !(x;W0)can be used to predict any param-
eters of another network 'like linear layers or convolutional
layers [16], and once learned, the parameters for any novel
category can be predicted by a simple forward pass. Besides
predicting parameters, other meta-learning methods such as
learning the optimization algorithm [226] or initialization [70]
can also be used for FSL. Since the tasks considered in meta-
learning is category-agnostic, they can be well transferred to
new few-shot categories.
3) Learning with imagination: Another explanation for the
FSL ability of humans is that we can easily visualize or
imagine what novel objects should look like from different
views although we only see very few examples. This has
inspired the learning with imagination to produce additional
training examples. As pointed out by [103], the challenge of
FSL is that the few examples can only capture very little of the
category’s intra-class variation. To solve this, we can use the
many-shot dataset Mto learn the intra-class transformations
of samples and then augment the samples in Falong these
transformations [103]. In another work [301], a hallucinator is
trained by taking a single example of a category and producing
other examples to expand the training set. The hallucinator is
trained jointly with the classiﬁcation model, and the goal is
to help the algorithm to learn a better classiﬁer [301], which
is different from other data generation model like GAN [87]