20
5) Discussion: Building a good model totally from scratch
with a small number of observations is difﬁcult, and actually,
the FSL abilities of human beings are based on our abundant
prior experiences of dealing with related tasks. Therefore,
as pointed out by [68]: the key insight for FSL is that the
categories we have already learned can give us information
that helps us to learn new categories with fewer examples.
Therefore, FSL can be viewed as cross-class transfer learning.
Moreover, humans are good at ZSL because we have other
knowledge sources (like book and Internet) from which we
can infer what a new category looks like. Therefore, ZSL is
more like cross-modal learning (Section V-D). Although many
approaches have been proposed in the literature, few-shot and
zero-shot learning are still urgently needed skills for machine
intelligence.
VII. C ONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper considers the robustness of pattern recognition
from the perspective of three basic assumptions, which are
reasonable in controlled laboratory environments for pursuing
high accuracies, however, will become unstable and unreliable
in real-life applications. To improve robustness, we present a
comprehensive literature review of the approaches trying to
break these assumptions:
For breaking closed-world assumption , we partition the
open-space into four components: the known known
corresponding to the empirical risk, the known unknown
corresponding to the outlier risk, the unknown known
corresponding to the adversarial risk, and the unknown
unknown corresponding to the open class risk.
For breaking independent and identically distributed as-
sumption , we ﬁrst discuss the problems in learning with
interdependent data, then review recent advances in do-
main adaptation and transfer learning, and ﬁnally analyse
the multi-task and multi-modal learning for increasing the
diversity on both output and input of the system.
For breaking clean and big data assumption , we ﬁrst
introduce supervised learning with noisy data, then re-
view un/self-supervised and semi-supervised learning to
learn from unlabeled data and surrogate supervision, and
lastly discuss few-shot and zero-shot learning to transfer
knowledge from big-data to small-data.
With the above approaches, we can improve the robustness
of a pattern recognition system by: growing continuously with
changing concepts in open world, adapting smoothly with
changing environments under non-identical conditions, and
learning stably with changing resources under different data
quality and quantity. Actually, these are fundamental issues
in robust pattern recognition, because these changing factors
will usually greatly affect the stability of ﬁnal performance in
practice. Furthermore, in continuous use of a pattern recogni-
tion system, other than being a static model, how to make it
evolvable during lifelong learning [215], [210] or never-ending
learning [189] is an important step towards real intelligence.
Through breaking the three basic assumptions, we can actually
eliminate the main obstacles in reaching this goal.
Unlike the traditional closed-world classiﬁcation which is
usually evaluated by accuracy, how to evaluate the recognitionperformance in open and changing environments is a big issue.
Besides accuracy, other evaluation measurements reﬂecting
the ability in dealing with the changing factors are more
important. As shown in Table III, when considering many
other evaluation metrics (different from the classiﬁcation accu-
racy), it is obvious that pattern recognition is far from solved.
Moreover, in the research community, different tasks are
usually evaluated with different metrics and databases. How
to build a general benchmark for evaluating the robustness by
integrating different metrics together is an important future
task for pattern recognition.
Different from the widely-used empirical risk minimization,
theoretical analysis to unify different open-world risks will
become the foundation for future classiﬁer design. A future
pattern recognition system should acquire complementary in-
formation from interdependent data in different modalities and
boost itself through the cooperation of multiple tasks by adap-
tively learning from a few labeled, unlabeled or noisy data.
Although many attempts have been proposed in the literature,
most of them try to solve a single problem from a single
perspective. However, the three basic assumptions are actually
related, and through joint consideration many new research
problems can be raised, such as open-world domain adapta-
tion [28], open-world semi-supervised learning [203], cross-
modal domain adaptation [113], multi-task self-supervised
learning [58], few-shot domain adaptation [194], and so on.
Future research of a uniﬁed framework to deal with the open-
world, non-i.i.d., noisy and small data issues simultaneously
is the ultimate goal of robust pattern recognition.
Besides the robustness issues, many other problems are
also important for pattern recognition. For example, the in-
terpretability [191] of the model: besides high accuracy, the
system also needs to explain why such a prediction is made,
for increasing our conﬁdence and safety in trusting the result.
Some traditional classiﬁers like decision tree and logistic
regression are interpretable, but how to make other models
especially black-box deep neural networks explainable [333]
is an important task. Another important issue is computational
efﬁciency [101]. Besides big data, strong computing power
is also a key for the success of modern pattern recognition
technologies. In order to widen the application scope and
also reduce resource consumption, the compression and ac-
celeration of pattern recognition models are of great values
for practical applications. Since pattern recognition can be
viewed as the simulation of human brain perception ability
which enables machine to recognize objects or events in
sensing data, how to effectively learn from neuroscience for
developing brain-inspired [217], biologically-plausible [15] or
psychophysics-driven [232] pattern recognition models is an
inspiring future direction. With more attentions and efforts
paid to these important issues in pattern recognition, the gap
between human intelligence and machine intelligence can be
narrowed in the foreseeable future.
APPENDIX A
BACKGROUND REFERENCES
Pattern Recognition [198] [76] [125] [78] [63] [20]