12
in Fig. 7, the whole framework is composed of four compo-
nents. The feature extractors 1(for source) and 2(for target)
are usually deﬁned as deep neural networks. The task classiﬁer
3is used to perform the original K-way classiﬁcation for
both source and target data. Importantly, a domain classiﬁer
4is used to judge whether a sample is from source or target
domain (binary classiﬁcation). Since we have two classiﬁers,
here we can deﬁne two standard classiﬁcation losses `1and
`2. The key of adversarial learning is that these losses are
optimized like playing a min-max game:
1)min`1;max`2; (15)
2)min`1(optional );max`2; (16)
3)min`1; (17)
4)min`2: (18)
The purpose of min`1is to guarantee classiﬁcation accu-
racy while max`2aims to confuse the domain classiﬁer
and make the feature distributions over two domains simi-
lar, thus resulting in domain-invariant features. To efﬁciently
seek max1;2`2, multiple strategies can be used, like using
gradient reversal layer [79] to reverse the gradient in back-
propagation, adopting inverted labels [283] to calculate another
surrogate fooled loss, and minimizing the cross-entropy loss
against a uniform distribution [282]. Moreover, the feature
extractor modules can be designed as shared ( 1=2) [79],
partially shared [235], or independent ( 16=2) [283]. Adver-
sarial learning is efﬁcient and effective for domain adaptation
and transfer learning, and many subsequent improvements are
still being gradually proposed [297].
5) Multi-source problem: In the above approaches, we
assume that there is only a single source domain, but in
practice, multiple sources [182] may exist during data col-
lection, which is related to the style consistent pattern ﬁeld
classiﬁcation problem in Section V-A. The above discussed
single-source methods can be extended accordingly to multi-
source case. For example, the cross-domain mapping can be
extended to multiple source-mappings with a shared Bayes
classiﬁer [326], the adversarial based method can be modiﬁed
by replacing the binary domain classiﬁer with a multi-way
classiﬁer representing multiple sources [311], and so on.
6) Discussion: Domain adaptation and transfer learning are
useful for many applications like speaker adaptation [161]
in speech recognition, writer adaptation [327] in handwriting
recognition, view adaptation [131] in face recognition, and
so on. Fine-tuning is a straightforward and effective strategy
for supervised adaptation, while cross-domain mapping is a
general approach for supervised [115], unsupervised [49], and
semi-supervised [327] adaptation. Traditional approaches usu-
ally focus on distribution matching, and adversarial learning
has become the new trend for deep learning based adaptation.
Multi-source phenomenon is common in practice, and how to
discover latent domains [114] in mixed-multi-source data is
an important and challenging problem.
C. Multi-task Learning
As shown in Fig. 6b, another case is that the feature spaces
are identical but the label spaces are changed. For example, a
濧濴瀆濾澳濄 濧濴瀆濾澳濅 濧濴瀆濾澳濆濧濴瀆濾澳濄 濧濴瀆濾澳濅 濧濴瀆濾澳濆
瀆濻濴瀅濸濷 濶瀂瀁瀆瀇瀅濴濼瀁濸濷
濧濴瀆濾澳濄 濧濴瀆濾澳濅
ߙଵଵ ߙଶଶ ߙଵଶߙଶଵ
ݔଶ ݔଵݕଵ ݕଶ
瀅濸瀃瀅濸瀆濸瀁瀇濴瀇濼瀂瀁濼瀁瀃瀈瀇
ܧଵܦଵ濧濴瀆濾澳濄
ܧଶܦଶ濧濴瀆濾澳濅
ܧ଴ 瀖瀖澻濴澼澳澳濛濴瀅濷澳瀃濴瀅濴瀀濸瀇濸瀅澳瀆濻濴 瀅濼瀁濺 澻濵澼澳澳濦瀂濹瀇澳瀃濴瀅濴瀀濸瀇濸瀅澳瀆濻濴瀅濼瀁濺
澻濶澼澳澳濟濸濴瀅瀁濼瀁濺澳瀇瀂澳瀆濻濴瀅 濸 澻濷澼澳濧濴瀆濾澳濹濸濸濷濵濴濶濾Figure 8. An illustration of multi-task representation learning.
face image can be classiﬁed into different races, ages, genders,
and so on. These tasks are not independent, instead, they are
complementary to each other, and learning one task is helpful
for solving another. How to efﬁciently and effectively learn
from multiple related tasks is known as multi-task learning .
1) Transferable representation learning: The ﬁrst question
for multi-task learning is that: can we ﬁnd a generic feature
representation that is transferable among different tasks? The
traditional hand-crafted feature representations are usually
task-speciﬁc, and new features need to be designed for new
tasks. It has been shown by [59] that the features extracted
from the deep neural network pre-trained with a large dataset
are transferable to different tasks. The usual method is to
train a base network, and then copy its ﬁrst few layers to
a target network, for which the remaining layers are randomly
initialized and trained toward target task. There are multiple
layers in deep neural networks, and the ﬁrst layers usually
learn low-level features whereas the latter layers learn semantic
orhigh-level features. The low-level features are more general
while the high-level features are more speciﬁc [315]. There-
fore, the transferabilities of features from bottom, middle, or
top of a neural network are different, depending on the distance
between the base task and target task [8]: for similar tasks the
later layers are more transferable, while for dissimilar tasks
the earlier layers are preferred.
2) Multi-task representation learning: The second question
for multi-task learning is that: can dealing with multiple
tasks simultaneously be used to integrate different supervisory
signals for learning an invariant representation? Since each
task will produce a task-speciﬁc loss function, generally, as
soon as you ﬁnd yourself optimizing more than one loss
function, you are effectively doing multi-task learning [236].
To learn multiple tasks jointly, there should be some shared
and task-speciﬁc parameters in the architecture, and sharing
what is learned during training different tasks in parallel is the
central idea in multi-task learning. A straightforward approach
is the hard parameter sharing [32] (Fig. 8a), which shares
the bottom layers for all tasks and keeps several task-speciﬁc
output layers. This is the most widely-used strategy in real
applications due to its simplicity and effectiveness. However,