9
Region Selection
Network
Fig. 8. Region-level dynamic inference. The region selection module
generates the transformation/localization parameters, and the subse-
quent network performs inference on the transformed/cropped region.
output feature and kis the kernel size). Considering the
pixels belonging to the same object may share identical
weights, dynamic region-aware convolution (DRConv) [155]
generates a segmentation mask for an input image, dividing
it intomregions, for each of which a weight generation net-
work is responsible for producing a data-dependent kernel.
2) Dynamic reception ﬁelds. Traditional convolution opera-
tions usually have a ﬁxed shape and size of kernels (e.g. the
commonly used 332D convolution). The resulting uniform
reception ﬁeld across all the layers may have limitations for
recognizing objects with varying shapes and sizes. To tackle
this, a line of work learns to adapt the reception ﬁeld for
different feature pixels [110], [111], [112], as discussed in Sec.
2.2.1. Instead of adapting the sampling location of features
or kernels, adaptive connected network [156] realizes a
dynamic trade-off among self transformation (e.g. 11con-
volution), local inference (e.g. 33convolution) and global
inference (e.g. FC layer). The three branches of outputs are
fused with data-dependent weighted summation. Besides
images, the local and global information in non-Euclidean
data, such as graphs, could also be adaptively aggregated.
3.2 Region-level Dynamic Networks
Pixel-level dynamic networks mentioned in Sec. 3.1 often
require speciﬁc implementations for sparse computation,
and consequently may face challenges in terms of achieving
real acceleration on hardware [148]. An alternative approach
is performing adaptive inference on regions/patches of input
images. There mainly exists two lines of work along this
direction (see Fig. 8): one performs parameterized trans-
formations on a region of feature maps for more accurate
prediction (Sec. 3.2.1), and the other learns patch-level
hard attention , with the goal of improving the effectiveness
and/or efﬁciency of models (Sec. 3.2.2).
3.2.1 Dynamic Transformations
Dynamic transformations (e.g. afﬁne/projective/thin plate
spline transformation) can be performed on images to undo
certain variations [157] for better generalization ability, or to
exaggerate the salient regions [158] for discriminative fea-
ture representation. For example, spatial transformer [157]
adopts a localization network to generate the transformation
parameters, and then applies the parameterized transforma-
tion to recover the input from the corresponding variations.
Moreover, transformations are learned to adaptively zoom-
in the salient regions on some tasks where the model per-
formance is sensitive to a small portion of regions.
3.2.2 Hard Attention on Selected Patches
Inspired by the fact that informative features may only be
contained in certain regions of an image, dynamic networks
with hard spatial attention are explored to strategically
select patches from the input for improved efﬁciency.1) Hard attention with RNNs. The most typical approach
is formulating a classiﬁcation task as a sequential decision
process, and adopting RNNs to make iterative predictions
based on selected patches [159], [160]. For example, images
are classiﬁed within a ﬁxed number of steps, and at each
step, the classiﬁer RNN only sees a cropped patch, deciding
the next attentional location until the last step is reached
[159]. An adaptive step number is further achieved by
including early stopping in the action space [160]. Glance-
and-focus network (GFNet) [39] builds a general framework
of region-level adaptive inference by sequentially focusing
on a series of selected patches, and is compatible with most
existing CNN architectures. The recurrent attention mecha-
nism together with the early exiting paradigm enables both
spatially and temporally adaptive inference [39], [160].
2) Hard attention with other implementations. Rather
than using an RNN to predict the region position that the
model should pay attention to, class activation mapping
(CAM) [142] is leveraged in [161] to iteratively focus on
salient patches. At each iteration, the selection is performed
on the previously cropped input, leading to a progressive
reﬁnement procedure. A multi-scale CNN is built in [162],
where the sub-network in each scale takes in the cropped
patch from the previous scale, and is responsible for si-
multaneously producing 1) the feature representations for
classiﬁcation and 2) the attention map for the next scale.
Without an iterative manner, the recent differentiable patch
selection [163] adopts a differentiable top-K module to select
a ﬁxed number of patches in one step.
3.3 Resolution-level Dynamic Networks
The researches discussed above typically divide feature
maps into different areas (pixel-level or region-level) for
adaptive inference. On a coarser granularity, some dynamic
networks could treat each image as a whole by processing
feature representations with adaptive resolutions. Although
it has been observed that a low resolution might be suf-
ﬁcient for recognizing most ”easy” samples [27], conven-
tional CNNs mostly process all the inputs with the same
resolution, inducing considerable redundancy. Therefore,
resolution-level dynamic networks exploit spatial redun-
dancy from the perspective of feature resolution rather
than the saliency of different locations. Existing approaches
mainly include 1) scaling the inputs with adaptive ratios
(Sec. 3.3.1); 2) selectively activating the sub-networks with
different resolutions in a multi-scale architecture (Sec. 3.3.2).
3.3.1 Adaptive Scaling Ratios
Dynamic resolution can be achieved by scaling features
with adaptive ratios. For example, a small sub-network is
ﬁrst executed to predict a scale distribution of faces on the
face detection task, then the input images are adaptively
zoomed, so that all the faces fall in a suitable range for
recognition [164]. A plug-in module is used by [165] to
predict the stride for the ﬁrst convolution block in each
ResNet stage, producing features with dynamic resolution.
3.3.2 Dynamic Resolution in Multi-scale Architectures
An alternative approach to achieving dynamic resolution
is building multiple sub-networks in a parallel [166] or
cascading [32] way. These sub-networks with different fea-
ture resolutions are selectively activated conditioned on