(a) Inception Scores [ 34] (IS) and Fréchet Inception
Distance scores (FID) [13].
(b) Precision - Recall metrics [32, 19].
Figure 7: Quantitative Evaluation of Diversity-Quality trade-off with FID/IS and Precision/Recall.
5.3.1 FID and Inception Score
The two most common metrics for comparing GANs are Inception Score [ 34] and Fréchet Inception
Distance (FID) [ 13]. Noting that there are several known drawbacks to these metrics [ 3,32,19],
we report our results in Fig. 7a. We use the classiﬁer-based rejection sampling for trading off
diversity with quality (Section 3.3). For VQ-V AE this improves both IS and FID scores, with the
FID going from roughly 30to10. For BigGan-deep the rejection sampling (referred to as critic)
works better than the truncation method proposed in the BigGAN paper [ 5]. We observe that the
inception classiﬁer is quite sensitive to event slightest blurriness or other perturbations introduced in
the VQ-V AE reconstructions, as shown by an FID 10instead of2when simply compressing
the originals. We therefore also compute the FID between VQ-V AE samples and the reconstructions
(which we denote as FID*) showing that the inception network statistics are much closer to real
images data than what the FID would otherwise suggest.
6 Conclusion
We propose a simple method for generating diverse high resolution images using VQ-V AE with
a powerful autoregressive model as prior. Our encoder and decoder architectures are kept simple
and light-weight as in the original VQ-V AE, with the only difference that we use a hierarchical
multi-scale latent maps for increased resolution. The ﬁdelity of our best class conditional samples
are competitive with the state of the art Generative Adversarial Networks, with broader diversity
in several classes, contrasting our method against the known limitations of GANs. Still, concrete
measures of sample quality and diversity are in their infancy, and visual inspection is still necessary.
Lastly, we believe our experiments vindicate autoregressive modeling in the latent space as a simple
and effective objective for learning large scale generative models.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Suman Ravuri, Jeff Donahue, Sander Dieleman, Jeffrey Defauw, Danilo J.
Rezende, Karen Simonyan and Andy Brock for their help and feedback.
9