Train NLL Validation NLL Train MSE Validation MSE
Top prior 3:40 3 :41 - -
Bottom prior 3:45 3 :45 - -
VQ Decoder - - 0.0047 0.0050
Table 1: Train and validation negative log-likelihood (NLL) for top and bottom prior measured by
encoding train and validation set resp., as well as Mean Squared Error for train and validation set.
The small difference in both NLL and MSE suggests that neither the prior network nor the VQ-V AE
overﬁt.
4in Fig. 5. As can be seen in these side-by-side comparisons, VQ-V AE is able to provide samples of
comparable ﬁdelity and higher diversity.
5.1 Modeling High-Resolution Face Images
To further assess the effectiveness of our multi-scale approach for capturing extremely long range
dependencies in the data, we train a three level hierarchical model over the FFHQ dataset [ 15]
at10241024 resolution. This dataset consists of 70000 high-quality human portraits with a
considerable diversity in gender, skin colour, age, poses and attires. Although modeling faces is
generally considered less difﬁcult compared to ImageNet, at such a high resolution there are also
unique modeling challenges that can probe generative models in interesting ways. For example, the
symmetries that exist in faces require models capable of capturing long range dependencies: a model
with restricted receptive ﬁeld may choose plausible colours for each eye separately, but can miss
the strong correlation between the two eyes that lie several hundred pixels apart from one another,
yielding samples with mismatching eye colours.
5.2 Quantitative Evaluation
In this section, we report the results of our quantitative evaluations based on several metrics aiming
to measure the quality as well as diversity of our samples.
5.2.1 Negative Log-Likelihood and Reconstruction Error
One of the chief motivations to use likelihood based generative models is that negative log likelihood
(NLL) on the test and training sets give an objective measure for generalization and allow us to
monitor for over-ﬁtting. We emphasize that other commonly used performance metrics such as FID
and Inception Score completely ignore the issue of generalization; a model that simply memorizes the
training data can obtain a perfect score on these metrics. The same issue also applies to some recently
proposed metrics such as Precision-Recall [ 32,19] and Classiﬁcation Accuracy Scores [ 28]. These
sample-based metrics only provide a proxy for the quality and diversity of samples, but are oblivious
to generalization to held-out images. Note that the NLL values for our top and bottom priors, reported
in Fig. 1, are close for training and validation, indicating that neither of these networks overﬁt. We
note that these NLL values are only comparable between prior models that use the same pretrained
VQ-V AE encoder and decoder.
5.2.2 Precision - Recall Metric
Precision and Recall metrics are proposed as an alternative to FID and Inception score for evaluating
the performance of GANs [ 32,19]. These metrics aim to explicitly quantify the trade off between
coverage (recall) and quality (precision). We compare samples from our model to those obtained
from BigGAN- deep using the improved version of precision-recall with the same procedure outlined
in [19] for all 1000 classes in ImageNet. Fig. 7b shows the Precision-Recall results for VQ-V AE and
BigGan with the classiﬁer based rejection sampling (’critic’, see section 3.3) for various rejection
rates and the BigGan-deep results for different levels of truncation. VQ-V AE results in slightly lower
levels of precision, but higher values for recall.
4Samples are taken from BigGAN’s colab notebook in TensorFlow hub:
https://tfhub.dev/deepmind/biggan-deep-256/1
6