hierarchy to separately depend on pixels, which encourages encoding complementary information in
each latent map that can contribute to reducing the reconstruction error in the decoder.
For256256images, we use a two level latent hierarchy. As depicted in Fig. 2a, the encoder
network ﬁrst transforms and downsamples the image by a factor of 4to a6464representation
which is quantized to our bottom level latent map. Another stack of residual blocks then further
scales down the representations by a factor of two, yielding a top-level 3232latent map after
quantization. The decoder is similarly a feed-forward network that takes as input all levels of the
quantized latent hierarchy. It consists of a few residual blocks followed by a number of strided
transposed convolutions to upsample the representations back to the original image size.
3.2 Stage 2: Learning Priors over Latent Codes
In order to further compress the image, and to be able to sample from the model learned during
stage 1, we learn a prior over the latent codes. Fitting prior distributions using neural networks from
training data has become common practice, as it can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of latent
variable models [ 6]. This procedure also reduces the gap between the marginal posterior and the
prior. Thus, latent variables sampled from the learned prior at test time are close to what the decoder
network has observed during training which results in more coherent outputs. From an information
theoretic point of view, the process of ﬁtting a prior to the learned posterior can be considered as
lossless compression of the latent space by re-encoding the latent variables with a distribution that
is a better approximation of their true distribution, and thus results in bit rates closer to Shannon’s
entropy. Therefore the lower the gap between the true entropy and the negative log-likelihood of the
learned prior, the more realistic image samples one can expect from decoding the latent samples.
In the VQ-V AE framework, this auxiliary prior is modeled with a powerful, autoregressive neural
network such as PixelCNN in a post-hoc, second stage. The prior over the top latent map is responsible
for structural global information. Thus, we equip it with multi-headed self-attention layers as in
[7,26] so it can beneﬁt from a larger receptive ﬁeld to capture correlations in spatial locations that
are far apart in the image. In contrast, the conditional prior model for the bottom level over latents
that encode local information will operate at a larger resolution. Using self-attention layers as in the
top-level prior would not be practical due to memory constraints. For this prior over local information,
we thus ﬁnd that using large conditioning stacks (coming from the top prior) yields good performance
(see Fig. 2b). The hierarchical factorization also allows us to train larger models: we train each prior
separately, thereby leveraging all the available compute and memory on hardware accelerators. Please
refer to Appendix A for the details of the architecture and hyperparameters.
3.3 Trading off Diversity with Classiﬁer Based Rejection Sampling
Unlike GANs, probabilistic models trained with the maximum likelihood objective are forced to
model allof the training data distribution. This is because the MLE objective can be expressed as the
forward KL-divergence between the data and model distributions, which would be driven to inﬁnity
if an example in the training data is assigned zero mass. While the coverage of all modes in the data
distribution is an appealing property of these models, the task is considerably more difﬁcult than
htop htop;hmiddle htop;hmiddle;hbottom Original
Figure 3: Reconstructions from a hierarchical VQ-V AE with three latent maps (top, middle, bottom).
The rightmost image is the original. Each latent map adds extra detail to the reconstruction. These
latent maps are approximately 3072x, 768x, 192x times smaller than the original image (respectively).
4