optimal hierarchies, which map to optimal policies that are able to generalize
to the distribution of all related tasks [63].
Parallel to these developments in cognitive science, advancements in AI and
deep learning have leveraged the ability to train powerful models on large quan-
tities of structured data to learn these eﬃcient representations and learning
mechanisms end-to-end [50, 70, 56, 75, 25, 1, 72, 23, 45]. In the supervised
case, it can be shown that a neural network training on an environment of
related tasks is equivalent to performing hierarchical Bayesian inference, i.e.
learning an appropriate prior (or hypothesis space H) such that the error for
learning on new related tasks is minimized [5]. This correspondence has also
been demonstrated to hold for a popular meta-learning method, model-agnostic
meta-learning [28], in which what is meta-learned are the initial parameters of
the neural network, constituting the learned prior. Similarly, memory-based
meta-learning approaches [56, 72, 23, 45] meta-learn the weights of a recurrent
neural network, such that the time-dependent evolution of the activity dynamics
eﬀectively tracks suﬃcient statistics of the current task and performs Bayesian
updating in a way close to Bayes optimal (given suﬃcient training) [49].
Taking this perspective further, we can see that, at least in the context of
reinforcement learning, there is little distinction between the fastest inner scale
of learning (which integrates incoming information with a learned, structured
prior) and latent state inference for decision-making or cognitive control. An
account for how this process could occur in the brain was put forth by Naka-
hara et al [47], which posited that dopamine encodes more than just reward
prediction error, and actually mediates learning more complex reward structure
via a learned internal state representation. Further, [21] suggested that PFC
performs online Bayesian inference combined with hypothesis testing to quickly
reason over potential strategies which have been learned and stored in memory.
Such proposals make contact with a particular subclass of meta-learning models
in AI based on episodic memory, in which memory banks of past experiences
are incorporated as part of the meta-learning process [56, 53, 73].
4 Bridging between AI and neuroscience: New
questions and future directions
We’ve seen that the multi-scale nature of learning in nature maps well to the
framework of meta-learning, as implemented in AI. These points of connection
allow us to deﬁne new potentially fruitful avenues of research. At the same
time, it is important to note the fundamentally diﬀerent goals of neuroscience
compared to AI research. Animal intelligence is already rife with practically
useful mental models. Therefore, the driving force of neuroscience is to discover
what already exists ; that is, the representations already acquired by animals and
themechanismsforcontroloversuchrepresentations, strategies, knowledge, and
subsequent impacts on new learning.
In contrast, the end goal of AI is to engineer a learning system from scratch.
6