Deep neural networks are typically initialized with random weights and pos-
sess very weak inductive biases [12]. Therefore, there has been a recognized
need foreither directly hand-designingalgorithmic/architecturalbiases or learn-
ing inductive biases to improve learning. Although the former has been quite
successful in achieving state-of-the-art results in various domains, the vast im-
provements in available training data in recent years have also led to a renewed
interestininducingmodelstolearntheseinductivebiasesthroughmeta-learning
approaches. This has inevitably shifted the engineering problem one layer of ab-
straction, from how to construct a model that learns to how to construct a model
of learning itself . It is in this aspect that cognitive science and neuroscience are
well-positioned to oﬀer unique insights to the AI community.
Recent work has already demonstrated how the two can be fruitfully com-
bined, showing that deep reinforcement learning models can capture meta-
learning eﬀects similar to how animals learn and in accordance with previous
neural ﬁndings [71]. In a nice demonstration of the "virtuous circle" between
AI and neuroscience put forth by Hassabis et al [31], these advances have led to
resurgent interest in meta-learning within neuroscience, for instance in extend-
ing meta-learning to more biologically plausible spiking networks and forms of
weight updating [8, 9]. More generally, we are witnessing in the last few years
great interest in incorporating deep neural networks as models of biological
learning [32, 16, 51, 42, 13, 52], sensory processing [76, 35], or even simultane-
ously ﬁtted decison-making behavior and neural activity [20].
Structure learning [26] and model-building are likely to be increasingly im-
portant in artiﬁcial agent construction, and it’s in this area that neuroscience
has the potential to oﬀer even more valuable insights. This highlights the need
to focus on discovering the processes of structure learning, rather than the struc-
tured representations themselves. Furthermore, this perspective has strong im-
plications for task design, emphasizing recording and measuring neural signals
during the training process itself rather than current practices of focusing on
already trained animals. Additionally, it points to a need for more precise de-
termination of existing priors and biases that animals already possess and how
these priors interact with new learning in everyday, complex settings.
5 Highlights
•Multiple scales of learning (and hence meta-learning) are ubiquitous in
nature.
•Many existing lines of work in neuroscience and cognitive science touch
upon diﬀerent aspects of meta-learning, of which we outline three in par-
ticular.
•The distinct but complementary goals of AI and neuroscience point to new
points of possible contact, among which meta-learning is well-positioned.
7