needing to hand-tune. Indeed, the momentum has increasingly shifted toward
meta-learning more and more aspects of the learning process in recent years
[78].
3.2 Meta-learning over representations
Some research lines within neuroscience broadly related to meta-learning are
those of learning control over existing representations. In particular, mental
schemas [67] are described as structured mental representations that allow for
faster learning, by aiding in retrieval of existing knowledge and integrating new
knowledge (see also [68] for a good review). Such processes are suggested to
be mediated by hippocampal-cortical interactions and a speciﬁc time course of
memory consolidation [67]. In general, the focus of these works center on how
existing mental schemas aﬀect new learning, rather than the learning process
giving rise to the schema in the ﬁrst place, and thus can be subsumed within
the broader scope of meta-learning. Another relevant line of research is that on
hierarchical representation and cognitive control (the ability to perform task-
relevant processing without external support or in the face of distractors) [38],
and a particularly compelling set of works proposing hierarchical organization
of prefrontal cortex along the rostro-caudal axis to support increasingly abstract
levelsofcognitivecontrol[37,2,3]. Suchahierarchicallystructuredorganization
is intriguingly suggestive of the multi-scaled nature of meta-learning systems.
Less explored in this area is how such hierarchical representations emerge
in the ﬁrst place. To examine this, it’s helpful to turn to developmental neuro-
science, which shows that infants can learn latent structure to construct hier-
archical rules [74] and extract statistical regularity from language [55]. Human
adults also learn new structure, and indeed have a bias toward structure learn-
ing [26], even when not strictly needed [17], since such structure aﬀords faster
learning and generalization in as-yet unseen situations. This work ties together
hierarchical structure learning and previous proposed theories of basal ganglia-
PFC gating models of working memory [48, 54]. Computational accounts have
also been put forth that show hierarchical control can emerge implicitly, as a
function of training on task distributions for which the optimal policy assumes
this hierarchical form [11], essentially allowing for optimal learning eﬃciency on
new problems drawn from this distribution.
3.3 Meta-learning as latent state and Bayesian inference
Humanrepresentationlearningandinferenceisincreasinglycharacterizedthrough
a Bayesian lens, and is seen to be key to fast human learning. Lake and col-
leagues proposed an inﬂuential Bayesian framework of learning probabilistic
programs, which is able to model how humans acquire new concepts from just
a few examples [39]. Such a model meta-learns by developing structured, hi-
erarchical priors, in which previous experience with similar tasks induce the
formation of concepts that improve learning of new concepts. Humans have
also been shown to perform tasks by subdividing and decomposing them into
5