scaﬀold new knowledge via spatial and relational conﬁgurations has been found
to be useful for learning even nonspatial conceptual representations in humans
[6, 18].
Innate learning does not have to be present from birth, but rather can be
expressed in relatively stereotyped and predictable trajectories throughout early
development. According to Alison Gopnik’s theory theory [27], human children
tend to formulate increasingly complex theories and ways of testing their hy-
potheses in a relatively predetermined way. Building on this, Elizabeth Spelke
posited a core body of knowledge (i.e. object representation, agency, etc.) upon
which all other understanding is built, which is present from very early life [65]
(see also [40] for a comprehensive review on these topics). That such core knowl-
edge and set developmental trajectories are so conserved indicates their value
in building foundational knowledge and skills vital for higher order cognition in
humans.
Within a single lifetime, we can see evidence of meta-learning in various
animal paradigms of cognition. In one of the ﬁrst experimental studies of learn-
ing to learn, monkeys were challenged to learn an abstract rule for object-role
bindings [30]. Two new objects were presented every six trials, only one of
which was rewarding, irrespective of object placement. The optimal policy was
to choose randomly on the ﬁrst trial, and then thereafter choose based on the
reward outcome of that trial, i.e. perform one-shot learning. Monkeys were able
to learn this policy only after an extended period of learning and many sets of
new objects.
Humans tend to meta-learn to much greater extent and at greater levels of
abstraction and nesting. For instance, we can perform meta-cognition in order
tomonitorandimproveourownlearningprogress[44], aswellasmeta-reasoning
to perform decision-making given ﬁnite computational resources and time [29].
Learning to learn also has roots within educational psychology and theories of
classroom learning and how children learn [14, 27]. Within cognitive science,
hierarchical Bayesian models of cognition capture how learning can occur at
multiple scales and via the acquisition of useful, structured priors [26, 39]. This
closely parallels the general formulation of meta-learning, and in fact constitutes
an exact equivalence for certain forms of meta-learning in AI [28].
3 Neuroscience of meta-learning
While there has been a robust history of meta-learning within the psychological
and cognitive sciences, the ties between meta-learning and neuroscience are
relatively newer. In this section, I detail several lines of research with direct
relevance to meta-learning, and draw ties to corresponding work in AI.
3.1 Meta-learning as learning of meta-parameters
Perhaps one of the most straightforward implementations of meta-learning is to
learn the parameters of the learning algorithm itself (for instance, the learning
3