everything from methods for meta-learning the initial weights of the network
[25], the weight update rule itself [50, 1], or some nonparametric representation
of the inputs that is easier to classify [70, 62]; to deriving an implicit learning
algorithm from a black-box recurrent neural network [72, 23, 56] (see [69] for a
comprehensive review).
On the other hand, the idea of "learning to learn" originated within the
psychological sciences many decades prior [30], and focused on one or few-shot
learning of learning sets and educational theory [15]. Given the rapid pace of
progress, it’s illustrative to examine how diﬀerent lines of work in psychology,
cognitive science, and neuroscience ﬁt within the meta-learning perspective as
understood currently in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). This review aims to demon-
strate that meta-learning is prevalent in nature, being naturally multi-scaled,
and examines past work centered on the points of interaction between neuro-
science and incipient research on meta-learning in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence. I then suggest interesting new questions and avenues of research that
naturally arise under this framework.
2 The scales of meta-learning: across and within
lifetimes
Biological learning, at its fundamental level, is the ability of an organism to
represent and adapt to changes and challenges presented to it by the external
environment. This adaptation is typically in pursuit of a speciﬁc drive or goal,
such as survival or reproduction. The challenges that one can face in everyday
life are widely varying in scope and duration. Accordingly, there exists a range
of learning mechanisms that span these diﬀerent timescales.
There are not only diﬀerent scales of learning, they are also often nested,
such that learning occurring at a longer timescale drives more eﬃcient learning
at shorter timescales (see Fig. 1). One of the most interesting examples of this is
known as the Baldwin eﬀect [4], whereby phenotypic expression of fast adaption
and learning creates positive selection pressure, allowing for indirect selection
of the genetic basis for these traits to be passed on to future generations. That
faster learning can be selected for by evolution was compellingly demonstrated
in simulation by Hinton and Nowlan [33]1. In this way, innate (evolutionar-
ily pre-programmed) or developmentally predetermined behaviors interact with
learned behaviors and representations [77]. For example, the propensity to form
place cells (or neurons that tend to ﬁre when only in one particular place in an
environment) is innate, while the speciﬁc content of these spatial representa-
tions in any given environment is learned. The ability to form place cells (and
closely related grid cells) thus presumably arose from the beneﬁts conferred by
ﬂexibly and quickly representing one’s spatial location, which allowed for the
evolutionary selection of this innate process. Indeed, the ability to organize and
1Interestingly, one of the most popular meta-learning approaches, Model-Agnostic Meta-
Learning [25] has been proposed to be closely related to the Baldwin eﬀect [24].
2