Meta-learning in natural and artiﬁcial
intelligence
Jane X. Wang
November 30, 2020
Abstract
Meta-learning, or learning to learn, has gained renewed interest in
recent years within the artiﬁcial intelligence community. However, meta-
learning is incredibly prevalent within nature, has deep roots in cognitive
science and psychology, and is currently studied in various forms within
neuroscience. The aim of this review is to recast previous lines of research
in the study of biological intelligence within the lens of meta-learning,
placing these works into a common framework. More recent points of
interaction between AI and neuroscience will be discussed, as well as in-
teresting new directions that arise under this perspective.
1 Introduction
Humans are remarkable for continuously learning throughout the entirety of
their lives, from acquiring physical reasoning and language skills at a young
age [64, 43], to the ability to reason about the detailed complexities inherent in
everydayadultlife. Onekeyqualityofthislearningisthatithappensatmultiple
scales, both in terms of time and abstraction, in a process termed meta-learning
orlearning to learn . The fundamental principle of meta-learning is that learning
proceeds faster with more experience, via the acquisition of inductive biases or
knowledge that allows for more eﬃcient learning in the future [66, 59, 57].
These favorable properties of meta-learning have recently gained it consider-
able renewed interest within the deep learning/artiﬁcial intelligence community.
Despitetheirtremendoussuccessesinrecentyears[46,61],deeplearningsystems
still require many orders of magnitude of data than humans [40, 12]. Although
earlywork demonstratedthefeasibility forneuralnetworks todiscover theirown
learning rules [10, 58], it was only recently that the ﬁeld has experienced a resur-
gence of new research in meta-learning using deep neural networks. This has
demonstrated the wide-ranging potential of neural networks to meta-learn all
aspects of the learning process. Deep neural networks are typically trained via
backpropagation, which adjusts the weights of the neural network so that given
asetofinputdata, thenetworkoutputsmatchsomedesiredtargetoutputs(e.g.,
classiﬁcation labels). Popular meta-learning techniques have therefore spanned
1arXiv:2011.13464v1  [cs.AI]  26 Nov 2020