Learning loopPriors/biases from higher
level of learningLearning highly invariant priors 
and universal structure (e.g. via evolution):
motor primitives, intuitive physics, etc.
Learning general structure of tasks,
can be done in a lifetime: 
video game playing, navigation, etc.
Learning to do a single task: 
play a game, find a location, etc.Figure 1: Multiple nested scales of learning in nature. At the highest level,
learning is done across generations, via evolution, to learn highly invariant uni-
versal structure such as intuitive physics, motor primitives, or other kinds of
"core knowledge" [65]. These priors help to make learning faster at the level
below, where learning is done within a lifetime and involves learning the gen-
eral structure of diﬀerent tasks, such as video game playing, how to navigate
around a city, or acquiring speciﬁc skills. Learning at the innermost level in-
volves fast adaptation within a speciﬁc task, such as playing a new video game
or ﬁnding a certain restaurant within a new city. Again, such fast adaptation is
crucially dependent on having learned useful priors and inductive biases at the
level above.
rate or discount factor; also called "hyper-" or "meta-parameters"). A notable
early account of biological meta-learning proposed that various neuromodula-
tors such as dopamine, serotonin, and noradrenaline played critical roles in the
regulation of the meta-parameters of reinforcement learning [22, 60]. Relatedly,
activity within anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) has been shown to track recent
volatility and uncertainty to drive learning rate changes in a Bayesian manner
[7], and ACC further was proposed to play a central role in dynamically regu-
lating the trade-oﬀ between exploration and exploitation during reward-based
task learning [36]. The ACC and certain areas of prefrontal cortex (PFC) have
also been suggested to function as a meta-controller dynamically arbitrating
between model-free and model-based learning systems [41] (see also [19]).
Learning of meta-parameters has already been popularized within machine
learning, due to its practical beneﬁts on performance (e.g. [34, 75]), and lack of
4