These strategies were applied to classify the virus presented
in Table II, with 80% of the sequences ( 1280 sequences) for
training and 20% (320 sequences) for validation. The ratio
(80% : 20% ) was maintained for each class. These training
experiments used mini-batches of size 64, and 35epochs.
Figures 13 and 14 show the density of all CNN weights,
C(n), versus validation accuracy for several values of weights-
size (and
), and NOPs (and 
), respectively. The density was
calculated as the number of the non-zero weights (in all layers)
over the number of weights (in all layers).
Fig. 13: Overall validation accuracy (for classes presented in
Table II) as a function of density of the CNN weights, C(n),
for several values of weights-size (and 
), with the density
being the fraction of nonzero weights in W(n)remaining.
Lower densities mean more aggressive model compression.
We note that Q!Piteration achieves higher accuracy than
P!Qiteration at similar densities.
Fig. 14: Overall validation accuracy (for classes presented in
Table II) as a function of density of the CNN weights, C(n),
for several values of NOPs (and 
).
As presented in ﬁgures 13 and 14, the value of the cut-off
thresholdk(or
) impacts in the density reduction. Note that
Q!Piteration compression can maintain the accuracy above
99% to low density values ( <20%), compared to the P!
Qiteration strategy. As illustrated in the graphs presented in
Figures 13 and 14, the Q!Piteration strategy, as opposed
toP!Qiteration, can maintain the accuracy above 99% for
a pruning cut-off threshold with 
= 1:5.Figures 15 and 16 show the CNN weights-size (in Mbits),
and the CNN NOPs bitwidth (in GbOPs) versus validation
accuracy for several values of CNN weights density C(n),
respectively. The graphs illustrated in Figures 15 and 16
show that the accuracy can be maintained even under severe
compression.
Fig. 15: Overall validation accuracy (for classes presented in
Table II) as a function of CNN weights-size (in Mbits), for
several values of CNN weights density C(n).
Fig. 16: Overall validation accuracy (for classes presented in
Table II) as a function of NOPs bitwidth (in GbOPs), for
several values of CNN weights density C(n).
Figures 17, 18 and 19 show the curves of the density (in %),
weights-size (in Mbps), and NOPs (in GbOPs) as a function
of pruning cut-off threshold ( k=
k), just for accuracy
above 99%.Q!Piteration archives the higher compression
thanP!Qiteration. Table V presents a summary of the
results presented in Figures 17, 18 and 19.
Based on the values presented in Table V, the highest
compression for the P!Qiteration strategy is about 62:6%
for density and weights-size, and 54:3%for NOPs. For the
Q!Piteration strategy they are about 77:4%for density and
weights-size, and 58:4%for NOPs. The difference between
weights-size and NOPs reﬂects the architecture of the DNN
(number of convolutional and fully connected layers).
Regarding DL-based viral classiﬁers, Figure 20 shows the
confusion matrix for the results with the highest compression
Q!Piteration strategy. The result indicates that a signiﬁcant
reduction in DNN parameters (more than 77% forQ!P