(a) Weights before pruning.
 (b) Weights after pruning.
Fig. 8: Example of the weights compression by pruning
applied to the second layer, W2(n), of the baseline CNN
detailed in Table III ( k= 0:5k).
The diagram presented in Figure 9 illustrates P!Qiteration,
and Figures 10a, and 10b show an example of the weights of
the second layer, W2(n), of the baseline CNN detailed in
Table III. The weights are presented before and after P!Q
iteration, respectively.
Forward
Weight updateQuantization Pruning
Gradient
Fig. 9: Pruning followed by quantization iteration, P!Q
iteration, architecture.
(a) Weights before P!Qitera-
tion.
(b) Weights after P!Qitera-
tion.
Fig. 10: Example of the weights compression by P!Q
iteration applied to the second layer, W2(n), of the baseline
CNN detailed in Table III. We assume, k= 0:5kand
b= 5 (M= 31 ).
E. Proposed quantization followed by pruning iteration ( Q!
Piteration)
Figure 11 shows the quantization followed by pruning
iteration,Q!Piteration, architecture proposed in this work.
In each mini-batch, a copy of weight values is quantized using
Equation 1, and this information is passed to the forward
stage (see Figure 11). Based on the error metric (loss), E0(n),
the new gradient, G0(n), is computed and sent to the weight
update stage.
Forward
Weight update
Pruning
Weight updateQuantization
ForwardGradient
GradientFig. 11: Quantization followed by pruning iteration, Q!P
iteration, architecture.
After quantization, the quantized weight values are pruned
using Equation 3 and a new gradient, G(n), is calculated in
the same mini-batch. The new gradient, G(n), is computed
using the new error metric (loss), E(n). TheQ!Piteration
weights values sent to the forward stage for k-th layer can be
expressed as
Ck(n) =P(Q(Wk(n);qk);k): (6)
With the new gradient, G(n), the weights are updated again
in the same mini-batch. Figures 12a and 12b show an example
of the weights compression, Q!Piteration, of the second
layer,W2(n), of the baseline CNN detailed in Table III. The
weights are presented before and after Q!Piteration with
pruning cut-off threshold, k= 0:5k, andb= 5(M= 31 ).
(a) Weights before Q!Pitera-
tion.
(b) Weights after Q!Pitera-
tion.
Fig. 12: Example of the weights compression by Q!P
iteration applied to the second layer, W2(n), of the baseline
CNN detailed in Table III. We assume, k= 0:5kand
b= 5 (M= 31 ).
V. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In order to show the advantages of the quantization followed
by pruning in viral classiﬁcation, we demonstrate several
results with b= 8 bits quantization ( M= 254 ) for different
values of cut-off threshold, k, wherek=
kfor some
parameter
. Use of a larger 
means more aggressive pruning.
The results were collected using the CNN presented in Figure
3 and the training strategies illustrated in Figures 9, and 11
forP!Qiteration and Q!Piteration, respectively.