(b) N-pair (d) Proxy-NCAE
(e) Ours (c) Lifted Structure (a) Triplet
Figure 2. Comparison between popular metric learning losses and ours. Small nodes are embedding vectors of data in a batch, and black
ones indicate proxies; their different shapes represent distinct classes. The associations deﬁned by the losses are expressed by edges, and
thicker edges get larger gradients. Also, embedding vectors associated with the anchor are colored in red if they are of the same class of the
anchor ( i.e., positive) and in blue otherwise ( i.e., negative). (a) Triplet loss [ 25,32] associates each anchor with a positive and a negative
data point without considering their hardness. (b) N-pair loss [ 27] and (c) Lifted Structure loss [ 29] reﬂect hardness of data, but do not
utilize all data in the batch. (d) Proxy-NCA loss [ 21] cannot exploit data-to-data relations since it associates each data point only with
proxies. (e) Our loss handles entire data in the batch, and associates them with each proxy with consideration of their relative hardness
determined by data-to-data relations. See the text for more details.
complexity and enable faster convergence since the num-
ber of proxies is substantially smaller than that of training
data in general. Further, these losses tend to be more robust
against label noises and outliers. However, since they asso-
ciate each data point only with proxies, proxy-based losses
can leverage only data-to-proxy relations , which are impov-
erished compared to the rich data-to-data relations available
for pair-based losses.
In this paper, we propose a novel proxy-based loss called
Proxy-Anchor loss, which takes good points of both proxy-
based and pair-based losses while correcting their defects.
Unlike the existing proxy-based losses, the proposed loss
utilizes each proxy as an anchor and associates it with all
data in a batch. Speciﬁcally, for each proxy, the loss aims
to pull data of the same class close to the proxy and to push
others away in the embedding space. Due to the use of prox-
ies, our loss boosts the speed of convergence with no hyper-
parameter for tuple sampling, and is robust against noisy la-
bels and outliers. At the same time, it can take data-to-data
relations into account like pair-based losses; this property is
given by associating all data in a batch with each proxy so
that the gradients with respect to a data point are weighted
by its relative proximity to the proxy ( i.e., relative hard-
ness) affected by the other data in the batch. Thanks to the
above advantages, a standard embedding network trained
with our loss achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and most
quickly converges as shown in Figure 1. The contribution
of this paper is three-fold:
•We propose a novel metric learning loss that takes ad-
vantages of both pair-based and proxy-based methods; it
leverages rich data-to-data relations and enables fast and
reliable convergence.
•A standard embedding network trained with our loss
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the four public
benchmarks for metric learning [ 17,19,29,36].
•Our loss speeds up convergence greatly without carefuldata sampling; its convergence is even faster than those
of Proxy-NCA [ 21] and Multi-Similarity loss [ 34].
2. Related Work
In this section, we categorize metric learning losses into
two classes, pair-based and proxy-based losses, then review
relevant methods for each category.
2.1. Pair­based Losses
Contrastive loss [ 2,4,9] and Triplet loss [ 25,32] are
seminal examples of loss functions for deep metric learning.
Contrastive loss takes a pair of embedding vectors as input,
and aims to pull them together if they are of the same class
and push them apart otherwise. Triplet loss considers a data
point as an anchor, associates it with a positive and a neg-
ative data point, and constrains the distance of the anchor-
positive pair to be smaller than that of the anchor-negative
pair in the embedding space as illustrated in Figure 2(a).
Recent pair-based losses aim to leverage higher order re-
lations between data and reﬂect their hardness for further
enhancement. As generalizations of Triplet loss, N-pair
loss [ 27] and Lifted Structure loss [ 29] associate an anchor
with a single positive and multiple negative data points, and
pull the positive to the anchor and push the negatives away
from the anchor while considering their hardness. As shown
in Figure 2(b) and 2(c), however, these losses do not utilize
entire data in a batch since they sample the same number
of data per negative class, thus may drop informative ex-
amples during training. In contrast, Ranked List loss [ 35]
takes into account all positive and negative data in a batch
and aims to separate the positive and negative sets. Multi-
Similarity loss [ 34] also considers every pair of data in a
batch, and assigns a weight to each pair according to three
complementary types of similarity to focus more on useful
pairs for improving performance and convergence speed.
3239