Case of Positive Examples3 E3W
3 E3W3 E3W
33W
E
(a) Proxy-NCA (b) Proxy-AnchorCase of Negative Examples3 E3W3 E3W3W
E33
E 3W
(c) Proxy-NCA (d) Proxy-Anchor
Figure 3. Differences between Proxy-NCA and Proxy-Anchor in handling proxies and embedding vectors during training. Each proxy
is colored in black and three different colors indicate distinct classes. The associations deﬁned by the losses are expressed by edges, and
thicker edges get larger gradients. (a) Gradients of Proxy-NCA loss with respect to positive examples have the same scale regardless of
their hardness. (b) Proxy-Anchor loss dynamically determines gradient scales regarding relative hardness of all positive examples so as
to pull harder positives more strongly. (c) In Proxy-NCA, each negative example is pushed only by a small number of proxies without
considering the distribution of embedding vectors in ﬁne details. (d) Proxy-Anchor loss considers the distribution of embedding vectors in
more details as it has all negative examples affect each other in their gradients.
class, respectively. Uis 1 thus ignored in most of proxy-
based losses including ours, but is nontrivial for those man-
aging multiple proxies per class such as SoftTriple loss [ 23].
Table 1compares the training complexity of our loss
with those of popular pair- and proxy-based losses. The
complexity of our loss is O(MC)since it compares every
proxy with all positive or all negative examples in a batch.
More speciﬁcally, in Eq. ( 4), the complexity of the ﬁrst sum-
mation is O(MC)and that of the second summation is also
O(MC), hence the total training complexity is O(MC).
The complexity of Proxy-NCA [ 21] is alsoO(MC)since
each data point is associated with one positive proxy and
C−1negative proxies as can be seen in Eq. ( 2). On the
other hand, SoftTriple loss [ 23], a modiﬁcation of SoftMax
using multiple proxies per class, associates each data point
withUpositive proxies and U(C−1)negative proxies. The
total training complexity of this loss is thus O(MCU2). In
conclusion, the complexity of our loss is the same with or
even lower than that of other proxy-based losses.
The training complexity of pair-based losses is higher
than that of proxy-based ones. Since Contrastive loss [ 2,
4,9] takes a pair of data as input, its training complexity
isO(M2). On the other hand, Triplet loss that examines
triplets of data has complexity O(M3), which can be re-
duced by triplet mining strategies. For example, semi-hard
mining [ 25] reduces the complexity to O(M3/B2)by se-
lecting negative pairs that are located within a neighbor-
hood of anchor but sufﬁciently far from it. Similarly, Smart
mining [ 10] lowers the complexity to O(M2)by samplingType Loss Training Complexity
ProxyProxy-Anchor (Ours) O(MC)
Proxy-NCA [ 21] O(MC)
SoftTriple [ 23] O(MCU2)
PairContrastive [ 2,4,9] O(M2)
Triplet (Semi-Hard) [ 25]O(M3/B2)
Triplet (Smart) [ 10] O(M2)
N-pair [ 27] O(M3)
Lifted Structure [ 29] O(M3)
Table 1. Comparison of training complexities.
hard triplets using an approximated nearest neighbor index.
However, even with these techniques, the training complex-
ity of Triplet loss is still high. Like Triplet loss, N-pair
loss [ 27] and Lifted Structure loss [ 29] that compare each
positive pair of data to multiple negative pairs also have
complexity O(M3). The training complexity of these losses
becomes prohibitively high as the number of training data
Mincreases, which slows down the speed of convergence
as demonstrated in Figure 1.
4. Experiments
In this section, our method is evaluated and compared to
current state-of-the-art on the four benchmark datasets for
deep metric learning [ 17,19,29,36]. We also investigate
the effect of hyperparameters and embedding dimensional-
ity of our loss to demonstrate its robustness.
3242