Pair-based losses enjoy rich and ﬁne-grained data-to-
data relations as they examine tuples ( i.e., data pairs or their
combinations) during training. However, since the number
of tuples increases polynomially with the number of train-
ing data, their training complexity is prohibitively high and
convergence is slow. In addition, a large amount of tuples
are not effective and sometimes even degrade the quality
of the learned embedding space [ 25,37]. To address this
issue, most pair-based losses entail tuple sampling tech-
niques [ 10,25,37,40] to select and utilize tuples that will
contribute to training. However, these techniques involve
hyperparameters that have to be tuned carefully, and may
increase the risk of overﬁtting since they rely mostly on lo-
cal pairwise relations within a batch. Another way to alle-
viating the complexity issue is to assign larger weights to
more useful pairs during training as in [ 34], which however
also incorporates a sampling technique.
Our loss resolves this complexity issue by adopting prox-
ies, which enables faster and more reliable convergence
compared to pair-based losses. Furthermore, it demands no
additional hyperparameter for tuple sampling.
2.2. Proxy­based Losses
Proxy-based metric learning is a relatively new approach
that can address the complexity issue of the pair-based
losses. A proxy means a representative of a subset of train-
ing data and is estimated as a part of the embedding net-
work parameters. The common idea of the methods in this
category is to infer a small set of proxies that capture the
global structure of an embedding space and relate each data
point with the proxies instead of the other data points dur-
ing training. Since the number of proxies is signiﬁcantly
smaller than that of training data, the training complexity
can be reduced substantially.
The ﬁrst proxy-based loss is Proxy-NCA [ 21], which
is an approximation of Neighborhood Component Analy-
sis (NCA) [ 8] using proxies. In its standard setting, Proxy-
NCA loss assigns a single proxy for each class, associates a
data point with proxies, and encourages the positive pair to
be close and negative pairs to be far apart, as illustrated in
Figure 2(d). SoftTriple loss [ 23], an extension of SoftMax
loss for classiﬁcation, is similar to Proxy-NCA yet assigns
multiple proxies to each class to reﬂect intra-class variance.
Manifold Proxy loss [ 1] is an extension of N-pair loss us-
ing proxies, and improves the performance by adopting a
manifold-aware distance instead of Euclidean distance to
measure the semantic distance in the embedding space.
Using proxies in these losses helps improve training con-
vergence greatly, but has an inherent limitation as a side
effect: Since each data point is associated only with prox-
ies, the rich data-to-data relations that are available for the
pair-based methods are not accessible anymore. Our loss
can overcome this limitation since its gradients reﬂect rela-tive hardness of data and allow their embedding vectors to
interact with each other during training.
3. Our Method
We propose a new metric learning loss called Proxy-
Anchor loss to overcome the inherent limitations of the pre-
vious methods. The loss employs proxies that enable fast
and reliable convergence as in proxy-based losses. Also,
although it is built upon data-proxy relations, our loss can
utilize data-to-data relations during training like pair-based
losses since it enables embedding vectors of data points to
be affected by each other through its gradients. This prop-
erty of our loss improves the quality of the learned embed-
ding space substantially.
In this section, we ﬁrst review Proxy-NCA loss [ 21],
a representative proxy-based loss, for comparison to our
Proxy-Anchor loss. We then describe our Proxy-Anchor
loss in detail and analyze its training complexity.
3.1. Review of Proxy­NCA Loss
In the standard setting, Proxy-NCA loss [ 21] assigns a
proxy to each class so that the number of proxies is the same
with that of class labels. Given an input data point as an
anchor, the proxy of the same class of the input is regarded
as positive and the other proxies are negative. Let xdenote
the embedding vector of the input, p+be the positive proxy,
andp−be a negative proxy. The loss is then given by
ℓ(X) =/summationdisplay
x∈X−loges(x,p+)
/summationdisplay
p−∈P−es(x,p−)(1)
=/summationdisplay
x∈X/braceleftBig
−s(x,p+)+ LSE
p−∈P−s(x,p−)/bracerightBig
,(2)
whereXis a batch of embedding vectors, P−is the set
of negative proxies, and s(·,·)denotes the cosine similarity
between two vectors. In addition, LSE in Eq. ( 2) means the
Log-Sum-Exp function, a smooth approximation to the max
function. The gradient of Proxy-NCA loss with respect to
s(x,p)is given by
∂ℓ(X)
∂s(x,p)=

−1, ifp=p+,
es(x,p)
/summationdisplay
p−∈P−es(x,p−),otherwise. (3)
Eq. ( 3) shows that minimizing the loss encourages xand
p+to be close to each other, and xandp−to be far away.
In particular, xandp+are pulled together by the constant
power, while xandp−closer to each other ( i.e., harder neg-
ative) are more strongly pushed away.
Proxy-NCA loss enables fast convergence thanks to its
low training complexity, O(MC)whereMis the number
3240