Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 22 of 28
Table 4. Major issues linked with the deployment of multi-path-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Highway NetworksBy introducing cross-layer connectivity, it
mitigates the constraints of deep networks.Because gates are data dependent, they may
become expensive.
Resent Use of identity-based skip connections to
provide cross-layer connectivity;
 Data independence and parameter-free
information ﬂow gates;
 Signal can be readily passed in both
directions, forward and backward. Many layers may offer very little or no
information;
 Redundant feature-maps may be re-learned.
DenseNet Introduced depth or cross-layer dimension;
 Ensures maximum data ﬂow between
network layers;
 Avoids relearning of redundant feature-maps;
 Both low and high level features are
accessible to decision layers. Signiﬁcant parameter increase due to an
increase in the number of feature-maps at
each layer.
Width-Based : Previously, it was considered that increasing the number of layers
would improve the accuracy. However, when the number of layers increases, the vanishing
gradient problem develops, and training may become slow. As a result, the concept of
layer widening was also examined. Table 5 describes major challenges in width based
CNN architecture.
Table 5. Major issues linked with the deployment of width-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Wide ResNet Demonstrates the usefulness of parallel transformation
utilization by expanding the breadth of ResNet while
decreasing its depth;
 Allows for feature reuse;
 Has demonstrated that dropouts between the
convolutional layer are more effective. There is a possibility of over-ﬁtting;
 There are more parameters than in thin deep
networks.
Pyramidal
Net Introduced the concept of progressively increasing the
width each unit;
 Avoids rapid information loss;
 Covers all feasible locations rather than retaining the
same dimension until the last unit. High spatial and time complexity;
 May become quite complex, if layers are
substantially increased.
Xception Introduced the concept that learning ﬁlters in 2D
followed by 1D are easier than learning ﬁlters in 3D
space;
 Introduced depth-wise separable convolution;
 Uses cardinality to discover good abstractions. Computational cost is high.
Inception Using varying size ﬁlters within the inception module
boosts the output of the intermediate layers;
 Using different size ﬁlters might help you to capture
the variation in high-detail photographs. Space and time complexity will increase.
ResNeXt Added cardinality to provide various transformations
at each layer;
 Homogeneous topology allows for easy parameter
customization. Computational cost is high.
Feature-Map Selection : As the deep learning topology is extended, an increasing
amount of features maps are generated at each step. Many of the feature-maps might be
important for the classiﬁcation task, whereas others might be redundant or less important.
Hence, feature-map selection is another important dimension in deep learning architectures.
Table 6 describes major challenges in feature map based CNN architecture.