Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 23 of 28
Table 6. Major issues linked with the deployment of feature-map-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Squeeze and Excitation Network It is a block-based concept;
 It introduced a generic block that,
due to its simplicity, can be simply
incorporated to any CNN model
 It squeezes fewer important
characteristics, and vice versa. In ResNet, the weight of each
channel is determined only by the
residual information.
Competitive Squeeze and Excitation
Networks Makes use of feature-map statistics
derived from both residual and
identity mapping-based features;
 Puts residual and identiﬁcation
feature-maps to the test. Doesn’t accompany the concept of
attention.
Channel Boosting : CNN learning is also dependent on the input representation. The
CNN performance may be hampered by a lack of diversity and class discernible information
in the input. To that end, the notion of channel boosting (input channel dimension) utilizing
auxiliary learners is introduced in CNN to improve the network’s representation [ 1].Table 7
describes major challenges in channel-boosting based CNN architecture.
Table 7. Major issues linked with the deployment of channel-boosting-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Channel Boosted CNN using Transfer
Learning It increases the number of input
channels to improve the network’s
representational capacity;
 Inductive transfer learning is
employed in an innovative
approach to generate a boosted
input representation for CNN. Increases in computational burden
may occur as a result of the creation
of auxiliary channels.
Attention-Based : There are many advantages of attention networks in determining
which patch is the focus or most essential in a picture. Table 8 describes major challenges
in attention based CNN architecture.
Table 8. Major issues linked with the deployment of attention-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Residual Attention Neural
Network Creates attention-aware feature-maps that are easy
to scale up because of residual learning;
 Provides distinct representations of the targeted
patches;
 Adds soft weights to features using bottom-up
top-down feed-forward attention. High complexity in model.
Convolutional Block Attention
Module CBAM is a generic building block for feed-forward
convolutional neural networks;
 Produces both a feature-map and spatial attention
in a sequential fashion.
 Channel attention maps assist in determining
where to focus one’s attention;
 Spatial attention aids in determining where to
focus;
 Improves the ﬂow of information;
 Employs both global average pooling and
maximum pooling at the same time. There are chances of a high
computational load.