Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 25 of 28
enhance hyper-parameters by conducting searches both at random and by directing
searches based on previous results (Khan et al., 2019);
 Deep and broad CNN poses a signiﬁcant difﬁculty in developing and executing them
on devices with limited resources;
 Pipeline parallelism can be utilized to scale up in-depth CNN training to overcome
hardware limitations. The Google group has presented GPipe, a distributed machine
learning library that includes a model parallelism option for training. Pipelining could
be utilized in the future to speed up the training of big models and scale performance
without having to tune hyper parameters;
 Cloud-based platforms’ promise in creating computationally expensive CNN applica-
tions is projected to be fully realized in the future. Cloud computing helps the user to
deal with large amounts of data and provides them with an exceptional computational
efﬁciency at a reasonable cost. Amazon, Microsoft, Google, and IBM, among others,
provide public cloud computing resources with superb scalability, speed, and ﬂexibil-
ity for training-resource-intensive CNN designs. Furthermore, the cloud environment
makes it simple for researchers and new practitioners to set up libraries;
 As CNN primarily uses image processing, implementing state-of-the-art CNN archi-
tectures on sequential data necessitates transforming 1D data to 2D data. The trend
of using 1D-CNNs for sequential data is being advocated because of their excellent
feature extraction capabilities and efﬁcient computations with a small number of
parameters [70];
 High-energy researchers at CERN have recently used CNN’s learning capabilities to
investigate particle collisions. The use of machine learning, speciﬁcally deep CNN, in
high-energy physics is projected to increase [70,71].
 Human activity recognition is trending research area in the ﬁeld of CNN. Refer-
ences [ 72,73] have described the various CNN variants for human activity and
pose recognition.
6. Conclusions
In the recent decade, convolutional neural networks have received much attention.
They have a large impact on image processing and vision-related tasks, which has piqued
academics’ curiosity. Many academics have carried out outstanding work in this area,
modifying the CNN design to improve its performance. Changes in activation func-
tions, developing or modifying loss functions, optimization, architectural innovations,
application-speciﬁc modiﬁcations in architecture, developing various learning algorithms,
and regularization are some of the categories in which researchers have made advance-
ments in CNN. This manuscript summarizes recent developments in CNN architectures.
The eight fundamental architectural advances in CNN are spatial exploitation, depth,
multi-path, breadth, dimension, feature-map exploitation, channel boosting, and attention.
It can be concluded by surveying various architectural modiﬁcations in CNN that CNN’s
block-based architecture supports modular learning, making the architecture more basic
and accessible. Another dimension-based category has a positive impact on CNN’s total
performance. Dimension-based CNN can also be used to recognize three-dimensional
objects. Training CNN for an exemplary performance in 3D object recognition is a promis-
ing and complicated research ﬁeld. Researchers in this area can still work on 3D object
recognition and NAS-based techniques. Modular or block-based architecture has shown
excellent optimization in both time and accuracy.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.B. and C.P .; methodology, D.B.; software, H.T.; vali-
dation, J.P ., R.V . and K.M.; formal analysis, S.P .; investigation, H.G.; resources, D.B.; data curation,
C.P .; writing—original draft preparation, D.B.; writing—review and editing, C.P .; visualization, H.T.;
supervision, K.M.; project administration, D.B.; funding acquisition, C.P . All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.