Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 21 of 28
Table 2. Major issues linked with the deployment of CNN architectures based on spatial exploitation.
Architecture Merits Demerits
LeNet Used spatial correlation to minimize computation and
parameter count;
 Feature hierarchies were automatically learned. Poor scaling to various picture classes;
 Large size ﬁlters;
 Low level feature extraction.
AlexNet Extraction of low, mid, and high-level features
utilizing large and small size ﬁlters on the initial (5 5
and 11 11) and ﬁnal layers (3 3);
 Introduced regularization in CNN to give a notion of
deep and extensive CNN architecture;
 Began using GPUs as an accelerator in parallel to deal
with complex architectures. Neurons in the ﬁrst and second layers that
are dormant;
 Aliasing artefacts in trained feature-maps as a
result of excessive ﬁlter size.
ZfNet Demonstrated parameter adjustment by seeing the
output of intermediary layers;
 Reduced the ﬁlter size and stride in AlexNet’s ﬁrst two
layers. Visualization needs additional information
processing.
VGG Proposed the concept of an effective receptive ﬁeld;
 Introduced the concept of simple and homogeneous
topology. The use of computationally costly fully
linked layers.
GoogleNet Presented the concept of utilizing multi-scale ﬁlters
within the layers;
 Introduced the concept of divide, transform, and
merge;
 Introduced the concept of divide, transform, and
merge;
 Used auxiliary classiﬁers to boost convergence rate. Difﬁcult parameter tuning owing to
heterogeneous topology;
 Due to a representational bottleneck, useful
information may be lost.
Depth-Based: The network can better approximate the target function using a number
of nonlinear mappings and enhanced feature representations as its depth increases. The
main hurdle that deep architectures face is the issue of vanishing gradients and negative
learning. Table 3 describes major challenges in depth based CNN architecture.
Table 3. Major issues linked with the deployment of depth-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Inception-V3 Asymmetric ﬁlters and a bottleneck layer were
used to reduce the computational cost of deep
systems. Architecture design is complex;
 Deﬁciency of homogeneity.
Highway
Networks Added a training method for deep neural
networks;
 Auxiliary connections were used in addition to
direct connections. Difﬁcult to implement parametric gating
mechanism.
Inception-ResNet The power of residual learning and the inception
block have been combined.
Inception-V4 Deep feature hierarchies, multilevel feature
representation. Learning is slow.
ResNet Reduced the error rate for deeper networks;
 Introduced the concept of residual learning;
 Mitigated the effect of the vanishing gradient
problem. A little complicated architecture;
 Degraded feature-map information in feed
forwarding;
 Over-adaption of hyper-parameters for
speciﬁc job owing to module stacking.
Multi-Path : Shortcut paths provide the option to skip some layers. Different types
of shortcut connections used in literature are zero padded, projection, dropout, 1 1
connections, etc. Table 4 describes major challenges in multi path based CNN architecture.