Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 14 of 28
that depicts a program’s workﬂow. It is commonly used in textbooks to teach coding
and illustrate applications. Furthermore, ﬂow charts are simple to use, allowing users to
concentrate on programming ideas rather than language intricacies [25].
MFRNet: (2021) (Multi-Level Feature Review Network)
This is a unique CNN architecture for video compression by performing in-loop
ﬁltering and post-processing. It has four multi-level feature review residual dense blocks
(MFRB) linked together in a cascade fashion. A multi-level residual learning framework
and dense collections are used for each MFRB, which collects features from multiple
convolutional layers. To optimize the information ﬂow between these blocks even further,
each reuses high-dimensional features provided by previous MFRB [26].
DDGD: Disentangled Dynamic Graph Deep Generation (2021)
This has demonstrated encouraging results in a variety of disciplines, including
chemical design and protein structure prediction. Existing research, however, has mostly
focused on static graphs. There is much less research carried out on dynamic graphs, which
are important in protein folding, chemical reactions, and human movement applications.
Encompassing existing deep generative models, from static to dynamic, is a difﬁcult
task that necessitates the factorization of static and dynamic features, as well as mutual
interactions between node and edge patterns. This study develops a novel framework of
factorized deep generative models for creating interpretable dynamic graphs [27].
YOLOv4 (2020)
The CNN accuracy is supposed to be improved through plenty of features. The practi-
cal testing of such feature combinations on large datasets is required, as is the theoretical
justiﬁcation of the results. Some aspects, such as batch normalization and residual con-
nections, are only appropriate to speciﬁc models and issues or to small-scale datasets, but
others are suitable to the broad majority of models, tasks, and datasets. To achieve cutting-
edge results, this paper employs novel features, such as cross-mini batch-normalization,
self-adversarial training, cross-stage partial connections, weighted residual connections,
Mish activation, DropBlock regularization, and Mosaic data augmentation, as well as
combining some of them [28].
Net2Vis (2021)
Appropriate visuals are critical for communicating neural network topologies in arti-
cles. While most contemporary deep learning publications include such visualizations, they
are typically constructed shortly before publication, resulting in a lack of standard visual
grammar, signiﬁcant time investment, inaccuracies, and ambiguities. Current automatic
network visualization techniques are designed to diagnose the network and are unsuitable
for creating published visuals. As a result, they have provided a method for automating
this process by converting Keras-speciﬁed network architectures into visualizations directly
inserted into any publication [29].
Sketch-R2CNN (2021)
Sketches in today’s large-scale datasets, such as the recently released QuickDraw
collection, are commonly kept in vector format, with strokes composed of consecutively
sampled points. In contrast, most recent sketch identiﬁcation systems rasterize vector
sketches as binary images before utilizing image classiﬁcation techniques. This paper
proposed a novel single branch network architecture to utilize vector of sketches for
recognition [30].
DeepThin (2021)
For automated car driving applications, a powerful and accurate trafﬁc sign detection
system is necessary. This study created a novel energy-efﬁcient thin but deep convolutional