Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 10 of 28
2.2.1. Spatial Exploitation-Based CNNs
There are many parameters in CNN, including biases, weights, the number of layers,
neurons, activation function, stride, ﬁlter size, learning rate, and so on. Different correlation
levels can be investigated using different ﬁlter sizes because convolutional operations
consider the vicinity (locality) of input pixels. Different ﬁlter sizes encompass diverse
levels of granularity; typically, ﬁne-grained information is extracted by ﬁlters in small sizes,
whereas coarse-grained information is extracted by ﬁlters in large sizes. As a result, in
the early 2000s, spatial ﬁlters were used by investigators to increase performance. It was
observed that there is relationship between a spatial ﬁlter and network learning. Various
experiments undertaken during this time period indicated that, by adjusting ﬁlters, CNN
could perform more effectively on coarse and ﬁne-grained details.
2.2.2. CNN Based on Depth
The main idea behind deep CNN architecture is that, with the help of additional map-
pings (nonlinear) and more advanced feature hierarchies, the network can approximate the
goal function effectively [ 9]. The network’s depth has been an important parameter for su-
pervised training. Deep networks represent speciﬁc function classes more effectively than
shallow systems. In 2001, [ 10] proposed a theorem called “universal approximation”. It
explained that a single hidden layer may approximate any function. However, this happens
at the cost of an exponentially enormous number of neurons and a computationally unreal-
istic result. Bengio and Delalleau postulated in 2011 that deeper networks can maintain
the network’s theatrical impact at a lesser cost [ 11,12]. Deep networks are computationally
more efﬁcient for complicated operations, according to Bengio, who demonstrated this
empirically in 2013 [ 11]. VGG and Inception performed best in the ILSVRC-2014 competi-
tion, reinforcing the notion that depth is an important parameter in regulating the learning
ability of networks [13–17].
2.2.3. CNNs with Multiple Paths
Deep CNNs are often good at complicated jobs. Sometimes they may suffer from
performance degradation, explosion issues, or gradient disappearing, which are produced
by increasing the depth rather than overﬁtting. The vanishing gradient problem leads to
an increased test error and training error [ 18]. The theory of cross-layer connectivity or
multi-path was proposed for deep training networks. Shortcut connections or numerous
pathways can have a connection from one layer to another analytically by evading some
in-between levels, allowing for the customized ﬂow of information between the layers [ 19].
The network is split into the sections using cross-layer connectivity. These pathways solves
the vanishing gradient problem by extending the gradient to lower layers.
2.2.4. Feature-Map Exploitation Based CNNs
CNN became popular for MV tasks due to its capacity to carry out hierarchical learning
and automatic feature extraction [ 4]. The performance of classiﬁcation, segmentation,
and detection modules is heavily inﬂuenced by feature selection. CNN selects features
dynamically by adjusting the weights associated with a kernel, also known as a mask.
Furthermore, different feature extraction stages are performed, allowing for various types
of features (known as feature maps or channels in CNN). However, some of the feature
maps have little or no function in object discrimination [ 20]. Excessive feature sets may
provide a noise effect, leading to the over-ﬁtting of the network. This implies that, in
addition to network engineering, the selection of feature maps can play a crucial role in
increasing network generalization.
2.2.5. Multi-Connection Depending on the Width
During CNN advancements, the emphasis was mainly on leveraging the potential
of the depth and the efﬁciency of connections in network regularization during 2012 to
2015. Kawaguchi, in 2019, discovered that the network width is equally essential [ 21].