Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 18 of 28
or sentence shaping, has taken a new turn. Sentence modeling is used to understand
the semantics of sentences to create new and appealing applications that meet customers’
needs. Data are analyzed using traditional information retrieval methods based on words
or attributes, but the essence of the statement is ignored. During training, Kalchbrenner
presented both a dynamic CNN and k-max pooling in 2014. This method discovers word
relationships without relying on external sources, such as a parser or a dictionary [ 47].
Similarly, Collobert and Weston developed a CNN variant to execute multiple NLP-related
tasks simultaneously, such as language modeling, chunking, named entity recognition,
and semantic role modeling. In 2011, Hu proposed a general CNN variant that conducts
sentence matching and can thus be used in various languages in another paper.
3.3. Object Detection and Segmentation
Object detection is concerned with identifying various items in photographs. R-CNN
has recently become popular for object detection. In 2015, Ren proposed a rapid R-CNN for
object detection as an enhancement over R-CNN (a fully connected convolutional neural
network), which is employed in their research for feature extraction and is able to recognize
the boundary and score of objects at various positions concurrently. Similarly, in 2016, Dai
proposed employing fully connected CNNs to detect objects depending on their location.
Gidaris et al. describe another object detection technique based on a multi-region-based
deep CNN that aids in learning semantic aware features [ 48]. On the PASCAL VOC 2007
and 2012 datasets, Gidaris’ method detects items with reasonable accuracy. AutoEncoder-
based CNN architectures have recently demonstrated success in segmentation challenges.
Various appealing CNN designs, including a fully convolutional network, SegNet, mask
region-based CNN (R-CNN), U-Net, and others, have been described in this regard for
both semantic and instance-based segmentation tasks [49].
3.4. Image Classiﬁcation
CNN is widely used for image classiﬁcation tasks. Medical images are one of CNN’s
critical uses, particularly for cancer diagnosis and utilizing histological images. Ref. [ 50]
employed CNN to diagnose breast cancer photos and compared the results to a pre-trained
network with a dataset using handmade descriptors. To deal with the problem of class
skewness, data augmentation is used in the second phase. There are several popular image
classiﬁcation pre-trained networks available. Image classiﬁcation can be easy if a labelled
dataset can be produced for the target image.
3.5. Recognition of Speech
CNN is often regarded as the most effective method to deal with image processing
tasks. However, recent research has revealed that it is also capable of performing well
for speech recognition tasks. Hamid, in 2012, disclosed a speaker-independent voice
recognition system using CNN [ 51]. In comparison to previously published methodologies,
experimental results revealed a ten percent reduction in the mistake rate. Furthermore, after
establishing the network, the performance of CNN is tested utilizing the pre-training phase.
Experiments revealed that almost all of the architectures investigated perform well in the
vocabulary and phone recognition tasks. CNN is becoming recognized for speech emotion
recognition these days. For identifying speech emotions, Huang et al. employed CNN
in conjunction with LSTM [ 52]. CNN was trained on both verbal and nonverbal portions
of speech in Huang’s technique, and CNN learned characteristics that were employed by
LSTM to recognize speech emotions.
3.6. Video Processing
Video processing algorithms use the temporal and spatial information of videos. Many
researchers have employed CNN to solve challenges connected to video processing [ 53].
For example, a straightforward border detecting method based on CNN was suggested.
TAGs are created using CNN in Tong’s method [ 19]. During the experiment, TAGs are