Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 24 of 28
Dimension-Based : Dimension-wise convolutions use light-weight convolutional ﬁl-
tering across each dimension of the input tensor, whereas dimension-wise fusion merges
these dimension-wise representations efﬁciently. Table 9 describes major challenges in
dimension based CNN architecture.
Table 9. Major issues linked with the deployment of dimension-based CNN architectures.
Architecture Merits Demerits
Dice-Net It includes two main novel aspects:
dimension-wise convolutions and
dimension-wise fusion;
 Dimension-wise convolutions use
light-weight convolutional ﬁltering
on each dimension of the input
tensor;
 Dimension-wise fusion mixes these
dimension-wise representations
efﬁciently;
 High accuracy in image recognition. It may increase the time for
producing results.
5. Future Directions
The use of numerous novel concepts in CNN’s architecture has shifted research
priorities, particularly in the ﬁeld of computer vision. To study innovations in CNN’s
architecture is an encouraging study area, and has the potential to become one of the
utmost utilized AI techniques.
 Ensemble learning is an upcoming research area in CNN. By extracting distinct se-
mantic representations, the model can improve the generalization and resilience of
many categories of images by combining multiple and diverse designs;
 In picture segmentation tasks, although it performs well, a CNN’s ability as a “genera-
tive learner” is limited. The use of CNNs’ generative learning capabilities throughout
feature extraction phases can improve the model’s representational power. At the
intermediate phases of CNN, fresh examples can be incorporated to improve the
learning capability by using auxiliary learners (Khan et al., 2018a);
 Attention is a crucial process in the human visual system for acquiring information
from images. Furthermore, the attention mechanism collects the crucial information
from the image and stores its context in relation to the other visual components. In the
future, the research could be conducted to preserve the spatial importance of objects
and their distinguishing characteristics during subsequent stages of learning;
 It is observed that the learning capability of a CNN is mainly increased by increasing
the network’s size, and this may be achieved by modern advanced hardware tech-
nologies, such as the Nvidia DGX-2 supercomputer. Nonetheless, training more deep
and high-capacity CNN architectures consumes a substantial amount of memory and
computing resources [68,69];
 The fundamental disadvantage of CNNs is their inability to be applied in real-time.
Furthermore, the CNN is delayed in compact hardware due to its high computational
cost, particularly in mobile systems. Therefore, various hardware accelerators are
necessary for this scenario to reduce the execution time and power consumption.
Thus far, numerous highly interesting accelerators have been presented in this ﬁeld.
Examples include Eyeriss, FPGA, and application-speciﬁc integrated circuits (Moons
and Verhelst 2017);
 The activation function (e.g., RELU, sigmoid, etc.), number of neurons per layer,
kernel size, layer organization, and other hyper-parameters of deep CNN are critical.
There is a trade-off between the selection of hyper-parameters and the evaluation
time. Hyper-parameter tuning is a time-consuming and intuitive process that cannot
be speciﬁed explicitly. In this case, genetic algorithms can be used to automatically