Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 11 of 28
This implies that, in addition to depth, width is an important component in developing
learning philosophies. It is shown that neural networks with ReLU activation functions
must be wide enough to retain a universal approximation property while also increasing
in depth [ 22]. One signiﬁcant issue with deep neural network architectures is that several
layers may fail to learn valuable features. Although stacking many layers (raising depth)
may learn varied feature representations, it does not always boost the NN’s learning power.
Furthermore, any deep network cannot arbitrarily approximate a class of continuous
functions on a compact set if the network’s maximum width is not greater than the input
dimension [ 23]. Thus, the research focus switched from deep and narrow designs to wide
and thin architectures to address this issue.
2.2.6. Exploitation-Based Feature-Map (ChannelFMap) CNNs
Because of its capacity to perform hierarchical learning and automatic feature extrac-
tion, CNN has received many interests in computer vision problems [ 4]. The performance
of classiﬁcation, segmentation, and detection modules is heavily inﬂuenced by feature
selection. CNN selects features dynamically by adjusting the weights linked with a kernel,
also known as a mask. In addition, many feature extraction phases are employed in CNN to
mine various types of features. However, some feature maps have little or no signiﬁcance in
object discrimination. Massive feature sets may provide a noise effect, causing the network
to overﬁt. This implies that, in addition to network engineering, the selection of feature
maps can play an essential role in increasing network generalization. Feature maps and
channel terms are frequently used interchangeably in the literature.
2.2.7. CNNs That Are Based on Attention
Diverse levels of abstraction play an essential role in determining the NN’s discrimi-
nation power. Different hierarchies of abstractions focused on attributes relevant to picture
localization and recognition play an essential role in learning. This effect is known as
attention in the human visual system. Humans can view any scene by integrating partial
glances of it and focusing on context-relevant aspects. This approach focuses on speciﬁed
regions and comprehends numerous interpretations of items at a speciﬁc spot, hence im-
proving visual structure capture. RNN and LSTM incorporate a more or less comparable
interpretation. RNN and LSTM networks use attention modules as progressive feature,
and the new tasters are weighted based on their recurrence in earlier rounds. The concept
of attention in the convolutional neural network is used by various scholars to improve
representation and overcome computational limitations. This concept of attention also con-
tributes to CNN becoming intelligent enough to distinguish items even in busy backdrops
and complex scenarios.
2.2.8. Dimension-Based CNN
The classic convolutions layer encodes both channel-wise and spatial information
simultaneously, but it is computationally expensive. The efﬁciency of ordinary convolu-
tions was enhanced by the introduction of separable (or depth-wise separable) convolu-
tions [ 7], which encode spatial and channel-wise information separately using point-wise
and depth-wise convolutions, respectively. This factorization is far more efﬁcient, but it
places a considerable computational burden on point-wise convolutions, making them
a computational bottleneck. Table 1 shows summary of various CNN variants with its
architectural categories.