Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 19 of 28
merged against a single shot to annotate that particular video. In 2016, Wang used 3D CNN
and LSTM to distinguish activity in the video. In 2016, Frizzi employed CNN in another
technique to identify some emergencies, such as ﬁre or smoke, in the video [ 54]. According
to Frizzi, CNN architecture is able to extract prominent characteristics and also perform
the classiﬁcation task. However, the collecting of geographical and temporal information is
a time-consuming operation in action recognition. Shi Y, in 2017, presented a three-stream-
based structure to solve the shortcomings of existing feature descriptors [ 55]. This structure
is capable of extracting spatial–temporal characteristics as well as short and long-term
motion inside the video. CNN uses bi-directional LSTM to recognize activity in the video,
as stated in the paper of [ 56]. Their strategy is divided into two parts. First, the sixth
frame of the videos is used to extract features in the ﬁrst phase. Then, the bi-directional
LSTM framework is used in the second phase to utilize sequential information between
frame features.
3.7. Images with Low Resolution
Different researchers in ML have employed CNN-based image enhancement ap-
proaches to improve image resolution [ 57–59]. Peng et al. employed a deep CNN-based
technique to identify items in low-resolution pictures [ 58]. LR-CNN was introduced by
Chevalier et al. for low-resolution picture categorization [ 57]. Kawashima et al. describe
another deep-learning-based technique in which convolutional layers and an LSTM layer
are used to discern action from low-resolution thermal pictures [59].
3.8. System with Limited Resources
In 2017, Bettoni built CNN on top of the FPGA architecture to deal with power
efﬁciency and mobility for embedded devices. Despite its high processing cost, CNN has
been effectively used to develop several machine-learning-based embedded devices. For
example, the number plate recognition system, created by Lee et al. is able to instantly
recognize the number written on the license plate [ 60]. This embedded recognition system
is based on a deep learning approach, which is based on a simple AlexNet architecture.
Another solution uses the FPGA embedded platform to efﬁciently perform various CNN-
based machine learning tasks [ 61]. Similarly, CNN designs with fewer resources, such as
MobileNet, ShufﬂeNet, ANTNets, and others, are ideal for mobile devices [ 62]. Researchers
have combined the MobileNet architecture with SSD to use MobileNet’s lightweight
architecture, which can be quickly installed on resource-constrained hardware and can
learn enhanced representations from incoming [63].
3.9. CNN for Various Dimensional Data
Not only has CNN performed well on images, but it has also performed well on 1D
data. As a result of its high feature extraction ability, 1D-CNN is becoming more popular
than other ML methods. For intrusion detection in network trafﬁc, Vinayakumar, in 2017,
used 1D-CNN in conjunction with LSTM, RNN, and gated recurrent units [ 64]. Vinaykumar
and co-researchers tested the proposed models and found that CNN outperforms classical
ML models by a large margin. They developed an end-to-end system that can automatically
extract damage-sensitive features from accelerated signals for detection purposes. Similarly,
Yildirim et al. showed the successful use of CNN for the 1D biomedical dataset [ 65]. Three-
dimensional shape models are becoming more readily available and easier to collect,
making 3D data essential for item classiﬁcation advancement. To overcome this challenge,
current state-of-the-art approaches rely on CNN. CNN based on volumetric representations
and CNN based on multi-view representations are two forms of CNN that have recently
been developed. Existing volumetric CNN architectures and techniques cannot completely
harness the power of 3D representations, as evidenced by empirical results from these two
types of CNN. According to a comprehensive review of existing techniques, this work
tries to improve both the volumetric CNN and multi-view CNN. To that purpose, two
distinct network architectures of volumetric CNN are introduced. In addition, we look into