Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 2 of 28
computer vision algorithms. A convolutional neural network is a method of deep learning
that takes an input image and assigns importance (learnable biases and weights) to various
objects in the image, distinguishing one from the other [1].
In comparison to other methods, CNN requires less preprocessing. Therefore, a CNN
is the most effective learning algorithm for comprehending picture material [ 1]. Further-
more, it has demonstrated exceptional image classiﬁcation, recognition, segmentation, and
retrieval [ 2]. The accomplishment of CNN has piqued the interest of people outside of
academia. Microsoft, Google, AT&T, NEC, and Facebook are among the companies engag-
ing in the development and advancement of CNN architecture [ 3]. In addition, they have
active research groups that are investigating novel CNN designs. At the moment, deep
CNN-based models are being used by the majority of front-runners in image processing
and computer vision competitions. As a result, there are several variants of the basic CNN
design. This manuscript covers an introduction to CNN, the evolution of CNN over time,
various features of CNN design, and the architectural analysis of each type of CNN with
its beneﬁts and drawbacks.
CNN reassembles regular neural networks, but it has an appealing characteristic made
up of neurons with learnable weights and biases. Every neuron receives many inputs
and then performs a dot product, which is optionally followed by nonlinearity [ 4]. As
a result, CNN functions as a feed-forward kernel, undergoing many modiﬁcations [ 4].
The primary goal of convolution is to extract meaningful features from locally associated
data sources. The convolutional kernels’ output is then fed into the activation function,
which aids in learning intellections and embeds nonlinearity in the feature space. This
nonlinearity produces different activation functions for each reaction, making it easier to
learn meaningful dissimilarities in images. Furthermore, a nonlinear activation function
produces an output that is frequently trailed by subsampling; this supports summarizing
the outputs, which makes the input insensitive to geometrical deceptions.
Najafabadi, in 2015, investigated that CNN has an automatic feature extraction capa-
bility that eliminates the requirement for a distinct feature extractor [ 5]. As a result, CNN
can learn from a good representation of internal raw pixels without exhausting processing.
Automatic feature extraction, multitasking, weight sharing, and hierarchical learning are
some of CNN’s appealing features [6].
CNN was formerly known as LeNet. LeNet was named after its creator, Yann LeCun.
Yann LeCun created a network for handwritten digit identiﬁcation in 1989, building on
the work of Kunihiko Fukushima, a Japanese scientist who designed the neocognitron
(essential image recognition neural network). The LeNet-5, which describes the primitive
components of CNN, might be regarded as the beginning of CNN. LeNet-5 was not well-
known because of hardware equipment paucity, particularly GPUs (graphics processing
units). As a result, there was little research on CNN between 1990 and 2000. The success
of AlexNet in 2012 opened the door for computer vision applications, and many various
forms of CNNs, such as the R-CNN series, have been raised. CNN models now are quite
different from LeNet, although they are all based on it.
In recent years, several exciting survey papers have been published on deep CNN. For
example, (Asifullah Khan et al., 2018) examined prominent structures from 2012 to 2018 and
their major components. (Alzubaidi et al., 2021) reviewed deep learning concepts, CNN
architecture, challenges, and future trends. This paper was the ﬁrst paper to include various
DL aspects. It also includes the impact of CPU, GPU, and FPGA on various deep learning
approaches. It includes one section about the introduction to CNN and its architecture.
(Smarandache et al., 2019) reviewed trends in convolutional neural network architecture.
This paper primarily focuses on the design of the architecture of around 10 well-known
CNN models.
Similarly, there are many authors, such as Liu (2017), LeCun (2010), Guo (2016), and
Srinivas (2016), who have discussed CNN’s many applications and tactics [ 4,6–8]. As a
result, this survey exempliﬁes the essential taxonomy discovered in the most recent and
well-known CNN designs reported between 2012 and 2021. This manuscript includes