Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 3 of 28
around eight major categories of CNN based on its architecture evolution. This investiga-
tion reveals the fundamental structure of CNN, as well as its roots. It also represents a wide
range of CNN architectures, from their conception to their most current advancements
and achievements. This survey will assist readers in developing architectural novelties in
convolutional neural networks by providing a more profound theoretical knowledge of
CNN design concepts.
The primary goal of this survey is to highlight the most signiﬁcant components of
CNN to provide readers with a comprehensive picture of CNN from a single survey
paper. In addition, this survey will assist readers in learning more about CNN and CNN
variants, which helps to improve the ﬁeld. The contributions of this survey paper are
summarized below:
This is the ﬁrst review that almost provides each detail about CNN for computer
vision, its history, CNN architecture designs, its merits and demerits, application, and the
future work to take upon in a single paper.
 This review assists readers in making sound decisions about their research work in
the area of CNN for computer vision;
 This manuscript includes existing CNN architectures and their architectural limita-
tions, leading it to design new architecture. Furthermore, it clearly explains the merits
and demerits of almost all popular CNN variants;
 It divides the CNN architecture into eight categories based on their implementation
criteria, which is an exciting part of this survey paper;
 Various applications of CNN are also explained so that readers can also take on any
other application area of CNN other than computer vision;
 It provides a clear listing of future research trends in the area of CNN for computer vision.
The organization of this survey paper includes the ﬁrst section, which presents a
methodical comprehension of CNN. Then, it explains CNN’s similarities to the primate’s
visual brain. Section 2, the Literature Review, is divided into two subsections. The outline
of the CNN components is explained in Section 2.1, and Section 2.2 describes various
profound CNN architectural evolutions. It also includes CNN’s eight broad categories of
architectural advancements. Section 3 explores CNN applications in a variety of disciplines,
Section 4 discusses current issues in CNN architecture, and Section 5 discusses the future
scope of research. Finally, Section 6 concludes a survey of various CNN variants.
2. Literature Review
This section includes fundamental components of the convolutional neural network. It
describes the basic architecture of CNN to further understand CNN architectural variants.
It also includes various competitive recent advancements in CNN architectures.
2.1. CNN Fundamentals
CNN is a computer vision deep learning network that can recognize and classify
picture features. CNN architecture was inﬂuenced by the organization and functions
of the visual cortex. It is designed to resemble the connections between neurons in the
human brain.
Image recognition is a task that humans have been performing from childhood. Chil-
dren were taught to identify fruits and vegetables, such as apples, bananas, and watermel-
ons. Is it possible to teach computers to perform the same thing? Is it feasible for a human
to build a machine that can see and understand just like humans? The answer is yes to all
of these questions. Humans must demonstrate an algorithm of millions of images before
a computer can generalize the input and make predictions for images that it has never
seen before, just as humans must demonstrate an algorithm of millions of images before a
computer can generalize the input and make predictions for images that it has never seen
before. The question is: how does the image appear to computers? Figure 1 Humans can
see the rose, but computers can see the numerical data. As a result, developing a computer
that can analyze and recognize images is a complex task.