Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 15 of 28
neural network architecture for trafﬁc sign recognition. It comprises fewer than 50 features
in each convolutional layer, allowing CNN to be trained quickly, even without the assistance
of a GPU [31].
YOLOX: Exceeding YOLO Series in 2021 (2021)
In this study, they offer some substantial improvements to the YOLO series, resulting
in creating a new high-performance detector called YOLOX. To achieve state-of-the-art
results over many models, they switch the YOLO detector to an anchor-free mode and use
other sophisticated detection approaches, such as a decoupled head and the leading label
assignment scheme SimOTA. For YOLO-Nano, with only 0.91 M parameters and 1.08 G
FLOPs, they achieve 25.3 percent AP on COCO, outperforming NanoDet by 1.8 percent
AP; for YOLOv3, one of the most widely used detectors in the industry, they achieve
47.3 percent AP on COCO, outperforming the current best practice by 3.0 percent AP; and
for YOLOX-L, it has roughly the same number of parameters as YOLOv4. Furthermore,
employing a single YOLOX-L model, they achieved ﬁrst place in the Streaming Perception
Challenge (Workshop on Autonomous Driving at CVPR 2021). This paper will beneﬁt
developers and researchers in real-world scenarios, who will also deploy versions that
support ONNX, TensorRT, NCNN, and Openvino [32].
ChebNet: Chebyshev Polynomial Based Graph Convolution (2016)
ChebNet is regarded as one of the ﬁrst and most inﬂuential papers on spectral graph
learning. The multiplication of a signal (node features/attributes) by a kernel is a spectral
convolution. It is analogous to how convolutions work on images, where a kernel value
is multiplied by a pixel value. A spectral convolution kernel is composed by Chebyshev
polynomials. Chebyshev polynomials are orthogonal polynomials with properties that
make them excellent at tasks such as function approximation [33].
GCN: Graph Convolutional Network (2016)
Graphs can be found in a variety of application disciplines, including as bioinfor-
matics, social analysis, and computer vision. The capacity of graphs to capture structural
links among data allows for more insights than evaluating data in isolation. However,
solving learning problems on graphs is generally difﬁcult because (1) many forms of data,
including as photos and text data, are not initially structured as graphs, and (2) the under-
lying connectivity patterns for graph-structured data are frequently complex and diverse.
Representation learning, on the other hand, has found considerable success in a multitude
of disciplines. As a result, learning how to represent graphs in a low-dimensional Euclidean
space while preserving graph features is one feasible answer [34].
FastGCN: Minibatch Training for Graph Convolutional Network (2018)
The recently suggested GCN is an operational graph model for semi-supervised
learning. Furthermore, because of the recursive neighborhood expansion across layers,
training with large, dense graphs possesses time and memory issues. To avoid having
test data accessible at the same time, this paper interprets graph convolutions as integral
transformations of embedding functions. Thus, it uses Monte Carlo techniques to reliably
guess the integrals, which leads to the batched training scheme [35].
LanczosNet (2019)
The Lanczos network (LanczosNet) is a graph convolution network that uses the
Lanczos algorithm to generate low-rank approximations of the graph Laplacian. Using
the Lanczos algorithm’s tridiagonal decomposition, we not only efﬁciently exploit mul-
tiscale information via the quick approximated computation of the matrix power, but
we also develop learnable spectral ﬁlters. LanczosNet, because it is fully differentiable,
allows for both graph kernel learning and learning node embeddings. We demonstrate
the relationship between our LanczosNet and graph-based manifold learning methods,