Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 20 of 28
multi-view CNN, where multi-resolution ﬁltering is used in 3D. Overall, both volumetric
CNN and multi-view CNN outperform existing state-of-the-art approaches. Extensive
experiments are provided to test underlying design decisions, allowing us to better grasp
the space of object categorization algorithms possible for 3D data.
3.10. Object Counting
One of the essential jobs in computer vision is counting objects in images. This has
a wide range of applications, including microbiology (e.g., counting bacterial colonies
in a Petri dish), surveillance (e.g., counting people), agriculture (e.g., counting fruits or
vegetables), medicine (e.g., counting tumor cells in histopathological images), and wildlife
conservation (e.g., counting animals). Counting things is a simple task for humans, but
it can be difﬁcult for computers. Pre-trained YOLO can count the number of objects by
removing the bottom prediction layer and feeding the characteristics to a classiﬁcation
feed-forward layer.
4. CNN Challenges
Deep CNNs have shown to be effective for data that are either time-series or have
a grid-like structure. Deep CNN architectures have also been used to solve several addi-
tional problems.
Different researchers have enthralling arguments about the performance of CNN on
various ML tasks. The following are some of the difﬁculties encountered while training
deep CNN models:
 As deep CNNs are typically a black box, they may be challenging to comprehend and
explain. As a result, verifying them can be challenging at times;
 According to Szegedy et al. (2013), training a CNN on noisy picture data can increase
the misclassiﬁcation error (Szegedy et al., 2014). Adding a small amount of random
noise to the input image can deceive the network, causing the original and slightly
agitated variant to be classiﬁed incorrectly;
 Each CNN layer is organized in such a manner that it extracts problem-speciﬁc
information associated with the task automatically. In some of the cases, before
classiﬁcation, some jobs require knowledge of the behavior of features retrieved by
deep CNN. Thus, the feature visualization concept in CNN may be helpful. Similarly,
Hinton stated that lower levels should only pass on their knowledge to the relevant
neurons of the following layer. Hinton presented an intriguing capsule network
technique in this area [66];
 Deep CNNs use supervised learning processes, which require huge amount of an-
notated data to train the network. Humans, on the other hand, can learn from a
few examples;
 The choice of hyper-parameters has a signiﬁcant impact on the CNN performance.
A slight change can inﬂuence the overall performance of a CNN in hyper-parameter
values. As a result, selecting hyper-parameters with care is a critical design issue that
must be addressed using an appropriate optimization technique;
 Effective CNN training necessitates the use of robust hardware resources, such as
GPUs. However, the effective use of CNNs in embedded and intelligent devices is
still required [53,67];
 One of CNN’s limitations in vision-related jobs is that it rarely performs well when
used to estimate an object’s pose, orientation, or location. In 2012, AlexNet attempted
to address this difﬁculty by developing data augmentation, which solved the problem
to some extent. In addition, data augmentation aids CNN in learning a variety of
internal representations, potentially improving its performance.
Spatial exploitation: Since convolutional operations take into account the neighbor-
hood (correlation) of input pixels, different levels of the correlation can be examined by
utilizing different ﬁlter sizes. Table 2 describes major challenges in spatial exploitation
based CNN architecture.