Electronics 2021 ,10, 2470 16 of 28
particularly diffusion maps. On citation networks and the QM8 quantum chemistry dataset,
we compare our model to other recent deep graph networks. Experiment ﬁndings reveal
that our model outperforms the competition in the majority of tasks [36].
SplineCNN (2018)
This is a deep neural network that processes an input that is irregularly structured
and geometric, such as graphs or meshes. The fundamental contribution of the study is
a unique B-spline-based convolution operator that, due to the local support property of
B-spline basis functions, renders the calculation time independent of the kernel size. They
generalize the classic CNN convolution operator by using continuous kernel functions
with a ﬁxed number of trainable weights. In contrast to comparable algorithms that ﬁlter in
the spectrum domain, the suggested method aggregates characteristics only in the spatial
domain. Furthermore, SplineCNN enables complete end-to-end deep architecture training
through using simply the geometric structure as an input rather than handcrafted feature
descriptors [37].
ECC: Edge-Conditioned Convolution (2017)
A prediction of graph-structured data can be used for a wide range of problems. In
this study, they extended the convolution operator from normal grids to random graphs
while avoiding the spectral domain, allowing them to handle graphs of various sizes
and connectivity. Filter weights are conditioned on the speciﬁc edge labels in a vertex’s
proximity to go beyond essential diffusion. They examined the development of deep neural
networks for graph classiﬁcation in conjunction with the selection of the appropriate graph
coarsening [38].
GAT: Graph Attention Network (2017) Ioffe 2013
These are novel architectures that operate on graph-structured data and employ
masked self-attentional layers to address the shortcomings of previous systems that relied
on graph convolutions or their approximations. For example, this paper allows (implicitly)
for specifying different weights to different nodes in a neighborhood by stacking layers
in which nodes can attend over the features of their neighborhoods without requiring
costly matrix operations (such as inversion) or relying on prior knowledge of the graph
structure. As a result, they address a number of critical challenges associated with spectral-
based graph neural networks at the same time, and our model is easily adaptable to both
inductive and transductive situations [39].
3. CNN Application
CNN is used for computer vision tasks, which solve image processing and ML-based
problems, such as object identiﬁcation, image recognition, image classiﬁcation, image
segmentation, and so on [ 40]. However, for training, CNN requires a huge amount of
data. CNN has mostly demonstrated remarkable success in trafﬁc sign identiﬁcation,
medical picture segmentation, face detection, and object identiﬁcation in natural photos,
where there is sufﬁcient labeled data available for training. Figure 13. Shows various
CNN applications.
3.1. Computer Vision and Associated Applications
Computer vision (CV) is the study of creating an artiﬁcial system that can perceive
and extract usable information from visual data, such as photographs and movies. Face
recognition, position estimation, activity recognition, and other applications are all covered
by CV . Face recognition is one of the CV’s most burdensome duties. Face recognition
systems must deal with variances induced by lighting, changes in posture, and various
face emotions. Deep CNN was proposed by Farfade in 2015 for face detection from various
positions and occluded faces [ 41]. In 2016, Zhang used a new multitasking cascaded CNN
for face detection in another study [ 42]. Compared to state-of-the-art approaches, Zhang’s