with this sensor, semantic segmentation.
This work proposes to combine the potential of event
cameras with deep learning techniques on the challenging
task of semantic segmentation. Semantic segmentation may
intuitively seem a task much better suited to models using
appearance information. However, we show how, with an
appropriate model and representation, event cameras pro-
vide very promising results for this task.
Figure 1 shows two visual results as an example of the
output of our work. Our main contributions are:
•First results, up to our knowledge, on semantic seg-
mentation using DVS data. We build an Xception-
based CNN that takes this data as input. Since there is
no benchmark available for this problem, we propose
how to generate approximated semantic segmentation
labels for some sequences of the DDD17 event-based
dataset. Model and data are being released.
•A comparison of different DVS data representation
performance on semantic segmentation (including a
new proposed representation that is shown to outper-
form existing ones), and an analysis of beneﬁts and
drawbacks compared to conventional images.
2. Related work
2.1. Event Camera Applications
As previously mentioned, event cameras provide valu-
able advantages over conventional cameras in many situa-
tions. We ﬁnd recent works which have proved these advan-
tages in several tasks typically solved with conventional vi-
sion sensors. Most of these works focus their efforts on 3D
reconstruction [28, 19, 35, 34] and 6-DOF camera tracking
[29, 11]. Although 3D reconstruction and localization solu-
tions are very mature on RGB images, existing algorithms
cannot be applied exactly the same way on event cameras.
The aforementioned works propose different approaches for
adapting them.
We ﬁnd recent approaches that explore the use of these
cameras for other tasks, such as optical ﬂow estimation
[12, 23, 36] or, closer to our target tasks, object detection
and recognition [26, 6, 20, 30]. Regarding the data used in
these recognition works, Orchard et al. [26] and Lagorce et
al. [20] performed the recognition task on small datasets,
detecting mainly characters and numbers. The most recent
works, start to use more challenging (but scarce) recordings
in real scenarios, such as N-CARS dataset, used in Sironi et
al. [30], or DDD17 dataset [2], which we use in this work
because of the real world urban scenarios it contains.
Most of these approaches have a common ﬁrst step: en-
code the event information into an image-like representa-
tion, in order to facilitate its processing.We discuss in detail different previous work event rep-
resentations (encoding spatial and temporal information) as
well as our proposed representation (with a different way of
encoding the temporal information) in Sec. 3.
2.2. Semantic Segmentation
Semantic segmentation is a visual recognition problem
which consists of assigning a semantic label to each pixel
in the image. State-of-the-art on this problem is currently
achieved by deep learning based solutions, most of them
proposing different variations of encoder-decoder CNN ar-
chitectures [5, 4, 17, 16].
Some of the existing solutions for semantic segmentation
target an instance-level semantic segmentation, e.g., Mask-
RCNN [15], that includes three main steps: region proposal,
binary segmentation, and classiﬁcation. Other solutions,
such as DeepLabv3+ [5], target class-level semantic seg-
mentation. Deeplabv3+ is a fully convolutional extension of
Xception [7], which is also a state-of-the-art architecture for
image classiﬁcation and the base architecture of our work.
A survey on image segmentation by Zhu et al. [37] pro-
vides a detailed compilation of more conventional solutions
for semantic segmentation, while Garcia et al. [13] present
a discussion of more recent deep learning based approaches
for semantic segmentation, covering from new architectures
to common datasets.
The works discussed so far show the effectiveness
of CNNs for semantic segmentation using RGB images.
Closer to our work, we ﬁnd additional works which prove
great performance in semantic segmentation tasks using ad-
ditional input data modalities to the standard RGB image.
For example, a common additional input data for semantic
segmentation is depth information. Cao et al. [3] and Gupta
et al. [14] are two good examples of how to combine RGB
images with depth information using convolutional neural
networks. Similarly, a very common sensor in the robotics
ﬁeld, the Lidar sensor, has also been shown to provide use-
ful additional information when performing semantic seg-
mentation [32, 10]. Other works show how to combine less
frequent modalities such as ﬂuorescence information [1] or
how to perform semantic segmentation on multi-spectral
images [10]. Semantic segmentation tasks for medical im-
age analysis [22] also typically apply or adapt CNN based
approaches designed for RGB images to different medical
imaging sensors, such as MRI images [18] and CT data [8].
Our work is focused on a different modality, event cam-
era data, not explored in prior work for semantic segmen-
tation. Following one of the top performing models on
semantic segmentation for RGB images [5], we base our
network on the Xception design [7] to build an encoder-
decoder architecture for semantic segmentation on event
images. Our experiments show good semantic segmentation
results using only event data from a public benchmark [2],