Grayscale Hist(x,y,−1)S(x,y,−1)Recent(x,y,−1)M(x,y,−1)
Figure 2. Visualization (between 0 and 255 gray values) of different 1-channel encodings of data from events with negative polarity
(p=−1)explained in the Sect. 3.2. In these examples the event information has been integrated for a time interval of 50ms ( T= 50ms).
Grayscale is shown as reference.
All these recent representations normalize the event
timestamps and histograms to be relative values within the
intervalW.
Inspired by all this prior work, we propose an alternative
representation that combines the best ideas demonstrated so
far: the 2-channels of event histograms to encode the spatial
distribution of events, together with information regarding
all timestamps occurred during the integrated time interval.
Our proposed representation. We propose a 6-channel
image representation. The ﬁrst two channels are the his-
togram of positive and negative events (eq. 3). The remain-
ing four channels are a simple but effective way to store
information relative to all event timestamps happening dur-
ing interval W. We could see it as a way to store how they
are distributed along Trather than selecting just one of the
timestamps. We propose to store the mean ( M) and stan-
dard deviation ( S) of the normalized timestamps of events
happening at each pixel (xi,yi), computed separately for
the positive and negative events, as follows:
M(x,y,p) =1
Hist(x,y,p)N/summationdisplay
i=1,tiǫWtiδ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p),
(5)
S(x,y,p) =/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbtN/summationdisplay
i=1,tiǫW(tiδ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p)−Mean(x,y,p))2
Hist(x,y,p)−1.
(6)
Then, our representation consists of these six 2D-
channels: Hist(x,y,−1),Hist(x,y,+1),M(x,y,−1),
M(x,y,+1),S(x,y,−1),S(x,y,+1). Figure 2 shows a
visualization of some of these channels. In the event rep-
resentation images, the brighter the pixels, the higher the
value encoded, e.g., white means the highest number of neg-
ative events in the Hist(x,y,−1).
3.3. Semantic Segmentation from Event Data
CNNs have already been shown to work well on dense
event-data representations, detailed in previous section [24,
36], therefore we explore a CNN based architecture to learn
a different visual task, semantic segmentation.
Figure 3. Semantic segmentation from event based cameras. We
process the different 2D event-data encodings with our encoder-
decoder architecture based on Xception [7] (Sec. 3.3 for more
details). Best viewed in color.
Semantic segmentation is often modeled as a per-pixel
classiﬁcation, and therefore the output of semantic segmen-
tation models has the same resolution that the input. As
previously mentioned, there are plenty of recent success-
ful CNN-based approaches to solve this problem both us-
ing RGB data and additional modalities. We have built
an architecture inspired on current state-of-the-art semantic
segmentation CNNs, slightly adapted to use the event data
encodings. Related works commonly follow an encoder-
decoder architecture, as we do. As the encoder, we use the
well-known Xception model [7], which has been shown to
outperform other encoders, both in classiﬁcation [7] and se-
mantic segmentation tasks [5]. As the decoder, also follow-
ing state-of-the-art works [4, 5], we build a light decoder,
concentrating the heavy computation on the encoder. Our
architecture also includes features from the most success-
ful recent models for semantic segmentation, including: the
use of skip connections to help the optimization of deep ar-
chitectures [16, 17] to avoid the vanishing gradient problem
and the use of an auxiliary loss [33] which also improves
the convergence of the learning process. Fig. 3 shows a di-
agram of the architecture built in this work, with the multi-
channel event representation as network input.
As similar architectures, we perform the training opti-
mization via back-propagation of the loss, calculated as the
summation of all per-pixel losses, through the parameter
gradients. We use the common soft-max cross entropy loss
function ( L) described in eq. (7):
L=−1
NN/summationdisplay
j=1M/summationdisplay
c=1yc,jln(ˆyc,j), (7)