close to what is achieved on standard imagery from the
same scenarios. We also demonstrate the complementary
beneﬁts that this modality can bring when combined with
standard cameras to solve this problem more accurately.
3. From Events to Semantic Segmentation
In this section, we will discuss different event represen-
tations used in visual recognition tasks in order to end up
proposing a rich encoding of the event data for semantic
segmentation.
3.1. Event data
Event cameras capture the changes in intensities for each
pixel. The output of an event camera is not a 3-dimensional
image (height, width, and channels) as conventional cam-
eras but a stream of events. An event represents the positive
or negative change in the log of the intensity signal (over an
established threshold σ):
log(It+1)−log(It)≥σ, (1)
beingIt+1andItthe intensity captured at two consecutive
timestamps. Each event ( ei) is then deﬁned by four differ-
ent components: two coordinates ( xi,yi) of the pixel where
the change has been measured, a polarity ( pi) that can be
positive or negative, and a timestamp ( ti):
ei=/braceleftbig
xi,yi,pi,ti/bracerightbig
. (2)
Events are asynchronous and have the described encod-
ing that, by construction, does not provide good input for
broadly used techniques in visual recognition tasks, such
as CNNs. Perhaps the most straightforward representation
would be a nx4matrix, with nthe number of events. But
obviously, this representation does not encode the spatial
relationship between events. Several strategies have been
proposed to encode this information into a dense represen-
tation successfully applied in different applications.
3.2. Event Representation
Basic dense encoding of event location. The most suc-
cessfully applied event data representation creates an im-
age with several channels encoding the following informa-
tion. It stores at each location (xi,yi)information from the
events that happened there at any time tiwithin an estab-
lished integration interval of size T. Variations of this rep-
resentation have been used by many previous works, show-
ing great performance in very different applications: opti-
cal ﬂow estimation [36], object detection [6], classiﬁcation
[20, 27, 30] and regression tasks [24], respectively.
Earlier works used only one channel to encode event oc-
currences. Nguyen et al. [25] stores the information of thelast event that has occurred in each pixel, i.e., the corre-
sponding value chosen to represent a positive event, nega-
tive event or absence of events. One important drawback is
that only the last event information remains.
In a more complete representation, a recent work for
steering wheel angle estimation, from Maqueda et al. [24],
stores the positive and negative event occurrences into two
different channels. In other words, this representation
(Hist ) encodes the 2D histogram of positive and negative
events that occurred at each pixel (xi,yi), as follows:
Hist(x,y,p) =N/summationdisplay
i=1,tiǫWδ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p),(3)
whereδis the Kronecker delta function (the function is 1 if
the variables are equal, and 0 otherwise), Wis the time win-
dow, or interval, considered to aggregate the event informa-
tion, andNis the number of events occurred within interval
W. Therefore, the multiplication δ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p)
denotes whether an event eimatches its coordinates xi,yi
withx,yvalues and its polarity piwithp. This representa-
tion has two channels, one per polarity p(positive and neg-
ative events). Our proposed representation described later,
will make use of these two histogram channels.
Note that all the representations discussed so far only
use the temporal information (timestamps ti) to see the time
interval where each event belongs to.
Dense encodings including temporal information.
However, temporal information, i.e., the timestamp of
each event ti, contains useful information for recognition
tasks, and it has been shown that including this non-spatial
information of each event into the image-like encodings
is useful. Lagorce et al. [20] propose a 2-channel image,
one channel per polarity, called time surfaces . They store,
for each pixel, information relative only to the most recent
event timestamp during the integration interval W. Later,
Sironi et al. [30] enhance this previous representation by
changing the deﬁnition of the time surfaces . They now
compute the value for each pixel combining information
from all the timestamps of events that occurred within W.
Another recently proposed approach by Zhu et al.
[36] introduces a more complete representation that in-
cludes both channels of event occurrence histograms from
Maqueda et al. [24], and two more channels containing tem-
poral information. These two channels ( Recent ) store, at
each pixel (xi,yi), the normalized timestamp of the most
recent positive or negative event, respectively, that occurred
in that location during the integration interval:
Recent(x,y,p) = max
tiǫWtiδ(xi,x)δ(yi,y)δ(pi,p).(4)