EV-SegNet: Semantic Segmentation for Event-based Cameras
I˜nigo Alonso
Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain
inigo@unizar.esAna C. Murillo
Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain
acm@unizar.es
Abstract
Event cameras are very promising sensors which have
shown several advantages over frame-based cameras. Deep
learning based approaches, which are leading the state-of-
the-art in visual recognition tasks, could potentially take
advantage of the beneﬁts of these cameras, but some adap-
tations are still needed in order to effectively work on event
data. This work introduces the ﬁrst baseline for semantic
segmentation with this kind of data. We build a seman-
tic segmentation CNN based on state-of-the-art techniques
which takes event information as the only input. Besides,
we propose a novel representation for DVS data that out-
performs previously used event representations for related
tasks. Since there is no existing labeled dataset for this
task, we propose how to automatically generate approx-
imated semantic segmentation labels for some sequences
of the DDD17 dataset, which we publish together with the
model, and demonstrate they are valid to train a model for
DVS data only. We compare our results on semantic seg-
mentation from DVS data with results using corresponding
grayscale images, demonstrating how they are complemen-
tary and worth combining.
Supplementary Material
A video showing the performance of our
method in the test sequence is available at:
https://youtu.be/YQXBjWUSiaA. We release the dataset
and code at: https://github.com/Shathe/Ev-SegNet
1. Introduction
Event cameras, as Dynamic Vision Sensor (DVS) [21],
are promising sensors which register intensity changes of
the captured environment. In contrast to conventional cam-
eras, this sensor does not acquire images at a ﬁxed frame-
rate. These cameras, as their name suggests, capture events
and record a stream of asynchronous events. An event in-
dicates an intensity change at a speciﬁc moment and at a
particular pixel (more details on how events are acquired in
Figure 1. Two examples of semantic segmentation (left) from
event based camera data (middle). The semantic segmentation is
the prediction of our CNN, fed only with event data. Grayscale
images (right) are displayed only to facilitate visualization.
Section 3.2). Event cameras offer multiple advantages over
more conventional cameras, 1) mainly its very high tempo-
ral resolution, which allows the capture of multiple events in
microseconds; 2) its very high dynamic range, which allows
the information capture at difﬁcult lighting environments;
3) its low power and bandwidth requirements. Maqueda et
al. [24] show how visual recognition tasks can beneﬁt from
these advantages in their work emphasizing that event cam-
eras are natural motion detectors and automatically ﬁlter out
any temporally-redundant information. Besides, they show
that these cameras provide richer information than just sub-
tracting consecutive conventional images.
These cameras offer a wide range of new possibilities
and features that could boost solutions for many computer
vision applications. However, new algorithms still have
to be developed in order to fully exploit their capabilities,
especially regarding recognition tasks. Most of the latest
achievements based on deep learning solutions for image
data have not yet been even attempted on event cameras.
One of the main reasons is the output of these cameras: they
do not provide standard images, and there is not yet a clearly
adopted way of representing the stream of events to feed a
CNN. Another challenge is the lack of labeled training data,
which is key to training most recognition models. Our work
includes simple but effective novel ideas to deal with these
two challenges. They could be helpful in many DVS ap-
plications, but we focus on an application not explored yet