Grayscale Label
Figure 4. Examples of the test sequence. Semantic label im-
ages (right) have been generated from the grayscale images (left)
through a CNN trained on a grayscale version of Cityscapes.
testing the sequence with more homogeneous class distribu-
tion, i.e., that contained more amount of labels of categories
which appears less such as the human/pedestrian label.
The labels have the same categories than the well-known
Cityscapes dataset [9] (see Table 1), with the exception of
skyandconstruction categories. Although these two cat-
egories were properly learned in the Cityscapes dataset,
when performing inferences on the DDD17 dataset with
grayscale images, these categories were not correctly gener-
ated due to the domain-shift. Therefore in our experiments,
those two categories are learned together, as if they were
the same thing. This domain shift between the Cityscapes
and DDD17 datasets was also the cause of generating the
Cityscapes categories instead of its classes.
Figure 4 shows three examples of grayscale images and
corresponding generated segmentation that belong to our
extension of the DDD17 dataset. We can see that although
the labels are not as perfect as if manually annotated (and
as previously mentioned, classes such as building andsky
were not properly learned using only grayscale), they are
pretty accurate and well deﬁned.
5. Experimental Validation
5.1. Experiment Set­up and Metrics
Metrics. Our work addresses the semantic segmentation
problem, i.e., per pixel classiﬁcation, using event cameras.
Thus, we evaluate our results on the standard metrics for
classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation: Accuracy and
Mean Intersection over Union (MIoU) .
In semantic segmentation, given a predicted image ˆyand
a ground-truth image y, and being Ntheir number of pixels,
which can be classiﬁed in Cdifferent classes, the accuracymetric, eq. (8) is computed as:
Accuracy (y,ˆy) =1
NN/summationdisplay
i=1δ(yi,ˆyi), (8)
and the MIoU is calculated per class as:
MIoU(y,ˆy) =1
CC/summationdisplay
j=1/summationtextN
i=1δ(yi,c,1)δ(yi,c,ˆyi,c)/summationtextN
i=1max(1,δ(yi,c,1)+δ(ˆyi,c,1)),
(9)
whereδdenotes the Kronecker delta function, yiindicates
the class where pixel ibelongs to, and yi,cis a boolean that
indicates if pixel ibelongs to a certain class c.
Set-up. We perform the experiments using the CNN ex-
plained in Sec. 3.3. and the Ev-Seg data detailed in Sec.
4. We train all model variations from scratch using: the
Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1e−4and a
polynomial learning rate decay schedule. We train for 30K
iterations using a batch size of 8 and during training we
perform several data augmentation steps: crops, rotations
(-15◦, 15◦), vertical and horizontal shifts (-25%, 25%) and
horizontal ﬂips. Regarding the event information encod-
ing, for training, we always use an integration time interval
T= 50mswhich has been shown to perform well on this
dataset [24].
5.2. Event Semantic Segmentation
Input representation comparison. A good input repre-
sentation is very important for a CNN to properly learn
and exploit the input information. Table 2 compares sev-
eral semantic segmentation models trained with different
input representations. The top three rows correspond to
event-based representations. We compare a basic dense
encoding of event locations, a dense encoding which also
includes temporal information and our proposed encoding
(see Sec.3.2. for details). Our event encoding performs
slightly but consistently better on the semantic segmenta-
tion task on the different metrics and evaluations consid-
ered. Fig. 5 shows a few visual examples of these results.
All models (same architecture, just trained with differ-
ent inputs) have been trained with data encoded using in-
tegration intervals of 50ms, but we also evaluate them us-
ing different interval sizes. This is an interesting evalua-
tion because by changing the time interval, in which the
event information is aggregated, we somehow simulate dif-
ferent camera movement speeds. In other words, intervals
of 50ms or 10ms may encode exactly the same movement
but at different speeds. This point is pretty important be-
cause, in real scenarios, models have to perform well at
different speeds. We can see that all models perform just
slightly worse on test data encoded with different intervals
sizes (10ms, 250ms) that the integration time used during