T= 250ms T = 50ms T = 10ms
Figure 6. Semantic segmentation results (bottom) using different
integration interval size ( T)for the event data representation (top).
Results obtained with a model trained only on 50ms integrated
event information encoded with our proposed representation.
Grayscale Event representation
Figure 7. Semantic segmentation result (bottom) on a static se-
quence, i.e, a car waiting at a crossing. This is an obvious adver-
sarial case for event cameras, due to lack of event information.
tion results are better when combining both of them. This
suggests they are learning complementary information. In-
terestingly, we should note that the data available for train-
ing and evaluation is precisely data where we could prop-
erly segment the grayscale image, therefore slightly more
beneﬁcial for grayscale images than event-based data (i.e.,
there is no night-time image included in the evaluation set
because there is no ground truth for those).
Two clear complementary situations from our experi-
ments: 1) On one hand, it is already known that one the
major drawback of event cameras is that objects that do not
move with respect to the camera do not trigger events, i.e.,
are invisible. Fig. 7 shows an example of a car waiting at
a pedestrian crossing, where we see that while conventional
cameras can perfectly see the whole scene, event cameras
barely capture any information; 2) On the other hand, event
cameras are able to capture meaningful information on situ-
ations where scene objects are not visible at all for conven-
tional vision sensors, e.g., difﬁcult lighting environments.
This is due to their high dynamic range, Fig. 8 illustrates an
example of a situation where neither of the grayscale nor the
event-based models have been trained for. The event-based
model performs much better due to the minor domain-shift
on the input representation.Grayscale Event representation
Figure 8. Semantic segmentation (bottom) on extreme lighting
conditions (night-time) with different input representations (top):
grayscale image and our event data representation. Corresponding
models trained only on good illuminated daytime samples. This is
an obvious adversarial case for conventional cameras, due to lack
of information in the grayscale capture.
6. Conclusions and Future Work
This work includes the ﬁrst results on semantic seg-
mentation using event camera information. We build an
encoder-decoder architecture which is able to learn seman-
tic segmentation only from event camera data. Since there
is no benchmark available for this problem, we propose how
to generate automatic but approximate semantic segmenta-
tion labels for some sequences of the DDD17 event-based
dataset. Our evaluation shows how this approach allows the
effective learning of semantic segmentation models from
event data. In order to feed the model, we also propose a
novel event camera data representation, which encodes both
the event histogram and their temporal distribution. Our se-
mantic segmentation experiments, comparing different rep-
resentations, show that our approach allows the effective
learning of semantic segmentation models and that our ap-
proach outperforms other previously used event representa-
tions, even when evaluating in different time intervals. We
also compare the segmentation achieved only from event
data to the segmentation from conventional images, show-
ing their beneﬁts, their drawbacks and the beneﬁts of com-
bining both sensors for this task. For future work, one of the
main challenges is still obtaining and generating more and
better semantic segmentation labels, through alternative do-
main adaptation approaches and/or event camera simulators
(they currently do not provide this kind of labels).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank NVIDIA Corporation
for the donation of a Titan Xp GPU used in this work. This
research has been partially funded by the Spanish Govern-
ment projects DPI2015-69376-R and DPI2016-76676-R-
AEI/FEDER-UE, and Arag ´on regional government (DGA
T45 17R/FSE).