5204 V. Jackins et al.
1 3
3.1  Proposed algorithm
3.1.1  Naive Bayes classification algorithm
Here it has used Bayes theorem for classification purpose and to assume that clas-
sification is predictor independent. It assumes that Naive Bayes classifier in the 
presence of a particular feature in a class is unrelated to any other feature.
Naive Bayes model is compatible for very large datasets to build and for further 
analysis. This model is very simple and sophisticated classification method, and it 
performed well even in complicated scenarios. By using Bayes theorem, calculate 
the posterior probability using the equation below:
where P(a/y) indicates the posterior probability of class, P(a) represents the class 
prior probability, P(y/a) shows the likelihood which is the probability of predictor 
given class and P(y) indicates the predictor’s prior probability.
3.1.2  Random forest algorithm
The random forest (RF) is a hierarchical collection of tree structured base classifiers. 
Text data usually have many number of dimensions. The dataset contains a large 
number of irrelevant attributes. Only few important attributes are informative for 
classifier model. RF algorithm uses a simple predetermined probability to select the 
most important relevant attribute. Breiman formulated the RF algorithm using sam-
ple data subsets and to construct multiple decision trees by mapping random sample 
of feature subspaces. The RF algorithm associated with a set of training documents 
D and Nf features can be described as follows:
(1) Initial: D1, D2,…….DK sampled by predetermined probability with replacement.
(2) For each document DK construct a decision tree model. The training documents 
are randomly sampled using its subspace of m-try dimension from the available 
features. Calculate all possible probability based on the m-try features. The leaf 
node produces the best data split. The process will be continued till it reaches 
the saturation criterion.
Combine the K number of unpruned trees h1(X1), h2(X2),…….. into a random for -
est ensemble and use the high probability value for classification decision.
Random forest pseudocode:
1. Randomly select  “n” features from total  “k” features.
1. Where  n <  < k
2. Among the “n” features, calculate the node  “n” using the best split point.
3. Categorize the node into  daughter nodes using the  best split.(2) P(a∕y)=(P(y∕a)P(a))∕P(y)