5202 V. Jackins et al.
1 3
Variety of classification and clustering algorithms plays a significant role for 
prediction and diagnosis of different types of diseases. Bayesian network clas-
sifier and random forest classifier are used to diagnose the risk for diabetes [10, 
19, 20]. The prediction accuracy of the k-means algorithm is enhanced using 
both class and cluster method and making it adapt to different datasets [21]. A 
group of classification algorithms excluding random forest algorithm is applied 
on diabetes data to diagnose the risk. On comparing the performance of each 
method, the outcome shows that Random Forest was performed well in both 
accuracy and ROC curve [8 , 22, 23].
In ANN hybrid classifier, each neuron of the hidden and output layer receives 
signals from the previous layer multiplied with the weights of the interconnec-
tion. The neuron then produces the output by passing the summed signal through 
the defined transfer function.
The network is trained for the given input iteratively. In each iteration, the 
mean square error (MSE) between the target and the achieved output is calcu-
lated. The MSE for the j th iteration is defined in Eq. (1 ) as follows,
tj and aj are the targeted and the achieved output, respectively. The network 
is trained by adjusting the weights and the bias so that the MSE get minimized. 
The MSE estimates the posterior probability function for the classification 
problem. Here in the gradient descent method, back-propagation (BP) method 
uses the calculated MSE at each layer to adjust the value of the interconnected 
weights. Though ANNs are good classifiers, they require large number of train-
ing sets to train for proper behavior. That is why it founds fine if hybridized with 
the classifiers which could require a smaller number of training samples to clas-
sify properly. Neural network-based cancer classifiers are used with binary and 
multi-class problems to identify the cancerous samples [8 ].
Applied Naïve Bayes algorithm developing an artificial intelligent system, 
based on the comparison of certain parameters used to predict whether a person 
is having diabetic problem or not [2 , 3]. The artificial intelligent-based methods 
are very effective and popular one in recent years [24]. The diagnosis of diabetes 
and cancer prediction the adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system shows better 
accuracy [12]. Also shows the accuracy information of Naive Bayes classifier 
and K-means algorithm. 80% accuracy is obtained from this method [12]. Modi-
fied extreme learning machine and back-propagation neural network method are 
addressed in prediction of diabetes mellitus [13]. The data mining techniques 
such as K-means algorithms, MAFIA algorithm, decision tree algorithm and 
other classification algorithms provide reliable performance in diagnosing the 
heart disease [7 , 16, 25, 26]. It helps a non-specialized doctor to make the right 
decision about the heart disease risk level by generating original rules, pruned 
rules, classified rules and sorted rules [27].(1) F(X)=/parenleft.s1ti−ai/parenright.s12