5201
1 3AI-based smart prediction of clinical disease using random…
SVM is the supervised learning model, which can perform well even with the 
smaller data samples [12, 13]. SVM classifier has no curse of dimensionality since 
it has the ability to manage sparse data in high-dimensional datasets [14]. Also, 
SVM classifier has better generalization than the ANN and avoid local minima prob-
lem. The logic behind the SVM method is it creates the optimal separation plane 
under linearly separable condition [12]. The hyper plane is optimized by increas-
ing the margin. The margin is the distance between boundary and nearest point of 
each class. These points nearest to the boundary are called support vectors [15]. For 
healthcare data analysis, data mining techniques like classification, association rules 
and clustering are commonly used.
The main contribution of this paper is summarized as follows.
• Initially disease dataset is taken as a input for the system. Diabetes, heart disease 
and cancer datasets are taken for the analysis, so many informations are related 
to the patients health care and general data there in disease dataset. These are the 
life-threading diseases for human beings.
• Data preprocessing is applied to the input datasets, it leads to reduce the 
unwanted information for the further analysis. Check the missing values and 
checking the correlation it helps to split the training data in to 70% original data 
and 30% testing data, for efficient data analysis.
• Data-mining algorithms like random forest and Gaussian Naïve Bayes are 
applied to estimate the performance of the system against the input disease data-
set. The classification results are compared with existing results, and it shows the 
better improvement.
The paper is organized as follows, Sect.  1 represents the introduction, Sect.  2 rep -
resents the literature survey, while Sect.  3 proposes the proposed method, Sect.  4 
represents the results and discussions, Sect.  5 proposes performance evaluation, 
Sect.  6 identifies the proposed metrics with random forest and the final Sect.  6 pro -
poses the conclusion with references.
2  Literature survey
Data mining is a growing field that transforms piece of data into useful information. 
This technique helps the authorized person make informed options and take right 
decisions for their betterment [16]. It used to understand, predict and guide future 
behavior based on the hidden patterns among huge dataset. It leads to offer tools for 
automated learning from the history of data and developing models to discover the 
outcomes of future scenarios. There are the various tools for data mining machine 
learning algorithms to identify and predict the various disease in terms of regres-
sion, decision tree and Bayesian network [17]. Finding of a disease, needed different 
test results in variety of scenarios with respect to the particular patient. By applying 
data mining, concept for data analysis number of tests will be reduced. It plays a 
vital role in data analysis to improve the performance and time saving [18].