5216 V. Jackins et al.
1 3
cancer datasets. But the performance of proposed random forest algorithm is per -
formed will than DBSCAN clustering.
Figure  9 shows the accuracy calculation results of Naïve Bayes algorithm, 
K-means algorithm and random forest algorithm. The training data are taken for the 
analysis, and the results of K-means algorithm are somewhat better against heart 
diseases and cancer datasets compared with Naïve Bayes algorithm. But the per -
formance of proposed random forest algorithm shows good results than K-means 
clustering.
Figure  10 shows the accuracy calculation results of Naïve Bayes algorithm, 
K-means algorithm and random forest algorithm. The training data are taken for the 
analysis, the results of DBSCAN algorithm are somewhat better against heart dis-
eases, and cancer datasets are compared with Naïve Bayes algorithm. But the per -
formance of proposed random forest algorithm shows good results than DBSCAN 
clustering.
6  Conclusion
Data mining can be effectively implemented in medical domain. The aim of this 
study is to discover a model for the diagnosis of diabetes, coronary heart disease 
and cancer among the available dataset. The dataset is chosen from online reposi-
tories. The techniques of pre-processing applied are filled in missing values and 
removing correlated columns. Next, the classifier is applied to the preprocessed 
dataset, and then Bayesian and random forest models are constructed. Finally, 
the accuracy of the models is calculated and analyses are based on the efficiency 
calculations. Bayesian Classification network shows the accuracy of 74.46, 82.35 
and 63.74% for diabetes, coronary heart disease and cancer data. Similarly, clas-
sification with Random forest model shows the accuracy of 74.03, 83.85 and 
92.40. The accuracy outcome of Random forest model for the three diseases is 
greater than the accuracy values of Naïve Bayes classifier. Finally, the proposed 
Fig. 10  Training data compared with DBSCAN Algorithm