5203
1 3AI-based smart prediction of clinical disease using random…
3  Proposed method
The proposed method has been used with Anaconda tool (AEN 4.1 Version) for 
data analysis. Anaconda a package management system manages the package ver -
sions for predictive analysis and data management [28]. It has been taken three 
disease patient data such as diabetes, coronary heart disease and breast cancer 
data as input, the reason for choosing these datasets only because of life threading 
characteristics and find the efficiency of the proposed method in fruitful manner 
and some relativity is there between these datasets. These data are loaded and 
checked to see whether it has any missing values or not. If any missing values are 
found, they are replaced to a null value. Then it has been checked whether any 
columns in the data have any correlation with another column in the data indi-
vidually. If any correlation is found between two columns, one of those column 
is removed. If any true and false value is found in data, it is replaced to 1 and 
0, respectively. It has split the original data into training data which has 70% of 
original data and test data which has 30% of the original data.
To check the number of true and false cases in original, training and test data 
of the three-class data, it has been trained our three different class data with the 
Naive Bayes algorithm and calculate the results accuracy this algorithm gives 
to the three classes separately using confusion matrix [29]. The block diagram 
of the proposed method is shown in Fig.  1. The performance report shows the 
performance metrics of the accuracy calculation for each class data individually. 
Similarly, it has trained our three different class data with the random forest algo-
rithm. It has calculated the results accuracy, and this algorithm gives the three 
classes separately using confusion matrix. The performance report shows the 
performance metrics of the accuracy calculation for each class data individually. 
Internal model parameters updated through epoch, every epoch contains one or 
more batches. The epoch can be applied until minimize the errors in datasets [30, 
31].
It has taken few sample test data separately for each class data. Applying these 
sample data on each trained model of that disease shows us the results whether 
the data are identified with that disease or not. While comparing the results of 
both model for each class data, it can see that the model trained with Random 
forest gives the accurate results of classification. To find the efficiency of the pro-
posed method, the trained data are compared separately with the proposed algo-
rithms and also checked the performance of test data. The proposed method is 
also applicable for testing the real-time disease data for classification and to iden-
tify whether the patient is affected by the particular disease or not.