5199
1 3AI-based smart prediction of clinical disease using random…
1 Introduction
Due to modern lifestyle, diseases are increasing rapidly. Our lifestyle and food 
habit leads to create impact on our health causing heart diseases and other health 
issues. Data mining technique is one of the most challenging and leading research 
areas in healthcare due to the high importance of valuable data [1 ]. The recent 
blooming in the data mining approaches has provided a solid platform for vari-
ous applications in the healthcare field. In healthcare, data mining is playing a 
vital role in different fields like intrusion detection, pattern recognition, cheaper 
medical treatments’ availability for the patients, disease diagnosing and finding 
its procurement methods [2 , 3]. An artificial intelligence makes the system more 
sensitive and activates the system to think. In machine learning, AI acts as a sub-
field to perform better prediction [4 ].
It also accommodates the researchers in the field of healthcare in development 
of effective policies, and different systems to prevent different types of disease, 
early detection of diseases can reduce the risk factor. The aim of our work is to 
predict the diseases among the trained dataset using classification algorithms. It 
has been trained the Naive Bayes and random forest classifier model with three 
different disease datasets namely—diabetes, coronary heart disease and cancer 
datasets and performance of each model are calculated. Over-fitting of single 
decision tree problem is overcome by applying the Random forest algorithm [5 ]. 
Random forest algorithm provides better prediction accuracy compared with the 
Naïve Bayes algorithm. In addition, it has been applied few sample test data of 
the three diseases to those classified models to show whether the patient data in 
sample test are suffering from that disease or not [6 ].
Artificial neural networks are the best effort classification algorithm for pre-
diction of medical diagnosis due to its best efficiency parameter [7 ]. The neural 
network comprises of the neurons with three layers such as input layer, hidden 
layer and output layer for the efficiency attainment. The training data are given as 
the input parameter with the support of back propagation algorithm. The feed-for -
ward neural network with support vector machine (SVM) is a best technique for 
prediction of cancer [8 ]. The ANN is used to classify the labeled images based 
on the determination of the true positive (TP) and false-positive (FP) detection 
rates. The detection mechanism is performed with the self-organized supervised 
learning algorithm. ANN approach gives the promising result for the detec-
tion of micro-calcifications features and biopsy detection [9 ]. The ANN is seg-
mented into two approaches, initially the classifier is applied to the image data 
with region of interest (ROI) and second includes the ANN learn the features 
from pre-processed image signals. SVM is a statistical learning theory-based 
machine learning approach. SVM works with the ANN to map the input space to 
the higher-dimensional space to split the labeled images. The labeled images are 
determined in a marginal space forming a hyper plane which reduces the gener -
alization error [10].
A hybrid classifier is proposed here by hybridizing support vector machine and 
artificial neural network [7 ]. A typical ANN consists of one input layer, one or