Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
Input ImageLSeg Ouput ALSeg Ouput B sky, road, house, plantsky, road, building, greenery
other, dog, table,cake, breadother, dog, table,dessert, bread
(a) Related unseen labels.
Input ImageLSeg Ouput ALSeg Ouput Bcat, grass, plant, stone furry, plant, stone
 sofa, painting, plant,ﬂoor, window, othersfurniture, painting, plant,ﬂoor, window, others
(b) Hierarchical unseen labels.
Figure 5: LSeg examples with related but previously unseen labels, and hierarchical labels. Going
from left to right, labels that are removed between runs are underlined , whereas labels that are added
are marked in bold red .
segments the image and correctly assigns the labels "cake" or "dessert" (again, the label "dessert"
was not seen during training), while successfully suppressing the label "bread" which is both visually
and semantically related.
Hierarchical unseen labels. Figure 5(b) demonstrates that LSeg can implicitly provide correct
segmentation maps for hierarchies of labels. In the ﬁrst row, the model is able to recognize the "cat",
"plant" and "grass" segments of the image, as expected since these labels are present in the training
set. When replacing "cat" with the label "furry", we notice that the model is able to successfully
recognize this parent category (that is, most cats are furry, but not all furry objects are cats). Similarly,
when removing the label "grass", we notice that the original "grass" region is merged into "plant",
again an indication of an implicit hierarchy that is afforded by the ﬂexibility of the text embeddings.
The second row illustrates a similar scenario, where LSeg recognizes the sofa and other objects.
However, the small shelf on the left is segmented as the unknown category "other". When we change
"sofa" to "furniture", LSeg successfully identiﬁes both the sofa and the small shelf as "furniture".
Note that "furniture" never appeared in the training label set.
toy, grass
(a)
tree, grass, sky,house, window, other (b)
Figure 6: Failure cases.Failure cases. While LSeg in general achieves
very promising results, we also observe some
failure cases, as illustrated in Figure 6. The left
image illustrates that LSeg is only trained with
positive samples from a class. When the test-
time input labels do not contain any of the true
labels for the corresponding pixel, the model
assigns the highest probability to the closest la-
bel in the text embedding space. In this speciﬁc
example, the model assigns the label "toy" since
the visual features of the dog are apparently closer to "toy" than to "grass" in the embedding space
and there is no other label that can explain the visual features. A second failure case is shown on
the right, where the model focuses on a single most likely object when multiple explanations are
consistent with the label set. In this speciﬁc example, the windows of the house are labeled as "house"
instead of window, even thought the label "window" is available as a choice. We hope that these
failure cases can inform future work, which could involve augmenting training with negative samples
or building ﬁne-grained language-driven semantic segmentation models that can potentially assign
multiple labels when multiple explanations ﬁt the data well.
6 C ONCLUSION
We introduced LSeg, a novel method and architecture for training language-driven semantic segmen-
tation models. LSeg enables a ﬂexible label representation that maps semantically similar labels to
similar regions in an embedding space and learns to correlate visual concepts in this space to produce
semantic segmentations. Our formulation enables the synthesis of zero-shot semantic segmentation
models with arbitrary label sets on the ﬂy. Our empirical results show that the resulting models
are strong baselines for zero-shot semantic segmentation and can even rival few-shot segmentation
models while not sacriﬁcing accuracy on existing ﬁxed label sets.
9