Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
learn to ﬁnd reliable visual correspondences between a query image that is to be labeled and labeled
support images that may contain novel semantic classes (Shaban et al., 2017; Rakelly et al., 2018;
Siam et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Nguyen & Todorovic, 2019; Liu et al., 2020b;
Wang et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020; Boudiaf et al., 2021; Min
et al., 2021). While this strategy can signiﬁcantly enhance the generality of the resulting model, it
requires the availability of at least one labeled example image with the target label set, something
that is not always practical.
Zero-shot semantic segmentation approaches aim to segment unseen objects without any additional
samples of novel classes. Text embeddings of class labels play a central role in these works. Bucher
et al. (2019) and Gu et al. (2020) propose to leverage word embeddings together with a generative
model to generate visual features of unseen categories, while Xian et al. (2019) propose to project
visual features into a simple word embedding space and to correlate the resulting embeddings to
assign a label to a pixel. Hu et al. (2020) propose to use uncertainty-aware learning to better handle
noisy labels of seen classes, while Li et al. (2020b) introduce a structured learning approach to
better exploit the relations between seen and unseen categories. While all of these leverage text
embeddings, our paper is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst to show that it is possible to synthesize
zero-shot semantic segmentation models that perform on par with ﬁxed-label and few-shot semantic
segmentation methods.
A variety of solutions have been proposed (Zhang et al., 2020b; Liu et al., 2020a; Perera et al., 2020;
Zhou et al., 2021) for open-set recognition (Scheirer et al., 2012; Geng et al., 2020). These aim to
provide a binary decision about whether or not a given sample falls outside the training distribution,
but do not aim to predict the labels of entirely new classes.
Finally, a different line of work explores cross-domain adaptation methods for semantic segmentation
by using feature alignment, self-training, and information propagation strategies (Yang et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2021). The target of these works is to enhance the transferability of models to novel
visual domains, but they do not address the issue of a restricted label set. As such they are orthogonal
to our work.
Language-driven recognition. Language-driven recognition is an active area of research. Common
tasks in this space include visual question answering (Antol et al., 2015), image captioning (Vinyals
et al., 2014), and image-text retrieval (Li et al., 2020a). CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) demonstrated that
classic recognition tasks that are not commonly associated with language can strongly beneﬁt from
language assistance. CLIP uses contrastive learning together with high-capacity language models
and visual feature encoders to synthesize extremely robust models for zero-shot image classiﬁcation.
Recent works have extended this basic paradigm to perform ﬂexible object detection. ViLD (Gu
et al., 2021) introduces an advanced zero-shot object detection method that leverages CLIP, whereas
MDETR (Kamath et al., 2021) proposes an end-to-end approach that modulates a transformer-based
baseline detector with text features that are obtained from a state-of-the-art language model. Like
CLIP, these works have shown that the robustness and generality of object detection models can be
strongly improved by language assistance. Our work is inspired by these approaches and presents, to
the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst approach to ﬂexibly synthesize zero-shot semantic segmentation
models by leveraging high-capacity language models.
3 L ANGUAGE -DRIVEN SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION
Our approach, Language driven Semantic segmentation (LSeg) embeds text labels and image pixels
into a common space, and assigns the closest label to each pixel. We illustrate the framework in
Figure 2 and describe each part in detail below.
Text encoder. The text encoder embeds the set of Npotential labels into a continuous vector space
RC, producing Nvectors T1; : : : ; T n2RCas outputs (blue vectors in Figure 2). Multiple network
architectures are possible, and we use the pretrained Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training (CLIP)
throughout (Radford et al., 2021). By design, the set of output vectors is invariant to the ordering of
the input labels and allows their number, N, to vary freely.
Image encoder. Similar to the text encoder, the image encoder produces an embedding vector for
every input pixel (after downsampling). We leverage dense prediction transformers (DPT) (Ranftl
3