Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
other, person, bicycleother, person, bicycle, skyother, person, bicycle,sky, mountain, grass
Input Image(a) LSeg Output(b) LSeg Output(c) LSeg Outputother, chairother, wall, chairother, wall, chair, window, ﬂoor, ceilingother, dogother, dog, treeother, pet, vehicle, tree
Figure 1: Example results. LSeg is able to handle unseen labels as well as label sets of arbitrary
length and order. This enables ﬂexible synthesis of zero-shot semantic segmentation models on the
ﬂy. From left to right, labels that are removed between runs are underlined , whereas labels that are
added are marked in bold red .
for image classiﬁcation (Radford et al., 2021), which pairs high-capacity image and text encoders
to produce robust zero-shot classiﬁers. We propose to use state-of-the-art text encoders that have
been co-trained on visual data, such as CLIP, to embed labels from the training set into an embedding
space and to train a visual encoder to produce per-pixel embeddings from an input image that are
close to the corresponding label embeddings. Since the text encoder is trained to embed closely
related concepts near one another (for example, “dog” is closer to “pet” than to “vehicle”), we can
transfer the ﬂexibility of the text encoder to the visual recognition module while only training on
the restricted label sets that are provided by existing semantic segmentation datasets. An example is
shown in Figure 1 (top row), where the model can successfully label pixels belonging to the class
“pet” although the training set did not contain this label.
Our approach enables the synthesis of zero-shot semantic segmentation models on the ﬂy. That
is, a user can arbitrarily expand, shrink, or reorder the label set for any image at test time. We
further introduce an output module that can spatially regularize the predictions while maintaining
this ﬂexibility. We demonstrate several examples of the ﬂexibility of our model in Figure 1. LSeg is
able to output different segmentation maps based on the provided label set. For instance, in the last
row, output (a) recognizes the chair and identiﬁes all non-chair objects as “other” since these are the
only two labels provided to the model. When labels are added, as in (b) and (c), the model is able to
successfully segment other objects with the expanded label set.
We conduct quantitative evaluation on a variety of zero- and few-shot semantic segmentation tasks.
Our approach outperforms existing methods in zero-shot settings and is competitive across multiple
few-shot benchmarks. Unlike the state-of-the-art baselines we compare to, our approach does not
require additional training samples. Our experiments also show that introducing the text embeddings
incurs only a negligible loss in performance when compared to standard ﬁxed-label segmentation
methods.
2 R ELATED WORK
Generalized semantic segmentation. The majority of existing semantic segmentation models are
restricted to a ﬁxed label set that is deﬁned by the labels that are present in the training dataset (Minaee
et al., 2021). Few-shot semantic segmentation methods aim to relax the restriction of a ﬁxed label set
when one or a few annotated examples of novel classes are available at test time. These approaches
2