Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
LANGUAGE -DRIVEN SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION
Boyi Li
Cornell University, Cornell TechKilian Q. Weinberger
Cornell UniversitySerge Belongie
University of Copenhagen
Vladlen Koltun
AppleRené Ranftl
Intel Labs
ABSTRACT
We present LSeg, a novel model for language-driven semantic image segmenta-
tion. LSeg uses a text encoder to compute embeddings of descriptive input labels
(e.g., “grass” or “building”) together with a transformer-based image encoder that
computes dense per-pixel embeddings of the input image. The image encoder is
trained with a contrastive objective to align pixel embeddings to the text embed-
ding of the corresponding semantic class. The text embeddings provide a ﬂexible
label representation in which semantically similar labels map to similar regions
in the embedding space (e.g., “cat” and “furry”). This allows LSeg to generalize
to previously unseen categories at test time, without retraining or even requiring
a single additional training sample. We demonstrate that our approach achieves
highly competitive zero-shot performance compared to existing zero- and few-shot
semantic segmentation methods, and even matches the accuracy of traditional
segmentation algorithms when a ﬁxed label set is provided. Code and demo are
available at https://github.com/isl-org/lang-seg.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Semantic segmentation is a core problem in computer vision, with the aim of partitioning an image
into coherent regions with their respective semantic class labels. Most existing methods for semantic
segmentation assume a limited set of semantic class labels that can potentially be assigned to a
pixel. The number of class labels is dictated by the training dataset and typically ranges from tens
(Everingham et al., 2015) to hundreds (Zhou et al., 2019; Mottaghi et al., 2014) of distinct categories.
As the English language deﬁnes several hundred thousand nouns (Li et al., 2020c), it is likely that
the limited size of the label set severely hinders the potential recognition performance of existing
semantic segmentation models.
The main reason for the restricted label sets in existing methods is the cost of annotating images
to produce sufﬁcient training data. To create training datasets, human annotators must associate
every single pixel in thousands of images with a semantic class label – a task that is extremely labor
intensive and costly even with small label sets. The complexity of the annotation rises signiﬁcantly
as the number of labels increases since the human annotator has to be aware of the ﬁne-grained
candidate labels. Additionally, inter-annotator consistency becomes an issue when objects are present
in an image that could ﬁt multiple different descriptions or are subject to a hierarchy of labels.
Zero- and few-shot semantic segmentation methods have been proposed as a potential remedy for this
problem. Few-shot approaches (Shaban et al., 2017; Rakelly et al., 2018; Siam et al., 2019; Wang
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Nguyen & Todorovic, 2019; Liu et al., 2020b; Wang et al., 2020; Tian
et al., 2020; Boudiaf et al., 2021; Min et al., 2021) offer ways to learn to segment novel classes based
on only a few labeled images. However, these approaches still require labeled data that includes the
novel classes in order to facilitate transfer. Zero-shot methods, on the other hand, commonly leverage
word embeddings to discover or generate related features between seen and unseen classes (Bucher
et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2020) without the need for additional annotations. Existing works in this space
use standard word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) and focus on the image encoder.
In this work, we present a simple approach to leveraging modern language models to increase the
ﬂexibility and generality of semantic segmentation models. Our work is inspired by the CLIP model
1arXiv:2201.03546v2  [cs.CV]  3 Apr 2022