Chapter 3
Random Forests
Abstract The general principle of random forests is to aggregate a collection of
random decision trees. The goal is, instead of seeking to optimize a predictor “atonce” as for a CART tree, to pool a set of predictors (not necessarily optimal). Since
individual trees are randomly perturbed, the forest beneﬁts from a more extensive
exploration of the space of all possible tree predictors, which, in practice, resultsin better predictive performance. Focusing on random forests, this chapter begins
by addressing the instability of a tree and subsequently introduces readers to two
random forest variants: Bagging and Random Forest Random Inputs. The construc-tion of random forests is illustrated on the spam dataset using the randomForest
package. The clever prediction error estimate Out-Of-Bag Error is also presented. In
turn, the chapter assesses the sensitivity of prediction performance to the two mainparameters: the number of trees and the number of variables picked at each node.
In the ﬁnal section, random forests are applied to three examples: predicting ozone
concentration, analyzing genomic data, and analyzing dust pollution.
3.1 General Principle
The general principle of random forests (RF henceforth) is to aggregate a collection
of random decision trees. The goal is, instead of seeking to optimize a predictor “at
once” as for a CART tree, to pool a set of predictors (not necessarily optimal). Sinceindividual trees are randomly perturbed, the forest beneﬁts from a more extensive
exploration of the space of all possible tree predictors, which, in practice, results in
better predictive performance.
The general deﬁnition of random forests, given by Breiman ( 2001 ), is as follows:
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Random forests )L e t/parenleftbig/hatwideh(., Θ
1) ,..., /hatwideh(., Θ q)/parenrightbig
be a collection of tree
predictors, with Θ1,...,Θ qqi.i.d. random variables independent of Ln. The random
forest predictor /hatwidehRFis obtained by aggregating this collection of random trees. The
aggregation is done as follows:
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
R. Genuer and J.-M. Poggi, Random F orests with R , Use R!,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-56485-8_333