Chapter 4
Variable Importance
Abstract Here, the focus is on creating a hierarchy of input variables, based on a
quantiﬁcation of the importance of their effects on the response variable. Such anindex of importance provides a ranking of variables. Random forests offer an ideal
framework, as they do not make any assumptions regarding the underlying model.
This chapter introduces permutation variable importance using random forests andillustrates its use on the spam dataset. The behavior of the variable importance index is
ﬁrst studied with regard to data-related aspects: the number of observations, number
of variables, and presence of groups of correlated variables. Then, its behavior withregard to random forest parameters is addressed. In the ﬁnal section, the use of
variable importance is ﬁrst illustrated by simulation in regression, and then in three
examples: predicting ozone concentration, analyzing genomic data, and determiningthe local level of dust pollution.
4.1 Notions of Importance
In this chapter, the focus is on constructing a hierarchy of explanatory variables basedon a quantiﬁcation of the importance of their effects on the response variable. Suchan index of importance provides a ranking of variables, from the most important
to the least important. A general discussion on variable importance can be found
in Azen and Budescu ( 2003 ). This notion has been mainly studied in the context
of linear models, as highlighted by Grömping ( 2015 )’s review or Wallard ( 2015 )’s
PhD thesis. From this standpoint, random forests offer an ideal framework, as they
are much more general and, as previously mentioned, do not make any assumptionsregarding the underlying model. They combine a nonparametric method, which does
not specify a particular type of the relationship between Yand X, with resampling
to provide an efﬁcient and convenient deﬁnition of such indices.
In this context, one of the most widely used measures of the importance of a
given variable is the average (among trees in a forest) increase in the error made by
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
R. Genuer and J.-M. Poggi, Random F orests with R , Use R!,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-56485-8_457