Chapter 1
Introduction to Random Forests with R
Abstract The two algorithms discussed in this book were proposed by Leo Breiman:
CART trees, which were introduced in the mid-1980s, and random forests, whichemerged just under 20 years later in the early 2000s. This chapter offers an intro-
duction to the subject matter, beginning with a historical overview. Some notations,
used to deﬁne the various statistical objectives addressed in the book, are also intro-duced: classiﬁcation, regression, prediction, and variable selection. In turn, the three
R packages used in the book are listed, and some competitors are mentioned. Lastly,
the four datasets used to illustrate the methods’ application are presented: the runningexample (spam), a genomic dataset, and two pollution datasets (ozone and dust).
1.1 Preamble
The two algorithms discussed in this book were proposed by Leo Breiman: CART
(Classiﬁcation And Regression Trees) trees, which were introduced in the mid-1980s
(Breiman et al. 1984 ), and random forests (Breiman 2001 ), which emerged just
under 20 years later in the early 2000s. At the conﬂuence of statistics and statistical
learning, this shortcut among Leo Breiman’s multiple contributions, whose scientiﬁcbiography is described in Olshen ( 2001 ) and Cutler ( 2010 ), provides a remarkable
ﬁgure of these two disciplines.
Decision trees are the basic tool for numerous tree-based ensemble methods.
Although known for decades and very attractive because of their simplicity and
interpretability, their use suffered, until the 1980s, from serious justiﬁed objections.
From this point of view, CART offers to decision trees the conceptual framework ofautomatic model selection, giving them theoretical guarantees and broad applicability
while preserving their ease of interpretation.
But one of the major drawbacks, instability, remains. The idea of random forests is
to exploit the natural variability of trees. More speciﬁcally, it is a matter of disrupting
the construction by introducing some randomness in the selection of both individuals
and variables. The resulting trees are then combined to construct the ﬁnal prediction,
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
R. Genuer and J.-M. Poggi, Random Forests with R , Use R!,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-56485-8_11