78 5 V ariable Selection
In many situations, in addition to designing a good predictor, practitioners also
want additional information on the variables used in the problem. Statisticians are
invited to propose a selection of variables in order to identify those that are mostuseful in explaining the input–output relationship. In this context, it is natural to think
that relatively a few variables (say at most nand hopefully much less, for example,√
n) actually affect the output, and it is necessary to make additional assumptions
(called parsimony or sparsity) to make it tractable and meaningful. In Giraud ( 2014 ),
there is a very complete presentation of mathematical problems and techniques for
addressing this kind of questions.
Let us mention some methods for variable selection in high-dimensional contexts.
Starting with an empirical study in Poggi and Tuleau ( 2006 ) where a method based on
the variable importance index provided by the CART algorithm is introduced. In thesame ﬂavor, let us also mention Questier et al. ( 2005 ). Considering the problem more
generally, Guyon et al. ( 2002 ), Rakotomamonjy ( 2003 ), and Ghattas and Ben Ishak
(2008 ) use the score provided by the Support V ector Machines (SVM: V apnik 2013 )
and Díaz-Uriarte and Alvarez De Andres ( 2006 ) propose a variable selection proce-
dure based on the variable importance index related to random forests. These methods
calculate a score for each of the variables, then perform a sequential introduction of
variables ( forward methods), or a sequential elimination of variables ( backward or
RFE for Recursive Feature Elimination methods), or perform step-by-step methods(stepwise methods) combining introduction and elimination of variables. In Fan and
Lv ( 2008 ), a two-step method is proposed: a ﬁrst step of eliminating variables to
reach a reasonable situation where pis of the same order of magnitude of n, then a
second step of model building using a forward strategy based, for example, on the
Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (Lasso: Tibshirani 1996 ). In this
spirit, a general scheme for calculating an importance score for variables is proposedin Lê Cao et al. ( 2007 ), then the authors use this scheme with CART and SVM as
the base method. Their idea is to learn a weight vector on all variables (their meta-
algorithm is called Optimal Feature Weighting, OFW): a variable with a large weightis important, while a variable with a small weight is useless.
Finally, more recently, methods to improve Lasso for variable selection have been
developed. The latter have points in common with the ensemble methods. Indeed,instead of trying to make selection “at once” with a classic Lasso, the idea is to con-
struct several subsets of variables and then combine them. In Bolasso (for Bootstrap-
enhanced Lasso), introduced by Bach ( 2008 ), several bootstrap samples are generated
and then the Lasso method is applied to each of them. Bolasso is therefore to be com-
pared with the Bagging of Breiman ( 1996 ). In Randomized Lasso, Meinshausen and
Bühlmann ( 2010 ) propose to generate several samples by subsampling and add an
additional random perturbation to the construction of the Lasso itself. Randomized
Lasso is therefore to be compared to Random Forests-RI variant of random forests.In the same spirit, we can also mention Fellinghauer et al. ( 2013 ) which use RF for
robust estimation in graphical models.
Interest in the subject still continues: for example, Hapfelmeier and Ulm ( 2012 )
propose a new selection approach using RF, and Cadenas et al. ( 2013 ) describe and
compare these different approaches in a survey paper.