5.2 Principle 79
5.2 Principle
In Genuer et al. ( 2010b ), we propose a variable selection method (see also in Genuer
et al. 2015 , the corresponding VSURF package). This is an automatic procedure
in the sense that there is no a priori to make the selection. For example, it is not
necessary to specify the desired number of variables; the procedure adapts to the
data to provide the ﬁnal subset of variables. The method involves two steps: theﬁrst, fairly coarse and descending, proceeds by thresholding the importance of the
variables to eliminate a large number of useless variables, while the second, ﬁner
and ascending, consists of a sequential introduction of variables into random forestmodels.
In addition, we distinguish two variable selection objectives: interpretation and
prediction (although this terminology may lead to confusion):
•For interpretation, we try to select all the variables X
jstrongly related to the
response variable Y(even if the variables Xjare correlated with each other).
•While for a prediction purpose, we try to select a parsimonious subset of variables
sufﬁcient to properly predict the response variable.
Typically, a subset built to satisfy the ﬁrst objective may contain many variables,
which will potentially be highly correlated with each other. On the contrary, a subset
of variables satisfying the second one will contain a few variables, weakly correlated.
A situation illustrates the distinction between the two types of variable selec-
tion. Consider a high-dimensional classiﬁcation problem ( n/lessmuch p) for which each
explanatory variable is associated with a pixel in an image or a voxel in a 3D imageas in brain activity classiﬁcation (fMRI) problems; see, for example Genuer et al.
(2010a ). In such situations, it is natural to assume that many variables are useless
or uninformative and that there are unknown groups of highly correlated predictorscorresponding to regions of the brain involved in the response to a given stimula-
tion. Although both variable selection objectives may be of interest in this case, it is
clear that ﬁnding all the important variables highly related to the response variable
is useful for interpretation, since the selected variables correspond to entire regions
of the brain or of an image. Of course, the search for a small number of variables,sufﬁcient for a good prediction, makes it possible to obtain the most discriminating
variables in the regions previously highlighted but is of less priority in this context.
5.3 Procedure
In this section, we present the skeleton of the procedure before providing additional
details, in the next section, after the application of the method to the spam data.
The ﬁrst step is common to both objectives while the second depends on the goal: