2 1 Introduction to Random Forests with R
rather than choosing one of them. Several algorithms based on such principles have
thus been developed, for many of them, by Breiman himself: Bagging (Breiman
1996 ), several variants of the Arcing (Breiman 1998 ), and Adaboost (Freund and
Schapire 1997 ).
Random forests (RF in the following) are therefore a nonparametric method of
statistical learning widely used in many ﬁelds of application, such as the study ofmicroarrays (Díaz-Uriarte and Alvarez De Andres 2006 ), ecology (Prasad et al.
2006 ), pollution prediction (Ghattas 1999 ), and genomics (Goldstein et al. 2010 ;
Boulesteix et al. 2012 ), and for a broader review, see Verikas et al. ( 2011 ). This
universality is ﬁrst and foremost linked to excellent predictive performance. This
can be seen in Fernández-Delgado et al. ( 2014 ) which crowns RF in a recent large-
scale comparative evaluation, whereas less than a decade earlier, the article in Wuet al. ( 2008 ) with similar objectives mentions CART but not yet random forests! In
addition, they are applicable to many types of data. Indeed, it is possible to consider
high-dimensional data for which the number of variables far exceeds the number ofobservations. In addition, they are suitable for both classiﬁcation problems (categori-
cal response variable) and regression problems (continuous response variable). They
also allow handling a mixture of qualitative and quantitative explanatory variables.
Finally, they are, of course, able to process standard data for which the number of
observations is greater than the number of variables.
Beyond the performance and the easy to tune feature of the method with very
few parameters to adjust, one of the most important aspects in terms of application
is the quantiﬁcation of the explanatory variables’ relative importance. This concept,which is not so much examined by statisticians (see, for example, Grömping 2015 ,i n
regression), ﬁnds a convenient deﬁnition in the context of random forests that is easy
to evaluate and which naturally extends to the case of groups of variables (Gregoruttiet al. 2015 ).
Therefore, and we will emphasize this aspect very strongly, RF can be used for
variable selection. Thus, in addition to a powerful prediction tool, it can also be usedto select the most interesting explanatory variables to explain the response, among a
potentially very large number of variables. This is very attractive in practice because
it helps both to interpret more easily the results and, above all, to determine inﬂuentialfactors for the problem of interest. Finally, it can also be beneﬁcial for prediction,
because eliminating many irrelevant variables makes the learning task easier.
1.2 Notation
Throughout the book, we will adopt the following notations. We assume that a learn-
ing sample is available:
Ln={ (X1,Y1) ,...,( Xn,Yn)}