4.1 Notions of Importance 61
MDI Importance
It should be noted that there is another VI index based on the Mean Decrease Impu-
rity (MDI) and inspired by the variable importance deﬁned in CART method (seeSect. 2.5.3 ). It is deﬁned as follows (Breiman 2001 ): for a given variable, its MDI is
the sum of the impurity decreases for all nodes where the variable is used to split,
weighted by the proportion of individuals in the node, on average on all trees in theforest. Although its use seems less frequent, it has given rise to theoretical results
(Louppe et al. 2013 ) and ﬁnds interesting practical applications despite real limita-
tions. In particular, it is highly dependent on forest parameters, biased for non-prunedtrees and ﬁnally the theoretical results only cover binary categorical variables.
4.2 Variable Importance Behavior
We illustrate the behavior of the permutation-based variable importance on a simu-
lated dataset, called toys . Introduced by Weston et al. ( 2003 ), it is a binary classiﬁca-
tion problem ( Y∈{ − 1,1}), with 6 “true” variables (related to Y) and noise variables
(independent of Y). For the latter, we will speak indifferently of variables that are
out of model or not informative.
The 6 true variables are divided into two independent groups: variables V1,V2,
andV3on the one hand and variables V4,V5, andV6on the other hand.
Deﬁnition 4.2 (T oys model) The simulation model is deﬁned using the distribution
of input variables Xjconditionally to Y=yas follows:
•For 70% of the observations: Xj∼N(y×j,1)for j=1,2,3 and Xj∼N(0,1)
for j=4,5,6.
•For the remaining 30% of observations: Xj∼N(0,1)for j=1,2,3 and Xj∼
N(y×(j−3),1)for j=4,5,6.
The additional noise variables, when p>6, are generated independently of Y:
Xj∼N(0.1)for j=7,..., p.
Once simulated, the input variables are all standardized.
Figure 4.2gives the histograms of the ﬁrst 9 input variables for a simulation of
1,000 observations based on toys model. The deﬁnition of the toys model as well as
the distribution of the input variables highlight the fact that the variables of the same
group are sorted from the least related to Yto the most related to Y.
4.2.1 Behavior According to n and p
Starting from a classical situation with n=500 and p=6, illustrating a very good
result of VI computation, we show in Fig. 4.3 the behavior of VI when increasing
the number of input variables and also when decreasing the number of observations.