12 2C A R T
V(t)−/parenleftbigg#tL
#tV(tL)+#tR
#tV(tR)/parenrightbigg
.
•In the classiﬁcation case, the possible labels are {1,..., C}, and the impurity of
the child nodes is most often quantiﬁed through the Gini index. The Gini indexof a node tis deﬁned by Φ(t)=/summationtext
C
c=1ˆpc
t(1−ˆpc
t), where ˆpc
tis the proportion
of observations of class cin the node t. We are then led, for any node tand any
admissible split, to maximize
Φ(t)−/parenleftbigg#tL
#tΦ(tL)+#tR
#tΦ(tR)/parenrightbigg
.
It should be emphasized that at each node, the search for the best split is made
among all the variables. Thus, a variable can be used in several splits (or only one
time or never).
In regression, we are therefore looking for splits that tend to reduce the variance
of the resulting nodes. In classiﬁcation, we try to decrease the Gini purity function,
and thus to increase the homogeneity of the obtained nodes, a node being perfectly
homogeneous if it contains only observations of the same class label. It should benoted that the homogeneity of the nodes could be measured by another function,
such as the misclassiﬁcation rate, but this natural choice does not lead to a strictly
concave purity function guaranteeing the uniqueness of the optimum at each split.This property, while not absolutely essential from a statistical point of view, is useful
from a computational point of view by avoiding ties for the best split selection.
In the case of a nominal explanatory variable X
j, the above remains valid except
that in this case, a split is simply an element of the form
{Xj∈d}∪{ Xj∈¯d},
where dand¯dare not empty and deﬁne a partition of the ﬁnite set of possible values
of the variable Xj.
Remark 2.1 In CART, we can take into account underrepresented classes by using
prior probabilities. The relative probability assigned to each class can be used to
adjust the magnitude of classiﬁcation errors for each class. Another way of doing
this is to oversample observations from rare classes, which is more or less equivalentto an overweighting of these observations.
Once the root of the tree has been split, we consider each of the child nodes and
then, using the same procedure, we look for the best way to split them into two new
nodes, and so on. The tree is thus developed until a stopping condition is reached.The most natural condition is not to split a pure node, i.e., a node containing only
observations with the same outputs (typically in classiﬁcation). But this criterion can
lead to unnecessarily deep trees. It is often associated with the classical criterionof not splitting nodes that contain less than a given number of observations. The
terminal nodes, which are no longer split, are called the leaves of the tree. We will