1.5 Datasets 5
1.5 Datasets
1.5.1 Running Example: Spam Detection
We will illustrate the application of the different methods on the very classical spam
data for educational purposes, as a running example.
This well-known and freely available dataset is due to an engineer from Hewlett-
Packard company, named George, who analyzed a sample of his professional emails:
•The observations are the 4,601 emails, of which 2,788 (i.e., 60 %) are desirable
emails and 1,813 (i.e., 40 %) are undesirable emails, i.e., spam.
•The response variable is therefore binary: spam ornon-spam . We will rename
the category non-spam tookto make some graphs easier to read.
•There are p=57 explanatory variables: 54 are proportions of occurrences of
words or characters, such as $(denoted charDollar ),!(denoted
charExclamation ),free ,money , andhp, two are related to the lengths of
the capital letter sequences (the average, capitalAve , the longest,
capitalLong ), and ﬁnally the last is the number of capital letters in the mail,
capitalTotal . These variables are classical and are deﬁned using standard text
analysis procedures, allowing observations characterized by texts to be statisticallyprocessed through numerical variables.
The statistical objectives stated above are formulated for this example as follows:
ﬁrst, we want to build a good spam ﬁlter: a new email arrives, we have to predict if it
is spam or not. Secondly, we are also interested in knowing which variables are themost important for the spam ﬁlter (here, words or characters).
To assess the performance of a spam ﬁlter, the dataset is randomly split into two
parts: 2,300 emails are used for learning while the other 2,301 emails are used to testpredictions.
1
So we have a problem of 2-class classiﬁcation (C=2) with a number of indi-
viduals ( n=2,300 for learning, model building) much larger than the number of
variables ( p=57). In addition, we have a large test sample ( m=2,301) to evaluate
an estimate of the prediction error.
Let us load the dataset into R, available in the kernlab package (Karatzoglou
et al. 2004 ); let us rename the category nonspam tookand ﬁx the learning and test
sets:
1Other usual choices are 70% of data for learning, 30% for test or even 80–20%: we choose 50–50%
to stabilize estimation errors and reduce computational times.