80 5 V ariable Selection
•Step 1. Ranking and preliminary elimination:
– Rank the variables by decreasing importance (in fact by average VI over typically
50 forests).
– Eliminate the variables of low importance (let us denote mto be the number of
retained variables).
More precisely, starting from this order, we consider the corresponding sequenceof standard deviations of the VIs that we use to estimate a threshold value on the
VIs. Since the variability of the VIs is greater for the variables truly in the model
than for the uninformative variables, the threshold value is given by estimating
the standard deviation of the VI for the latter variables. This threshold is set at
the minimum predicted value given by the CART model ﬁtting the data (X,Y)
where the Yare the standard deviations of the VI and the Xare their ranks.
Then only variables whose average importance VI is greater than this threshold
are kept.
•Step 2. V ariable selection:
–F o r interpretation : we build the collection of nested models given by forests
built on the data restricted to the ﬁrst kvariables (that is the kmost important),
for k=1t o m, and we select the variables of the model leading to the lowest
OOB error. Let us denote by m
/primethe number of selected variables.
More precisely, we calculate the averages (typically over 25 forests) of the OOB
errors of the nested models starting with the one with only the most important
variable and ending with the one involving all the important variables previouslyselected. Ideally, the variables of the model leading to the lowest OOB error are
selected. In fact, to deal with instability, we use a classical trick: we select the
smallest model with an error less than the lowest OOB error plus an estimate ofthe standard deviation of this error (based on the same 25 RF).
–F o r prediction : from the variables selected for interpretation, a sequence of
models is constructed by sequentially introducing the variables in increasing
order of importance and iteratively testing them. The variables of the last model
are ﬁnally selected.More precisely, the sequential introduction of variables is based on the following
test: a variable is added only if the OOB error decreases more than a threshold.
The idea is that the OOB error must decrease more than the average variationgenerated by the inclusion of non-informative variables. The threshold is set
to the average of the absolute values of the ﬁrst-order differences of the OOB
errors between the models including m
/primevariables and the one with mvariables:
1
m−m/primem−1/summationdisplay
j=m/prime|err O O B (j+1)−err O O B (j)| (5.1)
where err O O B (j)is the OOB error of the forest built with the jmost important
variables.