2.5 Competing and Surrogate Splits 25
importance index is provided by CART trees. It is based on the concept of surrogate
splits. According to Breiman et al. ( 1984 ), the importance of a variable can be deﬁned
by evaluating, in each node, the heterogeneity reduction generated by the use of thesurrogate split for that variable and then summing them over all nodes.
Inrpart , the importance of the variable X
jis deﬁned by the sum of two terms.
The ﬁrst is the sum of the heterogeneity reductions generated by the splits involving
Xj, and the second is weighted the sum of the heterogeneity reductions generated
by the surrogate splits when Xjdoes not deﬁne the split. In the second case, the
weighting is equal to the relative agreement, in excess of the majority routing rule,given for a node tof size n
t,b y
/braceleftBigg
(nXj−nmaj)/(nt−nmaj)ifnXj>nmaj
0 otherwise
where nXjand nmajare the numbers of observations well routed with respect to the
optimal split of the node t, respectively, by the surrogate split involving Xjand by
the split according to the majority rule (which routes all observations to the childnode of largest size). This weighting reﬂects the adjusted relative agreement between
the optimal routing rule and the one associated with the surrogate split involving X
j,
in excess of the majority rule. The raw relative agreement would be simply given byn
Xj/nt.
However, as interesting as this variable importance index may be, it is no longer so
widely used today. It is indeed not very intuitive, it is unstable because it is stronglydependent on a given tree, and it is less relevant than the importance of variables by
permutation in the sense of random forests. In addition, its analog, which does not
use surrogate splits, exists for random forests but tends to favor nominal variables
that have a large number of possible values (we will come back to this in Sect. 4.1).
>par(mar = c(7,3,1,1)+0.1)
>barplot (treeMax $variable.importance, las = 2,cex.names = 0.8)
Nevertheless, it can be noted that the variable importance indices, in the sense of
CART, for the maximal tree (given by Fig. 2.9) provide for the spam detection exam-
ple very reasonable and easily interpretable results. It makes it possible to identifya group of variables: charExclamation clearly at the top then capitalLong ,
charDollar ,free andremove then, less clearly, a group of 8 variables among
which capitalAve ,capitalTotal ,money but also your andnum000 intu-
itively less interesting.