4 1 Introduction to Random Forests with R
In the case where a test sample is not available, the prediction error can still be
estimated, for example, by cross-validation. In addition, we will introduce later on a
speciﬁc estimate using random forests.
Remark 1.1 In this book, we focus on regression problems and/or supervised clas-
siﬁcation ones. However, RF have been generalized to various other statistical prob-
lems.
First, for survival data analysis, Ishwaran et al. ( 2008 ) introduced Random Sur-
vival Forests, transposing the main ideas of RF to the case for which the quantityto be predicted is the time to event. Let us also mention on this subject the work of
Hothorn et al. ( 2006 ).
Random forests have also been generalized to the multivariate response variable
case (see the review by Segal and Xiao 2011 , which also provides references from
the 1990s).
Selection and importance of variables
A second classical objective is variable selection. This involves determining a subset
of the input variables that are actually useful and active in explaining the input–outputrelationship. The quality of a subset of selected variables is often assessed by the
performance obtained with a predictor using only these variables instead of all the
initial sets.
In addition, we can focus on constructing a hierarchy of input variables based on
a quantiﬁcation of the importance of the effects on the output variable. Such an index
of importance therefore provides a ranking of variables, from the most important tothe least important.
1.4 Packages
We will mainly focus on Rthree packages (R Core Team 2018 ):
•rpart (Therneau and Atkinson 2018 ) for tree methods, in Chap. 2.
•randomForest (Liaw and Wiener 2018 ) for random forests, in Chaps. 3and4.
•VSURF (Genuer et al. 2018 ) for variable selection using random forests, in
Chap. 5.
Remark 1.2 Regarding the variants of random forests discussed in the previous
section, the randomForestSRC package (Ishwaran and Kogalur 2017 ) provides a
uniﬁed implementation of RF for regression, supervised classiﬁcation, in a survival
context as well as for the multivariate response case.