Chapter 5
V ariable Selection
Abstract This chapter is dedicated to variable selection using random forests: an
automatic three-step procedure involving ﬁrst a fairly coarse elimination of a large
number of useless variables, followed by a ﬁner and ascending sequential introduc-
tion of variables into random forest models, for interpretation and then for prediction.
The principle and the procedure implemented in the VSURF package are presentedon the spam dataset. The choice of VSURF parameters suitable for selection is then
studied. In the ﬁnal section, the variable selection procedure is applied to two real
examples: predicting ozone concentration and analyzing genomic data.
5.1 Generalities
In the past, classic statistical problems typically involved many observations ( n=,
e.g., a few hundred or a few thousand) and relatively a few variables ( p=one to a
few tens). Today, the ease of data acquisition has led to huge databases that collect
new information almost daily. Traditional statistical techniques are poorly suited toprocessing these new quantities of data, in which the number of variables pcan reach
tens or even hundreds of thousands. At the same time, for many applications, the
number of observations ncan be reduced to a few tens, e.g., in the case of biomedical
data. In this context, it is indeed common to gather many types of data on a given
individual (e.g., gene expression data), but to keep the number of individuals on whomthe experiment is conducted small (for the study of a disease, the number of affected
individuals included in the study is often very limited). These data are said to be of
high dimension: the number of variables is quite large in comparison to the numberof observations, which is classically denoted by n/lessmuch p. Here, we are referring to
problems where nis several hundreds and pis several thousands. One of the most
attractive features of random forests is that they are highly efﬁcient both for traditionalproblems (where p≤n) and for such high-dimensional problems. Indeed, RF have
been previously shown to be inherently adapted to the high-dimensional case. For
instance, Biau ( 2012 ) shows that if the true model meets certain sparsity conditions,
then the RF predictor depends only on the active variables.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
R. Genuer and J.-M. Poggi, Random F orests with R , Use R!,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-56485-8_577