3.6 Examples 47
3.6 Examples
3.6.1 Predicting Ozone Concentration
For a presentation of this dataset, see Sect. 1.5.2 .
Let us load the randomForest package and Ozone data:
>library ("randomForest" )
>data ("Ozone" ,package = "mlbench" )
Remark 3.7 It should be noted that, in this example, the standard theoretical frame-
work that assumes observations as independent realizations from the same distribu-
tion is inappropriate. Indeed, the serial dependence between two successive obser-
vations is obvious and important since it carries both short-range dependence (theweather of the day is generally close to that of the next day) and long-range depen-
dence because of the seasonal nature of both the weather and social life. Nevertheless,
it appears that even in this context, random forests perform well.
Application of RF on this dataset can be done using the following command:
>OzRFDef <- randomForest (V4 ˜., Ozone, na.action = na.omit)
Note that the response variable, named V4, is located in the 4th column of the data
table. In addition, we must set the na.action parameter because we are dealing
with missing data. It should be noted that there are many of them (about 45% of theobservations contain at least one missing data) mainly because of V9. However, we
will simply omit them here.
Remark 3.8 TherfImpute() function of the randomForest package allows to
impute missing values using the proximities between complete observations. Prox-
imity between two observations is the proportion of trees in which they appear in
the same terminal node of a given forest. The iterative imputation procedure can bededuced from this: the ﬁrst forest is built using the median imputation, the proximities
are then calculated and new imputations are made by a weighted average according
to the regression proximities or a weighted vote according to the classiﬁcation prox-imities. A new forest is then built, giving new proximities and imputations, and the
procedure is iterated until the last imputation.
Let us display the results of this random forest:
>OzRFDef
Call:
randomForest(formula = V4 ˜ ., data = Ozone, na.action = na.omit)
Type of random forest: regression
Number of trees: 500