Chapter 2
CART
Abstract CART stands for Classiﬁcation And Regression Trees, and refers to a sta-
tistical method for constructing tree predictors (also called decision trees) for both
regression and classiﬁcation problems. This chapter focuses on CART trees, analyz-
ing in detail the two steps involved in their construction: the maximal tree growing
algorithm, which produces a large family of models, and the pruning algorithm, whichis used to select an optimal or suitable ﬁnal one. The construction is illustrated on
the spam dataset using the rpart package. The chapter then addresses interpretabil-
ity issues and how to use competing and surrogate splits. In the ﬁnal section, treesare applied to two examples: predicting ozone concentration and analyzing genomic
data.
2.1 The Principle
CART stands for Classiﬁcation And Regression Trees, and refers to a statistical
method, introduced by Breiman et al. ( 1984 ), for constructing tree predictors (also
called decision trees) for both regression and classiﬁcation problems.
Let us start by considering a very simple classiﬁcation tree on our running example
about spam detection (Fig. 2.1).
A CART tree is an upside-down tree: the root is at the top. The leaves of the tree
are the nodes without descendants (for this example, 5 leaves) and the other nodesof the tree are nonterminal nodes (4 such nodes including the root) that have two
child nodes. Hence, the tree is said to be binary. Nonterminal nodes are labeled by a
condition (a question) and leaves by a class label or a value of the response variable.When a tree is given, it is easy to use it for prediction. Indeed, to determine the
predicted value /hatwideyfor a given x, it sufﬁces to go through the only path from the root
to a leaf, by answering the sequence of questions given by the successive splits andreading the value of ylabeling the reached leaf. When you go through the tree, the
rule is as follows: if the condition is veriﬁed then you go to the left node and if not, go
to the right. In our example, an email with proportions of occurrences of characters“!” and “$”, respectively, larger than 7.95 and 0.65% will thus be predicted as spam
by this simple tree.
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
R. Genuer and J.-M. Poggi, Random F orests with R , Use R!,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-56485-8_29