16 2C A R T
where Tv
kminimizes the penalized criterion crit α/prime
k, withα/prime
k=(α kαk+1)1/2. We ﬁnally
choose the model Tˆkwhere ˆk=argmin1≤k≤KRcv(Tk).
Let us mention that the choice of αby a validation sample is not available in the
rpart package.
Finally, it should be noted that, of course, if a tree in the sequence has kleaves, it
is the best tree with kleaves. On the other hand, this sequence does not necessarily
contain all the best trees with kleaves for 1 ≤k≤| Tmax|but only a part of them.
However, the “missing” trees are simply not competitive because they correspond to
larger values of the penalized criterion, so it is useless to calculate them. In addition
their calculation could be more expensive since they are not, in general, pruned fromthe trees of the sequence.
As we will see below, random forests are, in most cases, forests of unpruned trees.
However, it should be stressed that a CART tree, if it used alone, must be pruned.Otherwise, it would suffer from overﬁtting by being too adapted to the data in L
n
and exhibit a too large generalization error.
2.4 The rpart Package
The rpart package (Therneau and Atkinson 2018 ) implements the CART method
as a whole and is installed by default in R.T h e rpart() function allows to build a
tree whose development is controlled by the parameters of the rpart.control()
function and pruning is achieved through the prune() function. Finally, the meth-
odsprint() ,summary() ,plot() , andpredict() allow retrieving and illus-
trate the results. It should also be noted that rpart fully handles missing data, both
for prediction (see Sect. 2.5.2 ) and for learning (see details on the Ozone example
in Sect. 2.6.1 ).
Other packages that implement decision trees are used in R, such as
•tree (Ripley 2018 ), quite close to rpart but which allows, for example, to trace
the partition associated with a tree in small dimension and use a validation sample
for pruning.
•rpart.plot (Milborrow 2018 ) which offers advanced graphics functions.
•party (Hothorn et al. 2017 ) which proposes other criteria for optimizing the split-
ting of a node.
Now let us detail the use of the functions rpart() andprune() on the spam
detection example.
The tree built with the default values of rpart() is obtained as follows. Note
that only the syntax formula =, data = is allowed for this function.
>library (rpart)
>treeDef <- rpart (type ˜.,data = spamApp)
>print (treeDef, digits = 2)