3.1 General Principle 39
error is due to CART instability. In fact, the instability of CART allows to build a
set of trees relatively different from each other in Bagging, because they are built on
different bootstrap samples.
In addition, Bagging, through aggregation, stabilizes CART trees. Indeed, by
averaging (or applying the majority vote rule in classiﬁcation) the individual trees,
which are very different from each other, Bagging provides a stable predictor.
Remark 3.3 The Bagging method is very general, and could be used with any basic
predictor, but the fact that it has been used most often with trees (or what are calledweak predictors) comes precisely from the unstable nature of the latter. In other
words, applying a Bagging method with a stable base predictor (such as logistic
regression for spam data) does not bring any signiﬁcant improvement.
3.2 Random Forest Random Inputs
Many RF methods, i.e., many types of additional hazards (the Θ/lscriptin Deﬁnition 3.1),
have been tried since the late 1990s (Ho 1998 ; Dietterich 2000 ;B r e i m a n 2000 ).
However, one of them has become the reference method: it is the Random Forests-
Random Inputs (RF-RI) algorithm, introduced by Breiman ( 2001 ). We now detail
this variant, which we will call RF later on.
Remark 3.4 The language abuse consisting in naming the RF-RI method by RF is
widely used in the literature on random forests. Indeed, very often we speak of random
forests to designate this particular case of the much more general Deﬁnition 3.1.
“Random Inputs” must be understood here as “random input variables”. The
principle of RF-RI is then to aggregate a collection of tree predictors with random
input variables, which we will call “RI trees”, each built on a bootstrap sample (seeDeﬁnition 3.2).
Deﬁnition 3.3 (RI Tree ) An RI tree is a tree predictor, with the following major
differences with a CART tree:
•At each node of a tree, we randomly select a subset of mtry variables, then we
look for the best way to split this node only among the splits that involve these
variables.
•Trees are not pruned.
The random selection of variables is done by a uniform draw of mtry variables
without replacement among the pavailable variables.
A summary diagram of the RF-RI algorithm, where Θrefers to the bootstrap draw
andΘ
/primerefers to the random draw of variables can be found in Fig. 3.5.