74 4 V ariable Importance
4.5.4 Air Pollution by Dust: What Is the Local Contribution?
We continue here the example of dust pollution in the network of the Haute-
Normandie region (Sect. 3.6.3 ), this time taking inspiration from the work of Bobbia
et al. ( 2011 ). We do not provide details on the Rcode used in this part, but prefer to
show another example of the possible use of variable importance.
In France, several regional plans have been deﬁned to reduce pollution. In this
context, determining the local contribution in relation to the background contribution
of a speciﬁc pollution is necessary. This makes it possible to assess the proportion
of pollution on which it is possible to act and can help to adapt the regional plan. Anassessment of the local contribution can be carried out using deterministic models that
provide a pollution map of the entire country at a regional scale. They are not related
to pollution measurements at monitoring sites but depend on imprecise and difﬁcult
to obtain emissions inventory. The large uncertainties that result from this therefore
lead to the use of statistical tools rather than a purely deterministic approach. Anexample of such an approach has recently been conducted in the Haute-Normandie
region to quantify local and background contributions speciﬁcally to dust pollution.
In the ﬁrst step, the marginal effects were classiﬁed according to the character-
istics of the monitoring stations: some are close to trafﬁc, others measure urban or
industrial background pollution, and the last is located in a rural area. Local pollution
is thus characterized by conventional pollutants, including nitrogen oxides for urbanpollution and sulfur dioxide for industrial use. It should be recalled that three groups
of meteorological variables have been structured in the following way-those with
an adverse effect on pollution: PL and VV (for all stations except AIL); a positiveeffect: GT, PA, and VV (for AIL); and a non-monotonic effect: T, DV .
Then, for each of the six monitoring stations, the individual VI is computed using
an RF model containing a large number of variables. To deﬁne the importance ofa group of variables, we propose to adopt the following rule: if the variables of the
group are redundant (either well correlated or, more weakly, with similar “effects on
PM10 concentrations”) then the importance of the group is deﬁned by the maximum
individual VI in this group. In this way, groups of variables can be directly compared.
The results are summarized in Table 4.2.
The importance of the three groups of weather variables is almost equal to 20, with
the exception of PA for GUI which reaches 32. On the other hand, the importance of
pollutants (by restricting ourselves to the largest importance) ﬂuctuates much more:from 28 to 49 if we exclude AIL since no measurement of pollutants were made
there.
The two trafﬁc stations (GUI and REP) give close values for the NO2 importance
(41 and 45). The two urban stations (JUS and HRI), on the other hand, have different
importance for SO2: 28 and 49, respectively. For the industrial station (GCM), the
importance of the pollutant (SO2) is 39, which is intermediate.
The idea is to use the pollution from the AIL station (noted as PM10_AIL) as a
measure of diffuse pollution at the regional level. It is supposed to capture phenomena
on a more or less large scale (regional or more) and not be affected by signiﬁcant