58 4 V ariable Importance
a tree when the observed values of that variable are randomly permuted in the OOB
samples.
Deﬁnition 4.1 (V ariable importance ) Let us ﬁx j∈{1,..., p}and calculate
VI(Xj), the importance index of variable Xj:
•Consider a bootstrap sample LΘ/lscriptnand the associated OOB /lscriptsample, that is, all
observations that do not belong to LΘ/lscriptn.
•Calculate errOOB /lscript, the error made on OOB /lscriptby the tree built on LΘ/lscriptn(mean square
error or misclassiﬁcation rate).
•Then randomly permute the values of variable Xjin the OOB /lscriptsample. This gives
a perturbed sample, noted /tildewideOOBj
/lscript.
•Finally, calculate err /tildewideOOBj
/lscript, the error made on /tildewideOOBj
/lscriptby the tree built on LΘ/lscriptn.
•Repeat these operations for all bootstrap samples. The importance of the variable
Xj,V I(Xj), is then deﬁned by the difference between the average error of a tree
on the perturbed OOB sample and that on the OOB sample:
VI(Xj)=1
qq/summationdisplay
/lscript=1/parenleftBig
err/tildewideOOBj
/lscript−errOOB /lscript/parenrightBig
.
Thus, the higher the error increase originating from the random permutations of
the variable, the more important is the variable. Conversely, if permutations have
little or no effect on the error (or even cause a decrease, because VI can be slightlynegative), the variable is considered unimportant.
This variable importance calculation above is exactly the one performed in the
randomForest package. It should be noted that the deﬁnition of variable importance
given by Breiman ( 2001 ) is slightly different. Indeed, if the perturbed OOB samples
are obtained in the same way, the importance of a variable is deﬁned by the difference
between the OOB error on the perturbed OOB samples, and the initial OOB error.One possible explanation for this change could be the following. In the calculation
of the OOB error, there is an aggregation step that tends to reduce individual trees’
errors, so the use of the OOB error in the calculation tends to dampen the effects ofrandom permutations of variables. However, when calculating importance, we want
to magnify the effects of these permutations. Therefore, the OOB error is replaced
by the average error on all trees, for which no aggregation step is performed.
Many studies, mainly by simulation, have been conducted to illustrate the behav-
ior of RF variable importance, including (Strobl et al. 2007 ,2008 ; Archer and Kimes
2008 ; Genuer et al. 2008 ,2010b ; Gregorutti et al. 2013 ). In this type of empirical
work, it is often difﬁcult to draw very conﬁdent general conclusions, but some inter-
esting behaviors can be noted from this variable importance (VI henceforth) scorethat will be useful for variable selection:
•The VI variability, through repetitions, of variables outside the model is less than
that of informative variables. Non-informative variables have a very low VI and
their variation order of magnitude is useful for identifying them.