7392 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 29, 2020
Fig. 4. On each FPN feature level, FoveaBox attaches two subnetworks, one for classifying the corresponding cells and one for predict the (x1,y1,x2,y2)
of ground-truth object box. Right is the score output map with their correspondi ng predicted boxes before feeding into non-maximum suppression (NMS ).
The score probability in each position is denoted by the color density. More examples are shown in Fig.5.
Fig. 5. FoveaBox results on the COCO minival set. These results are based on ResNet-101, achieving a single model box AP of 38.6. For each pair, left
is the detection results with bounding box, categor y, and conﬁdence. Right is the score output map w ith their corresponding bounding boxes before fee ding
into non-maximum suppression (NMS). The score probability in each position is denoted by the color density.
range are ignored during training. Note that an object may
be detected by multiple pyramids of the networks, which is
different from previous practice that maps objects to only onefeature pyramid [8].
Assigning objects to multiple adjacent pyramid levels has
two advantages: a) The adjacent pyramid levels usually have
similar semantic capacity, so FoveaBox could optimize these
pyramid features simultaneously. b) The training sample num-ber for each pyramid has largely enlarged, which make
the training process more stable. In the experiment section,
we show that our scale assignment strategy gives 3.1 AP gainscompared with single level training and predicting.
3) Box Prediction: Each ground-truth bounding box is
s p e c i ﬁ e di nt h ew a y G=(x
1,y1,x2,y2). Starting from a
positive point (x,y)inRpos, FoveaBox directly computes thenormalized offset between (x,y)and four boundaries :
tx1=logsl(x+0.5)−x1
rl,
ty1=logsl(y+0.5)−y1
rl,
tx2=logx2−sl(x+0.5)
rl,
ty2=logy2−sl(y+0.5)
rl. (4)
This function ﬁrst maps the coordinate (x,y)to the input
image, then computes the nor malized offset between the
projected coordinate and G. Finally the targets are regularized
with the log-space function. rlis the basic scale deﬁned in
section III-B.2.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on July 12,2020 at 14:55:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.