IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 29, 2020 7389
FoveaBox: Beyound Anchor-Based Object Detection
Tao Kong , Fuchun Sun, Fellow, IEEE , Huaping Liu, Yuning Jiang, Lei Li, and Jianbo Shi
Abstract — We present FoveaBox, an accurate, ﬂexible, and
completely anchor-free framework for object detection. Whilealmost all state-of-the-art object detectors utilize predeﬁnedanchors to enumerate possible locations, scales and aspectratios for the search of the objects, their performance andgeneralization ability are also limited to the design of anchors.Instead, FoveaBox directly learns the object existing possibilityand the bounding box coordinates without anchor reference.This is achieved by: (a) predicting category-sensitive semanticmaps for the object existing possibility, and (b) producingcategory-agnostic bounding box for each position that potentiallycontains an object. The scales of target boxes are naturallyassociated with feature pyramid representations. In FoveaBox,an instance is assigned to adjacent feature levels to makethe model more accurate.We demonstrate its effectiveness onstandard benchmarks and report extensive experimental analysis.Without bells and whistles, FoveaBox achieves state-of-the-artsingle model performance on the standard COCO and PascalVOC object detection benchmark. More importantly, FoveaBoxavoids all computation and hyper-parameters related to anchorboxes, which are often sensiti ve to the ﬁnal detection per-
formance. We believe the simple and effective approach willserve as a solid baseline and help ease future research forobject detection. The code has been made publicly available athttps://github.com/taokong/FoveaBox.
Index Terms — Object detection, anchor free, foveabox.
I. I NTRODUCTION
OBJECT detection requires the solution of two main
tasks: recognition and localization . Given an arbitrary
image, an object detection syste m needs to determine whether
there are any instances of semantic objects from predeﬁnedcategories and, if present, to return the spatial location and
extent. To add the localization functionality to generic object
detection systems, sliding window approaches have been the
method of choice for many years [1], [2].
Recently, deep learning techniques have emerged as power-
ful methods for learning feature representations automatically
from data [3]–[5]. For object detection, the anchor-based
Manuscript received December 29, 2019; revised May 6, 2020 and May 26,
2020; accepted June 5, 2020. Date of publication June 23, 2020; date ofcurrent version July 13, 2020. This work was supported in part by the National
Science Foundation of China unde r Grant 61621136008, Grant 91848206, and
Grant U1613212 and in part by the German Research Foundation under GrantDFG TRR-169. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript
and approving it for publication was Dr. Jiantao Zhou. (Corresponding author:
Fuchun Sun.)
Tao Kong, Yuning Jiang, and Lei Li are with the ByteDance AI Lab,
Beijing 100098, China (e-mail: taokongcn@gmail.com).
Fuchun Sun and Huaping Liu are with the Department of Computer Science
and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing National Research Centerfor Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Beijing 100084, China
(e-mail: fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Jianbo Shi is with the GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIP.2020.3002345Fig. 1. The anchor-based object detection frameworks need to (a) designanchors according to the ground-truth box distributions; (b) match anchors
with ground-truth boxes to generate trai ning target (anchor classiﬁcation and
reﬁnement); and (c) utilize the target generated by (b) for training.
Region Proposal Networks [6] are widely used to serve as a
common component for searching possible regions of interest
for modern object detection frameworks [7]–[9]. In short,
anchor method suggests dividing the box space into discrete
bins and reﬁning the object box in the corresponding bin. Moststate-of-the-art detectors rely on anchors to enumerate the pos-
sible locations, scales, and asp ect ratios for target objects [10].
Anchors are regression references and classiﬁcation candidatesto predict proposals for two-stage detectors or ﬁnal bounding
boxes for single-stage d etectors. Nevertheless, anchors can be
regarded as a feature-sharing sliding window scheme to cover
the possible locations of objects .
However, anchors must be carefully designed and used in
object detection frameworks. (a) One of the most important
factors in designing anchors is how densely it covers the
instance location sp ace. To achieve a good recall rate, anchors
are carefully designed based on the statistics computed from
the training/validation set [9], [11]. (b) One design choice
based on a particular dataset is not always applicable to
other applications, which harms the generality [12]. (c) At
training phase, anchor-methods rely on the intersection-over-
union (IoU) to deﬁne the positive/negative samples, which
introduces additional computation and hyper-parameters for
an object detection system [13].
In contrast, our human vision system can recognize the
instance in space and predict the boundary given the visual
cortex map, without any pre-deﬁned shape template [14].
In other words, we human naturally recognize the object in the
visual scene without enumerating the candidate boxes. Inspiredby this, an intuitive question to ask is, is the anchor scheme
the optimal way to guide the search of objects ? And further,
could we design an accurate object detection framework with-out anchors or candidate boxes ? Without anchors, one may
expect a complex method is required to achieve comparable
performance. However, we show that a surprisingly simple
and ﬂexible system can match, even surpass the prior state-
of-the-art object detection results without any requirement ofcandidate boxes.
To this end, we present FoveaBox, a completely anchor-free
framework for object detection. FoveaBox is motivated fromthe fovea of human eyes: the center of the vision ﬁeld is with
1057-7149 © 2020 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistri bution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on July 12,2020 at 14:55:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.