KONG et al. : FOVEABOX: BEYOUND ANCHOR-BASED OBJECT DETECTION 7393
TABLE I
OBJECT DETECTION SINGLE -MODEL RESULTS v.s.STATE -OF-THE-ARTS ON COCO test-dev .W ESHOW RESULTS FOR OURFOVEA BOXMODELS
WITH800 I NPUT SCALE .FOVEA BOX-ALIGN INDICATES UTILIZING FEATURE ALIGNMENT DISCUSSED
For simplicity, we adopt the widely used Smooth L1loss [6]
to train the box prediction Lbox. After targets being optimized,
we can generate the box boundary for each cell (x,y)on
the output feature maps.1In box branch, each output set of
pyramidal heatmap has 4 channels, for jointly prediction of(t
x1,ty1,tx2,ty2).
4) Network Architecture: To demonstrate the generality of
our approach, we instantiate FoveaBox with multiple archi-tectures. For clarity, we differentiate between: (i) the convo-
lutional backbone architecture used for feature extraction over
an entire image, and (ii) the network head for computing the
ﬁnal results. Most of the experiments are based on the head
architecture as shown in Fig.4. We also utilize different head
variants to further study the generality. More complex designshave the potential to improve performance but are not the focus
of this work.
5) Implementations: We adopt the widely used FPN net-
works for fair comparison. Concretely, we construct a pyramid
with levels {P
l},l=3,4,···,7, where lindicates pyramid
level. Plhas 1/2lresolution of the input. All pyramid levels
have C=256 channels. Fovea head is attached on each
pyramid level. Parameters are shared across all pyramid levels.
FoveaBox is trained with stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
We use synchronized SGD over 4 GPUs with a total
of 16 images per minibatch (4 images per GPU). Unlessotherwise speciﬁed, all models are trained for 12 epochs with
an initial learning rate of 0.01, which is then divided by 10 at
8th and again at 11th epochs . Weight decay of 0.0001 and
momentum of 0.9 are used. Only standard horizontal image
ﬂipping is used for data augmentation. During inference,
we ﬁrst use a conﬁdence threshold of 0.05 to ﬁlter out
predictions with low conﬁdence. Then, we select the top
1Eq.(4) and its inverse transformation can be easily implemented by an
element-wise layer in modern deep learning frameworks [70], [71].1000 scoring boxes from each prediction layer. Next, NMS
with threshold 0.5 is applied for each class separately. Finally,the top-100 scoring predictions are selected for each image.
Although there are more intelligent ways to perform post-
processing, such as bbox voting [72], Soft-NMS [73] ortest-time image augmentations, in order to keep simplicity and
to fairly compare against the baseline models, we do not use
those tricks here.
Two-stage detectors rely on region-wise sub-networks to
further classify the sparse region proposals. Since FoveaBoxcould also generate region proposals by changing the model
head to class agnostic scheme, we believe it could further
improve the performance of two-stage detectors, which beyondthe focus of this paper.
IV . E
XPERIMENTS
We present experimental results on the bounding box detec-
tion track of the MS COCO and Pascal VOC benchmarks. For
COCO, all models are trained on trainval35k . If not spec-
iﬁed, ResNet-50-FPN backbone and a 600 pixel train and test
image scale are used to do the ablation study. We report lesion
and sensitivity studies by evaluating on the minival split.
For our main results, we report COCO AP on the test-dev
split, which has no public labels and requires use of theevaluation server. For Pascal VOC, all models are trained
ontrainval2007 andtrainval2012 , and evaluated on
test2007 subset, following common practice [6], [7].
A. Main Results
We compare FoveaBox to the state-of-the-art methods
in Table I. All instantiations of our model outperform baselinevariants of previous state-of-the-art models. The ﬁrst group
of detectors on Table I are two-stage detectors, the second
group one-stage detectors, and the last group the FoveaBox
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on July 12,2020 at 14:55:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.