From GAN to WGAN
Lilian Weng
OpenAI
lilian@openai.com
Abstract
This paper explains the math behind a generative adversarial network (GAN) [ 1]
model and why it is hard to be trained. Wasserstein GAN is intended to improve
GANs’ training by adopting a smooth metric for measuring the distance between
two probability distributions.
1 Introduction
Generative adversarial network (GAN) [ 1] has shown great results in many generative tasks to
replicate the real-world rich content such as images, human language, and music. It is inspired by
game theory: two models, a generator and a critic, are competing with each other while making each
other stronger at the same time. However, it is rather challenging to train a GAN model, as people are
facing issues like training instability or failure to converge.
Here I would like to explain the math behind the generative adversarial network framework, why it is
hard to be trained, and ﬁnally introduce a modiﬁed version of GAN intended to solve the training
difﬁculties.
2 Kullback–Leibler and Jensen–Shannon Divergence
Before we start examining GANs closely, let us ﬁrst review two metrics for quantifying the similarity
between two probability distributions.
(1)KL (Kullback–Leibler) Divergence measures how one probability distribution pdiverges from
a second expected probability distribution q.
DKL(pkq) =Z
xp(x) logp(x)
q(x)dx
DKLachieves the minimum zero when p(x) ==q(x)everywhere.
It is noticeable according to the formula that KL divergence is asymmetric. In cases where p(x)is
close to zero, but q(x)is signiﬁcantly non-zero, the q’s effect is disregarded. It could cause buggy
results when we just want to measure the similarity between two equally important distributions.
(2)Jensen–Shannon Divergence is another measure of similarity between two probability distribu-
tions, bounded by [0;1]. JS divergence is symmetric and more smooth. Check this post if you are
interested in reading more about the comparison between KL divergence and JS divergence.
DJS(pkq) =1
2DKL(pkp+q
2) +1
2DKL(qkp+q
2)
Some [ 2] believe that one reason behind GANs’ big success is switching the loss function from
asymmetric KL divergence in traditional maximum-likelihood approach to symmetric JS divergence.
We will discuss more on this point in the next section.
Preprint. Work in progress.arXiv:1904.08994v1  [cs.LG]  18 Apr 2019