Figure 2. Example results on ImageNet validation images. For each triplet, we show the masked image (left), our MAE reconstructiony
(middle), and the ground-truth (right). The masking ratio is 80%, leaving only 39 out of 196 patches. More examples are in the appendix.
yAs no loss is computed on visible patches, the model output on visible patches is qualitatively worse. One can simply overlay the output with the visible
patches to improve visual quality. We intentionally opt not to do this, so we can more comprehensively demonstrate the method’s behavior.
Figure 3. Example results on COCO validation images, using an MAE trained on ImageNet (the same model weights as in Figure 2).
Observe the reconstructions on the two right-most examples, which, although different from the ground truth, are semantically plausible.
derstanding of parts, objects, and scenes. To overcome this
difference and encourage learning useful features, we show
that a simple strategy works well in computer vision: mask-
ing a very high portion of random patches. This strategy
largely reduces redundancy and creates a challenging self-
supervisory task that requires holistic understanding beyond
low-level image statistics. To get a qualitative sense of our
reconstruction task, see Figures 2 – 4.
(iii)The autoencoder’s decoder , which maps the latent
representation back to the input, plays a different role be-
tween reconstructing text and images. In vision, the decoder
reconstructs pixels , hence its output is of a lower semantic
level than common recognition tasks. This is in contrast
to language, where the decoder predicts missing words that
contain rich semantic information. While in BERT the de-
coder can be trivial (an MLP) [14], we found that for im-
ages, the decoder design plays a key role in determining the
semantic level of the learned latent representations.
Driven by this analysis, we present a simple, effective,
and scalable form of a masked autoencoder (MAE) for
visual representation learning. Our MAE masks random
patches from the input image and reconstructs the missing
patches in the pixel space. It has an asymmetric encoder-
decoder design. Our encoder operates only on the visible
subset of patches (without mask tokens), and our decoder islightweight and reconstructs the input from the latent rep-
resentation along with mask tokens (Figure 1). Shifting
the mask tokens to the small decoder in our asymmetric
encoder-decoder results in a large reduction in computation.
Under this design, a very high masking ratio ( e.g., 75%) can
achieve a win-win scenario: it optimizes accuracy while al-
lowing the encoder to process only a small portion ( e.g.,
25%) of patches. This can reduce overall pre-training time
by 3or more and likewise reduce memory consumption,
enabling us to easily scale our MAE to large models.
Our MAE learns very high-capacity models that gen-
eralize well. With MAE pre-training, we can train data-
hungry models like ViT-Large/-Huge [16] on ImageNet-1K
with improved generalization performance. With a vanilla
ViT-Huge model, we achieve 87.8% accuracy when ﬁne-
tuned on ImageNet-1K. This outperforms all previous re-
sults that use only ImageNet-1K data. We also evaluate
transfer learning on object detection, instance segmentation,
and semantic segmentation. In these tasks, our pre-training
achieves better results than its supervised pre-training coun-
terparts, and more importantly, we observe signiﬁcant gains
by scaling up models. These observations are aligned
with those witnessed in self-supervised pre-training in NLP
[14, 47, 48, 4] and we hope that they will enable our ﬁeld to
explore a similar trajectory.
16001