block 50% grid 75% random 75%
Figure 6. Mask sampling strategies determine the pretext task
difﬁculty, inﬂuencing reconstruction quality and representations
(Table 1f). Here each output is from an MAE trained with the spec-
iﬁed masking strategy. Left: random sampling (our default). Mid-
dle: block-wise sampling [2] that removes large random blocks.
Right: grid-wise sampling that keeps one of every four patches.
Images are from the validation set.
Reconstruction target. We compare different reconstruc-
tion targets in Table 1d. Our results thus far are based on
pixels without (per-patch) normalization. Using pixels with
normalization improves accuracy. This per-patch normal-
ization enhances the contrast locally. In another variant, we
perform PCA in the patch space and use the largest PCA
coefﬁcients (96 here) as the target. Doing so degrades ac-
curacy. Both experiments suggest that the high-frequency
components are useful in our method.
We also compare an MAE variant that predicts tokens ,
the target used in BEiT [2]. Speciﬁcally for this variant,
we use the DALLE pre-trained dV AE [50] as the tokenizer,
following [2]. Here the MAE decoder predicts the token in-
dices using cross-entropy loss. This tokenization improves
ﬁne-tuning accuracy by 0.4% vs. unnormalized pixels, but
has no advantage vs. normalized pixels. It also reduces lin-
ear probing accuracy. In §5 we further show that tokeniza-
tion is not necessary in transfer learning.
Our pixel -based MAE is much simpler than tokeniza-
tion. The dV AE tokenizer requires one more pre-training
stage, which may depend on extra data (250M images [50]).
The dV AE encoder is a large convolutional network (40%
FLOPs of ViT-L) and adds nontrivial overhead. Using pix-
els does not suffer from these problems.
Data augmentation. Table 1e studies the inﬂuence of data
augmentation on our MAE pre-training.
Our MAE works well using cropping-only augmenta-
tion, either ﬁxed-size or random-size (both having random
horizontal ﬂipping). Adding color jittering degrades the re-
sults and so we do not use it in other experiments.
Surprisingly, our MAE behaves decently even if using
no data augmentation (only center-crop, no ﬂipping). This
property is dramatically different from contrastive learning
and related methods [62, 23, 7, 21], which heavily rely
on data augmentation. It was observed [21] that using
cropping-only augmentation reduces the accuracy by 13%
100 200 400 800 160082838485
82.383.384.384.985.1
fine-tuningepochs (log-scale)
100 200 400 800 160060657075
57.364.469.773.575.1
linear probing
epochs (log-scale)
Figure 7. Training schedules . A longer training schedule gives a
noticeable improvement. Here each point is a full training sched-
ule. The model is ViT-L with the default setting in Table 1.
and 28% respectively for BYOL [21] and SimCLR [7]. In
addition, there is no evidence that contrastive learning can
work without augmentation: the two views of an image are
the same and can easily satisfy a trivial solution.
In MAE, the role of data augmentation is mainly per-
formed by random masking (ablated next). The masks are
different for each iteration and so they generate new training
samples regardless of data augmentation. The pretext task
is made difﬁcult by masking and requires less augmentation
to regularize training.
Mask sampling strategy. In Table 1f we compare different
mask sampling strategies, illustrated in Figure 6.
Theblock-wise masking strategy, proposed in [2], tends
to remove large blocks (Figure 6 middle). Our MAE with
block-wise masking works reasonably well at a ratio of
50%, but degrades at a ratio of 75%. This task is harder
than that of random sampling, as a higher training loss is
observed. The reconstruction is also blurrier.
We also study grid-wise sampling, which regularly keeps
one of every four patches (Figure 6 right). This is an eas-
ier task and has lower training loss. The reconstruction is
sharper. However, the representation quality is lower.
Simple random sampling works the best for our MAE. It
allows for a higher masking ratio, which provides a greater
speedup beneﬁt while also enjoying good accuracy.
Training schedule. Our ablations thus far are based on
800-epoch pre-training. Figure 7 shows the inﬂuence of the
training schedule length. The accuracy improves steadily
with longer training. Indeed, we have not observed sat-
uration of linear probing accuracy even at 1600 epochs.
This behavior is unlike contrastive learning methods, e.g.,
MoCo v3 [9] saturates at 300 epochs for ViT-L. Note that
the MAE encoder only sees 25% of patches per epoch,
while in contrastive learning the encoder sees 200% (two-
crop) or even more (multi-crop) patches per epoch.
16005