individuals interact with each other in the workplace. That is, we suspect that these
technologies will change the type of work that we do, and also how that work is
designed and organized as part of a larger production system.
To put this into perspective, in the early 2000s, online communication allowed for
the creation of “virtual teams ”(Jarvenpaa and Leidner 1999 ). Organizational scholars
have highlighted many of the ways in which virtual teams need to be managed differ-
ently than non-virtual teams (e.g., Gilson et al. 2015 ; Kirkman and Mathieu 2005 ).
Relatedly, we believe that a deeper understanding of how artificial intelligence is affect-
ing workplace organization will help inform some of the economic studies of the effect
of artificial intelligence on labor. More broadly, artificial intelligence and robotics are
likely to substitute for labor in some cases, but complement labor in other cases. A
better understanding of how work is done in the future will help inform conditions
under which we can expect these technologies to be complementary to labor and when
we should expect labor substitution.
The adoption and use of artificial intelligence and robotics technology also raises im-
portant questions with policy implications. Researchers can begin to examine the distri-
butional effects of technology adoption across different demographics and regions.
Feldman and Kogler ( 2010 ) show that industries, and even occupations within indus-
tries, tend to be geographically clustered. Because of that, the consequences of artificial
intelligence and robotics may be far more pronounced in some geographies compared
to others. In addition, to industry- and occupation-based differences, other factors may
influence a company ’s ability to take advantage of these technologies. For example,
these new technologies may have significant implications for entrepreneurs. Entrepre-
neurs may lack knowledge of how best to integrate robotics with a workforce and often
face financing constraints that make it harder for them to adopt capital-intensive tech-
nologies. In the case of artificial intelligence, entrepreneurs may lack data sets on cus-
tomer behavior, which are needed to train artificial intelligence systems.
In the case that artificial intelligence and robotics do substitute for labor in certain
industries or occupations, the labor market may look dramatically different from how it
does now, and significant work will need to be done to help prepare the next gener-
ation of workers to adapt to the new environment. There will be a need to evaluate
what skills and tasks are still valuable in the labor market compared to skills and tasks
that can now be fully automated. This calls for a greater understanding of the worker
experience in firms and occupations affected by artificial intelligence and robotics to
craft appropriate worker education, job training, and re-training programs.
Machine learning and artificial intelligence tools for organizational research
In addition to being a subject of future research, machine learning and artificial
intelligence technologies also offer potential as tools to be used by researchers in exam-
ining a broad range of questions. The computational abilities of artificial intelligence
technologies open the door to analyses that were not previously feasible due to compu-
tational complexity.
Machine learning tools make fewer a priori assumptions regarding data when fitting
models, and tools such as decision trees, random forests, K-nearest neighbors, and
neural networks thus allow for the recognition of complex patterns and offer potentialRaj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 10 of 14