may be particularly quick to adopt? Are there market level forces that impact the
adoption decision?
/C15Do artificial intelligence and robotics increase or decrease inequality within an
occupation, firm or region? Are there certain management or regulatory policies
that can mitigate or exacerbate any detrimental effects of artificial intelligence and
robotics?
/C15How does one firm ’s adoption of artificial intelligence and robotics affect its
competitors in the same industry or market, as well as upstream suppliers and
downstream customers? Under what conditions does use of artificial intelligence or
robotics help new entrants compete with established incumbents?
/C15How do artificial intelligence and robotics affect the nature of work? In what ways
do artificial intelligence and robotics change the relative importance of skills and
tasks required for an occupation? How do artificial intelligence and robotics affect
the way in which individual workers interact with each other in the workplace?
Under what organizational conditions do artificial intelligence and robotics
substitute or complement for labor?
Given the broad range of potential research questions, the far-reaching consequences
of these technologies, and important practical and policy implications that may spill
out of future work in this area, we believe that this is an exciting and fertile field for
future research in organizations and management. It is our hope that this Primer can
serve as a resource for organizational scholars who hope to build on this literature in
the future.
Endnotes
1https://www.bloomberg.com/professional/blog/new-era-artificial-intelligence-now-
biggest-tech-disrupter/
2https://www.ft.com/content/f04128de-c4a5-11e7-b2bb-322b2cb39656
3https://www.economicsofai.com/nber-conference-toronto-2017/ .
4https://ifr.org/standardisation
Authors ’contributions
MR and RS equally co-authored the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Publisher ’sN o t e
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Received: 24 October 2018 Accepted: 6 May 2019
References
Accenture (2018) It ’s learning. Just not as we know it. Available at: https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/future-
workforce/transforming-learning
Acemoglu D, Restrepo P (2018) Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor markets. NBER Working Paper
Adomavicius G, Tuzhilin A (2005) Toward the next generation of recommender systems: a survey of the state-of-the-art and
possible extensions. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 17(6):734 –749
Akerman A, Gaarder I, Mogstad M (2015) The skill complementarity of broadband internet. NBER Working Paper
Angwin J, Larson J, Mattu S, Kirchner L (2016) Machine bias: there ’s software used across the country to predict future
criminals. And it ’s biased against blacks. Propublica
Athey S (2018) The impact of machine learning on economics. In: Agarwal AK, Gans J, Goldfarb A (eds) The economics of
artficial intelligence: an agenda. University of Chicago PressRaj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 12 of 14