Future research directions for organizational scholars
There are a number of topics related to robotics, artificial intelligence, and automation
that would benefit from research by organizational scholars. For example, the popular
press tends to associate artificial intelligence and robotics with substitution, in part
because of an assumption that productivity gains are at the expense of labor. The evi-
dence does not support this conclusion, however. For example, Furman and Seamans
(2019 ) show that there is no correlation between a country ’s labor force and its prod-
uctivity, and Autor and Salomons ( 2018 ) show that while productivity growth may have
a negative employment effect on the sector that experiences the growth, this is more
than made up for by employment gains in related sectors.
More generally, there are reasons to expect that artificial intelligence will have com-
plementary effects on labor. This has been the case for prior episodes of automation —
for example, Bessen ( 2015 ) describes how the adoption of ATM machines by banks was
associated with an increase in bank employment —and early evidence suggests it will be
the same for artificial intelligence. Bessen et al. ( 2018 ) provide survey evidence that
software sold by artificial intelligence startups is designed in most cases to augment the
work that humans do. According to their findings, artificial intelligence startups are
most likely to provide technology that helps their customers “make better predictions
or decisions ”,“manage and understand data better ”, and “gain new capabilities to im-
prove services or provide new products. ”It is notable that these are all related to man-
agement and strategy. Given the dramatic impact that these technologies could have on
labor and society, it is vitally important to have a clear understanding of the relation-
ship between artificial intelligence, robotics, and labor. This is one area that we believe
would greatly benefit from research by organizational scholars, who are adept at de-
scribing mechanisms affecting the organization of work.
There are a variety of other questions surrounding artificial intelligence and robotics
that we encourage organizational scholars to turn to. One topic that has yet to be ex-
plored in much detail surrounds the establishment and firm-level consequences for
adoption of artificial intelligence and robotics technology. Research could examine per-
formance consequences as well as outcomes related to firm organization and strategy.
Scholars can study in what circumstances and in what kinds of firms such adoption has
the greatest impact. Additionally, adoption of these technologies within a firm may
have consequences for the adopting firm as well as other firms in the industry, includ-
ing firms upstream and downstream from the focal firm. The adoption of the technol-
ogy itself can be viewed as an outcome, and scholars can examine what circumstances
and factors encourage or discourage the use of these technologies. Certain industries,
management styles, or organizational forms may be particularly quick to adopt, and
market level forces may also impact the adoption decision. Industry and organizational
factors may play a role as well as the backgrounds of individuals and managers within
organizations. Greater work can be done to identify what factors contribute to adoption
and differential effects once technology is adopted.
Further, more specific to management scholars, we need a detailed understanding
about how artificial intelligence and robotics affect the nature of work. This includes
not only how artificial intelligence and robotics change a given type of work or occupa-
tion (for example, by changing the relative importance of skills and tasks required for
an occupation), but also how artificial intelligence and robotics affect the way in whichRaj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 9 of 14