Distributional effects of artificial intelligence and robotics
Existing work on artificial intelligence and robotics has also attempted to identify “win-
ners”and “losers ”and to understand the distributional effects of these new technologies.
A body of this work looks at cross-industry effects. Autor and Salomons ( 2018 )s h o wt h a t
industry-specific productivity increases are associated with a decrease of employment
within the affected industry; however, positive spillovers in other sectors more than offset
the negative own-industry effect. Similarly, Mandel ( 2017 ) examines brick-and-mortar re-
tail stores during the rise of e-commerce and finds that new jobs created at fulfillment
and call centers more than make up for job losses at department stores.
Other work looks at how skill composition can affect the potential complementary or
substitution effects of these new technologies. A recent working paper by Choudhury
et al. ( 2018 ) looks at performance effects of the use of artificial intelligence by workers
with different types of training. They find productivity with artificial intelligence tech-
nology is highly affected by an individual ’s background with computer science and en-
gineering. Individuals who have requisite computer science or engineering skills are
better able to unlock superior performance using artificial intelligence technologies
than individuals without those skills. Felten et al. ( 2018 ) use an abilities-based approach
to assess the link between recent advances in artificial intelligence and employment
and wage growth. They find that occupations that require a relatively high proportion
of software skills see growth in employment when affected by artificial intelligence,
while other occupations do not see a meaningful relationship between the impact of
artificial intelligence and employment growth.
Algorithmic decision-making and bias
There is a growing literature in economics, strategy, and information systems that studies
the use of machine learning algorithms in decision-making. Some of the authors in this
literature use disaggregated, micro-level data to draw insights as to how artificial
intelligence affects firms or individuals differently depending on their background. Some
of this work examines whether and how the use of artificial intelligence and machine
learning tools affects individual biases. For example, machine-based algorithms appear to
outperform judges in making decisions regarding potential detainment pre-trial and also
reduce inequities (Kleinberg et al. 2018 ). Hoffman et al. ( 2017 )f i n dt h a tm a n a g e r sw h o
choose to hire against recommendations constructed by machine-based algorithms
choose worse hires. Together, these results appear to suggest that machine learning algo-
rithms may have potential in improving decision quality and equity.
However, other research cautions that machine learning algorithms often contain
their own form of bias. For example, a machine learning algorithm designed to deliver
advertisements for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math occupations targeted
men more than women, despite the fact that the advertisement was explicitly intended
to be gender-neutral (Lambrecht and Tucker 2018 ); Google ’s Ad Settings machine
learning algorithm displays fewer advertisements for high-paying jobs to females than
to males (Datta et al. 2015 ); and artificial intelligence-based tools used in judicial
decision-making appear to display racial biases (Angwin et al. 2016 ). While these biases
are troubling, some argue that compared to the counterfactual of human
decision-making, algorithmic processes offer improvements in quality and fairness, andRaj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 6 of 14