in particular, machine learning tools are best able to mitigate biases when human
decision-makers exhibit bias and high levels of inconsistency (Cowgill 2019 ).
Recommender systems are a common tool on e-commerce platforms and frequently
incorporate machine learning or artificial intelligence algorithms in the creation of their
recommendations (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin 2005 ). Barach et al. ( 2018b ) show that
the use of recommendation systems for sellers can substitute for explicit monetary in-
centives in online marketplaces, highlighting one method by which firms can use artifi-
cial intelligence technologies to cut costs. Barach et al. ( 2018a ,2018b ) study
recommendation systems in online labor marketplaces and find that firms use
AI-driven recommendations to identify an initial set of generally acceptable partners
before relying on internal capabilities to select the best match. In particular, the use of
the recommendation system is used less for specialized jobs and for experienced
employees.
Other areas of interest
In addition to the above areas, research on artificial intelligence and robotics has
started to examine a broader range of questions, such as how artificial intelligence
may help stimulate innovation (Cockburn et al. 2018 ), the role of policy in an
economy featuring artificial intelligence (Goolsbee 2018 ), and the role of artificial
intelligence in international trade (Brynjolfsson et al. 2018a ; Goldfarb and Trefler
2018 ). There are other important firm strategy and policy questions left to answer
in this space such as the impact of artificial intelligence on firm structure, the fac-
tors that lead to increased adoption of these technologies, and distributional effects
of artificial intelligence across industrie s, geographies, and occupations. However,
aside from literature studying machine l earning algorithms, research in this area
has been slowed by a lack of available data, especially at the firm level. We discuss
future directions of research below.
While there are some data sets containing information on the diffusion of robotics, it
is largely at an aggregate level which does not allow for detailed microanalysis and dif-
ferences across industries and regions can be obscured. There are currently no public
data sets on the utilization or adoption of artificial intelligence at either the micro or
the macro level, as the most complete sources of information are proprietary and
inaccessible to the general public and the academic community (Raj and Sea-
mans 2018 ; McElheran 2019 ). Despite these limitations, scholars studying management
and organizations have constructed data sets and conducted research using trade maga-
zines and other industry-specific resources. For example, using the industrial robotics
industry as a setting, scholars have established that prior technological experience and
technological knowledge are associated with greater innovative behavior following the
introduction of a disruptive technology (Roy and Sarkar 2016 ; Roy and Islam 2017 ). Re-
searchers have also used the industrial robotics industry as a setting to study
organizational search and identify two distinct dimensions of search —search scope and
search depth (Katila and Ahuja 2002 ). Nevertheless, the next stage in the evolution of
research in this area should involve a proliferation of data to conduct a more focused
and rigorous analysis of important questions regarding these technologies, firm adop-
tion, and its consequences in an empirical manner.Raj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 7 of 14