Implications of artificial intelligence and robotics for organizational design
Historically, advances in technology have reshaped the workforce and our work habits
and required organizations to adjust their design paradigms in dramatic ways. For
example, in the last two decades, the rise of the Internet has led firms to increasingly
embrace remote work and virtual teams which can cross geographic boundaries and
use virtual means to coordinate actions (Kirkman and Mathieu 2005 ). A significant
challenge for firms lies in recognizing when this reorganization is beneficial and what
are the boundaries to adjusting to the new technology. Kirkman and Mathieu ( 2005 )
note the importance of weighing the “presses ”that operate on real-world teams that in-
fluence the effectiveness of face-to-face interaction compared to virtual interactions.
Similarly, artificial intelligence and robotics technology have the capacity to reshape
firms and change the structure of organizations dramatically. As discussed above, the
adoption of artificial intelligence and robotics technologies will likely alter the bundle of
skills and tasks that many occupations are comprised of. By that aspect alone, these tech-
nologies will reshape organizations and force firms to restructure themselves to account
for these changes. Boundaries between occupations within firms are likely to shift as some
tasks are automated, and individuals within firms that choose to adopt these technologies
are likely to have greater exposure to computer technologies. In addition, the composition
of the labor force may change to adopt to the new set of skills that are most valued. These
changes are also likely to be reflected in the design of organizations as they seek configu-
rations to get the most value out of their human capital.
Interfirm boundaries are also likely to shift as robotics and artificial intelligence tech-
nologies are adopted more widely. In a seminal article, Coase ( 1937 ) argues that firms
will expand until the cost of organizing an additional transaction within the firm equals
the cost of carrying out the same transaction on the market. Increased usage of artifi-
cial intelligence and robotics technology has the potential to greatly reduce costs within
firms, potentially leading to fewer transactions on the market. Tasks that previously
had to be contracted to other firms may now be able to be transferred in-house, or
alternatively, firms may find that tasks that were done within the firm can be more effi-
ciently done by other organizations with greater access and facility with these technolo-
gies. In addition, a firm may avoid adopting newer technologies such as robotics if the
technology is highly specific to the firm and the firm faces risk of hold-up from an
opportunistic downstream customer (Williamson 1985 ).
Regardless of what form the effect takes, th e strategy literature consistently pre-
sents evidence that incumbent firms struggl e during technological discontinuities
(e.g., Tushman and Anderson 1986 ; Henderson and Clark 1990 ). Despite the chal-
lenges presented by radical innovation, incumbents can be successful when they
are “pre-adapted, ”and their historical capabilities and assets can be leveraged to
take advantage of the new technology (Klepper 2002 ;C a t t a n i 2006 ). In the specific
context of robotics technology, Roy and Sarkar ( 2016 ) present evidence that the
presence of in-house users of robots and access to scientific knowledge will best
prepare firms to be flexible and adapt to new, “smarter ”robotics technology. To
the extent that this finding is generalizable, firms may consider employing individ-
uals with experience with these technologies and increase their facility with scien-
tific knowledge in the area to best be able to take advantage of potential benefits
from adoption.Raj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 8 of 14