become fuzzier as applications of artificial intelligence may involve robotics or vice
versa. For example, “smart robots ”are robots that integrate machine learning and artifi-
cial intelligence to continuously improve the robots ’performance.
Both artificial intelligence and robotics technologies are capable of automation. How-
ever, an open question is how and whether the effects of automation may differ across
the two technologies. Some scholars contend that computerization and the increased
use of artificial intelligence have the potential to automate certain non-routine
tasks compared to the more rote tasks previously subjected to automation (Frey
and Osborne 2017 ; Autor et al. 2006 ). Accordingly, it is possible that technologies
incorporating artificial intelligence m ay be able to automate far more tasks than
pure robotics-based technologies.
Importantly, even though a technology such as artificial intelligence or robotics may
automate some of the tasks previously done by human labor, it does not necessarily
imply that the human has been automated out of a job. In many cases, a computer or
robot may be able to complete relatively low-value tasks, freeing up the human to focus
efforts instead on high-value tasks. In this sense, artificial intelligence and robotics may
augment the work done by human labor.
Distinction from information and communication technology
In addition to the distinction across the concepts of robotics, artificial intelligence, and
automation, we additionally draw readers ’attention to the contrast between artificial
intelligence and robotics, and computerization and information technologies more gen-
erally. Similarly to robotics and artificial intelligence, information and communication
technology (ICT) has been of interest to researchers and policymakers with regards to
both its potential to increase productivity and its ability to affect labor (e.g., Autor et al.
2003 ; Bloom et al. 2014 ; Akerman et al. 2015 ). However, while artificial intelligence and
robotics may reduce the cost of storing, communicating, and transmitting information
much like ICT, they are distinct. ICT can refer to any form of computer-based informa-
tion system (Powell and Dent-Micallef 1999 ), while artificial intelligence and robotics
may be computer-based but are not necessarily information systems. This distinction
can be especially difficult to navigate given the broadness and variation in the defini-
tions used for robotics and artificial intelligence in the literature. Again, we urge
organizational scholars to carefully define any of these constructs in their studies.
Key questions and areas of interest
Extant work on artificial intelligence and robotics addresses a number of major ques-
tions regarding the effect of these technologies on firms and individuals.
Artificial intelligence, robotics, and productivity
Research on robotics and artificial intelligence builds off of the substantial body of lit-
erature surrounding innovation and technological development. Innovation is a key fac-
tor in contributing to economic growth (Solow 1957 ; Romer 1990 ) and has been an
area of interest for both theorists and policymakers for decades. Literature on r obotics
and automation has pointed to the impressive potential of these new technologies.Raj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 4 of 14