for inductive theory building (Choudhury et al. 2019 ). Further, machine learning
models can under certain conditions also improve causal inference with
high-dimensional data and can help sort meaningful variables from confounding infor-
mation (Belloni et al. 2014 ). As an example of a potential application, Guzman ( 2019 )
uses the double Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) method-
ology discussed by Belloni et al. ( 2014 ) to construct an appropriate counterfactual in
his analysis of the effect of migration on start-up performance.
Additionally, machine learning tools allow for the analysis of unstructured textual
data through natural language processing techniques, such as vector space models
and topic modeling, and provide an opportunity to explore novel,
difficult-to-measure constructs (Menon et al. 2018 ). For example, Furman and
Teodoridis ( 2018 ) use topic modeling techniques to measure scientists ’research
trajectories, Kaplan and Vakili ( 2014 ) use topic modeling to construct a measure of
novelty in patent applications, and Feng ( 2019 ) uses topic modeling to construct
measures of local knowledge spillovers.
Conclusion
Artificial intelligence and robotics have experienced dramatic increases in performance,
and this has led to greater funding for artificial intelligence and robotics start-ups, more
popular press articles on how these technologies will change the world, and a recent in-
crease in academic research around the consequences of these technologies for firms,
workers, and economies. In this Primer, we define the key concepts, review the existing
literature, identify implications for organizational design, and describe opportunities for
organizational and strategy scholars.
Much of the literature that has been undertaken in this area focuses on how the
adoption of robotics and artificial intelligence technologies affects economic growth
and labor markets. This is still a prime area for further research given the important
implications for social welfare. In addition, a lack of comprehensive data on the adop-
tion and use of artificial intelligence and robots means that much of the existing work
relies on expert or crowd-sourced opinions rather than empirical evidence (e.g., Frey
and Osborne 2017 ; Brynjolfsson et al. 2018b ; Felten et al. 2018 ). In the future, better
collection and organization of data will allow for more direct empirical studies and will
allow scholars to examine adjacent questions, such as differences in terms of perform-
ance and labor market consequences for different types of robotics or artificial
intelligence technologies. We need evidence-based research on how artificial
intelligence affects firm-level productivity, employment, and wages, as well as research
on how artificial intelligence may affect economic outcomes with distributional conse-
quences, such as innovation, business dynamism, and inequality.
There are multiple opportunities for organizational and strategy scholars to contrib-
ute to our understanding about how these technologies are affecting our society. In
particular, we highlight the following questions as those that organizational and strategy
scholars may be particularly well-suited to address:
/C15Which types of firms are more likely to adopt artificial intelligence and robotics
technologies? Are there certain management styles or organizational forms thatRaj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 11 of 14