Brynjolfsson and McAfee ( 2017 ) claim that artificial intelligence has the potential
to be “the most important general-purpose technology of our era. ”Graetz and
Michaels ( 2018 ) suggest that robotics added an estimated 0.37 percentage points to
annual GDP growth for a panel of 17 countries from 1993 and 2007, an effect
similar to that of the adoption of steam engines on economic growth during the
industrial revolution.
Artificial intelligence, robotics, and labor
Historically, excitement around radical new technologies is tempered by anxieties re-
garding the potential for labor substitution (Mokyr et al. 2015 ). A body of work has
shown that automation spurred by innovation can both complement and substitute for
labor. Acemoglu and Restrepo ( 2018 ) examine how increased industrial robotics usage
has impacted regional US labor markets between 1990 and 2007. Their findings suggest
that the adoption of industrial robotics is negatively correlated with employment and
wages —specifically that each additional robot reduced employment by six workers and
that one new robot across a thousand workers reduced wages by 0.5%. Graetz and Mi-
chaels ( 2018 ) find that while wages increase with robot use, on average, hours worked
drops for low- and middle-skilled workers. A similar study in Germany suggests that
each additional industrial robot leads to a loss of two manufacturing job, but these jobs
are offset by newly created roles in the service industry (Dauth et al. 2017 ).
Increasingly, work on automation considers or focuses on artificial intelligence rather
than just robotics. Frey and Osborne ( 2017 ) predict how increased computerization, in
particular, machine learning technologies, will affect non-routine tasks. Based on the
tasks most involved in an occupation, the authors propose which occupations may be
more or less at risk of automation in the future. Their results suggest that 47% of em-
ployment in the USA is at high risk of computerization. Frey and Osborne ’s work has
been applied by researchers in other countries. Using the same methodology, Brzeski
and Burk ( 2015 ) suggest that 59% of the German workforce may be highly susceptible
to automation, while Pajarinen and Rouvinen ( 2014 ) suggest that 35% of Finnish jobs
are at high risk. Similar to the task-based approach utilized by Frey and Osborne, Bryn-
jolfsson et al. ( 2018b ) take a task-based approach to assess occupations ’suitability for
machine learning. They show that occupations across the wage and wage bill spectrum
are equally susceptible, suggesting that machine learning will likely affect different parts
of the workforce than earlier waves of automation.
Work on automation and labor has focused on different units of analysis. Much of the
existing work in economics has focused on the economy as a whole. For example, Frey and
Osborne ( 2017 )m e a s u r et h er i s ko fa u t o m a t i o no na n occupation by occupation level but
consider the occupations at a global level. S imilar work by McKinsey Global Institute (MGI
2017 ) does the same, and recent work by Accenture considers these at the country level
(Accenture 2018 ). US-specific work has been done by Brynjolfsson et al. ( 2018b )a n dF e l t e n
et al. ( 2018 ). Some research has taken a more focused approach and highlights the effect of
artificial intelligence and automation on specific sectors of the economy. For example, Ace-
moglu and Restrepo ( 2018 ) highlight that the largest effects of technology adoption will
occur in manufacturing, especially among m anual and blue-collar occupations and for
workers without a college degree.Raj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 5 of 14