technological change can bring about great progress but also great turmoil. For ex-
ample, while the steam engine led to great economic growth (see, e.g., Crafts 2004 )i t
also led to job displacement. It is important for organizations to understand and antici-
pate the effects that artificial intelligence, robotics, and other types of automation may
have, and design themselves accordingly. While many lessons can be drawn from prior
episodes of automation, it is possible that artificial intelligence and robotics may have
unique consequences. Differences from prior episodes of automation include that (1)
the nature of business activity has shifted dramatically over the past decade such that
many businesses now rely on platform (i.e., 2-sided market) business models, (2) artifi-
cial intelligence is likely to affect white-collar workers more so than blue-collar workers
(while perhaps robotics may affect blue-collar workers more than white-collar workers),
and (3) artificial intelligence may affect the links between establishments and firms
(e.g., monitoring and firm scope).
This article is a primer on artificial intelligence, robotics, and automation. To begin,
we provide definitions of the constructs and describe the key questions that have been
addressed so far. We discuss implications of these technologies on organizational de-
sign, then describe areas in which organizational scholars can make substantial contri-
butions to our understanding about how artificial intelligence and robotics are affecting
work, labor, and organizations. We also describe ways in which organizational scholars
have been using artificial intelligence tools as part of their research methodology.
Finally, we conclude with a call for more research in this fertile area.
Artificial intelligence, robotics, and automation: definitions and key
questions
Definitions
Studies of artificial intelligence and robotics base their theory and analysis on con-
structs of automation, robotics, artificial intelligence and machine learning, and auto-
mation. In this body of literature, use of robotics, artificial intelligence, and machine
learning technologies can be used both as independent and as dependent variables —as
dependent variables to examine factors that encourage or discourage the adoption and
use of these technologies and independent variables to see how the use of these tech-
nologies impacts a variety of outcomes, such as effects on labor, productivity, growth,
and firm organization. It is important that organizational scholars carefully define any
such constructs in their studies and to avoid confusing these related but distinct con-
structs. The definitions below are meant to be a helpful first step in such an endeavor.
Robotics
The International Federation of Robots (IFR), an international industrial group focused
on commercial robotics, defines an industrial robot as an “automatically controlled, re-
programmable, multipurpose manipulator, programmable in three or more axes, which
can be either fixed in place or mobile for use in industrial automation applications. ”4
While this definition is a starting point, other roboticists may differ on dimensions such
as whether a robot must be automatically controlled or could be autonomous or
whether a robot must be reprogrammable. At a broader level, any machine that can beRaj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 2 of 14