used to carry out complex actions or tasks in an automatic manner may be considered
a robot.
Artificial intelligence and machine learning
Similar to robotics, artificial intelligence is a construct with varying definitions and po-
tentially broad interpretations. For starters, it is useful to distinguish between general
and narrow artificial intelligence (Broussard 2018 ).“General artificial intelligence ”
refers to computer software that can think and act on its own; nothing like this cur-
rently exists. “Narrow artificial intelligence ”refers to computer software that relies on
highly sophisticated, algorithmic techniques to find patterns in data and make predic-
tions about the future. In this sense, the software “learns ”from existing data and hence
is sometimes referred to as “machine learning ”but this should not be confused with
actual learning. Broussard ( 2018 ) writes that “machine ‘learning ’is more akin to a
metaphor …: it means that the machine can improve at its programmed, routine, auto-
mated tasks. It doesn ’t mean that the machine acquires knowledge or wisdom or
agency, despite what the term learning might imply [p. 89]. ”
Many applications of machine learning focus on prediction and estimation of un-
knowns based on a given set of information (Athey 2018 ; Mullainathan and Spiess
2017 ). There are a variety of algorithms that can be used for this machine learning.
Some of these techniques are relatively straightforward uses of logit models which
would be familiar to most organizational scholars, whereas others involve highly
sophisticated algorithms that attempt to mimic how a human brain looks for patterns
in data (the latter are called “neural networks ”). Artificial intelligence technology can
be used towards a variety of purposes, including playing abstract strategy games such
as Chess or Go; to playing real-time video games such as Atari, Asterix, or Crazy
Climber; to image or street number recognition; to natural language translation; and
many other uses.
Automation
Automation refers to the use of largely automatic, likely computer-controlled, systems
and equipment in manufacturing and production processes that replace some or all of
the tasks that previously were done by human labor. Automation is not a new concept,
as innovations such as the steam engine or the cotton gin can be viewed as automating
previously manual tasks. One of the concerns for scholars in this area revolves around
how and in what contexts increased use of robotics and artificial intelligence technol-
ogy may lead to increased automation, and the impact that this form of increased auto-
mation may have on the workforce and the design of organizations.
Disentangling artificial intelligence, robotics, and automation
While artificial intelligence, robotics, and automation are all related concepts, it is im-
portant to be aware of the distinctions between each of these constructs. Robotics is
largely focused on technologies that could be classified as “manipulators ”as per the
IFR definition, and accordingly, more directly relates to the automation of physical
tasks. On the other hand, artificial intelligence does not require physical manipulation,
but rather computer-based learning. The distinction between the two technologies canRaj and Seamans Journal of Organization Design            (2019) 8:11 Page 3 of 14