Journal of Machine Learning Research ? (2015) ? Submitted 2/15; Published ??/??
Cost-sensitive Support Vector Machines
Hamed Masnadi-Shirazi hmasnadi@shirazu.ac.ir
Department of Electrical Engineering, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran
Nuno Vasconcelos nuno@ucsd.edu
Statistical Visual Computing Laboratory, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92039
Arya Iranmehr airanmehr@ucsd.edu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92039
Editor:
Abstract
A new procedure for learning cost-sensitive SVM(CS-SVM) classiers is proposed. The
SVM hinge loss is extended to the cost sensitive setting, and the CS-SVM is derived as the
minimizer of the associated risk. The extension of the hinge loss draws on recent connections
between risk minimization and probability elicitation. These connections are generalized
to cost-sensitive classication, in a manner that guarantees consistency with the cost-
sensitive Bayes risk, and associated Bayes decision rule. This ensures that optimal decision
rules, under the new hinge loss, implement the Bayes-optimal cost-sensitive classication
boundary. Minimization of the new hinge loss is shown to be a generalization of the classic
SVM optimization problem, and can be solved by identical procedures. The dual problem of
CS-SVM is carefully scrutinized by means of regularization theory and sensitivity analysis
and the CS-SVM algorithm is substantiated. The proposed algorithm is also extended to
cost-sensitive learning with example dependent costs. The minimum cost sensitive risk is
proposed as the performance measure and is connected to ROC analysis through vector
optimization. The resulting algorithm avoids the shortcomings of previous approaches to
cost-sensitive SVM design, and is shown to have superior experimental performance on a
large number of cost sensitive and imbalanced datasets.
Keywords: Cost Sensitive Learning, SVM, probability elicitation, Bayes consistent loss
1. Introduction
The most popular strategy for the design of classication algorithms is to minimize the
probability of error, assuming that all misclassications have the same cost. The resulting
decision rules are usually denoted as cost-insensitive . However, in many important applica-
tions of machine learning, such as medical diagnosis, fraud detection, or business decision
making, certain types of error are much more costly than others. Other applications involve
signicantly unbalanced datasets, where examples from dierent classes appear with sub-
stantially dierent probability. It is well known, from Bayesian decision theory, that under
any of these two situations (uneven costs or probabilities), the optimal decision rule deviates
from the optimal cost-insensitive rule in the same manner. In both cases, reliance on cost
insensitive algorithms for classier design can be highly sub-optimal. While this makes it
c
2015 Hamed Masnadi-Shirazi, Nuno Vasconcelos and Arya Iranmehr.arXiv:1212.0975v2  [cs.LG]  15 Feb 2015