Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey 337
is typically added after several residual blocks.
3.2.3 SRM
Motivated by successes in style transfer, Lee et al. [ 55]
proposed the lightweight style-based recalibr ation
module (SRM). SRM combines style transfer with
an attention mechanism. Its main contribution
is style pooling which utilizes both mean and
standard deviation of the input features to improve
its capability to capture global information. It alsoadopts a lightweight channel-wise fully-connected
(CFC) layer, in place of the original fully-connected
layer, to reduce the computational requirements.
Given an input feature map X∈RC×H×W,
SRM ﬁrst collects global information by using
style pooling ( SP(·)) which combines global average
pooling and global standard deviation pooling. Then
a channel-wise fully connected ( CFC(·)) layer (i.e.,
fully connected per channel), batch normalization
BN, and sigmoid function σare used to provide the
attention vector. Finally, as in an SE block, the
input features are multiplied by the attention vector.
Overall, an SRM can be written as
s=Fsrm(X, θ )=σ(BN(CFC(SP( X)))) (11)
Y=sX (12)
The SRM block improves both squeeze and excitation
modules, yet can be added after each residual unit
like an SE block.
3.2.4 GCT
Due to the computational demand and number
of parameters of the fully connected layer in the
excitation module, it is impractical to use an SE block
after each convolution layer. Furthermore, using
fully connected layers to model channel relationships
is an implicit procedure. To overcome the aboveproblems, Yang et al. [
56] proposed the gated
channel transformation (GCT) to eﬃciently collect
information while explicitly modeling channel-wise
relationships.
Unlike previous methods, GCT ﬁrst collects global
information by computing the l2-norm of each
channel. Next, a learnable vector αis applied to
scale the feature. Then a competition mechanism is
adopted by channel normalization to interact between
channels. Like other common normalization methods,a learnable scale parameter
γand bias βare applied to
rescale the normalization. However, unlike previous
methods, GCT adopts tanh activation to control theattention vector. Finally, it not only multiplies the
input by the attention vector but also adds an identity
connection. GCT can be written as
s=Fgct(X, θ ) = tanh( γCN (αNorm(X )) +β) (13)
Y=sX+X (14)
where α,β,a n d γare trainable parameters. Norm (·)
indicates the l2-norm of each channel. CNis channel
normalization.
A GCT block has fewer parameters than an SE
block, and as it is lightweight, it can be added after
each convolutional layer of a CNN.
3.2.5 ECANet
To avoid high model complexity, SENet reduces
the number of channels. However, this strategy
fails to directly model correspondence between
weight vectors and inputs, reducing the quality
of results. To overcome this drawback, Wang etal. [
37] proposed the eﬃcient channel attention
(ECA) block which instead uses a 1D convolution to
determine the interaction between channels, instead
of dimensionality reduction.
An ECA block has similar formulation to an SE
block including a squeeze module for aggregating
global spatial information and an eﬃcient excitation
module for modeling cross-channel interaction.Instead of indirect correspondence, an ECA blockonly considers direct interaction between each
channel and its k-nearest neighbors to control model
complexity. Overall, the formulation of an ECA block
is
s=Feca(X, θ )=σ(Conv1D(GAP( X))) (15)
Y=sX (16)
where Conv1D (·) denotes 1D convolution with a
kernel of shape kacross the channel domain, to
model local cross-channel interaction. The parameter
kdecides the coverage of interaction, and in ECA
the kernel size kis adaptively determined from the
channel dimensionality Cinstead of by manual tuning,
using cross-validation:
k=ψ(C)=/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsinglelog2(C)
γ+b
γ/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
odd(17)
where γandbare hyperparameters. |x|oddindicates
the nearest odd function of x.
Compared to SENet, ECANet has an improved
excitation module, and provides an eﬃcient and
eﬀective block which can readily be incorporated
into various CNNs.