Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey 341
state r(1)
tof the recurrent network:
y=fcls(r(1)
t) (32)
Compared to a CNN operating on the entire image,
the computational cost of the proposed model is much
lower, and it can naturally tackle images of diﬀerent
sizes because it only processes a glimpse in each
step. Robustness is additionally improved by the
recurrent attention mechanism, which also alleviates
the problem of over-ﬁtting. This pipeline can be
incorporated into any state-of-the-art CNN backbones
or RNN units.
3.3.3 Hard and soft attention
To visualize where and what an image caption
generation model should focus on, Xu et al. [ 35]
introduced an attention-based model as well as two
variant attention mechanisms, hard attention andsoft
attention .
Given a set of feature vectors a={a1,...,a L},
ai∈RDextracted from the input image, the model
aims to produce a caption by generating one word at
each time step. Thus they adopt a long short-term
memory (LSTM) network as a decoder; an attention
mechanism is used to generate a contextual vector
ztconditioned on the feature set aand the previous
hidden state ht−1, where tdenotes the time step.
Formally, the weight αt,iof the feature vector aiat
thet-th time step is deﬁned as
et,i=fatt(ai,ht−1) (33)
αt,i=exp(e t,i)
L/summationdisplay
k=1exp(e t,k)(34)
where fattis implemented by a multilayer perceptron
conditioned on the previous hidden state ht−1.T h e
positive weight αt,ican be interpreted either as
the probability that location iis the right place
to focus on (hard attention), or as the relative
importance of location ito the next word (soft
attention). To obtain the contextual vector zt,
the hard attention mechanism assigns a multinoulli
distribution parametrized by {αt,i}and views ztas
a random variable:
p(st,i=1|a,h t−1)=αt,i (35)
zt=L/summationdisplay
i=1st,iai (36)
On the other hand, the soft attention mechanism
directly uses the expectation of the context vector zt:zt=L/summationdisplay
i=1αt,iai (37)
The use of the attention mechanism improves
the interpretability of the image caption generation
process by allowing the user to understand whatand where the model is focusing on. It also helpsto improve the representational capability of the
network.
3.3.4 Attention gate
Previous approaches to MR segmentation usually
operate on particular regions of interest (ROI), which
requires excessive and wasteful use of computational
resources and model parameters. To address this
issue, Oktay et al. [ 19] proposed a simple and yet
eﬀective mechanism, the attention gate (AG), to
focus on targeted regions while suppressing feature
activations in irrelevant regions.
Given the input feature map Xand the gating
signal G∈RC/prime×H×Wwhich is collected at a
coarse scale and contains contextual information,
the attention gate uses additive attention to obtain
the gating coeﬃcient. Both the input Xand the
gating signal are ﬁrst linearly mapped to an RF×H×W
dimensional space, and then the output is squeezed
in the channel domain to produce a spatial attention
weight map S∈R1×H×W. The overall process can
be written as
S=σ(ϕ(δ(φx(X)+φ g(G)))) (38)
Y=SX (39)
where ϕ,φx,a n d φgare linear transformations
implemented as 1 ×1 convolutions.
The attention gate guides the model’s attention
to important regions while suppressing featureactivation in unrelated areas. It substantially
enhances the representational power of the model
without a signiﬁcant increase in computing cost or
number of model parameters due to its lightweight
design. It is general and modular, making it simple
to use in various CNN models.
3.3.5 STN
The property of translation equivariance makes
CNNs suitable for processing image data. However,
CNNs lack other transformation invariance such as
rotational invariance, scaling invariance, and warping
invariance. To achieve these attributes while making
CNNs focus on important regions, Jaderberg et