Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey 347
visually similar regions while the long-term temporal
information serves to overcome occlusions and noise.
GLTR combines the advantages of both modules,
enhancing representation capability and suppressing
noise. It can be incorporated into any state-of-the-art
CNN backbone to learn a global descriptor for a whole
video. However, the self-attention mechanism has
quadratic time complexity, limiting its application.
3.4.2 TAM
To capture complex temporal relationships both
eﬃciently and ﬂexibly, Liu et al. [ 173] proposed
atemporal adaptive module (TAM). It adopts an
adaptive kernel instead of self-attention to capture
global contextual information, with lower time
complexity than GLTR [172].
TAM has two branches, a local branch and a
global branch. Given the input feature map X∈
RC×T×H×W, global spatial average pooling GAP
is ﬁrst applied to the feature map to ensure TAMhas a low computational cost. Then the localbranch in TAM employs several 1D convolutions
with ReLU nonlinearity across the temporal domain
to produce location-sensitive importance maps for
enhancing frame-wise features. The local branch can
be written as
s=σ(Conv1D( δ(Conv1D(GAP( X))))) (60)
X1=sX (61)
Unlike the local branch, the global branch is location
invariant and focuses on generating a channel-wise
adaptive kernel based on global temporal information
in each channel. For the c-th channel, the kernel can
be written as
Θc= Softmax(FC 2(δ(FC 1(GAP( X)c)))) (62)
where Θ c∈RKandKis the adaptive kernel size.
Finally, TAM convolves the adaptive kernel Θ with
X1
out:Y=Θ⊗X1(63)
With the help of the local branch and global
branch, TAM can capture the complex temporal
structures in video and enhance per-frame features
at low computational cost. Due to its ﬂexibility and
lightweight design, TAM can be added to any existing
2D CNNs.
3.5 Branch attention
Branch attention can be seen as a dynamic branch
selection mechanism: which to pay attention to , used
with a multi-branch structure. We ﬁrst summarize
representative branch attention mechanisms andspecify process
g(x)a n d f(g(x),x) described as
Eq. (1) in Table 6, then discuss various ones in detail.
3.5.1 Highway networks
Inspired by the long short term memory network,
Srivastava et al. [ 113] proposed highway networks
that employ adaptive gating mechanisms to enable
information ﬂows across layers to address the problem
of training very deep networks.
Supposing a plain neural network consists
ofLlayers, and Hl(X) denotes a non-linear
transformation on the l-th layer, a highway network
can be expressed as
Yl=Hl(Xl)Tl(Xl)+X l(1−Tl(Xl)) (64)
Tl(X)=σ(WT
lX+bl) (65)
where Tl(X) denotes the transform gate regulating
the information ﬂow for the l-th layer. XlandYlare
the inputs and outputs of the l-th layer.
The gating mechanism and skip-connection
structure make it possible to directly train very
deep highway networks using simple gradient descent
methods. Unlike ﬁxed skip-connections, the gating
mechanism adapts to the input, which helps to routeinformation across layers. A highway network can be
incorporated in any CNN.
T able 6 Representative branch attention mechanisms sorted by date. Cls = classiﬁcation, Det = Object Detection. g(x) and f(g(x),x) are
the attention process described by Eq. (1). Ranges means the ranges of attention map. S or H means soft or hard attention. (A) Element-wise
product, (B) channel-wise product, (C) aggergate information via attention. (I) Overcome the problem of vanishing gradient, (II) dynamically
fuse diﬀerent branches, (III) adaptively select a suitable receptive ﬁeld, and (IV) improve the performance of standard convolution (be)
dynamically fuse diﬀerent convolution kernels
Category Method Publication Tasks g(x) f(g(x),x ) Ranges S or H Goals
Combine diﬀerent
branchesHighway
Network [113]NeurIPS2015 Cls linear layer →sigmoid (A) (0, 1) S (I), (II)
SKNet [114] CVPR2019 Cls global average pooling →
MLP →softmax(B) (0, 1) S (II), (III)
Combine diﬀerent
convolution kernelsCondConv [174] NeurIPS2019 Cls,
Detglobal average pooling →
linear layer →sigmoid(C) (0, 1) S (IV), (V)