354 M.-H. Guo, T.-X. Xu, J.-J. Liu, et al.
and the spatial relation-aware feature yican be
written as
Yi=[gc
avg(δ(Wϕxi));δ(Wφri)] (123)
where gc
avgdenotes global average pooling in the
channel domain. Finally, the spatial attention score
at position iis given by
ai=σ(W2δ(W1yi)) (124)
RGA-C has the same form as RGA-S, except for
taking the input feature map as a set of H×W-
dimensional features.
RGA uses global relations to generate the attention
score for each feature node, so provides valuable
structural information and signiﬁcantly enhances the
representational power. RGA-S and RGA-C are
ﬂexible enough to be used in any CNN network;
Zhang et al. proposed using them jointly in sequence
to better capture both spatial and cross-channel
relationships.
3.6.10 Self-calibrated convolutions
Motivated by the success of group convolution, Liu
et al. [ 121] presented self-calibrated convolution as a
means to enlarge the receptive ﬁeld at each spatial
location.
Self-calibrated convolution is used together with a
standard convolution. It ﬁrst divides the input feature
XintoX1andX2in the channel domain. The self-
calibrated convolution ﬁrst uses average pooling to
reduce the input size and enlarge the receptive ﬁeld:
T1= AvgPoolr(X1) (125)
where ris the ﬁlter size and stride. Then a
convolution is used to model the channel relationship
and a bilinear interpolation operator Up is used to
upsample the feature map:
X/prime
1= Up(Conv 2(T1)) (126)
Next, element-wise multiplication ﬁnishes the self-
calibrated process:
Y/prime
1= Conv 3(X1)σ(X1+X/prime
1) (127)
Finally, the output feature map is formed:
Y1= Conv 4(Y/prime
1) (128)
Y2= Conv 1(X2) (129)
Y=[Y1;Y2] (130)
Such self-calibrated convolution can enlarge the
receptive ﬁeld of a network and improve itsadaptability. It achieves excellent results in image
classiﬁcation and certain downstream tasks such as
instance segmentation, object detection, and keypoint
detection.3.6.11 SPNet
Spatial pooling usually operates on a small region
which limits its capability to capture long-range
dependencies and focus on distant regions. To
overcome this, Hou et al. [ 125] proposed strip pooling,
a novel pooling method capable of encoding long-
range context in either horizontal or vertical spatial
domains.
Strip pooling has two branches for horizontal and
vertical strip pooling. The horizontal strip pooling
part ﬁrst pools the input feature F∈RC×H×Win
the horizontal direction:
y1= GAPw(X) (131)
Then a 1D convolution with kernel size 3 is applied in
yto capture the relationship between diﬀerent rows
and channels. This is repeated Wtimes to make the
output yvconsistent with the input shape:
yh= Expand(Conv1D( y1)) (132)
Vertical strip pooling is performed in a similar
way. Finally, the outputs of the two branches are
fused using element-wise summation to produce the
attention map:
s=σ(Conv1×1(yv+yh)) (133)
Y=sX (134)
The strip pooling module (SPM) is further
developed in the mixed pooling module (MPM). Both
consider spatial and channel relationships to overcome
the locality of convolutional neural networks. SPNet
achieves state-of-the-art results for several complex
semantic segmentation benchmarks.
3.6.12 SCA-CNN
As CNN features are naturally spatial, channel-wise,
and multi-layer, Chen et al. [ 50] proposed a novel
spatial and channel-wise attention-based convolutional
neural network (SCA-CNN). It was designed for
the task of image captioning, and uses an encoder–
decoder framework where a CNN ﬁrst encodes an
input image into a vector and then an LSTM decodes
the vector into a sequence of words. Given aninput feature map
Xand the previous time step
LSTM hidden state ht−1∈Rd, a spatial attention
mechanism pays more attention to the semantically
useful regions, guided by LSTM hidden state ht−1.
The spatial attention model is
a(h t−1,X) = tanh(Conv1×1
1(X)⊕W1ht−1) (135)
Φs(ht−1,X) = Softmax(Conv1×12(a(h t−1X)))
(136)