346 M.-H. Guo, T.-X. Xu, J.-J. Liu, et al.
et al. [ 87] presented the novel PSANet framework to
aggregate global information. It models information
aggregation as an information ﬂow and proposes a
bidirectional information propagation mechanism to
make information ﬂow globally.
PSANet formulates information aggregation as
zi=/summationdisplay
j∈Ω(i)F(xi,xj,Δij)xj (54)
where Δ ijindicates the positional relationship
between iandj.F(xi,xj,Δij) is a function that
takes xi,xj,a n dΔ ijinto consideration to control
information ﬂow from jtoi.Ω ( i) represents the
aggregation neighborhood of position i; if we wish to
capture global information, Ω( i) should include all
spatial positions.
Due to the complexity of calculating function
F(xi,xj,Δij), it is decomposed into an appro-
ximation:
F(xi,xj,Δij)≈FΔij(xi)+F Δij(xj) (55)
whereupon Eq. (54) can be simpliﬁed to
zi=/summationdisplay
j∈Ω(i)FΔij(xi)xj+/summationdisplay
j∈Ω(i)FΔij(xj)xj(56)
The ﬁrst term can be viewed as collecting information
at position iwhile the second term distributes
information at position j. Functions FΔij(xi)a n d
FΔij(xj) can be seen as adaptive attention weights.
The above process aggregates global information
while emphasizing the relevant features. It can be
added to the end of a convolutional neural network as
an eﬀective complement to greatly improve semantic
segmentation.
3.4 Temporal attention
Temporal attention can be seen as a dynamic
time selection mechanism determining when to pay
attention , and is thus usually used for video processing.
Previous works [ 172,173] often emphasise how to
capture both short-term and long-term cross-framefeature dependencies. Here, we ﬁrst summarize
representative temporal attention mechanisms andspecify process
g(x)a n d f(g(x),x) described as
Eq. (1) in Table 5, and then discuss various such
mechanisms according to the order in Fig. 4.
3.4.1 Self-attention and variants
RNN and temporal pooling or weight learning have
been widely used in work on video representation
learning to capture interaction between frames, but
these methods have limitations in terms of either
eﬃciency or temporal relation modeling.
To overcome them, Li et al. [ 172] proposed a global-
local temporal representation (GLTR) to exploit multi-
scale temporal cues in a video sequence. GLTR
consists of a dilated temporal pyramid (DTP) for
local temporal context learning and a temporal
self attention module for capturing global temporal
interaction. DTP adopts dilated convolution withdilatation rates increasing progressively to cover
various temporal ranges, and then concatenates the
various outputs to aggregate multi-scale information.
Given input frame-wise features F={f1,...,f T},
DTP can be written as
{f(r)
1,...,f(r)
T}= DConv(r)(F) (57)
f/prime
t=[f(1)
t;...f(2n−1)
t ...;f(2N−1)
t ] (58)
where DConv(r)(·) denotes dilated convolution with
dilation rate r. The self-attention mechanism adopts
convolution layers followed by batch normalization
and ReLU activation to generate the query Q∈Rd×T,
the key K∈Rd×T, and the value V∈Rd×Tbased
on the input feature map F/prime={f/prime
1,...,f/prime
T},w h i c h
can be written as
Fout=g(VSoftmax( QTK)) +F/prime(59)
where gdenotes a linear mapping implemented by a
convolution.
The short-term temporal contextual information
from neighboring frames helps to distinguish
T able 5 Representative temporal attention mechanisms sorted by date. ReID = re-identiﬁcation, Action = action recognition. Ranges means
the ranges of attention map. S or H means soft or hard attention. g(x) and f(g(x),x) are the attention process described by Eq. (1). (A)
Aggregate information via attention map. (I) Exploit multi-scale short-term temporal contextual information, (II) capture long-term temporal
feature dependencies, and (III) capture local temporal contexts
Category Method Publication Tasks g(x) f(g(x),x ) Ranges So rH Goals
Self-attention
based methodsGLTR [172] ICCV2019 ReID dilated 1D Convs → self-
attention in temporal dimension(A) (0, 1) S (I), (II)
Combine local
attention and
global attentionTAM [173] Arxiv2020 Action a) local: global spatial average
pooling →1D Convs, b) global:
global spatial average pooling →
MLP →adaptive convolution(A) (0, 1) S (II), (III)