334 M.-H. Guo, T.-X. Xu, J.-J. Liu, et al.
2 Other surveys
In this section, we brieﬂy compare this paper
to various existing surveys which have reviewedattention methods and visual transformers. Chau-
dhari et al. [ 141] provided a survey of attention models
in deep neural networks which concentrates on their
application to natural language processing, while our
work focuses on computer vision. Three more speciﬁc
surveys [ 142–144] summarize the development of
visual transformers while our paper reviews attention
mechanisms in vision more generally, not just self-
attention mechanisms. Wang and Tax [ 145] presented
a survey of attention models in computer vision, but
it only considers RNN-based attention models, which
form just a part of our survey. In addition, unlikeprevious surveys, we provide a classiﬁcation which
groups various attention methods according to their
data domain, rather than according to their ﬁeld of
application. Doing so allows us to concentrate on
the attention methods in their own right, rather than
treating them as supplementary to other tasks.
3 Attention methods in computer vision
In this section, we ﬁrst sum up a general form forthe attention mechanism based on the recognition
process of human visual system in Section 3.1. Then
we review various categories of attention models given
in Fig. 2, with a subsection dedicated to each category.
In each, we tabularize representative works for that
category. We also introduce that category of attention
strategy more deeply, considering its development in
terms of motivation, formulation, and function.
3.1 General form
When seeing a scene in our daily life, we will focus on
the discriminative regions, and process these regions
quickly. The above process can be formulated as
Attention =f(g(x),x) (1)
Here, g(x) can represent to generate attention which
corresponds to the process of attending to the
discriminative regions. f(g(x),x) means processing
input xbased on the attention g(x)w h i c hi s
consistent with processing critical regions and getting
information.
With the above deﬁnition, we ﬁnd that almost all
existing attention mechanisms can be written into the
above formulation. Here we take self-attention [ 15]
and squeeze-and-excitation (SE) attention [ 5]a sexamples. For self-attention, g(x)a n d f(g(x),x) can
be written as
Q, K, V = Linear( x) (2)
g(x) = Softmax( QK) (3)
f(g(x),x)=g(x)V (4)
For SE, g(x)a n df (g(x),x) can be written as
g(x) = Sigmoid(MLP(GAP( x))) (5)
f(g(x),x)=g(x)x (6)
In the following, we will introduce various
attention mechanisms and specify them to the above
formulation.
3.2 Channel attention
In deep neural networks, diﬀerent channels in diﬀerent
feature maps usually represent diﬀerent objects [ 50].
Channel attention adaptively recalibrates the weight
of each channel, and can be viewed as an object
selection process, thus determining what to pay
attention to . Hu et al. [ 5] ﬁrst proposed the concept
of channel attention and presented SENet for thispurpose. As Fig. 4 shows, and we discuss shortly,three streams of work continue to improve channel
attention in diﬀerent ways.
In this section, we ﬁrst summarize the represen-
tative channel attention works and specify process
g(x)a n d f(g(x),x) described as Eq. (1) in Table 3
and Fig. 5. Then we discuss various channel atten-
tion methods along with their development process.
3.2.1 SENet
SENet [ 5] pioneered channel attention. The core of
SENet is a squeeze-and-excitation (SE) block which
is used to collect global information, capture channel-
wise relationships, and improve representation ability.
SE blocks are divided into two parts, a squeeze
module and an excitation module. Global spatial
information is collected in the squeeze module byglobal average pooling. The excitation module
captures channel-wise relationships and outputs an
attention vector by using fully-connected layers and
non-linear layers (ReLU and sigmoid). Then, each
channel of the input feature is scaled by multiplying
the corresponding element in the attention vector.Overall, a squeeze-and-excitation block
Fse(with
parameter θ) which takes Xas input and outputs Y
can be formulated as
s=Fse(X, θ )=σ(W2δ(W1GAP( X))) (7)
Y=sX (8)