Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey 355
where ⊕represents addition of a matrix and a vector.
Similarly, channel-wise attention aggregates global
information ﬁrst, and then computes a channel-wise
attention weight vector with the hidden state ht−1:
b(ht−1,X) = tanh(( W2GAP( X)+b 2)⊕W1ht−1)
(137)
Φc(ht−1,X) = Softmax( W3(b(h t−1,X)) +b3)
(138)
Overall, the SCA mechanism can be written in one of
two ways. If channel-wise attention is applied before
spatial attention, we have
Y=f(X,Φs(ht−1,XΦc(ht−1,X)),Φc(ht−1,X))
(139)
and if spatial attention comes ﬁrst:
Y=f(X,Φs(ht−1,X),Φc(ht−1,XΦs(ht−1,X)))
(140)
where f(·) denotes the modulate function which takes
the feature map Xand attention maps as input and
then outputs the modulated feature map Y.
Unlike previous attention mechanisms which
consider each image region equally and use global
spatial information to tell the network where to focus,
SCA-Net leverages the semantic vector to produce
the spatial attention map as well as the channel-wise
attention weight vector. Being more than a powerful
attention model, SCA-CNN also provides a better
understanding of where and what the model should
focus on during sentence generation.
3.6.13 GALA
Most attention mechanisms learn where to focus using
only weak supervisory signals from class labels, whichinspired Linsley et al. [
123] to investigate how explicit
human supervision can aﬀect the performance andinterpretability of attention models. As a proof of
concept, Linsley et al. proposed the global-and-local
attention (GALA) module, which extends an SE block
with a spatial attention mechanism.
Given the input feature map X, GALA uses
an attention mask that combines global and local
attention to tell the network where and on what to
focus. As in SE blocks, global attention aggregatesglobal information by global average pooling and
then produces a channel-wise attention weight vector
using a multilayer perceptron. In local attention,two consecutive 1
×1 convolutions are conducted
on the input to produce a positional weight map.
The outputs of the local and global pathways arecombined by addition and multiplication. Formally,
GALA can be represented as
sg=W2δ(W1GAP( x)) (141)
sl= Conv1×1
2(δ(Conv1×11(X))) (142)
s∗
g= Expand( sg) (143)
s∗l= Expand( sl) (144)
s= tanh( a(s∗g+s∗l)+m ·(s∗gs∗l)) (145)
Y=sX (146)
where a, m ∈RCare learnable parameters
representing channel-wise weight vectors.
Supervised by human-provided feature importance
maps, GALA has signiﬁcantly improved represen-
tational power and can be combined with any CNN
backbone.
3.7 Spatial & temporal attention
Spatial & temporal attention combines the advan-
tages of spatial attention and temporal attentionas it adaptively selects both important regions and
key frames. Some works [ 16,131] compute temporal
attention and spatial attention separately, while
others [ 132] produce joint spatiotemporal attention
maps. Further works focusing on capturing pair-wise
relations [ 178]. Representative spatial & temporal
attention attentions and speciﬁc process g(x)a n d
f(g(x),x) described as Eq. (1) are summarised in
Table 8. We next discuss speciﬁc spatial & temporal
attention mechanisms according to the order in Fig. 4.
3.7.1 STA-LSTM
In human action recognition, each type of actiongenerally only depends on a few speciﬁc kinematic
joints [ 131]. Furthermore, over time, multiple actions
may be performed. Motivated by these observations,
Song et al. [ 131] proposed a joint spatial and temporal
attention network based on LSTM [ 148], to adaptively
ﬁnd discriminative features and keyframes. Its main
attention-related components are a spatial attention
sub-network, to select important regions, and a
temporal attention sub-network, to select key frames.
The spatial attention sub-network can be written as
st=Ustanh( WxsXt+Whshs
t−1+bsi)+b so(147)
αt= Softmax( st) (148)
Yt=αtXt (149)
where Xtis the input feature at time t,Us,Whs,
bsi,a n d bsoare learnable parameters, and hs
t−1is
the hidden state at step t−1. Note that use of the