352 M.-H. Guo, T.-X. Xu, J.-J. Liu, et al.
where fdenotes the fusion function, which can be
maximum, addition, multiplication, or concatenation.
The proposed scSE block combines channel
and spatial attention to enhance features as
well as capturing pixel-wise spatial information.
Segmentation tasks are greatly beneﬁted as a result.
The integration of an scSE block in F-CNNs makes a
consistent improvement in semantic segmentation at
negligible extra cost.
3.6.5 Triplet attention
In CBAM and BAM, channel attention and spatial
attention are computed independently, ignoring
relationships between these two domains [ 122].
Motivated by spatial attention, Misra et al. [ 122]
proposed triplet attention, a lightweight but eﬀective
attention mechanism to capture cross-domain
interaction.
Given an input feature map X, triplet attention
uses three branches, each of which plays a role in
capturing cross-domain interaction between any two
domains from H,W,a n d C. In each branch, rotation
operations along diﬀerent axes are applied to the
input ﬁrst, and then a Z-pool layer is responsible
for aggregating information in the zeroth dimension.
Finally, a standard convolution layer with kernel size
k×kmodels the relationship between the last two
domains. This process can be written as
X1=P m 1(X) (98)
X2=P m 2(X) (99)
s0=σ(Conv 0(Z-Pool(X ))) (100)
s1=σ(Conv 1(Z-Pool(X 1))) (101)
s2=σ(Conv 2(Z-Pool(X 2))) (102)
Y=1
3(s0X+P m−1
1(s1X1)+P m−12(s2X2))
(103)
where Pm 1andPm 2denote rotation through 90◦
anti-clockwise about the HandWaxes respectively,
while Pm−1
idenotes the inverse. Z-Pool concatenates
max-pooling and average pooling along the zeroth
dimension.
Y= Z-Pool( X) = [GMP( X); GAP( X)] (104)
Unlike CBAM and BAM, triplet attention stresses
the importance of capturing cross-domain interactions
instead of computing spatial attention and channel
attention independently. This helps to capture rich
discriminative feature representations. Due to its
simple but eﬃcient structure, triplet attention canbe easily added to classical backbone networks.
3.6.6 SimAM
Yang et al. [ 118] also stressed the importance of
learning attention weights that vary across both
channel and spatial domains in proposing SimAM, a
simple, parameter-free attention module capable of
directly estimating 3D weights instead of expanding
1D or 2D weights. The design of SimAM is based on
well-known neuroscience theory, thus avoiding need
for manual ﬁne tuning of the network structure.
Motivated by the spatial suppression pheno-
menon [ 177], they propose that a neuron which shows
suppression eﬀects should be emphasized and deﬁne
an energy function for each neuron as
et(wt,bt,y,x i)=( yt−ˆt)2+1
M−1M−1/summationdisplay
i=1(yo−ˆxi)
(105)
where ˆt=wtt+bt,ˆxi=wtxi+bt,a n d tandxiare
the target unit and all other units in the same channel
respectively; i∈1,...,N ,a n d N=H×W.
An optimal closed-form solution for Eq. (105)
exists:
e∗
t=4(ˆσ2+λ)
(t−ˆμ)2+2 ˆσ2+2λ(106)
where ˆμis the mean of the input feature and ˆσ2is
its variance. A sigmoid function is used to control
the output range of the attention vector; an element-
product is applied to get the ﬁnal output:
Y= Sigmoid/parenleftbigg1
E/parenrightbigg
X (107)
This work simpliﬁes the process of designing
attention and successfully proposes a novel 3D
weight parameter-free attention module based on
mathematics and neuroscience theories.
3.6.7 Coordinate attention
An SE block aggregates global spatial information
using global pooling before modeling cross-channel
relationships, but neglects the importance ofpositional information. BAM and CBAM adoptconvolutions to capture local relations, but fail tomodel long-range dependencies. To solve theseproblems, Hou et al. [
130] proposed coordinate
attention , a novel attention mechanism which embeds
positional information into channel attention, so that
the network can focus on large important regions at
little computational cost.
The coordinate attention mechanism has two
consecutive steps, coordinate information embedding