Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey 351
sub-module models the spatial relationships of
features, and is complementary to channel attention.
Unlike channel attention, it applies a convolution
layer with a large kernel to generate the attention
map:
Fs
avg= GAPc(X) (83)
Fs
max= GMPc(X) (84)
ss=σ(Conv([ Fs
avg;Fs
max])) (85)
Ms(X)=ssX (86)
where Conv (·) represents a convolution operation,
while GAPcandGMPcare global pooling operations
in the channel domain. The overall attention process
can be summarized as
X/prime=Mc(X) (87)
Y=Ms(X/prime) (88)
Combining channel attention and spatial attention
sequentially, CBAM can utilize both spatial and
cross-channel relationships of features to tell the
network what to focus on and where to focus. To
be more specific, it emphasizes useful channels as well
as enhancing informative local regions. Due to its
lightweight design, CBAM can be integrated into any
CNN architecture seamlessly with negligible additionalcost. Nevertheless, there is still room for improvement
in the channel & spatial attention mechanism. For
instance, CBAM adopts a convolution to produce the
spatial attention map, so the spatial sub-module may
suffer from a limited receptive field.
3.6.3 BAM
At the same time as CBAM, Park et al. [ 117] proposed
thebottleneck attention module (BAM), aiming to
eﬃciently improve the representational capability of
networks. It uses dilated convolution to enlarge the
receptive ﬁeld of the spatial attention sub-module,
and build a bottleneck structure as suggested by
ResNet to save computational cost.
For a given input feature map X, BAM infers
the channel attention sc∈RCand spatial attention
ss∈RH×Win two parallel streams, and then sums
the two attention maps after resizing both branch
outputs to RC×H×W. The channel attention branch,
like an SE block, applies global average pooling to thefeature map to aggregate global information, and then
uses an MLP with channel dimensionality reduction.
In order to utilize contextual information eﬀectively,
the spatial attention branch combines a bottleneckstructure and dilated convolutions. Overall, BAMcan be written as
sc= BN(W 2(W1GAP( X)+b 1)+b 2) (89)
ss= BN(Conv1×1
2(DC3×32(DC3×31(Conv1×11(X)))))
(90)
s=σ(Expand( ss)+E x p a n d ( sc)) (91)
Y=sX+X (92)
where Wi,bidenote weights and biases of fully
connected layers respectively, Conv1×1
1andConv1×1
2
are convolution layers used for channel reduction.
DC3×3
idenotes a dilated convolution with 3 ×3 kernel,
applied to utilize contextual information eﬀectively.
Expand expands the attention maps ssandscto
RC×H×W.
BAM can emphasize or suppress features in
both spatial and channel dimensions, as well as
improving the representational power. Dimensional
reduction applied to both channel and spatial
attention branches enables it to be integrated withany convolutional neural network with little extra
computational cost. However, although dilated
convolutions enlarge the receptive ﬁeld eﬀectively, it
still fails to capture long-range contextual information
as well as encoding cross-domain relationships.
3.6.4 scSE
To aggregate global spatial information, an SE block
applies global pooling to the feature map. However,
it ignores pixel-wise spatial information, which is
important in dense prediction tasks. Therefore,Roy et al. [
124] proposed spatial and channel SE
blocks (scSE). Like BAM, spatial SE blocks are used,
complementing SE blocks, to provide spatial attention
weights to focus on important regions.
Given the input feature map X, two parallel
modules, spatial SE and channel SE, are appliedto feature maps to encode spatial and channelinformation respectively. The channel SE module
is an ordinary SE block, while the spatial SE module
adopts 1 ×1 convolution for spatial squeezing. The
outputs from the two modules are fused. The overall
process can be written as
sc=σ(W2δ(W1GAP( X))) (93)
Xchn=scX (94)
ss=σ(Conv1×1(X)) (95)
Xspa=ssX (96)
Y=f(Xspa,Xchn) (97)