368 M.-H. Guo, T.-X. Xu, J.-J. Liu, et al.
Song-Hai Zhang received his Ph.D.
degree in computer science and
technology from Tsinghua University,in 2007. He is currently an associate
professor in the Department of Computer
Science and Technology at Tsinghua
University. His research interests include
image and video analysis and processing
as well as computer graphics.
Ralph R. Martin received his Ph.D.
degree from Cambridge University in
1983. He is an emeritus professor of
Cardiﬀ University with over 300 papers
and 14 books in geometry processing,
computer graphics, and computer vision.
He is a Fellow of the Learned Society of
Wales, the Institute of Mathematics and
its Applications, and the British Computer Society. He is
currently the Associate Editor-in-Chief of Computational
Visual Media .
Ming-Ming Cheng received his Ph.D.
degree from Tsinghua University in 2012.
He was a research fellow with Prof.
Philip Torr in Oxford for two years.
He is currently a professor with Nankai
University, leading the Media Computing
Laboratory. He has published 60+refereed research papers, with 20,000+
Google Scholar citations. His research interests include
computer graphics, computer vision, and image processing.
He received research awards, including ACM China Rising
Star Award, IBM Global SUR Award, and so on.
Shi-Min Hu is currently a professor in
computer science at Tsinghua University.
He received his Ph.D. degree from
Zhejiang University in 1996. His research
interests include geometry processing,image & video processing, rendering,
computer animation, and CAD. He has
published more than 100 papers in
journals and refereed conferences. He is the Editor-in-Chief
ofComputational Visual Media , and on the editorial boards
of several journals, including Computer Aided Design and
Computer &Graphics .
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduc-
tion in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriatecredit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link
to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made.
The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If materialis not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Other papers from this open access journal are available
free of charge from http://www.springer.com/journal/41095.
To submit a manuscript, please go to https://www.
editorialmanager.com/cvmj.