Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey 343
Fig. 7 Vision transformer. Left: architecture. Vision transformer ﬁrst splits the image into diﬀerent patches and projects them into feature
space where a transformer encoder processes them to produce the ﬁnal result. Right: basic vision transformer block with multi-head attention
core. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [34].
disentangled non-local approach [ 74] improves self-
attention’s accuracy and eﬀectiveness, but most
variants focus on reducing its computational
complexity.
CCNet [ 41] regards the self-attention operation
as a graph convolution and replaces the densely-
connected graph processed by self-attention withseveral sparsely-connected graphs. To do so, itproposes criss-cross attention which considers row
attention and column attention recurrently to obtainglobal information. CCNet reduces the complexity of
self-attention from O(N2)t oO (N√
N).
EMANet [ 40] views self-attention in terms of
expectation maximization (EM). It proposes EM
attention which adopts the EM algorithm to get a
set of compact bases instead of using all points as
reconstruction bases. This reduces the complexityfrom
O(N2)t oO(NK), where Kis the number of
compact bases.
ANN [ 68] suggests that using all positional
features as key and vectors is redundant and adopts
spatial pyramid pooling [ 157,158] to obtain a few
representative key and value features to use instead,
to reduce computation.
GCNet [ 69] analyses the attention map used in
self-attention and ﬁnds that the global contexts
obtained by self-attention are similar for diﬀerentquery positions in the same image. Thus, it ﬁrst
proposes to predict a single attention map shared by
all query points, and then gets global informationfrom a weighted sum of input features according to
this attention map. This is like average pooling,but is a more general process for collecting global
information.
A2Net [ 70] is motivated by SENet to divide
attention into feature gathering and featuredistribution processes, using two diﬀerent kinds ofattention. The ﬁrst aggregates global information
via second-order attention pooling and the second
distributes the global descriptors by soft selection
attention.
GloRe [ 71] understands self-attention from a
graph learning perspective. It ﬁrst collects N
input features into M/lessmuchNnodes and then
learns an adjacency matrix of global interactions
between nodes. Finally, the nodes distribute global
information to input features. A similar idea can
be found in LatentGNN [ 72], MLP-Mixer [ 159], and
ResMLP [160].
OCRNet [ 73] proposes the concept of object-
contextual representation which is a weighted
aggregation of all object regions’ representations in
the same category, such as a weighted average ofall car region representations. It replaces the key
and vector with this object-contextual representationleading to successful improvements in both speed and
eﬀectiveness.
Thedisentangled non-local approach was motivated
by Refs. [ 15,69]. Yin et al. [ 74] deeply analyzed the
self-attention mechanism resulting in the core idea of