342 M.-H. Guo, T.-X. Xu, J.-J. Liu, et al.
al. [32] proposed spatial transformer networks (STN)
that use an explicit procedure to learn invariance to
translation, scaling, rotation, and other more general
warps, making the network pay attention to the
most relevant regions. STN was the ﬁrst attention
mechanism to explicitly predict important regions and
provide a deep neural network with transformation
invariance. Various following works [ 7,36] have had
even greater success.
Taking a 2D image as an example, a 2D aﬃne
transformation can be formulated as/bracketleftBigg
θ11θ12θ13
θ21θ22θ23/bracketrightBigg
=floc(U) (40)
/parenleftBigg
xs
i
ys
i/parenrightBigg
=/bracketleftBigg
θ11θ12θ13
θ21θ22θ23/bracketrightBigg⎛
⎜⎝xt
i
yt
i
1⎞
⎟⎠ (41)
Here, Uis the input feature map, and floccan be any
diﬀerentiable function, such as a lightweight fully-
connected network or convolutional neural network.
xs
iandys
iare coordinates in the output feature map,
while xt
iandyt
iare corresponding coordinates in the
input feature map and the θmatrix is the learnable
aﬃne matrix. After obtaining the correspondence,
the network can sample relevant input regions using
the correspondence. To ensure that the whole process
is diﬀerentiable and can be updated in an end-to-endmanner, bilinear sampling is used to sample the input
features
STNs focus on discriminative regions automatically
and learn invariance to some geometric trans-
formations.
3.3.6 Deformable convolutional networks
With similar purpose to STNs, Dai et al. [ 7]
proposed deformable convolutional networks
(deformable ConvNets) to be invariant to geometric
transformations, but they pay attention to the
important regions in a diﬀerent manner.
Speciﬁcally, deformable ConvNets do not learn an
aﬃne transformation. They divide convolution into
two steps, ﬁrstly sampling features on a regular grid
Rfrom the input feature map, and then aggregating
sampled features by weighted summation using a
convolution kernel. The process can be written as
Y(p0)=/summationdisplay
pi∈Rw(pi)X(p0+pi) (42)
R={(−1, −1), (−1, 0),..., (1,1)} (43)
The deformable convolution augments the samplingprocess by introducing a group of learnable oﬀsets
Δpiwhich can be generated by a lightweight CNN.
Using the oﬀsets Δ pi, the deformable convolution can
be formulated as
Y(p0)=/summationdisplay
pi∈Rw(pi)X(p0+pi+Δpi) (44)
Through the above method, adaptive sampling is
achieved. However, Δ piis a ﬂoating point value
unsuited to grid sampling. To address this problem,
bilinear interpolation is used. Deformable RoI pooling
is also used, which greatly improves object detection.
Deformable ConvNets adaptively select the
important regions and enlarge the valid receptive ﬁeld
of convolutional neural networks; this is important in
object detection and semantic segmentation tasks.
3.3.7 Self-attention and variants
Self-attention was proposed and has had great
success in the ﬁeld of natural language processing
(NLP) [ 33,38,39,150–153]. Recently, it has also
shown the potential to become a dominant tool in
computer vision [ 8,15,34,78,154]. Typically, self-
attention is used as a spatial attention mechanism to
capture global information. We now summarize the
self-attention mechanism and its common variants in
computer vision.
Due to the localisation of the convolutional
operation, CNNs have inherently narrow receptive
ﬁelds [ 155,156], which limits the ability of CNNs to
understand scenes globally. To increase the receptive
ﬁeld, Wang et al. [ 15] introduced self-attention into
computer vision.
Taking a 2D image as an example, given a feature
map F∈RC×H×W, self-attention ﬁrst computes
the queries, keys, and values Q, K, V ∈RC/prime×N,N=
H×Wby linear projection and reshaping operations.
Then self-attention can be formulated as
A=(a)i,j= Softmax( QKT) (45)
Y=AV (46)
where A∈RN×Nis the attention matrix and
(a)i,jis the relationship between the i-th and j-th
elements. The whole process is shown in Fig. 7(left).
Self-attention is a powerful tool to model global
information and is useful in many visual tasks [ 9,
22, 26, 62–67].
However, the self-attention mechanism has several
shortcomings, particularly its quadratic complexity,
which limit its applicability. Several variants have
been introduced to alleviate these problems. The