Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey 339
channel attention weights of the outer point-wise
attention mechanism:
s=σ(/hatwidex) (26)
Y=sX (27)
The bi-attention block uses bilinear pooling to model
the local pairwise feature interactions along each
channel, while preserving the spatial information.Using the proposed AiA, the model pays moreattention to higher-order statistical informationcompared with other attention-based models. Bi-attention can be incorporated into any CNN
backbone to improve its representational power while
suppressing noise.
3.3 Spatial attention
Spatial attention can be seen as an adaptive spatial
region selection mechanism: where to pay attention .
As Fig. 4 shows, RAM [ 31], STN [ 32], GENet [ 61],
and Non-Local [ 15] are representative of diﬀerent
kinds of spatial attention methods. RAM represents
RNN-based methods. STN represents those use a sub-
network to explicitly predict relevant regions. GENet
represents those that use a sub-network implicitlyto predict a soft mask to select important regions.
Non-Local represents self-attention related methods.
In this subsection, we ﬁrst summarize representative
spatial attention mechanisms and specify process g(x)
andf(g(x),x) described as Eq. (1) in Table 4, and
then discuss them according to Fig. 4.3.3.1 RAM
Convolutional neural networks have huge compu-
tational costs, especially for large inputs. In order to
concentrate limited computing resources on important
regions, Mnih et al. [ 31] proposed the recurrent
attention model (RAM) that adopts RNNs [ 148]a n d
reinforcement learning (RL) [ 149] to make the network
learn where to pay attention. RAM pioneered the use
of RNNs for visual attention, and was followed by many
other RNN-based methods [21, 35, 88].
As shown in Fig. 6, the RAM has three key
elements: (A) a glimpse sensor, (B) a glimpse network,
and (C) an RNN model. The glimpse sensor takes
a coordinate lt−1and an image Xt. It outputs
multiple resolution patches ρ(Xt,lt−1) centered on
lt−1. The glimpse network fg(θ(g)) includes a glimpse
sensor and outputs the feature representation gtfor
input coordinate lt−1and image Xt. The RNN
model considers gtand an internal state ht−1and
outputs the next center coordinate ltand the action
at, e.g., the softmax result in an image classiﬁcation
task. Since the whole process is not diﬀerentiable,
it applies reinforcement learning strategies in the
update process.
This provides a simple but eﬀective method to focus
the network on key regions, thus reducing the number
of calculations performed by the network, especially
for large inputs, while improving image classiﬁcation
results.
Fig. 6 Attention process in RAM [ 31]. (A) A glimpse sensor takes image and center coordinates as input and outputs multiple resolution
patches. (B) A glimpse network includes a glimpse sensor, taking image and center co ordinates as input and outputting a feature vector. (C) The
entire network recurrently uses a glimpse network, outputting the predicted result as well as the next center coordinates. Reproduced with
permission from Ref. [31].