Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey 349
CondConv makes full use of the advantages of
the multi-branch structure using a branch attention
method with little computing cost. It presents a
novel manner to eﬃciently increase the capability of
networks.
3.5.4 Dynamic convolution
The extremely low computational cost of lightweight
CNNs constrains the depth and width of the networks,
further decreasing their representational power. To
address the above problem, Chen et al. [ 116] proposed
dynamic convolution , a novel operator design that
increases representational power with negligible
additional computational cost and does not changethe width or depth of the network in parallel with
CondConv [174].
Dynamic convolution uses Kparallel convolution
kernels of the same size and input/output dimensions
instead of one kernel per layer. Like SE blocks,it adopts a squeeze-and-excitation mechanism togenerate the attention weights for the diﬀerentconvolution kernels. These kernels are then aggre-gated dynamically by weighted summation and
applied to the input feature map X:
s= Softmax( W2δ(W1GAP( X))) (74)
DyConv =K/summationdisplay
i=1skConv k (75)
Y= DyConv( X) (76)
Here the convolutions are combined by summation
of weights and biases of convolutional kernels.
Compared to applying convolution to the feature
map, the computational cost of squeeze-and-excitation and weighted summation is extremely
low. Dynamic convolution thus provides an eﬃcient
operation to improve representational power and canbe easily used as a replacement for any convolution.
3.6 Channel & spatial attention
Channel & spatial attention combines the advantages
of channel attention and spatial attention. Itadaptively selects both important objects andregions [
50]. The residual attention network [119]
pioneered the ﬁeld of channel & spatial attention,
emphasizing the importance of informative features
in both spatial and channel dimensions. It
adopts a bottom–up structure consisting of several
convolutions to produce a 3D (height, width, channel)
attention map. However, it has high computationalcost and limited receptive ﬁelds.
To leverage global spatial information, later
works [ 6,117] enhance discrimination of features
by introducing global average pooling, as wellas decoupling channel attention and spatial
channel attention for computational eﬃciency. Other
works [ 10,101] apply self-attention mechanisms for
channel & spatial attention to explore pairwiseinteraction. Yet further works [
121,125] adopt the
spatial-channel attention mechanism to enlarge the
receptive ﬁeld.
Representative channel & spatial attention
mechanisms and speciﬁc process g(x)a n d f(g(x),x)
described as Eq. (1) are given in Table 7; we next
discuss various ones in detail.
3.6.1 Residual attention network
Inspired by the success of ResNet [ 146], Wang et
al. [119] proposed the very deep convolutional residual
attention network (RAN) by combining an attention
mechanism with residual connections.
Each attention module stacked in a residual
attention network can be divided into a mask branch
and a trunk branch. The trunk branch processes
features, and can be implemented by any state-of-
the-art structure including a pre-activation residual
unit and an inception block. The mask branch uses abottom–up top–down structure to learn a mask of thesame size that softly weights output features from thetrunk branch. A sigmoid layer normalizes the output
to [0,1] after two 1 ×1 convolution layers. Overall
the residual attention mechanism can be written as
s=σ(Conv1×1
2(Conv1×11(hup(hdown(X))))) (77)
Xout=sf(X)+f (X) (78)
where hupis a bottom–up structure, using max-
pooling several times after residual units to increase
the receptive ﬁeld, while hdown is the top–down part
using linear interpolation to keep the output size the
same as the input feature map. There are also skip-
connections between the two parts, which are omitted
from the formulation. frepresents the trunk branch
which can be any state-of-the-art structure.
Inside each attention module, a bottom–up top–
down feedforward structure models both spatial and
cross-channel dependencies, leading to a consistent
performance improvement. Residual attention can be
incorporated into any deep network structure in an
end-to-end training fashion. However, the proposed
bottom–up top–down structure fails to leverage global