358 M.-H. Guo, T.-X. Xu, J.-J. Liu, et al.
instance, GoogleNet [ 179] conforms to the above
formula, but does not belong to the attention
mechanisms. Unfortunately, we ﬁnd it diﬃcult to ﬁnd
a necessary and suﬃcient condition for all attention
mechanisms. The necessary and suﬃcient conditions
for the attention mechanism are still worth exploring
which can promote our understanding of attention
mechanisms.
4.2 General attention block
At present, a special attention mechanism needs to
be designed for each diﬀerent task, which requires
considerable eﬀort to explore potential attentionmethods. For instance, channel attention is a good
choice for image classiﬁcation, while spatial attention
is well-suited to dense prediction tasks such as
semantic segmentation and object detection. Channel
attention focuses on what to pay attention to while
spatial attention considers where to pay attention .
Based on this observation, we encourage consideration
as to whether there could be a general attention
block that takes advantage of all kinds of attention
mechanisms. For example, a soft selection mechanism
(branch attention) could choose among channel
attention, spatial attention, and temporal attention
according to the speciﬁc task undertaken.
4.3 Characterisation and interpretability
Attention mechanisms are motivated by the human
visual system and are a step towards the goal of
building an interpretable computer vision system.
Typically, attention-based models are understood by
rendering attention maps, as in Fig. 9. However,
this can only give an intuitive feel for whatis happening, rather than precise understanding.However, applications in which security or safetyare important, such as medical diagnostics andautomated driving systems, often have stricter
requirements. Better characterisation of how methods
work, including modes of failure, is needed in such
areas. Developing characterisable and interpretable
attention models could make them more widely
applicable.
4.4 Sparse activation
We visualize some attention map and obtain
consistent conclusion with ViT [ 34] shown in
Fig. 9 that attention mechanisms can produce
sparse activation. The phenomenon gives us a
inspiration that sparse activation can achieve a strongperformance in deep neural networks. It is worth
noting that sparse activation is similar with human
cognition. Those motivate us to explore which kind
of architecture can simulate human visual system.
4.5 Attention-based pre-trained models
Large-scale attention-based pre-trained models have
had great success in natural language processing [ 85,
162]. Recently, MoCoV3 [ 84], DINO [ 180], BEiT [ 85],
and MAE [ 170] have demonstrated that attention-
based models are also well suited to visual tasks. Due
to their ability to adapt to varying inputs, attention-
based models can deal with unseen objects and are
naturally suited to transferring pretrained weights to
a variety of tasks. We believe that the combination of
pre-training and attention models should be further
explored: training approach, model structures, pre-training tasks, and the scale of data are all worth
investigating.
4.6 Optimization
SGD [ 181] and Adam [ 182] are well-suited for
optimizing convolutional neural networks. For
visual transformers, AdamW [ 183] works better.
Recently, Chen et al. [ 184] signiﬁcantly improved
visual transformers by using a novel optimizer, the
sharpness-aware minimizer (SAM) [ 185]. It is clear
that attention-based networks and convolutional
neural networks are diﬀerent models; diﬀerent
optimization methods may work better for diﬀerent
models. Investigating new optimzation methods for
attention models is likely to be worthwhile.
4.7 Deployment
Convolutional neural networks have a simple, uniform
structure which makes them easy to deploy on various
hardware devices. However, it is diﬃcult to optimize
complex and varied attention-based models on edge
devices. Nevertheless, experiments in Refs. [ 46–48]
show that attention-based models provide betterresults than convolutional neural networks, so it is
worth trying to ﬁnd simple, eﬃcient, and eﬀective
attention-based models which can be widely deployed.
5 Conclusions
Attention mechanisms have become an indispensable
technique in the ﬁeld of computer vision in the era
of deep learning. This survey has systematically
reviewed and summarized attention mechanisms for