Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey 353
and coordinate attention generation. First, two
spatial extents of pooling kernels encode each channel
horizontally and vertically. In the second step, a
shared 1 ×1 convolutional transformation function
is applied to the concatenated outputs of the two
pooling layers. Then coordinate attention splits the
resulting tensor into two separate tensors to yield
attention vectors with the same number of channels
for horizontal and vertical coordinates of the input
Xalong. This can be written as
zh= GAPh(X) (108)
zw= GAPw(X) (109)
f=δ(BN(Conv1×1
1([zh;zw]))) (110)
fh,fw= Split( f) (111)
sh=σ(Conv1×1
h(fh)) (112)
sw=σ(Conv1×1
w(fw)) (113)
Y=Xshsw(114)
where GAPhandGAPwdenote pooling functions
for vertical and horizontal coordinates respectively,
and sh∈RC×1×Wand sw∈RC×H×1represent
corresponding attention weights.
Using coordinate attention, the network can
accurately obtain the position of a targeted object.
This approach has a larger receptive ﬁeld than
BAM and CBAM. Like an SE block, it also models
cross-channel relationships, eﬀectively enhancing the
expressive power of the learned features. Due to its
lightweight design and ﬂexibility, it can be easily used
in classical building blocks of mobile networks.
3.6.8 DANet
In the ﬁeld of scene segmentation, encoder–decoder
structures cannot make use of the global relationships
between objects, whereas RNN-based structures
heavily rely on the output of the long-termmemorization. To address the above problems,Fu et al. [
10] proposed a novel framework, the
dual attention network (DANet), for natural scene
image segmentation. Unlike CBAM and BAM,it adopts a self-attention mechanism instead of
simply stacking convolutions to compute the spatial
attention map, which enables the network to capture
global information directly.
DANet uses in parallel a position attention module
and a channel attention module to capture feature
dependencies in spatial and channel domains. Given
the input feature map X, convolution layers are
applied ﬁrst in the position attention module toobtain new feature maps. Then the position attention
module selectively aggregates the features at eachposition using a weighted sum of features at allpositions, where the weights are determined byfeature similarity between corresponding pairs ofpositions. The channel attention module has asimilar form except for dimensional reduction tomodel cross-channel relations. Finally the outputs
from the two branches are fused to obtain ﬁnal featurerepresentations. For simplicity, we reshape the featuremap
XtoC×(H×W) whereupon the overall process
can be written as
Q, K, V =WqX, W kX, W vX (115)
Ypos=X+VSoftmax( QTK) (116)
Ychn=X+ Softmax( XXT)X (117)
Y=Ypos+Ychn(118)
where Wq,Wk,Wv∈RC×Care used to generate new
feature maps.
The position attention module enables DANet
to capture long-range contextual information and
adaptively integrate similar features at any scale
from a global viewpoint, while the channel attention
module is responsible for enhancing useful channels as
well as suppressing noise. Taking spatial and channel
relationships into consideration explicitly improvesthe feature representation for scene segmentation.
However, it is computationally costly, especially for
large input feature maps.
3.6.9 RGA
Unlike coordinate attention and DANet, which
emphasise capturing long-range context, in relation-
aware global attention (RGA), Zhang et al. [ 101]
stressed the importance of global structural
information provided by pairwise relations, and used
it to produce attention maps.
RGA comes in two forms, spatial RGA (RGA-S)
andchannel RGA (RGA-C). RGA-S ﬁrst reshapes the
input feature map XtoC×(H×W) and the pairwise
relation matrix R∈R(H×W )×(H ×W )is computed
using
Q=δ(WQX) (119)
K=δ(WKX) (120)
R=QTK (121)
The relation vector riat position iis deﬁned by
stacking pairwise relations at all positions:
ri=[R(i,:);R(:,i)] (122)