344 M.-H. Guo, T.-X. Xu, J.-J. Liu, et al.
decoupling self-attention into a pairwise term and a
unary term. The pairwise term focuses on modeling
relationships while the unary term focuses on salient
boundaries. This decomposition prevents unwanted
interactions between the two terms, greatly improving
semantic segmentation, object detection, and action
recognition.
HamNet [ 42] models capturing global relationships
as a low-rank completion problem and designs a series
of white-box methods to capture global context using
matrix decomposition. This not only reduces the
complexity, but increases the interpretability of self-
attention.
EANet [ 75] proposes that self-attention should
only consider correlation in a single sample and
should ignore potential relationships between diﬀerentsamples. To explore the correlation between diﬀerent
samples and reduce computation, it makes use of an
external attention that adopts learnable, lightweight,
and shared key and value vectors. It further reveals
that using softmax to normalize the attention map is
not optimal and presents double normalization as a
better alternative.
In addition to being a complementary approach
to CNNs, self-attention also can be used to replace
convolution operations for aggregating neighborhood
information. Convolution operations can be
formulated as dot products between the input feature
Xand a convolution kernel W:
Yc
i,j=/summationdisplay
a,b∈{0,...,k −1}Wa,b,cXˆa,ˆb(47)
where
ˆa=i+a−⌊k/2⌋, ˆb=j+b−⌊k/2⌋ (48)
kis the kernel size and cindicates the channel. The
above formulation can be viewed as a process ofaggregating neighborhood information by using a
weighted sum through a convolution kernel. The
process of aggregating neighborhood information can
be deﬁned more generally as
Yi,j=/summationdisplay
a,b∈{0,...,k −1}Rel(i, j, ˆa,ˆb)f(Xˆa,ˆb) (49)
where Rel(i, j,ˆa,ˆb) is the relation between position
(i, j) and position ( ˆa,ˆb). With this deﬁnition, local
self-attention is a special case.
For example, SASA [43] writes this as
Yi,j=/summationdisplay
a,b∈N k(i,j)Softmax ab(qT
ijkab+qijra−i,b −j)vab
(50)where q,k,a n d vare linear projections of input
feature x,a n d ra−i,b −jis the relative positional
embedding of ( i, j)a n d( a, b).
We now consider several speciﬁc works using local
self-attention as basic neural network blocks
SASA [ 43] suggests that using self-attention to
collect global information is too computationallyintensive and instead adopts local self-attentionto replace all spatial convolution in a CNN. The
authors show that doing so improves speed, number
of parameters, and quality of results. They alsoexplore the behavior of positional embedding andshow that relative positional embeddings [
161] are
suitable. Their work also studies how to combinie
local self-attention with convolution.
LR-Net [ 76] appeared concurrently with SASA.
It also studies how to model local relationships byusing local self-attention. A comprehensive study
probed the eﬀects of positional embedding, kernel size,
appearance composability, and adversarial attacks.
SAN [ 77] explored two modes, pairwise and
patchwise, of utilizing attention for local featureaggregation. It proposed a novel vector attention
adaptive both in content and channel, and assessed
its eﬀectiveness both theoretically and practically. Inaddition to providing signiﬁcant improvements in the
image domain, it also has been proven useful in 3D
point cloud processing [80].
3.3.8 Vision transformers
Transformers have had great success in natural
language processing [ 33,38,150,151,153,162].
Recently, iGPT [ 78] and DETR [ 8] demonstrated
the huge potential for transformer-based models in
computer vision. Motivated by this, Dosovitskiy et
al. [34] proposed the vision transformer (ViT) which
is the ﬁrst pure transformer architecture for imageprocessing. It is capable of achieving comparable
results to modern convolutional neural networks.
As Fig. 7 shows, the main part of ViT is the
multi-head attention (MHA) module. MHA takes a
sequence as input. It ﬁrst concatenates a class token
with the input feature F∈RN×C, where Nis the
number of pixels. Then it gets Q, K ∈RN×C/primeand
V∈RN×Cby linear projection. Next, Q,K,a n d V
are divided into Hheads in the channel domain and
self-attention separately applied to them. The MHA
approach is shown in Fig. 8. ViT stacks a number
of MHA layers with fully connected layers, layer