Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
META-LEARNING WITHOUT MEMORIZATION
Mingzhang Yin12, George Tucker2, Mingyuan Zhou1, Sergey Levine23, Chelsea Finn24
mzyin@utexas.edu, gjt@google.com, mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu
svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu, cbfinn@cs.stanford.edu
1UT Austin,2Google Research, Brain team,3UC Berkeley,4Stanford
ABSTRACT
The ability to learn new concepts with small amounts of data is a critical aspect of
intelligence that has proven challenging for deep learning methods. Meta-learning
has emerged as a promising technique for leveraging data from previous tasks to
enable efﬁcient learning of new tasks. However, most meta-learning algorithms
implicitly require that the meta-training tasks be mutually-exclusive , such that no
single model can solve all of the tasks at once. For example, when creating tasks
for few-shot image classiﬁcation, prior work uses a per-task random assignment of
image classes to N-way classiﬁcation labels. If this is not done, the meta-learner
can ignore the task training data and learn a single model that performs all of the
meta-training tasks zero-shot, but does not adapt effectively to new image classes.
This requirement means that the user must take great care in designing the tasks,
for example by shufﬂing labels or removing task identifying information from
the inputs. In some domains, this makes meta-learning entirely inapplicable. In
this paper, we address this challenge by designing a meta-regularization objective
using information theory that places precedence on data-driven adaptation. This
causes the meta-learner to decide what must be learned from the task training data
and what should be inferred from the task testing input. By doing so, our algorithm
can successfully use data from non-mutually-exclusive tasks to efﬁciently adapt to
novel tasks. We demonstrate its applicability to both contextual and gradient-
based meta-learning algorithms, and apply it in practical settings where applying
standard meta-learning has been difﬁcult. Our approach substantially outperforms
standard meta-learning algorithms in these settings.
1 I NTRODUCTION
The ability to learn new concepts and skills with small amounts of data is a critical aspect of intelli-
gence that many machine learning systems lack. Meta-learning (Schmidhuber, 1987) has emerged
as a promising approach for enabling systems to quickly learn new tasks by building upon experi-
ence from previous related tasks (Thrun & Pratt, 2012; Koch et al., 2015; Santoro et al., 2016; Ravi
& Larochelle, 2016; Finn et al., 2017). Meta-learning accomplishes this by explicitly optimizing
for few-shot generalization across a set of meta-training tasks. The meta-learner is trained such
that, after being presented with a small task training set, it can accurately make predictions on test
datapoints for that meta-training task.
While these methods have shown promising results, current methods require careful design of the
meta-training tasks to prevent a subtle form of task overﬁtting , distinct from standard overﬁtting in
supervised learning. If the task can be accurately inferred from the test input alone, then the task
training data can be ignored while still achieving low meta-training loss. In effect, the model will
collapse to one that makes zero-shot decisions. This presents an opportunity for overﬁtting where
the meta-learner generalizes on meta-training tasks, but fails to adapt when presented with training
data from novel tasks. We call this form of overﬁtting the memorization problem in meta-learning
because the meta-learner memorizes a function that solves all of the meta-training tasks, rather than
learning to adapt.
Existing meta-learning algorithms implicitly resolve this problem by carefully designing the meta-
training tasks such that no single model can solve all tasks zero-shot; we call tasks constructed in this
Implementation and examples available here: https://github.com/google-research/
google-research/tree/master/meta_learning_without_memorization .
1arXiv:1912.03820v3  [cs.LG]  27 Apr 2020