Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
5 R ELATED WORK
Previous works have developed approaches for mitigating various forms of overﬁtting in meta-
learning. These approaches aim to improve generalization in several ways: by reducing the number
of parameters that are adapted in MAML (Zintgraf et al., 2019), by compressing the task embed-
ding (Lee et al., 2019), through data augmentation from a GAN (Zhang et al., 2018), by using an
auxiliary objective on task gradients (Guiroy et al., 2019), and via an entropy regularization ob-
jective (Jamal & Qi, 2019). These methods all focus on the setting with mutually-exclusive task
distributions. We instead recognize and formalize the memorization problem, a particular form of
overﬁtting that manifests itself with non-mutually-exclusive tasks, and offer a general and princi-
pled solution. Unlike prior methods, our approach is applicable to both contextual and gradient-
based meta-learning methods. We additionally validate that prior regularization approaches, namely
TAML (Jamal & Qi, 2019), are not effective for addressing this problem setting.
Our derivation uses a Bayesian interpretation of meta-learning (Tenenbaum, 1999; Fei-Fei et al.,
2003; Edwards & Storkey, 2016; Grant et al., 2018; Gordon et al., 2018; Finn et al., 2018; Kim
et al., 2018; Harrison et al., 2018). Some Bayesian meta-learning approaches place a distributional
loss on the inferred task variables to constrain them to a prior distribution (Garnelo et al., 2018b;
Gordon et al., 2018; Rakelly et al., 2019), which amounts to an information bottleneck on the latent
task variables . Similarly Zintgraf et al. (2019); Lee et al. (2019); Guiroy et al. (2019) aim to produce
simpler or more compressed task adaptation processes. Our approach does the opposite, penalizing
information from the inputs andparameters , to encourage the task-speciﬁc variables to contain
greater information driven by the per-task data.
We use PAC-Bayes theory to study the generalization error of meta-learning and meta-regularization.
Pentina & Lampert (2014) extends the single task PAC-Bayes bound (McAllester, 1999) to the multi-
task setting, which quantiﬁes the gap between empirical error on training tasks and the expected error
on new tasks. More recent research shows that, with tightened generalization bounds as the training
objective, the algorithms can reduce the test error for mutually-exclusive tasks (Galanti et al., 2016;
Amit & Meir, 2018). Our analysis is different from these prior works in that we only include pre-
update meta parameters in the generalization bound rather than both pre-update and post-update
parameters. In the derivation, we also explicitly consider the splitting of data into the task training
set and task validation set, which is aligned with the practical setting.
The memorization problem differs from overﬁtting in conventional supervised learning in several
aspects. First, memorization occurs at the task level rather than datapoint level and the model mem-
orizes functions rather than labels. In particular, within a training task, the model can generalize to
new datapoints, but it fails to generalize to new tasks. Second, the source of information for achiev-
ing generalization is different. For meta-learning the information is from both the meta-training data
and new task training data but in standard supervised setting the information is only from training
data. Finally, the aim of regularization is different. In the conventional supervised setting, regular-
ization methods such as weight decay (Krogh & Hertz, 1992), dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014), the
information bottleneck (Tishby et al., 2000; Tishby & Zaslavsky, 2015), and Bayes-by-Backprop
(Blundell et al., 2015) are used to balance the network complexity and the information in the data.
The aim of meta-regularization is different. It governs the model complexity to avoid one complex
model solving all tasks, while allowing the model’s dependency on the task data to be complex. We
further empirically validate this difference, ﬁnding that standard regularization techniques do not
solve the memorization problem.
6 E XPERIMENTS
In the experimental evaluation, we aim to answer the following questions: (1) How prevalent is the
memorization problem across different algorithms and domains? (2) How does the memorization
problem affect the performance of algorithms on non-mutually-exclusive task distributions? (3)
Is our meta-regularization approach effective for mitigating the problem and is it compatible with
multiple types of meta-learning algorithms? (4) Is the problem of memorization empirically distinct
from that of the standard overﬁtting problem?
To answer these questions, we propose several meta-learning problems involving non-mutually-
exclusive task distributions, including two problems that are adapted from prior benchmarks with
mutually-exclusive task distributions. We consider model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) and con-
ditional neural processes (CNP) as representative meta-learning algorithms. We study both variants
7