Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Another family of meta-learning algorithms are contextual methods (Santoro et al., 2016), such as
conditional neural processes (CNP) (Garnelo et al., 2018b;a). CNP instead deﬁnes q(jD;)as a
mapping fromDto a summary statistic (parameterized by ). In particular, =ah(D)is the
output of an aggregator a()applied to features h(D)extracted from the task training data. Then 
parameterizes a predictor network that takes andxas input and produces a predictive distribution
q(^yjx;;).
In the following sections, we describe a common pitfall for a variety of meta-learning algorithms,
including MAML and CNP, and a general meta-regularization approach to prevent this pitfall.
3 T HEMEMORIZATION PROBLEM IN META-LEARNING
The ideal meta-learning algorithm will learn in such a way that generalizes to novel tasks. However,
we ﬁnd that unless tasks are carefully designed, current meta-learning algorithms can overﬁt to the
tasks and end up ignoring the task training data (i.e., either q(jD;)does not depend on Dor
q(^yjx;;)does not depend on , as shown in Figure 1), which can lead to poor generalization.
This memorization phenomenon is best understood through examples.
Consider a 3D object pose prediction problem (illustrated in Figure 1), where each object has a
ﬁxed canonical pose. The (x;y)pairs for the task are 2D grey-scale images of the rotated object (x)
and the rotation angle relative to the ﬁxed canonical pose for that object (y). In the most extreme
case, for an unseen object, the task is impossible without using Dbecause the canonical pose for
the unseen object is unknown. The number of objects in the meta-training dataset is small, so it is
straightforward for a single network to memorize the canonical pose for each training object and
to infer the object from the input image (i.e., task overﬁtting), thus achieving a low training error
without usingD. However, by construction, this solution will necessarily have poor generalization
to test tasks with unseen objects.
As another example, imagine an automated medical prescription system that suggests medication
prescriptions to doctors based on patient symptoms and the patient’s previous record of prescrip-
tion responses (i.e., medical history) for adaptation. In the meta-learning framework, each patient
represents a separate task. Here, the symptoms and prescriptions have a close relationship, so we
cannot assign random prescriptions to symptoms, in contrast to the classiﬁcation tasks where we can
randomly shufﬂe the labels to create mutually-exclusiveness. For this non-mutually-exclusive task
distribution, a standard meta-learning system can memorize the patients’ identity information in the
training, leading it to ignore the medical history and only utilize the symptoms combined with the
memorized information. As a result, it may issue highly accurate prescriptions on the meta-training
set, but fail to adapt to new patients effectively. While such a system would achieve a baseline
level of accuracy for new patients, it would be no better than a standard supervised learning method
applied to the pooled data.
We formally deﬁne (complete) memorization as:
Deﬁnition 1 (Complete Meta-Learning Memorization) .Complete memorization in meta-learning
is when the learned model ignores the task training data such that I(^y;Djx;) = 0 (i.e.,
q(^yjx;;D) =q(^yjx;) =ED0jx[q(^yjx;;D0)]).
Memorization describes an issue with overﬁtting the meta-training tasks, but it does not preclude
the network from generalizing to unseen (x;y)pairs on the tasks similar to the training tasks.
Memorization becomes an undesired problem for generalization to new tasks when I(y;Djx)
I(^y;Djx;)(i.e., the task training data is necessary to achieve good performance, even with exact
inference under the data generating distribution, to make accurate predictions).
A model with the memorization problem may generalize to new datapoints in training tasks but
cannot generalize to novel tasks, which distinguishes it from typical overﬁtting in supervised learn-
ing. In practice, we ﬁnd that MAML and CNP frequently converge to this memorization solution
(Table 2). For MAML, memorization can occur when a particular setting of that does not adapt
to the task training data can achieve comparable meta-training error to a solution that adapts . For
example, if a setting of can solve all of the meta-training tasks (i.e., for all (x;y)inDandDthe
predictive error is close to zero), the optimization may converge to a stationary point of the MAML
objective where minimal adaptation occurs based on the task training set (i.e., ). For a novel
task where it is necessary to use the task training data, MAML can in principle still leverage the
task training data because the adaptation step is based on gradient descent. However, in practice, the
3