Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
poor initialization of can affect the model’s ability to generalize from a small mount of data. For
CNP, memorization can occur when the predictive distribution network q(^yjx;;)can achieve
low training error without using the task training summary statistics . On a novel task, the network
is not trained to use , so it is unable to use the information extracted from the task training set to
effectively generalize.
In some problem domains, the memorization problem can be avoided by carefully constructing the
tasks. For example, for N-way classiﬁcation, each task consists of examples from Nrandomly
sampled classes. If the classes are assigned to a random permutation of Nfor each task, this ensures
that the task-speciﬁc class-to-label assignment cannot be inferred from the test inputs alone. As
a result, a model that ignores the task training data cannot achieve low training error, preventing
convergence to the memorization problem. We refer to tasks constructed in this way as mutually-
exclusive . However, the mutually-exclusive tasks requirement places a substantial burden on the user
to cleverly design the meta-training setup (e.g., by shufﬂing labels or omitting goal information) and
cannot be applied to all domains where we would like to utilize meta-learning.
Figure 1: Left: An example of non-mutually-exclusive pose prediction tasks, which may lead to the memoriza-
tion problem. The training tasks are non-mutually-exclusive because the test data label (right) can be inferred
accurately without using task training data (left) in the training tasks, by memorizing the canonical orientation
of the meta-training objects. For a new object and canonical orientation (bottom), the task cannot be solved
without using task training data (bottom left) to infer the canonical orientation. Right: Graphical model for
meta-learning. Observed variables are shaded. Without either one of the dashed arrows, ^Yis conditionally
independent ofDgivenandX, which we refer to as complete memorization (Deﬁnition 1).
4 M ETA REGULARIZATION USING INFORMATION THEORY
At a high level, the sources of information in the predictive distribution q(^yjx;;D)come from
the input, the meta-parameters, and the data. The memorization problem occurs when the model
encodes task information in the predictive network that is readily available from the task training set
(i.e., it memorizes the task information for each meta-training task). We could resolve this problem
by encouraging the model to minimize the training error and to rely on the task training dataset as
much as possible for the prediction of y(i.e., to maximize I(^y;Djx;)). Explicitly maximizing
I(^y;Djx;)requires an intractable marginalization over task training sets to compute q(^yjx;).
Instead, we can implicitly encourage it by restricting the information ﬂow from other sources ( x
and) to^y. To achieve both low error and low mutual information between ^yand(x;), the
model must use task training data Dto make predictions, hence increasing the mutual information
I(^y;Djx;), leading to reduced memorization. In this section, we describe two tractable ways to
achieve this.
4.1 M ETA REGULARIZATION ON ACTIVATIONS
Given, the statistical dependency between xand^yis controlled by the direct path from
xto^yand the indirect path through D(see Figure 1), where the latter is desirable be-
cause it leverages the task training data. We can control the information ﬂow between xand
^yby introducing an intermediate stochastic bottleneck variable zsuch thatq(^yjx;;) = R
q(^yjz;;)q(zjx;)dz(Alemi et al., 2016) as shown in Figure 4. Now, we would like
4