Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
However, note that this solution does not achieve low regularization error when applying MR to the
weights because the function needed to produce the predicted label does not have low information
complexity. As a result, meta-regularization on the weights does not suffer from this pathology and
is robust to different learning rates. Therefore, we will use regularization on weights as the proposed
methodology in the following experiments and algorithms in Appendix A.1.
Quantitative results. We compare MAML and CNP with their meta-regularized versions (Table 2).
We additionally include ﬁne-tuning as baseline, which trains a single network on all the instances
jointly, and then ﬁne-tunes on the task training data. Meta-learning with meta-regularization (on
weights) outperforms all competing methods by a large margin. We show test error as a function of
the meta-regularization coefﬁcient in Appendix Figure 2. The curve reﬂects the trade-off when
changing the amount of information contained in the weights. This indicates that gives a knob that
allows us to tune the degree to which the model uses the data to adapt versus relying on the prior.
Figure 2: The performance of MAML and CNP with meta-regularization on the weights, as a function of the
regularization strength . We observe provides us a knob with which we can control the degree to which
the algorithm adapts versus memorizes. When is small, we observe memorization, leading to large test
error; whenis too large, the network does not store enough information in the weights to perform the task.
Crucially, in the middle of these two extremes, meta-regularization is effective in inducing adaptation, leading
to good generalization. The plot shows the mean and standard deviation across 5meta-training runs.
Table 2: Meta-test MSE for the pose prediction problem. We compare MR-MAML (ours) with conventional
MAML and ﬁne-tuning (FT). We report the average over 5 trials and standard deviation in parentheses.
Method MAMLMR-MAML (W)
(ours)CNPMR-CNP (W)
(ours)FT FT + Weight Decay
MSE 5.39 (1.31) 2.26 (0.09) 8.48 (0.12) 2.89 (0.18) 7.33 (0.35) 6.16 (0.12)
Comparison to standard regularization. We compare our meta-regularization with standard regu-
larization techniques, weight decay (Krogh & Hertz, 1992) and Bayes-by-Backprop (Blundell et al.,
2015), in Table 3. We observe that simply applying standard regularization to all the weights, as
in conventional supervised learning, does not solve the memorization problem, which validates that
the memorization problem differs from the standard overﬁtting problem.
Table 3: Meta-testing MSE for the pose prediction problem. We compare MR-CNP (ours) with conventional
CNP, CNP with weight decay, and CNP with Bayes-by-Backprop (BbB) regularization on all the weights. We
report the average over 5 trials and standard deviation in parentheses.
Methods CNP CNP + Weight Decay CNP + BbB MR-CNP (W) (ours)
MSE 8.48 (0.12) 6.86 (0.27) 7.73 (0.82) 2.89 (0.18)
6.3 O MNIGLOT AND MINIIMAGENET CLASSIFICATION
Next, we study memorization in the few-shot classiﬁcation problem by adapting the few-shot Om-
niglot (Lake et al., 2011) and MiniImagenet (Ravi & Larochelle, 2016; Vinyals et al., 2016) bench-
9