Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
marks to the non-mutually-exclusive setting. In the non-mutually-exclusive N-way K-shot classiﬁ-
cation problem, each class is (randomly) assigned a ﬁxed classiﬁcation label from 1 to N. For each
task, we randomly select a corresponding class for each classiﬁcation label and Ktask training data
points andKtask test data points from that class2. This ensures that each class takes only one clas-
siﬁcation label across tasks and different tasks are non-mutually-exclusive (See Appendix A.5.2 for
details).
We evaluate MAML, TAML (Jamal & Qi, 2019), MR-MAML (ours), ﬁne-tuning, and a nearest
neighbor baseline on non-mutually-exclusive classiﬁcation tasks (Table 4). We ﬁnd that MR-MAML
signiﬁcantly outperforms previous methods on all of these tasks. To better understand the problem,
for the MAML variants, we calculate the pre-update accuracy (before adaptation on the task training
data) on the meta-training data in Appendix Table 5. The high pre-update meta-training accuracy and
low meta-test accuracy are evidence of the memorization problem for MAML and TAML, indicating
that it is learning a model that ignores the task data. In contrast, MR-MAML successfully controls
the pre-update accuracy to be near chance and encourages the learner to use the task training data to
achieve low meta-training error, resulting in good performance at meta-test time.
Finally, we verify that meta-regularization does not degrade performance on the standard mutually-
exclusive task. We evaluate performance as a function of regularization strength on the standard
20-way 1-shot Omniglot task (Appendix Figure 10), and we ﬁnd that small values of lead to
slight improvements over MAML. This indicates that meta-regularization substantially improves
performance in the non-mutually-exclusive setting without degrading performance in other settings.
Table 4: Meta-test accuracy on non-mutually-exclusive (NME) classiﬁcation. The ﬁne-tuning and nearest-
neighbor baseline results for MiniImagenet are from (Ravi & Larochelle, 2016).
NME Omniglot 20-way 1-shot 20-way 5-shot
MAML 7.8 (0.2) % 50.7 (22.9) %
TAML (Jamal & Qi, 2019) 9.6 (2.3) % 67.9 (2.3) %
MR-MAML (W) (ours) 83.3 (0.8) % 94.1 (0.1) %NME MiniImagenet 5-way 1-shot 5-way 5-shot
Fine-tuning 28.9 (0.5)) % 49.8 (0.8)) %
Nearest-neighbor 41.1 (0.7) % 51.0 (0.7) %
MAML 26.3 (0.7) % 41.6 (2.6) %
TAML (Jamal & Qi, 2019) 26.1 (0.6) % 44.2 (1.7) %
MR-MAML (W) (ours) 43.6 (0.6) % 53.8 (0.9) %
7 C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
Meta-learning has achieved remarkable success in few-shot learning problems. However, we iden-
tify a pitfall of current algorithms: the need to create task distributions that are mutually exclusive.
This requirement restricts the domains that meta-learning can be applied to. We formalize the fail-
ure mode, i.e. the memorization problem, that results from training on non-mutually-exclusive tasks
and distinguish it as a function-level overﬁtting problem compared to the the standard label-level
overﬁtting in supervised learning.
We illustrate the memorization problem with different meta-learning algorithms on a number of
domains. To address the problem, we propose an algorithm-agnostic meta-regularization (MR) ap-
proach that leverages an information-theoretic perspective of the problem. The key idea is that by
placing a soft restriction on the information ﬂow from meta-parameters in prediction of test set la-
bels, we can encourage the meta-learner to use task training data during meta-training. We achieve
this by successfully controlling the complexity of model prior to the task adaptation.
The memorization issue is quite broad and is likely to occur in a wide range of real-world appli-
cations, for example, personalized speech recognition systems, learning robots that can adapt to
different environments (Nagabandi et al., 2018), and learning goal-conditioned manipulation skills
using trial-and-error data. Further, this challenge may also be prevalent in other conditional predic-
tion problems, beyond meta-learning, an interesting direction for future study. By both recognizing
the challenge of memorization and developing a general and lightweight approach for solving it,
we believe that this work represents an important step towards making meta-learning algorithms
applicable to and effective on any problem domain.
2We assume that the number of classes in the meta-training set is larger than N.
10