DNN
Speech WaveformFeature ComputationFeature ReadingFeature Processing
Label ComputationLabel ReadingLabel ProcessingPosterior ProcessingDecodingText
Labels FeaturesKaldi
PyTorch Kaldi
KaldiFig. 1 : An overview of the PyTorch-Kaldi architecture.
of the PyKaldi does not provide several pre-implemented and ready-
to-use neural models. Another python project is ESPnet [23]. ES-
Pnet is an end-to-end speech processing toolkit, mainly focuses on
end-to-end speech recognition and end-to-end text-to-speech. The
main difference with our project is the current version of PyTorch-
Kaldi implements hybrid DNN-HMM speech recognizers.
An overview of the architecture adopted in PyTorch-Kaldi is re-
ported in Fig. 1. The main script runexp:py is written in python
and manages all the phases involved in an ASR system, including
feature and label extraction, training, validation, decoding, and scor-
ing. The toolkit is detailed in the following sub-sections.
2.1. Conﬁguration ﬁle
The main script takes as input a conﬁguration ﬁle in INI format2,
that is composed of several sections. The section [Exp]speciﬁes
some high-level information such as the folder used for the experi-
ment, the number of training epochs, the random seed. It also allows
users to specify whether the experiments have to be conducted on a
CPU, GPU, or on multiple GPUs. The conﬁguration ﬁle continues
with the [dataset ]sections, that specify information on features
and labels, including the paths where they are stored, the charac-
teristics of the context window [24], and the number of chunks in
which the speech dataset must be split. The neural models are de-
scribed in the [architecture ]sections, while the [model ]section
deﬁnes how these neural networks are combined. The latter section
exploits a simple meta-language that is automatically interpreted by
therunexp:py script. Finally, the conﬁguration ﬁle deﬁnes the de-
coding parameters in the [decoding ]section.
2.2. Features
The feature extraction is performed with Kaldi, that natively pro-
vides c++ libraries (e.g., compute-mfcc-feats ,compute-fbank-feats ,
compute-plp-feats ) to efﬁciently extract the most popular speech
2The conﬁguration ﬁle is fully described in the project documentation.recognition features. The computed coefﬁcients are stored in bi-
nary archives (with extension .ark) and are later imported into the
python environment using the kaldi-io utilities inherited from the
kaldi-io-for-python project3. The features are then processed by the
function load-chunk , that performs context window composition,
shufﬂing, as well as mean and variance normalization. As out-
lined before, PyTorch-Kaldi can manage multiple feature streams.
For instance, users can deﬁne models that exploit combinations of
MFCCs, FBANKs, PLP, and fMLLR [25] coefﬁcients.
2.3. Labels
The main labels used for training the acoustic model derive from a
forced alignment procedure between the speech features and the se-
quence of context-dependent phone states computed by Kaldi with
a phonetic decision tree. To enable multi-task learning, PyTorch-
Kaldi supports multiple labels. For instance, it is possible to jointly
load both context-dependent and context-independent targets and
use the latter ones to perform monophone regularization [26, 27].
It is also possible to employ models based on an ecosystem of neu-
ral networks performing different tasks, as done in the context of
joint training between speech enhancement and speech recognition
[28, 29] or in the context of the recently-proposed cooperative net-
works of deep neural networks [30].
2.4. Chunk and Mini-batch Composition
PyTorch-Kaldi automatically splits the full dataset into a number
of chunks, which are composed of labels and features randomly
sampled from the full corpus. Each chunk is then stored into the
GPU or CPU memory and processed by the neural training algorithm
runnn:py . The toolkit dynamically composes different chunks at
each epoch. A set of mini-batches are then derived from them. Mini-
batches are composed of few training examples that are used for gra-
dient computation and parameter optimization.
The way mini-batches are gathered strongly depends on the ty-
pology of the neural network. For feed-forward models, the mini-
batches are composed of randomly shufﬂed features and labels sam-
pled from the chunk. For recurrent networks, the minibatches must
be composed of full sentences. Different sentences, however, are
likely to have different duration, making zero-padding necessary to
form mini-batches of the same size. PyTorch-Kaldi sorts the speech
sequences in ascending order according to their lengths (i.e., short
sentences are processed ﬁrst). This approach minimizes the need of
zero-paddings and turned out to be helpful to avoid possible biases
on batch normalization statistics. Moreover, it has been shown use-
ful to slightly boost the performance and to improve the numerical
stability of gradients.
2.5. DNN acoustic modeling
Each minibatch is processed by a neural network implemented with
PyTorch, that takes as input the features and as outputs a set of poste-
rior probabilities over the context-dependent phone states. The code
is designed to easily plug-in customized models. As reported in the
pseudo-code reported in Fig. 2, the new model can be simply de-
ﬁned by adding a new class into the neural nets.py . The class must
be composed of an initialization method, that speciﬁes the parame-
ters with their initialization, and a forward method that deﬁnes the
computations to perform.
3github.com/vesis84/kaldi-io-for-python