Table 2 : PER(%) obtained on TIMIT when progressively applying
some techniques implemented within PyTorch-Kaldi.
RNN LSTM GRU Li-GRU
Baseline 16.5 16.0 16.6 16.3
+ Incr. Seq. length 16.6 15.3 16.1 15.4
+ Recurrent Dropout 16.4 15.1 15.4 14.5
+ Batch Normalization 16.0 14.8 15.3 14.4
+ Monophone Reg. 15.9 14.5 14.9 14.2
Table 3 : PER(%) obtained by combining multiple neural networks
and acoustic features.
Architecture Features PER (%)
Li-GRU fMLLR 14.2
MLP+Li-GRU+MLP MFCC+FBANK+fMLLR 13.8
Table 4 : PER(%) obtained with standard convolutional and with the
SincNet architectures.
Model Features PER (%)
CNN FBANK 18.3
CNN Raw waveform 18.1
SincNet Raw waveform 17.2
ﬁrst row (Baseline) reports the performance achieved with a basic re-
current model, where powerful techniques such as dropout and batch
normalization are not adopted. The second row highlights the per-
formance gain that is achieved when progressively increasing the se-
quence length during training. In this case, we started the training by
truncating the speech sentence at 100steps (i.e, approximately 1 sec-
ond of speech) and we progressively double the maximum sequence
duration at every epoch. This simple strategy generally improves the
system performance since it encourages the model to ﬁrst focus on
short-term dependencies and learn longer-term ones only at a later
stage. The third row shows the improvement achieved when adding
recurrent dropout. Similarly to [40,41], we applied the same dropout
mask for all the time steps to avoid gradient vanishing problems. The
fourth line, instead, shows the beneﬁts derived from batch normal-
ization [18]. Finally, the last line shows the performance achieved
when also applying monophone regularization [27]. In this case, we
employ a multi-task learning strategy by means of two softmax clas-
siﬁers: the ﬁrst one estimates context-dependent states, while the
second one predicts monophone targets. As observed in [27], our
results conﬁrm that this technique can successfully be used as an
effective regularizer.
The experiments discussed so far are based on single neural
models. In Table 3 we compare our best Li-GRU system with a
more complex architecture based on a combination of feed-forward
and recurrent models fed by a concatenation of features. To the best
of our knowledge, the PER= 13:8% achieved by the latter system
yields the best-published performance on the TIMIT test-set.
Previous achievements were based on features computed with
Kaldi. However, within PyTorch-Kaldi users can employ their own
features. Table 4 shows the results achieved with convolutional mod-
els fed by standard FBANKs coefﬁcients or by the raw waveform di-
rectly. The standard CNN based on raw samples performs similarly
to the one fed by FBANK features. A performance improvement is
observed with SincNet [33], whose effectiveness in speech recogni-
tion is here highlighted for the ﬁrst time.Table 5 : WER(%) obtained for the DIRHA, CHiME, and Lib-
riSpeech ( 100h) datasets with various neural architectures.
DIRHA CHiME LibriSpeech
MLP 26.1 18.7 6.5
LSTM 24.8 15.5 6.4
GRU 24.8 15.2 6.3
Li-GRU 23.9 14.6 6.2
We now extend our experimental validation to other datasets.
With this regard, Table 5 shows the performance achieved on
DIRHA, CHiME, and Librispeech ( 100h) datasets. The Table
consistently shows better performance with the Li-GRU model, con-
ﬁrming our previous achievements on TIMIT. The results on DIRHA
and CHiME show the effectiveness of the proposed toolkit also in
noisy condition. To give a comparison, the best Kaldi baseline
proposed inegs=chime 4=s51chhas a WER(%)=18.1%. An end-
to-end system trained with ESPnet reaches a WER(%)=44.99%,
conﬁrming how critical is end-to-end speech recognition is chal-
lenging acoustic conditions. DIRHA represents another very chal-
lenging task, that is characterized by the presence of considerable
levels of noise and reverberation. The WER= 23:9% obtained on
this dataset represents the best performance published so-far on the
single-microphone task. Finally, the performance obtained with
Librispeech outperforms the corresponding p-norm Kaldi baseline
(WER = 6:5%) on the considered 100hours subset.
5. CONCLUSIONS
This paper described the PyTorch-Kaldi project, a new initiative that
aims to bridge the gap between Kaldi and PyTorch. The toolkit
is designed to make the development of an ASR system simpler
and more ﬂexible, allowing users to easily plug-in their customized
acoustic models. PyTorch-Kaldi also supports combinations of neu-
ral architectures, features, and labels, allowing users to possibly em-
ploy complex ASR pipelines. The experiments have conﬁrmed that
PyTorch-Kaldi can achieve state-of-the-art results in some popular
speech recognition tasks and datasets.
The current version of the PyTorch-Kaldi is already publicly-
available along with a detailed documentation. The project is still
in its initial phase and we invite all potential contributors to par-
ticipate in it. We hope to build a community of developers larger
enough to progressively maintain, improve, and expand the function-
alities of our current toolkit. In the future, we plan to increase the
number of pre-implemented models, support neural language model
training/rescoring, sequence discriminative training, online speech
recognition, as well end-to-end training.
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Maurizio Omologo, Enzo Telk, and Antonio
Mazzaldi for their helpful comments. This research was enabled in
part by support provided by Calcul Qu ´ebec and Compute Canada.
7. REFERENCES
[1] D. Yu and L. Deng, Automatic Speech Recognition – A Deep
Learning Approach , Springer, 2015.
[2] M. Ravanelli, Deep learning for Distant Speech Recognition ,
PhD Thesis, Unitn, 2017.