The Expando-Mono-Duo Design Pattern for Text Ranking with Pretrained Sequence-to-Sequence Models •11
4.3 TREC-COVID
As one response from the information retrieval community to the global COVID-19 pandemic, the U.S. National
Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) organized the TREC-COVID challenge [ 46,52], with the goal
of evaluating systems that help stakeholders access reliable scientific evidence about the virus. The series of
evaluations, which ran from mid-April to late-August 2020, used the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-
19) [54], curated by the Allen Institute for AI (AI2).
Due to the evolving nature of both the scientific literature and information needs, the evaluation was organized
into a series of “rounds” (five in total), each of which used CORD-19 at a snapshot in time. Each round essentially
comprised a separate TREC-style evaluation, with both new information needs (i.e., topics) as well as holdover
information needs from previous rounds; the first round had 35 topics, and each subsequent round added five
additional, yielding a set of 50 topics by round 5. One example is “serological tests that detect antibodies of
COVID-19”. For each round, relevance judgments were gathered using standard pooling methodology from
participant runs. Since each round used a corpus that was, to an approximation, a superset of the previous
(reflecting the growing literature),10NIST adopted a residual evaluation methodology. That is, at each round, all
previously judged documents were removed entirely from consideration (this was operationalized by removing
the docids of previously judged documents from all new run submissions).
Our participation in TREC-COVID is detailed in Zhang et al . [62] ; here we focus only on the aspects that are
relevant to our Expando-Mono-Duo design pattern, as opposed to a general overview of our team’s efforts.
“Expando” and Anserini Settings. For TREC-COVID, we used the model trained for the MS MARCO passage
ranking task. That is, document expansion was performed in a zero-shot manner, in that the model had not been
fine-tuned on data from the target corpus (CORD-19).
Due to limited computational resources, we only generated expansions from the article abstracts. However,
even the abstracts alone often exceeded T5’s input length restriction of 512 tokens. To address this issue, we
used the same sliding window approach described in Section 4.2 (window of ten sentences with a stride of
five, passages prepended with the title of the article). Inference was performed on these passages using a top- 𝑘
sampling decoder that generated 40 queries (i.e., expansions) per abstract passage. Interestingly, based on manual
examination of the predicted queries, we found their quality to be quite good, at least to untrained experts. This
was a surprising finding given the specialized domain: while it is true that T5 had been exposed to scientific text
during pretraining, the model was notfine-tuned with any data that could be considered “in domain”.
Previous work on searching full-text articles [ 25] and results from the first round of TREC-COVID showed
value in fusion approaches that combined multiple sources of evidence. Thus, starting in round 2, we adopted an
approach that fused results from three different indexes:
•An index where each “document” is comprised of the title and abstract of an article in the corpus.
•An index where each “document” is comprised of the full text of an article in the corpus (including title
and abstract). For articles in the corpus that do not have full text, the “document” contains only the title
and abstract.
•A paragraph-level index structured as follows: each full-text article was segmented into paragraphs, based
on the markup provided in the corpus, and for each paragraph, we created a “document” comprising the
title, abstract, and that paragraph. The title and abstract alone comprised an additional “document”. Thus, a
full-text article with 𝑛paragraphs yielded 𝑛+1separate retrieval units. With this index, a query is likely to
retrieve multiple paragraphs from the same article; we selected the highest-scoring paragraph as the score
of that article.
10While this characterization is conceptually accurate, articles were both added and removed in each round. There were also significant
complexities involving near-duplicate documents in the corpus and unstable document identifiers, for example, reflecting cases where a
preprint was later published in a peer-reviewed venue.