The Expando-Mono-Duo Design Pattern for Text Ranking with Pretrained Sequence-to-Sequence Models •9
0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,00000.511.5·105
Number of tokensNumber of documents
Fig. 3. Distribution of passages lengths in the MS MARCO document corpus.
In total, the dataset contains 367K training queries and 5193 development queries; each query has exactly one
relevance judgment. There are 5793 test queries, but as with the passage ranking task, relevance judgments are
only publicly available for the development set queries; obtaining scores to the held-out test set requires a making
a submission to the leaderboard.
Similar to the passage ranking task, relevance judgments for the document ranking task are sparse. Thus, we
also evaluated our models on the document ranking task of the TREC 2020 Deep Learning Track [ 8], which uses
the same corpus but has 45 queries with judgements (on a four-point scale), gathered via traditional pooling
techniques (with∼200 judgments per query).
For both the MS MARCO document ranking task and the TREC 2020 Deep Learning Track, we used models
trained only on the MS MARCO passage ranking dataset in a zero-shot setting. That is, we did not use any data
from the MS MARCO document ranking dataset to train our models; in addition, no training data from the TREC
2019 Deep Learning Track were used (both passage and document). However, we are clearly taking advantage
of the close relationship between the document and passage datasets, and so it cannot be claimed that we are
performing much meaningful transfer learning in this setup. Our motivation for reusing models from the passage
ranking task was to eliminate the need to perform costly fine-tuning and to simplify experimental variables.
“Expando” and Keyword Retrieval Settings. We performed document expansion on the MS MARCO document
corpus with queries predicted by the doc2query-T5 model trained on the MS MARCO passage ranking task.
However, the expansion procedure differed slightly for the document corpus because many documents exceed
T5’s input length restriction of 512 tokens (unlike with the passage corpus, where all passages fall under the
length limit). To address this issue, we first segmented each document into passages by applying a sliding window
of ten sentences with a stride of five. Each passage was then prepended with the title of the document. Finally,
we performed inference on these passages with doc2query-T5 using a top- 𝑘sampling decoder and generated ten
queries (i.e., expansions) per passage.
From this, we prepared two separate indexes with Anserini:
•Per-document expansion. Each document from the original corpus was appended with all its predicted
queries, and each of these augmented documents served as a unit of indexing.
•Per-passage expansion. Each passage above, with its predicted queries, served as a unit of indexing. In
this case, each document from the original corpus yielded multiple “retrievable units” in the index. To
distinguish among these, we numbered the passages in each document sequentially, and thus each document