The Expando-Mono-Duo Design Pattern for Text Ranking with Pretrained Sequence-to-Sequence Models •3
Although this paper represents the first opportunity we have had to detail the “Expando-Mono-Duo” design
pattern, individual components have been presented elsewhere, albeit in a piece-wise manner. We were the first
to propose multi-stage ranking with transformer models [ 40], although in the context of BERT (contrasting
with our shift to sequence-to-sequence models here) and without document expansion. The “Expando” idea
originated in Nogueira et al . [41] and was subsequently improved on in Nogueira and Lin [39]. “Mono” is detailed
in Nogueira et al . [38] . “Duo” with BERT appears in Nogueira et al . [40] , and was also referenced in a description
of our submissions to TREC-COVID [ 62]. However, none of these previous papers contained a clear end-to-
end explication of our ideas, presentation of comprehension evaluation results, and ablations analyzing the
contributions of different components.
3 EXPANDO-MONO-DUO WITH T5
In our formulation, a multi-stage ranking architecture comprises a number of stages, which we denote 𝐻0to𝐻𝑁.
Except for𝐻0, which retrieves 𝑘0candidates based on keyword search (i.e., from an inverted index), each stage
𝐻𝑛receives a ranked list 𝑅𝑛−1comprising𝑘𝑛−1candidates from the previous stage. Each stage, in turn, provides a
ranked list𝑅𝑛comprising 𝑘𝑛candidates to the subsequent stage, with the obvious requirement that 𝑘𝑛≤𝑘𝑛−1.
The ranked list generated by the last stage 𝐻𝑁in the pipeline is designated for final consumption, i.e., shown
to the human searcher or fed to a downstream application. In this context, 𝑘𝑁is the desired 𝑘in the original
ranking task; all the other 𝑘𝑛’s𝑛∈{0...𝑁−1}are internal system settings. As a simple example, for the MS
MARCO passage ranking task, where the official metric is MRR@10 (that is, the evaluation metric only considers
the first ten hits), a popular setting is to retrieve 1000 hits using keyword search, which are then fed to a reranker
to produce the top 10 final results [37].
Prior to building the inverted index that feeds first-stage retrieval 𝐻0, with “Expando”, we first perform
document expansion on the input corpus to enrich its representation; we denote this as the 𝐻−1stage. The
augmented documents are then indexed exactly as before; the only impact of document expansion is to (hopefully)
provide a richer set of candidate documents for downstream rerankers to process. The output of first-stage
retrieval𝐻0is then passed to the two-stage reranking pipeline comprised of monoT5 𝐻1(“Mono”) and duoT5 𝐻2
(“Duo”). We describe each component of the overall architecture (see Figure 1) in detail below. Here, our narrative
focuses on the overall design, and we defer details of our experimental settings for each task to Section 4. To
support replicability, all our implementations are open-sourced in the Pyserini IR toolkit1and PyGaggle2neural
reranking library.
3.1𝐻−1: Document Expansion with T5
The idea behind document expansion is to enrich each document (more generally, each text from the corpus) with
additional text (containing keywords) that are representative of its content for the purposes of retrieval. In our
particular implementation, we leverage a corpus of (query, relevant passage) pairs to train a sequence-to-sequence
model that maps passages to queries. That is, given a segment of text, the model predicts queries that the text can
potentially answer. For example, consider the following passage:
July is the hottest month in Washington DC with an average temperature of 27◦C (80◦F) and the
coldest is January at 4◦C (38◦F) with the most daily sunshine hours at 9 in July. The wettest month is
May with an average of 100mm of rain.
In this example, the “target query” (i.e., from our training data) is “What is the temperature in Washington?” In
the MS MARCO dataset we used for training, the queries tend to be relatively well-formed natural language
1http://pyserini.io/
2http://pygaggle.ai/