10 •Ronak Pradeep, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Jimmy Lin
from the original corpus yielded docid#0 ,docid#1 ,docid#2 , etc. This convention made it easy to tell at
query time which retrieved passages were from the same underlying document.
For ablation purposes, we also prepared non-expanded counterparts of the above indexes: a simple document
index and a passage index, segmented in the same manner as above, but without expansions.
In all cases, retrieval was performed with BM25 using Anserini’s default parameters 𝑘1=0.9,𝑏=0.4. For
the TREC 2020 Deep Learning Track topics, we also applied the BM25 + RM3 model (same as in the passage
ranking case, using all Anserini default settings). The results of the keyword queries provided the candidates that
fed our mono/duo rerankers, described in detail below. When evaluating document ranking in isolation, for the
per-passage indexes, we constructed a document ranking by retaining the passage from each document with
the highest score. Thus, to obtain a top 𝑘document ranking, we retrieve top 𝑘′passages from the passage index
(where𝑘′>>𝑘), and then apply per-document max passage filtering to retain the top 𝑘documents. This simple
yet effective approach draws from passage retrieval techniques that date back to the 1990s [4, 16].
“Mono” Settings. In the first reranker stage, we simply used the monoT5 model trained on the MS MARCO
passage ranking dataset. However, it is clear from Figure 3 that MS MARCO documents are too long to be directly
fed into our models. Instead, we applied the reranker in two different ways:
For the MS MARCO document ranking task, we used only the per-passage indexes (with and without expansion,
for ablation purpose). At reranking time, we performed monoT5 inference on the top 10000 passages, since each
“retrievable unit” was, in essence, already pre-segmented and could be directly fed to monoT5. In other words, we
only applied inference to the passages identified by keyword search as being potentially relevant. As with the
passage condition, input to our reranking pipeline did not include the predicted queries.
For the TREC 2020 Deep Learning Track, we only used results from the per-document indexes (with and
without expansion, for ablation purposes). At reranking time, we first segmented each document into passages
using the same technique as above (ten sentence sliding window, five sentence stride, prepending title). Note
that monoT5 was fed passages from the original documents (i.e., without predicted queries). We obtained a
probability of relevance for each passage by performing inference on it independently, and then selected the
highest probability among the passages as the relevance score of the document. This is similar to the MaxP
approach of Dai and Callan [10], although our definitions of passages differ. In this configuration, the reranker
considered the top 1000 keyword search results ( 𝑘0=1000).
“Duo” Settings. As with monoT5, we used the duoT5 model trained on the MS MARCO passage ranking dataset
with default parameters ( 𝑘1=50andSYM-SUM as the aggregation method). At reranking time, we used the
highest scoring monoT5 passage as the representative passage for each document. The duoT5 model was fed
pairs of representative passages from the documents under consideration to compute the pairwise scores, which
were then aggregated to yield the relevance scores of each document.
With duoT5, we increased the maximum input tokens from 512 to 1024 to account for pairs of passages that
were longer than the default limit of 512 tokens. We were able to do so in T5 since the models were trained with
relative positional encodings [ 48] and thus can (hopefully) generalize to contexts larger than those seen during
training. This modification, however, imposed additional computational costs that come from the model needing
to attend to twice the number of tokens; transformers exhibit quadratic complexity in both time and space with
respect to input length [20].9
9Note that increasing the length to 1024 tokens was sufficient in this case. However, for monoT5, such an increase would still not have been
sufficient to perform inference on a complete document.