The Expando-Mono-Duo Design Pattern for Text Ranking with Pretrained Sequence-to-Sequence Models •13
To be clear, the only adaptation of monoT5 for TREC-COVID was the additional fine-tuning with Med-
MARCO. Specifically, the model was not provided (for fine-tuning or otherwise) task-specific data (e.g., relevance
judgments), even though such data became available in the later rounds.
At reranking time, we only considered article titles and abstracts from CORD-19, primarily due to length
limitations already discussed. We used the same sliding window approach described above, and used the maximum
score of a passage as the overall score of that article, just as with our MS MARCO document ranking experiments.
Only the “question” field of the topic was used for the query text 𝑞in the input sequence template of our rerankers.
“Duo” Settings. Similar to monoT5, we used duoT5 trained on the MS MARCO passage dataset and then fine-
tuned again on Med-MARCO. In this second fine-tuning, we trained for 1K steps using batches of 128 examples
and a learning rate of 10−4. We used the default parameters ( 𝑘1=50andSym-Sum as the pairwise aggregation
method). At reranking time, we used the highest scoring monoT5 passage (eight sentence sliding window, four
sentence stride, prepending title) as the representative passage for each document. Like the MS MARCO document
ranking task, we increased the maximum input tokens to 1024 to account for pairs of passages that were longer
than the default limit of 512 tokens.
5 RESULTS
We present experimental results from applying our Expando-Mono-Duo pattern to five ad hoc retrieval tasks in
different domains. Empirically, our approach has been validated to be at or near the state of the art across all of
these tasks.
5.1 MS MARCO Passage Ranking
For the MS MARCO passage ranking task, Table 1 reports MRR@10, the official metric, for various combinations
of our techniques, as shown in the 𝐻−1,𝐻0,𝐻1,𝐻2columns: these provide ablations to show individual component
contributions. Note that obtaining a score on the test set requires submitting a run to the leaderboard organizers,
which we did not do for less interesting conditions. Overly frequent submissions to the leaderboard are actively
discouraged by the organizers, and we wished to minimize “probes” of the blind held out test set. Thus, for some
of the ablation and contrastive conditions, we only report scores on the development set.
At the time of submission (May 2020), the full Expando-Mono-Duo configuration, condition (7), was the best
result atop the very competitive leaderboard (which had received around one hundred submissions at the time).
For comparison, we provide scores from two other runs: BM25 + BERT-large, condition (10), can be characterized
as the “baseline” of transformer-based techniques [ 26]. The reported effectiveness is copied from Nogueira et al .
[40], but the general approach dates back to Nogueira and Cho [37]. TFR-BERT [ 15], condition (11), was the best
model just prior to our leaderboard submission. As of January 2021, our submission currently ranks fourth on
the leaderboard; the top spot is occupied by RocketQA [ 44], condition (12). While our run is no longer the best
known result, Expando-Mono-Duo remains near the state of the art in terms of effectiveness on this task. Since
our submission to the MS MARCO passage leaderboard in May 2020, we have not worked on this task further—to,
for example, incorporate more recent innovations that might bolster the effectiveness of Expando-Mono-Duo. It
is possible that recent advances are orthogonal (and hence cumulatively beneficial) to the techniques that we
propose here.
Conditions (2), (3), and (4) focus on single stage reranking using monoT5, without document expansion; these
differ in the size of the underlying T5 model (monoT5-base vs. monoT5-large vs. monoT5-3B). It is apparent that
increasing model sizes yields improvements in effectiveness, as expected. These results show that T5 is more
effective than BERT, even factoring in model size differences, bolstering the arguments of Nogueira et al . [38] in
advocating ranking with sequence-to-sequence models. In fact, a single large model, monoT5-3B, condition (4),