The Expando-Mono-Duo Design Pattern for Text Ranking with
Pretrained Sequence-to-Sequence Models
Ronak Pradeep, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Jimmy Lin
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
We propose a design pattern for tackling text ranking problems, dubbed “Expando-Mono-Duo”, that has been empirically
validated for a number of ad hoc retrieval tasks in different domains. At the core, our design relies on pretrained sequence-to-
sequence models within a standard multi-stage ranking architecture. “Expando” refers to the use of document expansion
techniques to enrich keyword representations of texts prior to inverted indexing. “Mono” and “Duo” refer to components in a
reranking pipeline based on a pointwise model and a pairwise model that rerank initial candidates retrieved using keyword
search. We present experimental results from the MS MARCO passage and document ranking tasks, the TREC 2020 Deep
Learning Track, and the TREC-COVID challenge that validate our design. In all these tasks, we achieve effectiveness that is at
or near the state of the art, in some cases using a zero-shot approach that does not exploit any training data from the target
task. To support replicability, implementations of our design pattern are open-sourced in the Pyserini IR toolkit and PyGaggle
neural reranking library.
1 INTRODUCTION
For text ranking tasks (specifically, ad hoc retrieval), a simple two-stage retrieve-then-rerank architecture has
proven to be an effective and widely adopted approach [ 2,43]. Retrieval can be accomplished via keyword
search, e.g., ranking with BM25 [ 47], or more recently, via approximate nearest-neighbor search on learned dense
representations [ 13,18,19,21,27,57]. Reranking is typically accomplished using pretrained transformers such as
BERT [11] or one of its variants that have been fine-tuned with (query, relevant document) pairs [37].
We present a refinement of this general approach that has been empirically demonstrated to work well for
multiple ad hoc retrieval tasks in different domains. In contrast to most current approaches that build on encoder-
only pretrained transformers such as BERT [ 11], our approach instead relies on pretrained sequence-to-sequence
transformers within a multi-stage ranking architecture. In our case, we use T5 [ 45], but our approach can be
extended to other sequence-to-sequence models such as BART [ 22] and Pegasus [ 63] as well. The key features of
our approach are as follows:
•Document expansion using a sequence-to-sequence model to enrich keyword representations of texts from
the corpus prior to indexing (“Expando”); we’ve also previously called this approach “doc2query”.
•Initial keyword-based retrieval (also called first-stage retrieval or candidate generation) using standard
inverted indexes.
•A two-stage reranking pipeline comprising a pointwise reranker (“Mono”) followed by a pairwise reranker
(“Duo”), both built on pretrained sequence-to-sequence models.
This combination, which we dub “Expando-Mono-Duo” has been empirically validated on a wide range of ad hoc
retrieval tasks in different domains. Based on formal evaluations, our approach has achieved effectiveness at or
near the state of the art, sometimes in a completely zero-shot manner (i.e., without fine-tuning models on data
from the target task). The generality of this approach, we believe, suggests that elevating it to a “design pattern”
for text ranking might be justified.
In this paper, we provide details about each aspect of the “Expando-Mono-Duo” design pattern, how the design
is specifically instantiated for different tasks, and report experimental results on five benchmark datasets: the MS
MARCO passage and document ranking tasks, the passage and document ranking tasks at the TREC 2020 Deep
Learning Track, and the TREC-COVID challenge. While some components in this pattern have been describedarXiv:2101.05667v1  [cs.IR]  14 Jan 2021