4 •Ronak Pradeep, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Jimmy Lin
d1
d2
d3 
d4 Expanded 
Corpus 
d5 BM25 monoT5 duoT5 
d3 d2 d5 
di q d2 d3 
di q 
dj R0 R1 R2
d5 q H0 H1 H2
d2 
d3 
mono 
T5
pi,j duo
T5d2 
d5 d3 
d2 d3 
d5 d5 
d2 d5 
d3 Doc Pairwise 
si 
docT5query 
Corpus H-1
Fig. 1. Illustration of our multi-stage ranking architecture. Prior to indexing, we perform document expansion, denoted 𝐻−1.
In stage𝐻0, given a query 𝑞, the top𝑘0(=5in the figure) candidate documents 𝑅0are retrieved using BM25. In stage 𝐻1,
monoT5 produces a relevance score 𝑠𝑖for each pair of query 𝑞and candidate 𝑑𝑖∈𝑅0. The top𝑘1(=3in the figure) candidates
with respect to these relevance scores are passed to stage 𝐻2, in which duoT5 computes a relevance score 𝑝𝑖,𝑗for each triple
(𝑞,𝑑𝑖,𝑑𝑗). The final output 𝑅2is formed by reranking the candidates according to these scores (see Section 3.4 for how these
pairwise scores are aggregated).
utterances, but for generality we refer to model output as queries. After learning from a large corpus of such
examples (details later), our model is able to predict the query “What is the weather in Washington DC?”
These predictions are then directly appended to the original (source) document; once this expansion has been
performed for every document, the new augmented corpus is indexed, as before. Since document expansion
occurs before indexing, we refer to this as the 𝐻−1stage. Note that in this case, the predicted query contains
a term (“weather”) that is not present in the original passage. This has the effect of enriching the passage and
increasing the likelihood of matching a broader range of queries for which this passage would be relevant. Even
in the case where the predicted queries repeat words that are already present in the text, it achieves the effect of
increasing the weight on the term, highlighting its importance.
This idea, dubbed “doc2query”, was first proposed in Nogueira et al . [41] , but in this work we take advantage of
the pretrained sequence-to-sequence model T5, as described in Nogueira and Lin [39]. In that paper, it was given
the somewhat awkward name docTTTTTquery (also written as docT5query), which seemed like a whimsical
yet accurate description at the time, although in retrospect the moniker is unwieldy in prose. Here, we refer
to the document expansion model with T5 as doc2query-T5, to disambiguate it from the original doc2query
proposal [41], which used vanilla (non-pretrained) transformers.
3.2𝐻0: Keyword Retrieval
The stage𝐻0receives as input the user query 𝑞and produces top 𝑘0candidates𝑅0. In multi-stage ranking
architectures this is called first-stage retrieval or candidate generation. In our implementation, the query is treated
as a bag of words for ranking documents from the corpus using a standard inverted index based on BM25 [ 47].
Depending on the exact setting and task (see Section 4), keyword search may additionally exploit query expansion
using pseudo-relevance feedback. All our experiments used the Pyserini IR toolkit,3which is the Python wrapper
3http://pyserini.io/