20 •Ronak Pradeep, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Jimmy Lin
Round 1. Our monoT5-3B reranker was introduced in round 1, shown as condition (1b), although its effectiveness
was still quite far behind the state of the art. The best submission in round 1 was a fusion-based run using the
the vector space model, involving no neural techniques at all. A post-hoc analysis diagnosed the issue with our
run to be with first-stage retrieval: we had used the paragraph index, but simply replacing our pipeline with the
abstract index improved nDCG@10 from 0.5223 to 0.5702. It is unclear whether this difference was due to an
evaluation artifact.
Round 2. Starting in round 2 for the remaining rounds, the fusion1 andfusion2 baselines described in Section 4.3
were made available to the community to serve as first-stage retrieval. We took advantage of these strong keyword
baselines as the input to our reranking pipeline. In condition (2b), we reranked fusion1 and fusion2 with monoT5-
3B, and then combined the reranked results using reciprocal rank fusion [ 7]. This yielded effectiveness that was,
for all practical purposes, the state of the art (behind the top scoring run by only 0.001).
Round 3. As the rounds progressed in TREC-COVID, we introduced more components in our Expando-Mono-
Duo design. Our duoT5-3B reranker was introduced in round 3, shown as condition (3b): similar to the round 2
configuration, we reranked fusion1 and fusion2 with the two-stage monoT5/duoT5 pipeline, and then combined
the reranked results using reciprocal rank fusion. Condition (3c) represents the same technique as condition as
(2b), and thus conditions (3b) and (3c) isolate the effects of the duoT5 reranker. We see that duoT5 contributes to
small increases in nDCG@10 and average precision, but a small decrease in precision at rank 5.
The highest scoring automatic run submitted in round 3 was SFDC-fus12-enc23-tf3 , which is 2.4 points
higher than our best run; condition (3b) represented the second-highest automatic run. Thus, it would be fair to
characterize the monoT5/duoT5 pipeline as close to the state of the art for this round.
Round 4. Our doc2query-T5 document expansion technique was introduced in round 3, thereby completing our
Expando-Mono-Duo design pattern. Row (4b) represents the same technique as row (3b), and thus conditions (4a)
and (4b) isolate the effects of document expansion. We see that document expansion clearly contributes to a large
increase in terms nDCG@20 and precision at rank 20, although, interestingly, average precision decreased.
Round 5. Since we were allowed eight submissions in this final round, we submitted two more ablations on our
design pattern. Row (5a), (5b), and (5e) represent the same techniques as row (4a), (4b), and (3c) respectively. Row
(5d) added the new condition where we just ran the “Expando-Mono” part of our design pattern. Comparing
conditions (5a) and (5d) vs. (5b) and (5e), we see the effects of document expansion in isolation (i.e., fixing the
other parts of the pattern). Consistent with results from the other retrieval tasks, we see large improvements in
effectiveness. Comparing (5a) and (5b) vs. (5b) and (5e), we see that pairwise reranking with duoT5-3B contributes
effectiveness gains over just reranking with monoT5. Again, this is consistent with results from other tasks.
6 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose Expando-Mono-Duo T5, a design pattern for multi-stage ranking architectures that
combines and synthesizes our previous work in document expansion, pointwise ranking, and pairwise ranking.
Our findings can be summarized as follows:
•It is possible to adapt sequence-to-sequence models for document expansion (“Expando”), pointwise ranking
(“Mono”), and pairwise ranking (“Duo”). Document expansion is a straightforward sequence-to-sequence
transformation, while reranking can be accomplished by designing appropriate input sequence templates
and probing model outputs to extract a probability of relevance.
•Document expansion (“Expando”) is an effective way to improve retrieval effectiveness without requiring
computationally expensive neural inference at query time.
•Pointwise reranking (i.e., relevance classification) with monoT5 is highly effective with different first-stage
retrieval results (with or without document expansion, with or without pseudo-relevance feedback).