The Expando-Mono-Duo Design Pattern for Text Ranking with Pretrained Sequence-to-Sequence Models •7
0 30 60 90 120 15000.511.5·106Number of documents
Fig. 2. Distribution of passages lengths in the MS MARCO passage corpus.
only publicly available for the development set; evaluation on the held-out test set requires submission to the
leaderboard.6
We also evaluated our models on the passage ranking task of the TREC 2020 Deep Learning Track [ 8],
which has 54 queries with graded relevance judgements (on a four-point scale) gathered via traditional pooling
techniques [ 51] (with∼210 judgments per query). The TREC evaluation used the same corpus as the MS MARCO
passage ranking task, and thus the two evaluations differed primarily in the number of queries and the abundance
of relevance judgments per query. The MS MARCO relevance judgments are sometimes referred to as “sparse”
judgments, contrasting with the richer “dense” judgments gathered via pooling by TREC assessors. We adopt this
terminology in our discussions.
Note that in our experiments the same exact settings were used for both the MS MARCO passage ranking task
as well as the TREC 2020 Deep Learning Track. Specifically, we did not take advantage of relevance judgments
from the TREC 2019 Deep Learning Track for either evaluation.
“Expando” and Keyword Retrieval Settings. In the first stage of our pipeline, we expanded all documents in
the MS MARCO passage corpus with queries predicted by our doc2query-T5 model [ 39], which was prepared as
follows: Starting with a publicly available checkpoint, we fine-tuned T5 with (query, relevant passage) pairs from
the MS MARCO passage ranking dataset with a constant learning rate of 10−3for 4K iterations with batches of
256, which corresponds to two epochs with the training data. We used a maximum of 512 input tokens and 64
output tokens. In the MS MARCO dataset, none of the inputs or outputs had to be truncated using these length
settings (see Figure 2). Similar to Nogueira and Lin [39], we found that the top- 𝑘sampling decoder [ 12] produced
better queries (i.e., leading to higher ranking effectiveness) than beam search. We used 𝑘=10and sampled 40
queries per document with T5-base; the large model variant did not appear to yield any improvements in retrieval
effectiveness. Our online replication guide details all these settings.7We did not experiment with T5-3B and
T5-11B due to their size and associated computational cost.
We used a Google TPU v3-8 to fine-tune the model and perform inference. Training took less than 1.5 hours on
a single TPU. For inference, sampling five queries for each of the 8.8M passages in the corpus took approximately
40 hours on a single TPU. Note that inference is trivially parallelizable and the inference time is linear with
respect to the number of samples.
6http://www.msmarco.org/
7http://doc2query.ai/