8 •Ronak Pradeep, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Jimmy Lin
All expanded texts were then indexed with the Anserini IR toolkit. The predicted queries were appended
to the original passages, without any intervening delimiters. Retrieval was performed using BM25 with the
parameters 𝑘1=0.82,𝑏=0.68, based on tuning on the development set via simple grid search. For the TREC
2020 Deep Learning Track topics, we additionally applied the BM25 + RM3 model for query expansion using
pseudo-relevance feedback (with all default parameters in Anserini). This approach was described in Yang et al .
[61] and has been shown to be a strong baseline, especially compared to pre-BERT neural ranking models, when
evaluated on traditional TREC topics with “dense” judgements.
“Mono” Settings. As part of the MS MARCO passage dataset, the creators provided (query, relevant passage,
non-relevant passage) triples, where the negative evidence came from sampling. For training monoT5, we used
the “small” triples file containing 39.8M records. We fine-tuned the base, large, and 3B variants of our monoT5
models with a constant learning rate of 10−3for 100K iterations with class-balanced batches of size 128. We
used a maximum of 512 input tokens and two output tokens (one for the true/false token and another for the
end-of-sequence token); none of the inputs had to be truncated when using this length (see Figure 2). Training the
base, large, and 3B models took approximately 12, 48, and 160 hours on a single Google TPU v3-8, respectively.
At reranking time, our model considered the top 1000 hits from first-stage retrieval (i.e., 𝑘0=1000). This is a
commonly used setting first proposed in Nogueira and Cho [37]. Note that the input to our reranker, here and in
all our experiments, did not include the predicted (expansion) queries; that is, the goal of document expansion is
to improve first-stage retrieval only. There are two reasons for this design decision: First, the predicted queries
are sometimes noisy and can potentially mislead the model. Second, they add to the length of each passage, thus
overflowing the model input length limitations for inference.
“Duo” Settings. We fine-tuned duoT5 using the monoT5 model trained on the MS MARCO passage data as a
starting checkpoint, using the same hyperparameters as those used for training monoT5. In more detail, we
also used the “small” triples file provided by the MS MARCO organizers, converted into duoT5’s input format
(Equation 4) and fed to the model. Based on initial experiments with duoT5-base, we found that model effectiveness
converged around 50K iterations. Hence, we trained duoT5-3B for 50K iterations, which took about 80 hours
overall on a single Google TPU v3-8.
On the development set, we examined different numbers of candidates 𝑘1(i.e., output from the mono stage) that
are reranked by the pairwise ranker. Note that the duo model is computationally expensive, requiring a number
of inferences per query that is quadratic with respect to the number of candidate pairs. Thus, for tractability, we
only ran experiments where 𝑘1ranged from 10 to 50, in increments of 10. The results of these explorations are
described later (see Figure 4); in our final experiments, we used 𝑘1=50with Sym-Sum as the pairwise aggregation
method. Note that if more than 𝑘1hits are requested as the output of duoT5, we simply take additional ranked
output from monoT5. For example, if the user (or downstream application) requires 1000 hits, then the first 50 will
come from duoT5 (assuming 𝑘1=50), while the remaining results (rank positions 51–1000) will be the unaltered
rankings from monoT5. Thus, as explained in Section 3.4, our pairwise reranker emphasizes early precision.
4.2 MS MARCO Document Ranking
We also evaluated our models on the MS MARCO document ranking dataset, which uses a corpus comprised of
3.2M documents, derived from the MS MARCO passage corpus. The mean length of each passage is 1131 tokens
(median: 584, max: 333757), and the distribution of document lengths8is shown in Figure 3. The general setup
of this task is similar to the passage ranking task, with the primary difference being the length of texts in the
corpus (passages vs. full-length web documents). We see that the median length of documents is longer than the
typical 512 token limit of transformer models, which presents a technical challenge for researchers to overcome.
8Also tokenized using Python’s string split method.