12 •Ronak Pradeep, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Jimmy Lin
First-stage retrieval (i.e., the input to our reranking pipeline) comprised results combined from all three indexes
using reciprocal rank fusion [7].
There is an additional complexity that needs explaining: one of the lessons learned in the first round of
TREC-COVID was the importance of query formulation. TREC-COVID information needs (i.e., topics) were
modeled after standard ad hoc retrieval topics, comprising “query”, “question”, and “narrative” fields.11Each of
the fields described the information needs in increasing detail: a few keywords, a sentence, and a short paragraph,
respectively. Of the three fields, taking the combination of the “query” and “question” (i.e., concatenating the
contents of both fields) was found to be the most effective based on empirical results from round 1 (which is
consistent with the literature).
Beyond this simple approach, researchers from the University of Delaware discovered an effective technique for
generating queries from the TREC-COVID topics, based on results from round 1. They began with non-stopwords
from the query field and then further added named entities extracted from the question field using ScispaCy [ 36].
Starting in round 2, keyword queries generated using this technique (dubbed the UDel query generator) were
shared with all participants prior to each round’s deadline. Since the query generator was not further modified, it
is accurate to claim that this technique was used in rounds 2 through 5 in a blind manner.
For TREC-COVID, there were thus two commonly adopted query generation approaches. Combined with the
three different index conditions discussed above, this led to two different fusion runs:
•fusion1 : reciprocal rank fusion of results from the abstract, full-text, and paragraph indexes with the “query”
and “question” fields (concatenated together) as the search query.
•fusion2 : reciprocal rank fusion of results from the abstract, full-text, and paragraph indexes with queries
generated by the UDel query generator.
Starting in round 2, these two fusion runs, fusion1 and fusion2 , were provided as community baselines by our
team, made available for downloading prior to the deadline of each round so that participants could build on them
(and indeed many did). The experimental runs we describe in this paper took fusion1 and fusion2 as independent
first-stage retrievers, reranked their output, and then combined their results using reciprocal rank fusion (details
in Section 5.5).
Document expansion was applied in the following manner: for each of the index conditions above, we expanded
the “documents” by appending all the expansion queries to form a total of three more augmented indexes enhanced
by doc2query-T5. First-stage retrieval then used these augmented indexes, exactly as before (i.e., reciprocal rank
fusion, as described above). As with the other tasks described in this section, downstream rerankers consumed
the original text, i.e., we did notfeed any of the expansion queries into the model for inference. The same two
query generation approaches described above could also be applied, yielding variants of fusion1 and fusion2
based on the augmented indexes.
In summary, there are four possible inputs to our reranking pipeline: results from fusion1 ,fusion2 and
the corresponding expanded versions based on doc2query-T5. We will further clarify the exact experimental
conditions evaluated in Section 5.5 when we present results.
“Mono” Settings. We used the monoT5 model fine-tuned on the MS MARCO passage dataset and then fine-tuned
again on Med-MARCO, which is a subset of the MS MARCO passage dataset where only queries containing
medical terms are kept [ 30]. For this second fine-tuning, we trained for 1K steps using batches of 128 examples
and a learning rate of 10−4. Although Med-MARCO is ten times smaller than the full MS MARCO passage dataset
in terms of (query, relevant passage) pairs for training, we noticed a small gain in effectiveness when fine-tuning
on it (additionally).
11These fields parallel the “title”, “description”, and “narrative” structure of standard TREC topics.