2 •Ronak Pradeep, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Jimmy Lin
separately and in a piece-wise manner, this is the first paper where we have brought together all these separate
threads of work, which allows us to thoroughly describe our ideas in a coherent, self-contained manner and to
present ablation analyses that quantify the impact of each component.
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
We assume the standard definition of ad hoc retrieval, where given a corpus of texts C, the goal of a ranking
model is to return a top 𝑘ranked list of texts from the corpus in response to an information need 𝑞that maximizes
some metric of ranking quality such as nDCG or MRR. In this paper we use the terms ad hoc retrieval and ranking
interchangeably.
The basic idea behind multi-stage ranking architectures is to break ad hoc retrieval down into a series of
pipeline stages. Following an initial retrieval stage (also called candidate generation or first-stage retrieval), where
a bag-of-words query is typically issued against an inverted index, each subsequent stage reranks the list of
candidates passed along from the previous stage until the final top 𝑘results are generated for consumption, e.g.,
returned to the user. Recognizing that the unit of retrieval might differ based on the task, per standard parlance in
IR, we use document to refer to the text being retrieved in a generic sense, when in actuality it may be a passage
(in the case of MS MARCO passage ranking) or some hybrid construction (in the case of our TREC-COVID
experiments).
Multi-stage ranking architectures have received much interest in academia [ 2,6,32,33,53] as well as industry.
Documented production deployments of this architecture include the Bing web search engine [ 43] as well as
Alibaba’s e-commerce search engine [ 28]. These represent instances of a mature and well-studied design, which
originally evolved to strike a balance between model complexity and search latency by controlling the size
of the candidate set at each stage. Increasingly richer (and typically slower) models can be made practical by
considering successively smaller candidate sets. For certain (easy) queries, stages of the pipeline can be skipped
entirely, known as “early exits” [ 5]. Viewed in this manner, multi-stage ranking captures the same intuition as
progressive refinement in classifier cascades [ 50], which has a long history. For example, an early stage might
consider only term statistics of individual terms, whereas later stages might consider bigrams, phrases, or even
apply lightweight NLP techniques (which can better capture aspects of relevance but are more computationally
intensive). Given this setup, a number of researchers have proposed techniques based, for example, on boosting
for composing these stages in an end-to-end manner [ 53,58]. While these techniques were previously explored
mostly in the context of feature-based learning to rank [ 24,29], many of the same ideas remain applicable in a
transformer-based setting [40, 49, 55].
In the past decade or so, the advent of deep learning has brought tremendous excitement to the information
retrieval community. Although machine-learned ranking models have been well studied since the mid-2000s in the
context of learning to rank [ 24,29], the paradigm was heavily driven by manual feature engineering; commercial
web search engines are known to incorporate thousands of features (or more) in their models. Continuous vector
space representations coupled with neural models promised to obviate the need for handcrafted features and
have attracted much attention from both researchers and practitioners. Well-known early neural ranking models
include DRMM [ 14], DUET [ 35], KNRM [ 56], and Co-PACRR [ 17]; the literature is too vast for an exhaustive
review here, and thus we refer readers to recent overviews [34, 42].
The introduction of BERT [ 11], however, marked the beginning of a new era in neural ranking models, beginning
with Nogueira and Cho [37]. Over the past couple of years, we have witnessed the increasing dominance of
reranking models based on pretrained transformers [ 1,10,23,31]. While retrieval using approximate nearest-
neighbor search on learned dense representations has emerged as a promising direction [ 13,18,19,21,27,57],
a multi-stage ranking architecture based on keyword search as first-stage retrieval remains popular. For more
details, the recent survey by Lin et al. [26] provides an overview of these developments.