The Expando-Mono-Duo Design Pattern for Text Ranking with Pretrained Sequence-to-Sequence Models •5
to Anserini [ 59,60],4itself built on the popular open-source Lucene search engine with the goals of supporting
replicable IR research and bringing research practices into better alignment with real-world search applications.
3.3𝐻1: Pointwise Reranking with monoT5
In stage𝐻1, documents retrieved in 𝐻0are reranked by a pointwise reranker called monoT5. The model estimates
a score𝑠𝑖quantifying how relevant a candidate 𝑑𝑖∈𝑅𝑛−1is to a query 𝑞. That is:
𝑃(Relevant =1|𝑑𝑖,𝑞). (1)
This approach is called relevance classification [ 26], or alternatively, a pointwise approach in the parlance of
learning to rank [ 24,29]. Naturally, we expect that the ranking induced by these scores yields a higher metric
(e.g., MAP or MRR) than the scores from the input ranking (i.e., the output of 𝐻0). At a high level, monoT5 is
a sequence-to-sequence adaptation of the monoBERT model proposed by Nogueira and Cho [37] and further
detailed in Lin et al. [26].
Details of monoT5 are described in Nogueira et al . [38] ; here, we only provide a short overview. Unlike
monoBERT [ 37], monoT5 uses T5 [ 45], a popular pretrained sequence-to-sequence transformer model. In this
model, all target tasks are cast as sequence-to-sequence tasks. Specifically, ranking is performed using the
following input sequence template:
Query:𝑞Document:𝑑Relevant: (2)
where𝑞and𝑑are the query and document texts, respectively. The model is fine-tuned to produce the tokens
“true” or “false” depending on whether the document is relevant or not to the query. That is, “true” and “false” are
the “target tokens” (i.e., ground truth predictions in the sequence-to-sequence transformation).
At inference time, to compute probabilities for each query–document pair (in a reranking setting), we apply
a softmax only on the logits of the “true” and “false” tokens. Following Nogueira et al . [38] , we rerank the
documents according to the probabilities assigned to the “true” token. Note that while 𝐻0uses a corpus enriched
by document expansion, documents in 𝑅0consist of original texts that do not include the predicted queries.
As discussed in Lin et al . [26] , one reoccurring theme in the application of transformers to text ranking is the
handling of texts that are longer than the input sequences that the models were designed to handle (typically, 512
tokens). Building on previous work [ 4,10,16], we were able to devise simple yet effective solutions to address
this issue. Since these solutions are corpus dependent, we save detailed discussion for Section 4.
3.4𝐻2: Pairwise Reranking with duoT5
The output 𝑅1from the previous stage is used as input to the pairwise reranker we call duoT5. In this pairwise
approach, the reranker considers a pair of documents (𝑑𝑖,𝑑𝑗)and estimates the probability 𝑝𝑖,𝑗that candidate 𝑑𝑖
is more relevant than 𝑑𝑗to query𝑞:
𝑃(𝑑𝑖≻𝑑𝑗|𝑑𝑖,𝑑𝑗,𝑞), (3)
where𝑑𝑖≻𝑑𝑗is a commonly adopted notation in IR for stating that 𝑑𝑖ismore relevant than𝑑𝑗(with respect to
the query𝑞).
The basic idea behind duoT5 was originally developed in Nogueira et al . [40] , but in the context of BERT (not
surprisingly, called duoBERT). As the name suggests, duoT5 is also based on T5. In this case, the reranker takes
as input the sequence:
Query:𝑞Document0: 𝑑𝑖Document1: 𝑑𝑗Relevant: (4)
The pairwise sequence-to-sequence model is fine-tuned to produce the token “true” if document 𝑑𝑖is more
relevant than 𝑑𝑗, and “false” otherwise.
4http://anserini.io/