Table 1: Comparison of different approaches. E QUIRECTANGULAR and C UBEMAP refer to applying the given CNN directly
to the equirectangular and cubemap projection, respectively. Supervised training means that the method requires annotated
360 images. The model size is the size for a single layer, where c,k,H refer to the number of channels, kernel size, and input
resolution (bandwidth) respectively. Note that c∼H≫kfor real images and source CNNs, and we keep only the leading
term for each method.
Translation Rotation Supervised Model Transferable
Invariance Invariance Training Size Across Models
EQUIRECTANGULAR No No No c2k2No
CUBEMAP No No No c2k2No
S2CNN [ 11] Yes Yes Yes c2H No
SPHERICAL CNN [ 15] Yes Yes Yes c2H No
SPHERICAL U-N ET[45] Yes No Yes c2k2No
SPHERE NET[12] Yes No Yes c2k2No
SPHCONV [36] Yes No No c2k2H No
KTN Yes No No c2k2+c2Yes
KTN’s transferability across source kernels is analogous to
the generalizability of visual features across natural images.
In general, the more visual diversity in the unlabeled train-
ing data, the more accurately we can expect the KTN to be
trained. While one could replace all convolution layers in a
CNN with KTNs and train the entire model end-to-end us-
ing annotated 360◦data, we believe that Eq. 5is a stronger
condition while also enjoying the advantage of bypassing
any annotated training data.
3.4. Discussion
Compared to existing methods for convolution for 360◦
images, the main beneﬁts of KTN are its compactness and
transferability . The information required to solve the target
task is encoded in the source kernel, which is fed into the
KTN as an input rather than part of the model. As a result,
the same KTN can be applied to another CNN having the
same base architecture but trained for a different target task.
In other words, without additional training, the same KTN
model can be used to solve multiple vision tasks on 360◦
images by replacing the source kernels, provided that the
source CNNs for each task have the same base architecture.
Most related to our work is the spherical convolution ap-
proach (SphConv) [ 36]. SphConv learns the kernels adapted
to the distortion in equirectangular projection. Instead of
learning the transformation function fin Eq. 2, SphConv
learnsKΩdirectly, and hence must learn one KΩfor every
different row of the equirectangular image. While SphConv
should be more accurate than KTN theoretically (i.e., re-
moving any limitations on memory and training time and
data) our experimental results show that the two methods
perform similarly in terms of accuracy. Furthermore, the
number of parameters in SphConv is hundreds of times
larger than KTN, which makes SphConv much more dif-
ﬁcult to train and deploy. The difference in model size be-
comes even more signiﬁcant when there are multiple mod-
els to be evaluated: the same KTN can apply to multi-
ple source CNNs and thus incurs only constant overhead,x1w2σ(w1x1)
x2w2σ(w1x2)
xc(x)
a bw1σ(x)w2
Figure 3: Beyond the ﬁrst CNN layer, the feature interpo-
lation assumption in SphereNet [ 12] yields only approxi-
mated results. See text for details.
whereas SphConv must fully retrain and store a new model
for each source CNN. For example, if we want to apply
ﬁve different VGG-based CNNs to 360◦images, SphConv
will take 29×5=145 GB of space, while KTN takes only
56×5+14=294 MB (cf. Sec. 4.3). In addition, since Sph-
Conv trains KΩfor a single source kernel K, the model
does not generalize to different source CNNs.
SphereNet [ 12] formulates the transformation function f
using the sphere-to-tangent-plane image projection. While
the projection transformation leads to an analytical solution
forf, it implicitly assumes that CNN feature maps can be
interpolated like pixels. This assumption is only true for
the ﬁrst layer in a network because of non-linear activation
functions used in modern CNNs between convolution lay-
ers. Consider a two layer 1D convolution with a kernel of
size 1, as sketched in Fig. 3. If we interpolate the pixel ﬁrst
and apply the kernels, the output of at location xis
c(x) =w2×σ(w1(ax1+bx2)). (7)
However, if we apply the kernels and then interpolate the
features, the result is
c(x) =aw2×σ(w1x1)+bw2×σ(w1x2). (8)
These two values are not equal because σis non-linear, and
the error will propagate as the network becomes deeper. The
interpolated feature can at most be an approximation for the
exact feature. Our experimental results show that a projec-
tion transformation for fleads to sub-optimal performance.
9446