els, this approach degrades accuracy—especially for deeper
networks—due to an implicit interpolation assumption, as
we will explain below. The third approach deﬁnes convo-
lution in the spectral domain [ 11,15], which has signiﬁcant
memory overhead and thus far limited applicability to real-
world data. All of the above require retraining to handle a
new recognition task.
In light of these shortcomings, we propose the Ker-
nel Transformer Network (KTN). The KTN adapts source
CNNs trained on perspective images to 360◦images. In-
stead of learning a new CNN on 360◦images for a speciﬁc
task, KTN learns a function that takes a kernel in the source
CNN as input and transforms it to be applicable to a 360◦
image in its equirectangular projection. See Fig. 1(C). The
function accounts for the distortion in 360◦images, return-
ing different transformations depending on both the polar
angleθand the source kernel. The model is trained to re-
produce the outputs of the source CNN on the perspective
projection for each tangent plane on an arbitrary 360◦im-
age. Hence, KTN learns to behave similarly to the source
CNN while avoiding repeated projection of the image.
Key highlights of the proposed KTN are its transferabil-
ityandcompactness —both of which owe to our function-
based design. Once trained for a base architecture, the same
KTN can transfer multiple source CNNs to 360◦images.
For example, having trained a KTN for VGG [ 35] on Ima-
geNet classiﬁcation, we can transfer the same KTN to run
a VGG-based Pascal object detector on 360◦panoramas.
This is possible because the KTN takes the source CNN as
input rather than embed the CNN kernels into its own pa-
rameters (unlike [ 11,12,15,36,45]). Furthermore, since the
KTN factorizes source kernels from transformations, it is
implementable with a lightweight network (e.g., increasing
the footprint of a VGG network by only 25%).
Results show KTN models are orders of magnitude
smaller than the most accurate competitor, SphConv [ 36].
Compared with Spherical U-Net [ 45] and SphereNet [ 12],
KTN is much more data efﬁcient because it does not require
any annotated 360◦images for training, and it is more accu-
rate because it avoids their feature interpolation assumption.
2. Related Work
360◦vision Ongoing work explores new projection mod-
els optimized for image display [ 5,25,43] or video stor-
age [ 1,4,27,28,38]. We adopt the most common equirect-
angular projection so our algorithm can be readily applied
to existing data. Other work explores how to improve the
display of 360◦video via video stabilization [ 22,23,26],
new display interfaces [ 31–33], and automatic view selec-
tion [ 7,10,19,29,37,39,42]. The latter all rely on applying
CNNs to 360◦data, and could beneﬁt from our method.
CNNs on spherical data As discussed above, early meth-
ods take either the expensive but accurate reprojection ap-proach [ 37,39,42,44], or the inaccurate but fast direct
equirectangular approach [ 19,29]. Recent work improves
accuracy by training vanilla CNNs on the cubemap projec-
tion, which introduces less distortion [ 3,7], but the model
still suffers from cubemap distortion and discontinuities and
has sub-optimal accuracy for tasks such as object detection.
In the last year, several methods develop new spherical
CNN models. Some design CNN architectures that account
for the distortion in 360◦images [ 12,36,45]. SphConv [ 36]
learns separate kernels for each row of the equirectangular
projection, training to reproduce the behavior of an off-the-
shelf CNN and adjusting the kernel shape based on its lo-
cation on the sphere. While more accurate than a vanilla
CNN, SphConv increases the model size signiﬁcantly be-
cause it unties kernel weights along the rows. In contrast,
SphereNet [ 12] deﬁnes the kernels on the tangent plane and
projects features to the tangent planes before applying the
kernels. Similarly, Spherical U-Net [ 45] deﬁnes the kernels
on the sphere and resamples the kernels on the grid points
for every location in the equirectangular projection. Both
allow weight sharing, but they implicitly assume that fea-
tures deﬁned on the sphere can be interpolated in the 2D
plane deﬁned by equirectangular projection, which we show
is problematic. Instead of learning independent kernels or
using a ﬁxed 2D transformation, our KTN learns a transfor-
mation that considers both spatial and cross-channel corre-
lation. Our model is more compact than SphConv by shar-
ing the kernels, and it is more accurate than SphereNet and
Spherical U-Net by learning a more generic transformation.
Another strategy is to deﬁne convolution in the spectral
domain in order to learn rotation invariant CNNs. One ap-
proach is to apply graph convolution and design the graph
structure [ 24] such that the outputs are rotation invariant.
Another approach transforms both the feature maps and
kernels into the spectral domain and applies convolution
there [ 11,15]. However, orientation is often semantically
signiﬁcant in real data (e.g., cars are rarely upside down)
and so removing orientation can unnecessarily restrict dis-
crimination. In addition, these approaches require caching
the basis functions and the frequency domain feature maps
in order to achieve efﬁcient computation. This leads to sig-
niﬁcant memory overhead and limits the viable input res-
olution. Both constraints limit the spectral methods’ accu-
racy on real world 360◦images. Finally, unlike any of the
above prior work [ 3,7,11,12,15,36,45], our KTN can trans-
fer across different source CNNs with the same architecture
to perform new tasks without re-training; all other methods
require training a new model for each task.
CNNs with geometric transformations For perspective
images, too, there is interest in encoding geometric trans-
formations in CNN architectures. Spatial transformer net-
works [ 20] transform the feature map into a canonical
view to achieve transformation invariance. Active convo-
lution [ 21] and deformable convolution [ 13] model geomet-
9443