360◦Imageθ
Equirectangular ProjectionK
⊕Kθθ
θChannel-wiseProjectionDepth-wise
Convolution
1x1 Convolution
Figure 2: KTN consists of row dependent channel-wise
projections that resize the kernel to the target size and depth
separable convolution blocks. It takes a source kernel K
andθas input and generates an output kernel KΩ.KΩis
then applied to the 360◦image in its equirectangular projec-
tion at row y=θH/π . The transformation accounts for the
distortion in equirectangular projection, while maintaining
cross-channel interactions.
We address the ﬁrst requirement (size and cost) by em-
ploying depthwise separable convolutions [ 9,18] within the
KTN. Instead of learning 3D (i.e., height ×width×channels)
kernels, KTN alternates between pointwise convolution that
captures cross-channel correlation and depthwise convolu-
tion that captures spatial correlation. Using the same 3x3
depthwise convolutions as in MobileNet [ 18], the computa-
tion cost is about 8 to 9 times less than standard convolution.
Furthermore, the model size overhead for KTN is roughly
1/k2of the source kernels, where most of the parameters
are in the 1x1 convolution. The size overhead turns out to
be necessary, because cross channel correlation is captured
only by the 1x1 convolution in KTN, and removing it re-
duces the ﬁnal spherical convolution accuracy signiﬁcantly.
To address the second requirement (variable-sized ker-
nels), we learn a row dependent depthwise projection to re-
size the source kernel. The projection consists of hprojec-
tion matrices Pi, fori∈[1,h], wherehis the number of
rows in the 360◦image. Let ri=hi×wibe the target
kernel receptive ﬁeld at row i. The projection matrix has
the sizePi∈Rri×k2, which projects the source kernel into
the target size. Similar to the depthwise convolution, we
perform channel-wise projection to reduce the model size.
The complete architecture for KTN is in Fig. 2. We use a
Residual Network [ 17]-like architecture. For both the resid-
ual and shortcut branches, we ﬁrst apply the row depen-
dent projection to resize the kernel to the target size. The
residual branch then applies depthwise separable convolu-
tion twice. Our depthwise separable convolution block con-
sists of ReLU-pointwise conv-ReLU-depthwise conv. Thisdesign removes the batch normalization used in MobileNet
to reduce the model size and memory consumption. The
two branches are added together to generate the output ker-
nel, which is then applied to a 360◦feature map as in Eq. 3.
Note that while the KTN can be applied to different kernels,
the structure of a KTN depends on Pi, which is determined
by the receptive ﬁeld of the source kernel. Therefore, we
need one KTN for each layer of a source CNN.
3.3. KTN Objective and Training Process
Having introduced the KTN module and how to apply it
for CNNs on 360◦images, we now describe the KTN ob-
jective function and training process. The goal of the KTN
is to adapt the source kernel to the 360◦domain. Therefore,
we train the model to reproduce the outputs of the source
kernels. Let Fl∈RH×W×ClandFl+1∈RH×W×Cl+1
be the feature maps generated by the l-th and(l+1)-th layer
of a source CNN respectively. Our goal is to minimize the
difference between the feature map generated by the source
kernelsKland that generated by the KTN module:
L=∥Fl+1−fl(Kl,Ω)∗Fl∥2(5)
for any360◦image. Note that during training the feature
mapsFlare not generated by applying the source CNN di-
rectly on the equirectangular projection of the 360◦images.
Instead, for each point (x,y)in the360◦image, we project
the image content to the tangent plane of the sphere at
(θ,φ) = (π×y
H,2π×x
W) (6)
and apply the source CNN on the tangent plane. This en-
sures that the target training values are accurately computed
on undistorted image content. Fl[x,y]is deﬁned as the l-th
layer outputs generated by the source CNN at the point of
tangency. Our objective function is similar to that of Sph-
Conv [ 36], but, importantly, we optimize the model over the
entire feature map instead of on a single polar angle in order
to factor the kernel itself out of the KTN weights.
The objective function depends only on the source pre-
trained CNN and does not require any annotated data for
training. In fact, it does not require image data speciﬁc to
the target task, because the loss is deﬁned over 360◦images.
In practice, we sample arbitrary 360◦images for training
regardless of the source CNN. For example, in experiments
we train a KTN on YouTube video frames and then apply it
for a Pascal object detection task. Our goal is to fully repro-
duce the behavior of the source kernel. Therefore, even if
the training images do not contain the same objects, scenes,
etc. as are seen in the target task, the KTN should still mini-
mize the loss in Eq. 5. Although KTN takes only the source
kernels and θas input, the exact transformation fmay de-
pend on all the feature maps Fl,Fl−1,...,F1to resolve
the error introduced by non-linearities. Our KTN learns the
important components of those transformations from data.
9445