18◦
36◦
54◦
72◦
90◦
0
2
4RMSE
Pascal VOC
KTN
 KTN-Transfer
 Projected
18◦
36◦
54◦
72◦
90◦
0
1
2
3
4
COCO
Figure 5: Model transferability. The title indicates the
source CNN being tested. KTN performs almost identi-
cally regardless of the source network it is trained on. The
results show we can learn a single KTN and apply it to other
source CNNs with the same architecture, even if that source
model is trained for a different task.
Fig. 5shows the results. The accuracy of KTN-
TRANSFER is almost identical to KTN. The results demon-
strate that KTN indeed learns a task-independent transfor-
mation and can be applied to different source models with
the same base architecture. None of the existing mod-
els [11,12,15,36,45] are equipped to perform this kind
of transfer, because they learn ﬁxed kernels for a speciﬁc
task in some form. Hence, the P ROJECTED baseline is the
only baseline shown in Fig. 5. Although P ROJECTED can
be applied to any source CNN without training, the per-
formance is signiﬁcantly worse than KTN. Again, the re-
sults indicate that a projection operation is not sufﬁcient to
model the required transformation f. The proposed KTN
is the ﬁrst approach to spherical convolution that translates
across models without requiring labeled 360◦images or re-
training. We also perform the same experiments between
VGG trained for ImageNet classiﬁcation and Faster R-CNN
trained for Pascal object detection, and the results are simi-
lar. See Supp.
4.3. Size and Speed
Finally, we compare the overhead introduced by KTN
versus that required by the baseline methods. In particular,
we measure the model size and speed for the convolution
layers in the VGG architecture. For the model size, we com-
pute the total size of the parameters using 32-bit ﬂoating
point numbers for the weights. While there exist algorithms
that compress neural networks, they are equally applicable
for all methods. For the speed, we measure the average pro-
cessing time (I/O excluded) of an image for computing the
conv5 3 outputs. All methods are evaluated on a dedicated
AWS p3.8xlarge instance. Because the model size for S PH-
CONV is 29GB and cannot ﬁt in GPU memory (16GB), it is
run on CPUs. Other methods are run on GPUs.
Fig.6shows the results. We can see that the model size
of KTN is very similar to E QUIRECTANGULAR , CUBEMAP
and P ROJECTED . In fact, it is only 25% (14MB) larger than102103104020406080
Size (MB)Accuracy
10−1101103020406080
Time (s) / ImageAccuracyEQUIRECTANGULAR
CUBEMAP
S2CNN [11]
SPHERICAL CNN [ 15]
SPHERE NET[12]
SPHERICAL U-N ET[45]
SPHCONV [36]
PROJECTED
KTN (Ours)
Figure 6: Model size (top) and speed (bottom) vs. accu-
racy for VGG. KTN is orders of magnitude smaller than
SPHCONV, and it is similarly or more compact as all other
models, while being signiﬁcantly more accurate.
the source CNN. At the same time, KTN achieves a much
better accuracy compared with all the models that have a
comparable size. Compared with S PHCONV, KTN not only
achieves a higher accuracy but is also orders of magnitude
smaller. Similarly, S2CNN and S PHERICAL CNN increase
model size by 131% and727% while performing worse in
terms of accuracy. Note that we do not include parame-
ters that can be computed analytically, such as the bases
forS2CNN and the projection matrices for S PHERE NET,
though in practice they also add further memory overhead
for those baselines.
On the other hand, the computational cost of KTN is
naturally much higher than E QUIRECTANGULAR . The lat-
ter only needs to run the source CNN on an equirectangular
image, whereas the convolution kernels are generated at run
time for KTN. However, as all the results show, KTN is
much more accurate. Furthermore, KTN is 26 times faster
than S PHCONV, since the smaller model size allows the
model to be evaluated on GPU.
5. Conclusion
We propose the Kernel Transformer Network for trans-
fering CNNs from perspective images to 360◦images. KTN
learns a function that transforms a kernel to account for the
distortion in the equirectangular projection of 360◦images.
The same KTN model can transfer to multiple source CNNs
with the same architecture, signiﬁcantly streamlining the
process of visual recognition for 360◦images. Our results
show KTN outperforms existing methods while providing
superior scalability and transferability.
Acknowledgement . We thank Carlos Esteves for the help
on S PHERICAL CNN experiments. This research is sup-
ported in part by NSF IIS-1514118, an AWS gift, a Google
PhD Fellowship, and a Google Faculty Research Award.
9449