Kernel Transformer Networks for Compact Spherical Convolution
Yu-Chuan Su
The University of Texas at AustinKristen Grauman
Facebook AI Research
The University of Texas at Austin
Abstract
Ideally,360◦imagery could inherit the deep convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs) already trained with great
success on perspective projection images. However, exist-
ing methods to transfer CNNs from perspective to spheri-
cal images introduce signiﬁcant computational costs and/or
degradations in accuracy. We present the Kernel Trans-
former Network (KTN) to efﬁciently transfer convolution
kernels from perspective images to the equirectangular pro-
jection of 360◦images. Given a source CNN for perspective
images as input, the KTN produces a function parameter-
ized by a polar angle and kernel as output. Given a novel
360◦image, that function in turn can compute convolutions
for arbitrary layers and kernels as would the source CNN
on the corresponding tangent plane projections. Distinct
from all existing methods, KTNs allow model transfer: the
same model can be applied to different source CNNs with
the same base architecture. This enables application to mul-
tiple recognition tasks without re-training the KTN. Validat-
ing our approach with multiple source CNNs and datasets,
we show that KTNs improve the state of the art for spherical
convolution. KTNs successfully preserve the source CNN’s
accuracy, while offering transferability, scalability to typi-
cal image resolutions, and, in many cases, a substantially
lower memory footprint1.
1. Introduction
The360◦camera is an increasingly popular technol-
ogy gadget, with sales expected to grow by 1500% before
2022 [ 41]. As a result, the amount of 360◦data is increasing
rapidly. For example, users uploaded more than a million
360◦videos to Facebook in less than 3 years [ 2]. Besides
videography, 360◦cameras are also gaining attention for
self-driving cars, automated drones, and VR/AR. Because
almost any application depends on semantic visual features,
this rising trend prompts an unprecedented need for visual
recognition algorithms on 360◦images.
Today’s wildly successful recognition CNNs are the re-
sult of tremendous data curation and annotation effort [ 6,
1Code and data available at http://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/ktn/
360◦image
fΩ1
fΩ2( )
( )
(C) Proposed KTN
(A) Apply directly
(B) Apply on tangent planes
Figure 1: Our goal is to transfer CNNs trained on planar
images to 360◦images. Common approaches either (A) ap-
ply CNNs directly on the equirectangular projection of a
360◦image or (B) project the content to tangent planes and
apply the models on the tangent planes. In contrast, Kernel
Transformer Network (KTN) adapts the kernels in CNNs to
account for the distortion in 360◦images.
14,16,30,35,40], but they all assume perspective pro-
jection imagery. How can they be repurposed for 360◦
data? Existing methods often take an off-the-shelf model
trained on perspective images and either 1) apply it repeat-
edly to multiple perspective projections of the 360◦im-
age [ 10,37,39,42] or 2) apply it once to a single equirectan-
gular projection [ 19,29]. See Fig. 1(A,B). These two strate-
gies, however, have severe limitations. The ﬁrst is expensive
because it has to project the image and apply the recogni-
tion model repeatedly. The second is inaccurate because the
visual content is distorted in equirectangular projection.
To overcome these challenges, recent work designs CNN
models speciﬁcally for spherical data [ 11,12,15,36,45].
Broadly speaking, they pursue one of three approaches.
The ﬁrst adapts the network architecture for equirectangu-
lar projection and trains kernels of variable size to account
for its distortions [ 36]. While accurate, this approach suf-
fers from signiﬁcant model bloat. The second approach
instead adapts the kernels on the sphere, resampling the
kernels or projecting their tangent plane features [ 12,45].
While allowing kernel sharing and hence smaller mod-
1
9442