ric transformations using the receptive ﬁeld of the kernel.
While these methods account for geometric transformations
in the input data, they are not suitable for 360◦images be-
cause the transformation is location dependent rather than
content dependent in 360◦images. Furthermore, all of them
model only geometric transformation and ignore the cor-
relation between different channels in the feature map. In
contrast, our method captures the properties of 360◦images
and the cross channel correlation in the features.
3. Approach
In this section, we introduce the Kernel Transformer Net-
work for transferring convolutions to 360◦images. We ﬁrst
introduce the KTN module, which can replace the ordinary
convolution operation in vanilla CNNs. We then describe
the architecture and objective function of KTN. Finally, we
discuss the difference between KTN and existing methods
for learning CNNs on 360◦data.
3.1. KTN for Spherical Convolution
Our KTN can be considered as an generalization of or-
dinary convolutions in CNNs. In the convolution layers of
vanilla CNNs, the same kernel is applied to the entire in-
put feature map to generate the output feature map. The
assumption underlying the convolution operation is that the
feature patterns, i.e., the kernels, are translation invariant
and should remain the same over the entire feature map.
This assumption, however, does not hold in 360◦images. A
360◦image is deﬁned by the visual content projected on the
sphere centered at the camera’s optical center. To represent
the image in digital format, the sphere has to be unwrapped
into a 2D pixel array, e.g., with equirectangular projection
or cubemaps. Because all sphere-to-plane projections in-
troduce distortion, the feature patterns are not translation
invariant in the pixel space, and ordinary CNNs trained for
perspective images do not perform well on 360◦images.
To overcome this challenge, we propose the Kernel
Transformer Network, which can generate kernels that ac-
count for the distortion. Assume an input feature map
I∈RH×W×Cand a source kernel K∈Rk×k×Cdeﬁned
in undistorted images (i.e., perspective projection). Instead
of applying the source kernel directly
F[x,y] = Σi,jK[i,j]∗I[x−i,y−j], (1)
we learn the KTN ( f) that generates different kernels for
different distortions:
KΩ=f(K,Ω) (2)
F[x,y] = Σi,jKΩ[i,j]∗I[x−i,y−j] (3)
where the distortion is parameterized by Ω. Because the dis-
tortion in 360◦images is location dependent, we can deﬁne
Ωas a function on the sphere
Ω =g(θ,φ), (4)whereθandφare the polar and azimuthal angle in spheri-
cal coordinates, respectively. Given the KTNs and the new
deﬁnition of convolution, our approach permits applying an
ordinary CNN to 360◦images by replacing the convolution
operation in Eq. 1with Eq. 3.
KTNs make it possible to take a CNN trained for some
target task (recognition, detection, segmentation, etc.) on
ordinary perspective images and apply it directly to 360
panoramas. Critically, KTNs do so without using any an-
notated360◦images. Furthermore, as we will see below,
once trained for a given architecture (e.g., VGG), the same
KTN is applicable for a new task using that architecture
without retraining the KTN. For example, we could train
the KTN according to a VGG network trained for ImageNet
classiﬁcation, then apply the same KTN to transfer a VGG
network trained for Pascal object detection; with the same
KTN, both tasks can be translated to 360◦images.
3.2. KTN Architecture
In this work, we consider 360◦images that are un-
wrapped into 2D rectangular images using equirectangular
projection. Equirectangular projection is the most popular
format for 360◦images and is part of the 360◦video com-
pression standard [ 8]. The main beneﬁt of equirectangu-
lar projection for KTNs is that the distortion depends only
on the polar angle. Because the polar angle has an one-to-
one correspondence with the image row ( y=θH/π ) in the
equirectangular projection pixel space, the distortion can be
parameterized easily using Ω =g(θ,φ) =y. Furthermore,
we can generate one kernel and apply it to the entire row
instead of generating one kernel for each location, which
leads to more efﬁcient computation.
A KTN instance is based on a given CNN architecture.
There are two basic requirements for the KTN module.
First, it has to be lightweight in terms of both model size
and computational cost. A large KTN module would in-
cur a signiﬁcant overhead in both memory and computation,
which would limit the resolution of input 360◦images dur-
ing both training and test time. Because 360◦images by
nature require a higher resolution representation in order to
capture the same level of detail compared with ordinary im-
ages, the accuracy of the model would degrade signiﬁcantly
if we were forced to use lower resolution inputs.
Second, KTNs need to generate output kernels with vari-
able size, because the appropriate kernel shape may vary in
a single360◦image. A common way to generalize convo-
lution kernels on the 2D plane to 360◦images is to deﬁne
the kernels on the tangent plane of the sphere. As a result,
the receptive ﬁeld of the kernel on the 360◦image is the
back projection of the receptive ﬁeld on the tangent plane,
which varies at different polar angles [ 12,36,45]. While one
could address this naively by always generating the kernels
in the largest possible size, doing so would incur signiﬁcant
overhead in both computation and memory.
9444