Table 2: Model accuracy.
MNIST Pano2Vid Pascal VOC
(Acc.↑) (RMSE ↓) (Acc. ↑)
EQUIRECTANGULAR 95.24 3.44 41.63
CUBEMAP 68.53 3.57 49.29
S2CNN [ 11] 95.79 2.37 4.32
SPHERICAL CNN [ 15] 97.48 2.36 6.06
SPHERICAL U-N ET[45] 98.43 2.54 24.98
SPHERE NET[12] 87.20 2.46 46.68
SPHCONV [36] 98.72 1.50 63.54
PROJECTED 10.70 4.24 6.15
KTN 97.94 1.53 69.48
image resolution. The fact that KTN scales to higher res-
olutions is precisely one of its technical advantages, which
we demonstrate on the other datasets.
ForSpherical MNIST , the baselines are trained to predict
the digit projected to the sphere except S PHCONV. SPH-
CONV and our KTN are trained to reproduce the conv3
outputs of the source model. For Pano2Vid , all methods
are trained to reproduce the conv5 3 outputs.
Please see Supp. ﬁle for additional details.
4.1. Model Accuracy
Table 2summarizes the methods’ CNN accuracy on all
three360◦datasets. KTN performs on par with the best
baseline method (S PHCONV) onSpherical MNIST . The re-
sult veriﬁes that KTN can transfer the source kernels to the
entire sphere by learning to reproduce the feature maps, and
it can match the accuracy of existing models trained with
annotated 360◦images.
KTN and S PHCONV perform signiﬁcantly better than
the other baselines on the high resolution datasets, i.e.,
Pano2Vid andPascal VOC .S2CNN , SPHERICAL CNN,
and S PHERICAL U-N ETsuffer from their memory con-
straints, which as discussed above restricts them to lower
resolution inputs. Their accuracy is signiﬁcantly worse
on realistic full resolution datasets. These models cannot
take higher resolution inputs even after using model paral-
lelism over four GPUs with a total of 64GB of memory.
Although E QUIRECTANGULAR and C UBEMAP are trained
and applied on the full resolution inputs, they do not account
for the distortion in 360◦images and yield lower accuracy.
Finally, the performance of P ROJECTED and S PHERE NET
suggests that the transformation fcannot be modeled by a
tangent plane-to-sphere projection. Although S PHERE NET
shows that the performance can be signiﬁcantly improved
by training the source kernels on 360◦images, the accu-
racy is still worse than KTN because feature interpolation
introduces error. The error accumulates across layers, as
discussed in Sec. 3.4, which substantially degrades the ac-
curacy when applying a deep CNN. Note that the number of
learnable parameters in KTN is much smaller than that in
Figure 4: KTN object detection examples on Pano2Vid .
See Supp. for detection examples on Pascal VOC .
SPHERE NET, but it still achieves a much higher accuracy.
Interestingly, although S PHCONV performs better in
RMSE on Pano2Vid , KTN peforms better in terms of object
classiﬁcation accuracy on Pascal VOC . We attribute this to
KTN’s inherent generalizability. S PHCONV has a larger
number of parameters, and the kernels at different θare
trained independently. In contrast, the parameters in KTN
are shared across different θand thus trained with richer in-
formation. Therefore, S PHCONV is more prone to overﬁt
the training loss, which is to minimize the RMSE for both
models. Furthermore, our KTN has a signiﬁcant compact-
ness advantage over S PHCONV, as discussed above.
Similarly, although S PHERICAL U-N ET and
SPHERE NET perform slightly worse than S2CNN
and S PHERICAL CNN on Pano2Vid , they are signiﬁcantly
better than those baselines on Pascal VOC . This result
reinforces the practical limitations of imposing rotation
invariance. S2CNN and S PHERICAL CNN require full
rotation invariance; the results show that orientation infor-
mation is in fact important in tasks like object recognition.
Thus, the additional rotational invariance constraince limits
the expressiveness of the kernels and degrades the perfor-
mance of S2CNN and S PHERICAL CNN. Furthermore,
the kernels in S2CNN and S PHERICAL CNN may span
the entire sphere, whereas spatial locality in kernels has
proven important in CNNs for visual recognition.
Fig. 4shows example outputs of KTN with a Faster R-
CNN source model. The detector successfully detects ob-
jects despite the distortion. On the other hand, KTN can fail
when a very close object cannot be captured in the ﬁeld-of-
view of perspective images.
4.2. Transferability
Next, we evaluate the transferability of KTN across dif-
ferent source models on Pano2Vid . In particular, we eval-
uate whether KTNs trained with a Faster R-CNN that is
trained on COCO can be applied to another Faster R-CNN
(both using VGG architecture) that is trained on Pascal
VOC and vice versa. We denote KTN trained on a different
source CNN than it is being tested on as KTN- TRANSFER
and KTN otherwise.
9448