Finally, other methods attempt to reduce distortion by
unwrapping a single 360◦image into multiple images using
perspective projection locally [ 3,7], e.g., with cubemap pro-
jection. It is non-trivial to deﬁne convolution across multi-
ple image planes, where two cube faces meet. Prior work
addresses this problem by “cube-padding” the feature maps
using output from adjacent image planes [ 3,7], but exper-
imental results indicate that the resultant features are not
accurate enough and degrade the accuracy. The reason is
that the same object may have different appearance on dif-
ferent tangent planes, especially when the ﬁeld-of-view is
large and introduces signiﬁcant perspective distortion. Al-
ternatively, one could sample the tangent planes densely and
apply convolution on each tangent plane independently, but
doing so incurs unrealistic computational overhead [ 37].
Table 1summarizes the tradeoffs between existing
spherical convolution models. In short, KTN is distinct
from all others in its ability to transfer to new tasks without
any labeled data. Furthermore, KTN has the favorable prop-
erties of a highly compact model and the ability to preserve
orientation-speciﬁc features (typically desirable for recog-
nition and other high-level tasks).
4. Experiments
We evaluate KTN on multiple datasets and multiple
source models. The goal is to 1) validate the accuracy of
KTN as compared to other methods for learning CNNs on
360◦images, 2) demonstrate KTN’s ability to generalize to
novel source models, and 3) examine KTN’s memory and
computation overhead compared to existing techniques.
Datasets Our experiments make use of both unannotated
360◦videos and 360◦images with annotation.
Spherical MNIST is constructed from the MNIST dataset
by back projecting the digits into equirectangular projection
with160×80resolution. The digit labels are used to train
the source CNN (recognition model), but they are notused
to train the KTN. Classiﬁcation accuracy on the 360◦-iﬁed
test set is used as the evaluation metric.
Pano2Vid is a real world 360◦video dataset [ 39]. We
sample frames from non-overlapping videos for training
and testing, and the frames are resized to 640×320reso-
lution. The models are trained to reproduce the convolution
outputs of the source model, so no labels are required for
training. The root-mean-square error (RMSE) of the ﬁnal
convolution outputs is used as the evaluation metric.
Pascal VOC 2007 is a perspective image dataset with
object annotations. We backproject the object bounding
boxes to equirectangular projection with 640×320resolu-
tion. Following [ 36], we use the accuracy of the detector
network in Faster R-CNN on the validation set as the eval-
uation metric. This dataset is used for evaluation only.
Source Models ForSpherical MNIST , we train the source
CNN on the MNIST training set. The model consistsof three convolution layers followed by one fully con-
nected layer. Each convolution layer consists of 5x5Conv-
MaxPool-ReLU, and the number of kernels is 32, 64, and
128, respectively. For Pano2Vid andPascal VOC , we take
off-the-shelf Faster R-CNN [ 34] models with VGG archi-
tecture [ 35] as the source model. The Faster R-CNN is
trained on Pascal VOC if not mentioned speciﬁcally. Source
models are not ﬁne-tuned on 360◦data in any form.
Baselines We compare to the following existing methods:
•EQUIRECTANGULAR —Apply ordinary CNNs on the
360◦image in its equirectangular projection.
•CUBEMAP —Apply ordinary CNNs on the 360◦image in
its cubemap projection.
•S2CNN [ 11]—We train S2CNN using the authors’ im-
plementation. For Pano2Vid andPascal VOC , we reduce
the input resolution to 64×64due to memory limits (see
Supp). We add a linear read-out layer at the end of the
model to generate the ﬁnal feature map.
•SPHERICAL CNN [ 15]—We train S PHERICAL CNN us-
ing the authors’ implementation. Again, the resolution of
input is scaled down to 80×80due to memory limits for
Pano2Vid andPascal VOC .
•SPHERICAL U-N ET[45]—We use the spherical convo-
lution layer in Spherical U-Net to replace ordinary con-
volution in CNN. Input resolution is reduced to 160×80
forPano2Vid andPascal VOC due to memory limits.
•SPHERE NET[12]—We implement S PHERE NETusing
row dependent channel-wise projection.2We derive the
weights of the projection matrices using the feature pro-
jection operation and train the source kernels. For the
Pano2Vid dataset, we train each layer independently us-
ing the same objective as KTN due to memory limits.
•SPHCONV [36]—We use the authors’ implementation.
•PROJECTED —Similar to S PHERE NET, except that it uses
the source kernels without training.
The network architecture for E QUIRECTANGULAR and
CUBEMAP is the same as the source model. For all meth-
ods, the number of layers and kernels are the same as the
source model.
Note that the resolution reductions speciﬁed above were
necessary to even run those baseline models on the non-
MNIST datasets, even with state-of-the-art GPUs. All ex-
periments were run on NVIDIA V100 GPU with 16GB
memory—the largest in any generally available GPU to-
day. Therefore, the restriction is truly imposed by the latest
hardware technology. Compatible with these limits, the res-
olution in the authors’ own reported results is restricted to
60×60[11],64×64[15], or150×300 [45]. On the
SphericalMNIST dataset, all methods use the exact same
2The authors’ code and data were not available at the time of publication.
9447