Equivariant Transformer Networks
Kai Sheng Tai1Peter Bailis1Gregory Valiant1
Abstract
How can prior knowledge on the transforma-
tion invariances of a domain be incorporated
into the architecture of a neural network? We
propose Equivariant Transformers (ETs), a fam-
ily of differentiable image-to-image mappings
that improve the robustness of models towards
pre-deﬁned continuous transformation groups.
Through the use of specially-derived canonical co-
ordinate systems, ETs incorporate functions that
are equivariant by construction with respect to
these transformations. We show empirically that
ETs can be ﬂexibly composed to improve model
robustness towards more complicated transforma-
tion groups in several parameters. On a real-world
image classiﬁcation task, ETs improve the sample
efﬁciency of ResNet classiﬁers, achieving rela-
tive improvements in error rate of up to 15% in
the limited data regime while increasing model
parameter count by less than 1%.
1. Introduction
In computer vision, we are often equipped with prior knowl-
edge on the transformation invariances of a domain. Con-
sider, for example, the problem of classifying street signs
in real-world images. In this domain, we know that the
appearance of a sign in an image is subject to various defor-
mations: the sign may be rotated, its scale will depend on its
distance, and it may appear distorted due to perspective in
3D space. Regardless, the identity of the street sign should
remain invariant to these transformations.
With the exception of translation invariance, convolutional
neural network (CNN) architectures typically do not take
advantage of such prior knowledge on the transformation
invariances of the domain. Instead, current standard practice
heuristically incorporates these priors during training via
data augmentation ( e.g., by applying a random rotation or
1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to:
Kai Sheng Tai <kst@cs.stanford.edu >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).scaling to each training image). While data augmentation
typically helps reduce the test error of CNN-based models,
there is no guarantee that transformation invariance will be
enforced for data not seen during training.
In contrast to training time approaches like data augmen-
tation, recent work on group equivariant CNNs (Cohen &
Welling, 2016; Dieleman et al., 2016; Marcos et al., 2017;
Worrall et al., 2017; Henriques & Vedaldi, 2017; Cohen
et al., 2018) has explored new CNN architectures that are
guaranteed to respond predictably to particular transforma-
tions of the input. For example, the CNN model family
may be constrained such that a rotation of the input results
in a corresponding rotation of its subsequent representa-
tion, a property known as equivariance. However, these
techniques—most commonly designed for rotations and
translations of the input ( e.g., Dieleman et al. (2016); Mar-
cos et al. (2017); Worrall et al. (2017))—fail to generalize
to deeper compositions of continuous transformations. This
limits the applicability of these techniques in more compli-
cated real-world scenarios involving continuous transforma-
tions in several dimensions, such as the above example of
street sign classiﬁcation.
To address these shortcomings of group equivariant CNNs,
we propose Equivariant Transformer (ET) layers, a ﬂexible
class of functions that improves robustness towards arbitrary
pre-deﬁned groups of continuous transformations. An ET
layer for a transformation group Gis an image-to-image
mapping that satisﬁes the following local invariance prop-
erty: for any input image and transformation T2G, the
imagesandTare both mapped to the same output im-
age. ET layers are differentiable with respect to both their
parameters and input, and thus can be easily incorporated
into existing CNN architectures. Additionally, ET layers
can be ﬂexibly combined to achieve improved invariance
towards more complicated compositions of transformations
(e.g., simultaneous rotation, scale, shear, and perspective
transformations).
Importantly, the invariance property of ETs holds by con-
struction , without any dependence on additional heuristics
during training. We achieve this by using the method of
canonical coordinates for Lie groups (Rubinstein et al.,
1991). The key property of canonical coordinates that we
utilize is their ability to reduce arbitrary continuous transfor-