Equivariant Transformer Networks
mations to translation. For example, polar coordinates are
canonical coordinates for the rotation group, since a rotation
reduces to a translation in the angular coordinate. These
specialized coordinates can be analytically derived for a
given transformation and efﬁciently implemented within a
neural network.
We evaluate the performance of ETs using both synthetic
and real-world image classiﬁcation tasks. Empirically, ET
layers improve the sample efﬁciency of image classiﬁers rel-
ative to standard Spatial Transformer layers (Jaderberg et al.,
2015). In particular, we demonstrate that ET layers improve
the sample efﬁciency of modern ResNet classiﬁers on the
Street View House Numbers dataset, with relative improve-
ments in error rate of up to 15% in the limited data regime.
Moreover, we show that a ResNet-10 classiﬁer augmented
with ET layers is able to exceed the accuracy achieved by
a more complicated ResNet-34 classiﬁer without ETs, thus
reducing both memory usage and computational cost.
2. Related Work
Equivariant CNNs. There has been substantial recent in-
terest in CNN architectures that are equivariant with respect
to transformation groups other than translation. Equivari-
ance with respect to discrete transformation groups ( e.g., re-
ﬂections and 90orotations) can be achieved by transforming
CNN ﬁlters or feature maps using the group action (Cohen
& Welling, 2016; Dieleman et al., 2016; Laptev et al., 2016;
Marcos et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2017). Invariance can then
be achieved by pooling over this additional dimension in
the output of each layer. In practice, this technique supports
only relatively small discrete groups since its computational
cost scales linearly with the cardinality of the group.
Methods for achieving equivariance with respect to con-
tinuous transformation groups fall into one of two classes:
those that expand the input in a steerable basis (Amari,
1978; Freeman & Adelson, 1991; Teo, 1998; Worrall et al.,
2017; Jacobsen et al., 2017; Weiler et al., 2018; Cohen
et al., 2018), and those that compute convolutions under
a specialized coordinate system (Rubinstein et al., 1991;
Segman et al., 1992; Henriques & Vedaldi, 2017; Esteves
et al., 2018). The relationship between these two categories
of methods is analogous to the duality between frequency
domain and time domain methods of signal analysis. Our
work falls under the latter category that uses coordinate
systems specialized to the transformation groups of interest.
Equivariance via Canonical Coordinates. Henriques &
Vedaldi (2017) apply CNNs to images represented using
coordinate grids computed using a given pair of continuous,
commutative transformations. Closely related to this tech-
nique are Polar Transformer Networks (Esteves et al., 2018),
a method that handles images deformed by translation, rota-tion, and dilation by ﬁrst predicting an origin for each image
before applying a CNN over log-polar coordinates. Unlike
these methods, we handle higher-dimensional transforma-
tion groups by passing an input image through a sequence
of ET layers in series. In contrast to Henriques & Vedaldi
(2017), where a pair of commutative transformations is
assumed to be given as input, we show how canonical co-
ordinate systems can be analytically derived given only a
single one-parameter transformation group using technical
tools described by Rubinstein et al. (1991).
Spatial Transformer Networks. As with Spatial Trans-
former (ST) layers (Jaderberg et al., 2015), our ET layers
aim to factor out nuisance modes of variation in images due
to various geometric transformations. Unlike STs, ETs in-
corporate additional structure in the functions used to predict
transformations. We expand on the relationship between
ETs and STs in the following sections.
Locally-Linear Approximations. Gens & Domingos
(2014) use local search to approximately align ﬁlters to
image patches, in contrast to our use of a global change
of coordinates. The sequential pose prediction process in
a stack of ET layers is also reminiscent of the iterative
nature of the Lucas-Kanade (LK) algorithm and its descen-
dants (Lucas & Kanade, 1981; Lin & Lucey, 2017).
Image Registration and Canonicalization. ETs are re-
lated to classic “phase correlation” techniques for image
registration that compare the Fourier or Fourier-Mellin trans-
forms of an image pair (De Castro & Morandi, 1987; Reddy
& Chatterji, 1996); these methods can be interpreted as
Fourier basis expansions under canonical coordinate sys-
tems for the relevant transformations. Additionally, the
notion of image canonicalization relates to work on de-
formable templates , where object instances are generated
via deformations of a prototypical object (Amit et al., 1991;
Yuille, 1991; Shu et al., 2018).
3. Problem Statement
In this section, we begin by reviewing inﬂuential prior
work on image canonicalization with Spatial Transform-
ers (Jaderberg et al., 2015). We then argue that the lack of
self-consistency in pose prediction is a key weakness with
the standard ST that results in poor sample efﬁciency.
3.1. Image Canonicalization with Spatial Transformers
Suppose that we observed a collection of images (x), each
of which is a mapping from image coordinates x2R2to
pixel intensities in each channel. Each image is a trans-
formed version of some latent canonical image:=
T:=(Tx), where the transformation T:R2!R2
is modulated by pose parameters 2Rk.