Agriculture 2022 ,12, 228 4 of 18
Avg. Pooling) layer converted 2D feature maps to 1D before a dense output layer. The
various attention modules were inserted into the base network at the same location, as
shown in Figure 2. The necessary zero padding and maximum pooling layers were added
to adjust the spatial dimension of the input and output feature maps.
2.2.1. Convolutional Block Attention Module (CBAM)
CBAM uses two attention modules (channel attention and spatial attention) in series,
followed by the spatial attention module [ 15], as shown in Figure 3. The channel attention
module was used to generate two feature maps using average and maximum pooling layers
from the intermediate layer. Then, both feature maps were input to the shared multilayer
perceptron (MLP), and the output feature maps were added before normalizing using
the sigmoid function. The multiplied features between the channel attention module and
convolutional layer were applied to the spatial attention module to determine the position
of the important features in the image. The ﬁnal feature maps from the channel and spatial
attention modules are given in Equations (1) and (2).
CA(x)=s(MLP (AvgPool (x))+MLP (MaxPool (x))) (1)
SA(x)=s
f77h
Fs
avg;Fs
maxi
(2)
where CA( x) represents the channel attention feature maps, SA( x) is the spatial attention
feature maps, srepresents the sigmoid function of the feature maps, f77represents
the77convolutional operation, MLP is multilayer perceptron, AvgPool (x)is average
pooling of input x,MaxPool (x)is the maximum pooling of input x,Fs
maxis the feature maps
obtained from maximum pooling operation, and Fs
avgis the feature maps from maximum
pooling operation.
Figure 1. Sample image of the dataset. ( a) Bacterial spot, ( b) early blight, ( c)Fusarium wilt, ( d) healthy,
(e) late blight, ( f) leaf mold, ( g) mosaic virus, ( h)Septoria leaf spot, ( i) spider mites; ( j) target spot,
(k) yellow leaf curl virus.
2.2.2. Squeeze-and-Excitation (SE) Attention Module
The dimension of the input feature map was squeezed to 1 1C by global pooling
operation, and two fully connected (FC) layers followed by a rectiﬁer linear unit (ReLU)
and sigmoid activation layers were attached to build an excitation block [25], as shown in
Figure 4. The squeeze-and-excitation (SE) feature maps were element-wise multiplication,
with the input feature maps forwarding to the next layer. The computational operation
of the SE module is expressed mathematically in Equation (3). Finally, a mathematical