Agriculture 2022 ,12, 228 3 of 18
study the performance of lightweight CNNs with improved image recognition algorithm
(attention modules) for detection of a few classes of plant diseases.
In this study, a lightweight CNN with 20 layers and reduced trainable parameters was
designed using the ResNet topology [ 24]. Then, the commonly used attention modules,
namely the convolutional block attention module (CBAM) [ 15], self-attention module [ 16],
squeeze-and-excitation module [ 25], and the dual attention module [ 26], were integrated
into the base network to observe the impact of different attention mechanisms on con-
ventional CNN. Moreover, the performance of the models with and without attention
mechanisms was assessed by employing well-known classiﬁcation metrics (accuracy, preci-
sion, recall, and F1 score). All the models were trained, validated, and tested using tomato
disease datasets split at a ratio of 8:1:1 for training, validation, and testing. Furthermore,
the productive number of attention modules and their locations in the base network were
comprehensively assessed through an ablation study. Finally, the computational complexity
of the models, the training and testing time per image, network parameters, and sizes were
calculated and compared parametrically. Therefore, the main objectives of this study were
to design a lightweight and computationally efﬁcient network for classiﬁcation of a few
classes of plant diseases, improve the performance of conventional CNN by amending it
with an attention mechanism, and identify an effective and efﬁcient attention module for
plant disease detection.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Data Collection and Preprocessing
Ten classes of tomato leaf images (9 disease and one healthy) that were part of the
PlantVillage public datasets [ 27] were collected. The Fusarium wilt diseased images were
captured from the greenhouse located at Gyeongsang National University, South Korea. In
this way, a total of 19,510 images from 10 distinct disease classes and one healthy class were
used to train, validate, and test the models. Most of the ﬁeld-captured images were taken
nondestructively, but few leaves were detached from the plant and captured on a white
background. A sample of images from each class is presented in Figure 1. Similarly, Table 1
shows various information about the dataset, such as class assignment, the common and
scientiﬁc name of the tomato diseases [ 13], the number of images per class, and the source
of data collection. As image data preparation is very crucial in the deep learning model,
different image preprocessing functions were carried out before applying to the model. The
main preprocessing functions were labeling, resizing, rescaling, and augmentation of the
raw images. Then, the images were split into training, validation, and testing sets at the
ratio of 8:1:1 [ 12]. The larger the number of input images, the better the learning of the deep
model. Thus, the image augmentation technique was performed to the training datasets.
2.2. Lightweight Attention-Based Network Design
A lightweight attention-based CNN model was designed using ResNet topology. It
consisted of 20 layers, and the attention modules were embedded between the residual
blocks 3 and 4 (after the 16th layer) [ 16]. Figure 2 shows the block diagram of the proposed
model, and the detailed parameters of the base model are given in Table 2. The kernel
ﬁlters of each layer of the base network were four times lower than the standard ResNet
architecture, lowering the total network parameters to make it lighter and portable. In
addition, the number of convolutional layers was limited to 20 to decrease the network
complexity [ 28]. Conv1 layer had 16 kernel ﬁlters of large patch size (7 7) followed by a
batch normalization layer, a rectiﬁer linear unit (ReLU) activation layer, and a maximum
pooling layer (Max. pooling), which reduced the size of feature maps to half of the input
image size. Residual blocks 1 and 4 comprise a convolutional block containing three
convolutional layers (conv.) accompanied by a batch normalization (BN) layer and an
activation (ReLU) layer. Whereas Residual blocks 2 and 3 have a convolutional block
followed by an identity block. The structure of the identity block was similar to the
convolutional block except for the shortcut path. Finally, a global average pooling (Global