Agriculture 2022 ,12, 228 14 of 18
4. Discussion
4.1. Tomato Disease Detection
The low interclass variance, high intra-class variance, and mixed symptoms of two or
more diseases on the same leaf are some of the serious challenges for plant disease detection
using computer vision techniques [ 9]. As all the images were of tomato leaves, the chances
of producing false positive (FP) and false negative (FN) were higher due to lower interclass
variance. Moreover, some of the images of late blight and target spot disease were in
the preliminary stage, so there was marginal difference between diseased images and
healthy images or mistakenly labeled ones, as shown in Figure 9. Therefore, most of the
models poorly detected early blight, healthy, late blight, and target spot leaf images. In
contrast, all the models perfectly identiﬁed the Fusarium wilt diseased images because of
the distinction in datasets. The majority of the Fusarium wilt images were captured directly
on the plant (nondestructively), which made them unique with the background and leaf
position (Figure 1). The precision, recall, and F1 score of the target spot class were minimum
for all the models due to higher FPs and FNs. All models wrongly detected some healthy
images as late blight, bacterial spot, and target spot diseases except the lw_resnet20_cbam
model, which falsely identiﬁed 1% of target spot images as healthy leaves because some
diseased images at a very early stage were almost visually indistinguishable from healthy
leaves. Therefore, all the models failed to achieve 100% correct classiﬁcation of healthy
and diseased images. However, lw_resnet20_cbam and lw_resnet20_sa models performed
well except for giving 1% FPs and FNs, respectively. On the other hand, almost all the
models precisely identiﬁed bacterial spot, leaf mold, mosaic virus, and yellow leaf curl
virus diseased images.
Figure 9. Sample images of different classes with visually similarity. ( a) Healthy leaf image, ( b) late
blight diseased image, and ( c) target spot diseased image.
4.2. Performance Evaluation of the Models
The attention modules allow the network to identify the discriminative features and
their location in the input images to emphasize key features during training. The channel
attention module determines the salient features available in the input images. At the same
time, the spatial or position attention reveal the spatial location of those key features. The
number of attention modules and their place in the network is same for all. We ﬁxed the
position of the attention module between blocks 3 and 4 to permit the network to focus
on speciﬁc high-level features because the datasets were of the same plant (tomato). The
lw_resnet20_cbam outperformed in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy and model lightness.
The additional maximum pooling layer in the channel attention module of the CBAM
provide even minute details of the salient features to the network, boosting the network’s
performance. DA also uses two attention modules (channel and position), but it failed
to perform as well as the CBAM model. One reason for the lower performance might
be the parallel combination of channel and position attention. As [ 15] suggests, series
combination results are better than parallel. Moreover, the module structure is bulkier than