Agriculture 2022 ,12, 228 8 of 18
Figure 5. Self-attention (SA) architecture and its integration into the main network. ( a) Integration of
the SA module in the main network and ( b) self-attention (SA) module architecture. Where Conv.
layer: convolutional layer and ReLU: rectiﬁer linear unit, H: height of the feature map, W: width
of the feature map, C: number of channels, r: channel reduction ratio, In(x): input feature maps,
P(x): feature maps after the ﬁrst branch convolutional and ReLU operations, Q(x): feature maps after
the second branch convolutional and ReLU operations, R(x): feature maps after the third branch
convolutional and ReLU operations, T(x): transposed feature maps of P(x).Q(x),S(x): softmax output
of transposed feature maps, SA( x): self-attention feature maps, : scaling factor, and Out(x): output
feature maps after the SA module.
Figure 6. Dual attention (DA) architecture and its application into the main network. ( a) Application
of the DA module in the main network, ( b) position attention (PA) network architecture, and
(c) channel attention (CA) network architecture. Where Conv. layer: convolutional layer, P(x),
Q(x), and R(x) are the feature maps from the three parallel convolutional operations, H: height of the
feature map, W: width of the feature map, C: number of channels, T(x): transposed feature maps
ofP(x).Q(x),S(x): feature map after the softmax operation of T(x),U(x): reshaped feature maps of
S(x).R(x),P A(x): position attention feature maps, In(x): input feature maps of the modules, M(x):
feature maps after the multiplication of reshaped and transposed and the input feature maps, N(x):
feature maps after the element-wise multiplication of the softmax output of M(x) and reshaped input
feature maps, and CA( x): channel attention feature maps.
2.3. Network Training and Evaluation
The lightweight base network and all the models with the various attention modules
were trained, validated, and tested using the same image datasets. Moreover, the same