Agriculture 2022 ,12, 228 2 of 18
Neocognitron [ 5] and LeNet [ 6] in the 1980s, the application of CNN skyrocketed after it
successfully classiﬁed ImageNet 1000 datasets by AlexNet [ 7] using graphical processing
unit (GPU).
The computer vision technique is widely used for agricultural domains such as prod-
uct quality inspection, disease identiﬁcation, and crop monitoring and management [ 8].
Phytopathology is one of the prominent ﬁelds of agriculture for computer vision appli-
cation. Moreover, accurate and automatic detection of plant diseases is a complex and
challenging task due to the clutter background, multiple simultaneous disorders, nuances
in some disease characteristics, variations in symptoms, etc. [ 9]. With efﬁcient hardware
and software development, the implementation of deep CNNs for plant disease detection
has steadily increased. Besides disease detection and classiﬁcation, CNN is used for pixel-
level segmentation of diseased and healthy regions, allowing the measurement of disease
severity [ 10]. Toda and Okura [ 11] designed a CNN based on InceptionV3 architecture us-
ing publicly available datasets, which had 54,306 images in which 26 classes were diseased
images and 12 classes were healthy images from 14 different plants. They also visualized
the internal performance of the CNN by exposing the output of the intermediate layer into
a human interpretable form. Moreover, they investigated how CNN extracts the color and
texture features of the lesion region using the semantic dictionary method. By visualizing
the intermediate layer’s output, they could reduce the network parameters by 75%.
The conventional CNN, a stack of convolutional and activation layers, learns global
features from input images and trains the model accordingly. However, the background
features sometimes overpower the foreground leaf and diseased regions, thus drastically
reducing the performance of the model for test images of different scenarios [ 12,13]. Inte-
grating the attention mechanism to CNN allows the model to focus on signiﬁcant features
rather than global features [ 14,15]. After the persuasive performance of the attention
mechanism on many image classiﬁcation datasets, various researchers have adapted it
for plant disease classiﬁcation [ 16–20]. Zeng and Li [ 16] designed a lightweight residual
network (ResNet) incorporating a self-attention module in the base network with four
residual blocks with 13 convolutional layers. They empirically tested the best locations of
the attention module in the base network and obtained the highest classiﬁcation accuracy
at the 8th convolutional layer. In addition, the various channel reduction ratios (1/2 to
1/16) were tested, and the best result was obtained at 1/8. In contrast, Lee et al. [ 17] used
attached an attention module with recurrent neural network (RNN) and trained it using
features extracted from input images. They used a pretrained GoogleNet CNN, Mountain
View, CA, USA, for global feature extraction and applied attention mechanism on the
features before applying it to the gated RNN and classifying 20 disease classes and one
healthy class of plant diseases. The model with attention mechanism showed signiﬁcant
improvement, even for the unseen test datasets. Zhao et al. [ 18] and Yilma et al. [ 19] also
applied attention-based deep CNN to classify tomato diseases. Zhao et al. [ 18] used a
squeeze-and-excitation network (SENet), also called channel attention module, and inte-
grated it into each stage of the ResNet50 architecture to build a proposed model called
SE-ResNet50. Then, the performance of the proposed model was evaluated with some
baseline models without the SENet module for tomato and grape disease classiﬁcation.
On the other hand, Yilma et al. [ 19] used attention augmented residual (AAR) network
that mixed the features from a residual block and element-wise multiplied features from a
residual block and an attention block to discriminate global features of tomato diseases.
Moreover, they used a conditional variation generative adversarial network (CVGAN)
to generate synthetic image data for increase in training and testing datasets. Moreover,
various researchers have utilized openly available tomato disease datasets to validate the
performances of conventional CNNs without the attention modules [ 2,21–23]. All the above
mentioned works used standard CNN architectures with deep and substantial training
parameters that were designed for large image datasets, such as ImageNet-1K, MS COCO,
and VOC-7. Although a deep and heavy network produces better detection accuracy, it
needs high-performance hardware and massive training datasets. Therefore, it is vital to