Agriculture 2022 ,12, 228 15 of 18
other attention modules due to three parallel convolutional layers for position attention
and three branching matrix operations of input feature maps for channel attention. In
contrast, CBAM uses maximum, average pooling, and convolutional layers in the spatial
attention module, which is computationally more efﬁcient than matrix operations.
The performance of our proposed model (lw_resnet20_cbam) was compared with
models that were previously studied by various researchers. Some studies utilized the
same tomato disease datasets with different deep CNN architectures. Some of them also
implemented attention-based CNN to improve detection accuracy. Table 8 demonstrates the
performance comparison of various CNN architectures used for the same tomato disease
datasets. Only [ 2] used more tomato disease datasets (12 classes) than ours (11 categories).
In addition, most researchers applied a generic model designed for a large number of image
classiﬁcation datasets, which is computationally inefﬁcient for a small number of plant
datasets. Moreover, the majority of generic models were used as transfer learning. From
the table, it can be seen that none of the previous studies achieved better detection results
than ours in such a large number of tomato leaf images with such a lightweight model.
Therefore, this study will be helpful for future researchers to design efﬁcient and effective
networks for portable devices.
Amongst the various attention modules, the SA module also showed competitive
results although it came at the cost of more network complexity and size. Its architecture
is almost similar to the position attention module of the DA network except for an addi-
tional ReLU activation layer in each convolutional branch. In addition, the SA model’s
performance superseded the DA model but could not match up to the CBAM model. The
SE network utilizes a similar principle as CBAM’s channel attention module, although it
only uses global average pooling operation in contrast to the maximum and global pooling
operations in CBAM. Nevertheless, its performance was similar to the DA model. How-
ever, the SE module is the lightest and most efﬁcient attention module. Thus, it is equally
important to identify key features and their locations in the input images. Furthermore,
the channel and spatial attention module should be in series so that the model can detect
dominant features and their place in the input images.
Table 8. Performance comparison of the proposed model with previous studies on tomato
disease classiﬁcation.
Reference Deep CNN Architecture Datasets Accuracy (%) Summary
[2] Improved YOLOV312 classes of tomato
leaf images92.39Applied feature fusion
technique for tiny disease
spot detection.
[18]ResNet50 with
squeeze-and-excitation (SE)
attention module10 classes of tomato
leaf and 4 classes of
grape leaf images96.81 for tomato and
99.24 for grape
datasetsSE attention module was
implemented into a generic
ResNet50 model.
[19]Attention augmented
ResNet (AAR)10 classes of tomato
leaf images98.91Synthetically generates
tomato leaf images to
increase training datasets.
[22]AlexNet and VGG16
(pretrained)7 classes of
tomato leaf images97.49 for AlexNet and
97.29 for VGG16 modelApplied transfer learning
strategy to swallow and
medium deep models.
[32] DenseNet121 (pretrained)5, 7, and 10 classes of
tomato leaf images99.51, 98.65, and 97.11
for 5, 7, and 10 classes,
respectivelyUsed transfer learning with
original and synthetically
generated images.
[33]AlexNet, GoogleNet,
Inception V3, ResNet18,
and ResNet5010 classes of tomato
leaf images98.93, 99.39, 98.65,
99.06, and 99.15,
respectivelyCompared the performances
of some standard models.