Fig. 4. An illustration of the NLM framework showing object properties and object relations as inputs, the concluding outputs of the objects properties and
relations, and the internal logical structure. Image originally from [9].
Fig. 5. Heatmap showing the proportion of each category of operation in each
model. Note that the neural models have different dominant components; the
NSCL executor and NLM models are dominated by element-wise operations.
See appendix for links to the model repositories.
2) Sparse Matrix Multiplication: Sparse matrices are those
in which the values of only some elements are speciﬁed;
all other elements are assumed to be some constant value,
typically 0. There are numerous ways to implement sparse
matrices; in general, there is a tradeoff between the generality
of the sparsity (how much structure is assumed) and how easy
it is to implement in hardware [25]. Sparse matrix multipli-
cation requires efﬁcient mechanisms to perform lookups into
the tables of non-zero values.
3) Convolution: Convolutions are another class of common,
computationally intensive operation. Unlike in GEMM, one ofthe inputs, the ﬁlter, is multiplied with a set of submatrices
of the other input. In theory, this should lead to excellent
operational intensity, since ﬁlter weights are reused for each
individual multiplication, and weights from the other matrix
are reused by overlapping submatrices. In practice, convolu-
tions have proven difﬁcult to parallelize, and are frequently
implemented using the im2col algorithm, which reduces the
problem to matrix multiplication. Performing im2col requires
substantial data movement and duplication, worsening the per-
formance and memory footprint of convolution. Recent efforts
have focused on performing convolution ”natively”, without
invoking im2col [26]. The more complex memory access
patterns of these approaches have their own considerations
for efﬁcient implementation. Whether im2col is used or not,
convolution presents a workload distinct from simple GEMM.
4) Element-wise Tensor Operations: Many operations in
deep learning are applied uniformly to all elements in a ten-
sor. These include activation, normalization, tensor addition,
Hadamard products, tensor-scalar operations, and relational
operations. All of these operations are ”embarrassingly par-
allel” in that they can be applied to every element of a
tensor simultaneously, but are challenging in that they have
poor operational intensity; each element of the input is only
operated on once.
5) Regional Operations: Some operations act on spatially
local regions of tensors. The best-known example of a regional
operation is pooling, which reduces the size of a tensor
in one or more dimensions by performing some reduction
operation (such as max or average) regionally. This is not
the only class of regional operation; other examples include
non-maximum suppression and region-of-interest alignment in
object detection networks. These operations are distinct from
element-wise operations in that they operate on potentially
overlapping regions rather than single elements and thus
have more complex access patterns; they are distinct from
convolution in that they operate on only a single tensor and
typically involve less computation.