used Python’s built-in cProﬁle proﬁler to perform function-
level proﬁling and identiﬁed categories of similar functions.
The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 7. Note,
however, that the plurality of the runtime still falls into the
”Other” category. This is a consequence of there being many
miscellaneous functions which individually contribute little to
runtime, but collectively contribute more than any of the major
categories.
Much of the executor’s runtime is spent on querying the
set of extracted features. Examples of these queries include
ﬁnding the ID of an object with given properties, looking up
the properties of an object given its ID, and queries relating
multiple objects such as ﬁnding an object’s closest neighbor.
These queries look similar to standard database operations. For
a sufﬁciently large set of symbolic features, it is likely that
feature querying could be approached using existing work in
parallelizing SQL queries [33]. However, the feature set the
NS-DR extracts is relatively small, meaning that the overhead
which parallelism incurs would almost certainly overwhelm
the speedup for this model.
The next-largest category of execution time is spent on
scalar arithmetic operations, in particular summing large ar-
rays. In principle these sorts of operations can sometimes
beneﬁt from being spread across multiple CPU cores, but in
practice we again expect the small size of the feature set to
make this pointless.
The third-largest category of operation is in fact JSON pars-
ing. This is an unfortunate artifact of the way data is passed
in the NS-DR model: rather than an end-to-end integration, it
stores data in JSON ﬁles between submodels. This means that
the executor has to load in the questions and extracted features
from JSONs for each inference sample. This overhead turns
out to be substantial for the very short runtime of this model.
F . Neural Logic Machines
A characterization proﬁle was created for each of the NLM
tasks: Sort, Path, and Blocks World. Each task provided
ranging variations in the produced results. The largest category
of operation was the ”other” category, where a signiﬁcant
amount of overall time was spent. The percentage of time
spent in the other category can be determined as 40.9 percent
for the Sort task, 40.0 percent for the critical path task, and
45.1 percent for the Blocks World task. The amount of time
spent in the other category can be attributed to miscellaneous
internal querying and generation functions for the different
tasks.
Following the ”other” category, the element-wise category
contributed the second most to the task executions. The
Sort task resulted in the highest percentage of element-wise
functions related to the vector multiplication being performed
on the numerical task. The high percentage of element-wise
functions is also represented in the Path task, with approxi-
mately a third of the total runtime spent on element-wise tasks.
Data movement represents the third largest category that
was characterized during the task executions. The Sort task
and Path task shared the highest percentage of data movementwithin the model’s execution. This is predominantly due to the
frequent movement of numerical values in these general tasks.
Blocks World yielded the lowest data movement characteristic
which can be perceived by the more symbolic and logical ﬂow
of functions and it’s data.
VI. A NALYSIS
Figure 6 shows the execution time breakdowns for single
input samples for each of the three models in this paper. We
now discuss each model individually.
A. NSCL and NS-DR
The NSCL runs in an average of 375ms per sample, with
310ms of this coming just from the question parser. The
clear bottleneck for this workload, dominating the question
parser’s runtime, is dense matrix multiplication. This is another
case where a sparse version of the model could potentially
yield improvements to runtime. However, this is not the
only contributing factor to the question parser’s long runtime.
Although the ability to ask questions of a model using natural
language is convenient, it is worth keeping in mind that it
can add substantial overhead and complexity, and considering
whether a simpler, machine-readable input ”language” could
be used instead.
It is clear that the dynamics predictor dominates the in-
ference runtime of the NS-DR. The total inference time for
this model is 4.44 seconds. Since input videos are 5 seconds
long, this does in theory allow for real-time inference on
this system, but this would not hold true for low-power or
embedded platforms.
Some portions of the NS-DR and NSCL are more suited
for acceleration than others. The CNN-based video frame
parser and the transformer-based question parser model can
be accelerated with existing GPU or accelerator architectures
[34]. On the other hand, the NS-DR’s dynamics predictor is
severely data-movement-bound due to its many sparse and
small tensor operations, and also suffers from the difﬁculty
of multiplying ”tall-and-skinny” matrices. It is possible that
data movement could be reduced somewhat through code
optimization, but it is fundamentally difﬁcult to accelerate
workloads with poor operational intensity. There have also
been several approaches investigated for near-memory linear
algebra [35] [36], which would likely be beneﬁcial for PropNet
as the reduced time accessing memory would help compensate
for the poor operational intensity.
The symbolic executor of the NS-DR exhibits complex
control ﬂow and heterogeneous functionality. Overall, this
workload has very little of the coarse-grain parallelism typical
of deep learning workloads. However, there are still oppor-
tunities for ﬁne-grain parallelism in its database queries and
arithmetic operations. It is doubtful that a multicore CPU
implementation would give any speedup for this particular
workload, given the relatively small sizes of the feature sets,
but this could be a viable approach for larger symbolic models.
Our biggest takeaway from analyzing the performance of
the NSCL and NS-DR models is that these NSAI models