Neuro-Symbolic AI: An Emerging Class of AI
Workloads and their Characterization
Zachary Susskind, Bryce Arden, Lizy K. John
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas
zsusskind, arden.bryce, ljohn@utexas.eduPatrick Stockton, Eugene B. John
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas
patrick.stockton, eugene.john@utsa.edu
Abstract —Neuro-symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence is a novel area
of AI research which seeks to combine traditional rules-based
AI approaches with modern deep learning techniques. Neuro-
symbolic models have already demonstrated the capability to
outperform state-of-the-art deep learning models in domains such
as image and video reasoning. They have also been shown to
obtain high accuracy with signiﬁcantly less training data than
traditional models. Due to the recency of the ﬁeld’s emergence
and relative sparsity of published results, the performance char-
acteristics of these models are not well understood. In this paper,
we describe and analyze the performance characteristics of three
recent neuro-symbolic models. We ﬁnd that symbolic models have
less potential parallelism than traditional neural models due to
complex control ﬂow and low-operational-intensity operations,
such as scalar multiplication and tensor addition. However, the
neural aspect of computation dominates the symbolic part in
cases where they are clearly separable. We also ﬁnd that data
movement poses a potential bottleneck, as it does in many ML
workloads.
Index Terms —Neuro-Symbolic, Machine Learning, Perfor-
mance, Inference
I. I NTRODUCTION
Conventional neural networks, based on Deep Learning
(DL), have proven to be effective in solving problems in many
domains. Recently, there has been an increase in the diver-
sity of neural models, including those composed of multiple
independently-trained submodels, and those which integrate
symbolic reasoning concepts (neuro-symbolic models). At the
same time, there is growing interest in heterogeneous archi-
tectures. These architectures pose the challenge of efﬁciently
mapping problems to different resources. Even in a relatively
simple heterogeneous design, such as a CPU-GPU system, it is
necessary to determine which tasks should be mapped to which
device. In order to facilitate this mapping, it is important to
understand emerging AI applications.
Neural networks have traditionally been grey-box systems.
It’s trivial to observe the internal physical structure of a
network, since a model’s topology is explicitly deﬁned as
part of hyperparameter selection. However, mapping the high-
dimensional, abstract features which neural networks manipu-
late to concrete concepts which humans can understand has
proven to be difﬁcult. Such mappings are highly desirable
for safety-critical ﬁelds such as medicine and self-driving
cars, where we must be certain a model is learning thedesired dataset features rather than over-ﬁtting to data artifacts
[1]. Networks composed of independent submodels have an
advantage here, since each submodel was trained for a speciﬁc
purpose. Knowing the purpose of each submodel gives us some
information about the internal state of the top-level model.
Neuro-Symbolic AI (NSAI) is another emerging AI domain
that combines deep learning for feature extraction and rules-
based ”intuition” for manipulating those features. Rules-based,
or symbolic, approaches dominated the ﬁeld of AI until the
1980s [2]. Symbolic models had several advantages: they
required only a few input samples, generalized well to new
problems, and their internal functionality was conceptually
simple when compared to DL models. At the same time, they
required substantial hand-tuning, which made them difﬁcult to
create for complex problems. A far larger issue was that they
simply weren’t very accurate: in 1973, the entire ﬁeld of AI
was summarised as ”increasingly disappointing” [3], and by
the 1980s, research had spiraled into what became known as
the ”AI winter” [4].
NSAI is a hybrid between DL and symbolic approaches
which attempts to capture the strengths of both ﬁelds. Deep
learning has proven singularly successful in extracting com-
plex features from data in tasks such as object detection and
natural language processing. At the same time, symbolic AI is
good for formalizing human-like reasoning. The objective of
NSAI is extract features from data using DL approaches, then
manipulate these features using symbolic approaches. Neuro-
symbolic models have outperformed pure DL models on image
and video question answering tasks, and have proven to
converge far quicker, with as little as 1/10 of the training data
needed for accuracy. Figure 1 contrasts the NSCL, a neuro-
symbolic model for image reasoning [5], with two other pure-
DL models (TbD [6] and MAC [7]). While all three models
obtain similar ﬁnal accuracies with 100% of the training data,
the neuro-symbolic model dramatically outperforms the other
two when restricted to training on only 10% of the total data
(CLEVR dataset) [5]. Therefore, neuro-symbolic models are
a good choice for scenarios where the availability of training
data is limited, or when training time is prohibitive.
In this paper, we analyze the inference performance char-
acteristics of three separate neuro-symbolic models. Two of
the models, the Neuro-Symbolic Concept Learner (NSCL) andarXiv:2109.06133v1  [cs.AI]  13 Sep 2021