TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF THE THREE NEURO -SYMBOLIC MODELS DISCUSSED IN THIS PAPER
Workload Source Description Submodels
NSCL [5] MIT/IBM A model that learns visual concepts, words, and semantic
parsing of sentences without explicit supervision on any of
them. Model learns by simply looking at images and reading
paired questions and answers. The speciﬁc MIT model builds an
object-based scene representation and translates sentences into
executable, symbolic programs. Uses CLEVR dataset.Image Parser (Object detection/masking)
Question Parser (Natural Language Processing)
Symbolic Executor
NS-DR [8] MIT/IBM A neuro-symbolic model for the CLEVRER dataset. CLEVRER
includes 300,000 questions and answers related to the action
depicted in the videos. The questions fall into four different
categories: Descriptive: e.g. “What is the material of the last
object to collide with the cyan cylinder? Explanatory: e.g.
“What is responsible for the collision between rubber and metal
cylinders?” Predictive: e.g. “What will happen next? Counter-
factual: e.g. “What will happen without the cyan cylinder?”Video Frame Parser (Object detection/masking)
Question Parser (Natural Language Processing)
Dynamics Predictor (Learned physics)
Symbolic Executor
NLM [9] Google A neuro-symbolic architecture for both inductive learning and
logic reasoning. Exploits the power of both neural networks as
function approximators, and logic programming as a symbolic
processor for objects with properties, relations, logic connec-
tives, and quantiﬁers. After being trained on small-scale tasks
(such as sorting short arrays), NLM models can recover lifted
rules, and generalize to large-scale tasks (such as sorting longer
arrays than they were trained on)No Submodels
TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF THE SUBMODEL COMPONENTS OF THE NSCL AND NS-DR
Submodel Origin Type Description
Image/Video Frame Parser Detectron2 [16] Neural (CNN) Extracts object features (positions, shapes, materials, sizes, and colors) from
still images or video frames.
Question Parser OpenNMT [17] Neural (Transformer) Translates natural-language input questions into a purpose-designed ”language”
of tokens. Tokens may describe the properties of objects, or describe ﬁltering
and querying operations to be performed on the set of object features.
Dynamics Predictor PropNet [18] Neural Learned physics engine for modeling and predicting collisions between objects.
Is capable of accurately modeling complex collisions involving more than two
objects, as well as operating with partial information (allowing objects to enter
and leave the scene).
Symbolic Executor NSCL [5] Quasi-Symbolic Fixed-function model which sequentially applies parsed tokens to extracted
image features to answer input questions. Unlike a true symbolic model,
approximates non-differentiable functions using probabilistic approaches and
softmax, enabling backpropagation.
Symbolic Executor NS-DR [8] Symbolic Fixed-function model which applies parsed tokens to both extracted video frame
features and PropNet predicted features (collisions). A true symbolic model, it
largely performs arithmetic and boolean operations as well as table lookups and
queries.
answers to these questions. Image samples in CLEVR contain
cubes, cylinders, and spheres with different sizes, colors, and
materials. An example of a scene in the CLEVR dataset, with
several of its accompanying questions, is shown in Figure 2.
As described in Table I, the NSCL is internally composed
of three submodels. We describe each of these submodels in
more detail here.
1) Image Parser: The objective of the image parser is to
generate object ”masks”: pixel-accurate regions with annotated
colors, shapes, and materials. This is accomplished using a
Mask R-CNN model, which constructs object segmentation
masks and classiﬁcations in parallel [20]. While the addition
of object mask generation makes its structure somewhat more
complex than a traditional convolutional neural network, both
branches of computation are internally convolutional.
The implementation of Mask R-CNN originally used for
the NSCL proved challenging to run on modern hardware.Not only was no pretrained model provided, but the software
libraries required were obsolete and not compatible with
modern CUDA versions. Therefore, we decided to use a
more recent, pretrained Mask R-CNN model provided by
Facebook’s Detectron2 [16]. This also had the advantage of
giving us access to the proﬁling tools built into more recent
versions of the PyTorch framework.
2) Question Parser: Questions in the CLEVR dataset are in
the form of natural language, which presents the challenge of
translating them into a form usable by the model. The authors
of the NSCL accomplished this by deﬁning a domain-speciﬁc
language, including verbs, such as ”Filter” or ”Intersect”,
and concepts, such as ”Blue” or ”Left”. This effectively
converts the problem of question parsing into neural machine
translation (NMT). A bidirectional GRU [21] was used to
accomplish this task for the original NSDR. However, source