Fig. 1. The neuro-symbolic model (NSCL [5]) achieves good accuracy
even when only trained with 10% of the data (CLEVR dataset) whereas the
accuracy of neural models (TbD [6] and MAC [7]) deteriorates when the
training set is small. Data is drawn from [5].
Neuro-Symbolic Dynamic Reasoning (NS-DR), are composed
of multiple independent ”submodels”, which extract problem
features before passing them as input to a ﬁnal symbolic sub-
model. The third, Neural Logic Machines (NLM), is an end-to-
end model without independent submodels. The NLM model
uses an object’s relations, properties, quantiﬁers, and logic
connectives in order to accomplish the task of generalization.
We provide an overview of all three models in Table I.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II outlines the space of neuro-symbolic learning, including the
progressive improvements to neuro-symbolic models. Section
III describes the three models that we are analyzing in this
paper in detail. Section IV describes our methodology for an-
alyzing the performance of these models, based on classifying
activity into eight distinct categories. Section V provides the
results of our analysis with breakdowns for each submodel
component. Section VI provides our takeaways on the behavior
and potential opportunities for acceleration of neuro-symbolic
models. Finally, in Section VII, we summarize our ﬁndings
and propose future work. We also provide direct links to the
repositories of the models cited in this paper as an appendix.
II. R ELATED WORK
A large portion of the research in NSAI to date has
been spearheaded by a collaborative effort between MIT and
IBM research groups [5], [10]. In 2019, the Neuro-Symbolic
Concept Learner proved the viability of combining symbolic
AI with deep learning techniques by parsing input questions
and scenes into symbolic programs [5]. The Concept Learner
demonstrated a novel technique for parsing input scenes
and questions into a semantic program, and introduced new
techniques for training this parsing at the same time as the
symbolic execution engine. The Concept Learner model was
followed the next year by the Visual Concept-Metaconcept
Learning (VCML) model, which used embeddings to learn
object properties with less supervision [10]. The VCML model
introduced the joint learning of concepts and metaconcepts
(e.g. the notion that two values describe the same propertyof objects), and the autonomous learning of new concepts
(e.g. color, shape, etc.). The VMCL obtained near-perfect
accuracy on the CLEVR image reasoning dataset. In early
2020, Chuang Gen et al. introduced the CLEVER dataset,
which pushed the boundaries of dynamic reasoning by using
videos instead of images, requiring models to learn both
physical and causal relationships [8]. The same paper also
introduced the Neuro-Symbolic Dynamic Reasoning (NS-DR)
model, which achieved state-of-the-art performance on the
CLEVRER dataset, dramatically outperforming traditional,
non-symbolic approaches to video reasoning. In early 2021,
the same MIT researchers released the Dynamic Concept
Learner (DCL) [11], which achieved a new state-of-the-art for
the CLEVRER dataset by adding learned features for object
behavior over time and using new training techniques. The
DCL has also been shown to generalize well to new datasets
for video question answering [11].
The neuro-symbolic Neural Logic Machine (NLM) re-
search was conducted by a collaboration between Google
Inc., ByteDance Inc., and Tsinghua University [9]. The re-
sulting NLM architecture provides a state-of-the-art method
for solving general application tasks such as array sorting,
critical path ﬁnding, and more complex tasks such as Blocks
World [12]. Blocks World is a classic symbolic reasoning
problem where the model is given a set number of blocks
and logical rules. Using the provided generalized rules, the
model will need to perform the available logical actions to
achieve the desired target result from the randomized starting
layout. Following the neuro-symbolic work from Jiayuan Mao
et al. introduced the concept learner for interpreting scenes,
words, and sentences from natural supervision (NS-CL) [13].
This NS-CL model utilized similar neuro-symbolic reasoning
modules to build an object-based scene for the system to infer.
The visual reasoning of the NS-CL model generalized tasks
using new object attributes and properties with scaling rule
sets which is supportive of the NLM work.
As mentioned in the introduction, the NS-DR and NSCL
models are composed of independent submodels. Many of
these are neural models similar to those already deployed
in data centers, covering tasks such as natural language and
image processing [14] [15]. While the approximate perfor-
mance proﬁles for some of these submodels is already known,
the renewed interest in symbolic AI is relatively recent,
and combining symbolic execution with neural networks is
quite novel. NLM takes a different approach, integrating its
symbolic and neural components, and does not contain any
submodels. The ﬁeld is still growing and evolving rapidly;
to the best of our knowledge, there is no prior work which
analyzes neuro-symbolic workloads.
III. M ODEL OVERVIEW
A. Neuro-Symbolic Concept Learner
The Neuro-Symbolic Concept Learner (NSCL) was de-
signed for the CLEVR dataset [19]. CLEVR is a dataset for
”image reasoning”: images are presented to the model, along
with a set of related questions, and the model’s outputs are the