6) Embedding Lookups: Embeddings are a way of trans-
forming data indices or high-dimensional one-hot vectors into
low-dimensional learned vectors. In practice, during inference,
embeddings function as lookup tables. The irregular memory
access patterns of embedding lookups and the large sizes of
embedding tables make acceleration a challenge. Tradition-
ally, embedding lookups are latency-sensitive, memory-bound
operations for inference [27].
7) Data Movement: Many types of operations require sub-
stantial data movement but little or no computation. This
primarily consists of host-device and device-host transfers;
we also include operations such as tensor duplication and
assignment.
8) Data Transformation: The last category of operations
we identify is data transformation: operations which reshape
or subsample data. This includes matrix transposes, tensor
reordering, and masked selection. We also include coalescing
in this category, which is a process in which duplicate entries
for the same coordinates in a sparse matrix are eliminated by
summing their associated values [28].
V. R ESULTS
In this section, we present and discuss results for the indi-
vidual submodels introduced in Section IV. We ﬁrst present
and discuss the performance characterizations of the individ-
ual submodels, then discuss the aggregate inference runtime
behavior of the NSCL, NS-DR, and NLM models.
A. Image and Video Frame Parser
Mask R-CNN, the video frame parser, has a well-studied
performance proﬁle that is dominated by convolution and
activation functions [20]. As mentioned in Section III, we
used Detectron2 due to difﬁculties bringing up the version of
Mask R-CNN used in the NS-DR paper. Mobile-optimized,
production ready implementations of Detectron2 models are
provided by the d2go project [29], which we used to collect re-
alistic performance measurements for Mask R-CNN inference
latency. The pretrained model we used was nottrained on the
CLEVR or CLEVRER dataset, as there is no pretrained model,
model source, or training instructions for CLEVRER, and we
wanted to use the same submodel for both the NSCL and
NS-DR. However, we do not anticipate that the performance
characteristics of the model would be any different if it were
trained for a different dataset, particularly since the runtime
of this model does not signiﬁcantly vary with the number of
objects in the input image.
Our analysis of Detectron2, as shown in Table III and
Figure 6, shows that Mask R-CNN spends the most execution
time on convolution and element-wise operations (such as
activation functions and normalization). This is not particularly
surprising, but serves as a simple example of our classiﬁcation
scheme. With an average 34.6ms inference time on our target
machine, a full 25-frame video requires 865ms of inference
time for the CLEVRER dataset. Thus, the NS-DR video frame
parser takes dramatically longer than the NSCL image parser.B. Question Parser
NLP models such as Seq2Seq, the original question parser
in the NS-DR, are a well-established family, having seen
datacenter deployments since at least 2016 [30]. However,
transformer-based attention models, such as the OpenNMT
model we proﬁled, typically outperform RNN-based models
such as Seq2Seq, and have seen wider adoption since 2017
[31].
The amount of computation required to perform inference
for an NMT model is dependent on the input sequence length.
Sentences in the CLEVR dataset have an average length of
18.4 words. The CLEVRER dataset is split between open-
ended questions with an average length of 10.9 words and
multiple-choice questions with an average length of 51.3
words (counting the answer choices), for an overall average
of 22.2 words.
Figure 6 shows that the performance of the transformer-
based OpenNMT model is dominated by dense matrix
multiplication and data movement. The OpenNMT model
performed inference in an average of 13.5ms per input
word/token. In practice, the runtime of a transformer model
asymptotically grows quadratically with input sequence length
[32], but we observed a linear relation on sample input
sentences. It is likely that, for the relatively short lengths
of the inputs we were observing, linear per-word operations
dominated the quadratic attention operations.
C. Dynamics Predictor
PropNet, the neural dynamics predictor, spends the majority
of its runtime on data movement. In fact, while analyzing
the behavior of this model using the nvidia-smi utility,
we noticed it was rarely able to exceed 50% utilization of
one GPU. The model also spends a substantial amount of
time on coalescing, which entails merging duplicate entries
in sparse tensors. It is unclear to what extent this coalescing
could be avoided through better-optimized code. A substantial
portion of the remaining runtime is spent on dense matrix
multiplication. This is because the workload involves the
multiplication of many very tall and skinny matrices, where m
andnare quite large, but kmay be as small as 1. As discussed
in Section IV, these types of matrices are challenging to
multiply efﬁciently.
Internally, this model consists of several smaller fully-
connected and convolutional networks. Some of these models
must be run multiple times for a single frame in order to
compute the propagation of forces. This contributes to this
model’s large amount of data movement and generally long
runtime. The data movement of this model could be reduced by
leveraging sparsity and weight reuse; since the same submodel
is used for inference many times, it is wasteful to move over
the weights for each inference.
Some tensor dimensions are input-dependent, corresponding
to the number of objects in the frame. We also observed sub-
stantial variation in inference runtimes. Across 400 samples,
the fastest inference ﬁnished in 1.8 seconds, and the slowest
in 5.3 seconds, with an average of 3.4 seconds.