Fig. 3. An example of the tokenized representation of a question in
the CLEVRER dataset. ”Noun/Adjective” tokens - features - have white
backgrounds, while ”verb” tokens - actions - are shaded. Arrows show the
dependencies for token processing [8].
C. Neural Logic Machines
The Neural Logic Machine (NLM) is a neuro-symbolic
architecture that applies both inductive learning and logic
reasoning to an object’s relations, properties, quantiﬁers, and
logic connectives in order to accomplish the task of gener-
alization. Unlike most traditional networks, NLMs are able
to achieve perfect generalization in various tasks such as
family tree decisions, sorting of arrays, ﬁnding the shortest
path between points, or playing the Blocks World task. The
NLM architecture provides the ability to solve historically
challenging tasks that traditional neural network architectures
struggle to complete. The challenge of generalization of tasks
from small scale to large scale are proven to be overcome using
NLM. Figure 4 shows an illustration for the NLM framework.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
We used function-level proﬁling to capture statistics such
as runtimes, invocation counts and tensor sizes. We then
developed a post-processing tool to partition the proﬁling
results into eight dominant categories of operations.
A. Experimental Methodology
The characterization of all GPU workloads
was performed using the built-in PyTorch proﬁler
(torch.autograd.profiler ). This proﬁler collects
CPU and GPU runtimes at a per-function granularity,
differentiating between ”total” runtime (including sub-
functions) and ”self” runtime (excluding sub-functions). In
most cases, this proﬁling introduced some overhead, and in a
few cases, it appeared to capture its own post-run analysis as
overhead. We have compensated for this to the extent possible
by comparing runs with and without the proﬁler enabled.
Since the symbolic executor for the NS-DR is a ﬁxed-
function, CPU-only model, it can not be effectively analyzed
using the PyTorch proﬁler. Instead, we used Python’s cProﬁle
module to get per-function execution times. The cProﬁle
module has several limitations when compared to the PyTorch
proﬁler - for instance, it does not proﬁle GPU activity, and
does not report input tensor sizes. However, these limitations
have no impact on scalar, CPU-only code.Data collection was performed on a system with two In-
tel Xeon E5-2698 v3 processors (totaling 32 cores and 64
threads), 128GB of DDR4 memory at 2133MHz, and two
NVIDIA Tesla M40s. However, most models were only single-
threaded, and were only able to make efﬁcient use of a single
GPU for inference.
B. Workload Taxonomy
Since simply reporting per-function proﬁling results would
require us to discuss an overwhelming number of individual
functions, we devised a function classiﬁcation scheme to
partition the data into eight dominant categories of operations.
We drew inspiration for this classiﬁcation from the Berkeley
”seven dwarfs” [23]: a mid-2000s effort to identify what were
then the most crucial kernels for parallel computing. In fact,
some of our categories are identical to Berkeley ”dwarfs”, but
we identify several others that also appear highly relevant to
the workloads discussed in this paper and/or machine learning
more generally. Given the wide diversity of models in modern
AI research, we do not claim that our classiﬁcation scheme
is universally applicable. However, we do hope to show that
workload classiﬁcation schemes are valuable for exploring the
differences between models.
1) Dense Matrix Multiplication: Fast, efﬁcient dense matrix
multiplication (GEMM) remains a critical requirement for
large DL models. Fully-connected layers in neural networks
use GEMM as their primary mathematical operation, often
with very large input matrices.
Multiplication of large, dense matrices is very computation-
ally intensive: the work to multiply a mkmatrix with
akmmatrix W=O(mnk). At the same time, data
intensity only grows quadratically with input size: given the
two input matrices and mnoutput matrix, the data intensity
Q=O(mk+kn+mn) =O(max( mk; kn; mn )). This gives
an operational intensity of:
I=W
Q=O(mkn)
O(max( mk; kn; mn ))=O(min( m; k; n ))
When m,k, and nare all large, operational intensity can
be very high. Since there are no internal dependencies in
matrix multiplication (the multiply-and-add operations can be
performed in any order), the multiplication of large, roughly-
square matrices is highly parallelizable. The challenge emerges
when any one of the dimensions is small relative to the other
two; in this case, the operational intensity approaches O(1),
requiring highly efﬁcient data movement to avoid becoming
memory-bound. Such ”tall-and-skinny” matrices are difﬁcult
to process efﬁciently on GPUs [24]. While operational in-
tensity can sometimes be addressed by processing multiple
inputs simultaneously via batching, this may not be an option
for latency-sensitive inference operations where input must
be processed as soon as it is received. An extreme case of
tall-and-skinny GEMM is the multiplication of a matrix by
a vector, as an n-element vector can be viewed as an n1
matrix.