INSIGHTS   |  PERSPECTIVES
sciencemag.org   SCIENCEBy Shimon Ullman
When the mathemati -
cian Alan Turing posed 
the question “Can ma -
chines think?” in the first line of his seminal 
1950 paper that ush
-
ered in the quest for artificial intelligence 
(AI) (1), the only known systems carrying 
out complex computations were biological 
nervous systems. It is not surprising, there -
fore, that scientists in the nascent field of AI turned to brain circuits as a source for 
guidance. One path that was taken since 
the early attempts to perform intelligent computation by brain-like circuits (2), and 
which led recently to remarkable successes, 
can be described as a highly reductionist approach to model cortical circuitry. In its 
basic current form, known as a “deep net
-
work” (or deep net) architecture, this brain-
inspired model is built from successive 
layers of neuron-like elements, connected 
by adjustable weights, called “synapses,” after their biological counterparts (3). The 
application of deep nets and related meth
-
ods to AI systems has been transformative. 
They proved superior to previously known 
methods in central areas of AI research, 
including computer vision, speech recogni -
tion and production, and playing complex games. Practical applications are already 
in broad use, in areas such as computer vi
-
sion and speech and text translation, and 
large-scale efforts are under way in many 
other areas. Here, I discuss how additional 
aspects of brain circuitry could supply cues for guiding network models toward broader 
aspects of cognition and general AI.
The key problem in deep nets is learning, 
which is the adjustment of the synapses to produce the desired outputs to their input 
patterns. The adjustment is performed au
-
tomatically based on a set of training exam -
ples, which are provided by input patterns coupled with their desired outputs. The 
learning process then adjusts the weights 
to produce the desired outputs to the train
-ing input patterns. Successful learning will cause the network to go beyond memoriz
-
ing the training examples, and be able to generalize, and provide correct outputs to 
new input patterns, which were not en
-
countered during the learning process.
Comparisons of deep network models 
with empirical physiological, functional 
magnetic resonance imaging, and behav -
ioral data have shown some intriguing simi -
larities between brains and the new models (4), as well as dissimilarities (5) (see the 
figure). In comparisons with the primate 
visual system, similarities between physi
-
ological and model responses were closer for the early compared with later parts of 
the neuronal responses, suggesting that the 
deep network models may capture better the early processing stages, compared with 
later, more cognitive stages.
In addition to deep nets, AI models re
-
cently incorporated another major aspect 
of brain-like computations: the use of re -
inforcement learning (RL), where reward signals in the brain are used to modify 
behavior. Brain mechanisms involved in 
this form of learning have been studied extensively (6), and computational models 
(7) have been used in areas of AI, in par
-
ticular in robotics applications. RL is used 
in the context of an agent (a person, ani -
mal, or robot) behaving in the world, and receiving reward signals in return. The 
goal is to learn an optimal “policy,” which 
is a mapping from states to actions, so as to maximize an overall measure of the reward 
obtained over time. RL methods have been 
combined in recent AI algorithms with deep network methods, applied in particular to 
game playing, ranging from popular video 
games to highly complex games such as chess, Go, and shogi. Combining deep nets 
with RL produced stunning results in game 
playing, including convincing defeats of the world’s top Go players, or reaching a world-
champion level in chess after ~4 hours of 
training, starting from just the rules of the game, and learning from games played in
-
ternally against itself (8).
From the standpoint of using neurosci -
ence to guide AI, this success is surpris -
ing, given the highly reduced form of the network models compared with cortical 
circuitry. Some additional brain-inspired 
aspects, for example, normalization across neuronal groups, or the use of spatial at
-
tention, have been incorporated into deep network models, but in general, almost 
everything that we know about neurons—
their structure, types, interconnectivity, and so on—was left out of deep-net models in 
their current form. It is currently unclear 
which aspects of the biological circuitry are computationally essential and could also be 
useful for network-based AI systems, but 
the differences in structure are prominent. For example, biological neurons are highly 
complex and diverse in terms of their mor
-
phology, physiology, and neurochemistry. 
The inputs to a typical excitatory pyrami -
dal neuron are distributed over complex, highly branching basal and apical dendritic 
trees. Inhibitory cortical neurons come in 
a variety of different morphologies, which are likely to perform different functions. 
None of this heterogeneity and other com
-
plexities are included in typical deep-net 
models, which use instead a limited set of 
highly simplified homogeneous artificial 
neurons. In terms of connectivity between units in the network, cortical circuits in the 
brain are more complex than current deep 
network models and include rich lateral connectivity between neurons in the same 
layer, by both local and long-range connec
-
tions, as well as top-down connections go -
ing from high to low levels of the hierarchy 
of cortical regions, and possibly organized 
in typical local “canonical circuits.”
The notable successes of deep network–
based learning methods, primarily in prob -
lems related to real-world perceptual data 
such as vision and speech, have recently been 
followed by increasing efforts to confront 
problems that are more cognitive in nature. For example, in the domain of vision, net
-
work models were developed initially to deal with perceptual problems such as object clas
-
sification and segmentation. Similar meth -
ods, with some extensions, are now being applied to higher-level problems such as im
-
age captioning, where the task is to produce a short verbal description of an image, or to the 
domain of visual question answering, where 
the task is to produce adequate answers to queries posed in natural language (that is, 
human communication) about the content 
of an image. Other, nonvisual tasks include judging humor, detecting sarcasm, or captur
-
ing aspects of intuitive physics or social un -
derstanding. Similar methods are also being developed for challenging real-world applica
-
tions such as online translation, flexible per -
sonal assistants, medical diagnosis, advanced robotics, or automatic driving.
With these large research efforts, and the NEUROSCIENCE
Using neuroscience to develop 
artificial intelligence
Combining deep learning with brain-like innate structures 
may guide network models toward human-like learning 
Department of Computer Science, Weizmann, Institute of 
Science, Rehovot, Israel. Email: shimon.ullman@weizmann.ac.il
692    15 FEBRUARY 2019 • VOL 363 ISSUE 6428