SCIENCE   sciencemag.orgGRAPHIC: C. BICKEL/ SCIENCEhuge funds invested in future AI applica -
tions, a major open question is the degree 
to which current approaches will be able to 
produce “real” and human-like understand -
ing, or whether additional, perhaps radi -
cally different, directions will be needed to 
deal with broad aspects of cognition, and 
artificial general intelligence (AGI) (9, 10). 
The answers to this question are unknown, 
and the stakes are high, both scientifically 
and commercially.
If the success of current deep network 
models in producing human-like cognitive abilities proves to be limited, a natural place 
to look for guidance is again neuroscience. Can aspects of brain circuitry, overlooked 
in AI models so far, provide a key to AGI? 
Which aspects of the brain are likely to be 
particularly important? There are at pres
-
ent no obvious answers, because our under -
standing of cortical circuitry is still limited, 
but I will briefly discuss a general aspect by 
which brains and deep network models ap -
pear to be fundamentally different and that 
is likely to have an important functional role 
in the quest for human-like AGI. The differ -
ence centers on the age-old question about 
the balance between empiricism and nativ -
ism in cognition, namely, the relative roles of innate cognitive structures and general 
learning mechanisms. Current AI modeling 
leans heavily toward the empiricist side, us
-
ing relatively simple and uniform network structures, and relying primarily on ex
-
tended learning, using large sets of train -
ing data. By contrast, biological systems often accomplish complex behavioral tasks with limited training, building upon spe
-
cific preexisting network structures already encoded in the circuitry prior to learning. 
For example, different animal species, in
-
cluding insects, fish, and birds, can perform 
complex navigation tasks relying in part on 
an elaborate set of innate domain-specific 
mechanisms with sophisticated computa -
tional capabilities. In humans, infants start to develop complex perceptual and cognitive 
skills in the first months of life, with little 
or no explicit training. For example, they spontaneously recognize complex objects 
such as human hands, follow other peoples’ 
direction of gaze, and distinguish visually whether animated characters are helping 
or hindering others, and a variety of other 
tasks, which exhibit an incipient under
-
standing of physical and social interactions. A large body of developmental studies have 
suggested that this fast, unsupervised learn
-
ing is possible because the human cognitive 
system is equipped, through evolution, with 
basic innate structures that facilitate the ac -
quisition of meaningful concepts and cogni -
tive skills (11, 12).
The superiority of human cognitive 
learning and understanding compared with 
existing deep network models may largely result from the much richer and complex 
innate structures incorporated in the hu
-
man cognitive system. Recent modeling of 
visual learning in infancy (13) has shown a 
useful combination of learning and innate 
mechanisms, where meaningful complex concepts are neither innate nor learned on 
their own. The innate components in this intermediate view are not developed con
-
cepts, but simpler “proto concepts,” which 
provide internal teaching signals and guide 
the learning system along a path that leads 
to the progressive acquisition and organiza -
tion of complex concepts, with little or no explicit training. For example, it was shown 
how a particular pattern of image motion 
can provide a reliable internal teaching signal for hand recognition. The detection 
of hands, and their engagement in object 
manipulation, can in turn guide the learn
-
ing system toward detecting direction of gaze, and detecting gaze targets is known 
to play a role in learning to infer people’s 
goals (14). Such innate structures could be implemented by an arrangement of local 
cortical regions with specified initial con
-
nectivity, supplying inputs and error signals 
to specific targets.
Useful preexisting structures could also be 
adopted in artificial network models to make their learning and understanding more hu
-
man-like. The challenge of discovering use -
ful preexisting structures can be approached by either understanding and mimicking re
-
lated brain mechanisms, or by developing computational learning methods that start 
“from scratch” and discover structures that 
support an agent, human or artificial, that learns to understand its environment in an 
efficient and flexible manner. Some attempts 
have been made in this direction (15), but in general, the computational problem of 
“learning innate structures” is different from 
current learning procedures, and it is poorly understood. Combining the empirical and 
computational approaches to the problem is 
likely to benefit in the long run both neuro
-
science and AGI, and could eventually be a component of a theory of intelligent process
-
ing that will be applicable to both. j
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1.  A. M. T uring, Mind 59, 433 (1950). 
 2.  F. Rosenblatt, Psychol. Rev. 65, 386 (1958).  
 3.  Y. LeCun et al., Nature 521, 436 (2015).  
 4.  N. J. Majaj et al., J. Neurosci. 35, 13402 (2015).  
 5.  R. Rajalingham et al., J. Neurosci. 38, 7255 (2018).  
 6.  D. Lee et al., Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 35, 287 (2012).  
 7 .  R. S. Sutton et al., Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction 
(MIT Press, 1998).
 8.  D. Silver et al., Nature 550, 354 (2017).  
 9.  D. Hassabis et al., Neuron 95, 245 (2017).  
 10.  B. M. Lake et al., Behav. Brain Sci. 40, e253 (2017). 
 11.  E. S. Spelke, K. D. Kinzler, Dev. Sci.  10, 89 (2007).  
 12.  S. Carey, The Origin of Concepts (Oxford Univ. Press, New 
Y ork, 2009).
 13.  S. Ullman et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109 , 18215 
(2012).  
 14.  A. T . Phillips et al., Cognition 85, 53 (2002).  
 15.  E. Real et al., Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning, PMLR 
70, 2902 (2017).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Supported by European Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework 785907 (HBP SGA2). S. U. thanks colleagues at the Center 
for Minds, Brains and Machines at Massachusetts Institute of 
T echnology for helpful discussions.
10.1126/science.aau6595
Brain circuitry and learning 
A major open question is whether the highly simpli/f_ied structures of current network models compared with 
cortical circuits are suﬃcient to capture the full range of human-like learning and cognition.
Input
layerAdjustable synapse Output
layer1 2 3
Complex neural network
Connectivity in cortical networks includes rich sets of connections, including local and long-range lateral connectivity, and top-down connections from high to low levels of the hierarchy.Informed AI networkBiological innate connectivity patterns provide mechanisms that guide human cognitive learning. Discovering similar mechanisms, by machine learning or by mimicking the human brain, may prove crucial for 
future arti/f_icial systems with human-like cognitive abilities.
 
15 FEBRUARY 2019 • VOL 363 ISSUE 6428     693Brain circuitry and learning 
A major open question is whether the highly simplified structures of current network models compared  
with cortical circuits are sufficient to capture the full range of human-like learning and cognition.