1767 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1765–1777 
1 3
the radiographs are extracted and the relevant features are 
then selected using a modified Social Group Optimization 
(SGO) algorithm which we call Hybrid SGO algorithm 
(HSGO). The features selected using HSGO were then 
used in classifying the radiographs using the support vector 
classifier (SVC), K-nearest neighbor (KNN), decision tree 
(DT), and random forest (RF).
Towards the development of an improved, reliable and 
accurate pipeline, the current work can be summarized 
through the following highlights: 
1. A model is proposed to classify COVID-19 infected 
patients from their CXR images.
2. The model is trained and tested on open dataset of 
COVID-19 infected CXR images sourced from Kaggle 
[31–33].
3. Hybrid Social Group Optimization algorithm is 
proposed which is used to select features from the CXR 
images.
4. The selected feature set is then used to classify the CXR 
images using various classifiers.
5. The proposed model achieves an accuracy of 99.65% 
using the Support Vector Classifier.
6. Deep learning counterparts had a maximum accuracy of 
99.27%.
7. The proposed method has a higher accuracy and 
significantly lower training time compared to any 
available state-of-the-art deep learning algorithms.
The remainder of the article is organized as follows: Section  2 
depicts the related works, the proposed method is described in 
Section  3, Section  4 details the experimentation process and 
results, followed by Section  5 which concludes the work and 
finally Section  6 highlights the possible future developments.
Related Works
Since early 2020, several studies have been reported in 
the literature highlighting the shortcomings of RT-PCR 
testing, which includes a high false-negatives rate [34] 
and a short window for detection. In this public health 
emergency where the number of cases is increasing 
every day, the low sensitivity and the high rate of false-
negatives means that patients will not be identified 
accurately, which hampers the chance of receiving 
appropriate treatment. The infected people, also run the 
risk of infecting others, thereby compounding the threat. 
In [35] the authors have conducted a thorough study on 
the spread and fatality rate of the pandemic, showing 
how fatality can be greatly reduced by minimizing the 
exposure of vulnerable groups to COVID-19.The Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the chest 
is one of the most important methods in the diagnosis 
of pneumonia. Ai et al. showed a strong correlation 
between chest CT scans and RT-PCR test results in the 
identification of COVID-19 [36]. Apostolopoulos and 
Mpesiana [37] have proposed an automated COVID-
19 detection system that utilizes CXR scans of the 
patient’s chest to diagnose the disease by using transfer 
learning with convolutional neural network (CNN). Some 
researchers have also shown CNN to be a great tool for 
identification of COVID-19 from CXR radiographs [38]. 
In [39], authors have suggested anti-aliased convolutional 
networks for detection of lung diseases. Also, a number 
of reported work have shown that chest CT scans are an 
important tool in COVID-19 diagnosis [9 , 40–42].
Evolutionary algorithms have always played a critical 
role in medical image analysis by reducing the overall 
computation required by intensive DL or ML algorithms. 
Rundo et al. [43] surveyed the literature for the state-of-
art of nature-inspired medical images analysis methods 
focusing on bio-medical data integration. Mostafa et al. 
[44] used whale optimization algorithm to segment liver 
from MRI scans by extracting features from different 
segments of the image with an accuracy of 97.5%. 
Woźniak et al. [45] used several bio-inspired algorithms 
to successfully detect pulmonary diseases from CXR 
images. The authors obtained the best accuracy of 
82.22% using the particle swarm optimization algorithm. 
González-Patiño et al. [46] proposed a novel bio-inspired 
method based on bat algorithm for early identification 
of breast cancer by analyzing mammographic images 
with an accuracy of 97.42%. Hemanth and Anitha [47] 
proposed a modified genetic algorithm to classify brain 
images from four different classes with a final accuracy 
of 98%. Agrawal et al. [48] proposed a hybrid adaptive 
cuckoo search-squirrel search algorithm to analyze 
Brain MRI scans by obtaining optimal multi-level 
thresholds using maximization of the edge magnitude 
information. Wachs-Lopes et al. [49] discusses seven 
recent bio-inspired algorithms over multi-thresholding 
segmentation of medical images. The algorithms were 
tested for a range of values of non-extensivity parameter 
(‘q’), which is an essential parameter for Tsallis entropy. 
The firefly algorithm had the best performance and the 
Grey Wolf Optimizer with the fastest convergence.
There have been a number of studies on COVID-
19 using CXR images, Ozturk et  al. [50] proposed 
DarkCOVIDNet using CNN and DarkNet, 2-D convolution 
and Max Pooling for identification of COVID-19 from 
CXR images. The accuracy achieved by this model was 
98.08%. Toğaçar et al. [51] used social mimic optimization 
along with SqueezeNet and MobileNetV2 deep learning