1770 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1765–1777
1 3
the grayscale method. In case of Bi-level mode the final accuracy 
was considerably lower as many details required to classify an 
image were lost in conversion, whereas Palette and RGB mode 
both preserved the details but the number of features extracted 
was excessive for the problem at hand. Thus, using Grayscale 
mode the lung CXRs were converted and a total of 10,000 features 
were extracted from each one. The extracted feature pool was then 
subjected to feature selection, as described in subsequent sections.
Feature Selection
In this section, we discuss feature selection from the 
extracted dataset using the proposed HSGO algorithm. This 
step is essential for reducing computational costs and also 
boosts accuracy. The feature selection method is based on 
the SGO algorithm, which is described below.
Social Group Optimization (SGO)
The SGO algorithm, proposed by Satapathy and Naik [60], 
is a meta-heuristic model based on population behavior that 
is inspired by the human group’s ability to solve a complex 
problem. It is based on the observation that a group’s prob-
lem-solving capability is better than an individual’s problem-
solving ability as it exploits every member’s unique traits to 
solve a complex problem. Every person in the population is 
a candidate solution that has some knowledge about the solu-
tion to the given problem. The person with the best solution 
in the population imparts its knowledge to others, thereby 
increasing the overall knowledge of the entire population.
Mathematically, the SGO algorithm can be expressed as: 
let N be the number of persons in the population and each 
person is defined as Pi=(x1,x2,x3,⋯,xD) where D  is the 
number of features which uniquely define a person. The 
features of every person need to be optimized to yield the 
best solution to the problem. For a given problem, the fitness 
function can be defined as fi where 0<i<N for every person 
in the population.
Improving Phase  Every person acquires some 
knowledge from the best person by the following function: 
xi,j(new)= c×xi,j(old)+r×(gbestj−xi,j(old)) here, gbestj 
is the population’s best person, i.e., person with the best fitness 
value, c is the self-introspection factor, r  is any random value 
0<r<1 , and xi,j(new)  is the j th feature for the i th person in 
the population which is accepted if it gives better fitness value.
Acquiring Phase  Every person in the population 
learns from random persons in the population and from 
the population’s best person by the following function: 
xi,j(new)= xi,j(old)+r 1×(xr,j−xi,j)+r 2×(gbestj−xi,j) 
where xi,j(old ) is the initial value of the j th feature for the i th 
person in the population, gbestj is the population’s best person, i.e., person with the best fitness value, c  is the self-introspection 
factor, r1 and r 2 are any random values 0<r1,r2<1 , and 
xi,j(new)  is the j th feature for the i th person in the population 
which is accepted if it gives better fitness value.
Hybrid Social Group Optimization (HSGO)
The HSGO algorithm is an improved version of the SGO 
algorithm, which has been developed to select optimal 
features from a feature pool. By following a wrapper-based 
approach, HSGO gives the optimal feature set in considerably 
fewer iterations. Theoretically, both SGO and HSGO should 
eventually give the optimal feature set but in our experiments 
HSGO outperforms SGO and other conventional feature 
selection methods by selecting a markedly smaller feature 
set which also gives a noticeably better accuracy. Table  1 
compares HSGO with SGO and other conventional methods. 
This improvement can be attributed to addition of a random 
factor which helps HSGO to overcome local minima or maxima 
traps, when compared to the traditional SGO algorithm. The 
SGO algorithm when used for feature selection, tends to yield 
the same results after a few generations of notable improvement 
in the population. The effect of this random factor is evident 
especially when the number of features in the dataset are high 
( >1000  ). The random factor is obtained by introducing a 
new step called the Mutation phase, this phase is explained 
in Algorithm  1. Algorithm  2 shows the proposed HSGO 
algorithm which can be broadly divided to the following steps.
Table 1  Comparison of Feature Selection Methods
Selection Method Features 
SelectedAccuracy (%) Classifier Used
Hybrid SGO 116 99.65 SVC
SGO 254 99.31 SVC
KPCA 500 99.31 SVC
PCA 511 99.31 SVC