1766 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1765–1777
1 3
end of January 2021, according to statistics of the European 
Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, there have been 
almost 100 million confirmed cases worldwide with more 
than 2 million confirmed deaths as seen in Fig.  2. The 
mortality rates depend heavily on the age of the patients 
and prior medical conditions.
The prodrome of COVID-19 generally appears after an 
incubation period of 5-6 days. The most common symptoms 
of COVID-19 onset are: fever, cough, and fatigue, while in 
some cases, the patient may also have a headache, excess 
sputum, and diarrhea [ 7]. Particularly, in severe cases, 
this disease often causes pneumonia leading to oxygen 
deprivation, thereby damaging the body’s vital organs 
which results in fatal issues such as, kidney failure, heart 
failure, and other life-threatening complications. But a large 
number of reported cases show only mild symptoms and can 
be efficiently treated and managed. Studies reported that the 
patients with severe symptoms tend to be older in age and 
had multiple comorbidities such as cardiovascular, digestive 
or respiratory diseases [8 ].
The outbreak has caused a major stir worldwide and has 
led to strict lockdown and social distancing measures being 
implemented in every affected country. Even developed 
countries find it difficult to cope with the ongoing demand 
for intensive care units which are essential to support 
patients with severe cases of COVID-19. There is also a crisis for testing kits as the number of cases has started to 
pile up due to the virulence of the disease [9 ]. According to 
the latest guidelines, the testing method for COVID-19 is the 
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
The test uses a respiratory sample that can be obtained by 
using a nasopharyngeal swab or sputum sample [ 10]. The 
RT-PCR test is reliable in the virulent period of the first 
week of infection but as time passes the virus might not 
appear in the throat as it completely moves down to the lungs 
and keeps multiplying. In this case, the coughed-up sputum 
samples are used to test [10].
Over the last few months, many researchers have been 
actively contributing towards methodological development 
for early COVID-19 detection and screening.   This has 
been possible due to the recent developments of artificial 
intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML)-based tools 
and techniques which have also been applied successfully 
to other tasks such as anomaly detection [12– 14], 
biological data mining [15, 16], cyber security [17], disease 
detection [18– 20], earthquake prediction [21], financial 
prediction [ 22], text analytics [ 23, 24] and urban planning 
[25].  Several AI and ML  driven approaches have been 
developed to support COVID-19 [26] through analyzing 
lung images acquired by means of Computed Tomography 
(CT) [ 9], CXR [11][27], safeguarding workers in workplaces 
[28], identifying symptoms using fuzzy systems [29], 
and supporting hospitals using robots [30]. Many of the 
proposed solutions are based on computationally extensive 
deep learning (DL) models which are highly complex in 
nature and often have unreasonable computational costs.
The previously proposed DL models require extensive 
amounts of data in order to be trained, which could be 
difficult to obtain, in case of pandemic such as COVID-19. 
Hence, we require a robust solution that can work on small 
dataset and has comparable or higher accuracy than state-of-
the-art DL models. Therefore, by using the inherent property 
of evolutionary algorithms of managing the smaller datasets 
with abridged computational complexity and relatively higher 
accuracy, we have developed a model which can be trained 
with smaller datasets and still yield respectable metrics.
In this paper, we propose a pipeline that uses CXR images 
to detect the COVID-19. In this pipeline the features from SARS-COV -2 and 
Primary host (bat)Direct Contact with 
infected host
Human hostH uman to human/community transmission COVID-19 patientInfected lungDroplets in air and surfac e
Unknown intermetiate 
host
Fig. 1  Block diagram showing SARS-CoV-2 transmission and spreading
0255075100 Covid-19 Cases  (Millions)
Months1      2      3     4      5      6     7      8     9     10    11    12    13
Fig. 2  Number of COVID-19 cases across the globe during the last 
13 months. The bar 13 is for January 2021 with data till January 24, 
2021