1771 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1765–1777 
1 3
Initialization function The initialization function initializes 
each person in the population by making a random array of integer values ranging from 0 to 9 with dimensions (N , D) 
where N is the number of people in population and D  is total 
extracted features. The range of 0 to 9 was chosen to allow 
enough randomness in features of every person in the 
population while at the same time making it much easier to 
trace the learning steps. The initialization and improvement 
process is shown pictorially in Fig.  5.
Fitness function The fitness function used here is the 
classifier which will be used on the optimal subset of features. 
It gives the fitness and the accuracy of the current subset of 
the dataset by assigning fitness values to each person in the 
population after every generation.
where, classifier is the classifier being used, Pi is the i th 
person in the population, and fi is the calculated fitness.
Mutation Phase The purpose of the mutation phase is 
to facilitate continuous improvement in the population by 
constantly introducing a new person whose traits are notably 
different from the persons currently in the population. 
Algorithm  1 shows the mutation phase of the process.
A subset of the dataset is created for each person 
in population, every generation, by selecting only the 
corresponding columns of the dataset where the persons feature 
value is greater than 3. Initially, we selected the columns from 
dataset which had corresponding feature value of 5 or more, but 
it was changed to 3 to get a wide variety of feature subsets in the 
initial population. The subset created is then used to calculate 
accuracy using appropriate classifiers and is gradually improved 
with every generation to give the final selection of features that 
give the best accuracy and minimum computational cost.
The HSGO algorithm selected 116 features out of 10,000 
raw features extracted from lung CXR images. In other words, 
the algorithm selected only 1.16% features from the extracted 
feature set, therefore, filtering out 98.84% of insignificant 
features. Table  1 shows the comparison of various feature 
selection methods used, accuracy obtained using the feature 
subset and the classifier used.
Experimentation and Results
In this section, we discuss the implementation of the HSGO 
algorithm. It comprises of setup specifications along with 
the various parameters used in the algorithm and classifiers.
Dataset
The dataset used in this work was obtained from the 
Kaggle repository ”COVID-19 Radiography Database”. 
The database from this repository consisted of 219 fi=classiﬁer (Pi)