ImprovementFigure 10: ZEPHYR -7Bunlearning across a hy-
perparameter search. RMU is most capable
of reducing WMDP accuracy while preserving
MMLU accuracy. Results obtained with the ini-
tial release of WMDP and unlearning method.
All College
CSComputer
SecurityCollege
BiologyVirology
MMLU Category020406080AccuracyMMLU Subjects That Should Not Be Unlearned
Base RMU (unlearned model) Random ChanceFigure 11: MMLU accuracy of ZEPHYR -7Bwith
RMU .RMU preserves general biology and com-
puter science knowledge. However, it unlearns
too much: it removes introductory virology and
computer security knowledge, indicating unlearn-
ing methods have room for future improvement.
model, suggesting that RMU does not merely mask or hide the information superficially, but rather
causes a substantial alteration that prevents the recall of the unlearned information.
Retain performance. We measure the retain performance by evaluating models’ knowledge on
MMLU and their fluency on MT-Bench.
MMLU evaluation. To be practical, unlearning methods must maintain general knowledge while re-
moving hazardous knowledge. To evaluate whether models retain general knowledge after unlearning,
we reuse the earlier QA evaluation setup for MMLU.
MMLU results. We report accuracy on subject-specific areas in MMLU (Figure 11). In contrast to
other baselines which either fail to reduce performance on WMDP or greatly reduce performance
on MMLU (Figure 10), RMU reduces performance on WMDP while maintaining overall MMLU
accuracy. Moreover, Figure 11 shows that RMU retains performance on MMLU topics related
to biology (college biology) and computer science (college CS), suggesting greater unlearning
precision than the baselines. However, RMU greatly drops performance on the most similar topics to
biosecurity (virology) and cybersecurity (computer security), suggesting the possibility for future
work to improve retention of general capabilities during unlearning. As we use Wikitext as the retain
set,RMU cannot determine exactly what knowledge to unlearn and retain. Thus, we encourage
future work to employ our subject-specific biology and cyber retain sets (Section 4.2) to improve
unlearning precision.
MT-Bench evaluation. Beyond retaining performance on academic multiple-choice questions, un-
learned models should still maintain general conversational and assistant abilities. We evaluate RMU
and all baselines on MT-Bench, a widely used metric for language model conversational fluency and
helpfulness. We again evaluate GPT-4 as an upper bound for benchmark performance.
MT-Bench results. We report the MT-Bench performance of all models in Table 1. RMU roughly
maintains performance on MT-Bench, with the score only decreasing 0.23onZEPHYR -7B,0.06
points on YI-34B, and0.13points on MIXTRAL -8X7B(out of a total possible of 9). Because RMU
still exhibits some degradation on MT-bench, particularly with ZEPHYR -7B, there is a need for further
development of unlearning methods that can retain general assistant capabilities.
5.3 Robustness Evaluation
A primary motivation for unlearning is ensuring that knowledge is irrecoverable, even when subject
to optimization pressure (Schwinn et al., 2024; Lynch et al., 2024). If unlearning is not resilient, the
adversary can still jailbreak the model to access hazardous information after unlearning.
We conduct a qualitative experiment using the GCG adversarial attack (Zou et al., 2023b) to measure
whether dangerous knowledge is recoverable after performing RMU . We sample a single prompt
from each of the WMDP -Bio and WMDP -Cyber datasets, slightly modify it such that the base
12