• Economics: Unlearning on high school macroeconomics and high school microeconomics
while retaining all other categories of MMLU.
•Law: Unlearning on international law and professional law while retaining all other cate-
gories of MMLU.
•Physics: Unlearning on high school physics, conceptual physics, and college physics while
retaining all other categories of MMLU.
We specifically chose these settings to forget topics that were relatively separate from the remainder
of MMLU, and contained a large enough sample size of forget set questions to benchmark on (more
than1,000questions).
We publicly release forget set corpora for all three of these settings. For each subject, a selection of
textbooks with Creative Commons licenses were identified (ranging from high-school to graduate
level). The text from these books was extracted and filtered to a set of paragraph-length chunks.
The beginnings and end matter (table of contents, acknowledgements, index, etc.) of each book
were excluded, as were most equations and exercises. Additional cleaning was performed to remove
citations, links, and other artifacts.
Table 3 demonstrates the results of RMU unlearning for each setting. In the forget column, we report
the accuracy for each setting, aggregated across all topics within the setting. For the retain column,
we include closely related MMLU categories that should not be unlearned – College Mathematics
andHigh School Mathematics for Physics, Jurisprudence for Law, and Econometrics for Economics.
Lastly, we also report the aggregate MMLU performance before and after RMU unlearning.
Unlearning on Physics results in a significant performance drop on College Physics and High School
Physics, and in a small variation on MMLU and Math related areas scores. Similar considerations
hold for the forget, retain and MMLU performance after unlearning on Economics. However, we
observe significant degradation in the Retain set performance while unlearning on Law, demonstrating
the potential for future methods to improve unlearning precision.
Category Forget Retain MMLU (Full)
Base RMU Base RMU Base RMU
Physics 38.8 27.0 34.6 29.2 58.6 57.1
Law 56.7 27.8 71.3 37.0 58.6 54.5
Economics 60.2 27.3 45.6 41.2 58.6 55.0
Table 3: Unlearning results on the MMLU auxiliary benchmark for ZEPHYR -7B.RMU exhibits a
decline in retain set performance for some categories, demonstrating the need for future methods to
improve unlearning precision.
D Broader Impacts of WMDP
We reflect on how WMDP comports with the broader landscape of risk mitigation strategies.
From a policy-making perspective, we hope that WMDP guides the evaluation of hazards posed by
ML systems, such as by informing the National Institutes of Standards and Technology’s AI Risk
Management Framework (NIST, 2023; White House, 2023) or other frameworks. Moreover, WMDP
may serve as risk marker for more stringent policy action. For example, a model scoring above a
particular threshold on WMDP could be flagged for more comprehensive evaluation, such as human
red teaming with biosecurity experts.
Furthermore, unlearning with WMDP may reduce general-purpose capabilities of models in biology
or cybersecurity, which could hamper their utility for defensive, or beneficial, applications in those
areas. Therefore, unlearning should be complemented with other safety interventions, such as
structured access (Section 6.2). This is especially important for cybersecurity, as most cybersecurity
knowledge may be used for both offensive and defensive purposes. For instance, AI progress could
significantly enhance anomaly detection capabilities. This could aid attackers in disguising their
activities to mimic normal usage patterns, but also inform critical infrastructure providers of atypical
behavior that could signify an attack.
28