Answer: WMDP increases the barrier of entry for malicious actors to cause catastrophic
harm. It decreases access to models with hazardous biological or cyber capabilities, reducing
the number of malicious actors with the skill and access to engineer pandemics or launch
cyberattacks on critical infrastructure (Section 3).
3.Diffuse Effects. If this work reduces existential risks indirectly or diffusely, what are the
main contributing factors that it affects?
Answer: Unlearning on WMDP reduces the risks of language model aided cyberattacks,
particularly from low-skilled malicious actors. Cyberattacks, particularly on critical infras-
tructure, could be catastrophic. They are a diffuse contributor to economic turbulence and
political instability (Forum, 2024), which may increase the risk of great power conflict,
which in turn would likely increase the probability of an existential catastrophe. Unlearning
may be applied to prevent other hazardous properties of ML models, such as situational
awareness.
4.What’s at Stake? What is a future scenario in which this research direction could prevent
the sudden, large-scale loss of life? If not applicable, what is a future scenario in which this
research direction be highly beneficial?
Answer: This directly reduces x-risks associated with the malicious use of language models
in developing weapons of mass destruction (Guembe et al., 2022; Gopal et al., 2023; OpenAI,
2024).
5.Result Fragility. Do the findings rest on strong theoretical assumptions; are they not
demonstrated using leading-edge tasks or models; or are the findings highly sensitive to
hyperparameters? □
6.Problem Difficulty. Is it implausible that any practical system could ever markedly outper-
form humans at this task? ⊠
7.Human Unreliability. Does this approach strongly depend on handcrafted features, expert
supervision, or human reliability? □
8.Competitive Pressures. Does work towards this approach strongly trade off against raw
intelligence, other general capabilities, or economic utility? □
E.2 Safety-Capabilities Balance
In this section, please analyze how this work relates to general capabilities and how it affects the
balance between safety and hazards from general capabilities.
9.Overview. How does this improve safety more than it improves general capabilities?
Answer: Unlearning does not improve general capabilities; rather, it removes specific model
capabilities while improving inherent model safety.
10.Red Teaming. What is a way in which this hastens general capabilities or the onset of
x-risks?
Answer: Although WMDP is constructed as a benchmark for measuring and reducing
inherent model hazards, it may inadvertently serve as a roadmap for malicious use, hastening
the onset of x-risks by lowering the barrier for causing catastrophe. To reduce these risks,
we conduct an extensive sensitive information mitigation process (Section 3.5).
11.General Tasks. Does this work advance progress on tasks that have been previously
considered the subject of usual capabilities research? □
12.General Goals. Does this improve or facilitate research towards general prediction, clas-
sification, state estimation, efficiency, scalability, generation, data compression, executing
clear instructions, helpfulness, informativeness, reasoning, planning, researching, optimiza-
tion, (self-)supervised learning, sequential decision making, recursive self-improvement,
open-ended goals, models accessing the Internet, or similar capabilities? □
13.Correlation with General Aptitude. Is the analyzed capability known to be highly predicted
by general cognitive ability or educational attainment? □
14.Safety via Capabilities. Does this advance safety along with, or as a consequence of,
advancing other capabilities or the study of AI? □
30