In biosecurity, however, there exist categories of primarily offensive knowledge that may be unlearned
without significant degradation to defensive capabilities. For instance, knowledge of historical
bioweapons programs may be safely removed from models without significantly affecting knowledge
related to countermeasure development or general-purpose biology. As a result, while both WMDP -
Bio and WMDP -Cyber are both useful measurements of hazardous language model capabilities,
WMDP-Bio may be the most useful tool for risk mitigation via unlearning.
More broadly, there are other strategies, including non-technical strategies, that could be pursued to
mitigate malicious use – such as implementing universal screening of synthetic DNA orders to prevent
the widespread access to pathogen DNA, addressing gaps in the regulation of Select Agents in the
Federal Select Agent Program, and improving oversight of laboratory automation and outsourcing.
D.1 Limitations
WMDP consists of four-way multiple choice questions, potentially neglecting hazards that only
surface in larger end-to-end evaluations. For instance, models that have memorized key biological
concepts from the training data may be equally likely to do well on a particular multiple choice
question as are models that have a true understanding of the underlying concept. Memorized facts
may be particularly over-represented in our biological benchmark since many questions that were
developed were drawn from open-access papers that were likely also included in the model’s training
data. In addition, multiple choice questions only test for whether the model retains hazardous
knowledge; these questions do not test whether the model will reveal that information to the end-user
in a helpful and timely manner during the planning or execution of a nefarious attack. To address
these limitations, future work in this area could include generating questions from scientific papers
that were only released after a model’s training date cutoff, or using other strategies to generate
questions which are difficult to search (Rein et al., 2023; Lála et al., 2023).
WMDP is a static benchmark which cannot anticipate the evolving landscape of cyber and biological
risks, as threats continuously change and new technologies emerge. Moreover, as with any metric,
scores on WMDP do not capture the full extent of malicious use risk. As a result, benchmarking on
only WMDP may yield a false sense of model safety after unlearning. This limitation emphasizes the
need for other safety benchmarks to complement WMDP , especially as new risks emerge over time.
For instance, benchmarks that assess open-ended conversations may be a more promising method to
assess capabilities of future models.
WMDP focuses on reducing risk for API-access models (Section 1); for models with publicly down-
loadable weights, unlearned information can be trivially re-introduced by malicious actors (Lynch
et al., 2024). If open-source models reach similar capabilities to closed-source models in the future,
these risks will remain unaddressed by this work.
E X-Risk Sheet
We provide an analysis of how our paper contributes to reducing existential risk from AI, following
the framework suggested by Hendrycks and Mazeika (2022). Individual question responses do not
decisively imply relevance or irrelevance to existential risk reduction.
E.1 Long-Term Impact on Advanced AI Systems
In this section, please analyze how this work shapes the process that will lead to advanced AI systems
and how it steers the process in a safer direction.
1.Overview. How is this work intended to reduce existential risks from advanced AI systems?
Answer: This work aims to mitigate existential risks posed by the malicious use of LLMs in
developing bioweapons and cyber weapons. WMDP serves both as a metric for evaluating
the presence of hazardous knowledge, and as a benchmark for testing unlearning methods.
We aim to reduce biological malicious use, as the proliferation of bioweapons could increase
the risk of a catastrophic pandemic, potentially causing civilizational collapse (Gopal et al.,
2023).
2.Direct Effects. If this work directly reduces existential risks, what are the main hazards,
vulnerabilities, or failure modes that it directly affects?
29