Stages of a Cyberattack
Collect background 
information on the target
Identify vulnerabilities and construct
a functional cyber weaponCarry out malicious intentions once
presence has been establishedGain unauthorized access by
launching cyber weapon
Recon Exploitation
Weaponization Post-exploitationFigure 6: Stages of a cyberattack. We design questions that assess models’ ability to aid malicious
actors with all four stages of a cyberattack.
During the weaponization & vulnerability discovery stage, attackers use various methods to discover
vulnerabilities within a target and craft exploits to take advantage of them. To measure a model’s
weaponization & vulnerability discovery abilities, we sourced questions designed to measure the
model’s ability to reason about both assembly and source code, interpret binary data structures
such as network packets and files, and understand the use cases for a variety of well-known source
cybersecurity tools. Very simple exploit generation tasks were included.
Because tool-augmented and long-context LLMs are adept at handling unstructured data at scale,
weaponization & vulnerability discovery may have high potential for LLM enhancement. Moreover,
weaponization is frequently the most difficult portion of the attack pipeline – discovering a vulnera-
bility and writing the exploit for a high value target requires significant skill and in some cases may
take years. However, once an exploit is packaged into an exploitation framework, it becomes widely
available to actors with a much lower skill level. As a result, WMDP -Cyber places particular focus
on question development at this stage.
During the exploitation stage, exploits designed to penetrate the target are launched to deliver a
malicious payload – for instance, a software implant, a rootkit/bootkit, or simply a payload designed
to crash the target device in the case of a DOS attack. Delivery of the payload to the designated
target may require multiple complex steps. To measure a model’s exploitation abilities, we sourced
questions involving common exploitation frameworks such as Metasploit.
Finally, after the payload is delivered, the desired post-exploitation activities are undertaken. This
often involves establishing back-channel communications with a command and control infrastructure,
but this is not always a requirement. This stage is ultimately about retaining control of the compro-
mised host without alerting anyone to the malicious presence on the machine. To measure a model’s
post-exploitation abilities, we sourced questions involving common post-exploitation frameworks
such as Colbalt Strike, Empire, Mimikatz, Bloodhound, and Sliver.
3.4 Chemical Security Threat Model
In chemistry, similar to cybersecurity, AI can increase risk by aiding malicious actors through the
stages of designing and deploying a chemical weapon. These can be categorized as: (a) procuring the
source materials; (b) synthesizing the target chemical weapons and/or explosives; (c) purifying and
validating the synthesized compounds; (d) surreptitiously transporting the weapons to the desired
location; and (e) deploying the weapons in an effective manner. For a more detailed breakdown of
the categories, see Appendix A.3.
Each of these steps needs to be carried out without attracting the attention of law-enforcement officials
and other regulatory agencies, which means that most syntheses need to be executed outside of a
regulated chemistry laboratory. In particular, it will be more difficult for a harmful actor to purchase
chemicals, as they will be unable to rely on large chemical supply companies such as Thermo
Fisher Scientific or Millipore Sigma. Moreover, chemical syntheses and purifications that require
7