General Knowledge
Synthesis
Sourcing / Procurement
Puri/f_ication
Analysis / Veri/f_ication
Deployment Mechanisms
Bypassing Detection
MiscellaneousWMDP
Exploitation
Background Knowledge
WeaponizationPost-Exploitation
ReconnaissanceBiology
1,273408
1,9873,668 QuestionsChemistry
CyberViral Vector Research
Dual-use Virology
Expanding AccessBioweapons & Bioterrorism
Reverse Genetics & Easy Editing
Enhanced Potential Pandemic
PathogensFigure 1: The WMDP Benchmark. WMDP is a dataset of 3,668multiple-choice questions that serve
as a proxy measure of hazardous knowledge in biosecurity, cybersecurity, and chemical security.
1 Introduction
Similar to other technologies, such as gene editing and nuclear energy, AI is dual-use —it can be
leveraged for benefit and harm (Urbina et al., 2022). To address its dual-use risks, the White House
Executive Order on Artificial Intelligence (White House, 2023) calls for investigation into the ability
of AI to enable malicious actors in developing chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and cyber
weapons. For instance, AI coding assistants may lower the barrier of entry for novices to conduct
cyberattacks (Fang et al., 2024), potentially increasing the frequency of cyberattacks and the risk
of catastrophe, especially if these attacks directed towards critical infrastructure, such as power
grids (UK Cabinet Office, 2023). Likewise, AI assistants for biology could troubleshoot bottlenecks
in biological weapons development, increasing the frequency of attempts to build a bioweapon and
straining risk mitigation measures (Sandbrink, 2023). This has motivated government institutions
and major AI labs to anticipate risk by designing evaluations for AI-aided biological threats (UK AI
Safety Summit, 2023; Anthropic, 2023; OpenAI, 2024; Mouton et al., 2024; Phuong et al., 2024).
Unfortunately, current evaluations of hazardous capabilities do not provide a guide for mitigating
malicious use risk. For example, developers evaluate whether models can build biological weapons
end-to-end (Sandbrink, 2023) or hack well enough to exfiltrate their own weights (Shevlane et al.,
2023), creating private, manual, and highly-specific evaluations. Because these evaluations test a
small number of specific risk pathways, low performance on them does not guarantee that LLMs
are secure across the broad distribution of malicious use risks. More importantly, such private
benchmarking limits scientific inquiry towards measuring and reducing malicious use.
Developers also lack robust technical solutions to reduce malicious use in LLMs. The primary
safeguard is training models to refuse harmful queries (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Mazeika
et al., 2024), but adversaries can deploy adversarial attacks (Wei et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023b) to by-
pass models’ refusal training. Another proposal is to filter hazardous information from the pretraining
data (Ngo et al., 2021), but adversaries may reintroduce this information through finetuning (Zhan
et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2023; Pelrine et al., 2023). A promising approach for closed-source LLM
providers is unlearning , directly removing hazardous knowledge before model serving (Figure 2).
Unlearned models have higher inherent safety: even if they are jailbroken, unlearned models lack
the hazardous knowledge necessary to enable malicious users (Hendrycks et al., 2021). However,
research into unlearning hazardous knowledge is bottlenecked by the lack of a public benchmark.
To overcome both of these challenges, we introduce the Weapons of MassDestruction Proxy
Benchmark ( WMDP ), a benchmark of 3,668multiple-choice questions costing over $200K to develop
(Figure 1). WMDP is a proxy measurement for hazardous knowledge in biosecurity (Section 3.2),
cybersecurity (Section 3.3), and chemical security (Section 3.4). To design WMDP , academics and
technical consultants created threat models for how LLMs might aid in the development of biological,
2