carefully controlled temperature conditions or exclusion of oxygen from the reaction environment
will be markedly harder to execute effectively outside of the confines of registered, regulated, and
well-stocked chemistry laboratories.
Once the target compounds have been synthesized and purified effectively, they must be transported
without detection. Transporting the compounds via mass transport, especially by airplanes, must be
done in a way that disguises the true identity of the compounds, either by mixing them with other
compounds that have similar chemical profiles but are non-toxic, by transporting them in parts and
assembling them at the final location, or via other similarly duplicitous strategies. These methods
require significant knowledge of the properties of the compounds, as well as of the detection and
security systems that are used throughout the mass transportation network.
Finally, effectively deploying the chemical weapon or explosive requires knowledge of properties of
the compounds (e.g., the vapor pressure, solubility, or density) and how they operate. For example,
malicious actors deploying chemical weapons must determine whether to deploy them through air,
water, or contact exposure. This demands knowledge of how these weapons exert their deleterious
health effects. For explosives, actors ensure that the explosives act only at the time and place of their
choosing, requiring knowledge of the stability of the explosives.
3.5 Sensitive Information Mitigation
We implemented stringent procedures to ensure that no sensitive information is released in WMDP .
First, we asked domain experts to flag questions they deemed to contain sensitive information
based on their own risk models. Flagged questions were immediately excluded from the dataset.
Aggregating opinions from discussions with academics and technical consultants, we identified
that most concerns with sensitive information centered around WMDP -Bio and WMDP -Chem,
so we took additional steps to mitigate sensitive knowledge in those categories. Specifically, we
instituted a policy of “cross-checking” for WMDP -Bio and WMDP -Chem: on each question, two
additional domain experts were tasked with determining whether the question constitutes sensitive
information. Finally, with the support and guidance of external counsel, the publication of WMDP
was assessed for compliance with applicable U.S. export control requirements, including with respect
to the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (22 CFR Parts 120-130) (ITAR, 2024) and Export
Administration Regulations (15 CFR Parts 730-774) (EAR, 2024).
4 RMU: Unlearning Inspired By Representation Engineering
We introduce Representation Misdirection for Unlearning ( RMU ), a finetuning method for unlearning
hazardous knowledge (Algorithm 1). We outline the setup (Section 4.1) and explain our method
(Section 4.2), with further detail in Appendix B.4 and B.5. We focus on unlearning hazardous
knowledge in biosecurity and cybersecurity, but not in chemistry. While WMDP -Chem is a useful
tool for hazard measurement , we are more uncertain if the hazard mitigation benefits of unlearning
on WMDP-Chem outweigh the costs on general model capabilities.
4.1 Setup
We consider an autoregressive language model that accepts a prompt (e.g., “ How can I synthesize
anthrax? ”) and returns a completion (e.g., “ To synthesize anthrax, you need... ”). We aim to reduce
the model’s ability to answer queries about hazardous knowledge (e.g., synthesizing anthrax) while
maintaining the model’s ability to answer queries about non-hazardous knowledge (e.g., culturing
yeast). We operationalize this as reducing a model’s QA accuracy on WMDP while maintaining
performance on general capabilities benchmarks, such as MMLU and MT-Bench.
In contrast to unlearning for copyright or privacy, we do not assume access to questions from WMDP .
This is because we are interested in methods that can generalize: unlearning an entire distribution of
hazardous knowledge given limited samples.
4.2 Method
Classically, language models are trained with a loss on their outputs (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin
et al., 2018). On the other hand, mechanistic interpretability proposes editing models by intervening
8