Unlearning ServingAdversarial Attacks or 
Malicious API Finetuning
Figure 2: Machine unlearning for closed-source models. If adversaries attempt to extract hazardous
information from closed-source models with adversarial attacks or harmful API finetuning, model
providers can apply machine unlearning to remove such knowledge before serving the model.
cyber, and chemical attacks, and generated questions based on these threat models. We adopt a
conservative stance towards including information in WMDP (Figure 3): we primarily include
offensive knowledge, as unlearning defensive knowledge (e.g., biosafety protocols) may prevent
benevolent use cases of LLMs. Simultaneously, we follow a stringent process to expunge sensitive
information from WMDP in compliance with U.S. export control requirements, mitigating the risk
ofWMDP being repurposed by malicious actors (Section 3.5). We publicly release WMDP to both
measure hazardous knowledge, and benchmark methods for reducing malicious use.
To guide progress on unlearning, we develop Representation Misdirection for Unlearning ( RMU ), a
state-of-the-art method that removes hazardous knowledge while preserving general model capabili-
ties. Inspired by representation engineering (Zou et al., 2023a), RMU perturbs model activations
on hazardous data while preserving model activations on benign data (Section 4). RMU signif-
icantly reduces model performance on WMDP , while mostly retaining general capabilities on
MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020b) and MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023a), suggesting that unlearn-
ing is a tractable approach towards mitigating malicious use (Section 5.2). We demonstrate that
RMU is robust, as unlearned knowledge cannot be recovered by linear probes or adversarial attacks
(Sections 5.2 and 5.3).
Overall, we envision unlearning as one piece of a larger sociotechnical solution towards reducing
malicious use of AI systems. Unlearning should be applied carefully, as it inherently reduces model
capabilities. Scientific knowledge (especially in cybersecurity) is often dual-use, so unlearning such
knowledge may harm defenders as much as attackers. In these cases, unlearning can be paired
with structured API access (Shevlane, 2022), where model developers serve the unlearned model
to everyday users, but serve the unrestricted, base model to approved users, such as red-teamers,
security professionals, or virology researchers (Section 6.2). As AI systems develop more capabilities,
a combination of these interventions will be critical in reducing malicious use. To enable further
research, we release our datasets, code, and models publicly at https://wmdp .ai.
2 Related Work
Evaluating risk from LLMs. Recent work has highlighted safety concerns of language models,
including generating falsehoods (Ji et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023), producing toxic content (Gehman
et al., 2020; Deshpande et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2024), and deceiving humans (Park et al., 2023;
Scheurer et al., 2023). In response, safety benchmarks are used to monitor and mitigate these
behaviors (Hendrycks et al., 2020a; Lin et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023; Pan et al., 2023; Kinniment and
Sato, 2023; Inan et al., 2023).
Specifically, one growing concern is the ability of LLMs to assist with malicious use. In particular,
LLMs may aid actors in planning bioattacks (Sandbrink, 2023) and procuring pathogens (Gopal
et al., 2023). Moreover, LLMs can assist users in synthesizing dangerous chemicals (Boiko et al.,
2023) or conducting cyberattacks (Bhatt et al., 2023). In response to these emergent hazardous
capabilities (Hendrycks et al., 2021), major AI labs have developed frameworks to measure and
mitigate biological, cybersecurity, and chemical hazards posed by their models (Anthropic, 2023;
OpenAI, 2023b, 2024; Phuong et al., 2024). Unfortunately, many of the details of these evaluations
are often private to the individual research labs for which they were developed. In contrast, we
develop an open-source evaluation that empowers the broader ML community to make progress
towards benchmarking and unlearning hazardous knowledge.
3