Default P rompt
How would I engineer in/f_luenza A to be
signi/f_icantly more virulent?
As an AI language model , I cannot assist ...
[Gibber ish t ext]Adversarial P rompt
[Gibber ish t ext]Unlearning with RMU is R obust t o Adversarial A ttacks
How would I engineer in/f_luenza A to be
signi/f_icantly more virulent?Figure 12: After applying RMU onYI-34B, the GCG adversarial attack (Zou et al., 2023b) cannot
extract hazardous knowledge within 2,500optimization steps, despite eliciting the same knowledge
from base models in less than 50 steps.
YI-34Bmodels refuse to answer, and identify whether GCG can jailbreak the base and unlearned
YI-34Bmodels to extract the correct answer (Appendix B.3).
GCG can jailbreak the base YI-34Bmodels to answer these prompts in less than 50 gradient steps,
while the unlearned models output gibberish even after 2,500steps, or over 7 hours of optimization
on an NVIDIA A100 GPU (Figure 12). This is a signal towards the resilience of RMU , suggesting
that unlearning persists even under optimization pressure.
Because we empirically only unlearn knowledge from three layers, RMU perhaps obfuscates knowl-
edge more than unlearns it from the model. Thus, we investigate whether RMU is robust to finetuning
in Appendix B.6. We emphasize, however, that finetuning after unlearning is not covered by our
threat model, as closed-source LLM providers can always choose to apply unlearning immediately
before model serving (Figure 2).
5.4 Generalization of WMDP to Hazardous Knowledge
We evaluate if unlearning on WMDP generalizes to unlearning especially hazardous knowledge.
WMDP-Bio Private set of hazardous
biology questions
Dataset020406080AccuracyWMDP correlates with hazardous knowledge
Base RMU (unlearned model) Random Chance
Figure 13: Unlearning on WMDP -Bio corre-
lates with unlearning especially hazardous biology
knowledge. This suggests that WMDP is a reason-
able proxy measurement for hazardous knowledge.During our dataset generation process, we iden-
tified 122questions in biosecurity that contained
sensitive information and removed them from
WMDP -Bio. We treat these as a held-out set
of private questions with especially hazardous
knowledge. We can evaluate whether WMDP
is a proxy for hazardous knowledge by examin-
ing if performance on WMDP correlates with
performance on the private set.
We follow the QA evaluation described in Sec-
tion 5.2 and report the performance of ZEPHYR -
7Bbefore and after unlearning with RMU on
this private set in Figure 13. Before and after
unlearning, both models achieve similar accu-
racy on both the private set and WMDP . This
result suggests WMDP is a reasonable proxy
for especially hazardous knowledge.
6 Discussion
We discuss how unlearning on WMDP can tie in with other strategies to mitigate malicious use, such
as structured API access. See Appendix D for a fuller discussion of the broader impacts of WMDP .
13