Ideation Design Test ReleaseLearn
BuildBiotechnology Risk ChainFigure 5: Biotechnology risk chain. The risk chain for developing a bioweapon starts with ideating a
biological threat, followed by a design-build-test-learn (DBTL) loop (Nelson and Rose, 2023).
from biotechnology stems from advances in synthetic biology and bioengineering that increase access
to, or modify, the design and development of transmissible agents (Esvelt, 2022).
A standard biotechnology risk chain can be seen in Figure 5. In this threat model, “ideation” involves
actively planning for a biological attack; “design” involves retrieving blueprints for a hazardous agent,
such as determining the DNA sequence; “build” consists of the protocols, reagents, and equipment
necessary to create the threat; and “test” consists of measuring characteristics or properties of the
pathogen of interest. By “learning” from these results and iterating after the test phase, the design
can be revised until the threat is released (Nelson and Rose, 2023).
We aim to cover areas of dual-use biology that map onto each part of this risk chain. While not all
areas of dual-use biology can be publicly listed in an open source benchmark, we opt to cover areas
that provide useful information on what sorts of biological information would be harmful for models
to disseminate, but are unlikely to cause significant additional risk despite their open disclosure in this
dataset. We consulted with external biosecurity experts when formulating these areas, and describe
additional considerations in Appendix A.2.
For “ideation,” we include areas of historical bioweapons and bioterrorism use (including methods,
pathogen strains, and delivery systems used to mount bioterrorist attacks) that are publicly available
online. We additionally include previously published information surrounding enhanced potential
pandemic pathogens (ePPP) research , which involves investigating ways to make pre-existing
pathogens more transmissible or virulent. Finally, we include what we believe are emerging areas
of dual-use risk, such as viral vector engineering and research – while this research has significant
benefits for medical treatments like gene therapy, we believe widespread access to information about
viral vectors to the public is unlikely to provide significant value and could be actively harmful.
For the “build” portion of the design-build-test-learn (DBTL) cycle, we include knowledge on viral
reverse genetics (protocols for reconstructing viruses), as well as niche areas of synthetic biology and
bioengineering that may expand access to pathogen acquisition and release (including knowledge
around circumventing DNA/RNA synthesis screening and export controls, as well as synthesizing
biological agents). While these areas have some dual-use risk, they primarily consist of knowledge
that a low-skilled actor can readily obtain through routine online sources.
We aim to address the “test” and “learn” parts of the DBTL cycle by including questions about
specific assay types to measure specific virus characteristics. Finally, many aspects of “release” are
included in questions formulated from the historical bioweapons and bioterrorism category; we did
not include additional information about the release of potential pandemic pathogens to mitigate
dual-use sensitive information risks.
3.3 Cybersecurity Threat Model
In cybersecurity, AI may aid malicious actors throughthe stages of a cyberattack: reconnaissance,
weaponization, exploitation, and post-exploitation (Strom et al., 2020; Hutchins et al., 2011).
In the initial reconnaissance stage, attackers gather any available information about their target
through both open-source and proprietary intelligence-gathering techniques. Openly available in-
formation on search engines such as Google and Shodan is critical in this process. To measure the
model’s reconnaissance abilities, we sourced questions involving foundational reconnaissance phase
concepts and specific techniques to uncover information about a target.
6