on individual neurons (Wang et al., 2022). In contrast to both these perspectives, we leverage the
idea that model representations encode knowledge of the world (Meng et al., 2022) and that these
representations may be manipulated to affect model behavior (Zou et al., 2023a; Ilharco et al., 2023;
Turner et al., 2023). We design a two-part loss function with a forget loss and a retain loss; intuitively,
the forget loss perturbs the model activations on hazardous data while the retain loss preserves its
activations on benign data (Figure 7).
Forget loss. Our goal is to degrade the model’s representations of hazardous knowledge. Our
experiments suggest that increasing the norm of the model’s activations on hazardous data in earlier
layers makes it difficult for later layers to process the activations, achieving our desiderata.
To calculate our forget loss, we assume access to Mupdated (·), the hidden states of the unlearned model
at some layer ℓandMfrozen(·), the hidden states of the original, frozen model at some layer ℓ. Then,
we compute u, a random unit vector with independent entries sampled uniformly at random from
[0,1). Note that uis held fixed throughout training. Given a forget dataset Dforget, we compute:
Lforget=Exf∼Dforget
1
LfX
tokent∈xf∥Mupdated (t)−c·u∥2
2

where Lfis the number of tokens in xfandcis some hyperparameter that controls activation scaling.
Retain loss. Our goal is to limit the amount of general capabilities lost from unlearning. Because our
forget term is an ℓ2loss on model activations, we regularize the model activations back to the original
model’s activations with an ℓ2penalty. Given the retain dataset Dretain, we calculate the retain loss:
Lretain=Exr∼Dretain"
1
LrX
tokent∈xr∥Mupdated (t)−Mfrozen(t)∥2
2#
where Lris the number of tokens in xr.
Full loss. The full loss (Figure 7) is a weighted combination of the forget loss and the retain loss:
L=Lforget+α· Lretain.
RMU finetunes the model weights to minimize this loss. To unlearn multiple distributions of knowl-
edge, we interleave the gradient updates (i.e., update model weights on the biosecurity distribution,
then update on the cybersecurity distribution, then repeat). In practice, we find it sufficient to compute
the loss only on layer ℓand update gradients only on layers ℓ−2,ℓ−1, and ℓ. We leverage this
observation to save memory and efficiently unlearn on larger LMs.
Forget and retain datasets. To alter model activations on hazardous knowledge, we need to collect
Dforget, an unlearning distribution which approximates WMDP . To collect Dforget for biosecurity,
we collect a corpus of relevant papers from PubMed used to generate questions in WMDP -Bio
(Appendix A.4). To collect Dforget for cybersecurity, we conduct an extensive crawl of GitHub for
Figure 7: RMU conducts machine unlearning by optimizing a two-part loss: a forget term, which
changes direction and scales up the norm of model activations on hazardous data ( xforget), and a retain
term, which preserves model activations on benign data ( xretain). Here uis a random unit vector with
independent entries sampled uniformly at random from [0,1)andcandαare hyperparameters.
9