security). Finally, to evaluate the fluency of models, we use MT-Bench, a multi-turn conservation and
instruction-following benchmark (Zheng et al., 2023b).
Models. We remove knowledge of biosecurity and cybersecurity on ZEPHYR -7B-BETA (Tunstall
et al., 2023), YI-34B-CHAT (01-ai, 2023), and MIXTRAL -8X7B-I NSTRUCT -V0.1(Jiang et al.,
2024), three of the most performant open-source generative language models at their respective sizes.
Additionally, we report the performance of GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a) as an upper bound on benchmark
performance.
Baselines. We benchmark RMU against three unlearning baselines: SCRUB (Kurmanji et al., 2023),
SSD (Foster et al., 2024), and LLMU (Yao et al., 2023b), on ZEPHYR -7B. Because we found low
performance on ZEPHYR -7B, we did not benchmark the baselines on YI-34BorMIXTRAL -8X7B.
See Appendix B.7 for our implementation of the baselines.
5.2 Quantitative Evaluation
To assess the efficacy of the methods, we examine the forget performance and retain performance of
the unlearned models. We see that RMU is able to unlearn WMDP -Bio and WMDP -Cyber while
maintaining performance on MMLU (Figure 8).
Forget performance. We measure forget performance by evaluating the knowledge of models on
WMDP with both question-answering (QA) and probing.
QA evaluation. In the future, LLMs may be used by adversaries as knowledge engines for developing
weapons. Under an API-access threat model, adversaries only receive output tokens and logits,
without access to internal activations. Hence, we evaluate the QA accuracy of models on WMDP .
We use a zero-shot question-answer format (Appendix B.1), taking the top logit between A,B,C,
andDas the answer choice. For comparison, we also benchmark GPT-4 zero-shot on each of
these tasks. As language models are sensitive to the prompting scheme (Sclar et al., 2023), we use
lm-evaluation-harness v0.4.2 (Gao et al., 2021) to standardize prompts.
QA results. We assess whether RMU is able to reduce QA accuracy on WMDP in Table 1. For
both ZEPHYR -7BandYI-34B,RMU is able to drop performance to near random accuracy on
WMDP -Bio and WMDP -Cyber, while other baselines struggle to drop accuracy on WMDP -Bio and
WMDP -Cyber without crippling model performance on MMLU. We provide a more comprehensive
table of results in Table 2.
Probing evaluation. While evaluating QA accuracy measures the primary risk of the API-access
threat model, it fails to assess whether knowledge has been fully removed from the models. Models
may possess more knowledge than is revealed in their output logits (Burns et al., 2022); for instance,
the unlearned model may still retain hazardous knowledge, but refuse to answer. Thus, we test
whether unlearned models can be probed to recall unlearned information. We train a 4-way linear
probe on the unlearned RMU models. We use half of WMDP -Bio and WMDP -Cyber for training
and hold out the other half for evaluation. We apply probing and report results for all layers of the
model.
Probing results. We assess whether probes are able to recover knowledge from a model unlearned
with RMU in Figure 9. Across both categories and model sizes, linear probing only achieves slightly
better than random accuracy. Linear probes are unable to extract unlearned information from the
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Layer0.20.40.60.8AccuracyProbe Accuracy for zephyr-7B
Bio (base)
Bio (unlearned)
Cyber (base)
Cyber (unlearned)
Random chance
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Layer0.20.40.60.8AccuracyProbe Accuracy for Yi-34B
Bio (base)
Bio (unlearned)
Cyber (base)
Cyber (unlearned)
Random chance
Figure 9: RMU makes hazardous knowledge unrecoverable with linear probes.
11