Precursors
Microbiology
Bacteria Viruses
In/f_luenza AAnthrax
Enhanced potential
   pandemic pathogens
Ideation for
    novel hazardsNeighborsHazard
Topics Chemical procurement SynthesisDataset Generation Processes for WMDP
Components
Payload
Infection
MechanismTrigger
MechanismFigure 4: Dataset generation processes for WMDP . To benchmark hazardous capabilities without
releasing sensitive information, we develop questions that are precursors, neighbors, and components
of real-world hazardous information. In particular, we target questions colored yellow .
3.1 Design Choices for WMDP
Dataset form. To create an automatic measure of hazardous capabilities that the broader research
community can readily iterate on, we design WMDP as a dataset of four-choice multiple-choice
questions. Multiple-choice is a common paradigm to test knowledge in language models (Hendrycks
et al., 2020b; Rein et al., 2023).
Because WMDP measures knowledge of hazardous topics, models with a low score on WMDP
likely lack the knowledge needed to help with malicious use. However, models with a high score
onWMDP are not necessarily unsafe, as they may still lack the reasoning ability to combine the
knowledge in the sequence of steps needed to create a weapon.
Dataset function. WMDP should guide risk mitigation by enabling researchers to measure and
reduce models’ hazardous capabilities. Because directly building a dataset of sensitive information
would increase the attack capabilities of malicious actors (Esvelt, 2018; Lewis et al., 2019), we collect
questions that approximate or correlate with the hazardous knowledge we wish to remove (Figure 3).
In particular, we collect questions with knowledge that is a precursor, neighbor, or component of the
hazardous knowledge we wish to remove. Moreover, we empirically demonstrate that models with
lower performance on WMDP are less capable for malicious use (Section 5.4).
Examples of our dataset generation processes are detailed in Figure 4. In the left panel, research
that aims to develop enhanced potential pandemic pathogens (ePPPs) is a precursor to developing
novel viruses, so unlearning the former will also unlearn a large subset of the latter. In the center
panel, there are topics in chemistry (e.g., procurement or synthesis) that contain questions with a wide
variance in hazard level, so we approximate especially sensitive information by collecting questions
near the boundary. In the right panel, a cyberweapon requires knowledge of several components (e.g.,
a payload, a trigger mechanism, and an infection mechanism), so excising knowledge of components
will reduce hazards. Because some of the components may be dual-use, we generate questions for
components that are primarily offensive in nature.
Dataset collection. Our questions are written by academics and technical consultants in biosecurity,
cybersecurity, and chemistry. We first generate threat models for each of these areas and then use the
models to inform questions that an adversary might encounter when developing attack capabilities. To
ensure quality, all of our questions were checked by at least two experts from different organizations.
3.2 Biosecurity Threat Model
In biosecurity, the malicious use threats that are increased by AI can be broadly categorized as expand-
ing access to pre-existing threats (by lowering barriers to entry), and unlocking new areas of biology
(by synthesizing new knowledge or accelerating in-silico modeling and experimentation) (Sandbrink,
2023).
We primarily focus on the development and dissemination of transmissible potential pandemic agents,
such as influenza, smallpox, etc. While our dataset additionally includes some information about
highly lethal non-transmissible bioweapons like anthrax, we believe the majority of emerging risk
5