6.1 How WMDP Mitigates Risk
Unlearning on WMDP mitigates risk for both closed-source and open-source models.
For closed-source models, unlearning reduces risk from malicious API finetuning (Zhan et al., 2023;
Qi et al., 2023; Pelrine et al., 2023), as hazardous knowledge can be removed prior to serving the
model. Furthermore, unlearning is a countermeasure against jailbreaks—even if they are jailbroken,
unlearned models lack the knowledge necessary to empower malicious users (Figure 2).
For open-source models, unlearning can expunge hazardous knowledge before such models are
publicly released, limiting adversaries from repurposing open-source models out of the box. However,
unlearning on WMDP does not address the threat model of relearning in open source models We
encourage future work towards mitigating risk in this pathway.
6.2 Structured API Access
WMDP complements the safety benefits of structured API access (Shevlane, 2022), where model
developers provide an API for users to query and finetune models without full weight access. In
this framework, ordinary users may query and finetune models with an API, but the model provider
applies safety mechanisms, such as unlearning, prior to serving the model. However, approved users
could obtain API access to the base model with full capabilities under strict guidelines, empowering
the use of LLMs for benign or defensive applications while mitigating potential vectors of malicious
use. For instance, OpenAI allows access of GPT-4 variants with fewer guardrails for red-teaming
and biological malicious use experiments (OpenAI, 2023a, 2024). Structured access mitigates the
concern that unlearning dual-use information will harm defenders.
Structured access requires model developers to solve the “Know Your Customer” (KYC) challenge,
which involves verifying the identity and intentions of customers before allowing them privileged
interactions. For structured access, implementing KYC-like procedures can help mitigate the risks as-
sociated with malicious use by ensuring that only verified and trustworthy individuals or organizations
are given the full capabilities of the model.
7 Conclusion
We propose a dataset, WMDP , to evaluate the potential of malicious use in LLMs. WMDP was
developed by subject matter experts in biology, cybersecurity, and chemistry, and was filtered to
remove sensitive or export-controlled information. Modern LLMs score highly on some aspects of
WMDP , suggesting presence of hazardous knowledge. We propose machine unlearning as a safety
intervention to reduce hazardous knowledge.
Towards making progress on unlearning, we introduce RMU , an unlearning method that removes
hazardous knowledge without significantly compromising general model performance. RMU also
generalizes and successfully removes information from a private sensitive dataset. However, RMU
reduces accuracy on closely related fields, such as introductory virology and computer security,
demonstrating the need for continued research towards improved unlearning precision.
Acknowledgments
We thank Alexander Sikalov, Adrian Huang, Andrew Papier, Anthony DeLorenzo, Anthony M.
Barrett, Cristae Consulting, Dinesh C. Aluthge, Frances Ding, Geetha Jeyapragasan, Isabella Wein-
land, Jake Pencharz, Jaspreet Pannu, Kathryn McElroy, Matthew Blyth, Mei Yi You, Miriam Sun,
Nathan Calvin, Nikki Teran, Patrick Biernat, RET2 Systems, Inc., Richard Moulange, Ritoban
Roy-Chowdhury, Samuel Curtis, Scott Donahue, Steve Newman, and Xinyan Hu for their assistance
and feedback. AP acknowledges support from the Vitalik Buterin PhD Fellowship in AI Existential
Safety. AD acknowledges support for the Long-Term Future Fund. AD and SG acknowledge support
from the ML Alignment Theory Scholars (MATS) program.
14