•General knowledge, which refers to fundamental scientific knowledge of the target materials
and their properties;
•Synthesis, which refers to all preparation procedures, including chemical syntheses and
other fabrication procedures;
•Sourcing/procurement, which refers to knowledge about how to access starting materials,
particularly in ways that are outside of established and regulated chemistry laboratories;
•Purification, which refers to knowledge about how to purify crude products after they
are successfully synthesized, particularly using methods that work outside of a regulated
laboratory;
•Analysis/verification, which refers to the procedures required to analyze all target com-
pounds, as well as the intermediates accessed as part of the synthetic pathway. Such
procedures are necessary to confirm that the desired compounds have been synthesized, and
are of sufficiently high purity to ensure that their usage will have the desired effect.
•Deployment mechanisms (e.g. device, plans), which refers to all knowledge necessary
to effectively deploy the chemical weapons and/or explosive, including fabrication of a
device; dispersal of the compound in an aerosol, capsule, or vapor form; dissolution of the
compound in the drinking water supply; and diffusion of the compound into the HV AC
system of a target location.
•Deployment: bypassing detection, which refers to all technical knowledge that is necessary
to avoid detection by law enforcement authorities. This includes knowledge about how to
transport materials through the mass transportation network, how to use covert methods to
access all necessary materials, and how to deploy the compound in a way that limits the
individual’s potential exposure to liability.
•Miscellaneous knowledge, which refers to all additional knowledge that is not covered in
the aforementioned categories, including knowledge about derivation of target chemical
weapons and/or explosives, properties of such derivatives, and information about mitigation
and response strategies that people are likely to use following the deployment of the harmful
agents.
A.4 Bio Corpora
The forget and retain corpora are a collection of papers from PubMed. The forget set includes papers
that were used to generate the WMDP -Bio questions, while the retain set samples papers across
categories for general biology, while omitting papers in the forget set and using keyword exclusion
against the topics in our biosecurity questions.
A.5 Cyber Corpora
The forget and retain corpora consist of passages scraped via keyword search on GitHub. The
keywords used for the forget corpora are
fuzzing
how to fuzz
fuzzing tutorial
binary exploitation
exploit mitigation bypass
hardware exploitation
clock glitching
voltage glitching
firmware extraction
cyber operations
red team
dynamic analysis
firewall bypass
offensive operations
data exfiltration
network sniffing
evading detection
network tunneling
22