42 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
ideas can be used, together with deep recurrent networks, for clinical decision support by
predicting orders and outcomes. Following Goethe’s proverb, “you only see what you know”,
we presented how background knowledge can dramatically improve information extraction
from images by deep convolutional networks and how tensor train models can be used for the
eﬃcient classiﬁcation of videos. We discussed potential links to the memory and perceptual
systems of the human brain. We concluded that tensor models, in connection with deep
learning, can be the basis for many technical solutions requiring memory and perception,
and might be a basis for modern AI.
3.10 Privacy and constrained access
Sabrina Kirrane (WU Wien, AT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sabrina Kirrane
Irrespective of whether the goal is to provide open access to a knowledge graph or to constrain
access to the graph or a subset of the knowledge held therein, policies have an important role
to play. For instance, if a data publisher does not specify a license the default is all rights
reserved. a company may wish to restrict access to their Enterprise knowledge graph and
likewise individuals may exercise there rights to specify how there data should be used and
by whom. There are already several existing ontologies and policy languages that could be
leveraged ranging from general policy languages, to speciﬁc policy languages, including some
standardisation eﬀorts, however the expressivity, correctness and completeness with respect
to speciﬁc use case requirements is still and open research challenge. Although it may be
possible to employ existing encryption and anonymisation techniques to knowledge graphs,
the utility of the knowledge will most certainly be compromised. Constraints are a fact of
life. Therefore we need to ﬁgure out how to deal with them!
3.11 Value Proposition of Knowledge Graphs
Sonja Zillner, (Siemens AG, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sonja Zillner
We often talk about the value of knowledge graphs. But what is their main value proposition
and what is their USP? In industrial settings, knowledge graphs are an important asset
for realizing industrial Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) applications. Through the combination
of both, knowledge graphs that capture relevant domain knowhow and AI algorithms that
reason and learn to solve problems or answer questions, augmented intelligence applications
supporting users to focus on ambitious and creative instead of repetitive tasks can be
developed. Examples range from the improved visualization of radiological ﬁndings to
advanced diagnostics systems for power plants to ﬂexible manufacturing for Industry 4.0
applications. But is there also a clear correlation between the type of a knowledge graph’s
value proposition and its addressed technical requirements?