Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 41
2.How can we come up with standardized evaluation setups for KGs and KG completion/-
correction methods?
3.How can we best preserve the eﬀorts made towards KG improvements?
References
1A. Zaveri, A. Rula, A. Maurino, R. Pietrobon, J. Lehmann, and S. Auer: Quality Assess-
ment for Linked Open Data: A Survey. SWJ 7(1), 2016
2Michael Färber, Frederic Bartscherer, Carsten Menne, and Achim Rettinger: Linked data
quality of DBpedia, Freebase, OpenCyc, Wikidata, and YAGO SWJ 9(1), 2018
3H. Paulheim: Knowledge Graph Reﬁnement – A Survey of Approaches and Evaluation
Methods. SWJ 8(3), 2017
3.8 Humans in the Loop, Human readable KG
Marta Sabou (TU Wien, AT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Marta Sabou
We consider two interaction interfaces between humans and knowledge graphs. On the
one hand, during the process of knowledge acquisition and veriﬁcation, humans act as
sources for diﬀerent types of knowledge, including, factual, expert, or social knowledge.
Mechanisms for acquiring such knowledge are diverse and range from manual approaches, to
semi-automatic and human-in-the loop systems where algorithmic and human computation
are intertwined (e.g., through active learning). On the other hand, knowledge graphs enable
various information seeking tasks, such as question answering, search (semantic, exploratory,
serendipitous) and conversational systems (e.g., chatbots). Technical challenges in these
interaction settings arise from dealing with large KGs and from the need to adapt generic
methods to domain/enterprise speciﬁc scenarios. Opportunities arise in terms of being able
to collect viewpoints, opinions etc from humans that enable the creation of more realistic
applications. Additionally, knowledge graphs enable a range of new applications (such as
sense making) which should be built by relying on cognitive science theories to maximize
the eﬀectiveness of the information transfer to humans. Besides technical challenges, ethical
issues should be considered when involving humans in KG creation processes (e.g., through
crowdsourcing) as well as for ensuring correct, unbiased and diversity aware output of
applications built on top of KGs.
3.9 ML with KGs – research and use cases around KGs at Siemens
Volker Tresp (Siemens AG – München, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Volker Tresp
Labeled graphs can describe states and events at a cognitive abstraction level, representing
facts as subject-predicate-object triples. A prominent and very successful example is the
Google Knowledge Graph, representing on the order of 100B facts. Labeled graphs can
be represented as adjacency tensors which can serve as inputs for prediction and decision
making, and from which tensor models can be derived to generalize to unseen facts. These
18371