74 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
3.20 (Re)Deﬁning Knowledge Graphs
Aidan Hogan (IMFD, DCC, University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL), Dan Brickley
(Google Research – Mountain View, US), Claudio Gutierrez (IMFD, DCC, University of Chile
– Santiago de Chile, CL), Axel Polleres (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT), and Antoine
Zimmermann (École des Mines de Saint-Étienne, FR)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Aidan Hogan, Dan Brickley, Claudio Gutierrez, Axel Polleres, and Antoine Zimmermann
The phrase “Knowledge Graph” has recently gained a lot of attention in both industry and
academia. But what is a “Knowledge Graph”? Several deﬁnitions have been proposed but –
we shall argue – fall short of capturing the full generality of the usage of the term. We argue
for a looser, more permissive deﬁnition that may be instantiated in various concrete ways,
setting the stage for the study and practice of “Knowledge Graphs” to become a commons
that unites – rather than divides – previously disparate areas of Computer Science, focused
on a shared goal: using graphs as a medium to make sense of large-scale, diverse data.
Introduction
Since the launch of the Google Knowledge Graph in 2012 – and subsequent announcements
of Knowledge Graphs by companies such as AirBnB, eBay, Elsevier, Facebook, Microsoft,
Springer Nature, and others – the notion of a “Knowledge Graph” has crystallised a number of
eﬀorts that draw upon a variety approaches for collecting, managing, integrating, publishing,
annotating, processing and analysing diverse data using a graph abstraction.
Given its origins, the phrase “Knowledge Graph” (in its modern use) naturally encourages
a pragmatic view of the data management and knowledge representation landscape. The
Knowledge Graph (KG) viewpoint emphasises that the expense and diﬃculty of curating and
extracting knowledge from large-scale data motivates interdisciplinary collaboration around
common data structures, knowledge extraction and knowledge representation techniques.
Initiatives, datasets and systems that self-describe as “KGs” are not (and, we argue, should
not be) dominated by a speciﬁc scientiﬁc research ﬁeld or application domain, but rather
should be seen as a commons within which various complementary perspectives are combined,
involving not only academia, but also industry, public organisations, developers, etc.
In terms of academic stakeholders, research on KGs should bring together techniques
from scientiﬁc disciplines such as Knowledge Representation, Machine Learning, Semantic
Web, Databases, Natural Language Processing, Multimedia Processing and Information
Extraction, amongst others, leading to applications in a variety of domains such as Life
Sciences, Library Science, Astronomy, Economics, Sociology, and more besides.
This inclusive view then leads to a contentious but key question that we address here:
“What is a Knowledge Graph? ”. We ﬁrst begin by reviewing several prior attempts to answer
this question, concluding that many of the deﬁnitions proposed recently in the literature
are too narrow-focused, adding technical requirements that – while concretising the notion
of a Knowledge Graph – exclude other viewpoints; some of these deﬁnitions arguably even
preclude the industrial KGs responsible for the recent popularisation of the phrase. We thus
aim to (re)deﬁne a Knowledge Graph not based on what it denotes, but rather by what it
has become to connote: the use of graphs to represent data from which knowledge can (later)
be composed. Our goal with this (re)deﬁnition of Knowledge Graphs is to position the topic
as a commons that can beneﬁt from work combining various disciplines, outlining a more
general scope within which various concrete deﬁnitions and research questions can coexist.