Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 45
4M. Minsky. A framework for representing knowledge. MIT-AI Memo 306, Santa Monica ,
1974.
5M. Nickel, K. Murphy, V. Tresp, and E. Gabrilovich. A review of relational machine
learning for knowledge graphs. Proc. of the IEEE , 2016.
6C.S. Peirce. How to make our ideas clear. Popular Science Monthly 12 , 1878.
7R. Quillian. A notation for representing conceptual information: An application to se-
mantics and mechanical English paraphrasing. Systems Development Corp. Santa Monica ,
1963.
8R.H. Ritchens. General program for mechanical translation between any two languages
via an algebraic interlingua. Report on Research: Cambridge Language Research Unit.
Mechanical Translation 3 (2) , 1956.
9J. Sowa. Semantics of conceptual graphs. Proc. 17th. ACL , 1979.
10J. Sowa. Semantic networks. In: Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science , 1987.
11J.J. Sylvester. Chemistry and algebra. Nature 17: 284 , 1878.
12Jeﬀrey Travers and Stanley Milgram. An experimental study of the small world problem.
Sociometry, Vol. 32, No. 4 , 1967.
13W.A. Woods. What’s in a link: Foundations for semantic networks. Representation and
Understanding. Studies in Cognitive Science, 35-82. , 1978.
14L. Zhang. Knowledge Graph Theory and Structural Parsing . Ph.D. Thesis, University of
Twente, 2002.
3.14 Grand Challenges
Paul Groth (University of Amsterdam, NL & Elsevier Labs, NL), Frank van Harmelen
(Free University Amsterdam, NL), Axel-Cyrille Ngonga-Ngomo (Universität Paderborn, DE),
Valentina Presutti (CNR – Rome, IT), Juan F. Sequeda (Capsenta Inc. – Austin, US), and
Michel Dumontier (Maastricht University, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Paul Groth, Frank van Harmelen, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Valentina Presutti, Juan
Sequeda, and Michel Dumontier
The emergence of large scale knowledge graphs (KGs) has opened up the possibility for
a wide-range of exciting research directions. This chapter attempts to capture some of
these large scale challenges. The participants tried to formulate challenges that pushed the
boundaries of current thinking. We clustered 14 speciﬁc challenges into four groups:
1.Representing Knowledge i.e. “How do you say that?”
2.Access and interoperability at scale i.e “How do you get that?”
3.Applications i.e. “How do you do that?”
4.Machine⇔Humanity Knowledge Sharing i.e .”Computamus ergo sumus”
These clusters range from deep technical challenges that are being tackled today (e.g. the
connection between subsymbolic and symbolic representations) to future visions where
knowledge graphs act as the communication mechanism between humanity and AI. We see
these challenges not as the deﬁnitive list but as inspiration for the broader community to
think about where the foundations of knowledge graphs can take us.
During the discussion, one frame that helped us was to think about the notion of
knowledge and data at scale. We begin by introducing that context. We then list the
challenges themselves.
18371