Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 37
3.3 Logic and learning – Can we provide Explanations in the current
Knowledge Lake?
Claudia d’Amato (University of Bari, IT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Claudia d’Amato
The goal of the talk is to raise the attention on the following research questions: a) is it
important to provide explanations when providing information by exploiting a Knowledge
Graph (KG)? b) Would it be possible to design integrated numeric and symbol-based machine
learning methods, to be used for tackling the link prediction problem, that are scalable
and able to provide interpretable models? c) Are interpretable models a suﬃcient form of
explanation or do we need to provide an actual line of reasoning, illustrating the decision
making process? d) Is it possible to develop a uniﬁed framework integrating diﬀerent
reasoning paradigms?
A KG is often deﬁned as an object for describing entities and their interrelations, by
means of a graph. Knowledge graphs are usually assumed to be large and arbitrary entities
may be interrelated, thus covering various topical domains [ 1]. The importance of assessing
relations among entities has driven research on developing eﬀective methods for solving the
link prediction problem. This is often regarded as a classiﬁcation problem that can be solved
by the use of machine learning classiﬁcation methods. In the last few years, vector space
embedding solutions have been largely adopted [ 2,3]. They allow to create propositional
feature vector representations starting from more complex representations, such as graphs,
thus allowing to apply numeric approaches resulting scalable besides of eﬀective. The main
problem of numeric approaches is that they do not allow to provide somehow an explanation
of the predicted results, that is, similarly to the goal of “Explainable AI” research ﬁeld
(which aims to produce “glass box” models that are explainable to a human, without greatly
sacriﬁcing performances), an explanation of the reason why a certain entity is predicted as
being related (with respect to a given relation) to another one. The exploitation of symbol-
based learning methods would be useful at this regards since they are known to generate
interpretable models that allow to explain how conclusions are drawn [ 4,5]. Nevertheless,
symbol-based learning methods are also known to be less scalable than numeric methods.
As such integrated numeric and symbol-based approaches need to be developed in order to
come up with interpretable models whilst still staying scalable. Such an integrated solution
would be an initial step ahead towards providing explanation. Indeed interpretable models
actually describe how solutions are obtained but not why they are obtained. Providing an
actual explanation means to formulate and supply a line of reasoning, illustrating the decision
making process of a model whilst using human understandable features of the input data.
The ability of performing reasoning is important not only for providing explanations. KGs are
often considered as the output of an information acquisition and integration process, where
information may come from several and diﬀerent sources. As such, problems such as noise
and conﬂicting information may arise. Additionally, some acquired information could be valid
only in some contexts or with respect to a certain period of time. As such the ability to apply
diﬀerent reasoning paradigms such deductive reasoning, paraconsistent reasoning, inductive
reasoning, normative reasoning, analogical reasoning could be necessary. Large research
eﬀorts have been devoted to study each reasoning paradigm, however, when considering
large KGs coming from the integration of multiple sources of information, multiple reasoning
paradigms could be needed at the same time. As such a uniﬁed framework integrating
diﬀerent reasoning paradigms needs to be formalized.
18371