62 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Lenses could be used (e.g., show just the current state versus showing the evolution
path to this statement). This allows for diﬀerent viewpoints on a subject.
Managing the full scale of evolution rates, i.e. from slowly changing concepts to rapidly
changing streams of data – potentially all in one system.
Engineering mechanisms for evolution (e.g., detecting and submitting updates)
Social processes need to be taken into account – someone usually owns a KG and may
not want it to be changed.
Mechanism for curation, change suggestions, moderation etc. are needed.
∗Managing the computational challenge of assessing and handling the eﬀects of the
updates.
Developing those mechanisms in a “tolerant” way (i.e., accepting local changes but
avoiding global drift), predicting eﬀects of a change on local and global levels.
Methods for automating evolution, e.g. detecting signals of change, generating sugges-
tions, ﬁnding the most appropriate change action.
Tooling and methodology support
Embracing controversy – we must be able to represent diﬀerent viewpoints, contexts,
inconsistencies, and even fuzzy or unclear notions that may or may not later evolve into
more crisp ones. For example, consider a knowledge graph that encompasses religions.
Overcoming current storage and computation limitations for implementing evolution and
dynamics of KGs in real-world systems, i.e. it all needs to scale.
Conclusion
Capturing the evolutionary nature of knowledge is critical as the community moves forward
and continues to build large, encompassing knowledge graphs, especially those that aim
to capture knowledge as it is created, discovered, or genreated. Of course, there are many
challenges inherent to this, from provenance explosion to what it actually means for an
knowledge graph to evolve. In this chapter, we have described several motivating use-cases
that capture useful knowledge, but in order to be eﬀective, must address the notion of
evolving knowledge. In addition, we have described the challenges that these developers must
face, but have also included a number of well-studied starting points from similar ﬁelds.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Sonja Zillner, Michel Dumontier, Sarven Capadisli, Maria-
Esther Vidal, Elena Simperl, and Juan Sequeda for their valuable discussion and input.
References
1D. Barbieri, D. Braga, S. Ceri, E. Della Valle, and M. Grossniklaus. Stream reasoning:
Where we got so far. In NeFoRS 2010: 4th International Workshop on New Forms of
Reasoning for the Semantic Web: Scalable and Dynamic , 2010.
2S. Bloehdorn, P. Haase, Y. Sure, and J. Voelker. Ontology Evolution , chapter 4, pages
51–70. Wiley-Blackwell, 2006.
3D. Dell’Aglio, E. Della Valle, F. van Harmelen, and A. Bernstein. Stream reasoning: A
survey and outlook. Data Science , (Preprint):1–25.
4J.D. Fernández, J. Umbrich, A. Polleres, and M. Knuth. Evaluating query and storage
strategies for RDF archives. In SEMANTICS , pages 41–48. ACM, 2016.