Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 101
Scenarios (centred around the types of knowledge graphs created and the underlying
processes): open vs. closed (e.g. in an enterprise); generic vs. domain-speciﬁc.
Lifecyle of KGs (types of activities and the ways each activity impacts KGs): from KG
creation to developing KG-based applications to using those applications.
Types of users (roles across scenarios and KG lifecycle and their characteristics, needs, and
expectations): individual vs. community contributors; lay people vs. experts; developers
vs. end-users.
Following these dimensions, we discussed open research challenges, which require input
from several disciplines: knowledge representation, knowledge engineering, social computing,
social sciences, behavioural economics, software engineering and HCI.
Challenges
Tailored support to KG engineering. The scenarios introduced earlier greatly inﬂuence the
choice of methods and tools to create and curate knowledge graphs. Organisations operate
within existing process, project and quality assurance frameworks. Grassroots initiatives
tend to deﬁne such frameworks as they advance with their work, leveraging the skills, ideas
and views of the participants. Hence, an approach suitable to develop a knowledge graph
in an enterprise context is likely to need substantial alterations if applied to a bottom-up,
community-driven project.
Existing knowledge and ontology engineering literature is rich in methodologies, tools,
and best practices, which should be revisited and updated to state-of-the-art technology
and practice. For open, decentralised scenarios, we have access to several notable initiatives
which could be subject to observational studies, interventions, and experiments to map the
research space and derive guidelines for system designers and community managers. As
organisations embrace participatory approaches in internal contexts to seek a broader base
of contributions and ideas, it would be equally interesting to study how ideas and lessons
learned in large community projects could transfer to enterprise or government contexts.
We have identiﬁed the following needs:
Update existing methodological guidelines to match the skills and requirements of their
audiences, oﬀer bespoke support to diﬀerent scenarios, and be clear about the scenarios
they work best in.
Add advanced features for the use of patterns in tool, for example through search and
composition.
Provide platforms and champion the publication of case studies and experience reports,
for example in the form of data study groups that bring together experts in databases,
RDF, knowledge acquisition, online communities etc.
Create a stronger culture of user-centric research and encourage comprehensive evaluations
of new methodologies, for example through the use of crowdsourcing.
Transparency and accountability in AI. Knowledge graphs are a valuable resource. They
empower decision-making algorithms and support people in seeking information. In a world
of ﬁlter bubbles and fake news, is it more important than ever to be able to explains how
particular outcomes or conclusions came about and knowledge graphs can turn into powerful
gateways to produce more transparent and accountable AI ecosystems. Considering the three
dimensions introduced earlier, any approach to explainability will have to be tailored to
the speciﬁc scenario, activities and roles involved, from developers issuing SPARQL queries
against Wikidata to end-users asking questions to intelligent assistants such as Siri, which
leverages Wikidata to generate answers.
18371