Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 67
work well under which characteristics of the KGs (e.g.: size, connectivity, etc.). Therefore,
when conducting more systematic evaluations, those can be done either by synthesizing
datasetswithdiﬀerentvariations, orbyusingavarietyofdatasetswithdiﬀerentcharacteristics.
Therefore, datasets for such evaluations may include:
1.Synthetic datasets, which could rely on some existing benchmark datasets such as LUBM
[11] or SP /two.superiorB [16]. Those can be used both for systematic testing of scalability, as well as
for analyses of the behavior of approaches when varying certain other properties of the
KG.
2.Alternatively, we could index existing datasets in terms of relevant properties that
are relevant for evaluation algorithms. These properties include: (a) graph/network
properties (degree, connectedness); (b) descriptive statistics of graph elements (e.g.,
number and distribution of classes, property types, entities); (c) expressiveness of the
data (e.g., RDF(S), OWL); (d) whether the dataset is fully materialized or contains
implicit knowledge; (e) natural language metrics (languages used, presence/absence of
natural language information); (f) the presence of speciﬁc domains (e.g., use of certain
namespaces, presence of geospatial data); (g) other: what were the main mechanisms
for creation. Note that many of these properties are easy to compute automatically, for
example, as in LOD Laundromat [ 3]. One issue is that they are mostly computed at the
level of ﬁle, rather than at the level of datasets/KGs.
3.Hybrid approaches, e.g., use properties calculated over (2) in order to improve the
generation of synthetic benchmarks [15].7
There is still some steps to be taken from the way evaluations are mostly carried out today
and the vision sketched above. As it is hard to enforce a change over night, we suggest we
propose to have a similar eﬀort ongoing in the major semantic web conferences. One option
is to award a “most reproducible paper” award. This way, we can increase the credibility of
our research and hopefully get more reuse of existing eﬀort. This would likely also lead to
more research software being open sourced and further built upon as code which is under
scrutiny of a reviewer will be written much cleaner.
References
1Maribel Acosta, Amrapali Zaveri, Elena Simperl, Dimitris Kontokostas, Sören Auer, and
Jens Lehmann. Crowdsourcing linked data quality assessment. In International Semantic
Web Conference , pages 260–276. Springer, 2013.
2Alsayed Algergawy, Michelle Cheatham, Daniel Faria, Alﬁo Ferrara, Irini Fundulaki,
Ian Harrow, Sven Hertling, Ernesto Jiménez-Ruiz, Naouel Karam, Abderrahmane Khiat,
Patrick Lambrix, Huanyu Li, Stefano Montanelli, Heiko Paulheim, Catia Pesquita, Tzanina
Saveta, Daniela Schmidt, Pavel Shvaiko, Andrea Splendiani, Elodie Thiéblin, Cássia Tro-
jahn, Jana Vataščinová, Ondřej Zamazal, and Lu Zhou. Results of the ontology alignment
evaluation initiative 2018. In Ontology Matching , 2018.
3Wouter Beek, Laurens Rietveld, Hamid R Bazoobandi, Jan Wielemaker, and Stefan Sch-
lobach. LOD laundromat: a uniform way of publishing other people’s dirty data. In
International Semantic Web Conference , pages 213–228. Springer, 2014.
4Christian Bizer and Andreas Schultz. The Berlin SPARQL benchmark. International
Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS) , 5(2):1–24, 2009.
5Christoph Böhm, Felix Naumann, Ziawasch Abedjan, Dandy Fenz, Toni Grütze, Daniel
Hefenbrock,MatthiasPohl,andDavidSonnabend. ProﬁlinglinkedopendatawithProLOD.
7See http://ldbcouncil.org for an existing initiative.
18371