48 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Applications
How do you do that?
Answering sophisticated questions over heterogeneous knowledge graphs. Can we an-
swer sophisticated, context-sensitive questions over diﬀerent knowledge graphs with diﬀerent
formalisms, languages, schemas, content, availability, restrictions, access methods?
Make the translation of knowledge to praxis instantaneous. Currently, knowledge is
transferred to practice through complex chains where humans translate knowledge into
software and physical systems. With the advent of cyber-physical systems (e.g. augmented
reality, IoT), there is the potential to directly translate knowledge into action. Thus, the
vision is that gap between knowing and practicing will approach zero.
Knowledge graphs as socio-technical systems. Graphs and their applications are largely
created by people. We need to leverage theory, methods and empirical evidence from other
disciplines (behavioural economics, CSCW, UX, cognitive psychology etc) to: Understand
the cognitive and social processes by which knowledge (and knowledge shaped as a graph)
emerges; Identify patterns and best practices to support these processes; Improve developer
experience to allow them to create, curate and reuse KGs eﬀectively; Provide guidelines
and best practices to help developers use and appreciate large-scale KGs that are inherently
messy, diverse and evolving; Understand what social features (expertise of KG contributors,
their motivations, group composition) inﬂuence the outcomes (completeness of the knowledge,
how it is represented, what is missing, viewpoints and opinions etc.)
Machine⇔Humanity Knowledge Sharing
Computamus ergo sumus (We compute, therefore we are).
Knowledge graphs as an interface between humanity and machines as well as machines
and machines. As machines become generators of knowledge how do we enable communic-
ation between those machines and humanity as whole. Likewise, just as humans share their
knowledge through institutions such as libraries how do we enable machines and humans to
share their knowledge at scale.
Generating, grounding, translating, and using machine generated languages. Recent
work suggests how machines may create their own languages that are distinct from those
that we know and understand. How can we explain or translate statements made in those
languages to other (human / non-human) languages?
Natural Data Understanding: The plethora of data formats and implicit semantics required
universal machinery which can consume arbitrary data (incl. KGs) and generate KGs. All
existing eﬀorts in natural language understanding, processing of web tables, etc. can be
regarded as a foundation for this eﬀort.
Self-aware KGs: What should KGs be? They are currently regarded as the result of some
(partly continuous) knowledge extraction processes. One possible path towards knowledge
graphs being universal enablers for agent-agent interchange (where agent = humans +
machines) would be to regard them as biological entities, which live in a digital space. These
universal independent social agents would be able to interface with other agents (humans,
machines) to fulﬁll goals set externally or internally.