Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 31
applications. We foresee, from the results summarised in the present report, the establishment
of a new research direction, which focuses on how to combine the results from knowledge
representation research in several subﬁelds for joint use for Knowledge Graphs and Data on
the Web.
The Seminar
The idea of this seminar emerged when the organisers got together discussing about writing
a grant proposal. They all shared, although from diﬀerent perspectives, the conviction
that research on Semantic Web (and its scientiﬁc community) reached a critical point: it
urged a paradigm shift. After almost two decades of research, the Semantic Web community
established a strong identity and achieved important results. Nevertheless, the technologies
resulting from its eﬀort on the one hand have proven the potential of the Semantic web vision,
but on the other hand became an impediment; a limiting constraint towards the next major
breakthrough. In particular, Semantic Web knowledge representation models are insuﬃcient
to face many important challenges such as supporting artiﬁcial intelligence systems in showing
advanced reasoning capabilities and socially-sound behaviour at scale. The organisers soon
realised that a project proposal was not the ideal tool for addressing this problem, which
instead needed a confrontation of the Semantic Web scientiﬁc community with other relevant
actors, in the ﬁeld. From this discussion, the ”knowledge graph” concept emerged as a key
unifying ingredient for this new form of knowledge representation – embracing both the
Semantic Web, but also other adjacent communities – and it was agreed that a Dagstuhl
seminar on ”Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for Knowledge Representation on the
Semantic Web” was a perfect means for the purpose.
The list of invitees to the seminar included scientists from both academia and industry
working on knowledge graphs, linked data, knowledge representation, machine learning,
automated reasoning, natural language processing, data management, and other relevant
areas. Forty people have participated in the seminar, which was very productive. The
active discussions during plenary and break out sessions conﬁrmed the complex nature of
the proposed challenge. This report is a fair representative of the variety and complexity of
the addressed topics.
The method used for organising the seminar deserves further elaboration. The seminar
had a ﬁve-day agenda. Half of the morning on the ﬁrst day was devoted to ten short
talks (5 minutes each) given by a selection of attendees. The speakers were identiﬁed by
the organisers as representatives of complimentary topics based on the result of a Survey
conducted before the seminar: more than half of the invitees ﬁlled a questionnaire that gave
them the opportunity to brieﬂy express their perspectives on the topic and to point out
relevant challenges that they would put in their future research agenda with the highest
priority.
The aim of these short speeches was to ignite the confrontation by sharing the emerging
views on the main challenges from this survey. After the speeches we organised the further
discussion in an “Open Space” session that served to collaboratively build the agenda for the
rest of the day (and that inﬂuenced the agenda of the next days). The open space method
consists of giving everyone the opportunity to propose one or more break out topics. To
propose a topic, a proposer had to explain in few words what it was about, then write it
down on a post-it that was attached on a blackboard (see Figure 1). At the end of the
session, attendees were invited to sign up for the topics of their interest (by marking the
corresponding post-it).
18371