84 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
speciﬁcation and enforcement mechanisms proposed to date, a necessary ﬁrst step towards is
to develop a framework that can be used to evaluate existing access control oﬀerings in terms
of expressivity, correctness and completeness. Inference-proof access control for distributed
data sources has been extensively discussed in a recent Dagstuhl workshop (n.17262, on
Federated Data Management, 2017) in the context of federated query processing. A recent
proposal in this direction is [17].
3.21.3 Knowledge conﬁdentiality
Several proposals to enable conﬁdentiality of RDFS and OWL knowledge bases that adopt
simple conﬁdentiality models exist (cf. [3, 11, 33, 45, 16]).
These approaches are vulnerable to attacks based on meta-knowledge; this issue has
been dealt with in [ 7,6], that show how to construct robust secure views. However, this
method probably does not scale suﬃciently yet.
Another limitation of this conﬁdentiality criterion lies in its “crisp” nature: what if a
secret is not entailed by the available (meta)knowledge but is very likely, given that
same knowledge? We cannot still assume the secret to be eﬀectively protected. The
probabilistic and correlation information used for this kind of attacks can be obtained
through both standard statistical analyses and machine learning algorithms. A reﬁned,
probabilistic conﬁdentiality model has already been developed [ 5], but it is diﬃcult to
implement eﬃciently, given the inherent complexity of probabilistic reasoning. Moreover,
the probabilistic criterion does not currently handle the knowledge produced by learning
algorithms, that is not strictly probabilistic.
Conversely, symbolic reasoning may be used to attack the conﬁdentiality of privacy-
preserving data mining algorithms. Such algorithms produce k-anonymous or diﬀerentially
private outputs (a survey is available in deliverable D1.7 of the H2020 project SPECIAL).
It is known that anonymization techniques are vulnerable to background knowledge
[48,30,12,38]. So it is important to investigate whether and how the symbolic background
knowledge encoded in KGs can be used to leak conﬁdential information.
Open research questions in relation to providing constrained access to Knowledge Graphs
include:
How does the whole protocol work?
How do we attach policies to data and how do we query considering the policy? Can
sticky policies be used?
Can we support automatic negotiation using policies?
Which additional information shall be removed to avoid inferring knowledge that should
not be accessible?
How do we avoid hybrid symbolic/ML attacks?
Conclusions
In this section we provided our envisioned deﬁntion for Knowledge Graph, since an agreed
formal deﬁnition of KG is nowadays still missing. Starting from deﬁning a KG as a graph-
based structured data organization, endowed with formal semantics we ﬁxed the semantics
that should be needed for KGs and most importantly, the necessary requirements to be
taken into account when ﬁxing the semantics. We particularly argued on the importance
of taking (diﬀerent kinds of) context and contextual information into account. Hence, we