Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 105
Other research directions would include the creation and management of scholarly journals
that are machine-readable. One of the related challenges in this respect is an aim to decouple
theregistration andcertiﬁcation functions in scientiﬁc communication so that free expression
can be exercised towards materialising open and accessible scholarly knowledge [4].
Further research directions would include the development of interoperable applications
to improve discovery, accessibility, integrability, and reusability of knowledge graphs. More
generally, facilitating interactions with knowledge graphs where applications enabling read-
write operations on information at distributed locations with diﬀerent access controls,
factoring in user’s privacy and security, as well as, allowing multiple researcher identities (eg
personal, professional) working on diﬀerent parts of a graph. For example, along the lines of
research and development around decentralised and interoperable systems [1, 2].
Wikidata
Wikidata [ 5] is a knowledge base that has gained a lot of attention over the last years and is
growing. It has various interesting features that the knowledge graph community can learn
from. It also faces a number of challenges.
Wikidata’s data model has a number of features that make dealing with diverse knowledge
possible for its community. These include the ability to record conﬂicting data as well as
qualifying data with additional statements to for example give it temporal information and
record the provenance of the data. It strikes an interesting balance between a strict ontology
that makes re-use easy and a ﬂexible data model that makes it possible to capture the
complexity of the world.
Through its open and ﬂexible nature Wikidata also faces a number of challenges. These
can roughly be grouped along the data lifecycle of import, clean-up/maintenance and export.
Some of them include:
During import it is a challenge to understand what consequences adding a particular
change will have. This includes violating of constraints in the system or unintended
changes to the larger ontology.
Wikidata lacks provenance information in the form of references for a considerable part
of the existing statements it contains. It is a challenge to ﬁnd references in an automated
way for this existing data.
Some of the concepts in Wikidata are not separated cleanly (e.g. a website and the
company operating the website being treated as one accidentally). It is not trivial to ﬁnd
such concepts in order to separate them more cleanly.
By its nature Wikidata is concept-centric. This makes it harder to see and understand
the ontology and how individual classes ﬁt into the ontology. Becauses of this lack of
high-level overview it is easy for editors to make mistakes that have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the ontology without realizing it.
With its hundreds of millions of statements it is unavoidable that some of them become
outdated, vandalized or otherwise wrong. These are hard to spot for editors and without
more visibility this data is propagated to the users of that data.
Users of Wikidata’s data want to understand the state of the data before committing
to using it in their application or visualisation. It is currently not possible to get an
overview of the quality of a particular subset of the data.
When using Wikidata’s data a number of statements will have multiple values like the
prizes a famous person won. Wikidata’s built-in mechanism to rank those values by are
not always suﬃcient.
18371