108 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
graph is centralized, the company responsible for it might have more means to devise
proper security measures for the system. Indeed, users would not be prepared to share
their data if it appears the solution is not secure.
Characteristics related to implementation include:
Identiﬁers: Centralised knowledge graphs control and manage their own identiﬁers and
namespaces. Not all knowledge graphs (e.g., the Google Knowledge Graph) expose their
identiﬁers to the outside. Sometimes centralised knowledge graphs do link to external
sources as well, leading to a hub-and-spoke structure of the graph.
Schema: Centralised knowledge graphs have a single schema, used all over the data.
Query:Centralised knowledge graphs oﬀer an API for data retrieval (or provide data
dumps) and querying. These systems are furthermore optimised for the type of queries
they support.
Location: Centralised knowledge graphs require substantial computing infrastructure to
be able to handle the load, especially for knowledge graphs that oﬀer a query interface.
Timeliness: If data for centralised knowledge graphs needs to be aggregated from outside
sources, the update interval of the aggregator inﬂuences the overall timeliness of the
knowledge graph.
Modularity/Allocation: Resources are allocated at the central point, so infrastructure has
to be provided at the central point.
Data Volume: Centralized knowledge graphs can be partitioned according to centrally
deﬁned criteria.
Consistency: Given a centrally managed curation process, in combination with test cases
run on the integrated data, the overall consistency of centralised knowledge graphs can
be ensured.
Load Balancing: Access load can be easily balanced in an organisation’s internal infra-
structure.
Decentralised knowledge graphs promise beneﬁts which cannot be oﬀered by centralised
variants. Again, we start with aspects related to organisation, and then list aspects related
to implementation.
Survivability and Robustness: Decentralized knowledge graphs do not assume a central
authority over all resources. With decentralised variants, resources are independently
created, managed, and distributed such that unavailability of any particular part will not
necessarily inﬂuence the other knowledge graphs. Hence, one could say that the system
has a higher survivability and robustness, at the cost of a chance that parts become
unavailable.
Stability: The decentralised architecture, once socialised and embraced by a critical mass
of users, gives strong stability to applications, not depending on external inﬂuences (like
change of owner, company commercial decisiones, etc.). Although parts of the knowledge
graphs can become unavailable if individual providers go oﬄine, the overall knowledge
graph is potentially more resilient than centralized systems.
Curation: As the experience of free software has shown, curating open artifacts is far
more convenient that closed or private ones.
Rights and License: The diﬀerent parts are owned by their creators; parts of decentralised
knowledge graphs tend to be copyrighted or unlicensed, however often with intention for
public reuse.