94 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
In Inductive Logic Programming, the learned machine learning models make deterministic
or close to deterministic based predictions, formulated in some logic language. ILP-
type approaches also permit the integration of ontological background knowledge. In
ILP, the main object of research is not making the predictions per se, but techniques
for automatically acquiring components of the theory that enables them, in a logical
language,
In Statistical Relational Learning approaches, learned machine learning models make
probabilistic statements formulated either as a conditional probability (as in Probabilistic
Relational Models) or as a potential function (as in Markov Logic Programming).
Currently most popular are models using latent representations. Popular examples are
RESCAL, TransE, HolE and ComplEx. More recent developments are Graph Convolu-
tional approaches.
When considering KGs, most often the learning problem is formulated as a link prediction
problem (“Is component A suitable for problem B?”) or a class (type) prediction problem
(“Is this a promising customer?”). Recently, KGs have been used also in transfer learning
approaches, where the latent representations are shared between knowledge graph models,
and the representations are used in a particular application. This has been the basis, for
instance, for a medical decision support system. Particularly interesting is the pairing of
knowledge graph-based learning with the use of unstructured data. For instance, this research
direction has been used to better understand texts and images, and, conversely, also for
knowledge graph completion.
Managing and Manipulating Knowledge: Comparing Machine Learning
and Knowledge Graphs
The symbolic representations of knowledge encountered in knowledge graphs have a number
of distinct characteristics in comparison with the kinds of latent representations at the
subsymbolic level that can be induced using machine learning.
Latent representations excel at capturing knowledge that is not crisp , e.g., statistical
regularities and similarities [ 3,4]. A knowledge graph, in contrast, captures discrete facts
and it is non-trivial – though still possible [ 5,22] – to quantify the strength of association
between arbitrary items.
An important advantage of latent representations is their ability to generalize beyond
what is known explicitly [ 3]. For instance, while a knowledge graph might store genre
information for several thousands of movies, latent representations may enable us to infer the
genre of additional movies based on various informative cues. However, latent representations
do not straightforwardly allow us to keep track of exceptions to typical patterns. They may
learn the typical attributes of 14-year old Canadian teens, but would not be able to keep
track of the fact that Computer scientist Erik Demaine completed his Bachelor’s degree at
the age of 14 and was awarded his PhD degree at the University of Waterloo at the age of 20.
More generally, latent representations typically fail to record precise identities . Dense
vector representations do not normally accurately keep track of who is married to whom.
Services such as Google or Siri would not try to rely on latent representations to deliver
answers to queries such as “Where was Einstein born?’ [ 10]’. Depending on the application,
it may be important to distinguish precisely whether someone won the Nobel Prize for
Literature or rather a similar – but distinct – literature award.