82 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Logics where contexts are separated from the universe of discourse: based on Giunchiglia’s
approach of contextual reasoning [ 22] and local model theory [ 20] (DFOL, DDL, E-
connection, Package-based DL, IDDL, CKR, E-SHIQ and other variations).
The inconvenients of the last two options are that the logical formalisms are diverse, com-
plicated, and non intuitive. Despite of the multiple existing proposals, converging on a
suﬃciently ﬂexible, yet not overly general approach remains a major challenge.
As regards the second research direction, that is discovering contexts, the works on
empirical semantics (see the previous section) have shown that capturing the intended
semantics starting from the evidence provided by the mass of data is actually doable. As
such, by extensions, discovering contexts appears to be meaningful in principle. Particularly,
latent semantic approaches [ 35,36] could be exploited for discovering preliminary (even
if weak) notion of context, whilst semantic data mining [ 37] methods could be extended
for tackling more complex notions of contexts. Also pattern mining methods applied to
semantically reach representations [ 19,13] could be an important direction to be investigated.
Speciﬁcally, in this case, the pattern discovery process should be goal driven, where goals
should be given by diﬀerent kinds of context to be possibly discovered.
The two research directions represent orthogonal views of the same issue: contextual
information can be represented when available whilst additional contextual information can
possibly be captured by exploiting the evidence coming from the data (contexts are described
extensionally whilst no explicit (intensional) representation is provided). A mixture of the
solutions developed in each direction is considered a valuable research perspective potentially
delivering even more powerful results (e.g. on performing “context discovery”) when applying
it to rich data that has “explicit context”.
Accessing Knowlege Graphs
Until now, mostly KGs in an open access scenerio have been implicitely considered. However,
in broader scenarios, this would not be the case, whilst conﬁdentiality requirements and
usage constraints may arise, due to privacy concerns, laws, licensing, and more. The lack
of technical instruments for regulating access to knowledge and its usage, may hinder the
adoption of knowledge-based technologies in application contexts where such technologies
may give signiﬁcant contributions. Knowledge graphs – and the other forms of digitized,
processable knowledge – play diﬀerent roles with respect to constrained access and usage,
as they can be both the object that must be “protected”, and the speciﬁcation of the
constraints, namely the policies. The former role leads to speciﬁc conﬁdentiality requirements
such as being inference-proof. In other words, it should not be possible to reconstruct
concealed information by (automatically) reasoning on the visible part. The latter role poses
expressiveness requirements on the (knowledge based) policy language. Both roles pose
scalability requirements, since the access control layer should not introduce unsustainable
overhead. We use two scenarios to illustrate the importance of regulating access to knowledge,
and the main open research challenges in this area. The scenarios consist of: (i) integrating
diﬀerent knowledge graphs with diﬀerent licenses, and (ii) providing support for a knowledge
graphs marketplace.
In the marketplace use case, there is a need to build a marketplace for knowledge that
could be used to speed up business processes and systems. The primary challenge relates
to the automated matchmaking between knowledge owners and knowledge consumers.
In order to support this matchmaking, we must be able to represent not only potential