Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 18371
Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for Knowledge
Representation on the Semantic Web
Edited by
Piero Andrea Bonatti1, Stefan Decker2, Axel Polleres3, and
Valentina Presutti4
1 University of Naples, IT, pieroandrea.bonatti@unina.it
2 RWTH Aachen, DE, decker@informatik.rwth-aachen.de
3 Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT, axel.polleres@wu.ac.at
4 STLab, ISTC-CNR – Rome, IT, valentina.presutti@istc.cnr.it
Abstract
The increasingly pervasive nature of the Web, expanding to devices and things in everyday
life, along with new trends in Artiﬁcial Intelligence call for new paradigms and a new look on
Knowledge Representation and Processing at scale for the Semantic Web. The emerging, but still
to be concretely shaped concept of “Knowledge Graphs” provides an excellent unifying metaphor
for this current status of Semantic Web research. More than two decades of Semantic Web
research provides a solid basis and a promising technology and standards stack to interlink data,
ontologies and knowledge on the Web. However, neither are applications for Knowledge Graphs
as such limited to Linked Open Data, nor are instantiations of Knowledge Graphs in enterprises
– while often inspired by – limited to the core Semantic Web stack. This report documents the
program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 18371 “Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for
Knowledge Representation on the Semantic Web”, where a group of experts from academia and
industry discussed fundamental questions around these topics for a week in early September 2018,
including the following: what are knowledge graphs? Which applications do we see to emerge?
Which open research questions still need be addressed and which technology gaps still need to
be closed?
Seminar September 9–14, 2018 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/18371
2012 ACM Subject Classiﬁcation Information systems →Semantic web description languages,
Computing methodologies →Artiﬁcial intelligence, Computing methodologies →Knowledge
representation and reasoning, Computing methodologies →Natural language processing,
Computing methodologies →Machine learning, Human-centered computing →Collaborative
and social computing
Keywords and phrases knowledge graphs, knowledge representation, linked data, ontologies,
semantic web
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.4230/DagRep.8.9.29
Edited in cooperation with Michael Cochez
Acknowledgements The editors are grateful to Michael Cochez for his valuable contributions
to the planning and organization of this workshop. He was in all respects the ﬁfth organizer.
Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for Knowledge Representation on the Semantic Web, Dagstuhl Reports ,
Vol. 8, Issue 09, pp. 29–111
Editors: Piero Andrea Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti
Dagstuhl Reports
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany