78 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Knowledge Graphs: A Commons
Our deﬁnition establishes a deliberately low barrier to entry for what is considered a
“Knowledge Graph” to not only ﬁt the diverse views now established in practice, but also
to encourage study across a variety of areas, ﬁtting with our goal that it may become a
commons for more interdisciplinary research. The study of “Knowledge Graphs” ideally
involves participation of researchers from the variety of ﬁelds previously mentioned, beneﬁting
from tighter collaborations between such ﬁelds, leading to novel research questions, theories
and techniques being applied speciﬁcally to understanding how to compose knowledge from
diverse data at scale. By scale we refer not only to volume, but also the notions of velocity,
variety and veracity often referred to under the moniker of “Big Data”.
On the other hand, we strongly encourage researchers who wish to refer to “Knowledge
Graphs” as their object of study to rigorously deﬁne how they instantiate the term as
appropriate to their investigation. Such a deﬁnition should begin by deﬁning the particular
graph-based model/view of data adopted by that particular study (while refraining from
excluding other deﬁnitions). Thereafter, the study should clarify what is the form of
“knowledge” that such a graph intends to compose, how this form of “knowledge” contributes
to the interpretability of such graphs, and what techniques are proposed along those lines.
Acknowledgements
Axel Polleres’ work is supported by the EC under the H2020 project SPECIAL and by the
Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) under the projects “CitySpin”, “Communidata”
and“DALICC”.AidanHoganisfundedbytheMillenniumInstituteforFoundationalResearch
on Data (IMFD) and Fondecyt Grant No. 1181896.
References
1R.R. Bakker. Knowledge Graphs: representation and structuring of scientiﬁc knowledge .
PhD thesis, University of Twente, Enschede, 1987.
2K. Bollacker, C. Evans, P. Paritosh, T. Sturge, J. Taylor Freebase: A Collaboratively
Created Graph Database For Structuring Human Knowledge . InSIGMOD Conference , pages
1247-1250, 2008.
3A. Borgida and J.F. Sowa. Principles of semantic networks – explorations in the represent-
ation of knowledge . The Morgan Kaufmann Series in representation and reasoning. Morgan
Kaufmann, 1991.
4L. Ehrlinger and W. Wöß. Towards a Deﬁnition of Knowledge Graphs. In International
Conference on Semantic Systems (SEMANTiCS2016), Posters & Demos . CEUR-WS.org,
2016.
5W.D. Hillis. “Aristotle” (The Knowledge Web). Later republished in Edge (May 2004) ,
https://www.edge.org/conversation/w_daniel_hillis-aristotle-the-knowledge-web, 2000.
6E. Marchi and O. Miguel. On the structure of the teaching-learning interactive process.
Int. Journal of Game Theory , 3(2):83–99, 1974.
7J.P. McCusker, J.S. Erickson, K. Chastain, S. Rashid, R. Weerawarana, and D.L. McGuin-
ness. What is a Knowledge Graph? Semantic Web , 2018. (under review; available from
http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/content/what-knowledge-graph).
8T. Pellissier Tanon, D. Vrandecic, S. Schaﬀert, T. Steiner, and L. Pintscher. From Freebase
to Wikidata: The Great Migration. In International World Wide Web Conference (WWW) ,
pages 1419–1428, 2016.