54 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
3.16 Knowledge Integration at Scale
Andreas Harth (Fraunhofer IIS – Nürnberg, DE), Roberto Navigli (Sapienza University of
Rome, IT), Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese (CNR – Rome, IT), Maria-Esther Vidal (TIB –
Hannover, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Andreas Harth, Roberto Navigli, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Maria-Esther Vidal
Introduction
The number and variety of data sets have grown exponentially during the last decades and a
similar growth rate is expected in the next years. In order to transform the enormous amount
of disparate data into actionable knowledge, fundamental problems, such as knowledge
integration, must be solved. Integrating data sets requires the eﬀective identiﬁcation of
entities that, albeit described diﬀerently, correspond to the same real-world entity. This
integration problem has received considerable attention from various computer science
domains such as databases, artiﬁcial intelligence, and semantic web. However, there are still
key challenges that need to be faced in order to integrate knowledge at scale. Open issues
arise because entities can be made available by autonomous sources either at rest or in motion,
and represented in various models or (un)structured formats. Moreover, entity meaning may
change over time and become inconsistent and incomplete with periodic peaks. During the
Dagstuhl seminar “Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for Knowledge Representation on
the Semantic Web”, members of the “Knowledge Integration at scale” working group have
discussed these challenges around entity meaning and identity reasoning. Results of these
discussions are reported, as well as existing approaches for knowledge integration, grand
challenges, and future research directions.
Knowledge Integration and Existing Approaches
The problem of knowledge integration can be framed as follows. Given a collection of data
sets such as unstructured text, media (e.g., images, videos, sounds), knowledge graphs,
databases, and knowledge bases, the problem of knowledge integration is to identify if two
entities in the collection of data sets match or do not match the same real-world entity. An
entity–in a data collection–is a multi-modal item of knowledge like a word, a concept, a
sentence, a text, a database record, a media segment, a knowledge graph, or an ontology.
Solving the problem of knowledge integration requires ﬁrst identifying the knowledge items
in diverse data sets. Then, interoperability conﬂicts among these items need to be detected,
and ﬁnally, these conﬂicts need to be resolved. Once equivalent entities have been matched,
diﬀerent fusion policies are performed for merging them into a single entity [ 6]. Considering
the wide nature of entities, the state of the art has focused on integration methods that
reduce manual work and maximize accuracy and precision.
Data integration has been extensively treated in the context of databases [ 9]. As a result,
a vast amount of integration frameworks [ 13] have been developed; they implement data
integration systems following the local-as-view (LAV), global-as-view paradigms (GAV), and
global and local as view (GLAV) [ 20]. Further, query processing has also played a relevant
role in solving data integration on the ﬂy. Graph-based traversal [ 2,21], and distributed and
federated query processing [ 3,5,27,31] are representative approaches for enabling the fusion
of the properties of equivalent entities on demand, i.e., at query execution time.