Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 103
For example, healthcare practitioners are used to work with lists of concepts, rather than
networks and graphs. Studies in cognitive sciences can help evaluate knowledge representation
decisions and inform the design of the tools and applications through which people interact
with knowledge graph structures, suggesting eﬀective ways to render and present them.
The UX of entity-centric exploratory tasks could be greatly enhanced if considering
theories about the nature of learning and the best ways to support it. For example, tools
could start by showing users entities they are familiar with, or entities that are far away
from their area of expertise, depending on the eﬀect that needs to be achieved. Learning
considerations should also inform the design of evaluations and benchmarks, which should
be extended to capture the eﬀects a particular technique or algorithm had on the reference
model of their users.
Natural language generation (NLG) can be used to create text summaries of datasets
which are more accessible to audiences that are not familiar with the particulars of data
modeling and engineering. Accessibility is critical to allow a greater range of people and
communities to contribute to knowledge graphs. In open contexts, this is very much aligned
with their diversity and inclusivity agendas. For enterprise knowledge graphs, broadening the
base of contributors is a pathway to sustainability. Existing narrative generation techniques
follow a tech-centric approach, using rule-based templates to capture domain knowledge or
data-heavy deep learning. The underlying models should incorporate insights from theoretical
and empirical cognitive science to ensure that the text they produce matches the abilities
and needs of the people using it.
Beyond text, the human data interaction community is exploring alternative data repres-
entations, interfaces and experiences, for instance by using games with a purpose, interactive
storytelling, orvirtualandaugmentedreality. Theseapproachescouldbeappliedtoknowledge
graphs, which through their rich content and connectedness oﬀer an interesting playground
for the development of bespoke projects that appeal to broader, non-expert audiences in
various professional roles.
In summary, there is a need to reach out to communities traditionally involved in studying
human and social factors. All challenges discussed by the group would beneﬁt from insights
and methods from complementary disciplines, including HCI and behavioural, cognitive,
social and political sciences. We should as a community strive to support the organisation of
workshops at venues such as CSCW, CHI, Information Science and Web Science, including
researchers and practitioners from other ﬁelds early on.
Summary
In summary, this working group concluded that a major challenge related to human and
social factors of knowledge graphs lies in leveraging theory, methods and empirical evidence
from other disciplines in order to:
Understand the cognitive and social processes by which knowledge (and knowledge shaped
as a graph) emerges.
Identify patterns and best practices to support these processes.
Improve developer experience to allow them to create, curate and reuse knowledge graph
eﬀectively.
Build an understanding of the frameworks, methods and tools required to support
developers create knowledge graph applications that are transparent and accountable by
design.
18371