Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 39
3.4 Knowledge graph creation and management
Michel Dumontier (Maastricht University, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Michel Dumontier
While there are many manifestations of knowledge graphs (KGs), there are few guidelines as
to how to create them or make them widely available in a reliable manner owing to ambiguity
in their deﬁnition. In the most basic sense, KGs represent some form of knowledge that
is amenable to processing by graph or reasoning algorithms, in which entities are related
to their attributes and to other entities, along with provenance of where that knowledge
was obtained. KGs are created through a myriad of approaches – be it manual, automatic,
or semi-automatic – using a variety of data sources such as textual documents, microdata
embedded in web pages, large and small databases, and crowdsourced statements. They are
subject to a wide variety of data processing activities such as mapping entities to concepts,
extracting relations from text, transforming facts to speciﬁc formats for indexing, integrating
vastly diﬀerent data sources, and ﬁnding errors through quality assessment. All KG creation
methods have their advantages and disadvantages, and can often create vastly diﬀerent
KGs that can have important implications in downstream applications such as answering
questions, oﬀering recommendations, and making new predictions. Clearly, there remain
great challenges towards organizing the emerging KG community in making their KGs FAIR
– Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable – to the beneﬁt of both humans and
machines.
3.5 New Symbol Groundings for Knowledge Graphs
Paul Groth (University of Amsterdam, NL & Elsevier Labs, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Paul Groth
Today’s knowledge graphs primarily use social systems in combination with logics to deﬁne
the meaning of their symbols. For example, a knowledge graph might use rdfs:subClassOf to
deﬁne a subclass hierarchy – the meaning of which is found by dereferencing to a document
on the web and then interpreting the natural language and mathematical deﬁnitions found
at the location. I suggest that we should instead think about grounding the symbols of
a knowledge graph (the entities and relations) in other mediums. For example, one can
think about grounding these symbols in a sub-symbolic space (e.g. vector embeddings).
Likewise, it is possible to ground symbols in physical reality through sensors or in shared
simulations. Adopting these other forms of groundings would allow for more expressive
knowledge graphs. There are a number of sets of related work that provide good routes into
these alternative mechanisms. The work of Douwe Kiela is highly relevant as discussed in
his thesis “Deep embodiment: grounding semantics in perceptual modalities”. The work of
Cynthia Matuszek on grounded language acquisition using robotics is also highly relevant.
Additionally, resources such as visualgenome.org enable the connection of symbols and images.
Overall, combining these lines of work with Knowledge Graphs can provide a rich set of new
research avenues around integration, reasoning, use and exchange.
18371