32 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Figure 1 Blackboard with post-its from the open session.
The more popular ones (up to ﬁfteen and having at least three sign ups) were selected
to compose the agenda. Each break out session used a one-hour slot during the afternoon.
The second day continued with most of the break out sessions with the aim of continuing
the discussion started the ﬁrst day and work towards consolidating a report (ﬁnalised on
the fourth day). Reports would reﬂect view and vision emerging from the break out group.
On the same day attendees had the opportunity to self-propose to give additional short
speeches, addressing missing relevant topics. We used part of the second day’s morning for
these speeches. We explicitly asked attendees to avoid speeches on “my research” and to
only address relevant challenges that were overlooked so far.
On the third day we started with a plenary discussion and the seminar group agreed on
splitting into four groups to discuss “Grand challenges” separately, then share the results
before going back to the break out sessions. The aim was to share a common high level
vision reference before consolidating the more speciﬁc discussions that were ongoing in the
break out sessions. On the fourth day, the seminar group split again in break out sessions
including a “Grand challenges” one. Each session was assigned to at least two coordinators,
who committed to consolidate in a draft report the results from the previous meetings. It
was decided to merge a few topics, when appropriate.
Break out sessions had varied level of technical abstraction depending on the nature of
the topic, and its level of maturity within the state of the art. To give some examples: the
break out session about “Grand challenges” mainly discussed a vision for a future research
agenda and maintained a high level of abstraction, while the session on “Human and Social
Factors in Knowledge Graphs” provided more concrete insights as it could build on both
academic and industrial research results, projects and practical experiences. The session on
“Applications of Knowledge Graphs” focused on technical details and issues on two relevant
sample applications.