Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 71
Motivating Examples
Before continuing, we enumerate some motivating examples that help to illustrate the
importance of considering queries and analytics in a uniﬁed framework. We will consider
a hypothetical Knowledge Graph of bibliographical data considering scientiﬁc articles, the
articles they cite, where they were published, their authors, their ﬁelds, and relations between
ﬁelds. Potentially relevant questions on such a Knowledge Graph include:
Find sub-communities of Computer Science in Mexico.
Find the most important papers in AI published in IJCAI.
Find connections (paths) from researchers in UChile and UBA.
Such questions involve goals that are naturally expressed through queries (Computer Science
papers, authors in Mexico, papers in IJCAI, researchers in UChile, etc.) and goals that are
naturally expressed through analytics (sub-communities, important papers, connections).
Inspecting these questions, we can see that querying and analytical goals are interleaved,
where we may wish to analyse a graph produced as the result of a query, or querying a graph
enriched with the results of analyse, or any such combination.
Rather than pushing data between separate querying and analytical frameworks, the goal
would be to combine both into one framework, allowing for the design of a uniﬁed language,
hybrid algorithms optimised to consider all goals, as well as practical tools, interfaces and
implementations.
Graph Analysis Requirements:
Letusconsidersomeofthecommontypesofalgorithmsusedinthegraphanalyticscommunity
that could be interesting to combine with queries in a uniﬁed framework.
Centrality. Centrality of graphs can serve as indicators of ﬁnding the most important/most
inﬂuential vertices of a graph. As an example, centrality measure would allow, e.g., an
analysis of the most inﬂuential papers in a network of publications, cross-citations, and
co-authorships (given the above example bibliographic Knowledge Graph).
Community structure/detection. A graph is said to have communities if there are densely
connected structures that can be grouped in node subsets. Community detection al-
gorithms, such as minimum-cut algorithms, allow to discover these sub-communities,
which, for instance, could relate to a connected sub-community of researchers, given the
above example.
Paths/Flows. A path in a graph generically denotes a connection between two nodes that
may traverse multiple edges. Various technical deﬁnitions exist that restrict the set of
valid paths between such nodes, including simple paths that do not visit the same node
twice, or regular path queries that restrict the labels of edges that can be traversed by
the path [ 2]. Additionally, extensions of such regular path queries with more complex
conditions on properties have been deﬁned, which are particularly important when dealing
with graph data beyond “ﬂat” RDF, such as property graphs that express provenance or
other contextual information along the edges.
Vertex similarity. There exist measures for “vertex similarity” that capture the relatedness
of nodes in a graph by considering the neighbours they have in common and/or the
speciﬁcity of the paths that exist between them. These methods allow to understand
what connects nodes, and, thereafter, in what ways they are similar.
Connectivity/Spanning trees. The connectivity of a graph – deﬁned as the number of vertices
or edges that need to be removed to disconnect the graph – in the context of Knowledge
Graphs allows to analyse the resilience and (un)reachability of components. Also, related
to the connectivity is the spanning tree of such a graph.
18371