56 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Opportunities of Knowledge Integration in Knowledge Graphs
Knowledge graphs encompass large volume of knowledge items, and enable the description
of the meaning of their main properties and relations. Albeit challenging in terms of data
and knowledge complexity, knowledge graphs bring enormous opportunities for improving
modern methods of knowledge integration. First, machine learning approaches like knowledge
graph embeddings, transfer learning, bidirectional information extraction, active learning,
and distance supervision, can beneﬁt from the knowledge encoded in knowledge graphs, thus
providing more accurate results during knowledge integration. Further, the deﬁnition of
expressive formalisms for describing integrated knowledge such as probabilistic logic, and
symbolic or subsymbolic knowledge representation, represent open challenges. Similarly,
the deﬁnition of entity matching methods capable of exploiting these novel representations
correspond to a propitious research topic. Finally, there is an expeditious need of devising
methods for eﬃciently including humans in the loop , and enabling them to eﬀectively deﬁne
and curate high-quality training data sets.
Conclusions and Future Directions
The problem of knowledge integration in a vast variety of large data sets has been discussed.
Existing approaches in areas like databases and semantic web, as well as the application
of modern machine learning methods, not only evidence the relevance of the problem, but
also the diversity of challenges that demand to be faced. The future of the area promises
a wide range of opportunities that vary from representation formalisms, modern machine
learning methods, and hybrid knowledge integration techniques. Our ambition is that the
presented discussion encourages the community to develop novel methods that enable the
overall reduction of knowledge integration while providing highly accurate results.
References
1R. Agerri, X. Artola, Z. Beloki, G. Rigau, and A. Soroa. Big Data for Natural Language
Processing: A streaming approach. Knowl.-Based Syst. , 79:36–42, 2015.
2R. Angles, M. Arenas, P. Barceló, A. Hogan, J.L. Reutter, and D. Vrgoc. Foundations
of Modern Query Languages for Graph Databases. ACM Comput. Surv. , 50(5):68:1–68:40,
2017.
3C.B. Aranda. Federated Query Processing for the Semantic Web . PhD thesis, Technical
University of Madrid, Spain, 2014.
4M. Cheatham, I.F. Cruz, J. Euzenat, and C. Pesquita. Special issue on ontology and linked
data matching. Semantic Web , 8(2):183–184, 2017.
5C. Chen, B. Golshan, A.Y. Halevy, W. Tan, and A. Doan. BigGorilla: An Open-Source
Ecosystem for Data Preparation and Integration. IEEE Data Eng. Bull. , 41(2):10–22, 2018.
6D. Collarana, M. Galkin, I. Traverso-Ribón, M. Vidal, C. Lange, and S. Auer. MINTE:
semantically integrating RDF graphs. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics, WIMS , 2017.
7D. V. Deursen, C. Poppe, G. Martens, E. Mannens, and R. V. de Walle. XML to RDF
Conversion: A Generic Approach. In Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on
Automated Solutions for Cross Media Content and Multi-channel Distribution , AXMEDIS
’08, pages 138–144, 2008.
8A. Dimou, M.V. Sande, P. Colpaert, R. Verborgh, E. Mannens, and R. V. de Walle. RML:
A generic language for integrated RDF mappings of heterogeneous data. In Proceedings