Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 91
Opportunities
The following opportunities are open at the intersection between knowledge graphs and NLP:
Mutual exchange between knowledge graphs and NLP: Explicit knowledge may
help ﬁlter out incorrect named entity linking candidates based on temporal constraints (a
car model cannot be involved in an accident before it is produced). Accordingly:
Is a knowledge graph expressive enough for NLP? An opportunity is to in-
vestigate new formalisms or theories for enabling knowledge graphs to represent the
richness of natural language;
CanlexicalizedknowledgegraphsimproveNLP? Multilingualknowledgegraphs
on Web scale can be used as background knowledge for addressing NLP tasks more
eﬀectively. For example, NLP tasks that needs to be context-aware or require commons
sense might beneﬁt from lexical knowledge graphs.
Representation issues: for instance, the semantics of an apparently unambiguous word
like copyright has distinct culturally-speciﬁc meanings in diﬀerent countries; some words,
such asikigaiorgezellig, cannot be expressed in other languages and alternative (typically
more general) meanings have to be provided.
How to address cultural speciﬁcity? Applications can be better tailored to users
needs, and barriers in cross-cultural communication can be overcome. This, together with
the above point, are important research opportunities to tailor solutions to the culture
which speaks (or translates from) a certain language.
Is there any eﬀective and usable formal semantics that, from an NLP perspective,
can be consistently adopted to capture the meaning of language (independently of which
language is used)? For instance, work in the ﬁeld of semantic parsing is still struggling
for the right type of structured representation [13].
Conclusions
The time is ripe for NLP and knowledge graphs to get together. Several opportunities
are open which can provide the two areas with mutual beneﬁts and clear performance
improvements, on one hand, in the type and quality of the represented knowledge, and, on
the other hand, on the use of general knowledge for improving text understanding.
References
1Eneko Agirre, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, and Aitor Soroa. Random walks for knowledge-based
word sense disambiguation. Computational Linguistics , 40(1):57–84, 2014.
2Francesco Corcoglioniti, Marco Rospocher, and Alessio Palmero Aprosio. Frame-based
ontology population with pikes. IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng. , 28(12):3261–3275,
December 2016.
3Gerard de Melo. Lexvo.org: Language-related information for the Linguistic Linked Data
cloud.Semantic Web , 6(4):393–400, August 2015.
4Oren Etzioni, Michele Banko, and Michael J. Cafarella. Machine reading. In Machine Read-
ing, Papers from the 2007 AAAI Spring Symposium, Technical Report SS-07-06, Stanford,
California, USA, March 26-28, 2007 , pages 1–5, 2007.
5Aldo Gangemi, Mehwish Alam, Luigi Asprino, Valentina Presutti, and Diego Reforgiato
Recupero. Framester: Awidecoveragelinguisticlinkeddatahub. In Knowledge Engineering
and Knowledge Management – 20th International Conference, EKAW 2016, Bologna, Italy,
November 19-23, 2016, Proceedings , pages 239–254, 2016.
18371