Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 97
lenges such as E2E18,19[14] and the WebNLG challenge [ 8] provide ﬁrst indications as
to KGs a potential lingua franca for human-machine interaction.
Early approaches to NLG are mostly template-based, which prevents them from being
easily adapted to other domains [ 16]. There are also approaches that compare and
contrast deep learning-based and template-based approaches [15, 2].
Caption generation for images
Video prediction
2.Medical / Drug:
Drug activity prediction
Transparency in the knowledge, behaviour and assumption change in the clinical
decision process.
The Clinical Data Intelligence Project. The notion of “clinical data intelligence” refers
to the integration of medical data from heterogeneous resources, the combination of
the extracted information, and the generation of medical clinically-relevant knowledge
about patients or treatments. [ 21]. Again here the semantic integration, that is,
the codiﬁcation of data, metadata and relationships with other sources and user
description together in one standard format, allows us to uniformly apply machine
learning techniques to this now uniﬁed knowledge.
Blue Brain Nexus20is a data repository and metadata catalogue organizing (agnostic
of the domain) that treats provenance as a ﬁrst-class citizen, thus facilitating the
tracking of the origin of data and how it is being used, thus allowing to assess data
quality.
3.Link Recommendation
4.Robotics. RoboBrain (2014): “Building such an engine brings with it the challenge
of dealing with multiple data modalities including symbols, natural language, haptic
senses, robot trajectories, visual features and many others. The knowledge stored in the
engine comes from multiple sources including physical interactions that robots have while
performing tasks (perception, planning and control), knowledge bases from the Internet
and learned representations from several robotics research groups.” [18].
Integrating these data sources to build a dataset requires importing and documenting in
the data the sources, types, interrelations, etc., that is, building a knowledge graph.
5.Deep Learning
Knowledge Graphs supporting DL for prediction and decision support
Transfer Learning: from KGs to DL
Knowledge Graph supported DL Perception Systems
Autonomous training of new DL models using data stored in KG, based on problem
description (completely automate training of a DL classiﬁer or transformer by storing
the data in a KG and identifying the relevant training examples using inference).
Similarly, supporting completely automated Data Science
Demonstrate storing outputs from a DL system in a KG in a form that allows another
DL system to perform better on a new task
E.g. translation system learns a new language with few examples using grammatical
or semantic knowledge acquired elsewhere
E.g. same KG improves caption generation
18http://www.macs.hw.ac.uk/InteractionLab/E2E/
19https://inlg2018.uvt.nl/special-session-generation-challenges/
20https://bluebrain.epﬂ.ch/page-153280-en.html
18371