Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 89
Martin Homola, and Daniele Porello, editors, Joint Proceedings of the Web Stream Pro-
cessing Workshop (WSP 2017) and the 2nd International Workshop on Ontology Modular-
ity, Contextuality, and Evolution (WOMoCoE 2017) Co-Located with 16th International
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2017), Vienna, Austria, October 22nd, 2017 , volume
1936 ofCEUR Workshop Proceedings , pages 74–85. Sun SITE Central Europe (CEUR),
October 2017.
51Antoine Zimmermann, Nuno Lopes, Axel Polleres, and Umberto Straccia. A general frame-
work for representing, reasoning and querying with annotated Semantic Web data. Journal
of Web Semantics , 11:72–95, 2012.
3.22 Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Graphs
Paul Groth (University of Amsterdam – Amsterdam, NL & Elsevier Labs – Amsterdam, NL),
Roberto Navigli (Sapienza University of Rome, IT), Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese (CNR –
Rome, IT), Marieke van Erp (KNAW Humanities Cluster – Amsterdam, NL), and Gerard
de Melo (Rutgers University – Piscataway, US)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Paul Groth, Roberto Navigli, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Marieke van Erp, and Gerard de Melo
Introduction
The Natural Language Processing (NLP) community has focused on machine learning and
data-driven approaches to linguistic problems for several decades now, leading to the recent
proposal of implicit, latent models and representations obtained from large amounts of
training data [ 9,17]. In contrast, the Semantic Technology community has primarily taken
a symbolic approach resulting in the production of explicit, human-readable knowledge
representations [ 7,19]. However, both communities share core goals of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
such as making applications more intelligent and interactive, and, in the longer term, enabling
machine understanding. Knowledge Graphs provide a key contribution to bridging the gap
between the two areas and join forces to achieve their common mission.
Challenges in NLP
A central goal in NLP is to study the design and implementation of abstractive and com-
prehensive representations of the knowledge captured in natural language. In many cases,
this can be achieved by means of knowledge graphs. The problem can be viewed from two
perspectives:
Capturing the richness of text as a knowledge graph: this perspective is charac-
terized by challenges such as extracting and representing:
quantiﬁers (e.g., “in this country a woman gives birth every15 minutes”);
modality (e.g., “it canbe a good opportunity”);
negation and logical structures (e.g., “this solution is notgood”);
temporal aspects, based on context and tenses (e.g., “Barack Obama served as US
President from 2009 to 2017 ”) or based on historical context (e.g., the evolution of
cultural heritage goods);
pragmatics, including coreference and anaphora resolution, common-sense reasoning
and irony detection (e.g., referring to the above sentence, “our job is to ﬁnd that
woman and stop her”).
18371