40 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
3.6 Cultural issues in multilingual knowledge graph
Roberto Navigli (Sapienza University of Rome, IT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Roberto Navigli
When dealing with multilingual lexicalized knowledge graphs, such as Wikidata or BabelNet,
a number of issues arise, including the impossibility to lexicalize a certain concept in a given
language (e.g. ikigai from Japanese; gezellig from Dutch), the diﬀerent perception of the same
concept in diﬀerent cultures (e.g. copyright in the UK vs. Germany) or the granularity of
sense distinctions. All these issues need to be addressed in upcoming research of multlingual
KGs.
3.7 Quality and Evaluation of Knowledge Graphs (beyond DBpedia)
Heiko Paulheim (Universität Mannheim, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Heiko Paulheim
Various metrics for the quality evaluation of knowledge graphs have been proposed. Zaveri et
al. [1] propose a set of 17 metrics, focusing mostly on technical and legal dimensions of the
data and Linked Data recommendations. They cluster the metrics into availability, licensing,
interlinking, security, and performance. Färber et al. [ 2] come up with a broader collection,
encompassing accuracy, trustworthiness, consistency, relevancy, completeness, timeliness,
ease of understanding, interoperability, accessibility, licensing, and interlinking. Looking not
only at those papers, but also at the open reviews reveals that deﬁning objective metrics for
KG quality is a challenging endeavour. Despite the mere analysis of the quality of existing
knowledge graphs, various methods for improving the quality of those knowledge graphs have
been proposed as well, which we have reviewed in [ 3]. In that article, we do not only review
more than 40 approaches of KG completion and error detection, but also shed more light on
the evaluation.
Some of the key ﬁndings of the survey include:
1.Although KG completion and error detection seem related, there are rarely any approaches
that tackle both tasks simultaneously.
2.Likewise, although quite a few approaches deal with error detection, error correction is
hardly addressed.
3.DBpedia is the most used KG for evaluation. Many papers only report on DBpedia,
hence making it diﬃcult to derive general applicability of the proposed approaches.
4.There is a large variety of evaluation setups, ranging from split validation to cross
validation with various splits and foldings, and a large number of diﬀerent metrics used
aside precision, recall, and F1-score. Due to those diﬀerences in the setup, it is hard to
compare results between diﬀerent papers directly.
5.Scalability evaluations are still rare; almost half of the papers do not mention scalability
at all.
Following up on those observations, there are some research question that we identfy
worthwhile diving into:
1.Which quality improvements does the community deem the most necessary (e.g., com-
pleteness, correctness, linkage, ...)