Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 63
5M. Hartung, J.F. Terwilliger, and E. Rahm. Recent advances in schema and ontology
evolution. In Schema Matching and Mapping , Data-Centric Systems and Applications,
pages 149–190. Springer, 2011.
6P.D. Leenheer and T. Mens. Ontology evolution. In Ontology Management , volume 7 of
Semantic Web and Beyond: Computing for Human Experience , pages 131–176. Springer,
2008.
7N.F. Noy and M.C.A. Klein. Ontology evolution: Not the same as schema evolution.
Knowl. Inf. Syst. , 6(4):428–440, 2004.
8V. Papakonstantinou, G. Flouris, I. Fundulaki, K. Stefanidis, and G. Roussakis. Versioning
for linked data: Archiving systems and benchmarks. In BLINK@ISWC , volume 1700 of
CEUR Workshop Proceedings . CEUR-WS.org, 2016.
9E.D. Valle, S. Ceri, F. van Harmelen, and D. Fensel. It’s a streaming world! reasoning
upon rapidly changing information. IEEE Intelligent Systems , 24(6):83–89, 2009.
10F. Zablith, G. Antoniou, M. d’Aquin, G. Flouris, H. Kondylakis, E. Motta, D. Plexousakis,
and M. Sabou. Ontology evolution: a process-centric survey. Knowledge Eng. Review ,
30(1):45–75, 2015.
3.18 Evaluation of Knowledge Graphs
Heiko Paulheim (Universität Mannheim, DE), Marta Sabou (TU Wien, AT), Michael Cochez
(Fraunhofer FIT – Sankt Augustin, DE), and Wouter Beek (University of Amsterdam, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Heiko Paulheim, Marta Sabou, Michael Cochez, and Wouter Beek
As there are more and more eﬀorts to build knowledge graphs that complement the “main-
stream” KGs such as DBpedia and Wikidata, and a plethora of work that try to improve
those knowledge graphs in various directions (e.g., adding missing pieces of information, or
ﬂagging incorrect axioms), there is a growing need to deﬁne the standards for an evaluation.
Moreover, since each research work has to prove itself against the state of the art, there is a
stronger focus on reproducibility of scientiﬁc experiments, also for knowledge graphs. This
chapter discusses some questions and guidelines regarding evaluation methods and protocols
for knowledge graphs.
Introduction
The evaluation of conceptual models has its roots in the ﬁeld of Knowledge-based systems
and was adapted to the evaluation of Description Logics ontologies popular in Semantic Web
[9], leading to a vibrant ﬁeld [ 6,8,29,24]. Ontology evaluation focuses on “checking the
technical quality of an ontology against a frame of reference” such as a gold standard ontology,
a representative domain corpus, a speciﬁcation document, or general human knowledge [ 9].
Evaluation activities have the goal of assessing the ontology’s domain coverage, quality of
modeling (syntactic, structural, semantic quality), suitability for anapplication, or community
adoption [ 24]. Evaluation goals are achieved with evaluation methods. Metrics-based methods
assess ontology quality by computing a numeric value based on its characteristics [ 6,8].
Veriﬁcation methods identify defects (a.k.a. errors, or pitfalls) in the ontology, i.e., a set of
issues related to a part of the ontology that should be corrected [22].
18371