100 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
21Daniel Sonntag, Volker Tresp, Sonja Zillner, Alexander Cavallaro, Matthias Hammon, An-
dré Reis, Peter A. Fasching, Martin Sedlmayr, Thomas Ganslandt, Hans-Ulrich Prokosch,
Klemens Budde, Danilo Schmidt, Carl Hinrichs, Thomas Wittenberg, Philipp Daumke,
and Patricia G. Oppelt. The clinical data intelligence project – A smart data initiative.
Informatik Spektrum , 39(4):290–300, 2016.
22Ganggao Zhu and Carlos A. Iglesias. Computing semantic similarity of concepts in know-
ledge graphs. IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng. , 29(1):72–85, January 2017.
3.24 Human and Social Factors in Knowledge Graphs
Marta Sabou (TU Wien, AT), Elena Simperl (University of Southampton, GB), Eva Blomqvist
(Linköping University, SE), Paul Groth (University of Amsterdam, NL & Elsevier Labs, NL),
Sabrina Kirrane (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT), Gerard de Melo (Rutgers University –
Piscataway, US), Barend Mons (Leiden University Medical Center, NL), Heiko Paulheim
(Universität Mannheim, DE), Lydia Pintscher (Wikimedia Deutschland, DE), Valentina
Presutti (STLab, ISTC-CNR, IT), Juan F. Sequeda (Capsenta Inc. – Austin, US), and
Cogan Matthew Shimizu (Wright State University – Dayton, US)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Marta Sabou, Elena Simperl, Eva Blomqvist, Paul Groth, Sabrina Kirrane, Gerarrd de Melo,
Barend Mons, Heiko Paulheim, Lydia Pintscher, Valentina Presutti, Juan F. Sequeda, and Cogan
Matthew Shimizu
Knowledge graphs are created in socio-technical systems. The fewest of them are produced
without any form of human or social activity. In most cases, whether it is community projects
such as Wikidata and the Linked Open Data Cloud or enterprise knowledge graphs such as
Amazon’s product graph, various knowledge acquisition and curation aspects can hardly be
fully automated for technical or operational reasons. Through their applications, knowledge
graphs also reach people as end-users or consumers, and fuel algorithmic decision-making
with potentially far-reaching economic and social impact.
Exploring the human and social factors of knowledge graphs has hence extensive beneﬁts:
It aids tech designers come up with methods and tools that support people at their
knowledge graph work.
It gives insight into the range of skills required to create, maintain and use knowledge
graphs, hence making projects more eﬀective.
It helps develop an understanding of the social processes that underpin community
projects such as Wikidata and DBpedia, and of the links between the social make-up of
the community and the qualities of its outcomes.
In the same context, it can assist community managers in improving teams’ performance
and collaboration, and spot areas that could beneﬁt from a greater diversity of skills,
interests and opinions.
It informs the design of useful interfaces and representations of knowledge graphs, partic-
ularly towards application end-users with limited technical abilities.
It supports the generation of richer explanations and other forms of transparency and
accountability of AI systems.
People and communities engage with knowledge graphs in multiple ways. Interactions
can be explicit (for instance, adding a statement to Wikidata) or implicit (for instance,
clicking on a product in Amazon’s knowledge graph when browsing the Amazon’s website).
To characterise them, we considered three dimensions: