Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 81
Taking context into account
To tackle the issue of managing and specifying diﬀerent kinds of contexts, two main research
directions are envisioned:
1.Representing contexts explicitly by extending the representation (reminding the trade-oﬀ
with the requirement of keeping things simple);
2.Discovering context by exploiting on the actual data available in KGs, e.g., ﬁnding
consistent subgraphs.
As regards the ﬁrst direction, some proposals have been made in the literature such as:
Reiﬁcation: representing contextual information on the level of the graph structure
(e.g., in plain RDF) by introducing auxiliary graph vertices to represent anything that
needs to be annotated (a comparison of reiﬁcation approaches is presented in [18]);
Named graphs, Nquads: extensions of graph models that provide the “handle” to
edges and groups of edge, avoiding reiﬁcation [28, 10];
Property graph, Wikidata, attributed logics: enriched graph models that add a
second layer for representing contextual data;
Semiring annotations: attaching a value from a well deﬁned algebraic structure
(semring) to all statements, that expresses to what extent the assertion can be considered
“true”. The value can capture contextual information such as provenance, probability, and
access permissions in (graph) databases.
The variety of solutions reﬂects a basic syntactic question, namely, “What belongs in the
KG and what belongs in the context?” Furthermore, is it necessary to separate context
from data? Answering these syntactic questions represents one of the main priorities when
considering the solution of representing contexts explicitly.
Additionally, the explicit representation of contexts also raises a basic related semantic
question, that is: “If a statement holds in one context, can we infer that it also holds in
another context?” In order to answer this question, hybrid reasoning approaches may need
to be formalized and developed. Additionally, the following views need to be taken into
account: crispness vs. uncertainty; discrete vs. continuous; declarative vs. procedural;
unstructured vs. semi-structured vs. structured; monotonicity; inconsistency tolerance.
Such a hybrid reasoning solution should be somewhere on the spectrum between latent
semantics (e.g. embeddings in vector spaces) and model-based semantics, and should include
statistics, graph theory, and (limited) natural language forms. This also implies that a sort
of multidimensional semantics needs to be considered. The semantic question has been
answered diﬀerently in the literature:
Semiring-stylesemanticsandannotatedlogics(suchasAnnotatedLogicProgramming[ 31],
Annotated RDF and RDFS [ 46,51]): deﬁne what can be entailed based on formal, logical
semantics and non-obvious consequences can be obtained.
Reiﬁcation: makes contexts part of the normal graph data, which might still be evaluated
under some general semantics (e.g., RDFS), but the method does not specify how to use
context. Diﬀerent reiﬁcation models aﬀect entailments diﬀerently, as shown in [21, 50]
Named graphs and Nquads: do not oﬀer a standard semantics for making entailments,
but various, conﬂicting approaches can be used to formalize it [49].
Property graphs: do not support entailment or formal semantics of any kind whilst attrib-
uted logics are a proposal for deﬁning an entailment semantics for property-graphs [34].
Logics where context is a ﬁrst class citizen: an example is given by McCarthy’s logic of
context [ 39] which has been formalized in diﬀerent ways [ 24,9,2,8,41] and applied to
RDF [25].
18371