70 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
In this chapter we attempt to identify some essential steps towards combining graph
querying and analytics in terms of useful features. We brieﬂy discuss the state-of-the-art
standard technologies to implement these features. We shall also turn towards questions
about how to implement those features in a scalable manner, and missing bits and pieces
with respect to these standard technologies. With currently available technologies we likely
end up with the necessity to store and transfer graphs between diﬀerent systems and stores
to enable all of these features, due to the non-availability of a single system and engine to
implement them. We argue that (extensions of) RDF and SPARQL seem to be the most
suitable anchor points as a crystallisation point to enable such interchange and integration
of query and analytics features.
Potential Starting points & Prior attempts
Although there have been proposals of various languages for querying graphs [ 2], including
for example Cypher [ 11] and G-CORE [ 1], in the Semantic Web community, SPARQL [ 6] has
been set as the standard query language for (Knowledge) Graphs, until now remaining the
only graph query language backed by a standardisation body and implemented by numerous
engines. The following discussion thus focuses on SPARQL, though the topics covered
generalise also to other query languages for graphs, such as those mentioned.
Since the original standardisation of SPARQL [ 9], the scientiﬁc community has proposed
lotsofusefulextensionsforthislanguageintermsofanalyticsanddataprocessingfeaturesand
combinations with other languages. This has led to SPARQL 1.1. which was a conservative
extension of features agreed, by the W3C, to be key to the future of the language, essentially
taking on board and consolidating the most urgent of these proposed features.
However, as for speciﬁc connections to graph analytics, apart from basic path query and
aggregation features, many issues and in meanwhile urgent features remain unaddressed. In
particular, core features relating to graph algorithms and network analysis have not found
their way into the standard, despite being part of many typical (knowledge) graph processing
pipelines.
While there have been attempts to combine SPARQL with other Turing-complete lan-
guages, e.g. Spark, Gremlin [ 3], XSPARQL [ 4], which would allow to address and implement
all such features – herein, we rather aim at investigating which are the core features and
tasks that typically are needed and that would deserve to be added as ﬁrst-class citizens (or
built-ins) in such a language.
Likewise, extensions of typical analytics languages like R [ 12], working on data frames,
have simple libraries to import/incorporate SPARQL results tables as such data frames, but
not allowing per se the reuse of analytical results as graphs again in a SPARQL-like query
language, nor providing an integrated graph analytics and query language.
Also, potentially interesting starting points are widely-used graph analysis systems outside
of the Semantic Web world; to name a few, e.g.: Shark [ 14], that allows to run SQL queries
and sophisticated analytics functions; Google’s Pregel [ 8], a system to eﬃciently process large
graphs (of billions of vertices and trillions of edges) which powers Google’s PageRank; as
well as frameworks built on top of Apache Spark [ 13,5], as well as various academic projects
such as Signal-Collect [10].