Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 59
Introduction
Knowledge is not static, but constantly evolving. This is true, regardless of whether we are
representing personal knowledge, knowledge within a company, or open, common knowledge
on the web. Not only does the knowledge itself change, but also our perception of and beliefs
about it, such as its trustworthiness or accuracy. Therefore, if knowledge graphs are to
capture at least a signiﬁcant portion of the world’s knowledge, they also need to be able to
evolve and capture the changes made to the knowledge it contains. There already exist some
approaches, in various related ﬁelds, for both describing those changes, as well as for dealing
with volatile knowledge. However, quite a few open questions still exist.
Perhaps foremost and fundamental of those is the question, ”What exactly does it mean
for a knowledge graph to evolve?” We do not, at this time, have a clear deﬁnition or
description of what knowledge graph evolution means. Then, we must address the following.
1.“Are existing methods for reﬂecting the evolutionary nature of knowledge suﬃcient for
capturing such knowledge in a knowledge graph?”
2.“What problems are not solved by existing methods?”
3.“What tasks are to be performed manually versus completed by a system?”
Yet, we do know that evolution is a very important aspect to the future of knowledge graphs;
this is recognised by almost all large knowledge graph developers and providers, today.
Examples of this were given during the Enterprise-Scale Knowledge Graphs Panel at the
17th International Semantic Web Conference.3For instance, Yuqing Gao from Microsoft
pointed out their challenge of having a real-time knowledge graph, but with archiving, which
is still a research challenge at Microsoft. Jamie Taylor of Google also acknowledged the long
term evolution of the Google Knowledge Graph as one of their main challenges. The IBM
Watson group is also struggling with similar challenges, although they claim to take a more
dynamic approach, not focusing on one global knowledge graph, but a framework for building
domain speciﬁc knowledge graphs, including knowledge discovery and analysis of change
eﬀects. Thus, their main struggles include modelling and analysing changing information
and incrementally updating global knowledge on horizontally scaled storage solutions.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 3.17 brieﬂy explores related
work that we may use as as starting points for further studying evolving knowledge graphs.
Section 3.17 describes some use-cases for evolving knowledge graphs, as identiﬁed during this
Dagstuhl seminar. Section 3.17 presents the initial challenges facing developers for evolving
knowledge graphs. Finally, in Section 3.17, we summarize and conclude.
Starting Points
While we may not have a clear deﬁnition for evolution in knowledge graphs, we may still
draw inspiration from previous work in related ﬁelds. As, in the realm of knowledge graphs,
there is no clear distinction between data and information on one side and knowledge4on
the other (ontologically, or in terms of description logics, we would say, ABox and TBox,
respectively), we may draw from a wide variety of ﬁelds. For example, this means that
both approaches for managing changing (web) data [ 8,4] as well as schema and ontology
evolution[7, 2, 10, 5, 6] may be relevant for knowledge graph dynamics and evolution.
3http://iswc2018.semanticweb.org/panel-enterprise-scale-knowledge-graphs/
4as the term is classically used in knowledge representation
18371