104 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Provide guidelines and best practices to help developers use and appreciate large-scale
knowledge graphs that are inherently messy, diverse and evolving.
Understand what social features (for example, expertise, motivation, team composition)
inﬂuence what qualities of the graph.
References
1Al Koudous Idrissou, Rinke Hoekstra, Frank van Harmelen, Ali Khalili, and Peter van den
Besselaar. Is my:sameas the same as your:sameas?: Lenticular lenses for context-speciﬁc
identity. In Proceedings of the Knowledge Capture Conference , K-CAP 2017, pages 23:1–
23:8, New York, NY, USA, 2017. ACM.
3.25 Applications of Knowledge Graphs
Sarven Capadisli (TIB – Hannover, DE) and Lydia Pintscher (Wikimedia – Germany, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sarven Capadisli and Lydia Pintscher
We report on two application areas for knowledge graphs as well as potential research
directions.
Scholarly Knowledge
Findability and use of scholarly and scientiﬁc knowledge is integral to the advancement of
human knowledge. Scholarly knowledge includes a range of research artefacts that needs to
be described and connected. These include research articles, peer reviews, research data,
social interactions like review requests and notiﬁcations in general, as well as diﬀerent kinds
of annotations on research objects.
The common methods of access and (re)use of scholarly output is technically and ethically
inadequate for the society at large. By enabling accessible scholarly knowledge graphs as
well as applications which make use of it, we hope to enable universal access to previous
research. By improving the availability through accessible knowledge graphs, we can facilitate
discovery and building on existing research.
The construction of a scholarly commons that meets the core requirements of a scholarly
communication system, i.e. registration, awareness, certiﬁcation, and archiving functions in
scientiﬁc communication [ 3], that is accessible to both humans and machines would require
capturing information at diﬀerent parts of the process. The incentive for content creators
and consumers of content would require lowering the barriers through useful and accessible
applications.
Some of the open challenges include identifying and building mechanisms to deal with
disagreements both within scholarly knowledge as well as knowledge on the Web at large.
Improving tooling to create knowledge graphs also facilitates the discovery of knowledge.
For example, academic authors can ﬁnd relevant scientiﬁc assertions during the writing
process. Hence, one of the research directions is to investigate and develop eﬀective ways to
represent ﬁne-grained information. Knowledge graphs at diﬀerent degrees of abstraction can
be formulated, whether they are about a collection of documents, at the document level, or
for any unit of information.