Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 51
requires end-user or customer involvement, is driven based on a set of design requirements,
and is iterative in that it produces an early deliverable and subsequently builds on the end
result.
Ontology Design Patterns (ODPs) [ 5] can provide guidance into speciﬁc ways to represent
diﬀerent forms of knowledge1. Use of ODPs promote interoperability across disciplines.
Ontology Design Patterns include a set of ontology pattern types, a list of existing patterns,
and a table of domains and their descriptions for which the patterns can be applied. Ontology
pattern types cover structural ODPs, such as logical and architectural ODPs, correspondence
ODPs, such as re-engineering and alignment ODPs, and presentation ODPs, such as naming
and annotation ODPs. Additionally, content, reasoning, and lexico-syntactic ODPs are
included. The list of patterns contain community submitted patterns for content, re-
engineering, alignment, logical, architectural and lexico-syntactic ODPs. The speciﬁed
domains are available on the organization wiki2and include various sciences, linguistics,
music and media, and various industry related topics, such as management, industrial
processes, and manufacturing. Creating ODPs allows for re-usability of artifacts across
diﬀerent use cases. Re-usability and interoperability is further promoted by following best
practices for documenting Ontology Design Patterns [10].
High Quality Metadata
High quality metadata is crucial to help users ﬁnd relevant knowledge graphs. Two useful
speciﬁcation are the HCLS dataset speciﬁcation [ 6] and the Data on the Web Best Practices
[12]. The HCLS dataset speciﬁcation provides detailed requirements on how to describe
datasets in terms of Semantic Web vocabularies in order to promote the search and reuse of
datasets. Many of the properties recommended in this speciﬁcation can be applied to the
publication of knowledge graphs, such as the inclusion of publication and version information,
descriptions and keywords, and provenance.
The Data on the Web Best Practices W3C recommendation also provides guidelines
related to the publication of data that can also be extended to publishing knowledge graphs.
This document includes the speciﬁcations of providing detailed metadata, data quality
information, provenance, persistent identiﬁers, and documentation. Furthermore, the reuse
of existing vocabularies and making the data accessible through an application program
interface (API) are also recommended.
As mentioned above, an important aspect of high quality metadata is the inclusion of
detailed provenance, where the content comes from and how it was generated or derived.
PROV-O [ 11] and Nanopublications [ 7] oﬀer guidance in this respect. The PROV-O ontology
is a W3C recommendation that provides a set of OWL classes, properties, and restrictions
that can be used to include provenance annotations. PROV-O includes high level classes
for prov:Entity, prov:Agent, and prov:Activity. Entities are deﬁned as anything physical,
digital, conceptual, real or imaginary that has ﬁxed features. Example prov:Entity classes
include prov:Collection, prov:Plan and prov:Bundle. Agents are deﬁned as the bearers of
responsibility for an activity. Included in the set of prov:Agent classes are prov:Organization,
prov:Person and prov:SoftwareAgent. Finally, prov:Activities represent events that occur
over a period of time that involve entites.
1http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/
2http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Community:Domain
18371