64 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
When discussing knowledge graph evaluation, there can be two possible targets:
1.Evaluating a knowledge graph as such, and
2.Evaluating techniques for constructing and/or improving knowledge graphs
The ﬁrst target is rather related to data proﬁling [ 5,14,17] – i.e., which data exists and and
in which quality – whereas the second is more concerned with the process of data creation
and/or manipulation. Nevertheless, it can be argued that both of the targets are actually
two sides of the same coin. In both cases, the object of study is a knowledge graph, so
that the same metrics can be applied. Evaluating a knowledge graph is also implicitly an
evaluation of the process that created that KG, and evaluating a method for construction or
improvement of a knowledge graph is usually done by evaluating the knowledge graph that
is the outcome of that process [18].
Evaluation Setups
On a coarse grained level, we can distinguish two orthogonal dimensions: intrinsic vs.
task-based evaluation, and automatic vs. human-centric evaluation.
Intrinsic vs. Task-based Evaluation
Intrinsic evaluation only looks at the knowledge graph per se. It measures, e.g., the size,
the fraction of correct statements, or the completeness. A larger set of quality metrics for
intrinsic evaluation have been proposed in the literature [ 7,30]. While these measures are
intuitive and objective, they can only be a ﬁrst attempt to evaluate a knowledge graph.
Knowledge graphs are not created as a means in themselves, thus, it is questionable
whether intrinsic evaluations can be the only means of evaluation, or whether we should
rather measure the quality of a knowledge graph by the added value it brings on an actual
task, such as question answering or recommender systems. The beneﬁt of this task-based of
evaluation is that it clearly shows the potential impact of the system under scrutiny. Another
aspect of this type of evaluation is that it can show how eﬀorts from diﬀerent communities
can be integrated.
The main diﬃculty with task-based evaluations is that the interpretation of the results
can become more diﬃcult. Often there are many aspects involved in running an evaluation,
and it is not always clear how they interact. In other words, even when the results of the
task are looking good, it might be that the actual performance is explainable by the interplay
of the other components. It is important to point out that neither of the two can serve as a
proxy or approximation for the other. A knowledge graph with good measures on internal
quality may perform poorly in a speciﬁc task (e.g., since it may have a good quality globally,
but bad quality in the domain at hand), and vice versa.
Automatic vs. Human-centric evaluation
While some evaluation protocols can be fully automated, especially if there is a gold standard
available, others cannot. Thus, human-centric evaluation is often used at least as one building
block for knowledge graph evaluation.