Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 69
24Marta Sabou and Miriam Fernández. Ontology (network) evaluation. In Mari Carmen
Suárez-Figueroa, Asunción Gómez-Pérez, Enrico Motta, and Aldo Gangemi, editors, On-
tology Engineering in a Networked World. , pages 193–212. Springer, 2012.
25Burr Settles. Active learning. Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine
Learning , 6(1):1–114, 2012.
26Katharina Siorpaes and Martin Hepp. Games with a purpose for the semantic web. IEEE
Intelligent Systems , 23(3), 2008.
27Christina Unger, Corina Forascu, Vanessa Lopez, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Elena Cab-
rio, PhilippCimiano, andSebastianWalter. Questionansweringoverlinkeddata(QALD-4).
InWorking Notes for CLEF 2014 Conference , 2014.
28Marieke Van Erp, Pablo N Mendes, Heiko Paulheim, Filip Ilievski, Julien Plu, Giuseppe
Rizzo, and Jörg Waitelonis. Evaluating entity linking: An analysis of current benchmark
datasets and a roadmap for doing a better job. In LREC, volume 5, page 2016, 2016.
29Denny Vrandečić. Ontology Evaluation . PhD thesis, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
2010.
30Amrapali Zaveri, Anisa Rula, Andrea Maurino, Ricardo Pietrobon, Jens Lehmann, and
Sören Auer. Quality assessment for linked data: A survey. Semantic Web , 7(1):63–93,
2016.
3.19 Combining Graph Queries with Graph Analytics
Dan Brickley (Google Research – Mountain View, US), Aidan Hogan (IMFD, DCC, University
of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL), Sebastian Neumaier (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT),
and Axel Polleres (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Dan Brickley, Aidan Hogan, Sebastian Neumaier, and Axel Polleres
Introduction
The topics of data analytics and querying in the context of Knowledge Graphs have been
addressed as part of two separate ﬁelds. However, most data processing pipelines using
Knowledge Graphs require interleaving analytical and query tasks. While there exists
infrastructure (languages, tools, algorithms, optimisations, etc.) for performing queries and
analytics as separate processes, currently there does not exist an infrastructure for integrating
the two. Still, many conceptual questions that a domain expert may wish to ask imply
such a combination. There are several applications for combining analytical algorithms and
querying relevant to Knowledge Graphs, for example:
Ranking query results (e.g., ordering solutions based on the centrality of nodes in a
graph),
selecting topical sub-graphs to query (e.g., performing community detection to run queries
on parts of a graph relevant to a given topic),
exploratory search (e.g., ﬁnding weighted shortest paths between pairs of nodes returned
as results for a query),
dataset search (e.g., considering various graph metrics to select an external dataset
suitable to querying), or
data quality issues (e.g., analysing the connectivity of the graph).
These examples illustrate that in some cases we may wish to query the results of an analytical
process, in other cases we may wish to perform analysis on the results of a query, or in other
cases still, we may wish to interleave various query/analysis steps.
18371