66 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Specifying Datasets and Knowledge Graphs
Specifying the dataset(s) or KG(s) used is the ﬁrst step towards reproducible results. This
does not only include referring to a dataset by name (e.g., “DBpedia”), but being as speciﬁc
as possible. Recommended attributes to be reported include: which version was used? which
subset of the dataset (if any)? The same applies to external sources of knowledge used (e.g.,
text corpora), if any. One possible way to verify the replicability of the experiments is to
report a content-based hash of the dataset(s) used for the evaluation. In case of KGs that
are not release-based (such as DBpedia), but constantly changing (such as Wikidata), either
a snapshot of the version used or clear instructions on how to obtain the version used should
be included.
As far as datasets or KGs are concerned, well-known knowledge graphs like DBpedia are
the most widely used [ 18]. However, the use of synthetic knowledge graphs has also been
proposed [ 11,15]. While evaluations encompassing a larger variety of KGs are clearly better
suited to harden the evidence that an approach works well in general (and not just on a
speciﬁc KG), evaluations on speciﬁc knowledge graphs still have their own utility, e.g., when
demonstrating a solution for a particular domain.
Specifying the Evaluation Protocol
The evaluation protocol is as important as the datasets. For example, for machine-learning
based approaches, cross or split validation may be used, and the random seed for folds can
have an impact on the results as well.
Specifying Evaluation Metrics
There are quite a few evaluation metrics, and although there is a wide adoption of recall,
precision, and F1-score, these are not the only metrics used (and in many cases, it may
make sense to use other metrics as well). Here, it is also important to be as speciﬁc as
possible. Typical distinctions include: macro vs. micro average, subset of entities on which
the evaluation is carried out (e.g., for type prediction: is the evaluation only carried out on
previously untyped entities?), and exact computation of the metrics (e.g., is the prediction of
the type owl:Thing for an entity counted as a true positive or ignored due to being trivial?).
Specifying Tasks
Finally, for task-based evaluations, the task has to be speciﬁed with equal care. For example,
for evaluating the performance of particular KGs in tasks like entity linking, question
answering, or recommender system, it is important to describe both the task and the KGs
used along the dimensions above.
Recommendations and Conclusions
As we can assume that there is no single approach for creating and/or reﬁning a knowledge
graph that works best in all tasks and for all knowledge graphs, one higher level goal of
evaluations (which is rarely addressed in current research) is to understand which approaches