Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 55
To overcome interoperability conﬂicts generated by the wide variety of existing formats–
short notes, videos, images, maps, or publications–several unstructured processing techniques
have been proposed. Natural language processing techniques contribute to integrating struc-
tured and textual data by providing linguistic annotation methods at diﬀerent levels [ 25], e.g.,
part-of-speech tagging, syntactic parsing, named entity recognition, word sense disambigu-
ation, entity linking, and anaphora resolution. Further, visual analytics techniques facilitate
the extraction and annotation of entities from non-textual data sources [ 1,15]. Annotations
extracted from unstructured data represent the basis for determining relatedness among the
annotated entities by the mean of similarity measures, as well as for identifying matches
between highly similar entities.
Several approaches have been proposed to integrate structured data. KARMA [ 18] is
a semi-automatic framework that relies on ontologies and mapping rules for transforming
data sources such as relational tables or JSON ﬁles, into RDF knowledge graphs. LDIF
[32], LIMES [ 26], MINTE [ 6], Sieve [22], Silk [36], and RapidMiner LOD Extension [ 29] also
tackle the problem of data integration. However, they resort to similarity measures and link
discovery methods to match equivalent entities from diﬀerent RDF graphs. Likewise, Galkin
et al. [12] present SJoin, a join operator, for identifying entity matches in heterogeneous
RDF knowledge during query processing. With the aim of transforming structured data in
tabular or nested formats like CSV, relational, JSON, and XML, into RDF knowledge graphs,
diverse mapping languages have been proposed [ 7,16,19,34]. Exemplary mapping languages
and frameworks include RDF Mapping Language (RML) [ 8], R2RDF [ 33], and R2RML [ 28].
Additionally, a vast amount of research has been conducted to propose eﬀective and eﬃcient
approaches for ontology alignment [ 4,11,23]. Regardless of the eﬀort of automatizing entity
and ontology matching, still a signiﬁcant amount of manual work is required in all these
approaches. This lack of automation prevents applications from scaling up to large and
heterogeneous data sets.
The AI community has also actively contributed to the problem of data integration [ 14].
Speciﬁcally, recent machine learning methods provide eﬀective and accurate building blocks
for entity matching, entity linking, name resolution, deduplication, and identity resolution.
For instance, random forest models have shown signiﬁcant improvement of entity matching
[10,30]. Further, deep learning and embedding representations are promising methods for
matching knowledge items represented in diverse formats [ 24,35]. Moreover, logic-based
approaches like probabilistic soft logic, have evidenced accurate performance in matching of
entities from multiple types [ 17]. Notwithstanding the overall cost reduction and improved
precision observed by the state-of-the-art machine learning approaches, the outcome of these
approaches directly depends on the quality of the training data. Given the large variety
and volume of existing data sets, the generation of these training data sets represents a
fundamental open challenge.
Grand Challenges of Knowledge Integration
The tremendous amount of research contributions for integrating knowledge items accurately
corroboratestheimportanceoftheproblem. Nevertheless, datacomplexitychallengesimposed
by current available data sets and modern knowledge-driven applications demand novel
computational methods for solving knowledge integration at scale. Particularly, integration
of multi-modal entities represented at diﬀerent levels of abstraction and evolving over time,
remains unsolved. Finally, context-based knowledge integration, including cultural speciﬁcity
of a concept, temporal context (within a given culture), and domain context also demand
eﬀective and eﬃcient solutions from the community.
18371