Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 75
Knowledge Graphs: Background
Several works have attempted to provide deﬁnitions of what a knowledge graph is (or isn’t).
We provide a non-exhaustive collection of examples herein to serve as general background.
Long before Google popularised the phrase “Knowledge Graph”, mentions can be found
in the scientiﬁc literature. In 1974, Marchi and Miguel [ 6] deﬁned a “Knowledge Graph” as a
mathematical structure with vertices as knowledge units connected by edges that represent
the prerequisite relation; this implies that units of knowledge are only accessible if other
units are previously known. In the late 1980’s, Bakker, in his Ph.D. Thesis [ 1], developed
his notion of a “Knowledge Graph” as a way of structuring and representing text encoding
scientiﬁc knowledge. In 1994, van der Berg [ 9] presented an extension of this work using
First Order Logic to model consistency and implication in such Knowledge Graphs. Though
related, we assume that the modern incarnation of the notion of a “Knowledge Graph” was
derived independently from such earlier deﬁnitions; these independent inventions of the
phrase do indicate some level of “naturalness” of the abstract idea, which can also be seen in
similar proposals, for example, of “Semantic Networks” [3], though under a diﬀerent name.
Nor did the 2012 announcement of the Google Knowledge Graph appear out of the blue:
the direct lineage of the Google Knowledge Graph can, in fact, be traced back to a 2000 essay
by Hillis [ 5] outlining his vision of “Aristotle”: a knowledge web in the form of an online
database “ organized according to concepts and ways of understanding them [containing]
speciﬁc knowledge about how the concepts relate, who believes them and why, and what they
are useful for ”. Hillis would later go on to co-found (in 2005) the Metaweb company, which
oversaw the development of the collaboratively-edited Freebase knowledge-base [ 2]. Metaweb
in turn was acquired by Google in 2010, with Freebase subsequently forming an important
source for the Google Knowledge Graph (with key involvement from ex-Metaweb personnel),
as well as the collaboratively-edited Wikidata knowledge-base [ 8,10]. These developments
have directly led to the recent popularisation of the phrase “Knowledge Graph”.
Turning to more recent times, the following descriptions have been provided by various
participants of the Dagstuhl Seminar 18371, Sept. 2018, within the plenary discussions:
“A graph-structured knowledge-base ”
“Any Dataset that can be seen through the lense of a Graph perspective ”
“Something that combines data and semantics in a graph structure ”
“Structured data organisation with a formal semantics and labels [that is] computationally
feasible & cognitively plausible ”
“[Knowledge Graphs are deﬁned] by example: Babelnet, OpenCyc, DBpedia, Yago,
Wikidata, NELL and their shared features ”
We see some varying and sometimes orthogonal approaches to the deﬁnition, including
some descriptions that focus on the graph abstraction, some that emphasise the role of
(formal) semantics, one that emphasises the importance of cognitive understanding, with the
latter description rather proposing that Knowledge Graphs should be deﬁned extensionally
by looking at common characteristics of a class of important graph-structured datasets.
Various other proposed deﬁnitions of a “Knowledge Graph” appear in the literature,
amongst which McCusker et al. [7] put forward that:
“a knowledge graph represents knowledge, and does so using a graph structure. ”
before coming to more binding technical criteria for deﬁning a “Knowledge Graph”:
“Knowledge graph meaning is expressed as structure. ”
“Knowledge graph statements are unambiguous. ”
18371