Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 65
It is clear that this kind of evaluation is not equally feasible for all tasks which are
reported in research work. Here we think especially about evaluation processes with a
human in the loop, evaluations which require special infrastructure or access to datasets
which are not publicly available. An important research question refers to identifying those
evaluation tasks that cannot (at this moment) be performed with automatic techniques,
but rather require input from humans. Some examples are: checking the freshness of the
information (i.e., whether it is up-to-date), checking completeness (e.g., does a KG contain
allGerman cities) [ 23], correctness of domain knowledge (e.g., was a person born in the given
place or not); correctness appropriateness of modeling decisions (e.g., whether some entities
should be modeled as concepts or instances, whether partonomy is modeled as subsumption).
Necessarily, the types of tasks will dictate the choice of the suitable human subjects (e.g.,
experts vs. laymen), as well as the most suitable human computation approach (e.g.,
gamiﬁcation [ 12,26] vs. expert-sourcing vs. crowdsourcing [ 1,13]). A further challenge refers
to how to scale up human-centric evaluation [ 19], especially by combining with automatic
approaches [ 20]. Active learning approaches [ 25] are a possible solution, but have not yet
been applied in the evaluation.
Reproducibility
Reproducibility is an essential part of evaluation. Only if the experiments performed are
reproducible, one can independently verify whether reported results are factual. Besides, one
can then compare the presented result with the results obtained from diﬀerent experiments.
Or at least see whether these results are in fact produced in similar conditions and whether
a comparison would make sense. [ 21] In our community, we have more or less generally
accepted tasks and even evaluation frameworks for SPARQL querying [ 4,16], reasoning [ 10],
natural language question answering [27], entity linking [28], and ontology matching [2].
We identiﬁed at least one other community which has a reproducibility initiative – i.e., the
database community has reproducibility guidelines for SIGMOD6. With these guidelines, each
paper has the option to prove its reproducibility by sending the code, data, and parameter
settings for the experiments to a review board. They will then rerun the experiments to
see whether the same, or at least very close results can be obtained. In this process, the
evaluator will also investigate how sensitive the evaluation is to changes in both the input
data and changes in the parameter settings.
Currently, reproducing or even comparing research results is diﬃcult due to various
datasets, protocols, and metrics used (but not always documented) in diﬀerent experiments
[18]. E.g., a sentences such as “We achieve an F1 score of 0.89 for type prediction on
DBpedia”’ is usually not enough to reproduce the results. Hence, in order to come to
reproducible and comparable results, the characteristics of the experiments carried out need
to be speciﬁed along various dimensions. Those include:
1.Dataset(s) / KG(s) used
2.Evaluation protocol
3.Evaluation metrics
4.Tasks (in case of task-based evaluation)
6http://db-reproducibility.seas.harvard.edu/
18371