Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 107
Problem Statement
Centralised knowledge graphs and decentralised knowledge graphs exhibit diﬀerent qualities.
To make informed decisions on which of these designs to use, we need to ﬁnd out the trade-oﬀs
between them. Once these quality criteria are established, we want to know whether these
aspects are inherent to the fact whether the knowledge graph is centralised or decentralised.
If they are not, we want to be able to transfer approaches and techniques in one design
approach to the other.
The Centralised vs. Decentralised Spectrum
There is a spectrum of knowledge graphs being published: on the one hand, the more
organisational-centric, which are centralised, and on the other hand the more individual-
centric, which are decentralised.
The spectrum between centralised and decentralised approaches has been a topic of
research in information systems [ 2,1] and databases [ 7] in general and in personal data [ 4],
social networks [3] and querying the Web of Data [5, 6] in particular.
In the following, we contrast properties of centralised and decentralised knowledge graphs.
We identiﬁed the following characteristics. We start with centralised knowledge graphs and
ﬁrst list characteristics related to organization, then move on to characteristics related to
implementation.
Survivability and Robustness: Centralised knowledge graphs can be controlled by a single
entity that can decide strategic issues, thus giving more powerful control over all aspects
of the knowledge graph. This can be beneﬁcial for their owners but, with regard to
survivability and robustness, not necessarily for its users (e.g., the shutdown of Freebase).
Besides organizational aspects, centralised knowledge graphs rely on one big node and
can thus can become unavailable for technical reasons.
Stability: Centralised knowledge graphs have uniform terms of use, a degree of promise of
longevity and availability. Hence, they have a more stable behaviour and are less likely
to suﬀer from disappearing links or can at least give a clear indication when a link would
disappear, or preserve the provenance information of changes made.
Curation: Centralised knowledge graphs have a clear curation mechanism in place, which
is expected to have a positive eﬀect on the consistency and quality of the data.
Rights and License: Centralized knowledge graphs usually have a clear license. Wikidata
and DBpedia are intended as public resources, indicated by their respective CC0 and
CC BY-SA 3.0 Unported licence. Other organizational knowledge graphs are typically
seen as an internal organizational asset. Sometimes parts of these are also made publicly
available, especially for reasons of interoperability with other systems. Examples include
the schemas developed by schema.org used by search engines to extract information from
web pages and Thomson Reuters’ permid.org, which has a public part licensed using
CC-BY 4.0 and CC-NC 3.0, and a part of the data not publicly available.
Service Level Agreements: Centralized knowledge graphs may have Service Level Agree-
ments (SLAs), giving clear guarantees on aspects such as response time and correctness.
One could even imagine a company being liable for the information provided.
Privacy and Security: If the KG contains personal information, with centralized knowledge
graphs, users give up some privacy in exchange of some convenience. In particular, the
access logs are also centralised, which facilitates analysing the logs. However, because the
18371