Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 83
usage constraints (like licenses) but also the knowledge request in a manner in which it
can be checked automatically.
In the biomedical use case we need to give a license to a knowledge graph that has been
composed from several other knowledge graphs, each with an associated license. Here the
primary challenges relate to extracting terms of use from textual licenses, and representing
individual licenses in a manner that enables license composition and conﬂict resolution.
In terms of enabling inference-proof secure access control for knowledge graphs, eﬀorts in
integrating symbolic AI with machine learning will introduce new challenges in preserving
the conﬁdentiality of knowledge. In the long term, where machine learning and symbolic
knowledge feed into each other and the respective inference mechanisms are integrated or
composed, new attack models arise. For example, symbolic knowledge may be exploited
as background knowledge to “break” the conﬁdentiality guarantees oﬀered by diﬀerentially
private learning mechanisms. Conversely, link prediction and other ML-based inferences may
be used to attack the (supposedly) secure views on knowledge bases obtained with methods
that take into account purely symbolic attacks.
Taking access constraints into account
In terms of supporting constrained access to knowledge graphs, fundamental challenges relate
to associating various policies with data and knowledge, enforcing inference proof access
control and ensuring knowledge conﬁdentiality.
3.21.1 Associating policies with data and knowledge
Generally speaking, the sticky policy concept [ 29] is used to tightly couple usage policies
to data and knowledge. When it comes to the state of the art, sticky policies are usually
implemented by using cryptography to strongly associate policies with data [ 40,42]. However,
itisworthnotingthattherearecurrentlynostandardapproachesforattachingpoliciestodata
in a linked data setting. Also, it is important to highlight that from a practical perspective it
is not possible for said policies to be enforced automatically (more precisely, it is an honors
system whereby data controllers and processors can choose to either obey the policy or not).
One of the challenges with respect to existing approaches is that there is a need for a trusted
third party to ensure that obligations speciﬁed in the policy are fulﬁlled. Methodologies and
formats for linking data and policies in a semantic framework are currently being investigated
in the SPECIAL H2020 project10. When it comes to usage control in the form of licensing,
research topics range from using Natural Language Processing to extract license rights and
obligations to licenses compatibility validation and Composition [ 47,26,23]. However, there
are currently no standard license-aware data querying and processing mechanisms.
3.21.2 Inference-proof access control
[32] provide a detailed survey of the various access control models, standards and policy
languages, and the diﬀerent access control enforcement strategies for RDF. However, at
the level of (possibly distributed) queries, linked data protocols do not currently support
inference-proof access control in a standard way. Considering the array of access control
10SPECIAL H2020 project, https://www.specialprivacy.eu/
18371