30 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
1 Executive Summary
Piero Andrea Bonatti (University of Naples, IT)
Michael Cochez (Fraunhofer FIT, DE)
Stefan Decker (RWTH Aachen, DE)
Axel Polleres (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT)
Valentina Presutti (STLab, ISTC-CNR – Rome, IT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Piero Andrea Bonatti, Michael Cochez, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and
Valentina Presutti
In 2001 Berners-Lee et al. stated that “The Semantic Web is an extension of the current web
in which information is given well-deﬁned meaning, better enabling computers and people to
work in cooperation.”
The time since the publication of the paper and creation of the foundations for the
Semantic Web can be roughly divided in three phases: The ﬁrst phase focused on bringing
Knowledge Representation to Web Standards, e.g., with the development of OWL. The
second phase focused on data management, linked data and potential applications. In the
third, more recent phase, with the emergence of real world applications and the Web emerging
into devices and things, emphasis is put again on the notion of Knowledge, while maintaining
the large graph aspect: Knowledge Graphs have numerous applications like semantic search
based on entities and relations, disambiguation of natural language, deep reasoning (e.g.
IBM Watson), machine reading (e.g. text summarisation), entity consolidation for Big Data,
and text analytics. Others are exploring the application of Knowledge Graphs in industrial
and scientiﬁc applications.
The shared characteristic by all these applications can be expressed as a challenge:
the capability of combining diverse (e.g. symbolic and statistical) reasoning methods and
knowledge representations while guaranteeing the required scalability, according to the
reasoning task at hand. Methods include: Temporal knowledge and reasoning, Integrity
constraints, Reasoning about contextual information and provenance, Probabilistic and
fuzzy reasoning, Analogical reasoning, Reasoning with Prototypes and Defeasible Reasoning,
Cognitive Frames, Ontology Design Patterns (ODP), and Neural Networks and other machine
learning models.
With this Dagstuhl Seminar, we intend to bring together researchers that have faced and
addressed the challenge of combining diverse reasoning methods and knowledge representa-
tions in diﬀerent domains and for diﬀerent tasks with Knowledge Graphs and Linked Data
experts with the purpose of drawing a sound research roadmap towards deﬁning scalable
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning principles within a unifying Knowledge Graph
framework. Driving questions include:
What are fundamental Knowledge Representation and Reasoning methods for Knowledge
Graphs?
How should the various Knowledge Representation, logical symbolic reasoning, as well as
statistical inference methods be combined and how should they interact?
What are the roles of ontologies for Knowledge Graphs?
How can existing data be ingested into a Knowledge Graph?
In order to answer these questions, the present seminar was aiming at cross-fertilisation
between research on diﬀerent Knowledge Representation mechanisms, and also to help
to identify the requirements for Knowledge Representation research originating from the
deployment of Knowledge graphs and the discovery of new research problems motivated by