36 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
3 Overview of Short Talks
3.1 Evolution and dynamics
Eva Blomqvist (Linköping University, SE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Eva Blomqvist
Nobody would today consider the Web as a static thing. Similarly, knowledge in a company is
never static, it is constantly changing. So why is it that so many approaches developed in the
past decades make the assumption that knowledge on the web, or elsewhere, is not going to
change? At an early stage this can be a way to manage the complexity of a problem, simply
to get started, but we cannot aﬀord to use that excuse any more – if we want to be taken
seriously by developers and users out in industry. New methods, technologies and standards
that we produce, or propose, need to start from this assumption, i.e., that everything is
dynamic, and build on that, rather than ignoring it and then potentially trying to cover it by
add-ons at the end. Knowledge graphs in a highly dynamic environment necessarily needs to
themselves be highly dynamic and constantly evolving, and we are the ones that have to
provide the technology to support that evolution!
3.2 Enabling Accessible Scholarly Knowledge Graphs
Sarven Capadisli (TIB – Hannover, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sarven Capadisli
Scholarly knowledge includes a range of research artefacts that needs to be described. These
include research articles, peer reviews, research data, social interactions like review requests
and notiﬁcations in general, as well as diﬀerent kinds of annotations on research objects. The
current state of access and use of scholarly knowledge is insuﬃcient for society at large. By
enabling accessible scholarly knowledge graphs as well as applications which make use of
it, we hope to enable universal access to previous research. By improving the availability
through linked research, we can facilitate discovery and building on existing research. A
fundamental ﬁrst step is to investigate and develop eﬀective ways to represent ﬁne-grained
information that is accessible, human and machine-interpretable, and interconnected. Other
challenges look into ways in which academic journals can decouple the registration and
certiﬁcation functions of scholarly communication. Also we can investigate the feasibility
of universal access to knowledge through decentralisation, freedom of expression, privacy
respecting, and social.