80 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
the misinterpretation of the IRI’s intended meanings. Additional problems that have been
experimentally shown are: the misuse of classes and instances (classes adopted as instances
and vice-versa) [ 1], the incorrect interpretation of domain and/or range for properties, and
the injection of logical inconsistencies due to wrong conceptualizations. The results of these
empirical studies, the diﬀusion of tools aiming at limiting the usage of formal semantics [ 44],
the very large size of (existing) KGs [ 15], that may also evolve by interlinking existing KGs
(the Linked Open Data Cloud9can be considered an example in this direction), suggest
that the semantics for KGs needs to satisfy the following basic requirements: facilitate
interoperability, simplicity (of usage), cognitive plausibility. Nevertheless, besides these
basics requirements, additional aspects and potential issues need to be taken into account.
Speciﬁcally, KGs are meant to represent large corpora of knowledge, possibly referring to
several, potentially interconnected, domains, as such conﬂicting information may arise. This
may not only be due to the fact that one piece of information and its opposite are declared,
e.g in diﬀerent KGs, but also to additional factors that are currently almost disregarded.
One of them is represented by the fact that the validity of (pieces of) knowledge can be:
context dependent, e.g., there exists norms that are valid in some countries whilst they
are not applicable in other countries; or it can be time dependent, e.g., Barack Obama as
USA president is applicable only to a certain period of time. Many KG-related projects
show the need to represent contexts: statement qualiﬁers in Wikidata; attributes in the
property graph data model; temporal and spatial validity in Yago(2). Actually, the word
context has several meanings and as such several forms of context may need to be taken into
account. Speciﬁcally, the following kinds of context are considered of particular importance:
a) temporal and spatial; b) domain, application, task and process; c) social, cultural, legal;
d) provenance, sourcing circumstances, trust; e) “view” such as looking at knowledge from
a perspective that is not entity-centric. This implies that the semantics for KGs needs to
allow for expressing (diﬀerent kinds of) contextual information while granting ambiguity and
inconsistency. Consequently, approximate inferences from approximate statements could
be allowed but, on the same time, the ability to make sound and complete inferences from
correct facts is somehow lost.
Arguably, one semantics may not be able to adequately address all requirements, intended
meanings, and usage scenarios. This means there is the need to allow for individual,
diverging semantics. At the same time, the “intended” meaning and/or usage should be
made transparent for the sake of interoperability, common understanding and appropriate
reuse.
A possible solution is to allow the KG to be accompanied by (meta)information about
how it is meant to be interpreted. Approaches to be considered are: a) the adoption of a
declarative description of the KG formal semantics, e.g., in terms of model theory; b) the
speciﬁcation of a piece of code as an operational or procedural semantics; c) the usage of a
pointer to a semantic proﬁle already deﬁned elsewhere.
In the following, possible research directions for tackling the issues and requirements
illustrated above are presented.
9https://lod-cloud.net/