Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 61
Patient records contain information about the states of a patient. Something that is
believed at one point might be proven false in the next time instant. This needs to be
captured, tracked and reasoned with, when analysing patient data.
A related use case is that of patient monitoring , where IoT devices and sensors are
used to monitor patients, either at home or in a care facility. Streams of data come
from each sensor and need to be interpreted both with respect to the patient record
and history, as well as in relation to generic medical knowledge. This in order to create
situation awareness, and reason on potential future situation that are likely to occur,
e.g. to prevent dangerous situations and alert medical staﬀ. Here several KGs can be
envisioned, i.e. both the personal, patient speciﬁc, knowledge, but also generic medical
knowledge graphs, and all of them have to evolve, although potentially at a very diﬀerent
pace.
Knowledge discovery, for instance in drug discovery , implies to treat concepts individu-
ally in a local context, to allow for diﬀerent viewpoints. In this way changes can happen
locally, without aﬀecting the whole knowledge graph. Knowledge graphs can later be
composed of these components, ﬁltered for certain views. Creating what could be called
a ﬂuent KG, where new knowledge can emerge at every new KG composition.
Inmanyorganisations, suchasa policedepartment , individuals(suchaspoliceanalysts)
want to have their own concepts represented in the knowledge graph. This may imply to
have individual knowledge graphs, or individual views of a knowledge graph, but such
additions or changes may also need to be introduced into the overall shared knowledge
graph if they reﬂect evolution or emergenc of new concepts, rather than just individual
views. Such changes need to be tracked, and one needs to determine what view (or
version) to use in a speciﬁc case, what knowledge from individual views (or contexts) to
propagate and what should stay private.
Crisis detection of large scale events (i.e. natural disaster, battle spaces, crime) is
another use case. Inputs will be frequent and likely conﬂicting. Representative, underlying
knowledge graphs will need to handle this in order to reason on what has actually occurred
and what is currently happening. We will need ways to also visualize and render such
information as well as tracking provenance and uncertainty and enabling evolution of
data in the graph.
Major Challenges
Based on what we know about the state of the art in knowledge and data evolution and
dynamics, and these use cases we have identiﬁed a (probably still incomplete) list of challenges
in this area, which are listed below.
Deﬁne the exact notion of evolution, i.e. distinguish it from notions such as change,
dynamicity, versioning, etc.
Diﬀerent levels of tracking evolution will be needed for diﬀerent use cases; best practices
and guidelines will need developed.
Manage the volume of provenance (i.e. preventing provenance explosion) caused by
capturing all evolution information, all data versions, etc.
This could include patterns for providing provenance information outside the actual
knowledge graphs.
Presenting provenance (and information about evolution) to an end user, developer,
knowledge engineer.
18371