60 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
It is also important to examine the rate of change in the data, as approaches diﬀer across
the spectrum. When data changes infrequently, state of the art approaches most often include
the production of new, manually curated versions of the data at certain time intervals, and
some appropriate version tracking and archiving of the dataset[ 8,4], possibly combined with
query rewriting and other techniques. At the other end of the spectrum, data may be treated
as a stream, where approaches for data stream management and stream reasoning[ 9,1,3],
including RDF stream processing, have been applied.
The versioning of datasets and ontologies is a quite well-studied problem. For example,
there exist annotation schemas and ontologies for describing datasets and ontologies and
track versions, such as through extensions of the PROV-O.5In addition, there exist mapping
languages for mapping between versions. Query rewriting has been used to transform queries
over one version to queries over a new version of the data.
Inherently, due to the open world assumption, languages proposed for the web are also
quite well suited for managing incomplete information. However, there are less approaches
proposed for how to actually manage the change process, detect change needs, apply changes,
and so on. We do know quite well, at a technical level, how to manually update ontologies
(e.g. implement changes, check consistency, track provenance of changes). Unfortunately, how
to automate parts of this process, or how to trigger and guide the change process is largely
unstudied. This is particularly true for schemas/ontologies, while for change management
in data we can rely on the history of relational database research and thereby also more
approaches have been proposed for graph data.
Additionally, there are approaches proposed for managing inconsistent and fuzzy know-
ledge, for example when using ontologies. These are maybe not so well used in practice, but
are usually well founded theoretically, and may have an important role to play when dealing
with large scale real-world knowledge that is rarely precise and consistent.
However, particularly targeted at knowledge graphs there are still not many approaches
available, hence, we are again left with either applying approaches originally developed with
some related structure in mind, e.g. ontologies and linked data, or we may look at the actual
practices for managing large knowledge graphs today and learn from there. While the former
was already discussed above, instead considering the latter an example of a change tracking
model, particularly targeted at knowledge graphs, is the Wikidata model for storing edit
history.
Use Cases
As an additional starting point, during the Dagstuhl seminar we collected a small (incomplete)
set of motivating use cases that may provide enough challenges in order to actually start
specifying the possible tasks involved and create a more detailed map of what solutions exist
and where the white spots are.
Newlawsare usually written as modiﬁcations of previous laws. This creates a complex
network of changes to laws, which together makes up the law of a country. If this is
to be modelled in a knowledge graph, the evolution/change history conveys important
information about the actual content and meaning of the law.
5https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/