102 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
We discussed features of knowledge graph representation which would help developers add
transparency and accountability by design to their knowledge graph applications. Provenance
and trust, as well as the ability to capture knowledge diversity were mentioned in this
context. Challenges remain in understanding the best ways to use these features, which
some knowledge graphs already oﬀer, in applications and to create tools and incentives for
developers to explore them in greater detail. More research is needed, for example in the
form of studies using ethnographic,as well as other qualitative and quantitative methods
to build a better understanding how developers work with knowledge graphs and how it
could be improved to support them in delivering transparent, accountable knowledge graph
experiences.
In addition, the knowledge graph community should consider existing work from related
ﬁelds on frameworks and approaches to communicate provenance and uncertainty of data
and analyses built on top of knowledge graphs to support question answering, information
retrieval and decision making. There are also opportunities to advance the state of the art in
human data interaction and data visualisation, as most relevant literature has focused on
tabular, numerical data rather than graphs, possibly labelled in multiple languages.
Finally, while some knowledge graph projects have been ahead of the curve in raising
awareness about the need to promote knowledge diversity, in most cases we have a rather
limited understanding of how biased knowledge graphs are. By the nature of knowledge
representation, knowledge graphs will capture an simpliﬁed view of the world. They may
abstract from particular details, make choices on how to model speciﬁc aspects and vary in
the quality and level of detail of the information they cover.
We need more research into knowledge representation approaches that can tackle complex-
ity and methods and tools to make it easier for developers to support and facilitate contextual
depth, diversity and potentially conﬂicting viewpoints when processing and analysing inform-
ation from a knowledge graph. Studies in other disciplines, including cognitive, behavioural,
social and political sciences can oﬀer very interesting impulses to put forward proposals that
are not only novel from a technology point of view, but also match the capabilities, needs and
expectations of the people engaging with the information – some participants noted there
are lessons to be learned from existing proposals such as link sets which were not eﬀective in
user studies [1].
Besides ways to capture and use additional knowledge graph features, there is a need
for representations and methods to study the inherent biases knowledge graphs suﬀer from
as they evolve in time. Data ingestion, social processes and the availability of resources
and expertise inadvertently lead to imbalances in the content and quality of a knowledge
graph, which may be remedied in time. To be able to do so eﬀectively, we need new models
and techniques to analyse and improve the quality of knowledge graphs (e.g. completeness,
correctness) and to conceptualise and measure diversity. We discussed the challenges arising
from deﬁning a suitable framework of reference, as biases in a knowledge graph may merely
reﬂect biases in the data sources it relies on. Visual analytics and dashboards, similar to what
Wikidata does with geographical coverage of entities, could be used to monitor additions
and changes to a knowledge graph and detect anomalies, though more research is needed to
understand user requirements for these tools in a knowledge graph context.
Make knowledge graph research truly interdisciplinary. There are many techniques that
can facilitate engagement with knowledge graphs: entity-centric exploratory search; narrative
generation; or games with a purpose. To be eﬀective, these techniques need to be better
aligned with theory and empirical evidence from cognitive sciences, which teach us how
diﬀerent demographics and professional groups create, organise and make sense of knowledge.