52 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Nanopublications allow for context to reinforce the value of an assertion, which can be
included in the form of provenance statements about assertions or facts. The nanopublication
model can be implemented using a collection of RDF Named Graphs. Facts are included in
an assertion graph. Provenance information about the assertion is included in a provenance
graph. Provenance about the nanopublication itself is included in a publication information
graph.
Linked Data oﬀers another way of providing semantically rich knowledge graphs. The
Best Practices for Publishing Linked Data [ 2] speciﬁes a set of guidelines as a sequence
of steps. These steps include selecting and then modeling a dataset, choosing appropriate
URIs, referencing standard vocabularies when possible, converting the data to a Linked
Data representation, and providing machine access such that the data is reachable by search
engines and similar web processes.
Structured Data Transformation
Standardized methods to transform data into knowledge graphs make it easier to maintain
and reproduce. Two such methods for data tranformation that we recommend include using
R2RML [ 3] or RML [ 4]. R2RML is language that allows the user to deﬁne custom mappings
from a relational database schema to an RDF model. The R2RML document itself is written
in RDF, in which mappings for each table can include a template for the desired output
URI structure, speciﬁed ontology classes to be instantiated to, and relationships between
columns. Such relationships can be used to link to other relational databases through, for
example, primary keys. Since the input data are stored in relational databases, SQL queries
can be used in the R2RML mapping ﬁles when constructing the desired RDF. An extension
to R2RML is RML, which aims to be more generic by keeping the core model of the R2RML
vocabulary, but excluding database speciﬁc concepts.
Challenges
We have identiﬁed four challenges that must be overcome to promote the use of best practices
when constructing knowledge graphs. It is important to promote the best practices identiﬁed
in this chapter in order to encourage wide spread use. We must also ﬁnd additional best
practices that were missed in this initial search. Overcoming the challenges of consolidating
and integrating best practices from diﬀerent communities will allow for interdisciplinary
collaboration. Finally, the set of best practices that are required for diﬀerent methodologies
of knowledge graph creation should be speciﬁed. For example, the best practices used for
manual creation of knowledge graphs may diﬀer from automated approaches. Corresponding
sets have to be discovered and organized accordingly.
Conclusion
In this chapter we considered how to apply best practices to knowledge graphs by identifying
a non-exhaustive list of existing best practices. We discussed best practices pertaining
to knowledge graph design, including Agile and eXtreme Design methodologies, as well
as Ontology Design Patterns. We considered W3C speciﬁcations pertaining to including