Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 47
Representing Knowledge
How do you say that?
Diversityandﬂexibilityinmethodsforknowledgerepresentation. To have at our disposal
a plurality of knowledge representations (from logics to embeddings, and others) to eﬀectively
capture all forms of knowledge including ambiguous, inconsistent, incomplete, erroneous,
biased, diverging, approximate, contested, and context-speciﬁc knowledge.
How do we capture and represent change within Knowledge Graphs? Knowledge Graphs
today are primarily entity centric. The goal here is develop new formalisms, algorithms,
techniques to handle the evolution and change of events, languages, and entities.
Symbolic meets subsymbolic (KG + ML): Knowledge graphs represent knowledge by
means which generalize well but lack the ﬂexibility of more fuzzy models to knowledge
representation such as those used by connectionist paradigms. Connectionist approaches on
the other hand fail to generalize and lack explainability. The is a need to enable connectionist
ML to consume and generate knowledge graphs while allowing for knowledge to represent
and infer upon knowledge stored in connectionist models.
Access and interoperability at scale
How do you get that?
Interoperable knowledge graphs: A large number of KGs are already available and they
capture a large portion of the knowledge of domains such as products, persons, locations,
etc. However, these knowledge graphs are available in heterogeneous formats with partly
incompatible semantics. The multitude of formats and semantics is likely to persist. How
can we create a universe of knowledge graphs with diﬀerent semantics that can interoperate
and represent all knowledge necessary for both humans and AIs. Related questions include
scalable partial/incomplete reasoning under these constraints as well the need to abide by
practical restrictions while using KGs.
A Public FAIR Knowledge Graph of Everything. We increasingly see the creation of
knowledge graphs that capture information about the entirety of a class of entities. For
example, Amazon is creating a knowledge graph of all products in the world and Google and
Apple have both created knowledge graphs of all locations in the world. This grand challenge
extends this further by asking if we can create a knowledge graph of “everything” ranging
from common sense concepts to location based entities. This knowledge graph should be
“open to the public” in a FAIR manner democratizing this mass amount of knowledge.
Uniform computational access to knowledge-based services. Can we access all forms
of knowledge, whether previously stated or inferred by computational service) through a
common interface, thereby reducing the barrier to ﬁnding and using knowledge at the time
it is needed?
Rapid task-performant reindexing of knowledge. Successful execution of particular tasks
(ﬁnding relevant datasets, predicting new drug uses, etc) may require transformation of
knowledge to other representations that are better suited for the task. Can we create an
infrastructure to facilitate this repurposing of global knowledge?
18371