44 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
What is really a Knowledge Graph?
John Sowa wrote in the entry Semantic networks in the Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science
(1987 [10]):
“Woods (1975) and McDermott (1976) observed, the semantic networks themselves
have no well-deﬁned semantics. Standard predicate calculus does have a precisely
deﬁned, model theoretic semantics; it is adequate for describing mathematical theories
with a closed set of axioms. But the real world is messy, incompletely explored, and
full of unexpected surprises.”
P. James, mentioned before, deﬁned a Knowledge Graph as follows:
“A knowledge graph is a kind of semantic network. [...] One of the essential diﬀerences
between knowledge graphs and semantic networks is the explicit choice of only a few
types of relations.”
Later Lei Zhang in a Ph.D. thesis titled Knowledge Graph Theory and Structural Parsing
(2002 [14]) deﬁned:
“Knowledge graph theory is a kind of new viewpoint, which is used to describe human
language [...] knowledge graphs have advantages, which are stronger ability to express,
to depict deeper semantic layers, to use a minimum relation set and to imitate the
cognition course of mankind etc. Its appearance gave a new way to the research of
computer understanding of human language.”
The Google Patent (2012) referred above conceptualized KG as systems:
“The system of the present invention systematically develops the one or more complete
contexts for distribution in a Personalized Medicine Service. These contexts are in
turn used to support the comprehensive analysis of subject performance, develop
one or more shared contexts to support collaboration, simulate subject performance
and/or turn data into knowledge.”
More recently, M. Nickel, K. Murphy, V. Tresp and E. Gabrilovich in their article A
Review of Relational Machine Learning for Knowledge Graph (2016 [5]) deﬁned KG as
follows:
“[...] a graph structured knowledge bases (KBs) that store factual information in form
of relationship between entities.”
In summary, we learned that a knowledge graph is a kind of semantic network, an artifact
whose scope, characteristic, features, even uses, remain open and are in the process of being
deﬁned. The brief history presented above suggests that, to design the future of the ﬁeld,
it would be valuable to climb on the shoulders of three giant notions: Frames, Semantic
Networks andConceptual Graphs .
References
1R.R. Bakker. Knowledge Graphs: Representation and Structuring of Scientiﬁc Knowledge .
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Twente, 1987.
2G. Frege. Begriﬀsschrift . Halle, 1879.
3P. James. Knowledge graphs. Linguistic Instruments in Knowledge Engineering. Elsevier
Publ., 1992.