Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 93
3.23 Machine Learning and Knowledge Graphs
Steﬀen Staab (Universität Koblenz-Landau, DE), Gerard de Melo (Rutgers University –
Piscataway, US), Michael Witbrock (IBM Research – Yorktown Heights, US), Volker Tresp
(Siemens AG – München, DE), Claudio Gutierrez (University of Chile – Santiago de Chile,
CL), Dezhao Song (Thomson Reuters – Eagan, US), and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga-Ngomo (Uni-
versität Paderborn, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Steﬀen Staab, Gerard de Melo, Michael Witbrock, Volker Tresp, Claudio Gutierrez, Dezhao
Song, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo
Machine learning with deep networks, and Knowledge Representation with knowledge graphs
are both advancing rapidly, both in depth and scale. Each has distinct advantages: symbolic
(knowledge graph) representation and inference brings high reliability, explainability and
reusability; machine learning brings the ability to learn from very weak signals (whole image
labels, or reinforcement signals), and to learn to do tasks that humans cannot program. These
sources of power are largely orthogonal, but applicable to similar problems and domains.
Although their advances have been proceeding largely independently, and sometimes in
ignorance of the other, there are early indications that they can be combined eﬀectively. We
believe that the potential value of this combination warrants immediate joint action.
To draw a roadmap for such action, the section is structured as follows:
1.position knowledge graphs in relation to the most closely related machine learning
paradigms (see Sect. 1)
2.identify some major opportunities that knowledge graphs may oﬀer to machine learning
to improve overall learning and inference (see Sect. 3).
3.analyse commonalities and diﬀerences that machine learning systems and knowledge
graph systems oﬀer with regard to manipulation of knowledge (see sect. 2).
4.provide a brief survey of methods and representations that beneﬁt from knowledge graphs
already today (see Sect. 4).
5.sketch future challenges for an integration of the two disciplines.
6.conclude with a call for action.
Positioning Knowledge Graphs with respect to Machine Learning
Paradigms
Traditional machine learning algorithms operate over feature vectors representing objects in
terms of numeric or categorical attributes. The main learning task is to learn a mapping
from such feature vectors to an output prediction in some form. This could be class labels, a
regression score, an unsupervised cluster ID or a latent vector (embedding). In knowledge
induction generally, the representation of an object, event or type can contain explicit
representations of the properties and simple or complex relationships with other objects,
types or events. In knowledge graph learning more speciﬁcally, the representation of an object
can include representations of its direct relationships to other individual objects, thus, the
data is in the form of a graph, consisting of nodes (entities) and labelled edges (relationships
between entities).
There are three main paradigms (for a survey consult [ 13] and [17]) that can be used for
performing the aforementioned learning task.
18371