Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 49
3.15 On the Creation of Knowledge Graphs: A Report on Best
Practices and their Future
Sabbir Rashid (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute – Troy, US) Eva Blomqvist (Linköping
University, SE), Cogan Matthew Shimizu (Wright State University – Dayton, US), and
Michel Dumontier (Maastricht University, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sabbir M. Rashid, Eva Blomqvist, Cogan Shimizu, and Michel Dumontier
Knowledge Graphs have an important role in organizing and making information more broadly
available to people and machines. While many knowledge graphs have been developed, the
approaches used to build them can diﬀer substantially. The elusiveness of standards or
best practices in this area poses a substantial challenge to the knowledge engineer that
wants to maximize their discovery and reuse, as dictated by the FAIR (Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, Reusable) principles. In this chapter, we deﬁne a set of best practices to
constructing FAIR knowledge graphs.
Introduction
A knowledge graph (KG) is a conceptual entity that, as the name implies, is a graph
structure that represents knowledge [ 13]. Knowledge graphs have been used for a variety
of tasks, including question answering, relationship prediction, and searching for similar
items. A knowledge graph has several components, including resources that convey attributes
and entities, relationships between such resources, and additionally annotations to express
metadata about the resources. Several requirements for KGs [ 13] are that they express
meaning as structure and use a limited set of relations. All statements and entities in
a knowledge graph should be unambiguous, which can be accomplished by “using global
identiﬁers with unambiguous denotation.” Furthermore, knowledge graphs must provide
justiﬁcation for statements by including explicit provenance information.
The Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability (FAIR) [ 17] principles
provide guidelines for publishing data and metadata on the web. In order for a knowledge
graph to adhere to the FAIR principles, resources in the graph should use unique and
persistent identiﬁers. The knowledge graph should be accessible, freely and openly, even after
the data has been retired. The resources should be described using descriptive metadata that
is written using vocabularies that adhere to the FAIR principles. Furthermore, provenance
about the resource, such as how they was derived, should be rich and detailed.
Interoperability is the ability of data or tools from diﬀerent sources to be integrated
[17]. It is one important aspect of knowledge graphs, as it advocates understanding and
reuse amongst various users. In order to achieve this across the multitude of engineers,
developers, and researchers, it is important to deﬁne a coherent set of best practices for
the engineering and creation of knowledge graphs. However, today there exist many best
practices and methodologies for creating diﬀerent kinds of knowledge graphs (e.g. ontologies,
linked data, etc.), resulting in knowledge graphs of various quality. Worse yet, when drawing
the best practices from these diﬀerent development communities, we see that they are
sometimes incompatible. For example, there is conﬂict over the best practices between those
communities that adhere to strong or weak weight semantics for their knowledge graphs.
In addition, we must consider how these best practices may apply to knowledge graphs in
general outside of semantic web communities, such as those used by the Natural Language
18371