Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 79
9H. van den Berg. First-Order Logic in Knowledge Graphs. In C. Martín-Vide, editor,
Current Issues in Mathematical Linguistics , volume 56 of North-Holland Linguistic Series:
Linguistic Variations , pages 319–328. Elsevier, 1994.
10D. Vrandečić and M. Krötzsch. Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communic-
ations of the ACM , 57(10):78–85, 2014.
3.21 Foundations
Claudia d’Amato (University of Bari, IT), Sabrina Kirrane (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien,
AT), Piero Andrea Bonatti (University of Naples, IT), Sebastian Rudolph (TU Dresden,
DE), Markus Krötzsch (TU Dresden, DE), Marieke van Erp (KNAW Humanities Cluster –
Amsterdam, NL), and Antoine Zimmermann (École des Mines de Saint-Étienne, FR)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Claudia d’Amato, Sabrina Kirrane, Piero Bonatti, Sebastian Rudolph, Markus Krötzsch,
Marieke van Erp, and Antoine Zimmermann
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are becoming more and more popular with an increasing interest
of both big industrial players and scientiﬁc communities in diﬀerent research ﬁelds such as
Semantic Web (SW), Databases, Machine Learning and Data Mining. However, an agreed
formal deﬁnition of KG is nowadays missing [ 15] and, as a consequence, also a shared view
on the needed KG semantics. Starting from deﬁning a KG, the attention of this document is
devoted to ﬁx the semantics that is needed for KGs and importantly, the requirements to
be taken into account when ﬁxing such a semantics. The importance of taking into account
(diﬀerent kinds of) contextual information is also analyzed and possible research directions for
tackling this aspect are illustrated. Finally, we analyzed another issues related to accessing
KGs, speciﬁcally when a fully open setting cannot be assumed, hence we report the main
research questions that need to be addressed.
Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are becoming more and more popular with an increasing interest
of both big industrial players, such as Google and Amazon, and scientiﬁc communities in
diﬀerent research ﬁelds such as Semantic Web (SW), Databases, Machine Learning and Data
Mining. However, despite this increasing interest in KGs, an agreed formal deﬁnition of KG is
nowadays missing [ 15] and, as a consequence, also a shared view on the needed KG semantics.
Starting from deﬁning a KG as a graph-based structured data organization, endowed with
formal semantics (i.e. a graph-based data organization where a schema and multiple labelled
relations with formal meaning are available), the attention of this document is devoted to ﬁx
the semantics needed for KGs and importantly, the requirements to be taken into account
when ﬁxing the semantics. The main motivation for looking at this direction is that, as
testiﬁed by recent studies on understanding the Empirical semantics [ 4,14,27,43] in SW
(where clear and formal semantics is often provided), the actual usage of formal languages by
human experts does not always matches the formal speciﬁcations.
Particularly, in [ 4,27,43] the formal and actual meaning of owl:sameAs has been
investigated, whilst in [ 14] the empirical proof that some semantics is encoded within
IRIs is provided; as a consequence, meanings within IRIs are practically exploited thus
generating polysemy issues of IRIs (similarly to texts) and wrong reuse of IRIs due to
18371