96 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
These are a few opportunities arising from the usage of knowledge graphs in machine
learning, which we consider could lead to step changes. More will likely be developed and
many gradual improvements may result from progressing machine learning to learn not only
from tables, but also from knowledge graphs of various levels of expressiveness and size.
Vice versa, as reported also in other sections of this report, creating and maintaining
knowledge tasks constitutes a major eﬀort, which beneﬁts already know beneﬁts a lot from
machine learning [7] – and probably even more so in the future.
Representations and Methods
Some prominent cases
1.Language/Images:
Question answering
Question answering is one important application of knowledge graphs. KGs contain a
wealth of information and question answering could be a good way to help end users to
more eﬀectively and also more eﬃciently retrieve information from the KGs. Various
approaches have been developed in this area and they are targeting diﬀerent types of
knowledge bases. A number of challenges pertaining to using knowledge graphs for
question answering are presented in [9].
Berant et al. [ 1] developed the SEMPRE system that translates/parses a natural
language question into a logic form. The approach takes into account both free text
and a knowledge base (more speciﬁcally, freebase) when translating the questions.
TR Discover [ 20] takes advantage of a feature-based context free grammar in order to
translate natural language questions into a ﬁrst-order logic representation. The logic
representation serves as an intermediate representation and it is further translated to
executable queries in diﬀerent query languages, including Cypher (Neo4J), SPARQL
and SQL. By further adopting a deep learning-based approach, the system tags the
tokens in a natural language question in order to reduce its dependence on the grammar
[19].
Deep learning-based approaches have been actively developed for question answering,
not only for RDF-based knowledge bases but also other types of databases. decaNLP
[11] is a recent system that provides question answering capability against relational
databases. It provides the general concept that a natural language question can be
represented by the question itself and its context (e.g., PoS tagging, semantic role
labeling result and relation extraction result). Instead of learning on a single task, it
tries to perform multi-task learning on various tasks and observed better performances
on some of the tasks.
In addition to adopting fully automatic query parsing, CrowdQ [ 6] also incorporates
crowd-sourcing techniques for understanding natural language questions.
Machine translation. [12]
Natural language generation (NLG) for structured data.
The NLG community has an increasing interest in the generation of natural language
from knowledge graphs, especially as this interface promises to generate the interface
between the data-centric world in which knowledge graphs dwell and humans. Chal-