Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 109
Service Level Agreements: As data is not centralized, there are no SLAs. Indeed, it would
be impossible to enforce them in case they are not met. On the other hand, because the
data is decentralized, one could in case of need decide to make local copies of the data,
i.e., centralize parts for which a speciﬁc level of service is expected.
Privacy and Security: With decentralised knowledge graphs, users retain their privacy to
the extent that usage patterns are distributed across systems. In these systems the security
aspect is often not stringent as the data is intended to be shared. One exception would
be the provenance of the data. Techniques like signing statements using public-private
key infrastructure exist to enable guaranteed authenticity of statements.
Characteristics related to implementation include:
Identiﬁers: Even when knowledge is distributed, there could be shared vocabularies.
Besides, one could implement a system for shared identiﬁers where people can create
their own (persistent) identiﬁers, hoping that others will reuse these. However, one would
not expect there to be a centralized identiﬁer system which all users have to adhere to,
as this would become a single point of failure and essentially make this a centralized
system. In eﬀect, one cannot prevent users from using identiﬁers in a wrong way or even
for completely wrong entities, nor can it be prevented that new identiﬁers are created for
already existing entities.
Schema: As mentioned, in a distributed system, there can be shared schemas. However,
anyone would be able to add their own schema parts to the system. One could also
imagine a distributed system in which users get to vote for schemas. This could be
combined with micropayments.
Query:As the system is not centralized, it would be expected that querying results in
more communication and total processing overhead. Data has to be aggregated from
many sources during query time. Parallelized data access can mitigate some of the
performance penalty, however, wide-area network access remains much slower than access
to local storage.
Location: Decentralised knowledge graphs can be made available from any location (e.g.,
own personal web server)
Timeliness: The data in decentralised knowledge graphs is updated immediately whenever
the data owner wants to update it.
Modularity/Allocation: The distributed nature results in a distributed allocation of
resources (processing, storage, and communication). The cost of deployment of the graph
is a) distributed over many parties and b) the upfront cost (capital expenditure) is low
for each participant.
Data Volume: Distributed knowledge graphs are already partitioned into smaller parts
where each has a speciﬁc purpose.
Consistency: Parts of the knowledge graphs are likely more consistent as providers
maintain their own data. But the combination of parts of the graph is likely to be less
consistent as in a centralized approach.
Load Balancing: The decentralisation works eﬀectively as a load balancing when consid-
ering the knowledge graph as a whole.
Conclusion
We have identiﬁed the above directions for further research and development of applic-
ations, to enable content creators and consumers to better access distributed resources.
Such applications should aim to preserve the beneﬁts decentralised approaches (e.g., be
18371