72 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Semantic Graph Analytics
There are various data models that can be used to describe “graphs”, including, for example,
directed-edge labelled graphs, property graphs, and so forth. However, many of the traditional
graph algorithms – though their generality and usefulness have been well-established in a
variety of domains – are proposed and studied for simple graphs or directed graphs without
labels. Hence the question arises of how to adapt and apply these algorithms to other
structures; there may be many options to “project” out a directed graph from a more
complex Knowledge Graph model, where each such projection may yield radically diﬀerent
results; respectively, depending on how the Knowledge Graph is stored, computing such
a projection and transforming it into a format amenable to these algrotithms itself might
impose a signiﬁcant eﬀort.
Aside from structure, Knowledge Graphs often embed semantics of domain terms ex-
pressed, for example, using formal model theory. Such semantics then permit reasoning
methods that allow for transforming or extending graphs in a manner that preserves truth
(i.e., applying inference); examples include subclass reasoning, or inferences over transitive or
inverse properties, identity reasoning, and so forth [ 2]. Applying analytics before or after
such transformations may again yield radically diﬀerent results, and hence it is important
to study such diﬀerences, and to study (and justify/evaluate) which transformations better
reﬂect the real-world phenomena under analysis.
Projections here can involve “Inference-based transformations”, i.e. materialisation or
core-reduction (e.g. removing transitives or inverse edges to reduce a graph to its raw form,
resolving non-unique names by choosing canonical representatives for an equivalence class)
wrt. semantic rules (related to e.g. spanning trees computation). That is, when doing
analytics one often needs to be aware that “semantically equivalent” graphs (with respect to
the chosen KG semantics) may behave fundamentally diﬀerently when taken as inputs for
graph analytics steps.
Conclusions and Next Steps
To present the herein discussed topics to a broader and appropriate audience we plan to
submit an extended version of this report as a position paper to the upcoming W3C Workshop
on Web Standardization for Graph Data.8The scope of the Workshop includes requirements
for graph query languages and diﬀerent kinds of reasoning in graph database systems. Also, it
aims at bringing together the adjacent worlds of RDF and Property Graphs (cf. for instance
[7]), to achieve productive and interoperable boundaries, and foster information exchange
and mutual awareness.
Acknowledgements
Axel Polleres’ and Sebastian Neumaier’s work is supported by the EC under the H2020
project SPECIAL and by the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) under the projects
“CitySpin”, “Communidata” and “DALICC”. Aidan Hogan is funded by the Millennium
Institute for Foundational Research on Data (IMFD) and Fondecyt Grant No. 1181896.
8https://www.w3.org/Data/events/data-ws-2019/