Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 95
This aﬀects the interpretability of the knowledge and the explainability and thus also
trustworthiness of results derived from such knowledge. Latent representations consist of
series of numbers without any obvious human interpretation. The knowledge in a knowledge
graph, in contrast, can straightforwardly be inspected.
The inability to record information precisely further also aﬀects the updatability of the
stored knowledge. While one can easily add a new fact to a knowledge graph, updating latent
representations is often non-trivial and even if it is possible, the newly added information
may still fail to be reﬂected the predictions made from the representations. The same applies
when removing facts. One can easily remove a fact from a knowledge graph, but updating a
machine learning model to capture such a change is challenging.
This suggests that representation learning alone cannot exhaustively address all knowledge
needs of modern AI-driven applications. The machine learning components in conversational
agents, Web search, and intelligent decision support systems will have to draw on large
repositories of knowledge to obtain the desired results.
Knowledge Graph Assets for Machine Learning: Grand Opportunities
Most of human learning is intrinsically linked to knowledge that the individual possesses.
Thus, we believe that bringing knowledge graphs to machine learning will systematically
improve the accuracy and extend the range of machine learning capabilities. In particular,
we see the following four grand opportunities:
1.Data eﬃciency: When data is sparse, knowledge structures may help to ﬁll the gap.
Knowledge graph abstractions may be used for coping with data sparsity by generating
additional training data, e.g. negative data that would lead to inconsistent interpretations,
or by giving indications of how to aggregate uncertain predictions over categories related
or similar in the knowledge graph. Thus, knowledge graphs may improve data eﬃciency.
2.Zero-shot learning describe the challenge to cope with previously unencountered types
of situations. The combination of induction from machine learning and deduction from
knowledge graphs provides for the opportunity to deal, e.g., with pictures where the
type of situation did not appear in the training data. One example might be a group of
dark wild boars roaming a street at night where an autonomous car is driving and thus
encountering a situation that might not have been in the training data at all.
3.Consistent and coherent structured predictions: The more complex the actual
prediction the less accurate it tends to be. Structured predictions may aim at predicting a
whole course of events (e.g. how a video will continue, how a patient’s illness will develop),
but not all of these predictions may exhibit the same level of consistency. Knowledge
graphs let us check which predictions might be consistent/inconsistent or coherent/inco-
herent with our available knowledge. For instance, the most likely classiﬁcation of traﬃc
signs – even under adversarial attacks – might be re-assessed with regard to a vehicle’s
knowledge graph.
4.Succinct explanations: Several diﬃculties arise when explaining predictions made by
machine learning systems. One issue is the implicit representations causing the predictions
(e.g. neural curve ﬁtting). A second problem is the possible low level of explanation a
system might give, even when it works on explicit representations. A third issue may
result from the sheer volume of explanation produced, and, fourth, an actual user might
only be interested in a speciﬁc detail of the overall explanation. Knowledge graphs may
alleviate all these four issues by (i) mapping the explanation to (ii) an appropriate level
of generalization, (iii) summarizing the found phenomenon and (iv) comparing this to a
state of knowledge that the user might already have.
18371