46 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Context: the structure of knowledge & data at scale
There are credible models of data at scale (from Data Management). There are credible
models of knowledge (from Knowledge Representation and Knowledge Engineering), but
there are very few credible models of knowledge and data at scale . (where “scale” is with
respect to each of the V’s: volume, variety, veracity, velocity, etc).
Our object of study is therefore the structure of knowledge and data at scale .
As in any scientiﬁc ﬁeld, we distinguish the following three layers:
Models: a model of the structure of knowledge and data at scale (e.g. knowledge graphs)
Manifestations: instances of such a model (e.g. Wikidata, DBpedia)
Applications: methods and tools that rely on such instances (e.g. “search engine”, “re-
commender system’, “data interoperability”,”knowledge integration system”, “knowledge
discovery”)
In the light of the above, what the community has done is to develop a model for the
structure of knowledge & data at scale, namely: Knowledge Graphs.
Multiple models for the structure of knowledge and data at scale have been proposed:
1.Relation algebra (“it’s a table!”)
2.Knowledge graphs (“it’s a graph!”)
3.Latent semantics (“it’s a vector space!”)
4.World Wide Web (“it’s a network of documents!”)
Thus, current knowledge graphs are just one model for the “structure of knowledge & data
at scale”, and alternative and complementary models have been studied and will no doubt
be proposed in the future. Each of these will explain/describe/implement other aspects of
the structure of knowledge & data at scale. Essential to our understanding of the structure
of knowledge & data at scale is knowing when to use which of these complementary and
sometimes competing models.
Any model has to be testable, in order to distinguish it from other models and to decide
when which model is most appropriate. A model for knowledge and data at scale can
be tested against:
Theoretical properties (Kuhn’s properties of scientiﬁc theories: accuracy, internal consist-
ency, scope, simplicity; as well as properties speciﬁc for models of knowledge and data at
scale such as robustness, graceful degradation and others)
Performance in a task at scale (the V’s): how well does this model support performance
of a particular task, measured in various ways: ease of design, ease of implementation,
ease of maintenance, does it combine with other models, and others).
Performance for users: supporting useful abstractions for presentation, explainability, etc.
Cognitive “convenience”
Occam’s razor (as always)
These and other criteria will allow models to be compared against other models, telling
us when to use which model. When a model falls short on some of these criteria, that
is a prompt to improve or extend the model. For example, current knowledge graphs
fall short on representing time, versioning, probability, fuzziness, context, reiﬁcation, and
handling inconsistency among others. New generations of knowledge graph models should
explain/describe/implement these and other aspects of the structure of “knowledge & data
at scale”.
The challenges clustered below can be thought of as directions in the exploration of
knowledge & data at scale.