76 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
“Knowledge graphs use a limited set of relation types. ”
“All identiﬁed entities in a knowledge graph, including types and relations, must be
identiﬁed using global identiﬁers with unambiguous denotation. ”
Ehrlinger and Wöß [4] also collect proposed deﬁnitions, and even go as far as adding:
“A knowledge graph acquires and integrates information into an ontology and applies a
reasoner to derive new knowledge. ”
The beneﬁt of these latter more speciﬁc deﬁnitions would be to provide an initial technical
agreement upon which further works can be elaborated and made interoperable. However,
the consensus at the Dagstuhl Seminar – which included various industry stakeholders – was
that these latter proposed deﬁnitions:
are biased towards particular scientiﬁc disciplines (particularly the Semantic Web);
deﬁne aspects that are in fact not essential for a Knowledge Graph, and thus, for example,
are not satisﬁed by the industrial Knowledge Graphs that have played a key role in the
recent popularisation of the phrase.
Upon reviewing prior proposals, it was decided to seek a more inclusive deﬁnition that
repositions Knowledge Graphs as a commons for researchers and practitioners from various
disciplines that are interested, more generally, in both the practical and scientiﬁc challenges
stemming from the collection, management, integration, publication, annotation, processing
and analysis of graph-structured data at scale. Beyond the (perhaps questionable) exercise
of laying claim to “yet another deﬁnition” of a Knowledge Graph, our goal is to outline a
scope and direction for this topic within which complementary perspectives can coexist.
Knowledge Graphs: A New Deﬁnition
Rather than assuming any speciﬁc core formalism for representing “knowledge” (e.g., rule-
based axiomatisation, description logics, computational linguistics, machine learning models,
relational schema and constraints), KGs start with data, and it is the data itself – organised
and viewed as a graph of entities and their relationships – that takes centre stage. This
graph representation allows data to cross application barriers, be aggregated and integrated
at diﬀerent levels of abstraction, without the encumbrance of sticking rigidly to a particular
formalism: a particular schema, notion of logical consistency, ontological language, etc.
Various mechanisms for extracting and representing “knowledge” can then be applied to
complement the data in its graph abstraction, making explicit more of its meaning, allowing
its interpretation in increasing depth and with increasing sophistication.
We thus propose to deﬁne a “Knowledge Graph”, succinctly, as:
“a graph of data with the intent to compose knowledge ”.
We elaborate on this deﬁnition in the following.
In terms of a “graph of data”, we refer to a dataset viewed as a set of entities represented
as nodes, with their relations represented as edges; technically this notion can be instantiated
with a number of concrete graph models, including for example:
directededge-labelledgraphs (akasetsoftriples), composedofnamedbinaryrelations
(labelled edges) between entities (nodes);
property graphs , which extends directed edge-labelled graphs such that both nodes
and edges may be additionally annotated with sets of property-attribute pairs;