50 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Processing (NLP) or Machine Learning (ML) communities. Often, at the application or
project level, methodologies used for the creation of knowledge graphs may not necessarily
follow any particular set of best practices. For example, several methods employed when
constructing knowledge graphs may include using models inherent in speciﬁc ontologies that
suggest a particular knowledge representation pattern. Additionally, for annotation using
concepts from ontologies, such as the annotation of dataset variables, the use of public search
engines on vocabulary repositories (Bioportal [ 14], Ontobee [ 18], linked open vocabularies
[16]) are often employed. The result may be the use of a concept that best matches the
task at hand. The use of multiple ontologies may have undesirable consequences, such as
resulting in inconsistencies between terms. If such concepts do not exist, one may continue
to deﬁne their own terms and build their own ontology without using commonly agreed upon
deﬁnitions. As a validation approach, some form of consistency checking is required in order
to keep the knowledge graph suitable for inference activities.
Knowledge graph developers must choose between methodologies and best practices
for speciﬁc domains, or for engineering diﬀerent kinds of knowledge graphs. Therefore,
one challenge is to examine and consolidate existing best practices, and possibly extend
them, to encompass all kinds of knowledge graphs, as well as currently unaddressed aspects
of knowledge graphs. Thus, we may ultimately provide a clear workﬂow for an arbitrary
development team to create FAIR [ 17] (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Re-usable)
knowledge graphs.
Existing Best Practices
We distinguish between two diﬀerent categories of best practices for the creation of knowledge
graphs: its provision (driving “ﬁndable” and “accessible”) and its design (driving “interoper-
able” and “re-usable”). In addition, we must promote these standards, because, even within
the Semantic Web community, an exhaustive set of best practices or standards is nonexistent.
It is hard to know which best practices to develop if we do not know which others may exist.
It then seems unreasonable to expect a similar set of best practices from the NLP and ML
communities with whom we try to bridge the gap. While an exhaustive set is diﬃcult to
come by, we have identiﬁed a non-exhaustive list of existing best practices related to the
design of knowledge graphs, inclusion of high quality metadata and provenance, and methods
for converting structured data into knowledge graphs.
Knowledge Graph Design
When starting to design an ontology or knowledge graph, all the necessary concepts or possible
uses may not be initially known. Agile [ 9] & eXtreme [ 15,1] Design (XD) methodologies
allows for modular updates when needed, which is pertinent for the design and sharing
of ontologies among collaborative groups. This approach is often referred to as modular
ontology modelling or design [8].
Agile design encourage simplicity, in which only essential features are implemented at
ﬁrst, and additional features can be included in the future. When following this methodology,
one should explain complex ideas fully and keep straightforward ideas simple. The eXtreme
Design methodology was inspired by this Agile approach, as ontologies used should only
contain concepts and properties that are essential for the particular task at hand. XD