106 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Querying Wikidata’s data is an important way to access the data and gain new insights.
It requires writing SPARQL queries, which is not possible for a signiﬁcant part of the
intended users – especially considering the data model’s special features (qualiﬁers, ranks,
references).
We invite the research community in helping us address these challenges in order to build
and maintain a general-purpose knowledge graph for everyone.
References
1S. Capadisli, A. Guy, R. Verborgh, C. Lange, S. Auer, and T. Berners-Lee. Decentralised
authoring, annotations and notiﬁcations for a read-write web with dokieli. 2017.
2E. Mansour, A.V. Sambra, S. Hawke, M. Zereba, S. Capadisli, A. Ghanem, A. Aboulnaga,
and T. Berners-Lee. A demonstration of the solid platform for social web applications. In
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference Companion on World Wide Web , WWW
’16 Companion, pages 223–226. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Com-
mittee, 2016.
3H. Roosendaal and P. Geurts. Forces and functions in scientiﬁc communication: an analysis
of their interplay. cooperative research information systems in physics, august 31-september
4 1997.(oldenburg, germany), 1997.
4H. Van de Sompel and A. Treloar. A perspective on archiving the scholarly web. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Digital Preservation (iPRES) , pages 194–
198, 2014.
5D. Vrandečić and M. Krötzsch. Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communic-
ations of the ACM , 57(10):78–85, 2014.
3.26 Knowledge Graphs and the Web
Sarven Capadisli (TIB – Hannover, DE), Michael Cochez (Fraunhofer FIT – Sankt Augustin,
DE), Claudio Gutierrez (University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL), Andreas Harth
(Fraunhofer IIS – Nürnberg, DE), and Antoine Zimmermann (École des Mines de Saint-
Étienne, FR)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sarven Capadisli, Michael Cochez, Claudio Gutierrez, Andreas Harth, and Antoine Zimmermann
Introduction
The web provides a large store of data and information from which knowledge graphs can be
constructed. The raw input that can be sourced from the web for constructing knowledge
graphs diﬀers in formality, in variety and scope, from text to HTML and XSL documents
to RDF. Some knowledge graphs rely on information extracted from unstructured sources,
while other knowledge graphs focus on information already available as RDF.
In the text, we focus on diﬀerent ways to organise knowledge graphs built from structured
data such as RDF or other graph-centric frameworks.
In this report we focus essentially on the counterpoint between centrally organized versus
decentralized knowledge graphs. Some current examples of centralised or organisational
knowledge graphs are the Google Knowledge Graph (former: Freebase), Wikidata, and
DBpedia. Examples of decentralized or personal knowledge graphs are the Linking Open
Data (LOD) cloud and the collection of all Linked Data on the web. The web with its
decentralised architecture is able to accommodate in principle both approaches.