JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 1
Domain Adaptive Ensemble Learning
Kaiyang Zhou, Yongxin Yang, Yu Qiao, and Tao Xiang.
Abstract —The problem of generalizing deep neural networks
from multiple source domains to a target one is studied under
two settings: When unlabeled target data is available, it is a
multi-source unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problem,
otherwise a domain generalization (DG) problem. We propose a
uniﬁed framework termed domain adaptive ensemble learning
(DAEL) to address both problems. A DAEL model is composed
of a CNN feature extractor shared across domains and multiple
classiﬁer heads each trained to specialize in a particular source
domain. Each such classiﬁer is an expert to its own domain
but a non-expert to others. DAEL aims to learn these experts
collaboratively so that when forming an ensemble, they can
leverage complementary information from each other to be more
effective for an unseen target domain. To this end, each source
domain is used in turn as a pseudo-target-domain with its own ex-
pert providing supervisory signal to the ensemble of non-experts
learned from the other sources. To deal with unlabeled target
data under the UDA setting where real expert does not exist,
DAEL uses pseudo labels to supervise the ensemble learning.
Extensive experiments on three multi-source UDA datasets and
two DG datasets show that DAEL improves the state of the art
on both problems, often by signiﬁcant margins.
Index Terms —Domain adaptation, domain generalization, col-
laborative ensemble learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
DEEP neural networks trained with sufﬁcient labeled data
typically perform well when the test data follows a
similar distribution as the training data. However, when the
test data distribution is different, neural networks often suffer
from signiﬁcant performance degradation. Such a problem
is common to machine learning models and is often re-
ferred to as domain shift [1] (or distribution shift). To over-
come the domain shift problem, two related areas have been
studied extensively, namely unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] and domain generalization
(DG) [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. UDA aims to adapt a model
from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
In contrast, DG aims to learn a model only from source data
typically gathered from multiple distinct but related domains,
and the model is directly deployed in a target domain without
any ﬁne-tuning or adaptation steps.
Early UDA work focuses on single-source scenarios. Re-
cently, multi-source UDA [16, 17, 18] has started to attract
more attention, thanks to the introduction of large-scale multi-
domain datasets such as DomainNet [18]. In contrast, having
multiple source domains has been the default setting for most
DG methods from much early on [11]. This is understandable:
without the guidance from target domain data, DG models
rely on the diversity of source domain to learn generalizable
K. Zhou is with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Y . Yang and T. Xiang are with the University of Surrey, UK.
Y . Qiao is with the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, China.knowledge. This paper focuses on the multi-source setting for
both problems.
How can multiple source domains be exploited to help
generalization? Many DG methods [19, 20, 21] aim to learn a
domain-invariant feature representation or classiﬁer across the
source domains, in the hope that it would also be invariant
to domain shift brought by the target domain. However,
there is an intrinsic ﬂaw in this approach, that is, when the
source domains become more diverse, learning a domain-
invariant model becomes more difﬁcult. This is because each
domain now contains much domain-speciﬁc information. Sim-
ply removing the information may be detrimental to model
generalization because such information could potentially be
useful for a target domain, especially when combined across
different source domains. An example can be found in Fig. 1(a)
where the only thing in common of the ﬁve source domains
for the airplane class seems to be shape. However, texture
information is also useful for object recognition in the target
sketch domain, which we want to maintain in the learned
classiﬁer. Existing multi-source UDA methods, on the other
hand, attempt to align the data distribution of the target domain
with each source domain individually [17, 18, 22] or by
means of a hard [23] or soft [16] domain selector. Again,
Fig. 1(a) suggests that aligning the target domain to each
individual source domain is not only difﬁcult but could also
be counterproductive due to drastic variations among source
domains.
In this paper, we propose a novel uniﬁed framework for both
multi-source DG and UDA based on the idea of collaborative
ensemble learning. Our framework, termed domain adaptive
ensemble learning (DAEL), takes a very different approach
from previous work. Speciﬁcally, each domain is used to learn
a model that is specialized in that domain (see Fig. 1(a)).
We call it a domain expert—a relative term as an expert to
a speciﬁc source domain would be a non-expert to all other
source domains as well as the target domain. The key idea
of DAEL is to learn these experts collaboratively so that
when forming an ensemble, they can leverage complementary
information to better tackle the target domain.
To realize the DAEL framework for a UDA or DG model,
a number of issues need to be addressed. (1) Scalability:
Training an ensemble of models instead of a single model
means higher computational cost. To solve this problem,
we design a DAEL model as a deep multi-expert network
consisting of a shared convolutional neural network (CNN)
feature extractor and multiple classiﬁer heads. Each head is
trained to classify images from a particular source domain.
Therefore, different heads learn different patterns from the
shared features for classiﬁcation. (2) Training: Since the target
domain data is either non-existent (for DG) or has no label (for
UDA), there is no target domain expert to provide supervisoryarXiv:2003.07325v3  [cs.CV]  8 Sep 2021