JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 2
Expert-3Expert-1Expert-2Expert-4Expert-5Expert group
Non-expert groupSoft probability as supervisionMost confident expertExpert-1Expert-3Expert-4Expert-5Expert group
Non-expert group
Expert-2Labeled source dataUnlabeled target dataPseudo-label as supervision
Source-1Source-2Source-3Source-4Source-5TargetExpert-1Expert-2Expert-3Expert-4Expert-5Supervised learning(a) Learning domain-specific experts
(b) Collaborative ensemble learning for labeled source(c) Collaborative ensemble learning for unlabeled target
Fig. 1: Overview of domain adaptive ensemble learning (DAEL).
signal for the source domain expert ensemble. To overcome
this, each source domain is used in turn as a pseudo-target-
domain with its own expert providing supervisory signal to the
ensemble of non-experts learned from the other sources (see
Fig. 1(b)). For unlabeled target data under the UDA setting
where real expert does not exist, DAEL uses as pseudo-label
the most conﬁdent estimation among all experts and train the
ensemble to ﬁt the pseudo-label (see Fig. 1(c)). (3) How to
measure the effectiveness of a non-expert ensemble w.r.t. an
expert: Inspired by consistency regularization (CR) [24, 25]
used in semi-supervised learning, the ensemble’s effectiveness
is measured by how close its prediction is to that of an expert
when both are fed with a data point from the expert’s domain.
To amplify the regularization effect brought by CR, we use
weak and strong augmentation for input to an expert and a non-
expert ensemble respectively. Such a strategy has been shown
useful in recent semi-supervised learning methods [26, 27, 28].
Once these three issues are addressed, we have a simple but ef-
fective solution to both UDA and DG. By sending supervisory
signal to an ensemble rather than each individual, different
domain-speciﬁc experts are allowed to exploit complementary
domain-speciﬁc information from each other, resulting in a
more domain-generalizable ensemble.
We summarize our contributions as follows. (1)We present
a novel framework called domain adaptive ensemble learning
(DAEL), which improves the generalization of a multi-expert
network by explicitly training the ensemble to solve the
target task. (2)A realization of DAEL is formulated which
provides a simple yet effective solution for both multi-source
UDA and DG, unlike previous methods that only tackle one
of them. (3)We deﬁne miniDomainNet, a reduced version
of DomainNet [18] to allow fast prototyping and experi-
mentation. For benchmarking, a uniﬁed implementation and
evaluation platform of all compared methods is created, called
Dassl.pytorch , which has been made publicly available.1
1https://github.com/KaiyangZhou/Dassl.pytorch.(4)We demonstrate the effectiveness of DAEL on three multi-
source UDA datasets and two DG datasets where DAEL
outperforms the current state of the art by a large margin (see
Table 1 & 2).
II. R ELATED WORK
Unsupervised domain adaptation. Motivated by the sem-
inal theory work by Ben-David et al. [29], numerous UDA
methods seek to reduce distribution discrepancy between
source and target features using some distance metrics, such
as maximum mean discrepancy [3, 30, 31], optimal trans-
port [32, 33], and graph matching [34, 35, 36]. Inspired
by generative adversarial network (GAN) [37], several meth-
ods [2, 38, 39, 40, 41] additionally train a domain discrim-
inator for feature alignment. GAN has also been exploited
for pixel-level domain adaptation where target images are
synthesized via image translation/generation [42, 43]. Instead
of aligning the coarse marginal distribution, recent alignment
methods have shown that ﬁne-grained alignment such as
aligning class centroids [44, 45, 46, 47] or using task-speciﬁc
classiﬁers [6, 48, 49] can give a better adaptation performance.
The multi-source UDA methods are more related to our
work because of the same problem setting. Several works [17,
18, 22] extend the domain alignment idea to multi-source
UDA by considering all possible source-target pairs. Kang
et al. [47] propose contrastive adaptation network where a
contrastive domain discrepancy loss is minimized for samples
from the same class but of different domains while maximized
for samples from different classes. Relationships between each
source and the target are learned by Li et al. [23] and only the
target-related sources are kept for model learning. Hoffman
et al. [16] compute distribution-based weights for combining
source classiﬁers. Our model architecture—a shared feature
extractor and multiple domain-speciﬁc classiﬁers—is similar
to M3SDA [18]. However, DAEL is very different in that
different domain-speciﬁc classiﬁers are learned collaboratively