Inputs Ground truth
Inputs Video prediction
Inputs Video predictions when top level does not receive inputs
t=1 4 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Figure 7: Visualization of the content stored at the top-level of a Clockwork V AE trained on GQN
Mazes. The first row shows ground truth and the second row shows a normal video prediction. The
remaining rows show video predictions where the top-level stochastic variables are drawn from the
prior rather than the posterior. In other words, only the lower and middle levels have access to the
context images but the top level is blind. We find that the positions of camera and nearby walls
remain unchanged, so this information must have been represented at lower and middle levels. In
contrast, the model predicts textures that differ from the context, meaning that this global information
must have been stored at the top level.
that the generations by models that predict purely in latent space are slightly blurry compared to
those generated by SVG.
3.6 Content Stored at Different Levels
3% 10% 30% 100% 300%
Speed of Moving Digits0.010.1110100KL divergence in nats
Adapting to Sequence Speed
Bottom level
Middle level
Top level
Figure 8: KL loss at each level of CW-V AE when
trained on slower or faster variants of Moving
MNIST. The KL value at a level indicates the
amount of information stored at that level. Faster
moving digits result in higher KLs at the lower level
and lower KLs at higher levels. Slower moving dig-
its result in more information at higher levels.We visualize the information stored at differ-
ent levels of the hierarchy. We generate video
predictions where only the lower and middle
layer have access to the context images, but
the high level follows its prior. This way, the
prediction will only be consistent with the con-
text inputs for information that was extracted
by the lower and middle level. Information that
is held by the top level is not informed by the
context frames and thus will follow the train-
ing distribution. We use 8 instead of 36 input
images for this experiment because we do not
need to compute the top level posterior here.
Figure 7 shows these samples for one input
sequence and more examples are included in
Figure G.1. We find that the video predictions
correctly continue the positions of the camera
and nearby walls visible in the input frames,
but that the textures appear randomized. This confirms that the top level stores the global information
about the textures whereas more ephemeral information is stored in the faster ticking lower and
middle levels. We also experimented with resetting the lower or middle level but found that they store
similar information, suggesting that a 2-level model may be sufficient for this dataset.
3.7 Temporal Abstraction Factor
Figure 1 compares the quality of open-loop video predictions on Moving MNIST for CW-V AE with
temporal abstraction factors 2, 4, 6, and 8 - all with equal number of model parameters. Increasing the
temporal abstraction factor directly increases the duration for which the predicted frames are accurate
for. Comparing to RSSM and SVG, CW-V AEs model long-term dependencies for 6×as many
frames as the baselines before losing temporal context. The point at which the models lose temporal
context is when they approach the “random” line, which shows the quality of using randomly sampled
training images as a native baseline for video prediction that has no temporal dependencies.
8