Inputs Video Prediction without Further InputsGT
 CW-V AE
 VTA
 RSSM
 SVG
t=1 18 36 50 80 110 140 170 200 230 260 290 320 350 380 410 440 470 500
Figure 2: Long-horizon video predictions on the MineRL Navigate dataset. In the dataset, the camera
moves straight ahead most of the time. CW-V AE accurately predicts the camera movement from the
ocean to the forest until the end of the sequence. In contrast, VTA outputs artifacts in the sky after
240 steps and shows less diversity in the frames. RSSM fails to predict the movement toward the
island after 290 frames. SVG simply copies the initial frame and does not predict any new events in
the future.
To better represent complex data, hierarchical latent variable models learn multiple levels of features.
Ladder V AE (Sønderby et al., 2016), VLAE (Zhao et al., 2017), NV AE (Vahdat and Kautz, 2020),
and very deep V AEs (Child, 2020) have demonstrated the success of this approach for generating
static images. Hierarchical latents have also been incorporated into deep video prediction models
(Serban et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2019; Castrejón et al., 2019). These models can learn to separate
high-level details, such as textures, from low-level details, such as object positions. However, they
operate at the frequency of the input sequence, making it challenging to predict far into the future.
Temporally abstract latent dynamics models predict learned features at a slower frequency than the
input sequence. This encourages learning long-term dependencies that can result in more accurate
predictions and enable computationally efficient long-horizon planning. Temporal abstraction has
been studied for low-dimensional sequences (Koutník et al., 2014; Chung et al., 2016; Mujika et al.,
2017). VTA (Kim et al., 2019) models videos using two levels of latent variables, where the fast states
decide when the slow states should tick. TD-V AE (Gregor and Besse, 2018) models high-dimensional
input sequences using jumpy predictions, without a hierarchy. Refer to Appendix B for further related
work. Despite this progress, scaling temporally abstract latent dynamics to complex datasets and
understanding how these models organize the information about their inputs remain open challenges.
In this paper, we introduce the Clockwork Variational Autoencoder (CW-V AE), a simple hierarchical
latent dynamics model where all levels tick at different fixed clock speeds. We conduct an extensive
empirical evaluation and find that CW-V AE outperforms existing video prediction models. Moreover,
we conduct several experiments to gain insights into the inner workings of the learned hierarchy.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
•Clockwork Variational Autoencoder (CW-VAE) We introduce a simple hierarchical video
prediction model that leverages different clock speeds per level to learn long-term dependencies
in video. A comprehensive empirical evaluation shows that on average, CW-V AE outperforms
strong baselines, such as SVG-LP, VTA, and RSSM across several metrics.
•Long-term video benchmark In the past, the video prediction literature has mainly focused
on short-term video prediction of under 100 frames. To evaluate the ability to capture long-term
dependencies, we propose using the Minecraft Navigate dataset as a challenging benchmark for
video prediction of 500 frames.
•Accurate long-term predictions Despite the simplicity of fixed clock speeds, CW-V AE im-
proves over the distance of accurate video prediction of prior work. On the Minecraft Navigate
dataset, CW-V AE accurately predicts for over 400 frames, whereas prior work fails before or
around 150 frames.
•Adaptation to sequence speed We demonstrate that CW-V AE automatically adapts to the
frame rate of the dataset. Varying the frame rate of a synthetic dataset confirms that the slower
latents are used more when objects in the video are slower, and faster latents are used more when
the objects are faster.
2