To implement this distribution and its inference model, CW-V AE utilizes the following components,
∀l∈[1, L], t∈ Tl,
Encoder: el
t=e(xt:t+kl−1−1)
Posterior transition ql
t:q(sl
t|sl
t−1, sl+1
t, el
t)
Prior transition pl
t: p(sl
t|sl
t−1, sl+1
t)
Decoder: p(xt|s1
t).(4)
Inference CW-V AE embeds the observed frames using a CNN. Each active latent state at a level
lreceives the image embeddings of its corresponding kl−1observation frames (dashed lines in
Figure 3). The diagonal Gaussian belief ql
tis then computed as a function of the input features, the
posterior sample at the previous step, and the posterior sample above (solid lines in Figure 3). We
reuse all weights of the generative model for inference except for the output layer that predicts the
mean and variance.
Generation The diagonal Gaussian prior pl
tis computed by applying the transition function from
the latent state at the previous timestep in the current level, as well as the state belief at the level
above (solid lines in Figure 3). Finally, the posterior samples at the lowest level are decoded into
images using a transposed CNN.
Training objective Because we cannot compute the likelihood of the training data under the model
in closed form, we use the ELBO as our training objective. This training objective optimizes a
reconstruction loss at the lowest level, and a KL regularizer at every level in the hierarchy summed
across active timesteps,
max
e,q,pPT
t=1Eq1
t[lnp(xt|s1
t)]−PL
l=1P
t∈TlEql
t−1ql+1
th
KL[ql
t∥pl
t]i
. (5)
The KL regularizers limit the amount of information about the images that enters via the encoder.
This encourages the model to utilize the “free” information from the previous and above latent and
only attend to the input image to the extent necessary. Since the number of active timesteps decreases
as we go higher in the hierarchy, the number of KL terms per level decreases as well. Hence it is
easier for the model to store slowly changing information high up in the hierarchy than to pay a
KL penalty to repeatedly extracting the information from the images at the lower level or trying to
remember it by passing it along for many steps at the lower level without accidental forgetting.
Stochastic and Deterministic Path As shown in Figure 3 (right), we split the state sl
tinto stochastic
(zl
t) and deterministic ( hl
t) parts (Hafner et al., 2019b). The deterministic state is computed using
the top-down and temporal context, which then conditions the stochastic state at that level. The
stochastic variables follow diagonal Gaussians with predicted means and variances. We use one GRU
(Cho et al., 2014) per level to update the deterministic variable at every active step. All components
of Equation 4 jointly optimize Equation 5 by stochastic backprop with reparameterized sampling
(Kingma and Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014). Refer to Appendix C for architecture details.
3 Experiments
We compare the Clockwork Variational Autoencoder (CW-V AE) on 4 diverse video prediction
datasets to state-of-the-art video prediction models in Sections 3.2 to 3.5. We then conduct an
extensive analysis to gain insights into the behavior of CW-V AE. We study the content stored at each
level of the hierarchy in Section 3.6, the effect of different clock speeds in Section 3.7, the amount of
information at each level in Section 3.8, and the change in information as a function of the dataset
frame rate Section 3.9. The source code and video predictions are available on the project website.2
Datasets We choose 4 diverse video datasets for the benchmark. The MineRL Navigate dataset
(available under the CC Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 license) was crowd sourced
by Guss et al. (2019) for reinforcement learning applications. We process this data to create a long-
horizon video prediction dataset that contains ∼750k frames. The sequences show players traveling
to goal locations in procedurally generated 3D worlds of the video game Minecraft (traversing
forests, mountains, villages, oceans). The KTH Action video prediction dataset (Schuldt et al., 2004)
(available under the CC Attribution-NonCommercial license) contains 290k frames. The 600 videos
show humans walking, jogging, running, boxing, hand-waving, and clapping. GQN Mazes (Eslami
2https://danijar.com/cwvae
4