zs
s1s2s3s4s1s3 2
 1  1  1  1 2
Video 
Data First 
Level Second 
Level 
t=1 t=2 t=4 t=3top-down 
context 
temporal 
context temporal 
context h
Connection only used 
for posterior (given data) Connection used for both 
prior and posterior bottom-up 
observations top-down 
context Figure 3: Clockwork Variational Autoencoder (CW-V AE). We show 2 levels with temporal abstraction
factor 2 (but we use up to 4 levels and abstraction factor of 8 in our experiments). Left is the structure
of the model, where each latent state sl
tin the second level conditions two latent states in the first
level. The solid arrows represent the generative model, while both solid and dashed arrows comprise
the inference model. On the right, we illustrate the internal components of the state, containing a
deterministic variable htand a stochastic variable zt. The deterministic variable aggregates contextual
information and passes it to the stochastic variable to be used for inference and stochastic prediction.
•Separation of information We visualize the content represented at higher levels of the temporal
hierarchy. This experiment shows that the slower levels represent content that changes more
slowly in the input, such as the wall colors of a maze, while faster levels represent faster changing
concepts, such as the camera position.
2 Clockwork Variational Autoencoder
Long video sequences contain both, information that is local to a few frames, as well as global
information that is shared among many frames. Traditional video prediction models that predict
ahead at the frame rate of the video can struggle to retain information long enough to learn such
long-term dependencies. We introduce the Clockwork Variational Autoencoder (CW-V AE) to learn
long-term correlations of videos. Our model predicts ahead on multiple time scales, as visualized in
Figure 3. We build our work upon the Recurrent State-Space Model (RSSM; Hafner et al., 2019b),
the details of which can be found in Appendix A.
CW-V AE consists of a hierarchy of recurrent latent variables, where each level transitions at a
different clock speed. We slow down the transitions exponentially as we go up in the hierarchy, i.e.
each level is slower than the level below by a factor k. We denote the latent state at timestep tand
level lbysl
tand the video frames by xt. We define the set of active timesteps Tlfor each level
l∈[1, L]as those instances in time where the state transition generates a new latent state,
Active steps: Tl.={t∈[1, T]|tmodkl−1= 1}. (1)
At each level, we condition kconsecutive latent states on a single latent variable in the level above.
For example, in the model shown in Figure 3 with k= 2,T1={1,2,3, . . .},T2={1,3,5, . . .},
and both s1
1ands1
2are conditioned on the same s2
1from the second level.
The latent chains can also be thought of as a hierarchy of latent variables where each level has a
separate state variable per timestep, but only updates the previous state every kl−1timesteps and
otherwise copies the previous state, so that ∀t /∈ Tl:
Copied states: sl
t.=sl
max
τ{τ∈Tl|τ≤t}. (2)
Joint distribution We can factorize the joint distribution of a sequence of images and active latents
at every level into two terms: (1) the reconstruction terms of the images given their lowest level
latents, and (2) state transitions at all levels conditioned on the previous latent and the latent above,
p(x1:T, s1:L
1:T).=QT
t=1p(xt|s1
t)QL
l=1Q
t∈Tlp(sl
t|sl
t−1, sl+1
t)
. (3)
3