3.8 Information Amount per Level
Table 1 shows the KL regularizers for each level for CW-V AEs of varying number of levels. The
KL regularizers are summed across evaluation sequences on the Moving MNIST dataset. The KL
regularizers provide an upper bound on the amount of information incorporated into each level of
the hierarchy, which we use as an indicator. The 2-level and 3-level CW-V AEs were trained with a
temporal abstraction factor of 6, and the 4-level model with a factor of 4 to fit into GPU memory.
We observe that the amount of information stored at the lowest level decreases as we use a deeper
hierarchy, and further decreases for larger temporal abstraction factors. Using a larger number of
levels means that the lowest level does not need to capture as much information. Moreover, increasing
the amount of temporal abstraction makes the higher levels more useful to the model, again reducing
the amount of information that needs to be incorporated at the lowest level.
3.9 Adapting to Sequence Speed
To understand how our model adapts to changing temporal correlations in the dataset, we train CW-
V AE on slower and faster versions of moving MNIST. Figure 8 shows the KL divergence summed
across the active timesteps of each level in the hierarchy. The KL regularizer at each level correlates
with the frame rate of the dataset. The faster the digits move, the more the fast ticking lowest level of
the hierarchy is used. The slower the digits move, the more the middle and top level are used. Even
though the KL divergence at the top level is small, it follows a consistent trend. We conjecture that
the top level stores relatively little information because the only global information is the two digit
identities, which take about 5 nats to store. The experiment shows that the amount of information
stored at any temporally abstract level adapts to the speed of the sequence, with high-frequency
details pushed into fast latents.
4 Discussion
This paper introduces the Clockwork Variational Autoencoder (CW-V AE) that leverages a temporally
abstract hierarchy of latent variables for long-term video prediction. We demonstrate its empirical
performance on 4 diverse video prediction datasets with up to 1000 frames and show that CW-V AE
outperforms top video prediction models from the literature. Moreover, we confirm experimentally
that the slower ticking higher levels of the hierarchy learn to represent content that changes more
slowly in the video, whereas lower levels hold faster changing information.
We point out the following limitations of our work as promising directions for future work:
•The typical video prediction metrics are not ideal at capturing the quality of video predictions,
especially for long horizons. To this end, we have experimented with evaluating the best out of
100 samples for each evaluation video but have not found significant differences in the results,
while evaluating even more samples is computationally infeasible to us. Using datasets where
underlying attributes of the scene are available would allow evaluating the multi-step predictions
by how well underlying attributes can be extracted from the representations using a separately
trained readout network.
•In our experiments, we train the Clockwork V AE end-to-end on training sequences of length 100.
With 3 levels and a temporal abstraction factor of 8, the top level can only step once within each
training sequence. Our experiments show clear benefits of the temporally abstract model, but
we conjecture that its performance could be further improved by training the top level on more
consecutive transitions.
•We used relatively small convolutional neural networks for encoding and decoding the images.
This results in a relatively light-weight model that can easily be trained on a single GPU in a
few days. However, we conjecture that using a larger architecture could increase the quality of
generated images, resulting in a model that excels at predicting both high frequency details and
long-term dependencies in the data.
Temporally abstract latent hierarchies are an intuitive approach for processing high-dimensional input
sequences. Besides video prediction, we hope that our findings can help advance other domains that
deal with high-dimensional sequences, such as representation learning, video understanding, and
reinforcement learning.
Acknowledgments We thank Ruben Villegas and our anonymous reviewers for their valuable
input.
9