CW-VAE
NoTmpAbsRSSMVTA SVG0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8AccuracyGQN Mazes Room Sequences(a)
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Prediction Horizon0.400.450.500.550.600.65AccuracyMoving MNIST Digit Identities
CW-VAE (ours)
NoTmpAbs (ours)RSSM
VTASVG (b)
CW-VAE
NoTmpAbsRSSMSVG VTA1.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Rank (lower is better)Avg Rank over Datasets and Metrics (c)
Figure 5: Evaluating video prediction models. (a) Accuracy of sequence of rooms in GQN Mazes.
CW-V AE predicts video with a significantly higher accuracy of high-level details than the second best
video prediction model for this evaluation (VTA). (b) Accuracy of digit identities in two-digit Moving
MNIST. CW-V AE generates video with a significantly higher accuracy of digit identities until 1000
timesteps. (c) Aggregated performance ranks of all methods across 4 datasets and 4 metrics. The
best possible rank is 1 and the worst is 5. Our CW-V AE uses a temporally abstract hierarchy and
substantially outperforms a hierarchy without temporal abstraction (NoTmpAbs), as well as the top
single-level model RSSM, the image-space model SVG, and the temporally abstract model VTA.
improvement due to temporal abstraction. Specifically, NoTmpAbs is sometimes outperformed by
RSSM but CW-V AE matches or outperforms RSSM on all datasets and metrics.
While SVG achieves high scores on GQN Mazes due to its sharp predictions, it performs poorly
compared to CW-V AE and RSSM on the other 3 datasets. This result indicates the benefits of
predicting forward purely in latent space instead of feeding generated images back into the model.
While VTA makes reasonable predictions, it lags behind the other methods in our experiments. One
reason could be that its low level latents do not carry over the recurrent state when the high level
ticks, which we found to cause sudden jumps in the predicted video sequence.
3.2 MineRL Navigate
Video predictions for sequences of 500 frames are shown in Figure 2. Given only an island on the
horizon as context, the temporally abstract models CW-V AE and VTA correctly predict that the
player will enter the island (as the player typically navigates straight ahead in the dataset). However,
the predictions of VTA lack diversity and contain artifacts. In contrast, CW-V AE predicts diverse
variations in the terrain, such as grass, rocks, trees, and a pond. RSSM generates plausible images but
fails to capture long-term dependencies, such as the consistent movement toward the island. SVG
only predicts small to no changes after the first few frames. Additional samples in Figure F.1 further
confirm the findings. The predictions of all models are a bit blurry, which we attribute to the model
capacity, which was restricted due to our limited computational resources.
3.3 KTH Action
Figure 4 shows video prediction samples for the walking task of KTH Action. CW-V AE accurately
predicts the motion of the person as they walk across the frame until walking out of the frame. VTA
predicts that the person suddenly disappears, which we attribute to it resetting the low level every
time the high level steps. Both RSSM and SVG tend to forget the task demonstrated in the context
frames, with RSSM predicting a person standing still, and SVG predicting the person starting to
move in the opposite direction, after open-loop generation of about 20 frames. We also point out that
SVG required the slower VGG architecture for KTH, whereas CW-V AE works well even with the
smaller DCGAN architecture.
3.4 GQN Mazes
Figure G.1 shows open-loop video prediction samples of GQN Mazes, where the camera traverses two
rooms connected by a hallway with distinct randomized textures in a 3D maze. CW-V AE maintains
and predicts wall and floor patterns of both rooms for 200 frames, whereas RSSM and VTA fail
to predict the transition to the textures of the second room. SVG is the model with the sharpest
predictions on this dataset which is reflected by the metrics. However, it confuses textures over a
6