We ﬁnally discuss the time complexity of computing feature im-
portance for a single instance, as well as for a set of instances. In
Section 3.2 we introduced three different implementations of SANsconsidered in this work: two instance-based, where attention is com-
puted for each instance and aggregated afterwards, as well as global,
where after training, the attention vector is simply extracted and usedto represent features’ importances. The ﬁrst situation, where predic-
tions up to the end of the second layer need to be conducted (up to the
activated attention vector), is of linear complexity with respect to the
number of test instances, across which the ﬁnal importances shall be
aggregated. On the other hand, if the attention vector is activated di-
rectly after the training phase, the computational complexity reducesto the computation of the softmax, and is in fact O(1)w.r.t. the num-
ber of test instances. Note that such computation is fundamentally
faster and scales to massive production environments seamlessly.
4.2 Overview of computational complexity
To contextualize the computational complexity of SANs, we com-
pare it with some of the established feature ranking algorithms thatwill offer the reader insights into possible beneﬁts, as well as draw-
backs of individual methods considered in this work.
In Tables 1 and 2, tdenotes the number of trees in the Random For-
est, while kdenotes the number of attention matrices (heads) used.
Table 1 : Computational complexity of feature importance estimation:
The learning stage.
Algorithm time complexity space complexity
ReliefF O(|F|·|I|2) O(|F|)
Random Forest O(t|F||I|log2|I|) O(|I|+|F|)
Mutual Information O(|F|·|I|) O(|I|)
SAN O(|F|2·|I|) O(k·|F|2)
Table 2 : Computational complexity of feature importance estimation:
The post-learning stage. NA (not applicable) denotes the cases where
feature importance is obtained directly from the learning stage.
Algorithm time complexity space complexity
ReliefF NA NA
Random Forest O(t|I|) O(|I|)
Mutual Information NA NA
SAN O(1)orO(|I|) O(k·|F|2)
In Table 1, we compare the computational complexity of the learn-ing process: this refers to either building a predictive model (RandomForest, SAN) or computing the feature importances from the trainingdata (ReliefF, Mutual Information). Further, in Table 2, we discussthe complexity of obtaining feature importances after the learningstage. Note that ﬁlter methods, such as the ReliefF and Mutual Infor-
mation only require the ﬁrst step of the computation, whereas SANand Random Forest require an additional computational step that ex-
tracts feature importances based on the trained model.
5 Experimantal setting
In this section we discuss the empirical evaluation setting used in
this work. The evaluation is split into two parts: measuring the fea-
ture ranking similarity and feature ranking quality. When measuringfeature ranking similarity, we compare pairs of the rankings via FUJI
score. When measuring feature ranking quality, we explore how a se-ries of classiﬁers behave, when top nfeatures are considered for the
task of classiﬁcation.5.1 Pairwise comparisons with FUJI
The output of a feature ranking can be deﬁned as a real-valued list,whosej-th element is the estimated feature importance of the j-th
feature. A typical approach for comparing such lists is to compute theJaccard indices [17] between the sets of top-ranked features. How-ever, this score takes into account feature importances only implic-itly (via the order of the features) and is consequently unstable and
often too pessimistic. Thus, we use its fuzzy version FUJI (the Fuzzy
Jaccard Index) [25].
Even though FUJI takes importances directly into account, it is
still scale-free and thus appropriate for comparing the outputs of dif-
ferent feature ranking algorithms. Given a pair of feature rankings,e.g., Mutual Information and Attention, FUJI is computed for differ-
ent sizes of top-ranked feature sets that belong to the two rankings.The obtained values are then plotted as a single curve, as shown inFigure 2. Such a comparison is very informative, since one can ob-
serve how the similarity of the two rankings changes when the num-
ber of features considered grows, but aggregation of a curve into asingle scalar may sometimes be preferred. We do so by computingthe area under the FUJI curve. Either trapezoidal or Simpson’s rule
can be employed; in this work we use the latter
4.
In the experiments, we obtain feature rankings for similarity com-
parison as follows. The model-based ranking algorithms (SANs andRandom Forests) were trained by ﬁrst selecting optimal model basedon ten fold stratiﬁed cross validation. This step is skipped in the caseof ReliefF and Mutual Information algorithms. In the second step,
we use the whole data set to estimate feature importances (either di-
rectly or using the chosen model). The whole data set can be usedsince these feature rankings are only used in the similarity compu-tation (and not for predicting the target values), and should be used
since the feature rankings are expected to be better when computed
from more data.
5.2 Classiﬁcation performance evaluation
In the second set of the experiments, we investigate how the top n
features assessed by a given method inﬂuence the performance ofthe Logistic Regression (LR) classiﬁer, for different values of n.W e
selected this learner for the following reasons. As evaluation of in-dividual values of nrequires hundreds (or thousands) of models to
be built, LR is fast enough to be used in such setting. Next, it is
sensitive to completely non-informative features. Should a given fea-
ture importance assessment method prioritize completely irrelevantfeatures, the classiﬁer will not perform well. In terms of hyperparam-eters, we use the same parametrization of SANs across all data sets.
The rationale for this decision is that neural networks can easily over-
ﬁt a given data set. We decided to use the same set of hyperparame-ters to showcase the overall adequate performance of SANs. The l
1
dimension was set to 128, the network was trained for 32epochs,
with the batch size of 5. The learning rate for the Adam optimizer
was set to 0.001, and the dropout, which we used for regularization,
was set to 20%. We used stratiﬁed 10fold cross validation where a
feature ranking is computed from the training set and evaluated onthe testing set. A single attention head was used ( k=1). We report
the average Logistic Regression performance for each n.
4This implicitly assumes the FUJI curve is a spline of quadratic polynomials.
We average the normalized areas across all data sets to obtain a single scalar
representing the relation between two methods.B.Škrlj etal./Featur eImportance Estimation withSelf-Attention Networks 1494