Feature Importance Estimation with Self-Attention
Networks
BlaˇzˇSkrlj1and Saˇso D ˇzeroski1and Nada Lavra ˇc1and Matej Petkovi ´c1
Abstract. Black-box neural network models are widely used in in-
dustry and science, yet are hard to understand and interpret. Recently,
the attention mechanism was introduced, offering insights into the in-ner workings of neural language models. This paper explores the useof attention-based neural networks mechanism for estimating featureimportance, as means for explaining the models learned from propo-
sitional (tabular) data. Feature importance estimates, assessed by
the proposed Self-Attention Network (SAN) architecture, are com-
pared with the established ReliefF, Mutual Information and Random
Forest-based estimates, which are widely used in practice for model
interpretation. For the ﬁrst time we conduct scale-free comparisons
of feature importance estimates across algorithms on ten real andsynthetic data sets to study the similarities and differences of theresulting feature importance estimates, showing that SANs identifysimilar high-ranked features as the other methods. We demonstratethat SANs identify feature interactions which in some cases yieldbetter predictive performance than the baselines, suggesting that at-tention extends beyond interactions of just a few key features and de-tects larger feature subsets relevant for the considered learning task.
1 Introduction
Deep neural networks have been successfully applied to text, graphand image-based classiﬁcation tasks, as well as to learning accurateclassiﬁers from propositional (tabular) data [10, 13, 20]. However,with increasing number of parameters, neural networks are becom-
ing less human-understandable. The currently adopted paradigm to
tackle this problem involves using post hoc explanation tools, such
as SHAP and LIME [23]. Such approaches operate by approximating
the outputs of a given black-box model via some tractable scheme,
such as efﬁcient computation of Shapley values or local approxima-
tion via a linear model. Such methods do not take into account the
inner structure of a given (deep) neural network, and treat it as a blackbox, only considering its inputs and outputs.
Recent advances in the area of language processing, however, of-
fer the opportunity to link parts of a given neural network with the
input space directly, via the attention mechanism [33]. Achieving
super-human performance on many language understanding tasks,
attention-based models are becoming widely adopted throughout sci-entiﬁc and industrial environments [34]. Models, such as BERT [11]and XLNet [37], exploit this learnable lookup to capture relations be-
tween words (or tokens). The attention layers, when inspected, canbe seen to map real values to parts of the human-understandable inputspace (e.g., sentences). Exploration of the potential of the attention
mechanism is becoming a lively research area on its own [7, 21]. We
1Joˇzef Stefan Institute and International Postgraduate School Jo ˇzef Stefan,
Slovenija, matej.petkovic@ijs.sibelieve similar ideas can be investigated in the context of proposi-
tional (tabular) data (where every row represents an individual data
instance) that remain one of the most widely used data formats in
academia and industry.
In this work, we propose the concept of Self-Attention Networks
(SANs) and explore, whether the representations they learn can beused for feature importance assessment, comparable to feature im-portance estimates returned by the established feature ranking ap-proaches ReliefF [27], Mutual Information and Genie3 [16, 24]. Themain contributions of this work are:
1. The Self-Attention Network (SAN) architecture, a novel neural
network architecture capable of assessing feature importance di-rectly, along with three ways of obtaining such importance esti-mates.
2. Extensive empirical evaluation of SANs against ReliefF, Mutual
Information and Genie3 feature ranking approaches, demonstrat-ing comparable performance to the SAN architecture. The mostimportant features according to SAN are shown to be in agree-
ment with the ones detected by the established approaches used in
the comparison.
3. Direct comparison of feature importance estimates, highlighting
similarities between the considered algorithms’ outputs.
4. A theoretical study of SAN’s properties, considering its space and
time complexity.
In the remainder of this paper we ﬁrst discuss the related work, fol-
lowed by the formulation and empirical evaluation of SANs.
2 Related work
In this section we present selected feature ranking approaches and
brieﬂy survey the approaches to learning from propositional data,followed by a presentation of neural attention mechanisms.
2.1 Feature ranking
Feature importance estimation refers to the process of discovering
parts of the input feature space, relevant for a given predictive mod-eling problem, i.e. identifying the (most) important features to beused in model construction.
The simplest task of estimating feature importance is partition-
ing the features into groups of irrelevant and relevant ones, which isequivalent to assigning every feature either importance 1(feature is
relevant) or 0(feature is irrelevant). This task is referred to as fea-
ture selection. Here, one can only partially order the features. In amore general case, when every feature is assigned an arbitrary im-
portance score, one can sort the features with respect to these scoresECAI 2020
G.D. Giacomo et al. (Eds.)© 2020 The authors and IOS Press.This article is published online with Open Access by IOS Press and distributed under the termsof the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC 4.0).
doi:10.3233/FAIA2002561491