and obtain feature ranking. In this case, the features can be totally
ordered. Given a feature ranking, one can partition the features into
relevant and irrelevant ones by thresholding, i.e., proclaiming rele-vant the features whose importance is higher than some threshold.
The main motivation for performing feature ranking (or selection)
is that an appropriately chosen subset of features may reduce thecomputational complexity of learning, while potentially increasingthe learner’s performance. Moreover, the learned models that use a
smaller number of features are easier to explain.
In this work we consider a feature space Fwith a correspond-
ing class label set C. We focus on feature ranking algorithms, but
use thresholding (for many different values of the threshold) at the
ranking-evaluation stage, i.e., we measure the quality of the rankingas the predictive performance of the models that are built from setsof top-ranked features.
In this work we consider two types of feature ranking algorithms:
Wrappers. A feature ranking algorithm of this family comes to-
gether with a supervised learner. Once trained on the training data,the learner is, apart from prediction, also capable of estimatinghow relevant is each of the features for the task at hand. An impor-tant member of this family is Genie3 feature ranking, computeddirectly from Random Forest [4].
Filters. Algorithms such as the Relief family or Mutual Informa-
tion do not need a predictive model to obtain feature rankings.Since they are model-agnostic, the corresponding feature rankings
are typically computed very efﬁciently, e.g., Mutual Information.
However, the computational efﬁciency often comes at the cost ofmyopia, i.e., they ignore possible feature interactions.
Recent advances in deep learning mostly address model-based rank-ing, where methodology, such as e.g., SHAP is used for post-hoc
analysis of a trained model. Note that such a methodology can alsobe model-agnostic, yet it needs a model to compute feature impor-
tance.
2.2 Propositional learning and neural networks
In this work we focus on learning from (propositional) data tables,where columns represent features (attributes) and rows correspondto individual data instances. Despite its simplicity, training neuralnetwork architectures on this type of data might be non-trivial in thecases of small data sets, noisy feature spaces, spurious correlations,etc. Further, recurrent or convolutional neural architectures are not
that useful for tabular data as there is frequently no spatial or tempo-
ral information present in the data. Methods, such as Extreme Gra-
dient Boosting [5] and similar, e.g., tree-based ensemble algorithms
often dominate competitive shared tasks on such input spaces.
Neural network approaches recently used in modeling proposi-
tional data are discussed next. The approach by Sakakibara [28] ad-
dresses learning of context-free grammars based on tabular (propo-sitional) representations. Further, multilayer perceptrons have beenwidely used, already in the previous century [18]. The recently intro-duced Regularization Learning Networks (RLNs) represent one of
the most recent attempts at training deep neural networks on propo-
sitional data sets [31]; the paper shows that correctly regularized neu-ral networks perform on par with e.g., gradient boosting machines,demonstrating competitive performance on multiple data sets. Fur-ther, the authors also explored the information content of the featurespace, showing that RLNs detect highly informative features. The
attention-based propositional neural networks were also consideredin the recently introduced TabNet [2]. Finally, ensemble-based learn-
ers were also successfully applied to propositional data, includingtime series modeling [26].
2.3 Attention-based neural network architectures
The area of deep learning has witnessed many novel ideas in recentyears. The notion of attention has emerged recently for language
model learning [11, 33], as well as geometric deep learning [36].
In short, the attention mechanism enables a neural architecture to
pinpoint parts of the feature space that are especially relevant, andﬁlter out the remainder. The attention mechanism effectively sparsi-ﬁes the input space, emphasizing only the elements relevant for the
task at hand (e.g., language understanding). This way, the attention
mechanism is commonly used to e.g., better learn the relations be-
tween words. Even though this mechanism has been widely adopted
to text-based and graph-based tasks, less attention has been devotedto its application to propositional learning from tabular data.
3 Self-Attention Networks
This section presents the proposed Self-Attention Network (SAN)approach, illustrated in Figure 1. We begin by a formal descriptionof the architecture, followed by feature importance computation.
3.1 Propositional Self-Attention Networks
This section sources some of the ideas from the seminal works onthe attention mechanism [6, 33]. We refer the interested reader to
the aforementioned publications for a detailed description and ex-
plain here only the essential ideas implemented as part of SANs ina propositional learning setting. The neural network architecture thatimplements the attention mechanism can be stated as:
l
2=σ(W2·(a(W|F|·Ω(X)+b l1))+ bl2).
The ﬁrst neural network layer Ωis designed speciﬁcally to maintain
the connection with the input features F. We deﬁne it as:
Ω(X)=1
k/circleplusdisplay
k/bracketleftbigg
X⊗softmax(Wk
lattX+bk
latt)/bracketrightbigg
.
Input vectors Xare ﬁrst used as input to a softmax-activated layer
containing the number of neurons equal to the number of features
|F|, where the softmax function applied to the ji-th element of a
weight vector vis deﬁned as:
softmax( vji)=exp(v ji)/summationtext|F|
j=1exp( vj),
wherev∈R|F|. Note that krepresents the number of attention
heads—distinct matrices representing relations between the input
features. The ⊗sign corresponds to the Hadamard product and the
⊕refers to the Hadamard summation across individual heads. Ωthus
represents the ﬁrst layer of a SAN, its output is of dimensionality |F|.
acorresponds to the activation function SELU [19], deﬁned as:
SELU(x)=λ/braceleftBigg
x ifx>0
α(exp(x)−1) ifx≤0.
whereλandαare hyperparameters. The proposed architecture en-
ables self-attention at the feature level, intuitively understood as fol-
lows. As Ωmaintains a bijection between the set of features FandB.Škrlj etal./Featur eImportance Estimation withSelf-Attention Networks 1492