Feature importanceDimension = 
Prediction
Figure 1 : Overview of Self-Attention Networks. lattcorresponds to the attention layer, where the element-wise product with the input space is
computed on each forward pass. l1andl2correspond to two dense layers, yielding a prediction ˆy. The1
k⊕box represents element-wise means
across the attention heads (k ). Note that, if extracted, the attention vectors from lattcan be used to compute the feature importance estimates.
the set of weights in individual heads Wk
latt, the weights in the
|F|×|F|weight matrix can be understood as relations between
features. Finally, SANs are additionally regularized using Dropout
[32]2. In this work, we are interested exclusively in self-attention—
the relation of a given feature with itself. We posit that such self-
relations correspond to features’ importance. Once a SAN is trained,we next discuss the ways of computing feature importance.
3.2 Computing feature importance with SANs
Let us show how the considered architecture can be used to obtainreal values which we argue represent feature importance. We explore
the procedures for obtaining the ﬁnal vector, as a mapping from the
feature space to the space of non-negative real values, i.e. functionf:F→R
+
0.
Instance-level aggregations (attention). Let(xi,yi),1≤i≤n,
be the instances. Let SAN(x i) represent the attention output of
thei-th instance, deﬁned as
SAN(xi)=1
k/circleplusdisplay
k/bracketleftbigg
softmax(Wk
lattxi+blatt)/bracketrightbigg
.
The ﬁrst option for computing feature importance performs the
following operation, where the outputs are averaged on-instance
basis.
RI=1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1SAN(xi).
Counting only correctly predicted instances (attentionPositive).
The second variant of the mechanism operates under the hy-
pothesis, that only correctly predicted instances should be taken
into account, as they offer extraction of representative attentionvectors with less noise. Such scenarios are suitable when the
number of instances based on which features’ importance are
to be computed is low, and the classiﬁcation performance is notoptimal. Let ˆy
irepresent the ﬁnal prediction of an architecture
(not only attention vectors). This version of the approach assessesfeature importance R
c
I(cstands for clean) as follows:
Rc
I=1
nn/summationdisplay
i=1SAN(xi)[ˆyi=yi].
2For readability purposes, we omit the deﬁnition of this well known regular-
ization method.Global attention layer (attentionGlobal). The previous two ap-
proaches construct the global feature importance vector incremen-tally, by aggregating the attention vectors based on individual in-stances used for training. However, such schemes can depend onthe aggregation scheme used. The proposed global attention ap-proach is more natural, as it omits the aggregation: once trained,
we simply activate the attention layer’s weights by using softmax.
This scenario assumes, that the weight vector itself contains the in-
formation on feature importance, and can be inspected directly
3.
Global attention is deﬁned as follows:
RG=1
k/circleplusdisplay
k/bracketleftbigg
softmax(diag(Wk
latt))/bracketrightbigg
;Wk
latt∈R|F|×|F |.
4 Theoretical considerations
In this section we discuss the relevant theoretical aspects of the con-
sidered neural network architecture, starting with SAN’s space andtime complexity, and followed by an overview of the computationalcomplexity of the considered methods.
4.1 Space and time complexity of SANs
We ﬁrst discuss the space complexity with respect to the number ofparameters, as we believe this determines the usefulness of SANs inpractice. Assuming the number of features to be |F|, the most com-
putationally expensive part of SANs is the computation of the atten-tion vector. The attention, as formulated in this work, operates in thespace of the same dimensionality as the input space; the number ofparameters is O(|F|
2). This complexity holds if a single attention
layer is considered. As theoretically, there can be multiple such map-pings to the input space in a single attention block, the space com-
plexity in such case rises to O(|F|
2·k), wherekis the number of
considered attention weight matrices (heads). In practice, however,
even very high dimensional data sets with, e.g., more than 60,000
features can be processed, which we prove in the empirical section.
Note that (6·104)2=3.6·109(≈11GB if stored as ﬂoating points),
which is the scale at which language models such as RoBERTa [22]and similar operate, thus the complexity does not prohibit the use onhigh dimensional data that of practical relevance. We believe, how-ever, that sparsity at the input level could signiﬁcantly reduce thecomplexity, which we leave for further exploration.
3In Appendix A we discuss another way how global attention can be ob-
tained, yet do not consider it in this work.B.Škrlj etal./Featur eImportance Estimation withSelf-Attention Networks 1493