5.3 Experimental data sets
We conducted the experiments on the following data sets.
DLBCL [3]. A series of translocations specify a distinct gene ex-
pression proﬁle that distinguishes a unique leukemia. The data set
consists of 7,070 features and 77 instances.
Genes [35]. The cancer genome atlas pan-cancer analysis project.
The data set consists of 20,531 features and 801 instances. Fea-tures correspond to gene expression vectors.
p53 [9]. Predicting Positive p53 Cancer Rescue Regions Using
Most Informative Positive (MIP) Active Learning. The data setconsists of 5,409 features and 16,772 instances.
Chess [30] (King-Rook vs. King-Pawn). The data set describes var-
ious endgames, and consists of 3,196 instances and 36 features.
pd-speech [29]. Collection and Analysis of a Parkinson Speech
data set with Multiple Types of Sound Recordings. The data setconsists of 26 features and 1,040 instances.
aps-failure [8]. IDA 2016 Industrial Challenge: Using Machine
Learning for Predicting Failures. The data set consists of 171 fea-tures and 60,000 instances.
biodeg [12]. Biodegradability of commercial compounds. the data
set consists of 62 features and 328 instances.
optdigits [1]. Optical Recognition of Handwritten Digits. The data
set consists of 64 features and 5,620 instances.
madelon [15]. This is a synthetic data set published at NIPS 2003,
aimed to test feature selection capabilities of various algorithms.The data set consists of 500 features and 4,400 instances.
The selected data sets span across multiple topics, and were selectedto provide insights into the quality of feature importance assessmentmethods. Finally, we also evaluated the difference in the attentionacross relevant and irrelevant features based on the algorithm pro-posed by Guyon et al. [14]
5. For the purpose of this synthetic ex-
periment, we generated a binary classiﬁcation problem data set com-prised of 100 features, where only 50 were deemed relevant, with1,000 samples of the data used for training SANs. The experimentwas conducted via three repetitions of three-fold cross validation. We
aggregated the attention values separately for the positive, as well as
the negative class if the classiﬁcation accuracy for a given fold wasmore than 50%. The attentions were aggregated only if a given pre-diction was correct—this step was considered to reduce the effectof the neural network’s performance on the attention vectors’ prop-erties, as we only attempted to extract the attention relevant for the
discrimination between the classes.
6 Results of experiments
In this section, we present the results of the empirical evaluation. For
improved readability, the results are presented graphically.
6.1 Differences in attention vectors
We ﬁrst visualize the distributions of attention with respect to bothpositive and negative instances in Figure 2.
It can be observed that the attention is on average observably
higher when positive instances are considered. As the neural networkis trained to recognize such examples, such outcome indicates the at-tention mechanism potentially detects the relevant signal. Note that
5Implemented in https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
modules/generated/sklearn.datasets.make_
classification.htmlFigure 2 : Differences in attention, aggregated w.r.t. correctly pre-
dicted positive and negative examples.
Figure 2 shows attention, aggregated only on the features that were
assessed as important (half of the features).
6.2 Importance similarities
We next discuss the similarities between the considered feature im-portance approaches. The results are presented as FUJI curves,
where we omit the space of all possible (pairwise) comparisons tothe ones, that are compared with the proposed SANs. The results are
shown in Figure 3.
The considered visualizations depict at least two general patterns.
First, the attentionClean and attention-based importances are indeed
very similar. We remind the reader that the difference between the
two is that attentionClean only takes into account the correctly classi-
ﬁed instances. Next, we can observe that ReliefF and Random Forest-
based importances are different. Further, the global attention appearsthe most similar to Random Forest importances. Overall areas below
FUJI curves are shown in Figure 4.
6.3 Classiﬁcation performance
We next discuss the classiﬁcation performance results. Let us remindthe reader that the results show how the logistic regression (C = 1, L2normalization) classiﬁer performs when parts of the feature space arepruned according to a given feature importance vector. The resultsare shown in Figure 5.
The ﬁrst observation—to our knowledge not known to the
community—is that SANs indeed perform competitively. Especially
on data sets with a large number of features, such as the p53, genes
and dlbcl (all biological ones), the attention mechanism detects larger
subsets of features that can improve the performance of the logistic
regression classiﬁer, in e.g., dlbcl even outperforming all other ap-
proaches by a margin of more than 15%. On smaller data sets, SANsperform competitively (e.g., madelon, optdigits, chess), or do not per-form that well (biodeg-p2-discrete). Overall, worse performance ofSANs coincides with smaller data sets, indicating that not enoughdata was present for SANs to distill the relevant parts of the featurespace. Further, it can be observed that ReliefF on data sets such aspd-speech and madelon outperforms all other approaches, indicatingthis state-of-the-art approach is suitable for low-resource situations.
7 Discussion and conclusions
Operating on propositional data, SANs have some inherent bene-ﬁts, as well as drawbacks. The most apparent drawback is the ar-chitecture’s space complexity, as with more attention heads, it couldincrease greatly for the data sets with a large number of features.In comparison, language models are maintaining a ﬁxed sequenceB.Škrlj etal./Featur eImportance Estimation withSelf-Attention Networks 1495