Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
		𝐴#		𝐴$		𝐴%…	𝐴&'$	𝐴&'#		𝐴&Task EmbeddingsShared Modules (LSTM/BERT) 	𝑅&		𝐼#	𝑅$	𝑅%…	𝑅&'$	𝑅&'#		𝑋#		𝑋$		𝑋%…	𝑋&'$	𝑋&'#		𝑋&𝐸,𝑍,
Figure 4: Illustration of the covariance alignment module on task embeddings.
3 E XPERIMENTS
We describe connections between our theoretical results and practical problems of interest. We show
three claims on real world datasets. (i) The shared MTL module is best performing when its capacity
is smaller than the total capacities of the single-task models. (ii) Our proposed covariance alignment
method improves multi-task training on a variety of settings including the GLUE benchmarks and
six sentiment analysis tasks. Our method can be naturally extended to transfer learning settings and
we validate this as well. (iii) Our SVD-based reweighed scheme is more robust than the standard
unweighted scheme on multi-label image classiﬁcation tasks in the presence of label noise.
3.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Datasets and models. We describe the datasets and models we use in the experiments.
GLUE: GLUE is a natural language understanding dataset including question answering, sentiment
analysis, text similarity and textual entailment problems. We choose BERT LARGE as our model,
which is a 24 layer transformer network from Devlin et al. (2018). We use this dataset to evaluate
how Algorithm 1 works on the state-of-the-art BERT model.
Sentiment Analysis: This dataset includes six tasks: movie review sentiment (MR), sentence sub-
jectivity (SUBJ), customer reviews polarity (CR), question type (TREC), opinion polarity (MPQA),
and the Stanford sentiment treebank (SST) tasks.
For each task, the goal is to categorize sentiment opinions expressed in the text. We use an embed-
ding layer (with GloVe embeddings2) followed by an LSTM layer proposed by Lei et al. (2018)3.
ChestX-ray14: This dataset contains 112,120 frontal-view X-ray images and each image has up to
14 diseases. This is a 14-task multi-label image classiﬁcation problem. We use the CheXNet model
from Rajpurkar et al. (2017), which is a 121-layer convolutional neural network on all tasks.
For all models, we share the main module across all tasks (BERT LARGE for GLUE, LSTM for
sentiment analysis, CheXNet for ChestX-ray14) and assign a separate regression or classiﬁcation
layer on top of the shared module for each tasks.
Comparison methods. For the experiment on multi-task training, we compare Algorithm 1 by
training with our method and training without it. Speciﬁcally, we apply the alignment procedure on
the task embedding layers. See Figure 4 for an illustration, where Eidenotes the embedding of task
i,Ridenotes its alignment module and Zi=EiRiis the rotated embedding.
For transfer learning, we ﬁrst train an STL model on the source task by tuning its model capacity
(e.g. the output dimension of the LSTM layer). Then, we ﬁne-tune the STL model on the target
task for 5-10 epochs. To apply Algorithm 1, we add an alignment module for the target task during
ﬁne-tuning.
For the experiment on reweighted schemes, we compute the per-task weights as described in Algo-
rithm 2. Then, we reweight the loss function as in equation 2. We compare with the reweighting
techniques of Kendall et al. (2018). Informally, the latter uses Gaussian likelihood to model classi-
2http://nlp.stanford.edu/data/wordvecs/glove.6B.zip
3We also tested with multi-layer perceptron and CNN. The results are similar (cf. Appendix B.5).
7