Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
𝐴*𝐴+𝐴,…𝐴-$+𝐴-$*𝐴-Task-Specific Modules (A)Shared Modules (B)……𝑋*𝑋+𝑋,…𝑋-$+𝑋-$*𝑋-Multiple Tasks (X)
Figure 1: An illustration of
the multi-task learning architecture
with a shared lower module Band
ktask-speciﬁc modules fAigk
i=1.
More PointsFewer pointsFigure 2: Positive vs. Negative transfer is affected by the data
– not just the model. See lower right-vs-mid. Task 2 and 3
have the same model (dotted lines) but different data distribu-
tions. Notice the difference of data in circled areas.
samples where task 2 and 3 have the same decision boundary but different data distributions (see
Figure 2 for an illustration). We observe that training task 1 with task 2 or task 3 can either im-
prove or hurt task 1’s performance, depending on the amount of contributing data along the decision
boundary! This observation shows that by measuring the similarities of the task data and the models
separately, we can analyze the interference of tasks and attribute the cause more precisely.
Motivated by the above observation, we study the theory of multi-task learning through the shared
module in linear and ReLU-activated settings. Our theoretical contribution involves three compo-
nents: the capacity of the shared module ,task covariance , and the per-task weight of the training
procedure . The capacity plays a fundamental role because, if the shared module’s capacity is too
large, there is no interference between tasks; if it is too small, there can be destructive interference.
Then, we show how to determine interference by proposing a more ﬁne-grained notion called task
covariance which can be used to measure the alignment of task data. By varying task covariances,
we observe both positive and negative transfers from one task to another! We then provide sufﬁcient
conditions which guarantee that one task can transfer positively to another task, provided with sufﬁ-
ciently many data points from the contributor task. Finally, we study how to assign per-task weights
for settings where different tasks share the same data but have different labels.
Experimental results. Our theory leads to the design of two algorithms with practical interest.
First, we propose to align the covariances of the task embedding layers and present empirical evalu-
ations on well-known benchmarks and tasks. On 5 tasks from the General Language Understanding
Evaluation (GLUE) benchmark (Wang et al. (2018b)) trained with the BERT LARGE model by De-
vlin et al. (2018), our method improves the result of BERT LARGE by a 2.35% average GLUE score,
which is the standard metric for the benchmark. Further, we show that our method is applicable
to transfer learning settings; we observe up to 2.5% higher accuracy by transferring between six
sentiment analysis tasks using the LSTM model of Lei et al. (2018).
Second, we propose an SVD-based task reweighting scheme to improve multi-task training for set-
tings where different tasks have the same features but different labels. On the ChestX-ray14 dataset,
we compare our method to the unweighted scheme and observe an improvement of 0.4% AUC score
on average for all tasks . In conclusion, these evaluations conﬁrm that our theoretical insights are
applicable to a broad range of settings and applications.
2 T HREE COMPONENTS OF MULTI -TASK LEARNING
We study multi-task learning (MTL) models with a shared module for all tasks and a separate output
module for each task. We ask: What are the key components to determine whether or not MTL is
better than single-task learning (STL)? In response, we identify three components: model capacity ,
task covariance , and optimization scheme . After setting up the model, we brieﬂy describe the role
of model capacity. We then introduce the notion of task covariance , which comprises the bulk of the
section. We ﬁnish by showing the implications of our results for choosing optimization schemes.
2