Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
UNDERSTANDING AND IMPROVING INFORMATION
TRANSFER IN MULTI -TASK LEARNING
Sen Wu
Stanford UniversityHongyang R. Zhang
University of PennsylvaniaChristopher R ´e
Stanford University
ABSTRACT
We investigate multi-task learning approaches that use a shared feature represen-
tation for all tasks. To better understand the transfer of task information, we study
an architecture with a shared module for all tasks and a separate output module
for each task. We study the theory of this setting on linear and ReLU-activated
models. Our key observation is that whether or not tasks’ data are well-aligned
can signiﬁcantly affect the performance of multi-task learning. We show that mis-
alignment between task data can cause negative transfer (or hurt performance)
and provide sufﬁcient conditions for positive transfer. Inspired by the theoreti-
cal insights, we show that aligning tasks’ embedding layers leads to performance
gains for multi-task training and transfer learning on the GLUE benchmark and
sentiment analysis tasks; for example, we obtain a 2.35% GLUE score average
improvement on 5 GLUE tasks over BERT LARGE using our alignment method.
We also design an SVD-based task reweighting scheme and show that it improves
the robustness of multi-task training on a multi-label image dataset.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Multi-task learning has recently emerged as a powerful paradigm in deep learning to obtain lan-
guage (Devlin et al. (2018); Liu et al. (2019a;b)) and visual representations (Kokkinos (2017)) from
large-scale data. By leveraging supervised data from related tasks, multi-task learning approaches
reduce the expensive cost of curating the massive per-task training data sets needed by deep learning
methods and provide a shared representation which is also more efﬁcient for learning over multiple
tasks. While in some cases, great improvements have been reported compared to single-task learning
(McCann et al. (2018)), practitioners have also observed problematic outcomes, where the perfor-
mances of certain tasks have decreased due to task interference (Alonso and Plank (2016); Bingel
and Søgaard (2017)). Predicting when and for which tasks this occurs is a challenge exacerbated by
the lack of analytic tools. In this work, we investigate key components to determine whether tasks
interfere constructively ordestructively from theoretical and empirical perspectives. Based on these
insights, we develop methods to improve the effectiveness and robustness of multi-task training.
There has been a large body of algorithmic and theoretical studies for kernel-based multi-task learn-
ing, but less is known for neural networks. The conceptual message from the earlier work (Bax-
ter (2000); Evgeniou and Pontil (2004); Micchelli and Pontil (2005); Xue et al. (2007)) show that
multi-task learning is effective over “similar” tasks, where the notion of similarity is based on the
single-task models (e.g. decision boundaries are close). The work on structural correspondence
learning (Ando and Zhang (2005); Blitzer et al. (2006)) uses alternating minimization to learn a
shared parameter and separate task parameters. Zhang and Yeung (2014) use a parameter vector for
each task and learn task relationships via l2regularization, which implicitly controls the capacity of
the model. These results are difﬁcult to apply to neural networks: it is unclear how to reason about
neural networks whose feature space is given by layer-wise embeddings.
To determine whether two tasks interfere constructively or destructively, we investigate an architec-
ture with a shared module for all tasks and a separate output module for each task (Ruder (2017)).
See Figure 1 for an illustration. Our motivating observation is that in addition to model similarity
which affects the type of interference, task data similarity plays a second-order effect after control-
ling model similarity. To illustrate the idea, we consider three tasks with the same number of data
Equal contribution. Correspondence to fsenwu,hongyang,chrismre g@cs.stanford.edu
1arXiv:2005.00944v1  [cs.LG]  2 May 2020