Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Du et al. (2020) consider the related meta learning setting, which is in spirit an online setting of
multi-task learning.
Our result on restricting the model capacities for multi-task learning is in contrast with recent the-
oretical studies on over-parametrized models (e.g. Li et al. (2018); Zhang et al. (2019a); Bartlett
et al. (2020)), where the model capacities are usually much larger than the regime we consider here.
It would be interesting to better understand multi-task learning in the context of over-parametrized
models with respect to other phenomenon such as double descent that has been observed in other
contexts (Belkin et al. (2019)).
Finally, Zhang et al. (2019b); Shui et al. (2019) consider multi-task learning from the perspective of
adversarial robustness. Mahmud and Ray (2008) consider using Kolmogorov complexity measure
the effectiveness of transfer learning for decision tree methods.
Hard parameter sharing vs soft parameter sharing. The architecture that we study in this work
is also known as the hard parameter sharing architecture. There is another kind of architecture
called soft parameter sharing. The idea is that each task has its own parameters and modules. The
relationships between these parameters are regularized in order to encourage the parameters to be
similar. Other architectures that have been studied before include the work of Misra et al. (2016),
where the authors explore trainable architectures for convolutional neural networks.
Domain adaptation. Another closely related line of work is on domain adaptation. The acute
reader may notice the similarity between our study in Section 2.3 and domain adaptation. The cru-
cial difference here is that we are minimizing the multi-task learning objective, whereas in domain
adaptation the objective is typically to minimize the objective on the target task. See Ben-David
et al. (2010); Zhang et al. (2019b) and the references therein for other related work.
Optimization techniques. Guo et al. (2019) use ideas from the multi-armed bandit literature to de-
velop a method for weighting each task. Compared to their method, our SVD-based method is con-
ceptually simpler and requires much less computation. Kendall et al. (2018) derive a weighted loss
schme by maximizing a Gaussian likelihood function. Roughly speaking, each task is reweighted
by1=2whereis the standard deviation of the Gaussian and a penalty of logis added to the
loss. The values of figiare also optimized during training. The exact details can be found in the
paper. The very recent work of Li and Vasconcelos (2019) show empirical results using a similar
idea of covariance normalization on imaging tasks for cross-domain transfer.
5 C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We studied the theory of multi-task learning in linear and ReLU-activated settings. We veriﬁed our
theory and its practical implications through extensive synthetic and real world experiments.
Our work opens up many interesting future questions. First, could we extend the guarantees for
choosing optimization schemes to non-linear settings? Second, a limitation of our SVD-based op-
timization scheduler is that it only applies to settings with the same data. Could we extend the
method for heterogeneous task data? More broadly, we hope our work inspires further studies to
better understand multi-task learning in neural networks and to guide its practice.
Acknowledgements. Thanks to Sharon Y . Li and Avner May for stimulating discussions dur-
ing early stages of this work. We are grateful to the Stanford StatsML group and the anony-
mous referees for providing helpful comments that improve the quality of this work. We grate-
fully acknowledge the support of DARPA under Nos. FA87501720095 (D3M), FA86501827865
(SDH), and FA86501827882 (ASED); NIH under No. U54EB020405 (Mobilize), NSF under Nos.
CCF1763315 (Beyond Sparsity), CCF1563078 (V olume to Velocity), and 1937301 (RTML); ONR
under No. N000141712266 (Unifying Weak Supervision); the Moore Foundation, NXP, Xilinx,
LETI-CEA, Intel, IBM, Microsoft, NEC, Toshiba, TSMC, ARM, Hitachi, BASF, Accenture, Er-
icsson, Qualcomm, Analog Devices, the Okawa Foundation, American Family Insurance, Google
Cloud, Swiss Re, and members of the Stanford DAWN project: Teradata, Facebook, Google, Ant Fi-
nancial, NEC, VMWare, and Infosys. H. Zhang is supported in part by Gregory Valiant’s ONR YIP
award (#1704417). The experiments are partly run on Stanford’s SOAL cluster.5The U.S. Govern-
ment is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes notwithstanding
5https://5harad.com/soal-cluster/
10