Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
B S UPPLEMENTARY EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We ﬁll in the details left from our experimental section. In Appendix B.1, we review the datasets
used in our experiments. In Appendix B.2, we describe the models we use on each dataset. In
Appendix B.3, we describe the training procedures for all experiments. In Appendix B.4 and Ap-
pendix B.5, we show extended synthetic and real world experiments to support our claims.
B.1 D ATASETS
We describe the synthetic settings and the datasets Sentiment Analysis ,General Language Under-
standing Evaluation (GLUE) benchmark , and ChestX-ray14 used in the experiments.
Synthetic settings. For the synthetic experiments, we draw 10,000 random data samples with di-
mensiond= 100 from the standard Gaussian N(0;1)and calculate the corresponding labels based
on the model described in experiment. We split the data samples into training and validation sets
with 9,000 and 1,000 samples in each. For classiﬁcation tasks, we generate the labels by applying
a sigmoid function and then thresholding the value to binary labels at 0:5. For ReLU regression
tasks, we apply the ReLU activation function on the real-valued labels. The number of data samples
used in the experiments varies depending on the speciﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, for the task covariance
experiment of Figure 3, we ﬁx task 1’s data with m1= 9;000training data and vary task 2’s data
under three settings: (i) same rotation Q1=Q2but different singular values D16=D2; (ii) same
singular values D1=D2but random rotations Q16=Q2.
Sentiment analysis. For the sentiment analysis task, the goal is to understand the sentiment opinions
expressed in the text based on the context provided. This is a popular text classiﬁcation task which
is usually formulated as a multi-label classiﬁcation task over different ratings such as positive (+1),
negative (-1), or neutral (0). We use six sentiment analysis benchmarks in our experiments:
Movie review sentiment (MR): In the MR dataset (Pang and Lee (2005)), each movie re-
view consists of a single sentence. The goal is to detect positive vs. negative reviews.
Sentence subjectivity (SUBJ): The SUBJ dataset is proposed in Pang and Lee (2004) and
the goal is to classify whether a given sentence is subjective or objective.
Customer reviews polarity (CR): The CR dataset (Hu and Liu (2004)) provides customer
reviews of various products. The goal is to categorize positive and negative reviews.
Question type (TREC): The TREC dataset is collected by Li and Roth (2002). The aim is
to classify a question into 6 question types.
Opinion polarity (MPQA): The MPQA dataset detects whether an opinion is polarized or
not (Wiebe et al. (2005)).
Stanford sentiment treebank (SST): The SST dataset, created by Socher et al. (2013), is an
extension of the MR dataset.
The General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) benchmark. GLUE is a collection
of NLP tasks including question answering, sentiment analysis, text similarity and textual entail-
ment problems. The GLUE benchmark is a state-of-the-art MTL benchmark for both academia and
industry. We select ﬁve representative tasks including CoLA, MRPC, QNLI, RTE, and SST-2 to
validate our proposed method. We emphasize that the goal of this work is not to come up with a
state-of-the-art result but rather to provide insights into the working of multi-task learning. It is
conceivable that our results can be extended to the entire dataset as well. This is left for future work.
More details about the GLUE benchmark can be found in the original paper (Wang et al. (2018a)).
ChestX-ray14. The ChestX-ray14 dataset (Wang et al. (2017)) is the largest publicly available
chest X-ray dataset. It contains 112,120 frontal-view X-ray images of 30,805 unique patients. Each
image contains up to 14 different thoracic pathology labels using automatic extraction methods on
radiology reports. This can be formulated as a 14-task multi-label image classiﬁcation problem.
The ChestX-ray14 dataset is a representative dataset in the medical imaging domain as well as in
computer vision. We use this dataset to examine our proposed task reweighting scheme since it
satisﬁes the assumption that all tasks have the same input data but different labels.
23