Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
−0.6
4.3
−2.4
1−0.6
5.8
−1.9
2.74.3
5.8
0.1
0.7−2.4
−1.9
0.1
1.11
2.7
0.7
1.1
SSTRTEQNLIMRPCCOLA
COLAMRPC QNLIRTESST
(a) MTL on GLUE over 10 task pairs
Baseline
Covariance 
AlignmentLSTMAccuracy
0.750.800.850.900.95
CRMPQA MR SUBJ TREC (b) Transfer learning on six sentiment analysis tasks
Figure 5: Performance improvements of Algorithm 1 by aligning task embeddings.
ﬁcation outputs. The weights, deﬁned as inversely proportional to the variances of the Gaussian, are
optimized during training. We also compare with the unweighted loss (cf. equation 1) as a baseline.
Metric. We measure performance on the GLUE benchmark using a standard metric called the
GLUE score, which contains accuracy and correlation scores for each task.
For the sentiment analysis tasks, we measure the accuracy of predicting the sentiment opinion.
For the image classiﬁcation task, we measure the area under the curve (AUC) score. We run ﬁve
different random seeds to report the average results. The result of an MTL experiment is averaged
over the results of all the tasks, unless speciﬁed otherwise.
For the training procedures and other details on the setup, we refer the reader to Appendix B.
3.2 E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We present use cases of our methods on open-source datasets. We expected to see improvements via
our methods in multi-task and other settings, and indeed we saw such gains across a variety of tasks.
Improving multi-task training. We apply Algorithm 1 on ﬁve tasks (CoLA, MRPC, QNLI, RTE,
SST-2) from the GLUE benchmark using a state-of-the-art language model BERT LARGE .4We
train the output layers fAigand the alignment layers fRigusing our algorithm. We compare the
average performance over all ﬁve tasks and ﬁnd that our method outperforms BERT LARGE by 2.35%
average GLUE score for the ﬁve tasks. For the particular setting of training two tasks, our method
outperforms BERT LARGE on 7 of the 10 task pairs. See Figure 5a for the results.
Improving transfer learning. While our study has focused on multi-task learning, transfer learning
is a naturally related goal – and we ﬁnd that our method is also useful in this case. We validate this
by training an LSTM on sentiment analysis. Figure 5b shows the result with SST being the source
task and the rest being the target task. Algorithm 1 improves accuracy on four tasks by up to 2.5%.
Reweighting training for the same task covariates. We evaluate Algorithm 2 on the ChestX-ray14
dataset. This setting satisﬁes the assumption of Algorithm 2, which requires different tasks to have
the same input data. Across all 14 tasks, we ﬁnd that our reweighting method improves the technique
of Kendall et al. (2018) by 0.1% AUC score. Compared to training with the unweighted loss, our
method improves performance by 0.4% AUC score over all tasks.
3.3 A BLATION STUDIES
Model capacity. We verify our hypothesis that the capacity of the MTL model should not exceed the
total capacities of the STL model. We show this on an LSTM model with sentiment analysis tasks.
Recall that the capacity of an LSTM model is its output dimension (before the last classiﬁcation
layer). We train an MTL model with all tasks and vary the shared module’s capacity to ﬁnd the
optimum from 5 to 500. Similarly we train an STL model for each task and ﬁnd the optimum.
In Figure 1, we ﬁnd that the performance of MTL peaks when the shared module has capacity
100. This is much smaller than the total capacities of all the STL models. The result conﬁrms that
4https://github.com/google-research/bert
8