Forests 2021 ,12, 217 14 of 16
4. Discussion
Compared with other common objects that have ﬁxed form, forest ﬁre is a dynamic
object [ 44]. In the real-world scenario, a forest ﬁre usually starts from small-scale ﬁre,
develops to medium-scale ﬁre, and then to big-scale ﬁre [ 45]. In terms of types, it starts
from ground ﬁre, then spreads to the trunk, and ﬁnally to the canopy [ 46]. The various
shapes, sizes, textures, and colors of forest ﬁres make the ﬁre evolution a complex process,
and bring great difﬁculty in ﬁre detection.
Therefore, it is highly imperative for detectors to be sensitive to different types of ﬁres.
Through careful experimental comparisons, we ﬁnd that no single detector that can handle
all kinds of ﬁres. They have respective advantages and disadvantages. Yolov5 is excellent at
detecting long-area ﬁres (Figure 7), but it frequently misses objects (Figure 8). EfﬁcientDet
is a more careful detector, compared to Yolov5; even though it has a bad performance on
long-area ﬁres (Figure 7), it can detect ﬁres that Yolov5 cannot (Figure 8), meaning that it
is a good partner for Yolov5. Our model, which efﬁciently integrates decisions of these
two powerful learners, boost detection performance by 2.5–10.9%, in terms of AP0.5,APS,
APM,APL,AR 0.5,AR S,AR M,AR L. The signiﬁcant improvements of average precision
and average recall for small, medium, and big objects make the model more sensitive
to the size changes of ﬁres, thereby enhancing detection performance on different types
of forest ﬁres: ground ﬁre, trunk ﬁre, canopy ﬁre, and ﬁres at night in the ﬁre evolution
(Figures 12 and 13).
Another problem is that the false positive rate of the improved model (2 learners)
becomes higher: 22.6% to 51.6% since the model also integrates wrong detection results
from both learners. To address this issue, we use 8185 images containing 2381 forest ﬁre
images and 5804 non-ﬁre images (containing ﬁre-like images and normal forest images) to
train our third learner EfﬁcientNet. Sufﬁcient training sets enabled EfﬁcientNet to show
a good discriminability between ﬁre objects and ﬁre-like objects, with 99.6% accuracy on
476 ﬁre images, and 99.7% accuracy on 676 ﬁre-like images. With the help of the leader
learner EfﬁcientNet, wrong detection results are eliminated, and the false positive rate is
signiﬁcantly decreased to 0.3% (Figure 14). Noticeably, the join of EfﬁcientNet reduces
AP0.5,APM,APL,AR 0.5,AR M,AR Lby roughly 1%, which is because that EfﬁcientNet
wrongly ignores 2 ﬁre images containing medium-scale and big-scale ﬁre objects.
In terms of latency, the Yolo family is superior compared to EfﬁcientDet and SSD.
Excellent inference speed makes Yolo family widely used in real-world applications, but
experimental results show that they are not able to have a satisfactory performance on forest
ﬁre detection tasks. The latency of EfﬁcientDet is 65.6 ms, which is over twice that of Yolov5
(28.0 ms), but EfﬁcientDet outperforms Yolov5 by over 5% regarding detection performance.
We ensemble these three learners Yolov5 (28.0 ms), EfﬁcientDet (65.6 ms), EfﬁcientNet
(31.3 ms) in parallel to make sure that our model can achieve the best performance without
any extra latency. The ﬁnal latency of our model (3 learners) is 66.8 ms, which shows that
an excellent trade-off between detection performance and efﬁciency has been achieved,
and the model is applicable for real-time detection task.
For further improvement, we plan to study the labeling strategy for forest ﬁres, since
the quality of training data directly determines the detection performance. Another inter-
esting extension is to investigate the network architecture of backbones, and modify them
to make sure that they are specially designed for forest ﬁre detection task. Additionally, we
will work on developing a forest ﬁre tracking system, which can classify different types of
forest ﬁres: ground ﬁre, trunk ﬁre and canopy ﬁre, to track the evolution and spread of
forest ﬁres.
5. Conclusions
The successful application of convolutional neural networks signiﬁcantly improves
the performance of object detection. However, forest ﬁre is a dynamic object with no ﬁxed
form, which the individual object detector cannot handle. In addition, object detectors are
easy to be deceived by ﬁre-like objects and generate false positives due to their limited