Forests 2021 ,12, 217 8 of 16
Another issue is that the ability of the object detector is limited. It only learns the ﬁre
region, which is just a local pattern of the whole image, but ignores the other information
like background. As a result, the object detector may treat ﬁre-like objects (e.g., sun) as ﬁres
(Figure 9), thereby making false alarms. Therefore, a good leader EfﬁcientNet that has a
full understanding of the whole image is needed to guide the detection process.
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   8 of 17 
 
 like background.  As a result, the object detector may treat fire‐like objects (e.g., sun) as 
fires (Figure 9), thereby making false alarms. Therefore,  a good leader EfficientNet  that 
has a full understanding  of the whole image is needed to guide the detection  process. 
  
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 9. Object detectors  Yolov5 and EfficientDet  are easy to be deceived  by fire‐like objects (e.g., sun). (a) False positive 
of Yolov5 (confidence  score: 0.63); (b) false positive of Yolov5 (confidence  score: 0.59); (c) false positive of EfficientDet  
(confidence  score: 0.84); (d) false positive of EfficientDet  (confidence  score: 0.71). 
To address the above two issues and make sure our model is robust to diverse sce‐
narios, three deep learners are integrated  to make decisions  together (Figure 10). The first 
and second learners Yolov5 and EfficientDet  act as object detectors,  to detect fire locations  
in images by generating  candidate  boxes, respectively.  Then, the non‐maximum  suppres‐
sion algorithm  [39] (Algorithm  1) is employed  to eliminate  redundant  boxes, preserving  
boxes with top confidence.  The third learner EfficientNet  acts as a binary classifier,  re‐
sponsible  for learning the whole image to determine  whether the image contains fire ob‐
jects. Finally, the object detection  results, and image classification  results are sent into a 
decision strategy module, in which if the image is considered  to contain fire objects, re‐
taining object detection  results, otherwise  ignoring  them. 
In addition,  integrating  multiple  learners will not affect the overall efficiency  of 
model, because the three learners are structurally  independent,  and the whole model is 
executed  by multi processes,  meaning  that each learner has a separate process responsible  
for it. 
  
Figure 9. Object detectors Yolov5 and EfficientDet are easy to be deceived by fire-like objects
(e.g., sun). (a) False positive of Yolov5 (conﬁdence score: 0.63); ( b) false positive of Yolov5 (conﬁdence
score: 0.59); ( c) false positive of EfﬁcientDet (conﬁdence score: 0.84); ( d) false positive of EfﬁcientDet
(conﬁdence score: 0.71).
To address the above two issues and make sure our model is robust to diverse scenar-
ios, three deep learners are integrated to make decisions together (Figure 10). The ﬁrst and
second learners Yolov5 and EfﬁcientDet act as object detectors, to detect ﬁre locations in
images by generating candidate boxes, respectively. Then, the non-maximum suppression
algorithm [ 39] (Algorithm 1) is employed to eliminate redundant boxes, preserving boxes
with top conﬁdence. The third learner EfﬁcientNet acts as a binary classiﬁer, responsible
for learning the whole image to determine whether the image contains ﬁre objects. Finally,
the object detection results, and image classiﬁcation results are sent into a decision strategy
module, in which if the image is considered to contain ﬁre objects, retaining object detection
results, otherwise ignoring them.
In addition, integrating multiple learners will not affect the overall efﬁciency of model,
because the three learners are structurally independent, and the whole model is executed
by multi processes, meaning that each learner has a separate process responsible for it.