Forests 2021 ,12, 217 4 of 16
Forests 2021, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   4 of 17 
 
   
(a)  (b) 
  
(c)  (d) 
Figure 3. Representative  images in the non‐fire section of our dataset, including  (a) wild scene with sun 1, (b) wild scene 
with sun 2, (c) wild scene with sun 3, and (d) wild scene with sun 4. (a–d) illustrate  normal wild scenes containing  fire‐
like object (e.g., sun). 
2.2. Yolov5 
Yolo is a state‐of‐the‐art, real‐time object detector,  and Yolov5 is based on Yolov1‐
Yolov4. Continuous  improvements  have made it achieve top performances  on two official 
object detection  datasets:  Pascal VOC (visual object classes) [32] and Microsoft  COCO 
(common  objects in context) [33].  
The network architecture  of Yolov5 is shown in Figure 4. There are three reasons why 
we choose Yolov5 as our first learner. Firstly, Yolov5 incorporated  cross stage partial net‐
work (CSPNet)  [34] into Darknet,  creating CSPDarknet  as its backbone.  CSPNet solves the 
problems  of repeated  gradient information  in large‐scale backbones,  and integrates  the 
gradient changes into the feature map, thereby decreasing  the parameters  and FLOPS 
(floating ‐point operations  per second) of model, which not only ensures the inference  
speed and accuracy,  but also reduces the model size. In forest fire detection  task, detection  
speed and accuracy  is imperative,  and compact model size also determines  its inference  
efficiency  on resource ‐poor edge devices. Secondly,  the Yolov5 applied path aggregation  
network (PANet) [35] as its neck to boost information  flow. PANet adopts a new feature 
pyramid  network (FPN) structure  with enhanced  bottom‐up path, which improves  the 
propagation  of low‐level features.  At the same time, adaptive  feature pooling, which links 
feature grid and all feature levels, is used to make useful information  in each feature level 
propagate  directly to following  subnetwork.  PANet improves  the utilization  of accurate 
localization  signals in lower layers, which can obviously  enhance the location accuracy  of 
the object. Thirdly, the head of Yolov5, namely the Yolo layer, generates  3 different  sizes 
(18ൈ18, 36ൈ36, 72ൈ72) of feature maps to achieve multi‐scale [18] prediction,  ena‐
bling the model to handle small, medium,  and big objects. A forest fire usually develops  
from small‐scale fire (ground fire) to medium‐scale fire (trunk fire), then to big‐scale fire 
(canopy fire). Multi‐scale detection  ensures that the model can follow size changes in the 
process of fire evolution.  
Figure 3. Representative images in the non-ﬁre section of our dataset, including ( a) wild scene
with sun 1, ( b) wild scene with sun 2, ( c) wild scene with sun 3, and ( d) wild scene with sun 4.
(a–d) illustrate normal wild scenes containing ﬁre-like object (e.g., sun).
2.2. Yolov5
Yolo is a state-of-the-art, real-time object detector, and Yolov5 is based on Yolov1-
Yolov4. Continuous improvements have made it achieve top performances on two ofﬁcial
object detection datasets: Pascal VOC (visual object classes) [ 32] and Microsoft COCO
(common objects in context) [33].
The network architecture of Yolov5 is shown in Figure 4. There are three reasons
why we choose Yolov5 as our ﬁrst learner. Firstly, Yolov5 incorporated cross stage partial
network (CSPNet) [ 34] into Darknet, creating CSPDarknet as its backbone. CSPNet solves
the problems of repeated gradient information in large-scale backbones, and integrates
the gradient changes into the feature map, thereby decreasing the parameters and FLOPS
(ﬂoating-point operations per second) of model, which not only ensures the inference
speed and accuracy, but also reduces the model size. In forest ﬁre detection task, detection
speed and accuracy is imperative, and compact model size also determines its inference
efﬁciency on resource-poor edge devices. Secondly, the Yolov5 applied path aggregation
network (PANet) [ 35] as its neck to boost information ﬂow. PANet adopts a new feature
pyramid network (FPN) structure with enhanced bottom-up path, which improves the
propagation of low-level features. At the same time, adaptive feature pooling, which links
feature grid and all feature levels, is used to make useful information in each feature level
propagate directly to following subnetwork. PANet improves the utilization of accurate
localization signals in lower layers, which can obviously enhance the location accuracy of
the object. Thirdly, the head of Yolov5, namely the Yolo layer, generates 3 different sizes
(1818,3636,7272) of feature maps to achieve multi-scale [ 18] prediction, enabling
the model to handle small, medium, and big objects. A forest ﬁre usually develops from
small-scale ﬁre (ground ﬁre) to medium-scale ﬁre (trunk ﬁre), then to big-scale ﬁre (canopy
ﬁre). Multi-scale detection ensures that the model can follow size changes in the process of
ﬁre evolution.