Forests 2021 ,12, 217 2 of 16
Combined with motion analysis, the model achieves a good discrimination between ﬁre
and ﬁre-like objects. Teng et al. [ 12] analyzed ﬁre characteristics and proposed a real-time
ﬁre detection method based on hidden Markov models (HMMs), which extracted candi-
date ﬁre-pixels using moving pixel detection, ﬁre-color inspection, and pixel clustering.
Chino et al. [ 13] found that most algorithms were designed for video, which had obvious
limitations. To solve this problem, a novel ﬁre detection method named BowFire was
proposed. The method combined color features with superpixel texture discrimination to
detect ﬁre in still images. In conclusion, most traditional ﬁre detection methods based on
image processing focused on creating artiﬁcial features like color, motion, and texture to
detect ﬁres.
However, powerful deep learners begin to replace human intelligence. They are better
at learning features than humans, and the features they extract contain much deeper
semantic information than manmade ones. Recently, deep learning has outperformed
traditional manmade features in many ﬁelds, and have been widely used in ﬁre detection.
Zhang et al. [ 14] created a forest ﬁre benchmark, and used Faster R-CNN (region-based
convolutional neural network) [ 15], Yolo (you only look once) [ 16–19], and SSD (single shot
multibox detector) [ 20] to detect ﬁre. They found that SSD was better regarding efﬁciency,
detection accuracy, and early ﬁre detection ability. Moreover, they proposed an improved
tiny-Yolo by adjusting the network architecture. Kim et al. [ 21] employed faster R-CNN to
detect ﬁre and non-ﬁre regions based on their spatial features. In addition, long short-term
memory (LSTM) is used to verify the reliability of ﬁre alarm. Lee et al. [ 22] proposed a
video-based ﬁre detection model, which used faster R-CNN to generate a ﬁre candidate
region for each frame. Then, structural similarity (SSIM) and mean square error (MSE)
were calculated to determine similarity between adjacent frames. Final ﬁre regions were
determined based on spatial and temporal features. Pan et al. [ 23] proposed a camera-based
wildﬁre detection system via transfer learning, in which block-based analysis strategy was
used to improve ﬁre detection accuracy. Redundant ﬁlters, which had low energy impulse
response, were removed to ensure the model’s efﬁciency on edge devices. Wu et al. [ 24]
applied principal component analysis (PCA) to process forest ﬁre images, and then fed
them into the training network. The combination of two models was proved to enhance
location results. In conclusion, faced with ﬁre detection task, most researchers tend to only
assign individual learners to perform object detection tasks, which is considered unreliable,
since it may lead to false negatives.
In this paper, a novel method based on ensemble learning for forest ﬁre detection is
proposed. First, forest ﬁre detection is a complicated and difﬁcult task, making it highly
impractical for individual learners to detect ﬁres in diverse scenarios. Every individual
learner has its own expertise, and can extract different features from the image, so inte-
grating different individual learners can signiﬁcantly improve the robustness of the model
and enhance detection performance. Therefore, two individual object detectors Yolov5 [ 25]
and EfﬁcientDet [ 26] are integrated to detect the ﬁre in parallel. These two learners work
synergistically in detecting different types of forest ﬁres, thereby improving the detection
accuracy. Second, the object detectors only care about what ﬁre is like, so they do not take
the whole image into consideration. In this case, ﬁre-like objects will absolutely affect the
detection results. To solve this problem, the EfﬁcientNet image classiﬁer [ 27] is incorpo-
rated into our model, whose role is to enable the model to take full advantage of the global
information. Final detection results will be made through the decision strategy according
to results of these three learners, which will efﬁciently increase detection accuracy and
decrease the false positives.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Datasets
To ensure our learners can handle different kinds of forest ﬁres (ground ﬁre, trunk
ﬁre, and canopy ﬁre), we collected images from multiple public ﬁre datasets: BowFire [ 28],
FD-dataset [ 29], ForestryImages [ 30], VisiFire [ 31], etc. After manual ﬁltration, we created