4.8. Analysis
To understand how the conv-orthogonal regularization
help improve the performance of CNNs, we analyze several
aspects of OCNNs. First, we analyze the spectrum of the
DBT matrix Kto understand how it helps relieve gradient
vanishing/exploding. We then analyze the feature similarity
of OCNNs, followed by the inﬂuence of the weight λof the
regularization term. Finally, the time and space complexity
of OCNNs is analyzed.
Spectrum of the DBT Kernel Matrix K.For a convolution
Y=KX, we analyze the spectrum of Kto understand
the properties of the convolution. We analyze the spectrum
ofK∈R64×128×3×3of the ﬁrst convolutional layer of
the third convolutional block of ResNet18 network trained
on CIFAR100. For fast computation, we use input of size
64×16×16, and solve all the singular values of K.
As in Fig. 1(b), the spectrum of plain models vanishes
rapidly, and may cause gradient vanishing problems. Ker-
nel orthogonality helps the spectrum decrease slower. With
our conv-orthogonal regularization, the spectrum almost al-
ways stays at 1. The uniform spectrum perserves norm and
information between convolution layers.
Filter Similarity . Orthogonality makes off-diagonal ele-
ments to be 0. This means that for any two channels of a
convolution layer, correlations should be relatively small.
This can reduce the ﬁlter similarity and redundancy across
different channels.
We use guided back-propagation patterns [ 51] on images
from the validation set of ImageNet [ 14] dataset to inves-
tigate ﬁlter similarities. Guided back-propagation patterns
visualize the gradient of a particular neuron with respect to
the input image X∈RC×H×W. Speciﬁcally for a layer
ofMchannels, the combination of ﬂattened guided back-
propagation patterns were denoted as G∈RM×CWH.
The correlation matrix corr (G)over different channels of
this layer is (diag(KGG))−1
2KGG(diag(KGG))−1
2, where
KGG=1
M[(G−E[G])(G−E[G])T]is the covariance
matrix. We plot the histogram of off-diagonal elements of
corr(G)of all validation images.
Fig.1(a) depicts the normalized histogram of pairwise ﬁl-
ter similarities of plain ResNet34. As number of channels
increases with depth from 128 to 512, the curve shifts right
and becomes far narrower, i.e., more ﬁlters become similar.
Fig.1(c) depicts the histogram of ﬁlter similarities at layer
27 of ResNet34 with different regularizers. OCNNs make
the curve shifts left and becomes wider, indicating its ability
to enhance ﬁlter diversity and decrease feature redundancy.
Hyper-parameter Analysis. We analyze the Inﬂuence of
the weight λof the orthogonality loss. As discussed earlier,
we achieve the “soft orthogonality” by add additional loss
with weight λto the network. Fig. 9plots the image clas-
siﬁcation performance of CIFAR100 with backbone model77.878.1
77.9
77.6
77.577.777.978.178.3
0.05 0.1 0.5 1
Figure 9. CIFAR100 classiﬁcation accuracy (%) with different
weightλof the regularization loss. With backbone model
ResNet18, we achieve the highest performance at λ= 0.1.
ResNet18 under λranging from 0.05 to 1.0. Our approach
achieves the best classiﬁcation accuracy when λ= 0.1.
Space and Time Complexity . We analyze the space and
time complexity in Table 9. We test the ResNet34 [ 24]
backbone model on ImageNet [ 14] with a single NVIDIA
GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU and batch size 256.
The number of parameters and the test time of the CNN
do not change since the regularizer is an additional loss term
only used during training. With kernel orthogonal regular-
izers, the training time increase 3%; with conv-orthogonal
regularizers, the training time increase 9%.
Table 9. Model size and training/ test time on ImageNet [ 14].
ResNet34 [ 24]kernel-orth [ 57]OCNN
# Params. 21.8M same same
Training time (min/epoch) 49.5 51.0 54.1
Test time (min/epoch) 1.5 same same
5. Summary
We develop an efﬁcient OCNN approach to impose a ﬁl-
ter orthogonality condition on a convolution layer based on
the doubly block-Toeplitz matrix representation of the con-
volutional kernel, as opposed to the commonly adopted ker-
nel orthogonality approaches. We show that kernel orthog-
onality [ 5,30] is necessary but not sufﬁcient for ensuring
orthogonal convolutions.
Our OCNN requires no additional parameters and lit-
tle computational overhead, consistently outperforming the
state-of-the-art alternatives on a wide range of tasks such as
image classiﬁcation and inpainting under supervised, semi-
supervised and unsupervised settings. It learns more diverse
and expressive features with better training stability, robust-
ness, and generalization.
Acknowledgements.
This research was supported, in part, by Berkeley Deep
Drive, DARPA, and NSF-IIS-1718991. The authors thank
Xudong Wang for discussions on ﬁlter similarity, Jesse
Livezey for the pointer to a previous proof for row-column
orthogonality equivalence, and anonymous reviewers for
their insightful comments.
11512