𝐴"#𝐵"#
𝐶"#𝐷"#𝐴"'𝐵"'
𝐶"'𝐷"'
𝐴'#𝐵'#
𝐶'#𝐷'#𝐴''𝐵''
𝐶''𝐷''… 
… … 𝑌								=												𝐾							∗												𝑋 ,      stride 1
𝑀output channel 
𝐶input channel 12
341 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 9,Output 𝑌 Kernel 𝐾 Input 𝑋
𝑀
=	Conv( )𝐶
4 5
7 85 6
8 91 2
4 52 3
5 6𝐶 1 2 4 5
2 3 5 6
4 5 7 8
5 6 8 9𝐴''𝐵''𝐶''𝐷''
𝐴6'𝐵6'𝐶6'𝐷''
............
𝐴"'𝐵"'𝐶"'𝐷"'1 2 3 4
1 2 3 4............
1 2 3 4× =
2×22×2×𝐶
2×2×𝐶𝑀𝑀
2×2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9Input channel 11 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1𝐴''𝐵'' 𝐶''𝐷''
2𝐴''𝐵'' 𝐶''𝐷''
3 𝐴''𝐵'' 𝐶''𝐷''
4 𝐴''𝐵'' 𝐶''Input channel 1Output channel 11
2
3
4Output channel 1… 
… … 
… get patches
reshape
𝑌									=											 𝒦																										 𝑋𝑌									=											𝐾																							 𝑋:
= ×(a)
(b)Patch -matrix 𝑋:
unrollreshape
flatten
Figure 2. Basic idea of our OCNN. A convolution layer Y=
Conv(K,X)can be formulated as matrix multiplications in two
ways: a)im2col methods [ 58,26] retain kernel Kand convert in-
putXto patch-matrix /tildewideX.b)We retain input Xand convert Kto a
doubly block-Toeplitz matrix K. WithXandYintact, we can di-
rectly analyze the transformation from the input to the output. We
further propose an efﬁcient algorithm for regularizing Ktowards
orthogonal convolutions and observe improved feature expressive-
ness, task performance and uniformity in K’s spectrum (Fig. 1b).
exploding or vanishing gradient issues [ 1].
Existing works impose orthogonality constraints as ker-
nel orthogonality, whereas ours directly implements orthog-
onal convolutions, based on an entirely different formula-
tion of a convolution layer as a linear operator.
Orthogonality for a convolution layer Y=Conv(K,X)
can be introduced in two different forms (Fig. 2).
1.Kernel orthogonality methods [ 57,3,4] view convo-
lution as multiplication between the kernel matrix K
and the im2col [58,26] matrix/tildewideX,i.e.Y=K/tildewideX. The
orthogonality is enforced by penalizing the disparity
between the Gram matrix of kernel Kand the identity
matrix, i.e./⌊ard⌊lKKT−I/⌊ard⌊l. However, the construction of
/tildewideXfrom input Xis also a linear operation /tildewideX=QX,
andQhas a highly nonuniform spectrum.
2.Orthogonal convolution keeps the input Xand the
outputYintact by connecting them with a doubly
block-Toeplitz (DBT) matrix Kof ﬁlterK, i.e.Y=
KXand enforces the orthogonality of Kdirectly. We
can thus directly analyze the linear transformation
properties between the input Xand the output Y.
Existing works on CNNs adopt kernel orthogonality, due to
its direct ﬁlter representation.
We will prove that kernel orthogonality is in fact only
necessary but not sufﬁcient for orthogonal convolutions.
Consequently, the spectrum of a convolutional layer is stillnon-uniform and exhibits a wide variation even when the
kernel matrix Kitself is orthogonal (Fig. 1b).
More recent works propose to improve the kernel or-
thogonality by normalizing spectral norms [ 40], regulariz-
ing mutual coherence [ 5], and penalizing off-diagonal ele-
ments [ 8]. Despite the improved stability and performance,
the orthogonality of Kis insufﬁcient to make a linear con-
volutional layer orthogonal among its ﬁlters.
In contrast, we adopt the DBT matrix form, and regular-
ize/⌊ard⌊lConv(K,K)−Ir/⌊ard⌊linstead. While the kernel Kis indi-
rectly represented in the DBT matrix K, the representation
of inputXand output Yis intact and thus the orthogonality
property of their transformation can be directly enforced.
We will show that our regularization enforces orthogo-
nal convolutions more effectively than kernel orthogonality
methods, and we further develop a very efﬁcient approach
for our OCNN regularization.
To summarize, we make the following contributions.
1. We provide an equivalence condition for orthogonal
convolutions and develop efﬁcient algorithms to im-
plement orthogonal convolutions for CNNs.
2. With no additional parameters and little computational
overhead, our OCNN consistently outperforms other
orthogonal regularizers on image classiﬁcation, gener-
ation, retrieval, to inpainting under supervised, semi-
supervised, and unsupervised settings.
Better feature expressiveness, reduced feature correlation,
more uniform spectrum, and enhanced adversarial robust-
ness may underlie our performance gain.
2. Related Works
Im2col -based Convolutions . The im2col method [ 58,26]
has been widely used in deep learning as it enables efﬁcient
GPU computation. It transforms the convolution into a Gen-
eral Matrix to Matrix Multiplication (GEMM) problem.
Fig.2a illustrates the procedure. a)Given an input X, we
ﬁrst construct a new input-patch-matrix /tildewideX∈RCk2×H′W′
by copying patches from the input and unrolling them into
columns of this intermediate matrix. b)The kernel-patch-
matrixK∈RM×Ck2can then be constructed by reshaping
the original kernel tensor. Here we use the same notation for
simplicity. c)We can calculate the output Y=K/tildewideXwhere
we reshape Yback to the tensor of size M×H×W– the
desired output of the convolution.
The orthogonal kernel regularization enforces the kernel
K∈RM×Ck2to be orthogonal. Speciﬁcally, if M≤Ck2,
row orthogonal regularizer is Lkorth-row=/⌊ard⌊lKKT−I/⌊ard⌊lF
whereIis the identity matrix. Otherwise, column orthogo-
nal may be achieved by Lkorth-col=/⌊ard⌊lKTK−I/⌊ard⌊lF.
Kernel Orthogonality in Neural Networks. Orthogonal
kernels help alleviate gradient vanishing or exploding prob-
11506