Orthogonal Convolutional Neural Networks
Jiayun Wang Yubei Chen Rudrasis Chakraborty Stella X. Yu
UC Berkeley / ICSI
Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks are hindered by
training instability and feature redundancy towards further
performance improvement. A promising solution is to im-
pose orthogonality on convolutional ﬁlters.
We develop an efﬁcient approach to impose ﬁlter or-
thogonality on a convolutional layer based on the doubly
block-Toeplitz matrix representation of the convolutional
kernel, instead of the common kernel orthogonality ap-
proach, which we show is only necessary but not sufﬁcient
for ensuring orthogonal convolutions.
Our proposed orthogonal convolution requires no ad-
ditional parameters and little computational overhead. It
consistently outperforms the kernel orthogonality alterna-
tive on a wide range of tasks such as image classiﬁcation
and inpainting under supervised, semi-supervised and un-
supervised settings. It learns more diverse and expressive
features with better training stability, robustness, and gen-
eralization. Our code is publicly available.
1. Introduction
While convolutional neural networks (CNN) are widely
successful [ 36,14,50], several caveats exist with deep nets:
over parameterization or under utilization of model capacity
[21,12], exploding or vanishing gradients [ 7,17], growth in
saddle points [ 13], and shifts in feature statistics [ 31].
We observe that convolutional ﬁlters learned in deeper
layers are not only highly correlated and thus redundant
(Fig. 1a), but each layer also has a long-tailed spectrum as
a linear operator (Fig. 1b), contributing to unstable training
performance from exploding or vanishing gradients.
We propose orthogonal CNN (OCNN), where a convo-
lutional layer is regularized with orthogonality constraints
during training. When ﬁlters are learned to be as orthog-
onal as possible, they become de-correlated and their ﬁlter
responses are no longer redundant, thereby fully utilizing
the model capacity, improving the feature expressiveness
and consequently the task performance.
Indeed, just by regularizing convolutions with our or-
thogonality loss during training, our OCNN can produce a
more uniform spectrum (Fig. 1c) and more diverse features0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 16%12%18%24%30%layer33
layer15  layer27
layer7
0.00.51.01.52.0𝒦
0 2000 4000 6000       8000OCNNkernel orth
baseline
a)histogram of ﬁlter similarities b)convolution kernel spectrum
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 12%4%6%8%10%12%
OCNN kernel orthbaseline
75%78%80%
ResNet18 ResNet34 ResNet50baselinekernel orthOCNN
c)histogram of ﬁlter similarities d)classiﬁcation accuracy
Figure 1. Our OCNN can remove correlations among ﬁlters and
result in consistent performance gain over standard convolution
baseline and alternative kernel orthogonality baseline ( kernel orth )
during testing. a)Normalized histograms of pairwise ﬁlter simi-
larities of ResNet34 for ImageNet classiﬁcation show increasing
correlation among standard convolutional ﬁlters with depth. b)
A standard convolutional layer has a long-tailed spectrum. While
kernel orthogonality widens the spectrum, our OCNN can produce
a more ideal uniform spectrum. c)Filter similarity (for layer 27 in
a) is reduced most with our OCNN. d)Classiﬁcation accuracy on
CIFAR100 always increases the most with our OCNN.
Table 1. Summary of experiments and OCNN gains.
Task Metric Gain
Image
ClassiﬁcationCIFAR100 classiﬁcation accuracy 3%
ImageNet classiﬁcation accuracy 1%
semi-supervised learning classiﬁcation accuracy 3%
Feature
Qualityﬁne-grained image retrieval kNN classiﬁcation accuracy 3%
unsupervised image inpainting PSNR 4.3
image generation FID 1.3
Cars196 NMI 1.2
Robustness black box attack attack time 7x less
(Fig. 1d), delivering a consistent performance gain with var-
ious network architectures (Fig. 1d) and on a variety of tasks
such as image classiﬁcation, image retrieval, image inpaint-
ing, image generation, and adversarial attacks (Table 1).
Many works have proposed the orthogonality of linear
operations as a type of regularization in training deep neural
networks. Such a regularization improves the stability and
performance of CNNs [ 5,57,3,4], since it can preserve
energy, make spectrum uniform [ 61], stabilize the activation
distribution in different network layers [ 46] and remedy the
1
11505