Revisiting Training Strategies and Generalization Performance in Deep Metric Learning
Figure 5. Correlation between generalization and structural prop-
erties derived from Xusing different DML objectives on each
dataset. Left-to-Right : Mean intra-class distances intra& inter-
class distances inter, the ratiointra=interand spectral decay .
Figure 6. Toy example illustrating the effect of -regularization.
(Leftmost) training and test data. (Mid-left) A small, normal-
ized two-layer fully-connected network trained with standard con-
trastive loss fails to separate all test classes due to excessive com-
pression of the learned embedding. (Mid-right) The regularized
embedding successfully separates the test classes by introducing
a lower spectral decay. (Rightmost) Singular value spectra of
training embeddings learned with and without regularization.
account. For CUB200-2011 and CARS196, we however
ﬁnd that an increased embedding space density ( ratio)is
linked to stronger generalisation. For SOP, its estimate is
likely too noisy due to the strong imbalance between dataset
size and amount of samples per class.
Implications: Generalization in DML exhibits strong in-
verse correlation to the SV spectrum decay of learned repre-
sentations, as well as a weaker correlation to the embedding
space density. This indicates that representation learning
under considerable shifts between training and testing dis-
tribution is hurt by excessive feature compression, but may
beneﬁt from a more densely populated embedding space.
5.1.-regularization for improved generalization
We now exploit our ﬁndings to propose a simple -
regularization for ranking-based approaches by counteract-
ing the compression of representations. We randomly alter
tuples by switching negative samples xnwith the positive
Figure 7. Sing. Value Spectrum for models trained with (red) and
without (blue) -regularization for various ranking-based criteria.
xpin a given ranking-loss formulation (cf. Sec. 3.1) with
probabilitypswitch. This pushes samples of the same class
apart, enabling a DML model to capture extra non-label-
discriminative features while dampening the compression
induced by strong discriminative training signals.
Fig. 6 depicts a 2D toy example (details supp. G) illustrating
the effect of our proposed regularization while highlighting
the issue of overly compressed data representations. Even
though the training distribution exhibits features needed to
separate all test classes, these features are disregarded by
the strong discriminative training signal. Regularizing the
compression by attenuating the spectral decay ()enables
the model to capture more information and exhibit stronger
generalization to the unseen test classes. In addition, Fig. 7
veriﬁes that the -regularization also leads to a decreased
spectral decay on DML benchmark datasets, resulting in
improved recall performance (cf. Tab. 2 (bottom)), while
being reasonably robust to changes in pswitch (see supp. B).
In contrast, in the appendix we also see that encouraging
higher compression seems to be detrimental to performance.
Implications: Implicitly regularizing the number of direc-
tions of signiﬁcant variance can improve generalization.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we counteract the worrying trend of diverging
training protocols in Deep Metric Learning (DML). We con-
duct a large, comprehensive study of important training com-
ponents and objectives in DML to contribute to improved
comparability of recent and future approaches. On this basis,
we study generalization in DML and uncover a strong corre-
lation to the level of compression and embedding density of
learned data representation. Our ﬁndings reveal that highly
compressed representations disregard helpful features for
capturing data characteristics that transfer to unknown test
distributions. To this end, we propose a simple technique
for ranking-based methods to regularize the compression
of the learned embedding space, which results in boosted
performance across all benchmark datasets.