Revisiting Training Strategies and Generalization Performance in Deep Metric Learning
(a) CUB200-2011
 (b) CARS196
 (c) SOP
Figure 3. Comparison of mini-batch mining strategies on three different datasets. Performance measures Recall@1 and 2, NMI, mAP and
F1 are normalized across metrics and loss function. We plot the distributions of relative performances for each strategy.
Figure 4. Metrics Correlation matrix for standard (Recall, NMI)
and underreported retrieval metrics. mAP denotes mAP@C. Please
refer to the supplementary for more information.
outperform the SPC-4 strategy which is commonly reported
to be used in literature (Wu et al., 2017; Schroff et al., 2015).
Implications: Our study indicates that DML beneﬁts from
data diversity in mini-batches, independent of the chosen
training objective. This coincides with the general beneﬁt
of larger batchsizes as noted in section 4.2. While complex
mining strategies may perform better, simple heuristics like
SPC-2 are sufﬁcient.
4.4. Comparing DML models
Based on our training parameter and batch-sampling eval-
uations we compare a large selection of 14different DML
objectives and 4mining methods under ﬁxed training condi-
tions (see 4.1 & 4.2), most of which claim state-of-the-art
by a notable margin. For ranking-based models, we employ
distance-based tuple mining (D) (Wu et al., 2017) which
proved most effective. We also include random, semihard
sampling (Schroff et al., 2015) and a soft version of hard
sampling (Roth & Brattoli, 2019) for our tuple mining study
using the classic triplet loss. Loss-speciﬁc hyperparame-
ters are determined via small cross-validation gridsearches
around originally proposed values to adjust for our training
setup. Exact parameters and method details are listed in
supp. A.1. Table 2 summarizes our evaluation results on all
benchmarks ( with other metric rankings s.a. mAP@C or
mAP@1000 in the supplementary (supp. I)), while Fig. 4
measures correlations between all evaluation metrics. Par-ticularly on CUB200-2011 and CARS196 we ﬁnd a higher
performance saturation between methods as compared to
SOP due to strong differences in data distribution. Gen-
erally, performance between criteria is much more similar
than literature indicates, (see also concurrent work by Mus-
grave et al. (2020)). We ﬁnd that representatives of ranking-
based objectives outperform their classiﬁcation/NCE-based
counterparts, though not signiﬁcantly. On average, margin
loss (Wu et al., 2017) and multisimilarity loss (Wang et al.,
2019a) offer the best performance across datasets, though
not by a notable margin. Remarkably, under our carefully
chosen training setting, a multitude of losses compete or
even outperform more involved state-of-the-art DML ap-
proaches on the SOP dataset. For a detailed comparison to
the state-of-the-art, we refer to the supplementary (supp. F).
Implications: Under the same setup, performance saturates
across methods, contrasting results reported in literature.
Taking into account standard deviations, usually left un-
reported, improvements become even less signiﬁcant. In
addition, carefully trained baseline models are able to out-
perform state-of-the-art approaches which use considerable
stronger architectures. Thus, to evaluate the true beneﬁt of
proposed contributions, baseline models need to be compet-
itive and implemented under comparable settings.
5. Generalization in Deep Metric Learning
The previous section showed how different model and train-
ing parameter choices result in vastly different performances.
However, how such differences can be explained best on
basis of the learned embedding space is an open question
and, for instance, studied under the concept of compres-
sion (Tishby & Zaslavsky, 2015). Recent work (Verma
et al., 2018) links compression to class-conditioned ﬂatten-
ing of representation, indicated by an increased decay of
singular values obtained by Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) on the data representations. Thus, class representa-
tions occupy a more compact volume, thereby reducing the
number of directions with signiﬁcant variance. The subse-