Revisiting Training Strategies and Generalization Performance
in Deep Metric Learning
Karsten Roth* 1 2Timo Milbich* 2Samarth Sinha1 3Prateek Gupta1 4Bj¨orn Ommer2Joseph Paul Cohen1
Abstract
Deep Metric Learning (DML) is arguably one of
the most inﬂuential lines of research for learn-
ing visual similarities with many proposed ap-
proaches every year. Although the ﬁeld beneﬁts
from the rapid progress, the divergence in training
protocols, architectures, and parameter choices
make an unbiased comparison difﬁcult. To pro-
vide a consistent reference point, we revisit the
most widely used DML objective functions and
conduct a study of the crucial parameter choices
as well as the commonly neglected mini-batch
sampling process. Under consistent comparison,
DML objectives show much higher saturation
than indicated by literature. Further based on
our analysis, we uncover a correlation between
the embedding space density and compression to
the generalization performance of DML models.
Exploiting these insights, we propose a simple,
yet effective, training regularization to reliably
boost the performance of ranking-based DML
models on various standard benchmark datasets.
Code and a publicly accessible WandB-repo
are available at https://github.com/Confusezius/
Revisiting Deep Metric Learning PyTorch.
1. Introduction
Learning visual similarity is important for a wide range of
vision tasks, such as image clustering (Bouchacourt et al.,
2018), face detection (Schroff et al., 2015) or image retrieval
(Wu et al., 2017). Measuring similarity requires learning
an embedding space which captures images and reasonably
reﬂects similarities using a deﬁned distance metric. One
of the most adopted classes of algorithms for this task is
*Equal contribution1Mila, Universit ´e de Montr ´eal2HCI/IWR,
Heidelberg University3University of Toronto4The Alan Turing
Institute, University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Karsten Roth
<karsten.rh1@gmail.com >.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).
Figure 1. Mean recall performance and standard deviation of vari-
ous DML objectives trained with (green) and without (orange) our
proposed regularization. For all benchmarks, see appendix.
Deep Metric Learning (DML) which leverages deep neural
networks to learn such a distance preserving embedding.
Due to the growing interest in DML, a large corpus of litera-
ture has been proposed contributing to its success. However,
as recent DML approaches explore more diverse research
directions such as architectures (Xuan et al., 2018; Jacob
et al., 2019), objectives functions (Wang et al., 2019b; Yuan
et al., 2019) and additional training tasks (Roth et al., 2019;
Lin et al., 2018), an unbiased comparison of their results
becomes more and more difﬁcult. Further, undisclosed
technical details (s.a. data augmentations or training regu-
larization) pose a challenge to the reproducibility of such
methods, which is of great concern in the machine learn-
ing community in general (Bouthillier et al., 2019). One
goal of this work is to counteract this worrying trend by
providing a comprehensive comparison of important and
current DML baselines under identical training conditions
on standard benchmark datasets (Fig. 1). In addition, we
thoroughly review common design choices of DML models
which strongly inﬂuence generalization performance to al-
low for better comparability of current and future work.
On that basis, we extend our analysis to: (i)The process of
data sampling which is well-known to impact the DML op-
timization (Schroff et al., 2015). While previous works only
studied this process in the speciﬁc context of triplet min-
ing strategies for ranking-based objectives (Wu et al., 2017;
Harwood et al., 2017), we examine the model-agnostic case
of sampling informative mini-batches. (ii)The generaliza-
tion capabilities of DML models by analyzing the structure