Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 5 of 17
governments in smart cities involve their communities, private organizations, and other
social actors to make better policies and decision-making beneﬁcial for everyone.
To improve cities’ social, economic, and ecological performance, this style of col-
lective smart governance aims to build “innovation hubs” [ 52] by fostering constructive
links between networks of actors, information centers, and resource institutions. The
Amsterdam Smart City illustrates collaborative urban governance by displaying a unique
relationship between municipal administration, private businesses, research institutes,
start-up investors, entrepreneurs, innovators, ordinary citizens, and other relative stake-
holders [ 53,54]. With the assistance from the extended cooperation of more than 2207 people
and organizations, Amsterdam city, being smart, developed numerous projects spanning
six areas that include infrastructure and technology involving energy, water, waste man-
agement, transportation, the living standard of citizens, and education [ 55]. Governors of
this city brand it as an “urban living lab”, inviting usage of collected data through artiﬁcial
intelligence to entrepreneurs from private and public sources to create apps and test pilot
creative ideas for bettering businesses and services. Engaging inhabitants and communities
through the “Smart Citizen” program, which recruits people to participate as data agents,
is vital for developing a smart city [ 56]. Amsterdam residents operate as data collection
agents, exhibiting their knowledge on sustainability issues and directly connecting with
their city, assisting in the city’s advancement as a smart city.
Social innovation denotes “penetration of business ideas, management practices, and
market principles into the world of non-proﬁts and government” [ 57]. Artiﬁcial intelligence
has a great potential to impact the way social actors engage themselves and interact with
their government for decision-making. Although artiﬁcial intelligence is not the sole
solution to problems between city government and stakeholders, it is one of the strong tools
to increase the efﬁciency of city government for policy and decision-making by involving
stakeholders through social innovation. Implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence in social
innovation may also indicate how the city government can provide stimulus to other
evolving digital devices for decision-making [ 58]. Several researchers emphasized the
inﬂuence of artiﬁcial intelligence on social innovation [ 59], the impact of social innovation
on smart decision-making [ 28], and the overall impact of artiﬁcial intelligence on smart
decision-making [ 4], structural equation modeling of mediation, and moderation with
contextual factors. Further, as [ 60] argued in their study, some direct relationships depend
on contextual factors, so we tried to investigate the mediation impact of contextual variables:
social innovation between independent and dependent variables. Believing the previous
theories and research, we can develop our hypothesis as follows:
Hypothesis 2. Artiﬁcial intelligence contributes to social innovation positively in smart cities.
Hypothesis 3. Social innovation contributes to smart decision-making positively in smart cities.
Hypothesis 4. Artiﬁcial intelligence, using big data, has a positive inﬂuence on smart decision-
making in smart cities mediated by social innovation.
3. Research Methodology
The primary goal of this research is to create a framework for a comprehensive
understanding of the interaction between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-making,
with social innovation acting as a moderator. Longitudinal research is carried out to
evaluate the hypothesis produced in this study and assess the test outcomes. It consists of
investigations of community perceptions of the role of AI in decision-making. Primary data
for this study were gathered. A total of 416 participants completed and returned survey
questionnaires provided to them by emails, mail posts, and online, allowing us to improve
the construct reliability and validity [61].