Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 6 of 17
3.1. Sample and Data Collection
The study sample encompasses two different economies in Asia, namely Pakistan and
South Korea. The main reason to select these two countries to collect data samples is to
conduct a comparative analysis because South Korea is a developed country with a higher
implementation of AI in decision-making [ 62]. However, Pakistan is relatively less devel-
oped and striving to achieve its targets to implement AI in all cities for decision-making.
The questionnaire for this study was grounded on relevant previous literature. We
employed literature research and subject matter experts in social innovation to construct
the scale instrument’s content validity [ 63]. Because the questionnaire was created in Urdu
and English and a Korean version was given, back-translation from English to Korean
and then from Korean to English, and from English to Urdu and then Urdu to English,
was performed to ensure the content’s correctness. The Korean and Urdu versions were
evaluated to see if the assertions were clear and intelligible, and it was examined again
by specialists after the material was amended. The amended Korean and Urdu versions
were then used to pre-test the 20 participants from Pakistan and Korea before sending the
surveys to a mass population.
Participants were asked to complete a survey questionnaire on their opinions on the
use of artiﬁcial intelligence in smart cities, social innovation, and smart decision-making
by local governments. The survey questionnaire, which included questions regarding the
trustworthiness of AI, the impact of AI on society, public conﬁdence in AI, unemployment
caused by AI, and the usage of AI for public service, was developed after evaluating prior
research and was adapted from it [ 64,65]. Social innovation questions, in the second seg-
ment, concerning social entrepreneurship, social economy, local, and regional development,
and design thinking were adapted from prior research [ 66,67]. Finally, the construct smart
decision-making was measured by using ﬁve components such as use of new technologies
for decision-making, data collection through sensors, optimistic solution for difﬁcult situa-
tions, optimal and timely decision-making, and use of all available alternatives for smart
decision-making [68].
A cross-sectional questionnaire survey was published online on social media in differ-
ent groups and sent through emails in September 2021. The target audience for our survey
was the Pakistani and the South Korean populations aged between 20 and 65 years, and
they were requested to ﬁll the survey questionnaire and send them back to us through
email. Four hundred thirty-seven completed and usable questionnaire responses were
eventually collected, with 52% (227) from South Korea and 48% (210) from Pakistan. A t-test
was employed to detect any prejudice between early and late replies, but no signiﬁcant
variation was identiﬁed between the two sets of observations. Different demographic
individualities by country of the data sample are shown in Table 1 below. We did not ﬁnd
any missing values from any of the participant’s survey answers.
The sample data collected through the surveys were then analyzed utilizing the sta-
tistical program SPSS version 21. We used analytical methods such as correlation, factor
analysis, multiple regression, and path analysis. The aspects of artiﬁcial intelligence, social
innovation, and smart decision-making were identiﬁed using an exploratory factor analysis
technique that was previously used by numerous scholars [ 69]. For path analysis, ordinary
least squares regression allows a dependent variable in one equation to become an inde-
pendent variable in another. As a result, it was utilized to explore the relationship between
social innovation and smart decision-making using a variety of metrics. Path coefﬁcients
may also deconstruct associations between dependent and independent constructs into
direct and indirect impacts to identify mediating inﬂuences. Teeratansirikool [ 69] used
this method to test the mediating role of competitive strategy on the association between a
ﬁrm’s cost leadership and ﬁrm performance.
Several previous scholars have focused on comparative analysis studies between
developed and developing countries on different topics; for example, [ 70] aimed to compare
payments for environmental services, [ 71] intended to study the contribution of SMEs in
economic development, [ 71] compared impact of capital ﬂows and the stock market on