Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 4 of 17
expand this framework as a technical infrastructure for personalized medicine [ 39]. The
application of contemporary AI techniques to forecast high-impact weather is expanding
our capability to scrutinize massive numbers of data in order to extract perceptions and
correct, appropriate guidance for human weather analysts and decision-makers [ 40], in
complex tasks. AI with exceptional quantitative, computational, and analytical abilities
has outstripped humans with algorithmic decision-making. When combined, big data in
organizations [ 26] and the advancement of AI in the method of machine learning will be
beneﬁcial in expanding our perception of how the high-frequency, real-time city operates,
but it is hard to see how such approaches could ever inﬂuence decision-making in the very
near future [2].
Smart cities are highly complexly built, with extremely sophisticated integrated tech-
nologies that contain a substantial number of sensors and equipment linked to comput-
erized systems that include analytics, surveillance, and decision-making algorithms [ 41]
and use of Internet of Things in smart cities [ 42]. The notion of a “smart city” is difﬁcult to
explain due of its complexities. Numerous scholars’ attempts to provide a relevant and
complete deﬁnition center on individuals or communities, or on their living standards [ 43].
Only a few mention the role of public and private organizations in promoting standard
of living, while others focus on the ecological impact of urbanization activities and use of
information communication infrastructure [ 44,45]. We, in our study, focus on the deﬁnition
by Caragliu [ 46], which explains that a city is considered smart when investments are made
social, and human capital and conventional and information communication technology
infrastructure support long-term economic development and a better quality of life while
managing natural resources efﬁciently via participatory governance.
AI informs the decision-making process in the same manner that various computer
technologies serve as the foundation of planning support systems. In terms of smart city
planning, few tools have been produced to demonstrate how AI may advance the state
of the art. Years ago, it dabbled with expert systems. However, they fell out of favor as
overly simplistic and apparent, despite some of the capabilities that resulted from these
innovations [ 47]. Numerous researchers emphasized that processing and interpreting
big data collected via AI is a vital step towards enriching the decision-making in smart
cities [ 1,12,18]. As cities are becoming smart and digitized globally by installing sensors,
computer cores, and other communication networks [ 48], as pushed by the modern notion
of “Smart”, this is becoming increasingly possible [ 1]. These digital ideas are linked to AI
and machine learning technologies, which enable collecting near real-time data, allowing
for a better knowledge of how cities change, adapt, and respond to diverse environments.
Allam and Dhunny [ 1] agreed that big data analysis might help urban city governors for
smart decision-making and help cities assist socio-economic factors while assuring the
execution of policies. Hence, we develop the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1. Artiﬁcial intelligence, by using big data, has a positive inﬂuence on smart decision-
making in smart cities.
2.3. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Social Innovation, and Smart Decision-Making
As a signiﬁcant dimension, this variable emphasizes “collaboration” between govern-
ment, community, and other stakeholders that contribute to the decision-making process
in smart cities. Megacities require a strong managerial structure to facilitate collaboration
between the society and government to make better policy and smart decision-making for
integrated administration [ 49,50]. It necessitates integrating internal governance structures
and establishing partnerships with external organizations [ 51]. A study about the determi-
nants of factors that contribute to smart city development [ 6] concluded that public–private
partnership is one of the ﬁve factors that make a city smarter. They explained that citizens’
or residents’ participation in urban policy decisions is not merely as beneﬁciaries simply;
rather, they contribute to the overall decision-making process and the government. Local