Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 12 of 17
study aims to meet this need by recognizing, evaluating, and researching an important
component in this research ﬁeld, namely social innovation. Several earlier researchers
discovered a moderating effect of elements between AI and decision-making [ 85] and
the mediating inﬂuence of elements between two constructs [ 86,87]. We implied social
innovation as mediating factor to investigate the relationship between artiﬁcial intelligence
and smart decision-making.
This study looked speciﬁcally at social innovation as a mediating element that might
inﬂuence big data’s smart decision-making process. The ﬁndings demonstrated a signif-
icant mediating role of social innovation between AI and SDM. First, we looked at the
direct association between AI and SDM, which was signed between both variables. Then,
we incorporated social innovation as a moderating variable between independent and
independent variables. An analysis of the direct and indirect interactions between AI, SI,
and SDM revealed a substantial direct relationship between AI and SDM and an entire
mediating inﬂuence of SI between AI and SDM. Smart city managers can gather, convert,
and transport data using surveillance cameras, environmental sensors, electronic billboards,
trafﬁc management systems, charging stations, Wi-Fi, and other devices. While there is a
high degree of AI use in the city, there is a greater possibility that the city’s governance will
be better and that choices for the public will be made wisely.
This research aims to determine if social innovation has a mediating effect between
external construct AI and endogenous construct SDM. We demonstrated this link with
empirical evidence that it exists and is highly supported when studied. The ﬁrst hypothesis
predicted a substantial relationship between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-
making, which was established correctly, and we discovered signiﬁcant outcomes. We
employed SPSS software and regression analysis to establish the strength and signiﬁcance of
these relationships, which were substantially and signiﬁcantly positive. Local governments
in cities employ gadgets and devices connected to the internet. They are inﬂuenced by the
usage of big data acquired through sensors and other artiﬁcial intelligence sources, which
is a good sign.
Further, the second hypothesis predicted a direct inﬂuence of artiﬁcial intelligence on
social innovation. The third hypothesis implicated a direct positive relationship between
social innovation and smart decision-making. We proved this with an empirical investiga-
tion; hence, we conclude that such relationships exist between independent and dependent
variables. Finally, we determined with our experimental testimony that social innovation
has a strong, substantial mediating impact between AI and SDM, as we anticipated in our
fourth hypothesis.
5.2. Implications
The ﬁndings of this study have ramiﬁcations for local city managers and smart city
governors. Because our research was done in the public and private sectors in Pakistan and
South Korea, city managers and governors may beneﬁt from it in various ways. Small or
rural communities may not beneﬁt from this study due to a lack of resources, technology,
social inclusion, political power, and other variables, but larger cities in these nations may
beneﬁt. The major goal of this study is smart decision-making; thus, we have emphasized
the aspects that contribute positively and substantially so that local government managers
should keep these factors in mind when developing public policies and choices. Sensors
are becoming essential types of data collecting equipment that may be utilized for decision-
making in smart cities for improved governance. Furthermore, local government can
share such collected data with entrepreneurs, businesses, and industries, as well as for the
prosperity of the society, and all relevant stakeholders, including such social innovators,
should be involved in the decision-making process by local government, bearing in mind
that such decisions will affect them directly or indirectly.
Because of various limitations, the ﬁndings and comments in this research should
be interpreted with vigilance. Our ﬁrst potential drawback is the very small sample size
of 437 survey questions. Although there have been multiple earlier studies with smaller