Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 8 of 17
ganizational commitment and 4 components for organizational culture to examine these
constructs. A questionnaire to measure the components is given in Appendix A.
3.3. Data Analysis
For this study, SPSS software was utilized to evaluate the collected sample, and a
multiple regression and bootstrap approach was performed to examine our hypothesis. In
recent years, social science research has indicated a strong dependence on the bootstrap
approach as one of the best traditional approaches for investigating mediating factors
in social scientiﬁc domains [ 76]. Further, multiple regression using SPSS is regarded as
one of the best novel alternatives to previous traditional analysis tools due to numerous
recent improvements such as conﬁrmatory analysis, non-linear impacts, and mediating and
moderating impacts [ 77]. Numerous previous scholars proposed multiple regression statis-
tical methods to examine the mediation effects using primary and secondary data [78,79] .
Although several researchers used structural equational modelling (SEM) to investigate
interaction mediation effects between independent and dependent variables [ 80,81], we
assumed that multiple regression using SPSS is the best method for this study to explore
our ﬁndings following [81] probed mediation effect of information on decision-making.
Conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) was conducted to create a measurement model
of entire self-rating scales by a convergent validity test. The modiﬁcation index is then
used to select objects in the variables. The component with the greatest modiﬁcation index
value was removed ﬁrst, and so on until the desired goodness of ﬁts was achieved. Most
goodness of ﬁt indicators exceeded the cut-off threshold speciﬁed, but a few factor loadings
were below the minimum required level of 0.5. Hence, we removed them to obtain valid
data for our framework. It is conﬁrmed that factor loadings of all components of observed
variables are greater than the critical point of 0.5 [ 82]. The absolute model ﬁt index was
discovered using the goodness-of-ﬁt test, which assessed whether the data sample matches
an overall framework’s connecting path map.
We now reach the critical decision of whether the measurement model that we have
described is valid after it has been deﬁned and after it has passed all the essential reliability
and validity tests. This was accomplished by determining the appropriate standard of
goodness-of-ﬁt for the model ﬁt. The goodness of ﬁt is the ability to determine how well
the model ﬁts into the dataset’s variance–covariance structure. Based on evaluation criteria
for quantitative measurements, the CFA measurement and structural model ﬁt the data
well. Cronbach’s alpha coefﬁcients were used to evaluate the measurements’ reliability, and
construct correlation was used to assess the validity of the sample. Previous research was
used to construct the items for each variable. These indexes can provide superior evidence
about construct reliability and validity. The acceptance level of Cronbach’s alpha should be
above the threshold of 0.50.
Figure 1 demonstrates our research model where artiﬁcial intelligence depicts inde-
pendence, dependence on smart decision-making, and social innovation as mediating
variables. Our research model indicates a direct effect of artiﬁcial intelligence on smart
decision-making, but with the inclusion of social innovation in the ﬁrst model, the direct
linear relationship turned to a mediating relationship. Three basic techniques are used for
statistical mediation analysis: (1) causal stages, (2) coefﬁcient difference, and (3) coefﬁcient
product [ 83]. All these strategies rely on data from the three regression equations listed
below, following the examples by [84]:
SDM = 10+11AI +12CONTROLS +21 (1)
SI =20+21AI +22CONTROLS +22 (2)
SDM = 30+31AI +32SI +33CONTROLS +23 (3)
where 10, B20, and30are intercepts, SDM indicates the dependent variable, AI describes
the independent variable, SI is the mediator, 11,21, and31are the coefﬁcients relating
the independent variable and the dependent variable, 32is the coefﬁcient concerning