Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 2 of 17
IoT for data acquisition by using surveillance cameras, meters, and sensor-based systems
for real-time data and from open data sources and social media for quick response. The
data collected through AI, IoT, and other sources are integrated and then transformed
into a piece of relative information in the “interconnected” phase to deliver better insights
for smart decision-making. Finally, transformed information gathered through data is
envisioned to understand the city’s demands, requirements, needs, and policies. Hence, it
can contribute to well-informed and smart decision-making [15,16].
The role of artiﬁcial intelligence in the SDM process has long been discussed and
acknowledged by many smart city scholars [ 17–20]. However, different factors can impact
decision-making in smart cities. Several scholars [ 21,22] have recently highlighted that
decision-making in smart cities is not affected by ICT only. However, the city managers
should listen to the people and stakeholders of the society and include them in this process.
Evidently, [ 23] found how digital towns may be utilized to embed planning and decision-
making and design codes into the city’s e-governance. Moreover, [ 24] suggested several
measures available to improve the energy efﬁciency of smart cities, and city managers must
compensate for energy, environmental, social, and ﬁnancial factors to make smart decisions.
Although it is found that AI has a positive impact on smart decision-making in smart cities,
we believe that other important factors mediate between these two variables.
Despite the extensive research outline explained above, our knowledge of the exact
use of AI on the SDM process in smart cities is still limited and inconsistent in many ways.
For instance, [ 25] argued that transparency should be seen both in designing AI assistants
and the decision-making process, ensuring more legitimacy in the public eye rather than
in the process. The advancement of AI in the form of learning algorithms is beneﬁcial in
expanding our comprehension of how the elevated smart city operates, but it is challenging
to see how such approaches could ever dominate decision-making in the near future [ 2].
What anticipated is that AI will inform the SDM process in the same manner that various
computer instruments serve as the foundation of planning support systems. Moreover, [ 4]
identiﬁed the challenges linked with the impact of artiﬁcial intelligence-based systems on
smart decision-making. They proposed a set of suggestions for IS scholars and discussed the
integration of AI support to replace humans in decision-making in particular. Jarrahi [ 26]
provided a more pragmatic and proactive perspective by highlighting the complementarity
of humans and AI by examining how the strength of each one can be utilized in the decision-
making process in organizations characterized by complexity, uncertainty, and equivocality.
Hence, the involvement of humans is important, and AI assistance can be utilized as a part
of the decision-making process. Another signiﬁcant weakness, we believe, is the lack of a
foundational theoretical framework linking AI and the smart decision-making process via
the mediating role of social innovation (the design and implementation of new solutions).
In their study, [ 27] proposed a research framework to simplify the interaction between
technology and social innovation to develop timely, pre-emptive, and sustainable plans
and strategies for decision-making. They have ﬁgured out how to use economic incentives
to beneﬁt society while also protecting the environment. Gibson-Graham and Roelvink [ 28]
also highlighted a framework about social innovation, explaining that it is concerned with
relegated social groups and their involvement in social decision-making. Drawing on these
frameworks, we propose that the relationship between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart
decision-making is indirect, rather than direct, mediated through social innovation.
This research aims to see how artiﬁcial intelligence, with the help of social innovation,
inﬂuences decision-making in smart cities. To the best of our knowledge, we uncovered this
gap in existing work, and we believe that our research will contribute to the literature on
artiﬁcial intelligence and smart cities. This research will help academics and government of-
ﬁcials better understand the need for social innovation and how it inﬂuences the interaction
between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-making in smart governance systems.
The remainder of the research is structured as follows: The literature review and
hypothesis building are explained in Section 2 after the introduction in Section 1. Section 3
describes the research methodology, data gathering, and data analysis. Tables, ﬁgures, and