Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 3 of 17
diagrams are used in Section 4 to present the ﬁndings. Finally, in Section 5, concluding
remarks, limitations, and research directions are discussed.
2. Literature Review and Hypothesis
2.1. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Although artiﬁcial intelligence has received minimal attention in the public sector,
there is an increased tendency in concentration, as seen by an increase in AI studies
and technical reports [ 3,29–32]. In these studies, the beneﬁts of artiﬁcial intelligence
applications in the public sector have been highlighted across numerous government
departments, showing that AI’s vast potential is impeded by technical, organizational, and
policy challenges [29].
Previously, researchers have demonstrated the critical role of artiﬁcial intelligence in
the rational decision-making processes, making a city smart and encouraging a high quality
of life in practice. Scholl and AlAwadhi [ 30] highlighted how AI-enabled governance
enables cities to collaborate to create smart services that no single city can provide. Smart
governance in smart cities encourages data collection from sensors and other sources to
improve urban safety governance [ 33]. For example, the South Korean government recently
used artiﬁcial intelligence to combat the COVID-19 epidemic by encouraging proactive
information exchange, assisting citizens in understanding the issue, and implementing
recently released safety protocols [34].
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in smart cities has become a critical aspect of cities facing
massive challenges such as conﬁrming social presence, sustainability, public health and
safety, prosperity, and making smart decisions [ 35,36]. When cities face such encounters,
they implement a variety of concepts to transmute their cities into smart cities. This pro-
gression contains a variety of AI strategies that are generally endorsed by urban politicians
who create the governing systems, as well as other experts all over the world [ 35]. Al-
though several ICT tools, such as databases and dashboards, can help decision-making,
artiﬁcial intelligence stands out because of its three design characteristics. However, the
most important feature is automated learning and decision-making procedures through
advanced mathematical representations of problems [32].
In their study, [ 25] created a framework to analyze transparency in AI decision-making
in the socio-technological system, and they asserted that a conﬁned type of transparency
in the shape of justiﬁcations for decisions—both regarding the design of AI assistants and
the decisions taken by them—has the potential to ensure more legitimacy in the eyes of
the public than transparency in process. When it comes to apparent legitimacy, we must
greatly prefer that our AI assistants justify themselves rather than opening their code, etc.
for public feedback. The same holds true for decision-makers’ decisions during the process
of setting goals and pertinent factors for the assistants.
By overwhelming common mistakes in administrative decision-making, artiﬁcial
intelligence provides a method for improving power structure in government. These
common problems include inappropriate forecasts on important administrative tasks such
as awarding a small business loan, unrestricted bias such policing unreliable citation rates,
and decision quality varying due to differences in accuracy between managers or over
time owing to decision exhaustion [ 4,37]. AI can help solve such problems by being more
consistent with diminishing variance and prejudice, more accurate, more lucrative by
reducing labor costs associated with repetitive tasks, and less corruptible by founding a
stronger link between data inputs and decisions [32].
2.2. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Smart Cities and Decision-Making
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has proven useful in decision-making in various ﬁelds,
including smart cities, medical tests and diagnostics, organizations, the public and private
sector, and medicine. Previous research, for instance, found that AI can reliably identify
diseases as precisely, and especially in ophthalmology [ 38], complex treatment decisions
may be handled better by AI modeling than by intuition alone, and there is potential to