Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 13 of 17
sample sizes than ours, we feel that the outcomes may be different with a larger sample size.
Next, while we worked hard to avoid any social or nationalist pressures on the participants,
it is conceivable that some of the contenders sensed some implied communal or patriotism,
which required them to respond to the questions in favor of their country because people of
many nationalities wants to demonstrate their nation as being better. Lastly, this survey was
done in both developed and emerging economies, and most respondents were educated
and earned a middle-income. There is a chance that the results will change if the sample is
drawn from various economies or drawn from a population with a low level of education
and income.
6. Conclusions and Future Research
Artiﬁcial intelligence has proven to be beneﬁcial in a variety of industries. As AI has
grown in popularity because of big data, enhanced algorithms, and increased processing
power and storage, AI systems are becoming an integrated component of digital systems
and signiﬁcantly inﬂuence smart decision-making. Consequently, there is a growing need
for social science and information systems researchers to examine and comprehend the
ramiﬁcations for decision-making and contribute to AI technologies’ academic growth
and empirical success. This work intends to meet this requirement by analyzing and
emphasizing the curative function of social innovation in the relationship of AI and smart
decision-making, emphasizing the signiﬁcant issues and opportunities for future studies.
Four research hypotheses are presented, focused on the usage and inﬂuence of AI for
decision-making, with social innovation acting as a mediator. Our multiple regression
results using SPSS suggest that AI using big data generated from sensors signiﬁcantly
inﬂuences social innovation and smart decision-making in smart cities. Furthermore, it is
statistically proven that social innovation plays a substantial and important mediating role
in the interaction between AI and smart decision-making.
Although the hypotheses given in this study are primarily for study in AI for decision-
making and social innovation mediation, they can also offer valuable recommendations for
research on the application and effect of AI in general, the impact of AI on decision-making
on different industries, and, most importantly, the analysis of these signiﬁcant relationships
in different contexts using interaction variables to achieve interesting outcomes.
Author Contributions: S.A.A.B.; conceptualization, methodology, validation, Formal Analysis, inves-
tigation, Writing—Original draft preparation, S.M.; conceptualization, methodology, writing—review
and editing, funding acquisition. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by Inha University (66287-01).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created in this study. Data sharing is not applicable
to this research.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Appendix A
Questionnaire Items
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
 In my opinion, Information from artificial intelligence science community is trustworthy ;
 In my opinion, artiﬁcial intelligence science community has much inﬂuence on society;
 I have very much conﬁdence in the artiﬁcial intelligence science community;
 In my opinion, artiﬁcial intelligence is contributing to unemployment in my country;
 In my opinion, government should utilize artiﬁcial intelligence for public services.