Ranked List Loss for Deep Metric Learning
Xinshao Wang1,2, Yang Hua1, Elyor Kodirov2, Guosheng Hu2,1, Romain Garnier2, Neil M. Robertson1,2
1School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
2Anyvision Research Team, UK
{xwang39, y.hua, n.robertson }@qub.ac.uk, {elyor, guosheng.hu, romaing }@anyvision.co
Abstract
The objective of deep metric learning (DML) is to learn
embeddings that can capture semantic similarity informa-
tion among data points. Existing pairwise or tripletwise
loss functions used in DML are known to suffer from slow
convergence due to a large proportion of trivial pairs or
triplets as the model improves. To improve this, ranking-
motivated structured losses are proposed recently to incor-
porate multiple examples and exploit the structured infor-
mation among them. They converge faster and achieve
state-of-the-art performance. In this work, we present two
limitations of existing ranking-motivated structured losses
and propose a novel ranked list loss to solve both of them.
First, given a query, only a fraction of data points is in-
corporated to build the similarity structure. Consequently,
some useful examples are ignored and the structure is less
informative. To address this, we propose to build a set-
based similarity structure by exploiting all instances in the
gallery. The samples are split into a positive set and a nega-
tive set. Our objective is to make the query closer to the pos-
itive set than to the negative set by a margin. Second, previ-
ous methods aim to pull positive pairs as close as possible in
the embedding space. As a result, the intraclass data distri-
bution might be dropped. In contrast, we propose to learn a
hypersphere for each class in order to preserve the similar-
ity structure inside it. Our extensive experiments show that
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance
on three widely used benchmarks.
1. Introduction
Deep metric learning (DML) plays a crucial role in a va-
riety of applications in computer vision, such as image re-
trieval [ 28,19], clustering [ 10], and transfer learning [ 20].
In addition, DML is a good solution for challenging extreme
classiﬁcation settings [ 22,40], in which there exist an enor-
mous number of classes and only a few images per class.
For example, by using DML, FaceNet [ 24] achieves super-
human performance on face veriﬁcation with 260M face im-
ages of 8M identities.
Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed RLL. Given a query
and its ranked list, RLL aims to make the query closer to the
positive set than to the negative set by a margin m. Circle
and triangle represent two different classes. The blue circle
is a query. The yellow shapes represent nontrivial examples
while the red shapes represent trivial examples. The arrow
indicates the query’s gradient direction determined by the
corresponding non-trivial examples. The ﬁnal gradient di-
rection of the query is a weighted combination of them . The
optimised ranked list is shown in the bottom.
Loss function plays a key role in successful DML frame-
works and a large variety of loss functions have been pro-
posed in the literature. Contrastive loss [ 2,6] captures the
relationship between pairwise data points, i.e., similarity or
dissimilarity. Triplet-based losses are also widely studied
[24,33,3]. A triplet is composed of an anchor point, a simi-
lar (positive) data point and dissimilar (negative) data point.
The purpose of triplet loss is to learn a distance metric by
which the anchor point is closer to the similar point than
the dissimilar one by a margin. In general, the triplet loss
outperforms the contrastive loss [ 20,24] because the rela-
tionship between positive and negative pairs is considered.
Inspired by this, recent work [ 24,28,20,29,16,19] pro-
poses to take into consideration the richer structured infor-
mation among multiple data points and achieve impressive
5207