17
TABLE 13: Strategies and mitigation approaches for threats in ACS
No.Threats in Autonomous
Car System (ACS)Privacy RequirementsSuggested strategies and
mitigation approaches
1 Linkability of ACUnlikability of vehicle information such as loca-
tion, speed, driving behavior.Applying the data anonymization methods, such
as k-anonymity [235].
2Linkability of data flow of the AC data
stream (AC-AC)Unlinkability of messages/ information of AC-AC
data stream, channel confidentiality.Applying the data anonymization methods, such
as Quasi-identifier, QID [236].
3Linkability of data flow of the AC data
stream to RSU (AC-RSU)Unlinkability of messages/ information of AC-
RSU data stream, link confidentiality.Applying the data anonymization methods, such
as Quasi-identifier, QID [237].
4 Identifiablity at the ACAnonymity of the vehicle users (i.e., drivers, pas-
sengers, owner etc.).Using anonymisation technique; de-identification
can be employed to remove personal information
of the AC’s users [238].
5Identifiability at data flow of AC data
stream (AC-AC)Anonymity of ACS users such that the users will
not be identified from AC-AC communication by
content; link confidentiality.Applying anonymity of AC-AC communication
link [239].
6Identifiability at data flow of AC data
data stream to RSU (AC-RSU).Anonymity of ACS users such that the users will
not be identified from AC-RSU communication by
content; link confidentiality.Applying AC-RSU link confidentiality [240].
7 Non-Repudiation at AC Plusiable repudiationMaintaining privacy and having plausible repudi-
ation AC. [241]
8 Disclosure of Information at AC Confidentiality of the AC data should be ensured.Apply the anonymity system at AC; applying con-
fidentiality of cryptographic keying in AC [198].
9Disclosure of Information of data stream
(AC-AC)Confidentiality of the communication between
AC-AC should be maintained.Applying anonymity and confidentiality of AC-
AC communication link [239].
10Disclosure of Information of data stream
(AC-RSU)Confidentiality of communication between AC-
RSU should be maintained.Applying the data anonymization and confiden-
tiality methods, such as Quasi-identifier, QID
[237].
11 Unawareness at ACAC users should know about how their data is
collected, shared and manipulated; require data
minimization.Providing information about exercising different
user rights to maintain its personal data [182]; Use
feedback tools to raise user’s privacy awareness.
12Policy and consent non-compliance of
the ACSACS need to be compliant with legal guidelines
for data protection.Employee GDPR regulatory compliance frame-
work for ACS; penalised the system if the process-
ing of the user’s personal is done without user’s
consent.
TABLE 14: Modelling threats using LINDDUN & STRIDE in accordance with the GDPR
GDPR Principles and Requirements STRIDE LINDDUN
I. GDPR Principles
1. Lawfulness, fairness, and transparency No No
1.1 Consent - X
1.2 Legitimate Interests - -
1.3 Contract - -
1.4 Legal Obligation - -
1.5 Vital Interests - -
1.6 Public Interests - -
2. Purpose Limitation No No
3. Data Minimization No Yes
4. Accuracy Yes Yes
5. Storage Limitation No Yes
6. Integrity and Confidentiality Yes Yes
7. Accountability No No
II. Data Subject Rights
a. Right to be Informed No Yes
b. Right of Access No Yes
c. Right to Rectification No No
d. Right to Restrict Processing No No
e. Right to Data Portability No No
f. Right to Object No No
g. Right to Automated Decision Making No No
h. Right to Erasure No No
III. International Transfer No No
4) Accuracy: In LINDDUN, we get references about
Accuracy under the threat tree of Unawareness. It
also provides a solution for enhancing accuracy by
allowing users to delete, update, or review data.
In STRIDE, we get a reference of Accuracy/update
data under the threat of Tampering, which requires
Integrity as a security requirement. Thus, both ap-
proaches cover the Accuracy principle.
5) Integrity and Confidentiality: LINDDUN and
STRIDE define the threat of Disclosure of Infor-
mation, which has the security requirements of In-
tegrity and Confidentiality. Hence, the principles of
Integrity and Confidentiality are covered by thesetwo approaches.
6) Storage Limitation: Under the Linkability of a Data
Store Threat Tree, LINDDUN displays the potential
threats that can arise as a result of storing data for
an extended period of time or storing an excessive
amount of data. So, we get the reference of storage
limitation/retention time in LINDDUN. Further-
more, there is no mention of Storage Limitations in
STRIDE. As a result, while modelling using STRIDE,
there is a risk of ’non-compliance with the storage
limitation’ in ACS.
7) Accountability: In the use-case of the ACS, the
accountability would be held by a Trusted Authority