16
TABLE 11: LINDDUN potential threats on DFD-ACS
DFD
ElementsThreat Targets L I N D D U N
Data
FlowAC data stream
(AC-AC)2 5 × × 9 12*
AC data stream
(AC-RSU)3 6 × × 10 12*
RSU data stream
(RSU-TA)× × × × × 12*
ProcessRoad Side Unit
(RSU)× × × × × 12*
Trusted Authority
(TA)12*
EntityAutonomous Car
(AC)1 4 7 × 8 11 12*
TABLE 12: LINDDUN privacy requirements & DFD entities
ThreatsDFD
EntitiesPrivacy
Requirements
Linkability AC, AC-AC, AC-RSU Unlinkability
Identifiability AC, AC-AC, AC-RSUPseudonymity/
anonymity
Non-repudiation AC Plausible deniability
Detectability AC, RSU, DF Undetactability
Disclosure
of InformationAC, RSU, DF Confidentiality
Unawareness AC Awareness of content
Non-compliace AC, RSU, TA, DF, DSConsent and regulatory
compliance
in Table 12. Unlikability [231] is meant to break or remove
the link between any two IOIs. For example, two different
locations visited by the same vehicle, two different accidents
are done by the same miss behaving car etc. Anonymity
[231] is another privacy security requirement that is pro-
vided by removing the link between actions, information or
identity. Moreover, plausible deniability [232] shows that no
one can prove that an individual has done something. Unde-
tectability is the opposite of detectability which assures that
no one can detect the two IOIs. For eliminating the threat
of DoI, confidentiality [233] is important to be maintained.
Furthermore, the awareness of the content and providing
consent and regulatory compliance to the system as a whole
is important to preserve the privacy of the system [234].
Step-6: we suggest the desired solutions for the identified
threats in ACS. Table 13, summarizes the suggested strate-
gies and mitigation approaches for the identified threats in
our use-case scenario.
LINDDUN is used for modelling some specified privacy
threats of an ACS. It does not guarantee to deal with the
other privacy threats, for example, non-compliance with
data minimization, non-compliance with storage limitation,
un-accountability etc. as discussed in the following section.
Fig. 9: Linkability threat tree5.3 Detailed Challenges in modelling data privacy
threats in ACS
As GDPR Principles provide the finest foundation for as-
suring data protection and privacy in a system, we will
utilize them as a baseline to analyze STRIDE and LINDDUN
concerning their capabilities in modelling data privacy in
ACS.
5.3.1 Comparison between threat modelling techniques for
ACS
Table 14 presents the comparison of the threat model us-
ing STRIDE and LINDDUN in accordance with the GDPR
principles, individual rights, and other requirements. We
use the GDPR as the baseline for comparing STRIDE and
LINDDUN, which consists of 7 principles and requirements
(e.g. individual rights and international transfer). If one
of the requirements of a principle is not covered by a
modelling technique, then the main principle is not cov-
ered. LINDDUN is 37% providing compliance with GDPR
as it is mapped with 6 principles. And STRIDE provides
12% GDPR compliance because it is mapped with only 2
principles.
GDPR Principles : The comparison of
STRIDE/LINDDUN based on GDPR principles [242],
and the identified gaps are discussed below:
1) Lawfulness, Fairness and Transparency: The pri-
vacy requirements of awareness and compliance
mentioned in LINDDUN do discuss the consent.
But it does not provide any reference about AC
users’ (i.e. owner/driver and passenger) ability to
update/withdraw and view consent; and AC users’
consent for sharing data with third parties. On the
other hand, STRIDE does not define any threat to
processing the data based on lawfulness. Moreover,
LINDDUN and STRIDE do not provide any de-
scription for processing the AC’s users’ data on
a lawful basis which includes: legitimate interests,
contract, legal obligation, vital interest, and public
interest. Similarly, LINDDUN and STRIDE do not
provide any reference to the principle of fairness
and transparency. Thus, these two modelling ap-
proaches do not deal with the compliance threats
of un-lawfulness, unfairness, and non-transparency.
2) Purpose Limitation: In LINDDUN and STRIDE,
we do not find any reference regarding purpose
limitation, hence these techniques do not cover this
principle. Therefore, STRIDE and LINDDUN do not
address the non-compliance threat of ’violating the
purpose limitation’.
3) Data Minimization: LINDDUN has a reference
to data minimization, under the threat tree of
Linkability and Identifiability. However, LIND-
DUN does not include any direct privacy tar-
gets/countermeasures or Privacy Enhancing Tech-
niques (PET) to address data minimization, which
is regarded as a gap/challenge. STRIDE, on the
other hand, shows no evidence of adhering to this
principle. As a result, there is a threat of ’non-
compliance with data minimization, which must be
addressed.