18
(TA), which would generate revocation/or cancel-
lation of the certificate for the misbehaving AC.
LINDDUN does not define any threat related to Ac-
countability. However, it refers to Accountability in-
directly, under the Content Unawareness threat tree.
Similarly, STRIDE makes no security requirements
for Accountability and does not address any threats
associated with it. As a result, the threat of ’non-
accountability’ is not addressed by both modelling
techniques.
Data Subject Rights : The GDPR requires ACS to implement
a variety of Data Subject rights to be compliant with the
legislation and to protect Data Subjects from numerous data
breaches, data exploitation, and data abuse.
1) Right to Informed: LINDDUN refers to the com-
pliance requirement of this principle under the
threat tree of Unawareness and Non-compliance.
But STRIDE does not provide any reference to cover
this right. In LINDDUN, under the Unawareness
threat tree, there is a leaf node ‘unable to review
personal information that refers to the right to ac-
cess. But this right does not directly mention if there
is physical access to data or just reviewing the data.
There is also a reference of DS to not being able to
modify or remove data under the Non-repudiation
of the data store threat tree. Moreover, STRIDE does
not cover the Right to access, as it does not define
any threat related to this right.
2) Right to Rectification: Neither LINDDUN nor
STRIDE include any references or security/privacy
requirements for the Right to Rectification. As a
result, both modelling approaches fail to respect the
right to rectification.
3) Right to Erasure: LINDDUN does not directly
define the threat to the right to erasure. It does,
however, appear in the Non-repudiation of a Data
Store threat tree, where the user is unable to erase
their own data. Because this right is not explicitly
described in LINDDUN, it is assumed that it is
not covered. Similarly, STRIDE does not have any
reference related to this right. Thus, both modelling
approaches fail to respect the right to erasure.
4) Right to Restrict Processing: In both LINDDUN
and STRIDE, there is no description/reference of
any privacy threat or countermeasure related to the
right to restrict processing. Thus, this right is not
covered by STRIDE and LINDDUN.
5) Right to Data Portability: This right is not cov-
ered by STRIDE and LINDDUN, as there is no
description or reference related to the right to data
portability in these two modelling approaches.
6) Right to Object: In both LINDDUN and STRIDE,
there is no reference to any privacy threat, related to
the right to object. Thus, this right is not covered by
STRIDE and LINDDUN.
7) Right to Automated Decision and Profiling: This
right is not covered by STRIDE and LINDDUN, as
there is no description or reference related to the
right to an automated decision and profiling in these
modelling approaches.International Data Transfer: The compliance requirements
of International data transfers in ACS are intended to en-
sure that the controller/processor complies with the GDPR.
However, neither LINNDUN nor STRIDE address the threat
of ’Non-compliance of international data transfer’.
5.4 Challenges in modelling the GDPR compliance
LINDDUN and STRIDE failed to model non-compliance
threats of un-lawfulness, unfairness, and non-transparency,
as they do not meet the compliance requirements of law-
fulness, fairness, and transparency for processing the AC
and its user’s personal data. The non-compliance threat of
un-lawfulness occurs when the processing of personal data
invalidates any lawful basis. Consent non-compliance16,
for example, occurs when trusted authorities fail to obtain
the consent of AC’s users (i.e., the driver/owner and pas-
senger) before processing and sharing sensitive data with
third parties, as well as when users are unable to update,
view, or withdraw consent while their data is being pro-
cessed. Similarly, neither LINDDUN nor STRIDE mention
any compliance requirements for another lawful basis of
data processing, such as legitimate interest, contract, legal
obligation, vital interest, or public interest. Any lawful basis
for data processing can be used to process the data of the
ACS. For example, if a malicious AC causes an accident,
data processing can be based on ’vital interest’. However,
neither LINDDUN nor STRIDE address the threat of ”not
respecting vital interest”. As a result, there is a gap in both
LINDDUN and STRIDE to cope with the compliance threats
of un-lawfulness, unfairness, and non-transparency.
Moreover, STRIDE and LINDDUN modelling techniques
lack the privacy/compliance requirements to ensure the
principle of ’Purpose limitation’. For example, the data of
ACS collected for vehicle management should not be used
to share with third parties (i.e., the insurance company -
Direct Line Group (DLG)). Likewise, these two modelling
approaches do not provide any reference to the compliance
requirement of ’data minimization. For example, service
providers and data processors (such as RSU, TA, and Uber)
should only keep as much data as is required to process it for
a specific purpose. LINDDUN and STRIDE also do not meet
the ’storage limitation’ compliance requirements, which as-
sert holding the data until the purpose of processing is
completed. Thus, LINDDUN and STRIDE failed to deal
with the non-compliance threats of ’violating of purpose
limitation’; ’non-compliance with data minimization’; and
’non-compliance with storage limitation’
Another challenge and gap in LINDDUN and STRIDE
modelling techniques are that they do not deal with the
compliance threat of ’unaccountability’. In our use-case of
the Autonomous Car (AC) system, the principle of ’Ac-
countability’ plays a crucial role. Because if AC misbehaves
or does any accident, then AC’s users (i.e. driver/owner)
should be accountable and explainable for this act. For
example, In the case of collision and emergency, the AC’s
owner/driver would be accountable and explain this act
[182]. Extensive research is going on the accountability [182],
[191], [243] of the autonomous vehicle but none of the exist-
16. https://www.linddun.org/