2
survey paper are as follows:
1) The review of the existing modelling techniques for
privacy threats in autonomous systems under the
GDPR compliance perspective.
2) An insightful analysis of modelling privacy threats
and complying with the GDPR in autonomous sys-
tems, provides a better understanding of how com-
plying with the GDPR directly results in preventing
privacy threats by taking an autonomous car system
as the evident instance.
3) The identification of challenges, gaps, and future
research directions in developing an effective data
privacy modelling technique leveraging the GDPR
principles and requirements as the baseline, en-
abling the compliance verification and enforcement
in autonomous systems.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: In Section
2, we provide the background on various threat modelling
techniques as well as an overview of autonomous systems.
In Section 3, the state-of-the-art threat modelling techniques
are described with analysis of how these techniques can de-
termine the data privacy requirements and identify threats
in AS. The next section (Section 4) provides detailed infor-
mation about the GDPR principles and requirements, their
roles in preserving data privacy in AS, and specifies the
rationale for not being compliant with the GDPR. Section
5 presents an insightful discussion on how threat modelling
techniques (i.e., STRIDE and LINDDUN) are applied in the
Autonomous Car System (ACS) use-case, along with the
challenges and gaps for identifying data privacy threats
under the perspective of GDPR compliance. In this sec-
tion, unsolved challenges hindering the existing modelling
techniques from effectively modelling data privacy and
the GDPR-compliance are also analysed. The last section
(Section 6) summarises the paper and provides potential
research directions to develop data privacy threat modelling
techniques for AS based on the GDPR.
2 B ACKGROUND
This section provides background on the concept of threat
modelling and notable modelling techniques that can be
employed in AS. An overview of AS with characteristics,
challenges, and difficulties in modelling data privacy threats
is also provided. Table 1 depicts the acronyms with descrip-
tions frequently used throughout this paper.
2.1 Overview of Threat Modelling
Threat modelling is a procedure that is used to (i) determine
the security requirements of a system, (ii) identify threats
and vulnerabilities, (iii) evaluate the criticality of the de-
tected threats and vulnerabilities, and (iv) prioritize the mit-
igation methods. Threat modelling is based on several tra-
ditional security methods such as attack trees and STRIDE,
which were developed in the 1990s. [14]. The modelling
of threats requires comprehending the system’s complexity
and recognizing all possible dangers to the system [15]. It
is essential to identify the threats that can occur in a system
before claiming that it is secured [15]. Furthermore, the secu-
rity of the system is defined using a systematic engineeringapproach [16]. This approach includes the identification of
security risks, security requirements, and recovery strate-
gies. It would require less time and effort to address the
security issues if security engineering [17] is incorporated in
the system design process [18] from the initial architecture
specification.
The identification of threats helps in the formulation of
realistic and relevant security requirements. This is impor-
tant because if the security criteria [19] are inaccurate, the
system’s concept of security is incorrect, and the system can-
not be secured. A proper threat assessment [20] reduces the
capacity of attackers to misuse the system. The most succinct
and basic descriptions of the threat modelling approach
have been provided which include four key phases, namely
decomposing the system, eliciting the threats, determining
the countermeasure and mitigation, and prioritizing the
threats. Therefore, a threat modelling technique is typically
developed based on a four-step framework in accordance
with the four phases, as illustrated in Figure 1 [21].
In step 1, a model of the system is created. Data
flow diagrams and attack trees, for example, are good
ways to illustrate system modelling. In step 2, the threat
model/approach is used to find threats. Threat modelling
approaches such as STRIDE [21], Attack trees [22], PASTA
[23] etc., can be used to find threats in a system. In step 3,
these approaches are used to outline mitigation strategies
for the threats. Finally, in step 4, the model is validated for
completeness and effectiveness (i.e., the system is secured
from potential threats).
2.2 Notable Threat Modelling Techniques
A variety of threat modelling techniques have been pro-
posed and are already used in real-world scenarios, coming
with both pros and cons.
2.2.1 STRIDE
STRIDE is a model-based threat modelling technique devel-
oped by Microsoft [24]. It has been effectively applied to
cyber-physical systems (i.e., grid systems, robotics systems
etc.) [25]. This is a two-way method. In the first phase, a
data flow diagram is created to check the flow of data.
In the second phase, the STRIDE technique is utilized to
identify and model the threats as defined by its name (i.e.,
Spoofing, Tempering, Repudiation, Information Disclosure,
and Elevation of Privileges) [26]. The threats identified by
STRIDE are listed in Table 2, along with their corresponding
definitions.
Before the physical installation of systems (i.e., IoT de-
vices, autonomous systems etc.), STRIDE [27] is utilized in
the design phase to identify cyber-attacks(i.e, phishing at-
tacks). After that, threat mitigation strategies are employed
to stop the identified threats [28]–[30]. In addition, The main
Fig. 1: The four-step framework for threat modelling tech-
niques