13
[208], [209]; external spoofing while communication [210];
packet fuzzing [211]; and jamming [212], [213]. Researchers
have also demonstrated how an automobile may be readily
hacked using a bus of Connected and Autonomous Net-
works (CAN) [214]. Furthermore, a car communicates with
the other car through the CarSpeak mechanism for sharing
sensory information [215] which should be protected for
privacy concerns. In ACS, personal data is shared with in-
frastructure and other connected cars for multiple purposes
(e.g., safety and value-added services), thus it is crucial to
preserve the privacy and security of such data.
5.1.2 Data Privacy Threats in ACS
There are a large number of data privacy threats in ACS,
as the system is collecting and processing heterogeneous
personal and sensitive information from different sources
such as RSUs, central base stations, and other ACs. In [216],
the researcher presented the main challenges to safety and
security in ACS by identifying various attacks. For example,
Sensor Attack [217] occurs when an attacker attempts to
disable the GPS by hacking the sensor installed on the car.
An attack on VANET [218] is done when a hacker employs
brute force to get access to a vehicle’s confidential data (i.e.,
passwords or keys). The V2X attack [219] is held when the
attacker attack any gadget (i.e., smartphone) through which
a vehicle communicates to an external network by WiFi,
Global System for Mobile or Bluetooth. The V2V attack [220]
in which a distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) occurs by
overpowering and manipulating the V2V communication.
Moreover, GPS spoofing attacks occur when the attacker
pretended to be the legitimate terminal in the GPS network
and tries to access confidential data and pose significant
damage to the network. This would let the attacker navigate
the AC by spoofing the GPS and taking control of the car.
The AC is more computerized in generating a large
amount of data. This system is more vulnerable to privacy
concerns [221], since the autonomous industry pays less
attention to monitoring and analyzing how data is collected
and created by the AC. Third parties and hackers now have
more opportunities to abuse the vehicle’s data. A hacker
can easily access the driver’s personal information, the
vehicle’s location, the information of others in the car (such
as passengers), or someone in the vicinity of the automobile.
As demonstrated in Figure 4, in AC, the obtained data
from the sensors [217] can be used by organizations and
third parties for location tracking. In self-driving cars, loca-
tion data is primarily collected and used for route planning
[222]. A data collection that correlates location and travel
information (e.g., current area, goal, speed, course, date, and
time) may reveal sensitive information about users. These
concerns about personal safety exist on both a personal and
societal level (Data Protection Report15).
Moreover, autonomous vehicles are ideal for acquiring
information about different drivers’ driving habits, goals,
and other information without their consent. Additional
issues could arise as a result of the vehicle’s use of sym-
bolism, such as ownership questions and potential intrusion
of protection claims, depending on the situations in which
15. https://www.dataprotectionreport.com/2017/07/the-privacy-
implications-of-autonomous-vehicles/TABLE 7: Security and privacy threats in ACS (ACS)
Security and Privacy
attacks in ACSDescription
Fake information
attackAn attacker sends false/fake information in
ACS for his interests. For instance, an attacker
could transmit the emergency vehicle approach
warning of getting a clear road.
Integrity attackThe attacker tempers the messages in a network
for threatening the integrity of the communica-
tion link.
Message replay
attackThe legitimate messages that sent already by
the authenticate sender are sent again for ma-
licious intentions (i.e., to create a delays to
disrupt the traffic).
Repudiation at-
tackIt is held when any message/consent send by
the malicious vehicle later deny the message or
information send by it.
Privacy attacksThis would lead a attack on AC sensitive infor-
mation(i.e., identity of vehicle, driver, passen-
ger, vehicle owner; driving style; geographical
location; mileage; or car’s technical data) from
invalid entities.
the images are captured [222]. Similarly, an individual’s
information around AC (i.e, client’s locations and on-street
behaviour) may be useful to third parties such as the gov-
ernment and private sector entities, law enforcement, the
news media, private specialists, and insurance companies.
5.2 Threat Modelling Techniques for ACS
Threat modelling plays a crucial role in identifying and
mitigating the threats in ACS. This section provides system-
atic approaches for modelling potential threats in ACS by
leveraging STRIDE and LINDDUN techniques [52].
5.2.1 Modelling Data Privacy Threats in ACS using
STRIDE
The STRIDE approach consists of nine steps to model threats
in ACS. Step-1: define the use-case scenarios: We identify
the potential security and privacy threats for our use-case
scenario (i.e, ACS) [199]. Step-2: gather a list of external
dependencies: we identify that an AC operates in a com-
munication network in which AC communicates with other
ACs, Road Side Units (RSUs), and a central operation server
called Trusted Authority (TA) [199]. Step-3: define security
assumptions: we have analyzed that in ACS, there would
be not only security threats but also privacy vulnerabilities
which need to be mitigated. The security and privacy attacks
in ACS are shown in Table 7 [52].
Step-4: create external security notes. As ACs operate
with other connected entities in a communication network,
there are external security and privacy concerns related to
RSUs, TA, and other connected vehicles such as spoofing
of AC and RSU etc. as presented in Table 7. Step-5: create
DFDs of the system based on logical and structural entities.
We illustrate the DFD of the ACS in Fig. 6 which will be
discussed throughout this paper. In DFD, there is AC, Road
Side Units (RSU), Trusted Authority (TA), and the data flow
between these entities. In this DFD, ACS consists of V2V and
V2I data flow (i.e., communications), where an AC shares
its data (i.e., location, speed, route, or any danger/threat
etc) with other ACs and RSUs. The information is further
transmitted from RSUs to the TA, which is responsible for
the registration of the vehicle (i.e., generating certificates),
the revocability of the vehicle, as well as the information