19
ing threat modelling techniques (i.e., LINDDUN/STRIDE)
have covered this principle of GDPR.
The compliance requirements for the ’international
transfer’ of personal data are not guaranteed by LINDDUN
and STRIDE. For example, the consent of AC users should
be obtained before personal data is transferred for cross-
border road safety investigations or commercial purposes
(i.e., EU-US privacy shield C/2016/4176) [244].
Furthermore, there is a gap in LINDDUN and STRIDE
to meet the compliance requirements of individual rights
(Art.12-23). In the ACS, the users of the car should be able
to exercise their right to rectification, right to update, right to
object, and right to restrict its data processing. For example,
it is the right of AC’s users to know how their data is gained,
stored, shared, and processed (Art. 13, 14 GDPR). The users
of the AC may want to access its data from the TA or other
data processors where it can exercise its ‘right to access’
(Art. 15 GDPR). Similarly, these two modelling methods are
not respecting the ‘right to rectification’; ‘right to restrict
processing ’; right to object’, ‘right to data portability’; and
‘right to automated decision making’.
5.5 Unsolved challenges and solutions for threat mod-
elling techniques
Research directions and suggested solutions for the iden-
tified challenges are presented in Table 15. For processing
the personal data in ACS and its users, the compliance
requirements of the Purpose Limitation (Article 5 (1) (b)),
Data Minimization (Article 5(1)(c)) and Storage Limitation
(Article 5(1)(e)) should be integrated into a threat modelling
approach for ACS. A framework should be developed for
the ACS to check whether its users’ data collected for one
purpose should not be used for any other purposes [244].
Notably, the consent verification framework should be used
to ensure that the consent of DS should be taken as a lawful
basis for using the same recorded data for any other pur-
pose. The compliance requirements of legitimate interests
may also be incorporated into the modelling approach for
processing the data. For example, the confidential data (i.e.,
real identity) of the ACS can be used by TA to create a
revocation list for a misbehaving car based on the legitimate
interests of data processing.
Similarly, the mechanism for Data Minimization should
be implemented to ensure that a system is not collecting
irrelevant information and respecting the purpose of pro-
cessing [246]. Moreover, the requirements of Storage Lim-
itations would also be implemented in the modelling ap-
proach for dealing with storage-related threats (linkability,
identifiability etc.) in the ACS. The secure and required data
storage/management may be implemented by employing
an EDR/AD solution which is a regulatory prerequisite for
the deployment of ACS [247].
It is essential to incorporate the principle of Account-
ability in a modelling method for the ACS [243]. Because the
actions and interactions of ACS in the real-time environment
are non-deterministic due to their high complexity and scal-
ability. The AC should be comprehensible and trustworthy
for its successful implementation in the real world [249].
For example, if an AC does an accident or misbehaves
then its owner/driver should be accountable for it andshould provide an explanation for doing so. Moreover, the
compliance requirements of International Transfer should be
implemented in modelling the ACS, because data protection
is necessary while cross-border experiments on road safety
and connectivity by digital technologies (i.e., EU-US Pri-
vacy Shield C/2016/4176) [244]. Furthermore, for securing
the confidential data of AC(i.e, owner/driver and passen-
ger), Integrity and Confidentiality should be incorporated
into the modelling approach by employing authorization
mechanisms [248]. The pseudonymization and encryption
techniques should be implemented while communicating
with messages (i.e., hash-based message authentication) in
a network [250].
The users of ACS should be able to exercise the rights
that are defined in GDPR for enhancing transparency and
ensuring the protection of data. For example, the right to
access, right to rectification, right to erasure the data (i.e.,
static road data (article 4), dynamic road data (article 5)
and traffic data (article 6) defined by Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2015/962) should be implemented in ACS. The privacy
rights framework would also be implemented in the auto-
motive industry. There are also some recommendations for
the right to explanation and right to reparation [243] that
may be included in the list of DS rights of the GDPR for
ACS.
6 R ECAPS AND OUTLOOK
Recently, the misuse and abuse of personal data is blooming
dramatically, resulting in serious data privacy concerns.
Such concerns are particularly critical in the scenarios of
AS (e.g., ACS) in which the operation of the systems are
dependent on the processing of the data and without human
intervention and verification. The increasing of ACS such
as Tesla with autopilot autonomous driving function [251],
[252] triggers the attention to a variety of privacy-related
aspects, not only for conventional privacy preservation but
also algorithm bias, ethics, and legal responsibility when
processing personal data. This leads to a critical demand
for a novel data privacy modelling technique as well as a
GDPR-compliance verification scheme.
6.1 Conclusion
We have surveyed the existing threat modelling techniques
with consideration for the applicability of these techniques
when modelling data privacy threats in autonomous sys-
tems. We have argued that complying with the GDPR plays
a bigger role in preserving users’ privacy and protecting
personal data compared to modelling data privacy threats,
which only consider typical privacy-related attacks. Follow-
ing this catalyst, we have provided an analysis of whether
such techniques can relate the data privacy threat modelling
to the GDPR-compliance. We have taken a specific use-case
of AS, namely ACS, as an instance to demonstrate the anal-
ysis of STRIDE and LINDDUN when modelling the data
privacy in ACS. We have also discussed the challenges and
gaps, as well as provided suggestions for a novel modelling
technique that not only models the traditional data privacy
threats but also effectively performs the GDPR-compliance
verification.