7
third parties. Furthermore, some organizations promote
drone-based advertising [92]. Individuals would be easily
exposed to coordinated autonomous systems without the
need for any precise time or location constraints. As a result,
this may pose a greater threat to an individual’s privacy
than any previous attacks in this technologically advanced
age.
In the next section, we will discuss how data privacy
threats in AS can be modelled using the existing threat
modelling techniques.
3 D ATA PRIVACY THREAT MODELLING FOR AU -
TONOMOUS SYSTEMS
This section examines how existing threat modelling tech-
niques are used for conducting data privacy threats, par-
ticularly for autonomous systems. We also scrutinize bar-
riers and challenges when implementing these techniques
for modelling data privacy and GDPR compliance as well
as discuss the reasons why such techniques are not fully
suitable for data privacy analysis in autonomous systems.
3.1 Overview of Data Privacy Threat Modelling Tech-
niques for Autonomous Systems
Existing threat modelling techniques such as STRIDE,
PASTA, and Attack trees are well suited for modelling
security threats for AS [93]; however, these may not be
effective enough to model the data privacy of an AS [94].
In the survey [95], the authors cover cyber-security and
modelling approaches for finding and mitigating risks and
vulnerabilities in the AS. The researcher further focuses on
modelling systems, threats, vulnerabilities, and attacks of
AS but does not highlight the approaches to model the data
privacy threats in autonomous systems.
Moreover, the survey [96] highlighted models and meth-
ods based on machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)
that can detect and counter both known and unidentified
threats (i.e., SQL injection, OS fingerprinting, malicious code
execution, etc.) in big data. The study also suggested a
Secure Data Analytics (SDA) architecture based on DL and
ML to characterize input data as acceptable or malicious.
Similarly, in the review paper [97], the authors examine
certain threat models and risk assessment techniques re-
lated to IoT. They also discuss the various IoT risk assess-
ment techniques. To predict and evaluate cyber risks and
safeguard industrial assets from future cyberattacks, the
study [98] suggests a structured threat modelling technique
for Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems (ICPS). The process
includes categorizing ICPS assets according to their level
of importance before examining the cyber security flaws,
threats, risks, effects, and solutions. However, these studies
do not discuss the data privacy threats and the countermea-
sures specifically for AS.
Syed Ghazanfar Abbas [99] used the STRIDE threat
modelling technique to identify phishing threats in the
automotive system [100] and the smart home [101]. Phish-
ing causes data breaches which are done by theft of the
user’s credentials by sending emails [102]–[104]. Moreover,
in [105], the authors used various threat modelling tech-
niques such as VAST, PASTA, STRIDE etc. for the IntelligentAutonomous Vehicles (IAV) to discuss and mitigate the
privacy and security-related vulnerabilities. It also discusses
the taxonomy of security, vulnerability, and privacy. The
researchers in [106], use the CIA (Confidentiality, Integrity,
Availability) model to analyze each component of a system
to identify security and privacy-related attacks. However,
these techniques are not fully effective in detecting phishing
attacks and preventing AS from data breaches.
In [107], the authors used LINDDUN threat modelling
technique and presented the evaluation criteria for a smart
home hub using common criteria. The descriptive study
[108] of LINDDUN assumptions is presented for the empiri-
cal study of IoT-based home automation systems. The result
showed that these assumptions are suitable for mitigating
some potential threats, but some assumptions are under
analysis where some are not in the scope of LINDDUN.
Moreover, in the study [109], the authors explained that
LINDDUN is not sufficient to mitigate the privacy threats
[110], which is not directly related to regulatory compli-
ance (i.e. General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)). He
proposed the basis for developing a new framework for
ensuring the privacy of IoT-based applications (i.e. smart
homes). This framework would be based on PbD and GDPR.
Thus, LINDDUN failed to fully detect the data privacy
threats and ensure data protection in AS systems.
Moreover, many researchers have proposed various pri-
vacy models for preserving the privacy of the AS systems
but they are not effective enough to ensure the data privacy
of these. For example, Feng [111], proposed the Sybil attack
model for VANET where attackers exploit the identities
of others to send false messages and create accidents in
VANET. The researcher describes different situations where
the attacker sends false notifications and messages to create
traffic issues. The authors in [112], discuss the Bell-LaPadula
privacy model for preserving the confidentiality of infor-
mation in securing Unmanned Autonomous Systems (UAS)
from cyber threats. Furthermore, in [112], the authors de-
scribe how the privacy-related legislation of various coun-
tries is not enough to meet the privacy requirements of the
AS such as unmanned aircraft systems. They suggest com-
bining the legislated requirements and impact assessments
to properly deal with the privacy of the systems. Therefore,
privacy-related legislation should be incorporated into the
proposed privacy models for AS system.
In [113], the researcher discusses the privacy and security
threats in IoT devices (i.e. smart locks). An attacker can
steal the credentials of the authorized person to permit to
open the smart lock. The researchers suggested geo-fencing
and touch-to-unlock techniques for unwanted unlocking
of smart locks. To deal with the trust and privacy of the
network of IoT devices the authors developed a fog com-
puting paradigm [114] instead of using threat modelling
techniques.
3.2 Challenges and difficulties in conducting threat
modelling for AS
In [115], STRIDE, LINDDUN, QTMM and CORAS mod-
elling techniques are used for security research for au-
tonomous applications (i.e IoT devices). The researchers
discuss three gaps in threat modelling frameworks that