12
TABLE 6: Data privacy threats and related GDPR principles
Data Privacy threats Description Consequences Related GDPR Principles
LinkabilityBeing capable to identify whether two items
of interests (IOI)s are linked or not.It can cause identifiability and inference
about the particular subject.Data Minimization
IdentifiabilityThe subject can be identified easily within
available set of subjects.It causes severe privacy violations (when
subject is assumed anonymous).Data Minimization
Non-repudiation Unable to deny a claim or an action.If a subject is not able to repudiate
claim/action, it can be held accountable.Accountability
DetectabilityThe ability to distinguish if an item
of interests (IOI)s exists or not.Inference of a subject can be caused by the
detection of an IOI.-
Disclosure of informationThis is referred to information disclosure of
the subject.This can lead the disclosure of personal
information of subject.Confidentiality
UnawarenessNot aware of impacts and consequences of
sharing information.This can lead to linkability and identifiabil-
ity.-
Consent non-complianceThe system/organization is compliant if it
adheres to regulatory principle of trans-
parency and take the user’s consent.This can make consent inconsistent. Transparency
are reflected in GDPR’s accountability mechanism. There-
fore, GDPR’s principles of ’Transparency’ and ’Accountabil-
ity’ play important role in AI, Autonomous Systems and
Robotics [190].
5 D ATAPRIVACY THREAT MODELLING FOR ACS
In this section, we are going to discuss how threat modelling
techniques (i.e., STRIDE and LINDDUN) can be used to
model the data privacy threats in a specific autonomous sys-
tem namely Autonomous Car Systems (ACS). We examine
the challenges and gaps when conducting these techniques
for identifying data privacy threats by leveraging GDPR as
the baseline.
5.1 Use-cases: Data Privacy threats in ACS
5.1.1 Overview of ACS
ACS is one of the milestone inventions in autonomous
technology [191] including automotive capabilities based on
LIDAR, Radar [192], [193] and machine learning algorithms.
The successful implementation of ACS depends on both
safety parameters (i.e., the effectiveness of the self-driving
mechanisms, cyber-security and data privacy) and human
trust [194]. ACS can only be practically deployed in the real
world if it is trustworthy [195]–[197]. Along with technolo-
gies to ensure safety, there should be approaches to educate
and enhance users’ confidence and trust in ACS [194], [198].
Figure 4 [199], illustrates the main components of an
ACS in which data acquisition is done by the radars, sen-
sors, cameras, communication devices, and Light Detection
and Ranging (LIDAR). Data collected by these devices are
manipulated and processed by a central system of the Au-
tonomous Car (AC), and then passed to a decision-support
system which let the system perform a set of required tasks.
To travel from point A to point B, AC perceives and gets
awareness of the external surroundings, plans an appropri-
ate route, navigates, and makes controlled movements.
Moreover, Figure 5 [199] is a simple illustration of the
ACS in which AC communicates with other communicating
nodes that include the Road Side Unit (RSU), Trusted Au-
thority (TA)(i.e., registration and management authorities),
and other connected AC for its fully implemented. Notably,
AC communicates with RSU, other connected vehicles, and
TA through VANET by LTE, WiFi, visible light communica-
tion etc. In ACS a vehicle (e.g., AC) interacts with another
vehicle (V2V) [200], [201], and infrastructure (V2I) [202],[203] such as RSU and TA for sharing information (i.e.,
traffic information, safety warnings etc.).
Furthermore, one of the most serious issues in the
automotive industry is the threat to security and privacy
[199]. The researchers in [204] and [205] have examined
numerous cyber-threats in autonomous vehicles. There are a
variety of conventional security vulnerabilities in ACS such
as the injection of malicious code into various sensors and
telematics units [206], [207]; hacking into an in-car network
Fig. 4: AC Architecture
Fig. 5: Simple illustration of ACS