14
TABLE 8: Mapping STRIDE Threats
Security threat Security property AC RSU TA DF
Spoofing Authentication × × ×
Tempering Integrity × × × ×
Non-Repudiation Repudiation × ×
Information Dis-
closureConfidentiality × × × ×
Denial of Ser-
vicesAvailability × × × ×
Elevation of Priv-
ilegeAuthorization ×
storage. The AC, RSU and TA are represented as processes
in DFD. The dotted red line indicates the trust boundaries
around TA which are assumed to be trustworthy in this
scenario.
Step-6: determine the types of threats. STRIDE’s taxon-
omy of threats is used to highlight the security threats in a
system namely Spoofing, Tampering, Repudiation, Informa-
tion Disclosure, Denial of Service and Elevation of Privilege.
These threats are found against the security requirements
such as Authentication, Integrity, Non-repudiation, Confi-
dentiality, Availability, and Authorization respectively. Step-
7: identify the threats to the ACS. Each entity and process
in a DFD is mapped to a set of threats. Table 8 shows the
mapping of security threats on various elements of DFD
(marked with ×).
In this paper, we have illustrated the threat tree pattern
of only Spoofing with ACS, as shown in Figure 7. The oval
(or circle) shape in the threat tree shows the root threat that
may lead to other possible threats. The rectangle represents
the concrete threat in the attack path. Step-9: determine and
prioritize the risks. For each identified threat, the security
risks are determined and prioritized for their resolution in
ACS. Step-9: plan mitigation. In this final step, the risks
of the identified threats are minimized by suggesting the
appropriate mitigation approaches. Table 9, illustrates the
risk priority and mitigation approaches of some possible
security threats in ACS.
We discuss each threat specified by STRIDE separately
which applies to the elements of the DFD of AC with
mitigation approaches:
Spoofing: Spoofing with AC is attempted by tricking
cameras, sensors, and receivers with wrong information
(i.e., false notifications or fake signals) to change the recip-
Fig. 6: DFD-ACS showing data flowing between AC, RSU,
and a trusted centralised server TA.ient Car’s behaviour or decision [228]. When an AC com-
municates in a network, an attacker/malicious vehicle may
spoof the GNSS [229] and GPS’s of the AC that attempts
to impersonate it [228]. Moreover, a malicious vehicle may
impersonate an RSU for distracting an AC. An attacker
spoof the GPS and tempers the Basic Safety Massage (BSM)
and lets the other AC accept the fake message that comes
from the authenticate source [223].
Tempering: In ACS, the integrity of confidential infor-
mation of AC (i.e. license plate) recorded by TA is important
as it is responsible for providing maintenance with updating
certificates, and keys and obtaining fresh Certificate Revo-
cation List (CRL). The exchange of messages (i.e. location
detail, speed, traffic congestion etc.) between AC, another
vehicle, and RSU may be tempered/modified. Data signa-
ture can be used for information and integrity [224], [225].
Non-repudiation: The AC cannot deny the message it
has already transmitted because the registered authority has
logged it (i.e., TA). The denial of a node in communication
would result in the loss of event traceability.
Information Disclosure: When an AC communicates
with other entities in a network, information is exposed due
to unsecured message transmission. For safe message trans-
mission in a network, [226] suggests the Secure Message
Transmission (SMT), NMD routing protocol with MAC, and
asymmetric cryptography solutions.
Denial of Services (DOS): When an attacker generates
jamming in a physical channel of a communication network,
the data/message becomes unavailable or delayed. To miti-
gate DOS [227], availability and authentication must be met.
Elevation of Privileges (EoP): The RSU can grant ser-
vices to an authorized AC who makes a request. If the
RSU fails to validate the authorized vehicle, privileges may
be elevated. In [230], the authors developed a strategy for
preventing EoP in a communication network.
STRIDE is an appropriate approach for identifying some
specified security threats (i.e. Spoofing, Tempering, Non-
repudiation, Information Disclosure, Denial of Services, and
Elevation of Privilege) in the ACS. However, STRIDE failed
to deal with the data privacy threats in ACS as defined in
Table 6.
5.2.2 Modelling Data Privacy Threats in ACS using LIND-
DUN
In this subsection, data privacy threats for ACS are modelled
using LINDUNN technique, which consists of 6 processes as
indicated in Figure 8 [33].
Step-1: The DFD of the ACS is constructed for mod-
elling the system as illustrated in Figure 6. Step-2: we
Fig. 7: Spoofing with AC