15
TABLE 9: Prioritization of risks and mitigation approaches based on STRIDE
Title Category Description Priority Mitigation /Justification
Spoofing the AC, and
RSUSpoofingAC and RSU may be spoofed by an attacker,
and this may lead to Information Disclosure.highStandard authentication mechanism must be
implemented to identify the valid processes.
[223].
Spoofing TA SpoofingTA may be spoofed by a malicious vehicle or an
attacker.lowTA is assumed trustworthy, so there are less
chance of Spoofing TA.
Tempering of AC, and
RSU and DFTemperingData flowing across Data Flow may be tam-
pered by an attacker. This may lead to a denial-
of-service, elevation of privilege, or information
disclosure attacks against AC, RSU. For exam-
ple, fake information attack, illegal pre-emption
attack.highIntegrity must be maintained; Data signature
can be used for integrity [224], [225].
Tempering of TA TemperingTA may be tempered by a malicious vehicle or
an attacker.lowTA is assumed as trustworthy, there are less
chance of tempering TA.
Data Repudiation of AC Non-
RepudiationAC claims that it did not receive data from a
source outside (i.e., RSU).medium Logging and auditing are required.
Information Disclosure
of Data FlowInformation
DisclosureData flowing across Data Flow may be sniffed
by an attacker. Depending on what type of
data an attacker can read, it may be used to
attack other parts of the system or simply be a
disclosure of information leading to compliance
violations.highEncryption of data flow must be implemented;
secure message transmission (SMT), NMD
routing protocol with MAC and asymmetric
cryptography solutions are suggested for se-
cure message transmission in a network [226].
Potential Process Crash
(AC, RSU)DoSAC and RSU crashes, halts, stops, or runs
slowly; in all cases violating an availability met-
ric.high Availability mechanism must be applied [227].
Potential Process
Crash (TA)DoS TA may be attacked by external attacker. low Availability mechanism must be applied [227].
Data Flow potentially
interruptedDoSAn external agent interrupts data flowing in
either direction. This further lead to denial of
services for AC, TA, and RSU. For example,
replay attack.high Availability mechanism must be applied [227].
AC may be Subject
to Elevation of PrivilegeElevation of
PrivilegeMalicious vehicle/attacker may be able to im-
personate AC to gain additional privilege from
RSU.high Authorization should be applied.
TABLE 10: Mapping LINDDUN threats on DFD-ACS
DFD
ElementsThreat Targets L I N D D U N
Data
FlowAC data stream
(AC-AC)× × × × × × ×
AC data stream
(AC-RSU)× × × × × × ×
RSU data stream
(RSU-TA)× × × × × ×
ProcessRoad Side Unit
(RSU)× × × × × ×
Trusted Authority
(TA)×
EntityAutonomous Car
(AC)× × × × × × ×
mapped the LINDDUN privacy threat types i.e, Linkability,
Identifiability, Non-repudiation, Detectability, Disclosure of
information, Unawareness, and Non-compliance with the
elements of DFD-ACS.
Table 10 illustrates the mapping of LINDDUN threats
on DFD of AC System. An attacker or a malicious vehicle,
for example, can detect the two Items Of Interest (IOI)s
(i.e, speed and location of AC) in a system at any time
to trace or monitor the vehicle. Following the Linkability,
an attacker can identify the targeted AC and continue to
Fig. 8: 6-step procedure in LINDDUN to model privacy
threats.pursue his harmful goals. Detectability happens when an at-
tacker/malicious vehicle determines whether the IOIs exist
in ACS to obtain his interests. Furthermore, a misbehaving
AC cannot deny that it has engaged in any specific activity
in the case of non-repudiation (i.e. sending any malicious
message). If the AC repudiates the violent behaviour, it will
be held liable.
Moreover, The theft of confidential data of the AC (i.e.,
pseudo-identity) can lead to the threat of Disclosure of Infor-
mation (DoI). the threat of ’Unawareness’ in ACS, refers to
the unawareness of the driver/owner and passenger, about
how their data is being captured, shared, or manipulated. In
addition, non-compliance highlights the lack of the proper
integration of privacy policies in the ACS. An attacker may
tamper with the privacy principles and make AC’s consent
inconsistent. For example, an attacker or third party may
use the personal data of the car for his interests without the
consent of the driver, owner, or passenger.
Step-3: The misuse of AC for Linkability is illustrated in
Figure 9. Linkability of AC is the root threat that may lead to
Identifiability, Detectability, and Disclosure of information.
If the personal data (i.e. pseudo-identity and location) of
AC is not protected, then the attacker can easily track and
identify the current location of the car, resulting in the
disclosure of information about the AC. Step-4: The risks
identified in the ACS are prioritized with a number (1-12) in
Table 11, which should be mitigated accordingly. The items
indicated with 12* mean that non-compliance and consent
threats have an effect on the ACS (DFD) as a whole. The
threats marked with ‘×’ are considered as not related to the
ACS.
Step-5: the privacy requirements are elicited across the
entities of the DFD of the ACS against the LINDDUN threats