4
play cards to answer questions about potential attacks in
various scenarios. For instance, why is the system under
attack? Who is responsible for this? What kind of assets can
be harmed and how can they be harmed? [41].
To identify threats, the Security Cards modelling tech-
nique uses a deck of 42 cards such as human impact (9
cards), adversary’s motivations (13 cards), adversary re-
sources (11 cards), and adversary’s methods (9 cards). This
approach can be used to discover almost any form of threat,
but it produces a lot of false positives and can not be
employed in non-standard scenarios [41]. In industry, the
Security Card technique is hardly used [41].
2.2.6 hTMM
The Hybrid Threat modelling Method (hTMM) is made up
of SQUARE (Security Quality Requirements Engineering
Method), Security Cards, and PnG activities [42], which
was developed by Software Engineering Institute in 2018.
The main characteristic of the technique is to provide a
consistent result with no false positives(i.e., an object, that
has been classified as harmful despite the fact that it isn’t
a threat), and no overlooked threats [42]. The main steps
of hTMM are to highlight the system to be threat-modelled,
apply for the security cards, remove unlikely PnG (i.e., there
are no realistic attack vectors), use the tool support for
finalizing the results, and finally continue to process for risk
assessment. The flaw in htMM is that it does not provide
mitigation for the threats that have been identified, and it
requires a lot of effort to model complex systems.
2.2.7 Attack Trees
This is one of the oldest techniques, and it has been widely
used in conjunction with other threat modelling techniques
like STRIDE, CVSS, and PASTA [43], [44]. The attacker’s
aim is put at the root of the tree, while the strategies to
achieve the goal are put at the leaf nodes. By travelling
through the leaves, AND and OR nodes are used for various
aims. Attack trees are used to make security decisions and
determine whether the system is vulnerable to attack. The
use of the attack tree modelling technique was proposed
[44] to develop the threat model of buildings and home
automation systems to model the security flaws in their
development and implementation. This strategy is simple
to understand and only beneficial when security considera-
tions are properly comprehended [44].
2.2.8 Quantitative Threat modelling Method (QTMM)
This technique [45] consists of STRIDE, CVSS and At-
tack Trees. With this technique [46], a few pressing issues
could be solved for cyber-physical systems. Another aim of
QTMM technique is to generate attack ports for individual
components. These attack ports then forward the risk to the
connected components. The system risk assessment is done
by score card (i.e., (1) Insignificant, (2) Minor, (3) Moderate,
(4) Major, and (5) Catastrophic). If the component root nodes
have a high-risk score, the attacked port has a high-risk
score as well and is thus more likely to be executed. This
is a time-consuming technique and requires high effort to
achieve consistent results.2.2.9 Trike
In Trike, the threat modelling is performed from the view-
point of defensive and risk management [47]. This technique
starts by defining a system. Then the expert analyses the
requirement model by enumerating and understanding the
system’s actors, assets, intended actions, and rules. As a
result, an actor-asset-action matrix can be built. The trike
modelling technique lacks documentation and is a time-
consuming process.
2.2.10 CVSS
The Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) mod-
elling approach identifies vulnerability attributes and as-
signs a numerical score to their severity. This establishes
a consistent grading system for a variety of cyber-physical
systems [48], [49]. CVSS has three metric categories (Base,
Temporal, and Environmental), each with a set of measure-
ments.
The algorithms for computing the scores of metrics are
confusing, even though these metrics are thoroughly de-
tailed in the documentation. However, this approach is still
commonly employed. Other threat modelling techniques are
utilized in conjunction with this technique.
2.2.11 VAST
The Visual, Agile, and Simple Threat (VAST) modelling ap-
proach is an automated threat modelling approach. Because
of its scalability and applicability, this strategy is employed
in large organizations to offer actionable and dependable
findings for a variety of stakeholders [50], [51].
Two models are developed in this technique: an appli-
cation threat model that uses data flow diagrams and an
operational threat model that is based on attacker mindset
DFDs. As a result, VAST can be integrated into the devel-
opment and DevOps life-cycle of an organization [50]. This
technique is used to model security and privacy in intelli-
gent autonomous vehicles [52]. However, this technique is
time-consuming and requires extensive effort in modelling
a system.
2.2.12 OCTAVE
For cyber-security planning and assessment, the Opera-
tionally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation
(OCTAVE) modelling technique [53], [54] are utilized. It is
primarily concerned with identifying organizational risks
and does not address technical threats. This strategy was
created primarily for large organizations. Small businesses
can also benefit from OCTAVE-S. This technique is com-
prehensive and adaptable. However, It’s a time-consuming
procedure with vague documentation.
Table 4 illustrates the strengths and weaknesses of threat
modelling techniques [38]. These techniques are evalu-
ated based on various parameters such as maturity, focus,
time/effort, mitigation etc. The ’maturity’ is determined
by how effectively each technique is specified, how fre-
quently it has been utilized in case studies, and how fre-
quently it has been coupled with other techniques. The
’focus’ shows the point of view or the perspective based
on which the technique was designed. The ’Time/Effort’
indicator indicates how time-consuming and labor-intensive