3
TABLE 1: Acronyms with Descriptions
Acronyms Description Acronyms Description
AC Autonomous Car IOI Items of Interest
AS Autonomous System LINDDUNLinkability, Identifiability, Non-Repudiation, Detectability, Disclosure of Infor-
mation, Unawareness, and Non-Compliance
ACS Autonomous Car System PbD Privacy by Design
DC Data Controller RSU Road Side Unit
DP Data Process STRIDESpoofing Tempering Repudiation Information Disclosure and Elevation of Privi-
leges
DS Data Subject TA Trusted Authority
DoI Disclosure of Information V2V Vehicle to Vehicle
GDPR Data Protection Regulation V2I Vehicle to Infrastructure
TABLE 2: Threat Categories of STRIDE
ThreatSecurity
RequirementDescription
Spoofing AuthenticationPretending to be something or someone
other than yourself.
Tampering IntegrityTry to add/modify something in re-
sources(disk, network, memory etc.).
RepudiationNon-
RepudiationClaiming you were not responsible or
did not do something.
Information
DisclosureConfidentialityThe information is provided to the one
who is not authorized.
Denial
of ServiceAvailabilityRestrict the resources that are required
to deliver.
Elevation
of privilegeAuthorizationPermitting someone to perform a task
for which they are not authorised.
TABLE 3: Threat Categories of LINDDUN
Threats Properties
Linkability Unlinkability
Identifiability Anonymity & pseudonymity
Non-repudiation Plausible deniability
Detectability Undectecbility & unobservability
Disclosure of information Confidentiality
Content unawareness Content awareness
Policy and content non-
compliancePolicy and content compliance
issue of modelling with the STRIDE is that as the system’s
complexity grows, so does the number of threats. Another
drawback of STRIDE is that it cannot guarantee to model
the system’s data privacy threats [31].
2.2.2 LINDDUN
LINDDUN stands for Linkability, Identifiability, Non-
Repudiation, Detectability, Disclosure of information, Un-
awareness, and Non-Compliance. Linkability allows the
attacker to connect two or more Items of Interest (IoIs) to
establish a link to a specific system. The term ”identifia-
bility” means that the attacker will be able to locate the
object of interest. Non-repudiation is another threat in which
an adversary attempts to attack a target, but difficult-to-
counter evidence. Detectability refers to whether an enemy
can identify a target of interest. Furthermore, information
disclosure is a security risk that exposes information that
should not be exposed [32].
Moreover, Unawareness is a threat that occurs when
a user does not know the effects of sharing information.
The non-compliance threat shows that the system is not
compliant with the regulations and legislation. Table 3 il-
lustrates the threat categories of LINDDUN. Furthermore,
LINDDUN uses the iterative process to discover dangers in
a system and then build threat trees [33]–[35]. The strong
point of LINDDUN is that it has rich privacy documenta-
tion. On the other hand, it is a lengthy procedure.Another deficiency of LINDDUN is that it is based
on some pre-defined assumptions and lacks flexibility in
complex scenarios where different components interplay
with each other. The assumptions are defined in the LIND-
DUN tutorial [33] as ”direct or indirect choices to trust
the system components (i.e., data store or data flow) to
behave as expected”. The LINDDUN threat template (which
is included in the supporting materials) allows assumptions
to be entered in the ’Remarks’ section. However, the study
[7] found that most of the assumptions are based on the DFD
notation’s limitation of expressiveness. Some assumptions
directly refer to concepts such as trust and attacker capabili-
ties that are not typically modelled in a system architecture,
which raises the question of whether these aspects should
be modelled directly as a part of the system [7].
2.2.3 PASTA
Process for Attack Simulation and Threat Analysis (PASTA)
is a risk-centric technique that consists of seven stages [36].
It has several functions which are performed at various
phases. Stage 1, defines the objectives; stage 2, defines
the technical purpose; stage 3, implements the application
decomposition; stage 4, conducts threat analysis; stage 5,
conducts vulnerability and weaknesses analysis; stage 6,
conducts attack modelling; and stage 7 conducts risk and
impact analysis [23], [37]. This technique can be used to
meet both business and technical goals [38]. PASTA has
rich documentation to assist with its laborious and extensive
process [39]. However, this technique is insufficient to deal
with data privacy threats.
2.2.4 Persona non-Grata
The Persona Non-Grata (PnG) modelling approach focuses
on attackers, their motivations, and their ability to attack a
system. It allows the threat modellers to identify the threats
from the counter side. The technical experts try to identify
vulnerabilities that are caused by the potential adversary
[40]. This technique [41] identifies misuse cases with a
target, possible attack scenarios, and adversarial personas
[42].
Furthermore, This technique is simple to implement, yet
it is underutilized in research. It has a low rate of false
positives and a good level of consistency, although it may
not be able to detect all threat types [41]. This technique can
be used with an agile approach that includes personas.
2.2.5 Security Cards
This is an informal technique based on brainstorming for
identifying novel and difficult attacks. The analysts utilize