5
Fig. 2: Characteristics of Autonomous Systems [57]
the procedure is. The term ’mitigation’ refers to whether
the procedure includes any mitigation strategies. The term
’consistent results’ refers to whether or not a technique
provides consistent results when repeated. The ’Easy to
use/learn’ term represents how easily these techniques are
adopted. The term ’automation’ shows the ability of the
technique to be examined in an automated way. Finally, the
term ’tool’ shows its integration with Software Development
Life Cycle (SDLC).
2.3 Autonomous Systems and Characteristics
A machine or a system is considered to be autonomous
when it is capable of thinking, contemplating, speculating,
and making judgments without human involvement [56].
Figure 2 [57], illustrates the characteristics of an autonomous
system (AS). These characteristics are divided into mi-
nor and major characteristics. The minor characteristics
include self-configuring, self-healing, self-optimizing, and
self-protecting (termed as CHOP); and the major charac-
teristics include open, anticipatory, context-aware, and self-
aware.
The relationship between ISO 9126 quality parameters
and AS features [58], [59] is depicted in Table 5. Functional-
ity, Reliability, Usability, Efficiency, and Maintainability are
examples of quality factors. The term ’Functionality’ refers
to software that can meet the needs of its users. It also
has the security features of appropriateness, accuracy, and
interoperability [60], [61]. The term ’Reliability’ refers to a
system’s ability to adapt to changes in the environment, cor-
rect problems, and improve its own performance. Moreover,
’Usability’ refers to how easily a user can communicate with
a system. Understandability, learnability, attractiveness, and
operability are all sub-factors of Usability. The ’Efficiency’
is measured in the context of time and resources; i.e., the
extent to which the system can make use of its resources.
Furthermore, the capacity to facilitate ease of maintenance
is referred to as ’Maintainability’. The sub-factors of main-
tainability are analysability, testability, changeability, and
scalability. The ability of software to adapt to and transfer
to any environment is referred to as ’Portability’. Portability
[61] has sub-characteristics such as adaptability, instability,
replicability, and coexistence.
The characteristics of AS highly affect the privacy preser-
vation in autonomous systems [62]. For example, the char-
acteristics of AS such as being open and transparent are
important factors for its users since it fosters confidencein the system by giving them an easy way to comprehend
what the system is doing and why. Moreover, transparency
is crucial for AS safety certification because it makes the
system’s procedures available for independent verification
against safety requirements. If accidents occur, an AS (i.e.,
Autonomous Car) must be open to investigators and be
able to pinpoint the internal procedure that caused the
accident. Thus, failing to be transparent would lead to an
untrustworthy AS, requiring the threat modelling technique
to ensure how the AS would respond to the external adverse
environment and identify the emergence of threats.
Figure 3 shows the architecture of the Autonomous
System (AS). The AS has five main components [63]: au-
tonomic manager, knowledge source, touch-point, manual
manager, and enterprise service bus. These components
work together to manage the system itself. The autonomic
manager uses the control loop which is made up of four
functions known as MAPE (Monitor, Analyze, Plan and Ex-
ecute). It controls both hardware and software components.
Autonomic Manager consists of two elements i.e., managed
element and the autonomic element. The managed element
represents the entire system that has sensors and effectors.
Sensors collect the information of current states and store
it in a knowledge base and effectors help the autonomic
manager to trigger actions over the managed elements.
The flow of data in Figure 3, illustrates how the man-
aged element collects the information through sensors and
transfer it to the control unit to decide on and dictate
appropriate actions to the effectors. All components work
together to perform tasks by transforming knowledge. The
knowledge component contains knowledge of any type of
data that is used by the autonomic manager for perform-
ing management functions. The knowledge can be in the
form of information on policies, requests or changes in
plans. Moreover, the touch-point identifies the current state
of the managed element and performs some management
operations. The manual managers allow IT professionals
to perform management operations. Whereas the enterprise
service bus enables the connection between all the building
blocks of a system through which they can communicate
with each other.
Fig. 3: Architecture of Autonomous System