20
TABLE 15: Suggested solutions for unsolved challenges for Compliance requirements of ACS
Unsolved challenges for modelling
GDPR-compliance for ACSSuggested solutions
Unable to figure out unlawful/unfair/non-transparent
data collection and processing1. RSU, TA, and other service providers should be transparent, fair, and non-discriminatory to offer
services to the ACS.
2. The mechanism to check whether implementation of a consent manager existed in ACS [244].
3. Consent verification framework for ACS may be implemented [245].
Unable to figure out how data is processed (for what
purpose) in ACS (fail to check Purpose Limitation
compliance)The mechanism to check Purpose Limitation (Article 5(1)(b), Article 89(1)) compliance in ACS [244].
Unable to figure out whether collected data is ade-
quate, relevant and limited to the specific purposes (fail
to check Data Minimization compliance)A framework to check that not collecting and storing too much AC’s users information with respect
to purpose of processing.
[246].
Unable to figure out whether collected data is stored
for longer period needed or deleted (fail to check
Storage Limitation compliance)1. The technique to assure that the data should only be retained until the purpose of processing is
fulfilled.
2. Ensure the secure and required data storage and management by employing EDR/AD solution
which is a regulatory prerequisite for deployment of ACS [247].
Inability of securing confidential data and providing
integrity in ACS1. Employing the integrity and confidentiality compliance requirements in a threat modelling
technique.
2. Preservation of privacy/personal data of AC(i.e., vehicle identity, location, speed, driving behavior
etc.) and its users (i.e., driver/owner and passenger).
3. Integrity and Confidentiality should be implemented by employing authorization techniques (i.e.,
pseudonymization) [248].
Unable to figure out cross-border data transfer in au-
tonomous industry (fail to check International Data
Transfer requirement)1. Integrating the compliance requirements of International data Transfer in a modelling technique
for ACS.
2. Adopting the intelligent transport system (ITS)Dir 2010/40/UE with delegated regulations in
modelling approach.
3. A framework for implementing the protection of personal data in electronic communications
(privacy and electronic communication directives 2002/58/EC) for ACS [244].
Unable to incorporate data subject rights in ACS in-
dustry (fail to check an ACS implement DS rights as
required)1. Incorporating the data subject (i.e., owner/driver and passenger) rights (Art. 12-23) for ACS for
preserving the privacy of its personal data and ensuring road safety [182].
2. A modelling approach with Rights to explanation and rights to reparation [243] may be included
in the list of other DS rights of GDPR.
6.2 Future Research Directions
To preserve data privacy and prevent personal data from
data misuse and data abuse effectively, a data privacy mod-
elling technique should take the GDPR-compliance into con-
sideration rather than focus only on modelling conventional
privacy threats. To develop such a technique, the GDPR
principles and requirements are leveraged as the baseline
and incorporated into the technique knowledge-based. This
is based on the analysis and results of extensive empirical
studies on the GDPR. For instance, an extensive knowledge-
base of the first GDPR principle (i.e., Lawfulness, Fairness,
and Transparency) should be included in the knowledge-
base as a part of a non-compliance threat tree catalogue with
the associated threat description so that the analyst of data
privacy and non-compliance threats are easily traced and
examined. This enables the compliance verification and
enforcement of the GDPR. For example, in ACS, the DS and
DP should take consent from ACS end-users for process-
ing their personal data [244]. Furthermore, communication
networks, RSUs, TAs and other service providers should
be operated in a transparent, fair, and non-discriminatory
manner offering their services to any AC. Therefore, a novel
modelling technique should develop a model for inspecting
a legal basis for processing data, along with mechanisms for
justifying transparency and fairness [244], [253].
Another important research direction to develop a
novel modelling technique for data privacy and GDPR-
compliance is to re-design the system model based on the
traditional Data Flow Diagram used in most of the existing
techniques like STRIDE and LINDDUN. In this respect,
the re-designed Data Flow Diagram does not necessarily
include all system components but the GDPR roles. In other
words, DS, DC and DP can be a part of the data flow
diagram besides some of the system components; and some
components could also play the role of a DS, DC or DP . Thiswill illustrate the movement and processing of personal data
in the system effectively and enable the modelling technique
to analyse any systems following the GDPR requirements.
REFERENCES
[1] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine learning: Trends,
perspectives, and prospects,” Science , vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 255–
260, 2015.
[2] N. B. Truong, K. Sun, G. M. Lee, and Y. Guo, “Gdpr-compliant
personal data management: A blockchain-based solution,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , vol. 15, pp. 1746–
1761, 2019.
[3] F. Doshi-Velez and B. Kim, “Towards a rigorous science of inter-
pretable machine learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608 , 2017.
[4] M. Ananny and K. Crawford, “Seeing without knowing: Limita-
tions of the transparency ideal and its application to algorithmic
accountability,” new media & society , vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 973–989,
2018.
[5] F. Harder, M. Bauer, and M. Park, “Interpretable and differen-
tially private predictions.” in AAAI , 2020, pp. 4083–4090.
[6] A. Adadi and M. Berrada, “Peeking inside the black-box: a survey
on explainable artificial intelligence (xai),” IEEE access , vol. 6, pp.
52 138–52 160, 2018.
[7] D. Van Landuyt and W. Joosen, “A descriptive study of assump-
tions made in linddun privacy threat elicitation,” in Proceedings of
the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing , 2020, pp.
1280–1287.
[8] P . Torr, “Demystifying the threat modeling process,” IEEE Secu-
rity & Privacy , vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 66–70, 2005.
[9] H. Michael and L. Steve, “The security development lifecycle:
Sdl: A process for developing demonstrably more secure soft-
ware,” 2006.
[10] K. A. Houser and W. G. Voss, “Gdpr: The end of google and
facebook or a new paradigm in data privacy,” Rich. JL & Tech. ,
vol. 25, p. 1, 2018.
[11] A. Tsohou, M. Magkos, H. Mouratidis, G. Chrysoloras, L. Piras,
M. Pavlidis, J. Debussche, M. Rotoloni, and B. G.-N. Crespo,
“Privacy, security, legal and technology acceptance requirements
for a gdpr compliance platform,” in Computer Security . Springer,
2019, pp. 204–223.
[12] S. Greengard, “Weighing the impact of gdpr,” Communications of
the ACM , vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 16–18, 2018.