1
Data Privacy Threat Modelling for Autonomous
Systems: A Survey from the GDPR’s
Perspective
Naila Azam∗, Lito Michala∗, Shuja Ansari†, Nguyen Binh Truong∗
∗School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ UK
†James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ UK
Email: {n.naila.1 }@research.gla.ac.uk
{AnnaLito.Michala, shuja.ansari, nguyen.truong }@glasgow.ac.uk
Abstract —Artificial Intelligence-based applications have been increasingly deployed in every field of life including smart homes, smart
cities, healthcare services, and autonomous systems where personal data is collected across heterogeneous sources and processed
using ”black-box” algorithms in opaque centralised servers. As a consequence, preserving the data privacy and security of these
applications is of utmost importance. In this respect, a modelling technique for identifying potential data privacy threats and specifying
countermeasures to mitigate the related vulnerabilities in such AI-based systems plays a significant role in preserving and securing
personal data. Various threat modelling techniques have been proposed such as STRIDE, LINDDUN, and PASTA but none of them is
sufficient to model the data privacy threats in autonomous systems. Furthermore, they are not designed to model compliance with data
protection legislation like the EU/UK General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which is fundamental to protecting data owners’
privacy as well as to preventing personal data from potential privacy-related attacks. In this article, we survey the existing threat
modelling techniques for data privacy threats in autonomous systems and then analyse such techniques from the viewpoint of GDPR
compliance. Following the analysis, We employ STRIDE and LINDDUN in autonomous cars, a specific use-case of autonomous
systems, to scrutinise the challenges and gaps of the existing techniques when modelling data privacy threats. Prospective research
directions for refining data privacy threats & GDPR-compliance modelling techniques for autonomous systems are also presented.
Index Terms —Autonomous Systems, Data Privacy, General Data Protection Regulation, GDPR, Threat Modelling Technique
✦
1 I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, data-driven applications are increasingly
being deployed in all aspects of life including smart homes,
smart cities, healthcare, medical services, and autonomous
systems (AS) [1]. In such applications, Artificial Intelligence
(AI) incorporating various algorithms is profoundly em-
ployed, where personal data is collected and aggregated
from heterogeneous sources before being processed using
”black-box” algorithms in opaque centralised servers [2]–
[5]. As a consequence, preserving the data privacy and
security of these applications is of paramount importance
[6]. In this respect, a modelling technique for detecting po-
tential threats and specifying countermeasures to mitigate
the vulnerability plays a significant role in securing personal
data from a variety of data breaches and privacy attacks.
Numerous threat modelling techniques have been pro-
posed in the literature such as STRIDE, LINDDUN, and
PASTA but none of them is sufficient to model the privacy
threats of AS. This is due to several reasons such as: (i) most
of the existing threat modelling techniques sorely focus on
software-based security, not data privacy threats, (ii) several
techniques such as LINDDUN are dedicated to modelling
data privacy threats but their approaches are based on
assumptions [7] (i.e., implementation assumptions [8] and
security assumptions [9]); as a consequence, such techniques
are limited to only pre-defined threats [7]–[9]; and (iii) thesetechniques are not adoptable to new privacy breaches and
new types of privacy attacks in complex systems consisting
of numerous components including humans, smartphones,
sensors, and other types of Internet of Things (IoT) devices
such as traffic cameras and road-side units (RSU). Modelling
the privacy threats for such systems requires a holistic pic-
ture of threat landscapes in which diversified components
are interplayed, rather than only considering some specified
and pre-defined system models. Furthermore, since May
2018, the new data protection legislation in EU member
states and the UK (i.e., the General Data Protection Regu-
lations (GDPR)1) has come into force. Modelling the GDPR-
compliance is more effective in ensuring users’ privacy
and protecting personal data, far beyond modelling data
privacy threats, which only focus on different types of
privacy-related attacks [10], [11]. This has called a critical
need for applications and/or services processing personal
data to have modelling tools for analysing data privacy
threats and analysing compliance with sophisticated GDPR
requirements [11]–[13].
In this paper, we conduct a survey on data privacy threat
modelling techniques with the focal point of whether such
techniques are applicable for modelling data privacy threats
in autonomous systems, particularly under the perspective
of complying with the GDPR. The main contributions of this
1. https://gdpr-info.eu/