10
and right to automated decision-making. The DC and DP
are responsible to provide access to various rights to DS and
fulfil the request of DS. Moreover, there are six lawful bases
of data processing, for example, consent, legitimate interest,
contract, legal obligation, vital interest, and public interest.
For processing the data, one of these six lawful bases of
processing is taken for ensuring compliance. For example,
the DC should take the consent of the DS before processing
its personal data; Without taking the consent of the DS, its
data can not be processed.
The system can only be considered compliant when the
principles identified by GDPR are adopted and the defined
duties of DP and DC are performed for preserving the
privacy of the individual. Furthermore, to comply with the
GDPR, organizations are required to implement appropri-
ate controls and statistical disclosure-limitation strategies.
And one of the challenges for the implementation is the
considerable conceptual gap between legal statements and
mathematical formulation around data privacy [158]. The
authors explained the concept of “ Predicate Singling Out ”
(PSO), which is a privacy attack type that endeavours to
capture the notion of singling out occurring in the GDPR.
If an attacker identifies a predicate p matching exactly one
row in xwith a probability substantially higher than a
statistical baseline, it isolates a dataset xusing the output of
a data-release mechanism M(x) . This further demonstrates
that PSO security implied differential privacy [159] which
is a mathematical concept with legal outcomes. The PSO
security of differential privacy and k-anonymity are investi-
gated in [160]. Furthermore, the study in [158] depicted that
differentiated privacy necessitates PSO security through a
relationship to statistical generalisation.
4.2 GDPR Principles and the reciprocity to data privacy
threats
GDPR is aimed to provide data protection and privacy
to individuals [142]. In today’s modern age, preserving
the privacy of individuals is not trivial. This sub-section
discusses the reciprocity between GDPR principles and data
privacy and security by scrutinizing the underlying threats
which may occur in case of non-compliance. The relation-
ship between non-complying with the GDPR principles and
potential privacy threats will be thoroughly discussed.
4.2.1 Lawfulness, Fairness and Transparency
The first principle of GDPR is Lawfulness/Fairness & Trans-
parency. The lawful basis for processing personal data must
be considered for the processing to be lawful. There are six
lawful bases (i.e., consent, legitimate interest, contract, legal
obligation, vital interest, and public interest). If none of the
legal bases applies, there will be a violation of this principle,
resulting in the unlawful processing of personal data.
Fairness is applied when the data is handled reasonably.
This covers how data is collected. The data controller vio-
lates the principle of fairness if they have misled someone
to collect their data.
According to the principle of transparency, Individuals
must know which data is obtained, for what purpose, for
whom, and for how long it will be kept. This information
should be written as clearly as possible in an easily under-
standable way.If the processing of data is unlawful, unfair, and non-
transparent, the processing of personal data would lead to
data abuse , and data exploitation . For example, it is noted that
Amazon processes the data of its users unlawfully without
informing the DS which is the transparency requirement
(i.e, the right to be informed). It was, therefore, recently
fined a large sum of money (i.e. $877 million) due to the
way it collects and shares personal data via cookie consent
on its website5. Furthermore, the violation of principles
of lawfulness, fairness & transparency would lead to pri-
vacy leakage with various privacy attacks (i.e., property
inference, reconstruction, membership inference, and model
extraction etc.) [161].
4.2.2 Purpose Limitation
This principle state that the processing of the data should
be limited to legitimate, explicit, and specific ‘purposes’
clearly defined in the legal basis (e.g., consent) before the
data collection. The processing of data should not be used
or transferred beyond the initial purposes for which it has
been collected or stored. Generally, processing personal data
for new purposes outside of the originally stated purposes is
considered unlawful; unless Data Controller performs and
passes a ‘Compatibility’ test for a new purpose to ensure
that the data is still processed on the same ‘lawful basis.
There are also exceptions including further processing based
on EU or member state law and further processing for
public interest purposes. Purpose limitation is designed to
ensure the confidentiality, reliability, and accuracy of per-
sonal data being collected and processed [162]. Preserving
purpose limitation is of interest to Data Subject, ensuring
the confidentiality of personal data, as well as safeguarding
of the balance of powers between Data Subjects and Data
Controllers6.
Violation of this purpose limitation principle neglects
personal privacy and might lead to various data privacy
threats including data misuse ,data exploitation , and data
breaches . The fundamental purpose of this principle is to
protect Data Subject’s privacy from data misuse and data
exploitation. For instance, Google has been found to un-
lawfully feed personal data to advertisers in violation of
the purpose limitation principles and unclear data consent
policies by the French data regulator7. This could go further
than just a targeted advertisement, and the damage could be
tremendous. Personal data could be processed for numerous
illegitimate purposes including (e.g., by using inference
attacks [163], [164]) to political campaigns8.
4.2.3 Data Minimization
According to the principle of Data Minimization, only the
required detail of personal data that is necessary for a spe-
cific purpose should be processed by the data controller. The
data breaches would result in a violation of the data mini-
mization principle. As H&M was fined (i.e., $41.4 million)
5. https://www.tessian.com/blog/biggest-gdpr-fines-2020/
6. https://migrationpolicycentre.eu/point-no-return-migration-
and-crime/
7. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-46944696
8. https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/cmselect/
cmcumeds/1791/179110.htm