Failing Loudly: An Empirical Study of Methods
for Detecting Dataset Shift
Stephan Rabanser∗
AWS AI Labs
rabans@amazon.comStephan G ¨unnemann
Technical University of Munich
guennemann@in.tum.deZachary C. Lipton
Carnegie Mellon University
zlipton@cmu.edu
Abstract
We might hope that when faced with unexpected inputs, well-designed software
systems would ﬁre off warnings. Machine learning (ML) systems, however, which
depend strongly on properties of their inputs (e.g. the i.i.d. assumption), tend to
fail silently. This paper explores the problem of building ML systems that fail
loudly, investigating methods for detecting dataset shift, identifying exemplars
that most typify the shift, and quantifying shift malignancy. We focus on several
datasets and various perturbations to both covariates and label distributions with
varying magnitudes and fractions of data affected. Interestingly, we show that
across the dataset shifts that we explore, a two-sample-testing-based approach,
using pre-trained classiﬁers for dimensionality reduction, performs best. More-
over, we demonstrate that domain-discriminating approaches tend to be helpful
for characterizing shifts qualitatively and determining if they are harmful.
1 Introduction
Software systems employing deep neural networks are now applied widely in industry, powering the
vision systems in social networks [47] and self-driving cars [5], providing assistance to radiologists
[24], underpinning recommendation engines used by online platforms [9, 12], enabling the best-
performing commercial speech recognition software [14, 21], and automating translation between
languages [50]. In each of these systems, predictive models are integrated into conventional human-
interacting software systems, leveraging their predictions to drive consequential decisions.
The reliable functioning of software depends crucially on tests. Many classic software bugs can be
caught when software is compiled, e.g. that a function receives input of the wrong type, while other
problems are detected only at run-time, triggering warnings or exceptions. In the worst case, if the
errors are never caught, software may behave incorrectly without alerting anyone to the problem.
Unfortunately, software systems based on machine learning are notoriously hard to test and maintain
[42]. Despite their power, modern machine learning models are brittle. Seemingly subtle changes
in the data distribution can destroy the performance of otherwise state-of-the-art classiﬁers, a phe-
nomenon exempliﬁed by adversarial examples [51, 57]. When decisions are made under uncertainty,
even shifts in the label distribution can signiﬁcantly compromise accuracy [29, 56]. Unfortunately,
in practice, ML pipelines rarely inspect incoming data for signs of distribution shift. Moreover, best
practices for detecting shift in high-dimensional real-world data have not yet been established2.
In this paper, we investigate methods for detecting and characterizing distribution shift, with the
hope of removing a critical stumbling block obstructing the safe and responsible deployment of
machine learning in high-stakes applications. Faced with distribution shift, our goals are three-fold:
∗Work done while a Visiting Research Scholar at Carnegie Mellon University.
2TensorFlow’s data validation tools compare only summary statistics of source vs target data:
https://tensorflow.org/tfx/data_validation/get_started#checking_data_skew_and_drift
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.