3 Shift Detection Techniques
Given labeled data {(x1,y1),...,(xn,yn)} ∼pand unlabeled data {x′
1,...,x′
m} ∼q, our task is
to determine whether p(x)equalsq(x′). Formally, H0:p(x) =q(x′)vsHA:p(x)/ne}ationslash=q(x′).
Chieﬂy, we explore the following design considerations: (i) what representation to run the test on;
(ii) which two-sample test to run; (iii) when the representation is multidimensional; whether to run
multivariate or multiple univariate two-sample tests ; and (iv) how to combine their results.
3.1 Dimensionality Reduction
We now introduce the multiple dimensionality reduction (DR) techniques that we compare vis-
a-vis their effectiveness in shift detection (in concert with two-sample testing). Note that absent
assumptions on the data, these mappings, which reduce the data dimensionality from DtoK(with
K≪D), are in general surjective, with many inputs mapping to the same output. Thus, it is trivial
to construct pathological cases where the distribution of inputs shifts while the distribution of low-
dimensional latent representations remains ﬁxed, yielding false negatives. However, we speculate
that in a non-adversarial setting, such shifts may be exceedingly unlikely. Thus our approach is (i)
empirically motivated; and (ii) not put forth as a defense against worst-case adversarial attacks.
No Reduction ( NoRed ): To justify the use of any DR technique, our default baseline is to run
tests on the original raw features.
Principal Components Analysis ( PCA ): Principal components analysis is a standard tool that
ﬁnds an optimal orthogonal transformation matrix Rsuch that points are linearly uncorrelated after
transformation. This transformation is learned in such a way that the ﬁrst principal component
accounts for as much of the variability in the dataset as possible, and that each succeeding principal
component captures as much of the remaining variance as possible subject to the constraint that
it be orthogonal to the preceding components. Formally, we wish to learn RgivenXunder the
mentioned constraints such that ˆX=XR yields a more compact data representation.
Sparse Random Projection ( SRP ): Since computing the optimal transformation might be expen-
sive in high dimensions, random projections are a popular DR technique which trade a controlled
amount of accuracy for faster processing times. Speciﬁcally, we make use of sparse random pro-
jections, a more memory- and computationally-efﬁcient modiﬁcation of standard Gaussian random
projections. Formally, we generate a random projection matrix Rand use it to reduce the dimen-
sionality of a given data matrix X, such that ˆX=XR . The elements of Rare generated using the
following rule set [1, 27]:
Rij=

+/radicalbigv
Kwith probability1
2v
0 with probability 1−1
vwhere v=1√
D.
−/radicalbigv
Kwith probability1
2v(1)
Autoencoders ( TAE andUAE ): We compare the above-mentioned linear models to non-linear
reduced-dimension representations using both trained (TAE) and untrained autoencoders (UAE).
Formally, an autoencoder consists of an encoder function φ:X → H and a decoder function
ψ:H → X where the latent space Hhas lower dimensionality than the input space X. As part of
the training process, both the encoding function φand the decoding function ψare learned jointly
to reduce the reconstruction loss: φ,ψ= argminφ,ψ/bardblX−(ψ◦φ)X/bardbl2.
Label Classiﬁers ( BBSDs⊳and BBSDh⊲): Motivated by recent results achieved by black box
shift detection (BBSD) [29], we also propose to use the outputs of a (deep network) label classiﬁer
trained on source data as our dimensionality-reduced representation. We explore variants using
either the softmax outputs (BBSDs) or the hard-thresholded predictions (BBSDh) for subsequent
two-sample testing. Since both variants provide differently sized output (with BBSDs providing an
entire softmax vector and BBSDh providing a one-dimensional class prediction), different statistical
tests are carried out on these representations.
Domain Classiﬁer ( Classif×): Here, we attempt to detect shift by explicitly training a domain
classiﬁer to discriminate between data from source and target domains. To this end, we partition
both the source data and target data into two halves, using the ﬁrst to train a domain classiﬁer to
distinguish source (class 0) from target (class 1) data. We then apply this model to the second
3