Binomial Testing : For the domain classiﬁer, we simply compare its accuracy (acc) on held-out
data to random chance via a binomial test. Formally, we set up a testing problem H0:acc= 0.5
vsHA:acc/ne}ationslash= 0.5. Under the null hypothesis, the accuracy of the classiﬁer follows a binomial
distribution: acc ∼Bin(Nhold,0.5), whereNholdcorresponds to the number of held-out samples.
3.3 Obtaining Most Anomalous Samples
As our detection framework does not detect outliers but rather aims at capturing top-level shift
dynamics, it is not possible for us to decide whether any given sample is in- or out-of-distribution.
However, we can still provide an indication of what typical samples from the shifted distribution look
like by harnessing domain assignments from the domain classiﬁer. Speciﬁcally, we can identify
the exemplars which the classiﬁer was most conﬁdent in assigning to the target domain. Since
the domain classiﬁer assigns class-assignment conﬁdence scores to each incoming sample via the
softmax-layer at its output, it is easy to create a ranking of samples that are most conﬁdently believed
to come from the target domain (or, alternatively, from the source domain). Hence, whenever the
binomial test signals a statistically signiﬁcant accuracy deviation from chance, we can use use the
domain classiﬁer to obtain the most anomalous samples and present them to the user.
In contrast to the domain classiﬁer, the other shift detectors do not base their shift detection potential
on explicitly deciding which domain a single sample belongs to, instead comparing entire distribu-
tions against each other. While we did explore initial ideas on identifying samples which if removed
would lead to a large increase in the overall p-value, the results we obtained were unremarkable.
3.4 Determining the Malignancy of a Shift
Theoretically, absent further assumptions, distribution shifts can cause arbitrarily severe degradation
in performance. However, in practice distributions shift constantly, and often these changes are
benign. Practitioners should therefore be interested in distinguishing malignant shifts that damage
predictive performance from benign shifts that negligibly impact performance. Although prediction
quality can be assessed easily on source data on which the black-box model fwas trained, we are
not able compute the target error directly without labels.
We therefore explore a heuristic method for approximating the target performance by making use
of the domain classiﬁer’s class assignments as follows: Given access to a labeling function that can
correctly label samples, we can feed in those examples predicted by the domain classiﬁer as likely
to come from the target domain. We can then compare these (true) labels to the labels returned by
the black box model fby feeding it the same anomalous samples. If our model is inaccurate on
these examples (where the exact threshold can be user-speciﬁed to account for varying sensitivities
to accuracy drops), then we ought to be concerned that the shift is malignant. Put simply, we sug-
gest evaluating the accuracy of our models on precisely those examples which are most conﬁdently
assigned to the target domain.
4 Experiments
Our main experiments were carried out on the MNIST ( Ntr= 50000 ;Nval= 10000 ;Nte= 10000 ;
D= 28×28×1;C= 10 classes) [25] and CIFAR-10 ( Ntr= 40000 ;Nval= 10000 ;Nte=
10000 ;D= 32×32×3;C= 10 classes) [23] image datasets. For the autoencoder (UAE &
TAE) experiments, we employ a convolutional architecture with 3convolutional layers and 1fully-
connected layer. For both the label and the domain classiﬁer we use a ResNet-18 [17]. We train
all networks (TAE, BBSDs, BBSDh, Classif) using stochastic gradient descent with momentum in
batches of 128examples over 200epochs with early stopping.
For PCA, SRP, UAE, and TAE, we reduce dimensionality to K= 32 latent dimensions, which for
PCA explains roughly 80% of the variance in the CIFAR-10 dataset. The label classiﬁer BBSDs
reduces dimensionality to the number of classes C. Both the hard label classiﬁer BBSDh and the
domain classiﬁer Classif reduce dimensionality to a one-dimensional class prediction, where BBSDh
predicts label assignments and Classif predicts domain assignments.
To challenge our detection methods, we simulate a variety of shifts, affecting both the covariates
and the label proportions. For all shifts, we evaluate the various methods’ abilities to detect shift at
5