Revisiting Heterophily For Graph Neural Networks
Sitao Luan1,2, Chenqing Hua1,2, Qincheng Lu1, Jiaqi Zhu1, Mingde Zhao1,2, Shuyuan Zhang1,2,
Xiao-Wen Chang1, Doina Precup1,2,3
{sitao.luan@mail, chenqing.hua@mail, qincheng.lu@mail, jiaqi.zhu@mail, mingde.zhao@mail,
shuyuan.zhang@mail, chang@cs, dprecup@cs}.mcgill.ca
1McGill University;2Mila;3DeepMind
Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) extend basic Neural Networks (NNs) by using
graph structures based on the relational inductive bias (homophily assumption).
While GNNs have been commonly believed to outperform NNs in real-world tasks,
recent work has identiﬁed a non-trivial set of datasets where their performance
compared to NNs is not satisfactory. Heterophily has been considered as the main
cause of this empirical observation and numerous works have been put forward to
address it. In this paper, we ﬁrst revisit the widely used homophily metrics and
point out that their consideration of only graph-label consistency is a shortcoming.
Then, we study heterophily from the perspective of post-aggregation node similarity
and deﬁne new homophily metrics, which are veriﬁed to be advantageous compared
to existing ones. Based on this investigation, we prove that some harmful cases of
heterophily can be effectively addressed by local diversiﬁcation operation. Then,
we propose the Adaptive Channel Mixing (ACM), a framework to adaptively
exploit aggregation, diversiﬁcation and identity channels node-wisely to extract
richer localized information for diverse node heterophily situations. ACM is more
powerful than the commonly used uni-channel framework for node classiﬁcation
tasks on heterophilic graphs and is easy to be implemented in baseline GNN layers.
When evaluated on 10benchmark node classiﬁcation tasks, ACM-augmented
baselines consistently achieve signiﬁcant performance gain, exceeding state-of-the-
art GNNs on most tasks without incurring signiﬁcant computational burden. Code:
https://github .com/SitaoLuan/ACM-GNN
1 Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (NNs) [ 22] have revolutionized many machine learning areas, including
image recognition [ 21], speech recognition [ 13] and natural language processing [ 2], due to their
effectiveness in learning latent representations from Euclidean data. Recent research has shifted focus
on non-Euclidean data [ 6],e.g., relational data or graphs. Combining graph signal processing and
convolutional neural networks [ 23], numerous Graph Neural Network (GNN) architectures have been
proposed [ 39,10,15,41,19,30], which empirically outperform traditional NNs on graph-based
machine learning tasks such as node classiﬁcation, graph classiﬁcation, link prediction and graph
generation, etc.GNNs are built on the homophily assumption [ 35]: connected nodes tend to share
similar attributes with each other [ 14], which offers additional information besides node features.
This relational inductive bias [ 3] is believed to be a key factor leading to GNNs’ superior performance
over NNs’ in many tasks.
However, growing empirical evidence suggests that GNNs are not always advantageous compared to
traditional NNs. In some cases, even simple Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) can outperform GNNs
by a large margin on relational data [ 46,29,32,8]. An important reason for this is believed to be the
heterophily problem: the homophily assumption does not always hold, so connected nodes may in
fact have different attributes. Heterophily has received lots of attention recently and an increasing
number of models have been put forward to address this problem [ 46,29,32,8,45,44,33,16,24]. In
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).