(a)"10.16 % ⇠13.44 %
(b)"20.25 % ⇠27.50 %
(c)"11.64 % ⇠13.45 %
(d)"2.04 % ⇠11.90 %
(e)"4.31 % ⇠6.35 %
(f)"4.06 % ⇠25.22 %
Figure 6: Comparison of baseline GNNs (red), ACM-GNNs (green), ACMII-GNNs (blue) with SOTA
(magenta line) models on 6selected datasets. The black lines indicate the standard deviation. The
symbol “ "” shows the range of performance improvement (%) of ACM-GNNs and ACMII-GNNs
over baseline GNNs. See Appendix I for a detailed discussion of the relation between HM
aggand GNN
performance.
To visualize the performance, in Fig. 6, we plot the bar charts of the test accuracy of SOTA models,
three selected baselines (GCN, snowball-2, snowball-3), their ACM(II) augmented models, ACM(II)-
GCN+ and ACM(II)-GCN++ on the 6most commonly used benchmark heterophily datasets (See
Table 2 in Appendix A.1 for the full results, comparison and ranking). From Fig. 6, we can see that
(1) after being combined with the ACM or ACMII framework, the performance of the three baseline
models is signiﬁcantly boosted, by 2.04% ⇠27.50% on all the 6 tasks. The ACM and ACMII in
fact achieve SOTA performance. (2) On Cornell, Wisconsin, Texas, Chameleon andSquirrel , the
augmented baseline models signiﬁcantly outperform the current SOTA models . Overall, these
results suggest that the proposed approach can help GNNs to generalize better on node classiﬁcation
tasks on heterophilic graphs, without adding too much computational cost.
7 Conclusions and Limitations
We have presented an analysis of existing homophily metrics and proposed new metrics which are
more informative in terms of correlating with GNN performance. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
work analyzing heterophily from the perspective of post-aggregation node similarity. The similarity
matrix and the new metrics we deﬁned mainly capture linear feature-independent relationships of each
node. This might be insufﬁcient when nonlinearity and feature-dependent information is important
for classiﬁcation. In the future, it would be useful to investigate if a similarity matrix could be deﬁned
which is capable of capturing nonlinear and feature-dependent relations between aggregated node.
We have also proposed a multi-channel mixing mechanism which leverages the intuitions gained in
the ﬁrst part of the paper and can be combined with different GNN architectures, enabling adaptive
ﬁltering (high-pass, low-pass or identity) at different nodes. Empirically, this approach shows very
promising results, improving the performance of the base GNNs with which it is combined and
achieving SOTA results at the cost of a reasonable increase in computation time. As discussed in
Sec. 4.2, however, the ﬁlterbank method cannot properly handle all cases of harmful heterophily, and
alternative ideas should be explored as well in the future.
8 Acknowledge
The authors would like to give very special thanks to William L. Hamilton for valuable discussion
and advice. The project was partially supported by DeepMind and NSERC.
10