GPRGNN). BernNet [ 16] designs a scheme to learn arbitrary graph spectral ﬁlters with Bernstein
polynomial to address heterophily. [ 33] points out that homophily is not necessary for GNNs and
characterizes conditions that GNNs can perform well on heterophilic graphs.
6 Empirical Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the proposed ACM and ACMII framework on real-world datasets
(see Appendix D.2 for a performance comparison with basline models on synthetic datasets). We
ﬁrst conduct ablation studies in Sec. 6.1 to validate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of different
components of ACM and ACMII. Then, we compare with state-of-the-art (SOTA) models in Sec. 6.2.
The hyperparameter searching range and computing resources are described in Appendix C.
(a) Input Feature
(b) GCN Output
(c) ACM-GCN Output
(d) Low-pass Channel
(e) High-pass Channel
(f) Identity Channel
(g) Learned Weights ↵
Figure 5: t-SNE visualization of the output layer of ACM-GCN and GCN trained on Squirrel
6.1 Ablation Study & Efﬁciency
We will now investigate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of adding HP, identity channels and the
adaptive mixing mechanism in the proposed framework by performing an ablation study. Speciﬁcally,
we apply the components of ACM to SGC-1 [ 42]12and the components of ACM and ACMII to
GCN [ 19] separately. We run 10 times on each of the 9 benchmark datatsets, Cornell ,Wisconsin ,
Texas ,Film ,Chameleon ,Squirrel ,Cora ,Citeseer andPubmed used in [ 37,36], with the same
60%/20%/20% random splits for train/validation/test used in [ 8] and report the average test accuracy
as well as the standard deviation. We also record the average running time per epoch (in milliseconds)
to compare the computational efﬁciency. We set the temperature Tin equation 4.2 to be 3, which is
the number of channels.
The results in Table 1 show that on most datasets, the additional HP and identity channels are helpful,
even for strong homophily datasets such as Cora, CiteSeer and PubMed . The adaptive mixing
mechanism also has an advantage over directly adding the three channels together. This illustrates
the necessity of learning to customize the channel usage adaptively for different nodes. The t-SNE
visualization in Figure 5 demonstrates that the high-pass channel(e) and identity channel(f) can
extract meaningful patterns, which the low-pass channel(d) is not able to capture. The output of ACM-
12We only test ACM-SGC-1 because SGC-1 does not contain any non-linearity which makes ACM-SGC-1
and ACMII-SGC-1 exactly the same.
8