Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 4 of 27
 Sensing capabilities : the main technology that promotes developments in various IoT domains is
the wireless sensor network (WSN). WSN is typically a network of sensors that sense information
about the surroundings and send this information over a communication medium for processing.
Sensors are the building blocks of the IoT that enable collecting all real-time and contextual
information about the surroundings which allow the decision-makers to make accurate and
precise decisions on time.
 Connectivity : this is among the key characteristics of the IoT system that enables billions of
devices and objects to be accessible remotely. Additionally, it allows various objects in our
environment to be connected and communicate with each other over the Internet, which allows
creating new applications and services.
 Large scale network : as stated earlier, the IoT system includes billions of devices that are expected
to reach 75 billion devices by the end of 2025 [ 9]. This large number of devices and objects create a
large-scale network that cannot be managed by traditional or classical methods.
 Dynamic system : the IoT is a dynamic system in nature. It can connect various objects in di erent
locations. In addition, with sensors that collect various real-time and contextual information about
surroundings, IoT devices can be dynamically adapted to changing circumstance and conditions.
 Intelligence capabilities : with advanced hardware, software and sensing capabilities that enable
collecting a vast volume of contextual data, IoT devices can make smart decisions in several
conditions and cooperate intelligently with other collaborating objects.
 Big data : there are billions of IoT devices, which creates a vast volume of data that cannot be
analysed using traditional data analytics methods. This refers to the term “big data”. The IoT is
among the richest sources of big data that creates a vast volume of data that needs innovative
analytics methods to have the full beneﬁts of IoT data.
 Unique identity : the IoT system enables various objects to connect over the Internet. Having the
ability to connect to the Internet can be guaranteed only if each device can have a unique identity
or identiﬁer such as the IP address. For the IoT system, manufactures give a unique identiﬁer to
each device that allows it to update devices to appropriate platforms especially in case there was a
security breach. Therefore, although IoT devices are in billions, each device has a unique identity.
 Autonomous decision : there is many sensors in the IoT system, which enable collecting huge
contextual and real-time data about the surrounding environment. These dynamic data allow IoT
devices to make context-aware and autonomous decisions.
 Heterogeneity : the IoT system allows di erent devices and objects to be addressable and
communicate with each other over the Internet. These devices come with heterogeneous
characteristics including communication protocols, operating systems, platforms, and other
software and hardware components. Despite these heterogeneous characteristics, the IoT system
allows all these devices to communicate with each other e ciently and e ectively.
2.2. Centralized IoT Architecture
Managing a set of nodes to work together to formulate a system needs to have a certain architecture
design. Among the popular designs is the centralized architecture, which is built using a centralized
server to control and manage a set of nodes. These nodes vary from an advanced computer system,
laptop, mobile phone, etc., which are capable of performing various types of operations. The centralized
server acts as the manager that deals with all requests coming from various nodes and manages task
scheduling and allocation among nodes in the network [ 11]. A simple form of a centralized architecture
is shown in Figure 2, where all nodes in the network are connected through a central server.