Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 22 of 27
such resource-constrained IoT devices with blockchain technology will face several issues. For instance,
consensus mechanisms need exhaustive processing power and consume intensive energy. Hence,
consensus mechanisms with enormous processing and power demands cannot operate with IoT
devices with limited resources. Moreover, as discussed earlier, the storage capacity is among the
major issues of blockchain, as the total size of Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains are around 150 and
400 gigabytes respectively. However, IoT devices generate data in Zettabytes. Therefore, blockchain is
not suitable for storing IoT data [3,91].
Possible solutions to this issue may be integrating cloud computing with IoT and blockchain to
resolve issues of the resource constraints of IoT objects [ 92]. The main issue will be how to integrate
centralized cloud computing with blockchain to provide e cient resultant technology.
8. Conclusions
With several challenges presented in the centralized IoT architecture, moving the IoT into one
of the distributed ledger technologies may be the correct choice. Among the common types of
distributed ledger technologies is the blockchain. It utilizes a decentralized approach which delivers
better e ciency and eliminates the single point of failure. Moreover, blockchain delivers better
security and data integrity through tamper-proof and immutability features. The integration of
blockchain with IoT can resolve issues of the IoT centralized system and provides a good way for future
developments. Therefore, the objective of this paper was to provide a comprehensive discussion of
integrating the IoT system with blockchain technology. After presenting the basis of IoT and blockchain,
the paper presented a comprehensive discussion of integrating IoT with blockchain by highlighting
how blockchain resolved issues of IoT. Besides, recent studies presenting the convergence of IoT with
blockchain are also presented. Then, blockchain as a service for the IoT is discussed to show how
various features of blockchain technology can be implemented as a service for various IoT applications.
This was followed by discussing the impact of integrating AI on both IoT and blockchain. To this end,
future research directions of IoT with blockchain were discussed.
Author Contributions: H.F.A. designed and developed the structure and writing of the manuscript. M.A.A. and
A.G.A. have been involved in drafting the manuscript, while G.W. contributed to the abstract part and reviewed
the completed manuscript before submission. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Atlam, H.F.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B. Internet of Things: State-of-the-art, Challenges, Applications, and Open
Issues. Int. J. Intell. Comput. Res. 2018 ,9, 928–938. [CrossRef]
2. Atlam, H.F.; Alenezi, A.; Alassaﬁ, M.O.; Alshdadi, A.A.; Wills, G.B. Security, Cybercrime and Digital
Forensics for IoT. In Greedoids ; Springer Science and Business Media LLC: Berlin, Germany, 2019; Volume 174,
pp. 551–577.
3. Atlam, H.F.; Alenezi, A.; Alassaﬁ, M.O.; Wills, G.B. Blockchain with Internet of Things: Beneﬁts, Challenges,
and Future Directions. Int. J. Intell. Syst. Appl. 2018 ,10, 40–48. [CrossRef]
4. Fernandez-Carames, T.M.; Fraga-Lamas, P . A Review on the Use of Blockchain for the Internet of Things.
IEEE Access 2018 ,6, 32979–33001. [CrossRef]
5. Atlam, H.F.; Wills, G.B. Intersections between IoT and distributed ledger. In Advances in Organometallic
Chemistry Volume 60 ; Elsevier BV: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2019; pp. 73–113.
6. Karaﬁloski, E.; Mishev, A. Blockchain solutions for big data challenges: A literature review. In Proceedings
of the IEEE EUROCON 2017—17th International Conference on Smart Technologies, Ohrid, Macedonia,
6–8 July 2017; pp. 763–768. [CrossRef]
7. Reyna, A.; Mart ín, C.; Chen, J.; Soler, E.; D íaz, M. On blockchain and its integration with IoT. Challenges and
opportunities. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2018 ,88, 173–190. [CrossRef]