Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 20 of 27
Analysing these vast amounts of data with traditional analytics methods will not be viable, instead,
adopting various AI and machine learning methods will have the ability to analyse and extract
meaningful information to proﬁt from the full beneﬁts of IoT data [ 83]. With the massive analytic
abilities of AI, numerous governments and organizations have started adopting AI methods as a way to
unlock the value of vast amounts of IoT data. Although the invention of fog /edge computing minimized
the response time that allows real-time-based IoT applications to grow signiﬁcantly, adopting AI
approaches will have the capability to provide better performance in a very short response time.
In addition, the integration of AI with IoT can improve security, not only by combat external threat but
also provide an e ective way to predict those threats.
On the other hand, integrating AI with blockchain can have a good e ect on both technologies.
For AI, blockchain can resolve several issues of AI, for example, transparency. AI is a block-box for
users that lack explainability. With the transparency of blockchain by sharing the ledger to all its
nodes and audit trail that provides a clear method for tracking data back to the machine decision
process, this will optimize the trustworthiness of data and AI. In addition, blockchain can improve AI
eectiveness to secure data sharing that allows having more data, which in turn increases training
data and produces better AI models. Moreover, implementing AI with smart contracts can decrease
risk scenarios, as smart contracts are programmed to perform speciﬁc actions when the conditions are
met [5].
For blockchain, AI can resolve some of the limitations of blockchain technology, for instance,
consensus mechanisms. Utilizing AI in PoW or PoS can allow nodes to validate the transactions
quickly and e ciently. Furthermore, AI can improve energy consumption in blockchain since the
mining process needs huge amounts of energy by adopting AI approaches which have demonstrated
eectiveness in improving energy consumption [ 84]. Moreover, adopting AI can resolve the scalability
issues of blockchain by adopting federated learning, as an example, that is able to provide a decentralized
learning system. In addition, although blockchain provides better security over existing technologies,
AI can provide an additional layer of security [84,85].
Although the combination of the three technologies of Blockchain, AI and IoT is still in the
development stage, there are numerous expectations that it could have a signiﬁcant e ect on both the
global economy and the way we live. Integrating these technologies will provide a new perspective on
our future and world. It will create a world where the data of our environment /world are collected
through IoT devices, and analysis and decisions are on our behalf by AI, before being stored and
time-stamped on blockchain as a permanent record that is communicated and shared on our behalf [ 85].
Therefore, there is a need for research to investigate the possible and best ways of integrating these
technologies to experience from their full beneﬁts.
7. Future Research Directions of IoT with Blockchain
Despite the integration of IoT with blockchain has several advantages, it also brings multiple
issues that need to be resolved to obtain the full beneﬁts of both technologies. This section provides a
discussion of future research directions of IoT with blockchain technology.
7.1. Security
The IoT system involves billions of heterogeneous IoT objects that are designed with little security
in the consideration of their manufactures. These devices with poor built-in security procedures are a
simple mark for various security attackers. Although incorporating IoT with blockchain technology
can improve the IoT security by utilizing encryption, immutability, tamper-proof and digital signature
features of blockchain technology, the security is still one of the challenges in implementing an e cient
and e ective IoT system with blockchain [86].
With the increasing adoption of IoT devices and applications, there is an increasing direction
towards expanding the use of wireless networks, especially in industrial domains. Although wireless
communication provides several advantages, it also su ers from several security vulnerabilities like