Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 21 of 27
replaying attacks, passive eavesdropping, and jamming [ 51]. Besides, due to the limitations of resources
in IoT devices, sophisticated and advanced encryption algorithms cannot be utilized in the IoT system.
Meanwhile, blockchain technology has its security weaknesses. For example, there are program defects
of smart contracts and decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) attack [ 73]. Therefore, there is a
need for more research to investigate security issues in IoT and blockchain.
7.2. Scalability
Among the key issues of integrating blockchain with IoT is the ability of the blockchain to scale
and work e ciently with a large-scale network like the IoT. The throughput of transactions per second
can be used to measure the scalability of blockchain against the number of IoT devices. Blockchain
platforms provide poor throughput. For example, Bitcoin can only process seven transactions per
second. Moreover, Ethereum can only process 20 transactions per second. In contrast, VISA can process
nearly 2000 transactions per second and PayPal has a throughput of 170 transactions per second [87].
Therefore, this processing speed cannot address the demands of the IoT which contains billions of
transactions. Moreover, several IoT applications are mainly working with real-time data, with limited
throughput of blockchain, so these applications will face complications in order work e ciently.
Although there are several suggested solutions to resolve the scalability issue of blockchain technology
such as building more scalable consensus algorithms and designing private blockchain for IoT, there is
a need for more research to discover an e cient solution to this issue [88].
7.3. Data Storage
Blockchain is not built to record vast volumes of data. In contrast, the IoT system is considered as
one of the sources of big data. The storage capacity is among the major issues of blockchain technology.
The size of the entire Bitcoin blockchain is around 150 gigabytes, also, the size of the entire Ethereum
Blockchain is around 400 gigabytes. Storing all blocks of the blockchain is required. Without having
all previous blocks, IoT devices cannot validate the transactions produced by other devices. Besides,
historical data are required to produce new transactions [ 89]. Hence, all data created by IoT devices,
which are in Zettabytes, need to be stored on the blockchain, which is not feasible.
In addition, the cost of storing data on the blockchain is very expensive. For instance, the cost
of storing one Gigabyte of data is about USD 200,000 in Ethereum [ 73]. This price is not practical for
various IoT applications and services. Indeed, the convergence of IoT with blockchain removes the
necessity for a centralized server to keep IoT data, however, data storage in the blockchain is very
dicult and expensive. Hence, there is a need for more research to investigate new methods to resolve
this issue.
7.4. Legal Issues
Any new technology such as IoT and blockchain is a ected by regulation and laws of each nation.
Among the issues that stand in the way of integrating IoT and blockchain successfully is the lack of
laws, especially regarding blockchain. Since blockchain provides anonymity features, it is very di cult
to identify the real identities of their users, making it a suitable environment for criminals. Therefore,
dierent countries still have several issues about how to deal with blockchain technology and what are
suitable laws and regulations that can be used to control such a new environment [32].
In the same way, IoT devices collect a huge amount of data about their owners. This information
can include sensitive and conﬁdential data. Most IoT devices share this information with their
manufactures or service providers without having authorization from their owners. This completely
violates the privacy of the devices’ owners [90].
7.5. Limited Resources
Most IoT devices have limited resources in terms of memory, processing power and energy.
For instance , smart meters have low battery power, limited storage and low computing. Integrating