Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 2 of 27
and personal information, are kept in one location in a remote server under the full control of a
third-party provider [ 3]. Besides, the scalability of the centralized architecture is another problem,
which may not be a practical solution for the IoT system that increases in billions every year [4].
With multiple issues introduced by the centralized IoT architecture, moving the IoT into one
of the distributed ledger technologies may be the correct choice. Among the common and popular
kinds of distributed ledger technologies is the blockchain. It is essentially a distributed, decentralized,
shared and immutable ledger that keeps the information of various transactions that ever happened
in a certain peer-to-peer (P2P) network [ 3]. A group of transactions were collected and assigned a
block in the ledger. Each block has a timestamp and hash function which are used to link the current
block to the previous block. This creates chains of blocks, which is why it is called the blockchain.
To store a transaction in the distributed ledger, the majority of nodes in the blockchain network should
record their agreement. Blockchain technology promotes information sharing in which all contributing
users /nodes in the blockchain network have a replica of the golden /original ledger so that all users are
updated with recently added transactions or blocks [5].
Integrating the IoT with blockchain brings numerous advantages. For example, employing
decentralized and distributed attributes of blockchain technology can handle issues of security and
a single point of failure associated with the centralized IoT architecture, as there is no need for
a central server to control IoT devices and their communications with each other. Furthermore,
blockchain delivers better security and privacy, since blockchain utilizes sophisticated cryptography
algorithms, hash functions and timestamp, which provide a secure computing environment. In addition,
the blockchain provides tamper-proof and immutable ledger to safeguard data against harmful attacks
such that any data change cannot be stored in the ledger only if the majority of contributing users
validate it [ 6]. This, in turn, delivers a trusted system where the participating IoT devices are the only
objects to accept or discard a transaction based on their consent [7].
The objective of this paper was to provide a comprehensive discussion of integrating the IoT system
with blockchain technology. This paper starts by presenting an overview of the IoT system involving its
characteristics and centralized architecture. Then, an overview of blockchain technology is presented
by highlighting its main components and features. This is followed by presenting a comprehensive
review of integrating IoT with blockchain by highlighting how blockchain resolved issues of IoT,
the architecture of IoT with blockchain, why blockchain platforms needed to implement IoT with
blockchain and the recent studies that have outlined the convergence of IoT with blockchain. Then,
blockchain as a service for the IoT is presented to show how various features of blockchain technology
can be implemented as a service for various IoT applications. This is followed by discussing the
impact of integrating artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) on both IoT and blockchain. In the end, future research
directions of IoT with blockchain are discussed.
Compared to the existing reviews conducted on integrating IoT with blockchain, this paper
provides an up-to-date comprehensive survey of IoT with blockchain. In this paper, novel and
signiﬁcant aspects of IoT with blockchain are discussed, such as blockchain as a service for the IoT
and the impact of integrating AI on both IoT and blockchain. The related survey failed to discuss the
implementation of blockchain in IoT applications. Besides, they failed to discuss implementing features
of blockchain as a service for the IoT system. Furthermore, the related survey failed to highlight the
need for integrating AI with IoT and blockchain, which is signiﬁcant especially with the huge amount
of data created by IoT devices and the scalability issues of both IoT and blockchain.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows:
1. Investigating the state-of-the-art research and recent studies of IoT with blockchain;
2. Discussing the need for integrating IoT with blockchain and how blockchain resolved issues of
the centralized IoT architecture;
3. Introducing blockchain as a service to deploy features of blockchain as a service for the IoT system;
4. Exploring the impact of integrating AI on both IoT and blockchain;
5. Discussing future research directions of IoT with blockchain.