Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 7 of 27
Table 1. Cont.
Challenge Description
ScalabilityAmong the topmost challenges associated with the centralized model is scalability.
Managing and controlling all nodes in the network by a central server can scale well only
in small networks. Employing the notion of a centralized system with large enterprise
organizations that involve several branches in di erent areas will be unreasonable.
The number of IoT devices is increasing constantly which means that the centralized
model is unable to scale and function e ciently [18].
Access and
DiversityAmong the important aspects of an e cient system is the capability to provide access to all
their users with diverse needs. However, the centralized system requires its users to access
the information steadily using identical processes. Furthermore, most centralized systems
utilize a particular operating system for the whole network which restricts diversity within
the network. For the IoT system that contains heterogeneous and diverse devices, this will
produce a serious issue that requires being handled [19].
3. Blockchain Technology
The world continued utilizing the centralized architecture in which a central server is needed to
control the processing and scheduling of tasks until Szabo created a decentralized digital currency
at the end of 1990. Ten years later, Bitcoin cryptocurrency was o ered. Blockchain became generally
widespread after Satoshi Nakamoto’s paper in 2009 [ 20]. This section presents an overview of
blockchain technology.
3.1. An Overview of Blockchain
Blockchain technology is among the most recent themes that attracted the attention of several
organizations and researchers due to the countless beneﬁts it provided over existing solutions [ 21].
A blockchain is essentially a distributed, decentralized and immutable ledger that keeps the information
of the various transactions that ever happened in a certain P2P network [ 22]. To store a transaction in
the distributed ledger, most of the nodes should record their agreement. This requires a consensus
mechanism. The most common and popular consensus mechanisms are Proof of Stake (PoS) and Proof
of Work (PoW). A group of transactions are collected and assigned a block in the ledger. A timestamp
and hash function associated with each block are used to link the block to the previous block. So,
multiple blocks are chained together, and given the name blockchain. The hash function is mainly
used to validate the integrity of the block’s content or data [ 3]. The blockchain technology promotes
information sharing in which all participating users /nodes in the blockchain network have a copy of
the original ledger, so all nodes are updated with newly added transactions or blocks [5].
There are various deﬁnitions for the blockchain. For instance, Coinbase, the world’s largest
cryptocurrency exchange, deﬁned blockchain as “ a distributed, public ledger that contains the history of
every bitcoin transaction ” [23]. In the same way, the Oxford dictionary deﬁnes blockchain. It stated,
“a digital ledger in which transactions made in bitcoin or another cryptocurrency are recorded chronologically
and publicly ” [24]. These deﬁnitions describe the blockchain from cryptocurrency’s viewpoint that
does not reﬂect the reality that blockchain can be utilized in numerous domains. Moreover, discussing
key components of blockchain, Sultan et al. [ 25] delivered a common description for the blockchain.
It stated, “ a decentralized database containing sequential, cryptographically linked blocks of digitally signed
asset transactions, governed by a consensus model ”.
3.2. Components of Blockchain
Blockchain technology can deliver several beneﬁts over existing solutions. There are a set of
elementary components of the blockchain, which include ledger, block, hashing, transaction, minor and
consensus mechanisms, as depicted in Figure 4. The ledger is a data structure that is utilized to store
various types of information. There are signiﬁcant di erences between the classical database and the
ledger. A database system stores data in the form of tables with columns and rows. Moreover, it uses a