Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 19 of 27
infrastructure. These services will be required for Fog nodes (IoT devices) to beneﬁt and utilize the
advantages of blockchain technology in the IoT context. BaaS can be implemented for IoT devices
explicitly as PaaS or implicitly as SaaS. While implementing blockchain on-premise is very costly,
as it needs high-cost equipment to build the infrastructure and performance of the distributed ledger
technology [ 80]. BaaS is currently being presented by platforms such as Amazon, Microsoft Azure,
Oracle, IBM Blockchain. The architecture of BaaS is shown in Figure 6.
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  19 of 27 
technology [80]. BaaS is currently being presented by platforms  such as Amazon, Microsoft Azure, 
Oracle, IBM Blockchain. The architecture of BaaS is shown in Figure 6.  
 
Figure 6. Typica l Architecture of BaaS . 
BaaS can be used to provide several advantages for various IoT applications. For instance, with 
the pre -built cloud platforms, BaaS can be utilized  more  easily and cheaply than on -premise 
implementation. Moreover , since BaaS exists with other cloud services (SaaS, PaaS, IaaS), this will 
allow blockchain to be deployed with various cloud and IoT applications and increase the 
interoperability of blockchain technology with these different applications. In addition,  among the 
other benef its BaaS can provide is usability. In other words, implementing a blockchain using one of 
blockchain platforms needs a good level of skills in cryptography and distributed technologies. 
Alternatively, BaaS can be delivered as a full service by the service provider, which allow s the user 
to deploy, control and run blockchain technology without the need for any technical skills.  
6. AI with Blockchain and IoT  
There is no doubt that AI has become one of the topics that ha s significant effects on different 
dom ains. According to the Merriam -Webster dictionary, AI is defined as “the capability of a machine 
to imitate intelligent human behaviour” [81]. The key issue of AI is to produce new models and 
approaches that can provide smart activities. Typically, AI is m ainly based on experiments in which 
the researcher uses the computer system as a lab to execute the validation and testing of their 
hypotheses [82].  
Integrating the IoT with AI has the ability to produce a robust technology that  is able to resolve 
several IoT issues that are associated with the vast volume of data produced by billions of IoT devices. 
Analysing these vast amounts of data with traditional analytics methods will not be viable, instead , 
adopting various AI and machine learning methods will have  the ability to analyse and extract 
meaningful information to  profit from  the full benefits of IoT data [83]. With the massive analytic 
abilities of AI, numerous governments and organizations have started adopting AI methods as a way 
Figure 6. Typical Architecture of BaaS.
BaaS can be used to provide several advantages for various IoT applications. For instance,
with the pre-built cloud platforms, BaaS can be utilized more easily and cheaply than on-premise
implementation. Moreover, since BaaS exists with other cloud services (SaaS, PaaS, IaaS), this will allow
blockchain to be deployed with various cloud and IoT applications and increase the interoperability of
blockchain technology with these di erent applications. In addition, among the other beneﬁts BaaS
can provide is usability. In other words, implementing a blockchain using one of blockchain platforms
needs a good level of skills in cryptography and distributed technologies. Alternatively, BaaS can be
delivered as a full service by the service provider, which allows the user to deploy, control and run
blockchain technology without the need for any technical skills.
6. AI with Blockchain and IoT
There is no doubt that AI has become one of the topics that has signiﬁcant e ects on di erent
domains. According to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, AI is deﬁned as “the capability of a machine to
imitate intelligent human behaviour” [ 81]. The key issue of AI is to produce new models and approaches
that can provide smart activities. Typically, AI is mainly based on experiments in which the researcher
uses the computer system as a lab to execute the validation and testing of their hypotheses [82].
Integrating the IoT with AI has the ability to produce a robust technology that is able to resolve
several IoT issues that are associated with the vast volume of data produced by billions of IoT devices.