Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 9 of 27
 Decentralization : blockchain is typically a decentralized and distributed environment that is
based on the P2P communication between communicating nodes. The decentralization enables
utilizing the processing power of all contributing users, which decreases latency and removes the
single point of failure. This feature overcomes the single point of failure issue.
 Transparency : in contrast to the centralized model where the central server is only having the
full control and access to all data, blockchain o ers a good level of transparency in which all
nodes have access to all the details of the transactions that ever happened in their network.
Besides, each node has a copy of the distributed ledger to keep updated with changes. In addition,
the absence of a third party increases business friendliness and trust [28].
 Immutability : among the crucial characteristics of blockchain is the capability of guaranteeing
the transactions’ integrity through producing immutable ledgers. In contrast to the centralized
model where data integrity is only managed and preserved through the central authority, which
can be a threat, the blockchain uses hash functions that are collision-free to link each block to the
previous block which maintains the integrity of the block’s contents. In addition, blocks stored in
the ledger can never be changed only if most of the users conﬁrm that change [26].
 Better security : among the advantages of blockchain technology is that it provides better security
over existing solutions. With the use of public key infrastructure, blockchain provides a secure
environment against various types of attacks. In addition, the consensus mechanism provides a
trusted method that improves the security of the blockchain. Moreover, the absence of the single
point of failure in the blockchain technology, that can a ect the whole systems, provides better
security over the centralized model [29].
 Anonymity : despite blockchain utilizing a ledger that is distributed between all users, blockchain
provides an anonymous identity to protect the nodes’ privacy. The anonymity feature can be
utilized to provide a secure and private voting system [30].
 Cost reduction : in contrast to the centralized architecture in which the advanced and complete
hardware and software system is required to build the centralized server, the blockchain technology
reduces the costs related to ﬁtting and sustaining large centralized servers as it utilizes the
processing power of communicating devices [31].
 Autonomy : the ability to make autonomous decisions is among the features that the blockchain
technology can provide. It allows the manufacturing of new devices that are able to make smart
and autonomous decisions. For instance, blockchain features including tamper-proof and better
security can be used to build better and secure autonomous vehicles [7].
4. IoT with Blockchain
The IoT has become one of the unprecedented technologies that enable virtual and physical
objects to be linked together over the Internet, which in turn produce numerous opportunities in
dierent domains. The unexpected development of the IoT system has unlocked innovative chances in
various ﬁelds. However, the IoT still has some issues that stand like a wall in the face of the promised
spreading of IoT objects. Among these issues is the lack of trust and conﬁdence. The current IoT
centralized model utilizes a third-party central authority that has complete control of data collection
and processing from various IoT objects without any clear restrictions about how the collected data
are being used. Hence, the central authority is like a block box for IoT users, which is a convincing
situation for the majority of IoT devices’ owners [32].
On the other hand, blockchain technology delivers decentralized, autonomous, trustless and
distributed environment. In distinction to the centralized model where there are several issues related
to the single point of failure, trust and security, the blockchain utilizes a decentralized approach to
use the processing abilities of all the contributing users which deliver better e ciency and eliminate
the single point of failure. In addition, blockchain provides better security and data integrity through
tamper-proof and immutability features [33].