Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 6 of 27
WSNs. The main responsibility of this layer is to sense and perceive the surrounding environment
and collect the relevant data that can be processed and extract meaningful information to understand
and control our surrounding physical world [ 13]. Based on the collected data, IoT devices can make
context-aware and autonomous decisions using actuators. The network layer is utilized to connect
and communicate all IoT things and devices over the Internet, where the centralized server is located.
This layer incorporates gateways that represent the communication points between the perception
and network layer. Various communication technologies and protocols were employed in this layer
such as 3G /4G, ZigBee, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and Broadband to transfer the data between the perception
and application layer. The application layer comprises of diverse IoT applications that utilizes huge
amounts of data collected and processed at the perception and network layer, respectively, and produce
digitized services in diverse domains such as healthcare, smart parking, smart home, smart city,
wearables, smart grid, agriculture and many others [5,14].
The existing centralized model of the IoT system provides several advantages to connect and
communicate a wide variety of devices that are managed by the centralized server. Hence, the whole
charge of the IoT network is managed through a central server, which is simpler to manage and
maintain. In addition, it saves costs of implementing several complete workstations of hardware
and software in the network, in which most of the processing operations are only handled by the
centralized server. Therefore, most nodes in the network can be like a terminal to connect to the central
server. Besides, the centralized IoT architecture delivers better physical security as most IoT data are
kept in a single location, which is simpler to safeguard from physical harms [5].
On the other hand, the centralized IoT architecture introduces multiple challenges. For example,
it faces scalability issues as it cannot handle the constant increase in IoT devices. In addition,
it introduces numerous security and privacy challenges [ 15]. Table 1 provides a summary of issues
related to the IoT centralized architecture.
Table 1. Summary of challenges of the IoT centralized model.
Challenge Description
Single Point of
FailureAs the centralized server performs all processing operations and manages communications
between various devices, this produces a single point of failure in which if the server goes
down, the whole network of devices will be unreachable.
SecuritySecurity is among the key challenges in the IoT centralized model since all data processing
operations and data storage are done in one location and through a central server which
makes it susceptible to di erent kind of threats speciﬁcally Denial of Service (DoS) [13].
PrivacyVarious types of real-time data including sensitive information are collected from IoT
devices such as habits, passwords, personal and ﬁnancial information, etc. These collected
data are kept in one location under the full control of the centralized third-party server
which can violate the data privacy. Additionally, storing it in one location can make it
easier to be breached [16].
InﬂexibilityThe centralized server controls communications and processing operations between all
nodes linked to the IoT network, which creates a huge workload. To handle this workload,
the centralized server plans the load to evade peak-load issues. However, this limits user
ﬂexibility while doing their own tasks due to the tight agenda and delay linked to this
process [17].
CostThe central server performs all processing and communication operations between all
nodes in the network which require high hardware and software capabilities to handle this
workload.
Additionally, it needs huge retaining storages that are able to store data coming from
various IoT devices. All these high capabilities of hardware and software come with a high
cost [4].