Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 11 of 27
Table 3. Cont.
Challenges of
Centralized IoTHow Blockchain Can Resolve the Challenge
Ownership and
IdentityBlockchain has the capability to deliver a trustworthy, authorized identity registration,
ownership tracking and monitoring. Additionally, it was implemented successfully in
various applications especially in the tracking and monitoring goods and products [ 34].
FlexibilityThe blockchain technology provides a ﬂexible environment for various IoT objects
through numerous open-source options for blockchain. Moreover, blockchain can scale
well to meet the scope and transactional volume of a ﬂexible grid.
Costs and Capacity
ConstraintsThe blockchain provides a decentralized architecture where a central authority or
third-party is not required to manage the communications between communicating
nodes. This allows for more secure data communication and exchange. In addition,
no need for the costs of installing a server with high software and hardware capabilities
[7].
4.1. IoT with Blockchain Architecture
Integrating blockchain with IoT has become a necessity to overcome the issues of the centralized
IoT architecture and utilize countless beneﬁts of blockchain technology. Implementing the blockchain
with IoT can be achieved in numerous ways. This section presents a discussion for one of the approaches
of integrating blockchain with the IoT in a layered architecture.
The simple layered blockchain with IoT architecture comprises of four layers. It is the IoT
architecture layers discussed in Section 2.2 adding blockchain as a separate layer between network and
application layers, as shown in Figure 5.
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 27 
4.1. IoT with Blockchain Architecture  
Integrating blockchain with IoT has become a necessity to overcome the issues of the centralized 
IoT a rchitecture and utilize countless benefits of blockchain technology. Implementing the blockchain 
with IoT can be  achieved  in numerous ways. This section presents a discussion for one of the 
approaches of integrating blockchain with the IoT in a layered arc hitecture.  
The simple layered blockchain with IoT architecture comprises of four layers. It is the IoT 
architecture layers discussed in Section 2 .2 adding blockchain as a separate layer between network 
and application layers, as shown in Figure 5.  
 
Figur e 5. Architecture of IoT with blockchain . 
As discussed earlier, the first layer is the perception layer that contains IoT things and objects 
such as sensors and actuators that are used to sense and perceive the surrounding environment and 
collect relevant data that can help us understand our surroundings. Then, the network layer that 
performs network and routing management enable s all IoT objects to be linked and communicate 
together over the Internet. This layer includes networking and security devices tha t enable 
communication and security management.  
The newly added layer is named the IoT–blockchain layer, which involves all modules that 
enable various features of the blockchain technology to be implemented in the IoT system. These 
features include P2P c ommunication, distributed ledger, smart contracts, Application Programming  
Interface ( API), big data analytics, consensus management, and identity management. P2P protocols 
are required to enable decentralized communication between various IoT objects. A dditionally , the 
distributed ledger is among  the significant features that each IoT device will hold a copy of so that it 
can be updated with changes in minutes or even seconds within the IoT network [35]. The ledger can 
be created either with or without per mission . The type of ledger will be heavily dependent on the IoT 
context and the number of nodes in the IoT network.  
The b ig data analytics module enables the blockchain to provide efficient online data storage 
and processing since the IoT system create hu ge amounts of data that cannot be processed using 
traditional methods. In addition , many transactions are deposited in structured ways of ledgers, 
which will require further data analysis. Smart contracts are also  among the important parts of the 
Figure 5. Architecture of IoT with blockchain.
As discussed earlier, the ﬁrst layer is the perception layer that contains IoT things and objects such
as sensors and actuators that are used to sense and perceive the surrounding environment and collect
relevant data that can help us understand our surroundings. Then, the network layer that performs
network and routing management enables all IoT objects to be linked and communicate together over