Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 14 of 27
Table 4. Comparison between Ethereum, Hyperledger and IOTA.
Item Ethereum Hyperledger IOTA
Transaction Time 10–15 s 0.05–100 ms 120 s
Consensus Mechanism Proof of Work (PoW)Practical byzantine fault
tolerance (PBFT)N/A
Network Usage Less usage High usage Less usage
Computation Cost High computation cost Less computation cost Less computation cost
Smart Contracts Yes Yes No
4.3. Recent Studies of IoT with Blockchain
Integrating blockchain technology with IoT is among the most modern subjects that has attracted
the courtesy of various researchers to overcome issues of centralized IoT architecture. For example,
several studies presented the blockchain as the ultimate solution to tackle security and privacy
challenges in the IoT system. For instance, Khan and Salah [ 22] presented a review of IoT and
its security challenges concerning IoT-layered architectures. Then, the authors identiﬁed security
requirements of the IoT system and state-of-the-art solutions. The paper also presented blockchain
technology as a vital empowering to resolve most of the security issues of the IoT system. Moreover,
Sengupta et al. [ 47] provided a review of security attacks and issues in the IoT and industrial IoT (IIoT)
and classify it based on the vulnerability. Then, the authors presented the blockchain technology and
how it can resolve some of the aforementioned security issues. Besides, they presented some of the
challenges of blockchain with IIoT.
In the same way, Banejee et al. [ 48] provided a review of IoT security solutions and discussed issues
of lack of IoT datasets for researchers and practitioners. Then, the authors proposed the blockchain to
provide a secure environment for sharing IoT datasets. They also discussed some of the challenges of
blockchain technology. In addition, Dorri et al. [ 49] proposed a lightweight architecture for IoT based
on blockchain technology to provide a secure and private IoT system and at the same time eliminate
the overhead of blockchain. Moreover, Polyzos and Fotiou [ 50] review the potential of blockchain
technology to investigate the security requirements of the IoT system and how integrating the IoT with
blockchain can solve these security challenges.
Moreover, Karthikeyan et al. [ 51] provided a review of IoT security issues, then proposed the
blockchain as a suggested solution to resolve these issues. They also discussed the potentials of
integrating IoT with blockchain. In addition, Fotiou et al. [ 52] suggested a smart contract-based solution
to handle security and privacy issues in the IoT system and to make the IoT device communicate
securely. Their proposed solution enabled decentralization for access control, authentication and
payments depending on blockchain technology.
Tandon [ 53] provided a review of blockchain technology and how it provides the ultimate solution
to handle the security and privacy challenges associated with the IoT system. The paper also discussed
the beneﬁts and challenges of integrating blockchain with IoT. In the same way, Zhu and Badr [ 54]
provided a review to deﬁne the demands of creating an identity management system for IoT. Then,
they proposed that blockchain technology be integrated with the IoT to build an e cient identity
management system to provide better trust and performance. Moreover, Hang and Kim [ 35] proposed
an integrated IoT platform using blockchain technology to ensure sensing data integrity. Their platform
enabled real-time monitoring and control between the end-user and device. The results demonstrated
that their platform could be a good solution for resource-constrained IoT devices. Additionally,
Kadam and John [ 55] proposed a framework based on the Ethereum blockchain for low-power IoT
devices to solve the power issue in IoT devices while communicating, validating transactions and
providing security.
Blockchain technology was presented as a solution to provide an e cient and e ective access
control system. For example, Dukkipati et al. [ 56] proposed a blockchain-based access control model to