Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 12 of 27
the Internet. This layer includes networking and security devices that enable communication and
security management.
The newly added layer is named the IoT–blockchain layer, which involves all modules that enable
various features of the blockchain technology to be implemented in the IoT system. These features
include P2P communication, distributed ledger, smart contracts, Application Programming Interface
(API), big data analytics, consensus management, and identity management. P2P protocols are required
to enable decentralized communication between various IoT objects. Additionally, the distributed
ledger is among the signiﬁcant features that each IoT device will hold a copy of so that it can be
updated with changes in minutes or even seconds within the IoT network [ 35]. The ledger can be
created either with or without permission. The type of ledger will be heavily dependent on the IoT
context and the number of nodes in the IoT network.
The big data analytics module enables the blockchain to provide e cient online data storage
and processing since the IoT system create huge amounts of data that cannot be processed using
traditional methods. In addition, many transactions are deposited in structured ways of ledgers,
which will require further data analysis. Smart contracts are also among the important parts of the
blockchain technology that used to enable automated decisions based on predetermined conditions.
Typically, a smart contract is a software code that runs using blockchain to execute a set of actions
when predetermined conditions are met or veriﬁed.
Consensus management is also among the main features needed to integrate blockchain with IoT.
It acts as the central server that maintains the trust between communicating nodes in the network.
Identity management is used to control and identify various nodes in the IoT network. In addition,
the API interface enables IoT applications to access blockchain services. The application layer is the top
layer that includes various IoT applications and provides data visualization tasks that create numerous
digitized services and help decision-makers make accurate and precise decisions based on the collected
data from physical IoT devices.
4.2. Implementation of Blockchain with IoT
Blockchain was ﬁrstly used for ﬁnancial transactions and cryptocurrency where transactions are
executed and stored by all nodes in the blockchain network. Then, blockchain is integrated in various
domains due to the enormous beneﬁts it provides. Among these domains is the IoT system. Combining
blockchain with IoT can provide countless beneﬁts for various IoT applications [ 13]. Meanwhile,
the blockchain is decentralized and trustless, as it is suitable for IoT applications such as healthcare,
smart homes, smart city, smart transportation and others.
Implementing blockchain in the IoT system is not an easy task. The ﬁrst and important step is
to choose the blockchain platform that will be adopted to merge the IoT with blockchain technology.
Ethereum, Hyperledger and IOTA are the most common platforms that can be utilized in implementing
blockchain with IoT. Not only are they open-source platforms, but they can also deliver key abilities to
connect among blocks, cryptographically secure for the hashing of di erent transactions minimally in
single blocks, advanced marks, consensus, and smart contracts [36].
4.2.1. Ethereum
Ethereum is a multipurpose blockchain platform that was announced in 2013 and then launched
in 2015. It produces a universal platform for various blockchain-based applications. It was mainly
based on implementing smart contracts, which are programmed codes that are permanently kept
on the blockchain and enable executing users’ requests. Ethereum also o ers a decentralized virtual
machine called Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) [37].
Although Ethereum is based on smart contracts, the transactions can keep di erent types of data.
This enlarges the likelihood for auditability and allows robust expansion for various IoT applications.
Among the drawbacks of Ethereum is that it needs between 10 and 20 s to send a block, which may