Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 8 of 27
relational model for querying and gathering data by connecting information from several sources [ 26].
On the other hand, the ledger is utilized to store all the transactions that were ever made from all
participating users in the network. Additionally, the ledger was distributed among the participating
nodes, so each user has its own replica of the ledger.
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 27 
 
Figure 4. Main components of block chain . 
Block is among  the primary components of the blockchain. Each block comprises a set of 
transactions. The blocks were chained together by storing a unique  hash value  of the preceding block 
in the existing block. This link blocks together like a chain . The hash function is used to validate the 
data integrity of the content of each block. Basically, the hash function is a mathematical problem that 
the minors need to crack to find a block. The reason to use the hash function is that it is collision -free 
in which it is very hard to create two identical hashes for two different digital data. So, assigning a 
hash value for each block can serve as a way to identify the block and also validate its contents [18].  
A transaction is the smallest unit of process or  operation in which a set of transactions are 
combined and stored in a block. A certain transaction cannot be added to the block unless the majority 
of the participating nodes in the blockchain network record their consent. The size of a transaction is 
important for minors as small transactions require less power and are easier to validate. Minors are 
computers/agents that attempt to solve a complex mathematical problem (typically, a form of hash 
functions) to explore a new block. Discovering a new block is  started by broadcasting new 
transactions to all nodes, and then each node combines a set of transactions into a block and operates 
to discover the block’s proof -of-work. If a node discovers a block, then the block will be broadcasted 
to all the nodes to b e verified [27].  
3.3. Features of Blockchain  
Blockchain can deliver numerous advantages for multiple fields and applications. This new 
technology shares some common features that involve:  
 Decentralization : blockchain is typically a decentralized and dis tributed environment that is 
based on the P2P communication between communicating nodes. The decentralization enables 
utilizing the processing power of all contributing users, which decrease s latency and remove s 
the single point of failure. This feature ov ercomes the single point of failure issue.  
 Transparency : in contra st to the centralized model where the central server is only having the 
full control and access to all data, blockchain offers a good level of transparency in which all 
nodes have access to  all the details of the transactions that ever happened in their network. 
Figure 4. Main components of blockchain.
Block is among the primary components of the blockchain. Each block comprises a set of
transactions. The blocks were chained together by storing a unique hash value of the preceding block
in the existing block. This link blocks together like a chain. The hash function is used to validate the
data integrity of the content of each block. Basically, the hash function is a mathematical problem that
the minors need to crack to ﬁnd a block. The reason to use the hash function is that it is collision-free in
which it is very hard to create two identical hashes for two di erent digital data. So, assigning a hash
value for each block can serve as a way to identify the block and also validate its contents [18].
A transaction is the smallest unit of process or operation in which a set of transactions are
combined and stored in a block. A certain transaction cannot be added to the block unless the majority
of the participating nodes in the blockchain network record their consent. The size of a transaction is
important for minors as small transactions require less power and are easier to validate. Minors are
computers /agents that attempt to solve a complex mathematical problem (typically, a form of hash
functions) to explore a new block. Discovering a new block is started by broadcasting new transactions
to all nodes, and then each node combines a set of transactions into a block and operates to discover
the block’s proof-of-work. If a node discovers a block, then the block will be broadcasted to all the
nodes to be veriﬁed [27].
3.3. Features of Blockchain
Blockchain can deliver numerous advantages for multiple ﬁelds and applications. This new
technology shares some common features that involve: