Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 10 of 27
There are numerous similarities and variances between IoT and blockchain. Table 2 provides a
simple comparison between IoT and blockchain.
Table 2. A simple comparison between IoT and blockchain.
Items IoT Blockchain
Privacy Lack of privacyEnsures the privacy of the
participating nodes
BandwidthIoT devices have limited bandwidth
and resourcesHigh bandwidth consumption
System Structure Centralized Decentralized
ScalabilityIoT considered to contain a large number
of devicesScales poorly with a large network
Resources Resource restricted Resource consuming
Latency Demands low latency Block mining is time-consuming
Security Security is an issue Has better security
Integrating the blockchain technology with the IoT can resolve several challenges of the centralized
IoT model. Table 3 provides a summary of the challenges of the centralized IoT system and how
integrating the blockchain with IoT could handle it.
Table 3. Blockchain can provide innovative solutions to issues of the centralized IoT model.
Challenges of
Centralized IoTHow Blockchain Can Resolve the Challenge
SecurityBlockchain o ers better security by utilizing the public key infrastructure that provides
more protection against various attacks. In addition, it o ers an immutable ledger that
cannot be updated only with the approval of the majority of contributing users in the
network, which guarantees data integrity. Moreover, all communications between
various devices are maintained and secured cryptographically [18].
ScalabilityAmong the main aspects of the IoT is the enormous number of devices which constantly
increases every day. The distributed and decentralized nature of the blockchain can
provide an e cient way to provide a scalable way to handle the constant increase in IoT
devices.
Point of FailureThe blockchain technology provides distributed and decentralized communication
between participating nodes which eliminates the necessity for a central server to
manage and control processing and communication operations. Hence, if one device
goes down, this will not a ect the entire network which overcomes the single point of
failure issue associated with the centralized model.
Address SpaceThe blockchain has a large address space that allows allocating addresses to a large
number of devices. The blockchain provides a 160-bit address space which enables the
blockchain to assign addresses for a considerable number of objects. Compared to IPv6,
blockchain o ers 4.3 billion more addresses [34].
Authentication and
Access ControlAmong the advantages provided by blockchain technology is delivering e cient identity
management that helps to build e ective authentication and access control. Moreover,
smart contracts provide several beneﬁts such as decentralized authentication rules that
can be utilized to provide an e ective authentication model for various IoT devices.
Data IntegrityBlockchain presents a tamper-proof ability such that a certain transaction cannot be
added, edited or deleted only if most of the contributing users in the network verify it.
This, in turn, guarantees data integrity.
Susceptibility to
ManipulationThe blockchain provides an immutable environment that prevents the manipulation of
data to ensure data integrity. In the blockchain, the manipulation or update is only
conﬁrmed after the agreement of the majority of participating users.