Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 15 of 27
handle security and privacy challenges in the IoT system. They employed blockchain as decentralized
access manager which provides the access decision. Moreover, Novo [ 57] suggested a blockchain-based
distributed control model for the IoT system. The author claimed that the blockchain could provide
ecient access control management in the IoT applications. Besides, Zhang et al. [ 58] have suggested a
smart contract-based access control framework that contained several access control contracts (ACCs).
They utilized smart contracts to achieve a trusted and distributed access control model for the IoT.
Blockchain was also proposed as an e cient solution to enhance the security and privacy of
healthcare data. For example, Badr et al. [ 59] utilized the blockchain to enhance the privacy of
patient data. They suggested a protocol for protecting the privacy of eHealth data (EHRs) based
on pseudonym-based encryption with di erent authorities (PBE-DA). Furthermore, they utilized
blockchain as a stage between IoT medical devices and the healthcare system. Additionally, Mishra and
Tyagi [ 60] proposed an intrusion detection system for the IoT based on blockchain technology to detect
unauthorized access and ﬁlter network tra c. They applied their proposal to the healthcare domain to
protect patient information.
Another domain in which blockchain technology was deployed was agriculture. Several
researchers proposed utilizing blockchain to overcome the issues of existing systems. For instance,
Patil et al. [ 61] suggested a lightweight architecture for smart greenhouse farms based on blockchain to
improve security and privacy in agriculture. The blockchain makes IoT devices in greenhouses act
as immutable ledgers. Moreover, Lin et al. [ 62] suggested an open, self-organized and trusted food
traceability system by integrating blockchain with IoT. Their proposed system replaced labour-intensive
recording and minimized human involvement, which created a smart agriculture system. Besides,
Dogo et al. [63] proposed a framework for utilizing blockchain in agriculture. They showed
technological beneﬁts and technical advantages of integrating blockchain and IoT in agriculture
to improve security, transparency and overall e ciency. In addition, Kamilaris et al. [ 64] provided
a discussion of the use of the blockchain in agriculture and food chain by investigating beneﬁts
and challenges.
Blockchain was adopted in the supply chain as well. Rejeb et al. [ 65] provided a review of
the deployment of blockchain technology with IoT and potential beneﬁts of this integration on the
supply chain domain. They also discussed the impact of blockchain on key features of the IoT system.
Moreover, Huckle et al. [ 66] provided a discussion of the use of the blockchain with IoT to deliver its
safe and distributed application in the economy. Additionally, blockchain was adopted in E-business
and payments, for example, Zhang and Wen [ 67] suggested an IoT E-business system based on
blockchain technology. They utilized decentralization and smart contracts to achieve integration
with the IoT system. Moreover, Ruta et al. [ 68] suggested a blockchain-based service-oriented model.
They utilized smart contracts to enable distributed and decentralized execution and trust. Besides,
Huh et al. [69] proposed using Ethereum smart contract to store the data produced by IoT devices like
smart meters and phones. They utilized Ethereum smart contracts to control the usage of electricity
through the smartphone.
Reviewing the beneﬁts, constraints and issues of integrating blockchain with IoT was among
the topics that attracted many researchers. Some researchers provided a systematic literature review
to help the reader obtain a precise knowledge about certain research questions. For example,
Conoscenti et al. [70] provided a systematic literature review to collect information and knowledge on
the present uses of blockchain technology to validate its ability to provide better security, anonymity
and adaptability over existing technologies. They also categorised the current uses of the blockchain.
Moreover, Lo et al. [71] provided a systematic literature review to analyse various solutions suggested
by di erent researchers to converge the blockchain with the IoT. They reviewed publications that
involved the implementation of blockchain with IoT. In the same way, Abadi et al. [ 72] provided a
systematic literature review of integrating blockchain with IoT.
Other researchers provided reviews and surveys to investigate the integration of blockchain with
IoT. Wang et al. [ 73] provided a survey of blockchain technologies and their e ect on IoT applications.