Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 3 of 27
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of the IoT
system; Section 3 provides an overview of blockchain technology; Section 4 discusses the integration of
IoT with blockchain; Section 5 introduces blockchain as a service for the IoT; Section 6 discusses the
impact of integrating AI in IoT and blockchain; Section 7 presents future research directions of the IoT
with blockchain; and Section 8 concludes the paper.
2. An Overview of IoT
The term IoT refers to the modern proliferation of internet-enabled devices with embedded
computing capability. The term describes a wide range of technologies, from the internet-enabled
security cameras and surveillance devices, networked industrial equipment and sensors to domestic
products like fridges and cars. The IoT is an ever increasingly popular technology that has developed
with ubiquitous computing in today’s era of technology. IoT devices have helped to facilitate the way
we live using IoT applications like smart homes, smart cities and smart transportation [1].
With the term IoT being so broad and widely used, there is no speciﬁc deﬁnition. The IoT was
deﬁned by several organizations and researchers. It is deﬁned by the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) in 2012 as “ a global infrastructure for the information society, enabling advanced services by
interconnecting (physical and virtual) things based on, existing and evolving, interoperable information and
communication technologies ” [8].
The number of IoT objects bypassed the population worldwide in 2008. With several advantages
of the IoT system, new applications and services can be established every day. According to Statista [ 9],
the number of IoT objects is anticipated to be about 31 billion worldwide by the end of 2020. This number
is expected to grow signiﬁcantly to reach about 75 billion devices by the end of 2025, as depicted in
Figure 1.
Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020, 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 27 
4. Exploring the impact of integrating AI on both IoT and blockchain ; 
5. Discu ssing future research directions of IoT with blockchain.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of the IoT 
system; Section 3 provides an overview of blockchain technology; Section 4 discusses the integration 
of IoT with blockchain; Section 5 introduces blockchain as a service for the IoT; Section 6 discusses 
the impact of integrating AI in IoT and blockchain;  Section 7 presents future research directions of 
the IoT with blockchain ; and Section 8 concludes the pa per.  
2. An Overview of IoT  
The term IoT refers to the modern proliferation of internet -enabled devices with embedded 
computing capability. The term describes a wide range of technologies, from the internet -enabled 
security cameras and surveillance device s, networked industrial equipment and sensors to domestic 
products like fridges and cars. The IoT is an ever increasingly popular technology that has developed 
with ubiquitous computing in today’s era of technology. IoT devices have helped to facilitate th e way 
we live using IoT applications like smart homes, smart cities and smart transportation [1].  
With the term IoT being so broad and widely used, there  is no specific definition. The IoT was 
defined by several organizations and researchers. It is defined  by the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) in 2012 as “ a global infrastructure for the information society, enabling 
advanced services by interconnecting (physical and virtual) things based on, existing and evolving, 
interoperable information and communication technologies ” [8].  
The number of IoT objects bypasse d the population worldwide in 2008. With several advantages 
of the IoT system, new applications and services can be established every day. According to Statista 
[9], the number of IoT object s is anticipated to be about 31 billion worldwide by the end of 2020. This 
number is expected to grow significantly to reach about 75 billion devices by the end of 2025, as 
depicted in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1. Expected  Internet of Things (IoT) growth from 201 5 to 2025 [3] . 
In addition, the IoT market is growing almost exponentially. According to Statista, the estimat ed 
revenue of IoT in 2015 was USD 743 billion. This number is expected to i ncrease dramatically to reach 
USD 1710 billion by the end of 2019 [9].  
  
Figure 1. Expected Internet of Things (IoT) growth from 2015 to 2025 [3].
In addition, the IoT market is growing almost exponentially. According to Statista, the estimated
revenue of IoT in 2015 was USD 743 billion. This number is expected to increase dramatically to reach
USD 1710 billion by the end of 2019 [9].
2.1. Features of IoT System
The IoT system describes an innovative technology that can change our life, business, and economy.
The IoT produces countless digitized services and applications that provide several beneﬁts over
existing solutions. These applications and services share some common features, which include [ 1,5,10]: