Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2020 ,4, 28 13 of 27
create issues in IoT applications that use real-time data. In addition, IoT gadget operations may not
promote such a delay [29].
Some studies utilized Ethereum to integrate blockchain with IoT. For instance, Sun et al. [38]
proposed Ethereum blockchain-based rich-thin-clients IoT solution to handle issues of
resource-constrained IoT when working on the mining of blockchain in IoT applications. Additionally,
Mehedi et al. [ 39] proposed a lightweight masonry for IoT-based blockchains that overcome the memory
payload and centralized issues and at the same time improve security and privacy. The authors utilized
Ethereum as the blockchain platform to guarantee security, privacy and availability.
4.2.2. Hyperledger
Hyperledger is an open source platform that was designed to help cross-industry blockchain
technologies. It is essentially a world-wide open source collaboration involving leaders from numerous
industries (about 100 members). Hyperledger is a permissioned blockchain that applies access control,
chain code-based smart contracts and variable consensus methods. Although the majority of the
distributed records permit open deployment, the permissioned Hyperledger promotes and improves
security to avoid various types of attacks, especially Sybil attacks [ 40]. Since the implementation
of smart contracts in Hyperledger is mainly based on chain code implementation, it provides faster
execution among peers in several milliseconds. Therefore, adopting chain code smart contracts
provides a robust method to implement blockchain in IoT applications [41].
Although there are several frameworks of the Hyperledger, Hyperledger Fabric is among the
most common and widely utilized frameworks. It is an open source and modular system. Several
studies compare the performance of Ethereum and Hyperledger. For instance, in Franke et al. [ 42],
the authors compared two blockchain platforms to test their feasibility regarding the beneﬁts and
restrictions of employing blockchain for the Paris Agreement carbon market mechanism. Furthermore,
Pongnumkul et al. [ 43] performed a performance analysis to assess the performance and limitations of
Ethereum and Hyperledger. Their results indicated that Hyperledger Fabric consistently outperformed
Ethereum in terms of latency, execution time and throughput.
4.2.3. IOTA
IOTA is not considered as one of the blockchain platforms as it mainly depends on Tangle,
another distributed ledger technology. IOTA can be deﬁned as a decentralized platform that facilitates
and processes various transactions between communicating devices over the Internet. Basically,
IOTA executes a coordinated acyclic chart of transactions instead of chained blocks of numerous
transactions. This provides several beneﬁts, for instance, it provides a lightweight solution as
consensus does not require the majority of communicating nodes to approve di erent incremented
transactions, instead, two transactions can be veriﬁed by single nodes submitting a transaction
themselves. This reduces transaction time and overhead [44].
Lightweight and less overhead features of IOTA as well as the use of coordinated acyclic graphs
make it among the most adaptable implementations of a distributed record, making it mainly an
ecient solution and platform for IoT applications. Many researchers utilized IOTA to provide an
ecient platform for IoT applications. For instance, Shabandri and Maheshwari [ 45] proposed using
IOTA to enhance the privacy and security of a smart meter and smart car. The authors presented
that IOTA addressed issues related to the limitations of resources in IoT devices and indicated that
IOTA eliminated transaction fees and mining which takes large processing power. On the other
hand, some researchers indicated that IOTA maybe not the optimal solution for the IoT system.
For example, Elsts et al. [46] presented an experimental assessment of IOTA on various IoT platforms.
They concluded that the computational overhead of IOTA is high, and it is not an appropriate solution
for battery-powered IoT devices. Table 4 provides a comparison between Ethereum, Hyperledger
and IOTA.