Env Hidden size
Ant 1024
HalfCheetah 512
Swimmer 128
Hopper 512
Table 1: Hidden sizes for the model NN
C.2 Engineering details
For the nite-state MDP experiments, the policy is parameterized by jXjjAj parameters with
Softmax applied row-wise (over actions for each state). The model is parameterized by jAjjXjjXj
parameters with Softmax applied to the last dimension (over states for each state, action pair).
Calculation of policy gradients is done by solving for the exact value function and taking gradients
with respect to the policy parameters using backpropagation. Hyperparameters for performance
plots are as follows, model learning rate : 0.001, policy learning rate: 0.1, training iterations for
model (per outer loop iteration): 200, training iterations for policy (per outer loop iteration):
1. Since there are no sources of randomness in these experiments (all gradients were calculated
exactly), only 1 run is done per experiment. As well, all parameters for the models and policies
were initialized at 0.
For the REINFORCE experiments, the policy is a 2-layer neural network (NN) with hidden size
64 and Rectied Linear Unit (ReLU) activations for the hidden layer. The second layer is separated
for predicting the mean and log standard deviation (std) of a Gaussian policy (i.e. the rst layer
is shared for the mean and std but the second layer has separate weights for each). The output
layer activations are Tanh for the mean and Softplus for the log std. The policy is trained with the
Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) with learning rate 0.0001.
For the actor-critic formulation, the critic network is a 2-layer NN with hidden size 64 and ReLU
activations for the hidden layer. The output layer has no nonlinearities. The policy is a 2-layer
NN with hidden size 30 and ReLU activations for the hidden layer. The output layer has Tanh
activations. Both the policy and actor are trained with the Adam optimizer with learning rates
0.0001 and 0.001, respectively. The soft update parameter (Lillicrap et al., 2015) for the target
networks is 0.001.
The model architectures are as follows:
•LQR: Linear connection from input to output with no nonlinearities.
•Pendulum: two linear layers with hidden size 2. This is a linear model with a bottleneck as
the states of the Pendulum environment are represented with 3 dimensions.
•For all other environments: 3-layer NN with ReLU activations. The output layer has no
nonlinearities. The hidden sizes are provided in Table 1
For all the approximate experiments, the number of replications, unless stated otherwise in
the captions, is 10 and shaded areas indicate standard error. The parameters of the networks in
these cases were initialized using Xavier initialization (Glorot and Bengio, 2010). The models in all
experiments are optimized using stochastic gradient descent with no momentum and initial learning
rates given in Table 2. The learning rates are reduced by an order of magnitude according to a
46