Policy-Aware Model Learning for Policy Gradient Methods
Romina Abachi∗Mohammad Ghavamzadeh†Amir-massoud Farahmand‡
January 5, 2021
Abstract
This paper considers the problem of learning a model in model-based reinforcement learning
(MBRL). We examine how the planning module of an MBRL algorithm uses the model, and
propose that model learning should incorporate the way the planner is going to use the model.
This is in contrast to conventional model learning approaches, such as those based on maxi-
mum likelihood estimation, that learn a predictive model of the environment without explicitly
considering the interaction of the model and the planner. We focus on policy gradient planning
algorithms and derive new loss functions for model learning that incorporate how the planner
uses the model. We call this approach Policy-Aware Model Learning (PAML). We theoretically
analyze a model-based policy gradient algorithm and provide a convergence guarantee for the
optimized policy. We also empirically evaluate PAML on some benchmark problems, showing
promising results.
1 Introduction
A model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) agent gradually learns a model of the environment
as it interacts with it, and uses the learned model to plan and nd a good policy. This can be done
by planning with samples coming from the model, instead of or in addition to the samples from the
environment, e.g., Sutton (1990); Peng and Williams (1993); Sutton et al. (2008); Deisenroth et al.
(2015); Talvitie (2017); Ha and Schmidhuber (2018). If learning a model is easier than learning
the policy or value function in a model-free manner, MBRL will lead to a reduction in the number
of required interactions with the real-world and will improve the sample complexity of the agent.
However, this is contingent on the ability of the agent to learn an accurate model of the real
environment. Thus, the problem of learning a good model of the environment is of paramount
importance in the success of MBRL. This paper addresses the question of how to approach the
problem of learning a model of the environment, and proposes a method called policy-aware model
learning (PAML).
The conventional approach to model learning in MBRL is to learn a model that is a good
predictor of the environment. If the learned model is accurate enough, this leads to a value function
or a policy that is close to the optimal one. Learning a good predictive model can be achieved by
minimizing some form of a probabilistic loss. A common choice is to minimize the KL-divergence
∗Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto & the Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
†Google Research, CA, USA
‡The Vector Institute & the Department of Computer Science and the Department of Mechanical and Industrial
Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
1arXiv:2003.00030v2  [cs.AI]  4 Jan 2021