between the empirical data and the model, which leads to the Maximum Likelihood Estimator
(MLE).
The often-unnoticed fact, however, is that no model can be completely accurate, and there are
always dierences between the model and the real-world. An important source of inaccuracy/error
is the choice of model space, i.e., the space of predictors, such as a particular class of deep neural
networks. We suer an error if the model space does not contain the true model of the physical
system.
The decision-aware model learning (DAML) viewpoint suggests that instead of trying to learn
a model that is a good predictor of the environment, which may not be possible as just argued,
one should learn only those aspects of the environment that are relevant to the decision problem.
Trying to learn the complex dynamics that are irrelevant to the underlying decision problem is
pointless, e.g., in a self-driving car, the agent does not need to model the movement of the leaves
on trees when the decision problem is simply to decide whether or not to stop at a red light. The
conventional model learning approach cannot distinguish between decision-relevant and irrelevant
aspects of the environment, and may waste the \capacity" of the model on unnecessary details. In
order to focus the model on the decision-relevant aspects, we shall incorporate certain aspects of
the decision problem into the model learning process.
There are several relatively recent works that can be interpreted as doing DAML, even though
they do not always explicitly express their goal as such. Some methods such as Joseph et al.
(2013); Silver et al. (2017b); Oh et al. (2017); Farquhar et al. (2018) learn a model implicitly, in
an end-to-end fashion. This can be interpreted as DAML because the model is learned in service
of improving policy performance. Other methods incorporate the value function in model-learning.
For example, Value-Aware Model Learning (VAML) is an instantiation of DAML that incorporates
the information about the value function in learning the model of the environment (Farahmand
et al., 2017; Farahmand, 2018). Recent similar works include Ayoub et al. (2020); Luo et al. (2019).
In the latter, the loss is dened to only include the value function learned on the model, whereas
Farahmand et al. (2017); Farahmand (2018); Ayoub et al. (2020) require the inclusion of the true
value function in their loss as well. The formulation by Farahmand et al. (2017) incorporates the
knowledge about the value function space in learning the model, and the formulation by Farahmand
(2018) benets from how the value functions are generated within an approximate value iteration
(AVI)-based MBRL agent. We explain the VAML framework in more details in Section 2.
Designing a decision-aware model learning approach, however, is not limited to methods that
benet from the structure of the value function. Policy is another main component of RL that can
be exploited for learning a model. Using the policy in model learning is done concurrently by D'Oro
et al. (2020) and Schrittwieser et al. (2019). We brie
y compare to D'Oro et al. (2020) in Section
3. MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2019) takes into account both the value function and policy.
The model in MuZero includes separate functions for predicting next \internal" states, policies
and values. The policy prediction function learns to predict policies that would be obtained by
the MCTS planner that is used to train it. On the other hand, in this work we consider policy
gradient planners and instead of predicting policies directly, consider the interaction of the policy
and value function in obtaining policy gradients. The high-level idea is simple: If we are using
a policy gradient (PG) method to search for a good policy, we only need to learn a model that
provides accurate estimates of the PG. All other details of the environment that do not contribute
to estimating PG are irrelevant. Formalizing this intuition is the main algorithmic contribution of
this paper (Section 3).
The rst theoretical contribution of this work is a result that shows how the error in the model,
2