0 2 4 6 8 10
Norm of Model Params106
104
102
100L_PAMLMinimizer of KL
Minimizer of PAML
0 2 4 6 8 10
Norm of Model Params102
101
100101KL-divergence
0 20 40 60 80 100
Policy updates0.81.01.21.41.61.8Policy Performance (Expected Return)KL, Norm of model params = 11.00
KL, Norm of model params = 5.00
KL, Norm of model params = 0.50
PAML, Norm of model params = 11.00
PAML, Norm of model params = 5.00
PAML, Norm of model params = 0.50Figure 2: Results for nite 3-state MDP dened in Appendix C. (Top) Comparison of the minimizers
of the PAML loss and the KL-divergence as a function of the maximum allowable norm of model
parameters. The true model's parameter norm would be close to 11 :0 as measured by minimizing the
KLwithout constraints. (Bottom) Policy performance as a function of model loss and (maximum
allowed) norm of model parameters. Note that there is no estimation error in this setting.
5 Empirical Studies
We compare the performances of PAML and MLE in the framework of Algorithm 1. We rst present
an illustration of PAML and MLE for a nite-state MDP. We then discuss how the loss introduced
in Section 3 can be formulated for two PG-based planners, namely REINFORCE (Williams, 1992)
and DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015). Details for reproducing these results and additional experiments
can be found in the Appendix .
We illustrate the dierence between PAML and MLE on a nite 3-state MDPand 2-state MDP.
In this setting, we can calculate exact PGs with no estimation error, and thus the exact PAML loss
andKL-divergence. The details of the MDPs are provided in Appendix C. In these experiments,
we use Projected Gradient Descent to update the model parameters and constrain their L2norm,
in order to limit model capacity. In Figures 2 and 3 (Left two), we compare the PAML loss and
KL-divergence of models trained to minimize each for a xed policy. We see that the PAML loss
of a model trained to minimize PAML is (expectedly) much lower than that of a model trained to
minimize KL. Note that the PAML loss of the KLminimizer decreases as the constraint on model
parameters is relaxed, whereas the PAML minimizer is much less dependent on model capacity.
We also evaluate the performances of policies learned using these models, in a process similar to
Algorithm 1, but with exact values rather than sampled ones. Referring to Figures 2 (Right) and 3
(Right) , as the norm of the model parameters becomes smaller, the performance of the KLagent
drops much more than the PAML agent. However, when the constraint is relaxed (i.e. increased),
theKLagent performs similarly to the PAML one. This example provides justication for the use
of PAML: when the model space is constrained, such that it does not contain P, PAML is able to
learn a model that is more useful for planning.
A question that arises is how updates on the policy aect model error since PAML is policy-
aware. The Top Figures of 4a and 4b show the change in LPAML as a result of a number of
policy updates in an epoch (i.e. an epoch refers to each iteration kin 1), while keeping the model
xed in that epoch. For the HalfCheetah experiments (the setup for which is described later),
timestep refers to step taken in the environment. The Bottom Figures of 4a and 4b show the policy
performance over the same epochs. We observe in the 3-State MDP experiments that the change in
LPAML decreases as the policy performance improves. This is expected as the policy, and therefore
model, converge. We also observe that for higher numbers of policy updates, the performance of
29