in terms of total variation, aects the quality of the PG estimate (Theorem 2 in Section 4.1). This
is reassuring as it shows that a good model leads to an accurate estimate of the PG. It might
seem natural to assume that an accurate gradient estimate leads to convergence to a good policy.
However, we could not quantify the quality of the converged policy in a PG procedure beyond
stating that it is a local optimum until recently, when Agarwal et al. (2019) provided quantitative
guarantees on the convergence of PG methods beyond convergence to a local optimum. Our second
theoretical contribution is Theorem 4 (Section 4) that extends one of the results in Agarwal et al.
(2019) to model-based PG and shows the eect of PG error on the quality of the converged policy,
as compared to the best policy in the policy class. We also have a subtle, but perhaps important,
technical contribution in the denition of the policy approximation error, which holds even in the
original model-free setting. Our empirical contributions are demonstrating that PAML can easily be
formulated for two commonly-used PG algorithms and showing its performance in benchmark envi-
ronments (Section 5), for which the code is made available at https://github.com/rabachi/paml .
In addition, our results in a nite-state environment show that PAML outperforms conventional
methods when the model capacity is limited.
2 Background on Decision-Aware Model Learning (DAML)
A MBRL agent interacts with an environment, collects data, improves its internal model, and
uses the internal model, perhaps alongside the real-data, to improve its policy. To formalize, we
consider a (discounted) Markov Decision Process (MDP) ( X;A;R;P;
) (Szepesv ari, 2010). We
denote the state space by X, the action space by A, the reward distribution by R, the transition
probability kernel by P, and the discount factor by 0 
1. In general, the true transition
modelPand the reward distribution Rare not known to an RL agent. The agent instead can
interact with the environment to collect samples from these distributions. The collected data is in
the form of
Dn=f(Xi;Ai;Ri;X0
i)gn
i=1; (1)
with the current state-action being distributed according to Zi= (Xi;Ai)(XA )2M(XA ),
the reward RiR(jXi;Ai), and the next-state X0
iP(jXi;Ai). Note that Mrefers to the set
of all probability distributions dened over XandA. In many cases, an RL agent might follow a
trajectoryX1;X2;::: in the state space (and similar for actions and rewards), that is, Xi+1=X0
i.
We denote the expected reward by r(x;a) =E[R(jx;a)].1
A MBRL agent uses the interaction data to learn an estimate ^Pof the true model Pand ^R
(or simply ^ r) of the true reward distribution R(orr). This is called model learning . These
models are then used by a planning algorithm Planner to nd a close-to-optimal policy. The policy
may be used by the agent to collect more data and improve the estimates ^Pand ^R. This generic
Dyna-style (Sutton, 1990) MBRL algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
How should we learn a model ^Pthat is most suitable for a particular Planner ? This is the
fundamental question in model learning. The conventional approach in model learning ignores
how Planner is going to use the model and instead focuses on learning a good predictor of the
environment. This can be realized by using a probabilistic loss, such as KL-divergence, which leads
1Given a set 
 and its -algebra 
,M(
) refers to the set of all probability distributions dened over 
. As
we do not get involved in the measure theoretic issues in this paper, we do not explicitly dene the -algebra, and
simply use a well-dened and \standard" one, e.g., Borel sets dened for metric spaces.
3