6
Encoding Space
(Search Space )Initial Space
Fig. 6. The relationship between encoding space, search space and initial
space.
encoding strategy methods [21] resulting in preventing the
method from discovering a deeper architecture. Wang et al. [75]
tried to break the limit of maximum length by using a Gaussian
distribution initialization mechanism. Irwin et al. [146] broke
the limit by using the evolutionary operators, the crossover
operator and the mutation operator, to extend the depth to any
size.
Generally, the encoding space can be served as the basis of
the search space and the initial space. In practice, the encoding
space is often the same as the search space, while the initial
space is often a subspace of the encoding space. Fig. 6 shows
the relationship between the three spaces. The search space
is larger than the initial space when some manual constraints
are added to the population initialization. When there is no
such manual constrains, search space and initial space are
equivalent. Furthermore, the initial space determines what kind
of individuals may appear in the initial population, and the
search space determines what kind of individuals may appear
in the evolutionary search process, as illustrated in Fig. 2. In
the following subsections, we will discuss the initial space and
the search space in Subsections III-B and III-C, respectively.
B. Initial Space
In general, there are three types of architecture initialization
approaches in the initial space: starting from trivial initial con-
ditions [23], randomly initialization in the encoding space [21]
and staring from a well-designed architecture (also termed
as rich initialization) [34]. These three types of initialization
correspond to three different initial spaces: trivial space ,
random space andwell-designed space .
The trivial space contains only a few primitive layers. For
example, the LargeEvo algorithm [23] initialized the population
in atrivial space where each individual constitutes just a single-
layer model with no convolutions. Xie et al. [35] experimentally
demonstrated that a trivial space can evolve to a competitive
architecture. The reason for using as little experience as possible
is to justify the advantage of EC-based methods where some
novel architectures can be discovered, and most of the discovery
is different from the manually designed DNN architectures.
On the contrary, the well-designed space contains the state-
of-the-art architectures. In this way, a promising architecture
can be obtained at the beginning of the evolution, whereas
it can hardly evolve to other novel architectures. Actually,
many of ENAS methods adopting this initial space focus on
improving the performance upon the well-designed architecture.
For example, the architecture pruning aims at compressing
DNNs by removing less important connections [134]. For a
random space , all the individuals in the initial population
are randomly generated in the limited space, and it has been
adopted by many methods, such as [9], [21], [67]. The aim of
this type of initial spaces is also to reduce the intervention of
human experience in the initial population.C. Search Space
After the initialization of the population, the ENAS methods
start to search the architectures in the search space. Generally
speaking, the search space is the same as the initial space when
the random initial space is adopted. For other two types of
initial spaces, however, due to the relatively small initial space,
the search space will become much larger with the expectation
that the promising architecture is included. It is worth noting
that many methods do not directly deﬁne the search space, but
restrict the search space by using evolutionary operators. For
example, Irwin et al. [146] did not specify the maximal depth,
instead, they used the evolutionary operations to extend the
architecture to any depth.
IV. E NCODING STRATEGY
This section will discuss how to encode a network architec-
ture into an individual of the EC methods. Each ENAS method
needs to determine its encoding strategy before starting the ﬁrst
stage of the ENAS method, i.e., the population initialization.
The most intuitive difference in different encoding strategies
of ENAS methods is the length of the encoded individuals.
Generally, the encoding strategies can be divided into two
different categories according to whether the length of an
individual changes or not during the evolutionary process.
They are the ﬁxed-length encoding strategy and the variable-
length encoding strategy . Particularly, the individuals have the
same length during the evolutionary process when the ﬁxed-
length encoding strategy is used. In contrast, the individuals
are with different lengths during the evolutionary process if the
variable-length encoding strategy is employed. The advantage
of the ﬁxed-length encoding strategy is that it is easy to use
standard evolutionary operations which are originally designed
for the individuals with equal lengths. In Genetic CNN [35], for
example, the ﬁxed-length binary string helped the evolutionary
operators (especially the crossover) with easy implementation.
Another example is [115], where Loni et al. used a ﬁxed-length
string of genes to represent the architecture which led to easy
implementation of the one-point crossover in the corresponding
encoded information. However, a proper maximal length must
be predeﬁned for the ﬁxed-length encoding strategy. Because
the maximal length relates to the optimal depth of the DNN
architecture, which is unknown in advance, the corresponding
ENAS algorithms still rely on expertise and experience.
Compared with the ﬁxed-length encoding strategy , the
variable-length encoding strategy dose not require the human
expertise regarding the optimal depth in advance, which has the
potential to be fully automated. In addition, the advantage of
this encoding strategy is that it can deﬁne more details of the
architecture with freedom. For example, when solving a new
task where there is no expertise in knowing the optimal depth of
the DNN, we just initialize the individuals with a random depth,
and the optimal depth can be found through the variable-length
encoding strategy, where the depths of the corresponding DNN
can be changed during the evolutionary process. However, the
variable-length encoding strategy also brings some drawbacks.
Because the traditional evolutionary operators might not be
suitable for this kind of encoding strategy, the corresponding