16
GP tree and make a further analysis on the deeper architecture
in the future.
E. Future Applications
Table VI shows various applications which have been
explored by ENAS. But these are just a small part of all areas
of neural network applications. ENAS can be applied wherever
neural networks can be applied, and automate the process of
architecture designed which should have been done by experts.
Moreover, plenty of the image classiﬁcation successes of ENAS
have proven that ENAS has the ability to replace experts in
many areas. The automated architecture design is a trend.
However, this process is not completely automated. The
encoding space (search space) still needs to be designed by
experts for different applications. For example, for the image
processing tasks, CNNs are more suitable, so the encoding
space contains the layers including convolution layers, pooling
layers and fully connected layers. For the time-series data
processing, RNNs are more suitable, so the encoding space
may contain the cells including -RNN cell, LSTM [204],
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [227], Minimally-Gated Unit
(MGU) [228], and Update-Gated RNN (UGRNN) [229]. The
two manually determined encoding spaces already contain a
great deal of artiﬁcial experience and the components without
guaranteed performance are excluded. The problem is: can
a method search the corresponding type of neural network
for multiple tasks in a large encoding space, including all the
popular widely used components? Instead of searching one
multitask network [212] which learns several tasks at once
with the same neural network, the aim is to ﬁnd appropriate
networks for different tasks in one large encoding space.
F . Fair Comparisons
Section VII-B gives a brief introduction of the unfair
comparisons. The unfairness mainly comes from two aspects:
(1) the tricks including cutout [216], ScheduledDropPath [144],
etc. (2) The different encoding spaces. For aspect (1), some
ENAS methods [24] have reported the results with and without
the tricks. For aspect (2), the well-designed search space is
widely used in different ENAS methods. For instance, the
NASNet search space [144] is also used in [36], [132] because
it is well-constructed so that even random search can perform
well. The comparison under the same condition can tell the
effectiveness of different search methods.
Fortunately, the ﬁrst public benchmark dataset for NAS, the
NAS-Bench-101 [142] has been proposed. The dataset contains
432K unique convolutional architectures based on the cell-based
encoding space. Each architecture can query the corresponding
metrics, including test accuracy, training time, etc., directly in
the dataset without the large-scale computation. NAS-Bench-
201 [143] was proposed recently and is based on another
cell-based encoding space, which does not have no limits on
edges. Compared with NAS-Bench-101, which was only tested
on CIFAR-10, this dataset collects the test accuracy on three
different image classiﬁcation datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
ImageNet-16-120 [222]). But the encoding space is relatively
small, and only contains 15.6K architectures. Experiments withdifferent ENAS methods on these benchmark datasets can get
a fair comparison and it will not take too much time. However,
these datasets are only based on the cell-based encoding spaces
and cannot contain all the search space of the existing methods,
because the other basic units (layers and blocks) are built using
more hyper-parameters, which may lead to a larger encoding
space.
In the future, a common platform making fair comparisons
needs to be built. This platform must have several benchmarks
encoding space, such as the NASNet search space, NAS-Bench-
101 and NAS-Bench-201. All the ENAS methods can be
directly tested on the platform. Furthermore, this platform
also needs to solve the problem that different kinds of GPUs
have different computing power, which may cause an inaccurate
GPU Days based on different standards. The GPU Days cannot
be compared directly until they have a common baseline of
computing power.
IX. C ONCLUSIONS
This paper provides a comprehensive survey of ENAS. We
introduced ENAS from four aspects: population representation,
encoding space, population updating, and ﬁtness evaluation
following the uniﬁed ﬂow, which can be seen in Fig. 2. The
various applications and the performance of the state-of-the-art
methods on image classiﬁcation are also summarized in tables
to demonstrate the wide applicability and the promising ability.
Challenges and issues are also discussed to identify future
research direction in this ﬁeld.
To be speciﬁc, ﬁrstly, the encoding space is introduced by
categories. We divide the encoding space into two parts: initial
space and search space, where the former one deﬁnes the initial
conditions whereas the latter one deﬁnes the architectures that
can be found in the evolutionary process. Also, different en-
coding strategies and architecture representations are discussed.
Secondly, the process of population updating including the
evolutionary operators, the multi-objective search strategy, and
the selection strategy are presented. A variety of EC paradigms
use respective metaphors to generate new individuals. Based
on standard algorithms, many improved methods have been
proposed to obtain a stable and reliable search capability.
Furthermore, we introduce the existing methods to reduce
the need for large amounts of time and computing resources,
which is a huge obstacle to efﬁciency.
Although the state-of-the-art methods have achieved some
success, ENAS still faces challenges and issues. The ﬁrst
important issue is whether the EC-based search strategy has
advantages. If the result is at the same level as the baseline
(e.g., random search), it is unnecessary to design the complex
evolutionary operators. A sophisticated experiment is in urgent
need to tell the effectiveness, especially in a large encoding
space. Secondly, the crossover operator is a multi-individual
based operator and there is no sufﬁcient explanation to how
the crossover operator works well on ENAS. Besides, ENAS is
just beginning a new era, so there is a lot of uncharted territory
to be explored. Moreover, a uniﬁed standard or platform is
demanded to make a fair comparison.