15
the effectiveness of the crossover operator in this method.
This method can ﬁnd a good architecture with the help of
the crossover operation. On the contrary, when crossover
is not used, the architecture found is not promising, unless
it runs for a long time. In fact, the mutation operator let
an individual explore the neighbouring region, and it is a
gradually incremental search process like searching step by step.
Crossover (recombination) can generate offspring dramatically
different from the parents, which is more likely a stride. So,
this operator has the ability to efﬁciently ﬁnd a promising
architecture. Chu et al. [121] preferred that while a crossover
mainly contributes to exploitation, a mutation is usually aimed
to introduce exploration. These two operators play different
roles in the evolutionary process. But there is not a sufﬁcient
explanation of how the crossover operator works. Maybe some
additional experiments need to be done on the methods without
the crossover operator.
The EC approach generally performs well when dealing with
practical problems (e.g., the vehicle routing problem). This
is mainly because EC is designed collectively by considering
the domain knowledge in most cases [219], [220]. Similarly,
another key reason to ensure the effectiveness of the ENAS
algorithm is that the EC approach can effectively consider (and
embed) some domain knowledge of the neural architecture.
Since the original intention of ENAS is to design neural
architectures automatically without manual experience, the
future development of ENAS will need to continue to reduce
any artiﬁcial experience by including prior knowledge of the
encoding space. In this case, how to effectively embed domain
knowledge into ENAS is a big challenge.
B. Scalability
The scale of the datasets used in most ENAS methods is
relatively large. Taking the image classiﬁcation task as an
example, the MNIST dataset [221] is one of the earliest datasets.
In total, it contains 70;000 2828grayscale images. Later
in 2009, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 [13] including 60;000
3232color images are medium-scale datasets. One of
the most well-known large-scale datasets is ImageNet [195],
which provides more than 14 million manually annotated high-
resolution images. Unlike CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, which
are commonly used in ENAS, fewer methods choose to verify
their performance on ImageNet [122], [134], [180]. This can
be explained by the data shown in Table VII, where the GPU
Days are usually tens or even thousands. It is unaffordable for
most researchers when the medium-scale dataset changes to
the lager one.
However, Chen et al. [122] believed that the results on the
larger datasets like ImageNet are more convincing because
CIFAR-10 is easy to be over-ﬁtting. A popular way to deal
with this is using a proxy on CIFAR-10 and transfers to
ImageNet [36], [105]. Another alternative approach is to
use the down-scaled dataset of a large-scale dataset such as
ImageNet 6464[222].C. Efﬁcient Evaluation Method and Reduce Computational
Cost
Section VI has introduced the most popular and effective
ways to reduce the ﬁtness evaluation time and the computational
cost. In a nutshell, it can be described as a question that strikes
the balance between the time spent and the accuracy of the
evaluation. Because of the unbearable time for fully training
the architecture, we must compromise as little as we can on
the evaluation accuracy in exchange for signiﬁcant reduction
in the evaluation time without sufﬁcient computing resources.
Although a lot of ENAS methods have adopted various
means to shorten the evaluation time. Even though Sun et
al.[203] speciﬁcally proposed a method for acceleration, the
research direction of search acceleration is just getting started.
The current approaches have many limitations that need to be
addressed. For example, although the LargeEvo algorithm [23]
used the weight inheritance to shorten the evaluation time
and reduced the computational cost, it still ran for several
days with the use of lots of computational resources which
cannot be easily accessed by many researchers. Furthermore,
there is no baseline and common assessment criteria for search
acceleration methods. It is a major challenge to propose a novel
method to evaluate the architecture accurately and quickly.
D. Interpretability
CNNs are known as black-box-like solutions, which are
hard to interpret [63]. Although some works have been done
to visualize the process of feature extraction [223], they are
uninterpretable due to a large number of learned features [154].
The low interpretability of the manual designed architecture
becomes a big obstacle to the development of neural networks.
To overcome this obstacle, some researches [63], [154], [167]
used GP to automatically design the neural network. Being
well-known for its potential interpretability, GP aims at solving
problems by automatically evolving computer programs [224].
All the above researches [63], [154], [167] gave a fur-
ther analysis to demonstrate the interpretability. Speciﬁcally,
Evans et al. [154] have made a visualization on the JAFFE
dataset [225] to expound how the evolved convolution ﬁlter
served as a form of edge detection, and the large presence
of white color in the output of the convolution can help
the classiﬁcation. In their subsequent work [167], they made
a visualization of the automatically evolved model on the
Hands dataset [226], where the aggregation function extracts
the minimum value of a speciﬁc area in the hand image to
determine whether the hand is open or closed. Furthermore, Bi
et al. [63] displayed the features described by the evolved
functions like convolution, max-pooling and addition, and
the generated salient features are discriminative for face
classiﬁcation.
Despite the interpretability the existing work made, all these
GP-based ENAS methods only aim at shallow NNs and the
number of the generated features is relatively small. However,
all the most successful NNs have a deep architecture. This is
due partly to the fact that very few GP based methods can be
run on GPUs. It is necessary to use deep-GP to evolve a deeper