3
Initial Space Search Space
Population Initialization
Fitness EvaluationPopulation Updating
Evolutionary Operations
Fitness Evaluation
Next Generation
Stopping Criterion Last PopulationYes NoSelection
Return
Fig. 2. The ﬂowchart of a common ENAS algorithm.
this section, we will ﬁrst introduce the uniﬁed ﬂow chart of
ENAS in Subsection II-A. Then, the categories of EC methods
based on their search strategies and the categories of DNN
architectures in Subsections II-B and II-C, respectively.
A. Flow Chart of ENAS
Fig. 2 shows an illustration of the ﬂowchart of an ENAS
algorithm. Speciﬁcally, the evolutionary process takes place in
the initial space and the search space sequentially. First of all, a
population is initialized within the initial space that is deﬁned in
advance. Each individual in the population represents a solution
for the ENAS, i.e., a DNN architecture. Each architecture needs
to be encoded as an individual before it joins the population.
Second, the ﬁtness of the generated individuals is evaluated.
Note that there are two ﬁtness evaluation steps as shown in
Fig. 2, which commonly employ the same evaluation criterion.
Thirdly, after the ﬁtness evaluation of the initial population,
the whole population starts the evolutionary process within
the search space, which is shown by the dashed box in Fig. 2.
In the evolutionary process, the population is updated by the
selection and the evolutionary operators in each iteration, until
the stopping criterion is met. Please note that the selection
stage is not necessary for some other EC paradigms like SI.
Finally, a population that has ﬁnished the evolution is obtained.
In the following sections, these key steps are documented in
detail.
B. Evolutionary Search Strategy
ENAS is distinguished from other NAS methods by its
employed optimization approach, i.e., the EC methods, where
the optimization approaches can be further subdivided based
on the search strategy that the optimization approach adopted.
Fig. 3 provides such an illustration from three aspects: EAs,
Swarm Intelligence (SI), and others, and more detailed statistics
can be observed in Table III. In practice, the EA-based methods
account for the majority of existing ENAS algorithms, where
the GA takes a large part of EA-based methods. The other
categories of EC methods are also important parts for realizing
ENAS algorithms, such as GP, Evolutionary Strategy (ES), PSO,
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [29], Differential Evolution
(DE) [30], Fireﬂy Algorithm (FA) [31]. In this paper, the Hill-
Climbing Algorithm (HCA) is classiﬁed into EC paradigm
ENAS
EA SI Others
GA GP ES PSO ACO Memetic DEAIS, FA 
etc.Fig. 3. The categories of ENAS from EC methods regarding the search
strategies.
ENAS
CNN Others DBN AE RNN
Fig. 4. The categories of ENAS from neural network perspective.
because it can be regarded as an EA with a simple selection
mechanism and without crossover operation [32]. HCA has
been well known as a widely used local search algorithm in
memetic algorithms [33].
C. Common Neural Networks in ENAS
The end product of ENAS is all about DNNs, which can be
broadly divided into ﬁve different categories: CNN, Deep Belief
Network (DBN), Stacked Auto-Encoder (SAE), Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) and others. The brief fact can be
seen from Fig. 4, and a detailed illustration will be shown in
Table III.
Most ENAS methods are proposed for searching for the
optimal CNN architectures. This is because many hand-crafted
CNNs, such as VGG [8], ResNet [2] and DenseNet [3],
have demonstrated their superiority in handling the image
classiﬁcation tasks which is the most successful applications
in the deep learning ﬁeld. Generally, the CNN architecture is
composed of the convolutional layers, the pooling layers and
the fully-connected layers, and a common example of CNNs is
shown in Fig. 5 (a). The optimization of CNN architecture is
mainly composed of three aspects: the hyperparameters of each
layer [34], the depth of the architecture [21] and the connections
between layers [35]. In practice, the majority of the ENAS
methods consider the above three aspects collectively [23],
[36].
DBN [37] is made up by stacking multiple Restricted
Boltzmann Machines (RBMs), and an example can be seen in
Fig. 5 (b). Speciﬁcally, RBMs have connections only between
layers, while without any inter-layer connection. Meanwhile,
RBMs allow the DBN to be trained in an unsupervised manner
to obtain a good weight initialization. There are two commonly
used types of hyperparameters needed to be optimized in DBN:
the number of neurons in each layer [38] and the number of
layers [39], [40].
An SAE is constructed by stacking multiple of its building
blocks which are AEs. An AE aims to learn meaningful
representations from the raw input data by restoring its input
data as its objective [41]. Generally, an AE is typically
composed of two symmetrical components: the encoder and
the decoder, and an example including both parts is shown