7
evolutionary operators need to be redesigned, where an example
can be seen in [21]. Another disadvantage is that, due to the
ﬂexibility of variable length encoding, it could generally result
in over-depth architectures, which sometimes further leads to
more time-consuming ﬁtness evaluation. Please note that some
works claimed their use of the variable-length encoding strategy,
where each individual is designed with a maximal length, and
then the placeholder is used to indicate the gene’s validation of
the gene [97]. For example, the individual is designed to have
1;000genes, while some genes having the values of zeros do
not participate in the evolutionary process. In this paper, we
also categorize these methods into the ﬁxed-length encoding
strategy.
In addition, most of the DNN architectures can be represented
as directed graphs which are made up of different basic units
and the connections between the units. Therefore, the encoding
for architecture can be divided into two aspects: conﬁgurations
of basic units and connections, which will be discussed in the
following subsections.
A. Encoding for Conﬁgurations of Basic Units
In practice, different basic units have different conﬁgurations,
such as layers, blocks and cells, which are demonstrated
in Section III. For example, in CNNs, there are multiple
parameters in the primitive layers which can be seen in Table I.
As for the DenseBlock implemented by Sun et al. [9], only
two parameters are needed to build the block. Because the
conﬁguration of cell is more ﬂexible than that of blocks in
CNNs, which can be regarded as a microcosm of a complete
neural network. For example, the cells in [36] are made up by
a combination of 10 layers selected from 8 different primitive
layers. But the cells do not include some of the conﬁgurations
of primitive layer, such as the feature map size which is an
important parameter in the primitive layer [21].
B. Encoding for Connections
When the parameters (conﬁgurations) of the basic units
in the architecture have been determined, the corresponding
architecture cannot be built up immediately. Since edges are
indispensable in directed graph, connections are also part of
the architecture. The connections discussed in this section
include not only connections between basic units, but also the
connections within the basic units.
Generally, the architectures of neural networks can be
divided into two categories: linear architecture andnon-linear
architecture . The former denotes the architectures containing
sequential basic units. The latter indicates that there are skip-
connections or loop-connections in the architecture. Please note
that, the structure could be the macro structure consisting of
basic units, or the micro structure within the basic units.
1) Linear Architecture: The linear architecture can be found
in different kinds of architectures including the one generated
from the layer-based encoding space and the block-based
encoding space. Its widespread use in ENAS stems from its
simplicity. No matter how complex the internal of the basic
units is, many ENAS methods stack the basic units one by one
to build up the skeleton of the architecture which is linear. Forexample, in AE-CNN [9], Sun et al. stacked different kinds of
blocks to generate the architecture.
One special case is a linear architecture generated from the
layer-based encoding space. In this case, there is no need to
solely encode the connections, and only the parameters in each
basic unit are enough to build an architecture. One classical
example can be seen in [21] where Sun et al. explored a great
number of parameters based on a linear CNN architecture.
However, most architectures are not designed to be linear. The
skip connections in ResNet [2] and the dense connections in
DenseNet [3] show the ability to build a good architecture.
2) Non-linear Architecture: Firstly, we will introduce two
approaches to encoding a non-linear architecture in this subsec-
tion. Speciﬁcally, the adjacent matrix is the most popular way to
represent the connections for non-linear architectures. Genetic
CNN [35] used a binary string to represent the connection,
and the string can be transformed into a triangular matrix.
In the binary string, “1” denotes that there is a connection
between the two nodes while “0” denotes no connection in
between. Lorenzo et al. [135] used a matrix to represent the
skip connections, and this work revolved around the adjacent
matrix. Back in the 1990s, Kitano et al. [147] began to study
the use of the adjacent matrix to represent network connection
and explained the process from the connectivity matrix, to
the bit-string genotype, to the network architecture phenotype.
Another way to represent the connections is to use an ordered
pairG= (V;E)with vertices Vand edgeEassociated with
a direction, to represent a directed acyclic graph. Irwin et
al.[146] also used this strategy to encode the connections.
Secondly, the non-linear architecture is a more common
case in both the macro architecture and the micro architecture.
AmoebaNet-A [36], as an example of non-linear macro
architecture, stacked these two kinds of cells for several times
to build up an architecture. In addition, each cell receives two
inputs from the previous two cells separately, which means that
the direct connection and the skip-connection are both used in
this macro structure. Also in AmoebaNet, each cell is a non-
linear architecture inside, which means the micro architecture
is also non-linear. The non-linear architecture provides the
architecture with more ﬂexibility, which makes it more likely
to build up a promising architecture than that of the linear
ones.
V. P OPULATION UPDATING
This section discusses the population updating process as
shown in Fig. 2. Generally, the population updating varies
greatly among existing ENAS algorithms because they may
employ different EC methods which are with different updating
mechanisms. Table III shows the ENAS algorithms which are
classiﬁed according to the EC methods that they employ and
different types of DNNs that they target at. Obviously, the
EA-based ENAS algorithms dominate the ENAS. To be more
speciﬁc, the GA-based ENAS is the most popular approach
which largely owes to the convenience of architecture repre-
sentation in GA. As a result, we give a detailed introduction
to the EA-based ENAS including the selection strategy at
ﬁrst. Immediately after, we present a summary of the SI-based