12
to save time. Different architectures, i.e., the SubNets, are
sampled from the SuperNet with the shared parameters. Yang
et al. [137] believed the traditional ENAS methods without
using SuperNet which were less efﬁcient for models to be
optimized separately. In contrast, the one-shot model optimizes
the architecture and the weights alternatively. But the weight
sharing mechanism brings difﬁculty in accurately evaluating
the architecture. Chu et al. [200] scrutinized the weight-
sharing NAS with a fairness perspective and demonstrated
the effectiveness. However, there remain some doubts that
cannot explain clearly in the one-shot model. The weights in
the SuperNet are coupled. It is unclear why inherited weights
for a speciﬁc architecture are still effective [139].
Making the use of hardware can reduce the time, too. Jiang
et al. [92] used a distributed asynchronous system which
contained a major computing node with 20 individual workers.
Each worker is responsible for training a single block and
uploading its result to the major node in every generation.
Wang et al. [109] designed an infrastructure which has the
ability to leverage all of the available GPU cards across multiple
machines to concurrently perform the objective evaluations for
a batch of individuals. Colangelo et al. [201], [202] designed
a reconﬁgurable hardware framework that ﬁts the ENAS. As
they claimed, this was the ﬁrst work of conducting NAS and
hardware co-optimization.
Furthermore, Lu et al. [101] adopted the concept of proxy
models, which are small-scale versions of the intended archi-
tectures. For example, in a CNN architecture, the number of
layers and the number of channels in each layer are reduced.
However, the drawback of this method is obvious: the loss of
prediction accuracy. Therefore, they performed an experiment
to determine the smallest proxy model that can provide a
reliable estimate of performance at a larger scale.
All the above methods obtain the ﬁtness of individuals
by directly evaluating the performance on the validation
dataset. An alternative way is to use indirect methods, namely
the performance predictors. As summarized in [203], the
performance predictors can be divided into two categories:
performance predictors based on the learning curve and end-
to-end performance predictors, both of which are based on the
training-predicting learning paradigm. This does not mean the
performance predictor does not undergo the training phase at
all, while it means learning from the information obtained in
the training phase, and uses the knowledge learned to make a
reasonable prediction for other architectures. Ralwal et al. [157]
took the use of the learning curve based predictor, where the
ﬁtness is not calculated in the last epoch but is predicted by
the sequence of ﬁtness from ﬁrst epochs. Speciﬁcally, they
used a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [204] as a sequence
to sequence model, predicting the ﬁnal performance by using
the learning results of the ﬁrst several epochs on the validation
dataset. Sun et al. [203] adopted a surrogate-assisted method
which is called end-to-end performance predictor. The predictor
does not need any extra information about the performance
of individuals to be evaluated. The performance predictor is
essentially a regression model mapping from the architecture
to its performance. The regression model needs to be trained
with sufﬁcient training data pairs ﬁrst, and each pair consistsof architecture and its corresponding performance. Speciﬁcally,
they chose random forest [205] as the regression model to
accelerate the ﬁtness evaluations in ENAS. When the random
forest receives a newly generated architecture as input, the
adaptive combination of a huge number of regression trees
which have been trained in advance in the forest gives the
prediction.
VII. A PPLICATIONS
This section discussed different application ﬁelds of ENAS
has involved. Generally, the ENAS algorithms can be applied
to wherever DNNs can be applied. Table VI shows the wide
range of applications and Table VII displays the performance of
extraordinary ENAS methods on two popular and challenging
datasets for image classiﬁcation tasks, namely CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100. Both of these two tables can show what ENAS
has achieved so far.
A. Overview
Table VI shows the applications of existing ENAS algorithms,
which contains a wide range of real-world applications.
Generally, these applications can be grouped into the
following ﬁve different categories:
(1) Image and signal processing, including image clas-
siﬁcation which is the most popular and competitive ﬁeld,
image to image processing (including image restoration, image
denoising, super-resolution and image inpainting), emotion
recognition, speech recognition, language modelling, and face
de-identiﬁcation.
(2) Biological and biomedical tasks, including medical image
segmentation, malignant melanoma detection, sleep heart study,
and assessment of human sperm.
(3) Predictions and forecasting about all sorts of data,
including the prediction of wind speed, car park occupancy,
time-series data, ﬁnancial and usable life, the forecasting of
electricity demand time series, trafﬁc ﬂow, electricity price,
and municipal waste.
(4) Engineering, including engine vibration prediction, Un-
manned Aerial Vehicle (UA V), bearing fault diagnosis and
predicting general aviation ﬂight data.
(5) Others, including crack detection of concrete, gamma-
ray detection, multitask learning, identify galaxies, video
understanding, and comics understanding.
B. Comparisons on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet
In Table VI, it is obvious to see that many ENAS methods
are applied to the image classiﬁcation tasks. The benchmark
dataset, CIFAR-10 which contains a total of ten classes, and
the CIFAR-100 is the advanced dataset including a hundred
classes. These two datasets have been widely used in image
classiﬁcation tasks, and the accuracy on these two challenging
datasets can represent the ability of the architecture searched.
In addition, ImageNet [195] is a more challenging benchmark
dataset, which contains 1,000 classes and more than one million
images. Because CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 are relatively small
and easy to be over-ﬁtting nowadays [122], the results of