1
A Survey on Evolutionary Neural Architecture
Search
Yuqiao Liu, Student Member, IEEE, Yanan Sun, Member, IEEE, Bing Xue, Member, IEEE,
Mengjie Zhang, Fellow, IEEE, Gary G. Yen, Fellow, IEEE and Kay Chen Tan, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great
success in many applications. The architectures of DNNs play
a crucial role in their performance, which is usually manually
designed with rich expertise. However, such a design process
is labour intensive because of the trial-and-error process, and
also not easy to realize due to the rare expertise in practice.
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is a type of technology that can
design the architectures automatically. Among different methods
to realize NAS, Evolutionary Computation (EC) methods have
recently gained much attention and success. Unfortunately, there
has not yet been a comprehensive summary of the EC-based NAS
algorithms. This paper reviews over 200 papers of most recent
EC-based NAS methods in light of the core components, to sys-
tematically discuss their design principles as well as justiﬁcations
on the design. Furthermore, current challenges and issues are also
discussed to identify future research in this emerging ﬁeld.
Index Terms —Evolutionary Neural Architecture Search, Evo-
lutionary Computation, Deep Learning, Image Classiﬁcation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
DEEP Neural Networks (DNNs), as the cornerstone of deep
learning [1], have demonstrated their great success in di-
verse real-world applications, including image classiﬁcation [2],
[3], natural language processing [4], speech recognition [5],
to name a few. The promising performance of DNNs has
been widely documented due to their deep architectures [1],
which can learn meaningful features directly from the raw data
almost without any explicit feature engineering. Generally,
the performance of DNNs depends on two aspects: their
architectures and the associated weights. Only when both
achieve the optimal status simultaneously, the performance
of the DNNs could be expected promising. The optimal
weights are often obtained through a learning process: using a
continuous loss function to measure the discrepencies between
the real output and the desired one, and then the gradient-
based algorithms are often used to minimize the loss. When
the termination condition is satisﬁed, which is commonly
a maximal iteration number, the algorithm can often ﬁnd a
good set of weights [1]. This kind of process has been very
popular owing to its effectiveness in practice, and has become
the dominant practice for weight optimization [6], although
Yuqiao Liu and Yanan Sun are with the College of Computer Science,
Sichuan University, China.
Bing Xue and Mengjie Zhang are with the School of Engineering and
Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New
Zealand.
Gary G. Yen is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, USA.
Kay Chen Tan is with the Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong.they are principally local-search [7] algorithms. On the other
hand, obtaining the optimal architectures cannot be directly
formulated by a continuous function, and there is even no
explicit function to measure the process for ﬁnding optimal
architectures.
To this end, there has been a long time that the promising
architectures of DNNs are manually designed with rich
expertise. This can be evidenced from the state of the arts, such
as VGG [8], ResNet [2] and DenseNet [3]. These promising
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models are all manually
designed by the researchers with rich knowledge in both neural
networks and image processing. However, in practice, most end
users are not with such kinds of knowledge. Moreover, DNN
architectures are often problem-dependent. If the distribution
of the data is changed, the architectures must be redesigned
accordingly. Neural Architecture Search (NAS), which aims to
automate the architecture designs of deep neural networks,
is identiﬁed as a promising way to address the challenge
aforementioned.
Mathematically, NAS can be modeled by an optimization
problem formulated by Equation (1):
arg minA=L(A;Dtrain;Dfitness )
s:t: A2A(1)
whereAdenotes the search space of the potential neural
architectures,L()measures the performance of the architecture
Aon the ﬁtness evaluation dataset Dfitness after being trained
on the training dataset Dtrain . TheL()is usually non-convex
and non-differentiable [9]. In principle, NAS is a complex
optimization problem experiencing several challenges, e.g.,
complex constraints, discrete representations, bi-level struc-
tures, computationally expensive characteristics and multiple
conﬂicting criteria. NAS algorithms refer to the optimization
algorithms which are speciﬁcally designed to effectively and
efﬁciently solve the problem represented by Equation (1). The
initial work of NAS algorithms is commonly viewed as the
work in [10], which was proposed by Google. The pre-print
version of this work was ﬁrstly released in the website of
arXiv1in 2016, and then was formally accepted for publication
by the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR) in 2017. Since then, a large number of researchers
have been investing tremendous efforts in developing novel
NAS algorithms.
Based on the optimizer employed, existing NAS algorithms
can be broadly classiﬁed into three different categories:
1https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.01578arXiv:2008.10937v4  [cs.NE]  4 Feb 2022