Page 14 of 23 Zhang et al. Comput Soc Netw            (2019) 6:11 
they are difficult to encode the intrinsic graph structures in the specific learning tasks. In 
contrast, the graph convolutional networks have been applied to solve some computer 
vision problems and shown a comparable or even better performance. In this subsec -
tion, we further categorize these applications based on the type of data.
Images
Image classification is of a great importance in many real-world applications. By some 
carefully hand-crafted graph construction methods (e.g., kNN similarity graphs) or other 
supervised approaches, the unstructured images can be converted to the structured graph data and thereby are able to be applied to graph convolutional networks. Existing models for image classification include, but are not limited to [5, 32, 34, 71, 72]. Another 
application on images is visual question answering that explores the answers to the ques
-
tions on images. Narasimhan et al. propose a graph convolutional network-based deep learning model to use the information from multiple facts of the images from knowl
-
edge bases to aid question answering, which relies less on retrieving the single correct fact of images [73]. In addition, as images often contain multiple objects, understanding 
the relationships (i.e., visual relationships) among the objects helps to characterize the 
interactions among them, which makes visual reasoning a hot topic in computer vision. For visual relationships detection, Cui et al. propose a graph convolutional network to leverage both the semantic graphs of words and spatial scene graph [74]. Besides, Yao 
et al. propose an architecture of graph convolutional networks and LSTM to explore the 
visual relationships for image captioning [75]. To generate scene graphs, despite some existing message-passing-based methods [76, 77], many of them may not handle the 
unreliable visual relationships. Yang et  al. propose an attentional graph convolutional model that can place attention on the reliable edges while dampening the influence of 
unlikely edges [78]. In the opposite direction, Johnson et al. use a graph convolutional 
network model to process the input scene graph and generate the images by a cascaded refinement network [79] trained adversarially [80].
Videos
One of the high-impact applications of videos is the action recognition which can help video understanding. In [81], a spatial-temporal graph convolutional model is designed 
to eliminate the need of hand-crafted part assignment and can achieve a greater expres
-
sive power. Another skeleton-based method is [82], where a generalized graph con -
struction process is proposed to capture the variation in the skeleton sequences and the 
generalized graph is then fed to a graph convolutional network for variation learning. 
Wang and Gupta [83] represents the input video as a space-time region graph which 
builds two types of connections (i.e., appearance similarity and spatial-temporal proxim -
ity), and then recognizes actions by applying graph convolutional networks. Zhang et al. propose a tensor convolutional network for action recognition [84].
Point clouds
Point clouds provide a flexible geometric representation for many applications in com -
puter graphics and computer vision. Followed by the pioneering PointNet [85], the state-
of-the-art deep neural networks consider the local features of point clouds [85, 86].