Page 15 of 23
 Zhang et al. Comput Soc Netw            (2019) 6:11 
However, these works ignore the geometric relationships among points. EdgeConv [87], 
on the other hand, is proposed to capture the local geometric structure while maintain -
ing the permutation invariance property and outperforms other existing approaches in the point cloud segmentation task. A regularized graph convolutional network model 
has been proposed for segmentation on point clouds in [88] in which the graph Lapla
-
cian is dynamically updated to capture the connectivity of the learned features. FeaStNet 
[89] built upon graph convolutional networks dynamically determines the association 
between filter weights and graph neighborhood, showing a comparable performance in part labeling. Wang et al. propose a local spectral graph convolutional network for both point cloud classification and segmentation [90]. For point cloud classification, other graph convolution-based methods include [45, 59]. Valsesia et  al. propose a localized 
generative model by using graph convolution to generate 3D point clouds [91].
Meshes
One application on meshes which we consider in this paper is the shape correspondence, i.e., to find correspondences between collections of 3D shapes. Beyond the classic CNN-
based methods (e.g., [92, 93]), several graph convolutional network-based approaches 
have been proposed, including [5, 89]. In addition, Litany et  al. propose to combine 
graph convolutional networks with variational auto-encoder for the shape completion 
task [ 94].
Applications in natural language processing
Text classification is one of the most classical problems in natural language processing. With the documents as nodes and the citation relationships among them as edges, the citation network can be constructed, in which node attributes are often modeled by the 
bag-of-words. In this scenario, the straightforward way to classify documents into differ
-
ent categories is by node classification. Many graph convolutional network models have 
been proposed, to name a few, including [5, 37, 42, 61, 95]. Another way is to view the 
documents at the graph-level (i.e., each document is modeled as a graph) and classify 
the texts by graph classification [33, 34]. Besides, TextGCN [96] models a whole corpus 
to a heterogeneous graph and learn word embedding and document embedding simul -
taneously, followed by a softmax classifier for text classification. Gao et al. use a graph 
pooling layer and the hybrid convolutions of graph convolution and classic convolution to incorporate node ordering information, achieving a better performance over the tra
-
ditional CNN-based and GCN-based methods [97]. When there are lots of labels at dif -
ferent topical granularities, these single-granularity methods may achieve a suboptimal performance. In [98], a graph-of-words is constructed to capture long-distance seman
-
tics, and then, a recursively regularized graph convolution model is applied to leverage the hierarchy of labels.
Information extraction is often the cornerstone of many NLP-related applications 
and graph convolutional networks have been broadly applied in it and its variant prob
-
lems. For example, GraphIE [99] first uses a recurrent neural network to generate local 
context-aware hidden representations of words or sentences and then learns non-local 
dependencies between textual units, followed by a decoder for labeling at the word level. GraphIE can be applied to information extraction such as named entity extraction.