Page 18 of 23 Zhang et al. Comput Soc Netw            (2019) 6:11 
More powerful graph convolutional networks
Most of the existing spatial graph convolutional network models are based on neighbor -
hood aggregations. These models have been proved theoretically to be at most as pow -
erful as one-dimensional Weisfeiler–Lehman graph isomorphism test, and the graph 
isomorphism network has been proposed to reach the limit [70]. However, one natu -
ral question to be asked is: can we break the limit of 1-dimensional Weisfeiler–Lehman 
graph isomorphism test? A few works have studied the related questions such as [127–
129]. However, further researches on this problem are still quite challenging.
Multiple graph convolutional networks
As already mentioned before, the major drawback of the spectral graph convolutional networks is its inability of adaptation from one graph to another graph if two graphs 
have different Fourier basis (i.e., eigenfunctions of the Laplacian matrix). The existing 
work [130] alternatively learns the filter parameters by generalizing the eigenfunc
-
tions of a single graph to the eigenfunctions of the Kronecker product graph of mul -
tiple input graphs. As a different track, inductive learning is possible for many spatial graph convolutional network models, such that one model learned on one or several 
graphs can be applied to other graphs. However, a drawback of these methods is that 
the interactions (e.g., anchor links, cross-network node similarities) or correlations (e.g., correlations among multiple views) across multiple graphs are not exploited. In fact, given multiple graphs, the representation learning of a unique node should be 
able to benefit from more information provided across graphs or views. However, to 
our best knowledge, there is no existing model aiming at the problems in this setting.
Concluding remarks
Graph convolutional network models, as one category of the graph neural network mod -
els, have become a very hot topic in both machine learning and other related areas, and a substantial amount of models have been proposed to solve different problems. In this survey, we conduct a comprehensive literature review on the emerging field of graph 
convolutional networks. Specifically, we introduce two intuitive taxonomies to group the 
existing works based on the types of graph filtering operations and also on the areas of applications. For each taxonomy, we highlight with some detailed examples from a 
unique standpoint. We also discuss some open challenges and potential issues of the 
existing graph convolutional networks and provide some future directions.
Abbreviations
CNN: convolution neural network; ChebNet: Chebyshev polynomial based graph convolution (model proposed in [34]); GCN: graph convolutional network (model proposed in [37]); FastGCN: minibatch training for GCN (model proposed in [39]); CayleyNet: Cayley polynomial based graph convolution (model proposed in [42]); LanczosNet: multiscale graph convolutional network by Lanczos algorithm (model proposed in [43]); PATCHY-SAN: graph CNN (model proposed in [52]); LGCN: large-scale graph CNN (model proposed in [53]); DCNN: diffusion-based graph convolutional network (model proposed in [57]); MoNet: pseudo-coordinates based graph convolutional network (model proposed in [5]); SplineCNN: B-splines based convolution kernel for graphs and meshes (model proposed in [58]); ECC: edge-conditioned convolution (model proposed in [59]); GraphSAGE: mean/LSTM/pooling aggregation based graph convolutional net -
work (model proposed in [61]); GAT  : graph attention network (model proposed in [24]); MPNN: message passing neural 
networks (model proposed in [69]).