Page 3 of 23
 Zhang et al. Comput Soc Netw            (2019) 6:11 
domain (i.e., vertex domain) as the aggregations of node representations from the node 
neighborhoods. The emergence of these operations opens a door to graph convolutional 
networks. Generally speaking, graph convolutional network models are a type of neural 
network architectures that can leverage the graph structure and aggregate node informa -
tion from the neighborhoods in a convolutional fashion. Graph convolutional networks have a great expressive power to learn the graph representations and have achieved a 
superior performance in a wide range of tasks and applications. Note that in the past few 
years, many other types of graph neural networks have been proposed, including (but are not limited to): (1) graph auto-encoder [21], (2) graph generative model [22, 23], (3) 
graph attention model [24, 25], and (4) graph recurrent neural networks [26, 27].
There exist several other related surveys on the topic of graph neural networks. Bron
-
stein et  al. review the mathematical details and a number of early approaches of geo -
metric deep learning for both graphs and manifolds [28]. Zhang et al. present a detailed review that covers many existing graph neural networks beyond graph convolutional networks, such as graph attention networks and gated graph neural network [29]. In 
addition, Wu et al. also review the studies on graph generative models and neural net
-
works for spatial-temporal networks [30]. Besides, Lee et  al. present an overview of 
graph neural networks with a special focus on graph attention networks [31]. However, since graph convolutional network is a very hot and fast developing research area, these 
existing surveys may not cover the most up-to-date models. In this survey, we focus spe
-
cifically on reviewing the existing literature of the graph convolutional networks and 
cover the recent progress. The main contributions of this survey are summarized as 
follows:
1. We introduce two taxonomies to group the existing graph convolutional network 
models (Fig.  1). First, we categorize graph convolutional networks into spectral-
based and spatial-based models depending on the types of convolutions. Then, we introduce several graph convolutional networks according to their application 
domains.
2. We motivate each taxonomy by surveying and discussing the up-to-date graph con
-
volutional network models.
Fig. 1 An overview of graph convolutional networks