Page 2 of 23 Zhang et al. Comput Soc Netw            (2019) 6:11 
modeling the transactions among people as a graph, the complex transaction patterns 
can be mined for synthetic identity detection [3] and money laundering detection [6].
However, the complex structure of graphs [7] often hampers the capability of gain -
ing the true insights underlying the graphs. Such complexity, for example, resides in 
the non-Euclidean nature of the graph-structured data. A potential solution to dealing with the complex patterns is to learn the graph representations in a low-dimensional 
Euclidean space via embedding techniques, including the traditional graph embedding 
methods [8–10], and the recent network embedding methods [11, 12]. Once the low-
dimensional representations are learned, many graph-related problems can be easily done, such as the classic node classification and link prediction [12]. There exist many thorough reviews on both traditional graph embedding and recent network embed
-
ding methods. For example, Yan et al. review several well-established traditional graph embedding methods and discuss the general framework for graph dimensionality reduc
-
tion [13]. Hamilton et  al. review the general graph representation learning methods, including node embedding and subgraph embedding [14]. Furthermore, Cui et al. dis
-
cuss the differences between the traditional graph embedding and the recent network embedding methods [15]. One notable difference is that the recent network embedding is more suitable for the task-specific network inference. Other existing literature reviews 
on network embedding include [16, 17].
Despite some successes of these embedding methods, many of them suffer from the 
limitations of the shallow learning mechanisms [11, 12] and might fail to discover the 
more complex patterns behind the graphs. Deep learning models, on the other hand, 
have been demonstrated their power in many applications. For example, convolution neural networks (CNNs) achieve a promising performance in many computer vision [18] and natural language processing [19] applications. One key reason of such successes is that CNN models can highly exploit the stationarity and compositionality properties of 
certain types of data. In particular, due to the grid-like nature of images, the convolu
-
tional layers in CNNs enable to take advantages of the hierarchical patterns and extract 
high-level features of the images to achieve a great expressive capability. The basic CNN 
models aim to learn a set of fixed-size trainable localized filters which scan every pixel 
in the images and combine the surrounding pixels. The core components include the convolutional and pooling layers that can be operated on the data with an Euclidean or grid-like structure.
However, the non-Euclidean characteristic of graphs (e.g., the irregular structure) 
makes the convolutions and filtering on graphs not as well-defined as on images. In the past decades, researchers have been working on how to conduct convolutional opera
-
tions on graphs. One main research direction is to define graph convolutions from the spectral perspective, and thus, graph signal processing, such as graph filtering and graph 
wavelets, has attracted lots of research interests. Shuman et  al. give a comprehensive 
overview of graph signal processing, including the common operations and analyses on graphs [20]. Briefly speaking, spectral graph convolutions are defined in the spec
-
tral domain based on graph Fourier transform, an analogy of 1-D signal Fourier trans -
form. In this way, the spectral-based graph convolutions can be computed by taking 
the inverse Fourier transform of the multiplication between two Fourier transformed 
graph signals. On the other hand, graph convolution can be also defined in the spatial