Page 17 of 23
 Zhang et al. Comput Soc Netw            (2019) 6:11 
a so-called crystal graph convolutional neural network to directly learn material proper -
ties from the connection of atoms in the crystal.
Social network analysis
Beyond the applications in classical problems of social science, such as community 
detection [42, 118], and link prediction [21, 119, 120], graph convolutional networks 
have been applied in many other problems. DeepInf [121] aims to predict social influ -
ences by learning users latent features. Vijayan et al. propose to use graph convolutional 
networks for retweet count forcasting [122]. Moreover, fake news can be also detected by graph convolutions [123]. Graph convolutional networks have been widely used 
for social recommendation which aims to leverage the user–item interactions and/or 
user–user interactions to boost the recommendation performance. Wu et  al. propose a neural influence diffusion model that takes how users are influenced by their trusted friends into considerations for better social recommendations [124]. Ying et al. propose 
a very efficient graph convolutional network model PinSage[125] based on GraphSAGE 
[61] which exploits the interactions between pins and boards in Pinterest. Wang et al. propose a neural graph collaborative filtering framework that integrates the user–item interactions into the graph convolutional network and explicitly exploits the collabora
-
tive signals [126].
Challenges and future researches
Deep graph convolutional networks
Although the initial objective of graph convolutional network models is to leverage the deep architecture for better representation learning, most of the current models still suf
-
fer from their shallow structure. For example, GCN [37] in practice only uses two layers and using more graph convolution layers may even hurt the performance. This is also 
intuitive due to its simple propagation procedure. As deeper the architecture is, the rep
-
resentations of nodes may become smoother even for those nodes that are distinct and 
far from each other. This issue violates the purpose of using deep models. Although few works have been proposed to address this issue (e.g., skip connection based models), 
how to build a deep architecture that can better adaptively exploits the deeper structural 
patterns of graphs is still an open challenge.
Graph convolutional networks for dynamic graphs
Most of the existing graph convolutional networks explicitly assume the input graphs are static. However, in the real cases, networks are often changing dynamically. For exam
-
ple, social networks are essentially dynamic networks as users are joining/quiting the networks frequently and friendships among users are also changing dynamically. To this 
end, learning graph convolutional networks on static graphs may not provide an opti
-
mal performance. Thus, the efficient dynamic graph convolutional network models are important to be studied.