Page 9 of 23
 Zhang et al. Comput Soc Netw            (2019) 6:11 
instead of directly parameterizing the filter coefficients, the spectral graph convolu -
tion layer parameterizes a function over the graph Laplacian by introducing a notion of 
residual Laplacian. However, the main drawback of this method is the inevitable O(n2) 
complexity.
Spatial graph convolutional networks
As the spectral graph convolution relies on the specific eigenfunctions of Laplacian 
matrix, it is still nontrivial to transfer the spectral-based graph convolutional network 
models learned on one graph to another graph whose eigenfunctions are different. On the other hand, according to the graph filtering in vertex domain (i.e., Eq. (5 )), graph 
convolution can be alternatively generalized to some aggregations of graph signals within the node neighborhood. In this section, we categorize the spatial graph con
-
volutional networks into the classic CNN-based models, propagation-based models, and other related general frameworks.
Classic CNN‑based spatial graph convolutional networks
Classic CNN models on grid-like data, such as images, have been shown great suc -
cesses in many related applications, including images classification [46– 48], object 
detection [18, 49], semantic segmentation [50, 51], etc. The basic properties of grid-
like data that are exploited by convolution architectures include: (1) the number of 
neighboring pixels for each pixel is fixed, and (2) the spatial order of scanning images 
is naturally determined, i.e., from left to right and from top to bottom. However, dif -
ferent from images, neither the number of neighboring units nor the spatial order among them is fixed in the arbitrary graph data.
To address these issues, many works have been proposed to build graph convolu
-
tional networks directly upon the classic CNNs. Niepert et  al. propose to address the aforementioned challenges by extracting locally connected regions from graphs 
[52]. The proposed PATCHY-SAN model first determines the nodes ordering by a 
given graph labeling approach such as centrality-based methods (e.g., degree, Pag
-
eRank, betweenness, etc.) and selects a fixed-length sequence of nodes. Second, to 
address the issue of arbitrary neighborhood size of nodes, a fixed-size neighborhood 
for each node is constructed. Finally, the neighborhood graph is normalized accord -
ing to graph labeling procedures, so that nodes of similar structural roles are assigned 
similar relative positions, followed by the representation learning with classic CNNs. However, as the spatial order of nodes is determined by the given graph labeling 
approach that is often solely based on graph structure, PATCHY-SAN lacks the learn
-
ing flexibility and generality to a broader range of applications.
Different from PATCHY-SAN that order nodes by structural information [52], 
LGCN model [53] is proposed to transform the irregular graph data to grid-like data 
by using both structural information and input feature map of the p -th layer. In par -
ticular, for a node u∈V in G , it stacks the input feature map of the node u ’s neighbors 
into a single matrix M∈R|N(u)|×d p , where |N(u)| represents the number of 1-hop 
neighboring nodes of node u . For each column of M , the first r  largest values are pre -
served and form a new matrix ˜M∈Rr×dp . In such a simple way, the input feature map