To push the envelope further: we investigate why the
efficiency of region proposal-based oriented detectors has
trailed thus far. Our observation is that the main obsta-
cle impeding the speed of proposal-driven detectors is from
the stage of proposal generation. A natural and intuitive
question to ask is: can we design a general and simple
oriented region proposal network (oriented RPN for short)
to generate high-quality oriented proposals directly? Mo-
tivated by this question, this paper presents a simple two-
stage oriented object detection framework, called oriented
R-CNN, which obtains state-of-the-art detection accuracy,
while keeping competitive efficiency in comparison with
one-stage oriented detectors.
To be specific, in the first stage of oriented R-CNN, a
conceptually simple oriented RPN is presented (see Figure
1(c)). Our oriented RPN is a kind of light-weight fully con-
volutional network, which has extremely fewer parameters
than rotated RPN and RoI transformer+, thus reducing the
risk of overfitting. We realize it by changing the number
of output parameters of RPN regression branch from four
to six. There is no such thing as a free lunch. The de-
sign of oriented RPN benefits from our proposed represen-
tation scheme of oriented objects, named midpoint offset
representation. For arbitrary-oriented objects in images, we
utilize six parameters to represent them. The midpoint off-
set representation inherits horizontal regression mechanism,
as well as provides bounded constraints for predicting ori-
ented proposals. The second stage of oriented R-CNN is
oriented R-CNN detection head: extracting the features of
each oriented proposal by rotated RoI alignment and per-
forming classification and regression.
Without bells and whistles, we evaluate our oriented R-
CNN on two popular benchmarks for oriented object de-
tection, namely DOTA and HRSC2016. Our method with
ResNet-50-FPN surpasses the accuracy of all existing state-
of-the-art detectors, achieving 75.87% mAP on the DOTA
dataset and 96.50% mAP on the HRSC2016 dataset, while
running at 15.1 FPS with the image size of 1024 ×1024 on
a single RTX 2080Ti. Thus, the oriented R-CNN is a prac-
tical object detection framework in terms of both accuracy
and efficiency. We hope our method will inspire rethink-
ing the design of oriented object detectors and oriented ob-
ject regression scheme, as well as serve as a solid baseline
for oriented object detection. For future research, our code
is available at https://github.com/jbwang1997/
OBBDetection .
2. Related Work
In the past decade, remarkable progresses [23, 33, 2, 42,
31, 24, 45, 13, 20, 29] have been made in the field of ob-
ject detection. As an extended branch of object detection,
oriented object detection [7, 37, 26, 12, 5, 28] has received
extensive attention driven by its wide applications.General object detection methods (e.g., Faster R-CNN)
relying on horizontal bounding boxes could not tightly lo-
cate oriented objects in images, because a horizontal bound-
ing box may contain more background regions or multiple
objects. This results in the inconsistency between the fi-
nal classification confidence and localization accuracy. To
address this issue, much attention has been devoted. For
instance, Xia et al. [36] built a large-scale object detection
benchmark with oriented annotations, named DOTA. Many
existing oriented object detectors [7, 37, 41, 26, 25, 18]
are mainly based on typical proposal-based object detection
frameworks. A nature solution to oriented object is to set ro-
tated anchors [26, 25], such as rotated RPN [26], in which
the anchors with different angles, scales and aspect ratios
are placed on each location. These densely rotated anchors
lead to extensive computations and memory footprint.
To decrease the large number of rotated anchors and
reduce the mismatch between features and objects, Ding
et.al [7] proposed the RoI transformer that learns rotated
RoIs from horizontal RoIs produced by RPN. This manner
greatly boosts the detection accuracy of oriented objects.
However, it makes the network heavy and complex because
it involves fully-connected layers and RoI alignment oper-
ation during the learning of rotated RoIs. To address the
challenges of small, cluttered, and rotated object detection,
Yang et.al [41] built an oriented object detection method on
the generic object detection framework of Faster R-CNN.
Xu et.al [37] proposed a new oriented object representation,
termed gliding vertexes. It achieves oriented object detec-
tion by learning four vertex gliding offsets on the regression
branch of Faster R-CNN head. However, these two meth-
ods both adopt horizontal RoIs to perform classification and
oriented bounding box regression. They still suffer from se-
vere misalignment between objects and features.
In addition, some works [12, 28, 39, 27, 43, 16, 40, 47,
15] have explored one-stage or anchor-free oriented object
detection frameworks: outputting object classes and ori-
ented bounding boxes without region proposal generation
and RoI alignment operation. For example, Yang et.al [39]
proposed a refined one-stage oriented object detector, which
involves two key improvements, including feature refine-
ment and progressive regression, to address the problem of
feature misalignment. Ming et.al [27] designed a new la-
bel assignment strategy for one-stage oriented object de-
tection based on RetinaNet [22]. It assigns the positive
or negative anchors dynamically through a new matching
strategy. Han et.al [12] proposed a single-shot alignment
network (S2ANet) for oriented object detection. S2ANet
aims at alleviating the inconsistency between the classifica-
tion score and location accuracy via deep feature alignment.
Pan et.al [28] devised a dynamic refinement network (DRN)
for oriented object detection based on the anchor-free object
detection method CenterNet [46].
3521