Figure 2: Overall framework of oriented R-CNN, which is a two-stage detector built on FPN. The first stage generates
oriented proposals by oriented RPN and the second stage is oriented R-CNN head to classify proposals and refine their
spatial locations. For clear illustration, we do not show the FPN as well as the classification branch in oriented RPN.
In contrast with the above methods, our work falls within
proposal-based oriented object detection methods. It fo-
cuses on designing a high-efficiency oriented RPN to break
the computational bottleneck of generating oriented propos-
als.
3. Oriented R-CNN
Our proposed object detection method, called oriented
R-CNN, consists of an oriented RPN and an oriented R-
CNN head (see Figure 2). It is a two-stage detector, where
the first stage generates high-quality oriented proposals in a
nearly cost-free manner and the second stage is oriented R-
CNN head for proposal classification and regression. Our
FPN backbone follows [21], which produces five levels
of features {P2, P3, P4, P5, P6}. For simplicity, we do
not show the FPN architecture as well as the classifica-
tion branch in oriented RPN. Next, we describe the oriented
RPN and oriented R-CNN head in detail.
3.1. Oriented RPN
Given an input image of any size, oriented RPN outputs
a sparse set of oriented proposals. The entire process can be
modeled by light-weight fully-convolutional networks.
Specifically, it takes five levels of features
{P2, P3, P4, P5, P6}of FPN as input and attaches a
head of the same design (a 3 ×3 convolutional layer and
two sibling 1 ×1 convolutional layers) to each level of
features. We assign three horizontal anchors with threeaspect rations {1:2, 1:1, 2:1 }to each spatial location in
all levels of features. The anchors have the pixel areas
of
322,642,1282,2562,5122	
on{P2, P3, P4, P5, P6},
respectively. Each anchor ais denoted by a 4-dimensional
vector a= (ax, ay, aw, ah), where (ax, ay)is the center
coordinate of the anchor, awandahrepresent the width
and height of the anchor. One of the two sibling 1 ×1 con-
volutional layers is regression branch: outputting the offset
δ= (δx, δy, δw, δh, δα, δβ)of the proposals relative to the
anchors. At each location of feature map, we generate A
proposals ( Ais the number of anchors at each location, and
it equals to 3 in this work), thus the regression branch has
6Aoutputs. By decoding the regression outputs, we can
obtain the oriented proposal. The process of decoding is
described as follows:


∆α=δα·w, ∆β=δβ·h
w=aw·eδw, h =ah·eδh
x=δx·aw+ax, y =δy·ah+ay(1)
where (x, y)is the center coordinate of the predicted pro-
posal, wandhare the width and height of the external rect-
angle box of the predicted oriented proposal. ∆αand∆β
are the offsets relative to the midpoints of the top and right
sides of the external rectangle. Finally, we produce oriented
proposals according to (x, y, w, h, ∆α,∆β).
The other sibling convolutional layer estimates the ob-
jectness score for each oriented proposal. For clear illustra-
tion, we omit the scoring branch in Figure 2. The oriented
RPN is acctually a natural and intuitive idea, but its key lies
3522