Oriented R-CNN for Object Detection
Xingxing Xie Gong Cheng* Jiabao Wang Xiwen Yao Junwei Han
School of Automation, Northwestern Ploytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{xiexing,jbwang }@mail.nwpu.edu.cn {gcheng,yaoxiwen,jhan }@nwpu.edu.cn
Figure 1: Comparisons of different schemes for generating oriented proposals. (a) Rotated RPN densely places rotated
anchors with different scales, ratios, and angles. (b) RoI Transformer+learns oriented proposal from horizontal RoI. It
involvs RPN, RoI Alignment, and regression. (c) Our proposed oriented RPN generates high-quality proposals in a nearly
cost-free manner. The number of parameters of oriented RPN is about 1/3000 of RoI Transformer+and 1/15 of rotated RPN.
Abstract
Current state-of-the-art two-stage detectors generate
oriented proposals through time-consuming schemes. This
diminishes the detectors’ speed, thereby becoming the com-
putational bottleneck in advanced oriented object detection
systems. This work proposes an effective and simple ori-
ented object detection framework, termed Oriented R-CNN,
which is a general two-stage oriented detector with promis-
ing accuracy and efficiency. To be specific, in the first stage,
we propose an oriented Region Proposal Network (oriented
RPN) that directly generates high-quality oriented propos-
als in a nearly cost-free manner. The second stage is ori-
ented R-CNN head for refining oriented Regions of Interest
(oriented RoIs) and recognizing them. Without tricks, ori-
ented R-CNN with ResNet50 achieves state-of-the-art de-
tection accuracy on two commonly-used datasets for ori-
ented object detection including DOTA (75.87% mAP) and
HRSC2016 (96.50% mAP), while having a speed of 15.1
FPS with the image size of 1024 ×1024 on a single RTX
2080Ti. We hope our work could inspire rethinking the
design of oriented detectors and serve as a baseline for
oriented object detection. Code is available at https:
//github.com/jbwang1997/OBBDetection .
*Corresponding author.+denotes the official version of RoI Trans-
former implemented on AerialDetection (the same below).1. Introduction
Most existing state-of-the-art oriented object detection
methods [7, 37, 41] depend on proposal-driven frameworks,
like Fast/Faster R-CNN [11, 10, 32]. They involve two key
steps: (i) generating oriented proposals and (ii) refining pro-
posals and classifying them into different categories. Nev-
ertheless, the step of producing oriented proposals is com-
putationally expensive.
One of the early methods of generating oriented pro-
posals is rotated Region Proposal Network (rotated RPN
for short) [26], which places 54 anchors with different an-
gles, scales and aspect rations (3 scales ×3 ratios ×6 an-
gles) on each location, as shown in Figure 1(a). The intro-
duction of rotated anchors improves the recall and demon-
strates good performance when the oriented objects dis-
tribute sparsely. However, abundant anchors cause massive
computation and memory footprint. To address this issue,
RoI Transformer [7] learns oriented proposals from hori-
zontal RoIs by complex process, which involves RPN, RoI
Alignment and regression (see Figure 1(b)). The RoI Trans-
former scheme provides promising oriented proposals and
drastically reduces the number of rotated anchors, but also
brings about expensive computation cost. Now, how to de-
sign an elegant and efficient solution to generate oriented
proposals is the key to breaking the computational bottle-
neck in state-of-the-art oriented detectors.
3520