Figure 5: Illustration of the process of rotated RoIAlign.
Blue box is a parallelogram proposal generated by oriented
RPN, and the most-left red box is its corresponding rectan-
gular proposal used for projection and rotated RoIAlign.
3.2. Oriented R-CNN Head
Oriented R-CNN head takes the feature maps
{P2, P3, P4, P5}and a set of oriented proposals as in-
put. For each oriented proposal, we use rotated RoI
alignment (rotated RoIAlign for short) to extract a fixed-
size feature vector from its corresponding feature map.
Each feature vector is fed into two fully-connected layers
(FC1 and FC2, see Figure 2), followed by two sibling
fully-connected layers: one outputs the probability that the
proposal belongs to K+1 classes ( Kobject classes plus 1
background class) and the other one produces the offsets of
the proposal for each of the Kobject classes.
3.2.1 Rotated RoIAlign
Rotated RoIAlign is an operation for extracting rotation-
invariant features from each oriented proposal. Now, we
describe the process of rotated RoIAlign according to Fig-
ure 5. The oriented proposal generated by oriented RPN
is usually a parallelogram (blue box in Figure 5), which is
denoted with the parameters v= (v1,v2,v3,v4), where
v1,v2,v3, andv4are its vertex coordinates. For ease of
computing, we need to adjust each parallelogram to a rect-
angular with direction. To be specific, we achieve this by
extending the shorter diagonal (the line from v2tov4in
Figure 5) of the parallelogram to have the same length as
the longer diagonal. After this simple operation, we obtain
the oriented rectangular (x, y, w, h, θ )(red box in Figure 5)
from the parallelogram, where θ∈[−π/2, π/2]is defined
by the intersection angle between the horizontal axis and
the longer side of the rectangular.
We next project the oriented rectangular (x, y, w, h, θ )
to the feature map Fwith the stride of sto obtain a rotated
RoI, which is defined by (xr, yr, wr, hr, θ)through the fol-
lowing operation.
wr=w/s, h r=h/s
xr=⌊x/s⌋, y r=⌊y/s⌋(5)
Then, each rotated RoI is divided into m×mgrids ( m
defaults to 7) to get a fixed-size feature map F′with the
dimension of m×m×C. For each grid with index (i, j)(0≤i, j≤m−1)in the c-th channel (1≤c < C ), its
value is calculated as follows:
F′
c(i, j) =X
(x,y)∈area( i,j)Fc(R(x, y, θ ))/n (6)
where Fcis the feature of the c-th channel, nis the number
of samples localized within each grid, and area( i, j)is the
coordinate set contained in the grid with index (i, j).R(·)
is a rotation transformation the same as [7].
3.3. Implementation Details
Oriented R-CNN is trained in an end-to-end manner by
jointly optimizing oriented RPN and oriented R-CNN head.
During inference, the oriented proposals generated by ori-
ented RPN generally have high overlaps. In order to re-
duce the redundancy, we remain 2000 proposals per FPN
level in the first stage, followed by Non-Maximum Sup-
pression (NMS). Considering the inference speed, the hor-
izontal NMS with the IoU threshold of 0.8 is adopted. We
merge the remaining proposals from all levels, and choose
top-1000 ones based on their classification scores as the in-
put of the second stage. In the second stage, ploy NMS for
each object class is performed on those predicted oriented
bounding boxes whose class probability is higher than 0.05.
The ploy NMS IoU threshold is 0.1.
4. Experiments
To evaluate our proposed method, we conduct extensive
experiments on two most widely-used oriented object de-
tection datasets, namely DOTA [36] and HRSC2016 [25].
4.1. Datasets
DOTA is a large-scale dataset for oriented object de-
tection. It contains 2806 images and 188282 instances
with oriented bounding box annotations, covered by the
following 15 object classes: Bridge (BR), Harbor (HA),
Ship (SH), Plane (PL), Helicopter (HC), Small vehicle
(SV), Large vehicle (LV), Baseball diamond (BD), Ground
track field (GTF), Tennis court (TC), Basketball court (BC),
Soccer-ball field (SBF), Roundabout (RA), Swimming pool
(SP), and Storage tank (ST). The image size of the DOTA
dataset is large: from 800 ×800 to 4000 ×4000 pixels. We
use training and validation sets for training and the rest for
testing. The detection accuracy is obtained by submitting
testing results to DOTA’s evaluation server.
HRSC2016 is another widely-used dataset for arbitrary-
oriented ship detection. It contains 1061 images with the
size ranging from 300 ×300 to 1500 ×900. Both the train-
ing set (436 images) and validation set (181 images) are
used for training and the remaining for testing. For the de-
tection accuracy on the HRSC2016, we adopt the mean av-
erage precision (mAP) as evaluation criteria, which is con-
sistent with PASCAL VOC 2007 [8] and VOC 2012.
3524