ChronoNet: A Deep Recurrent Neural Network for
Abnormal EEG Identiﬁcation
Subhrajit Roy, Isabell Kiral-Kornek, and Stefan Harrer
IBM Research – Australia, 60 City Rd, Southbank, VIC, 3006, Australia
{subhrajit.roy, isabeki, sharrer}@au1.ibm.com
Abstract
Brain-related disorders such as epilepsy can be diagnosed by analyzing electroen-
cephalograms (EEG). However, manual analysis of EEG data requires highly
trained clinicians, and is a procedure that is known to have relatively low inter-rater
agreement (IRA). Moreover, the volume of the data and the rate at which new data
becomes available make manual interpretation a time-consuming, resource-hungry,
and expensive process. In contrast, automated analysis of EEG data offers the
potential to improve the quality of patient care by shortening the time to diagnosis
and reducing manual error. In this paper, we focus on one of the ﬁrst steps in
interpreting an EEG session - identifying whether the brain activity is abnormal or
normal. To address this speciﬁc task, we propose a novel recurrent neural network
(RNN) architecture termed ChronoNet which is inspired by recent developments
from the ﬁeld of image classiﬁcation and designed to work efﬁciently with EEG
data. ChronoNet is formed by stacking multiple 1D convolution layers followed by
deep gated recurrent unit (GRU) layers where each 1D convolution layer uses multi-
ple ﬁlters of exponentially varying lengths and the stacked GRU layers are densely
connected in a feed-forward manner. We used the recently released TUH Abnormal
EEG Corpus dataset for evaluating the performance of ChronoNet. Unlike previous
studies using this dataset, ChronoNet directly takes time-series EEG as input and
learns meaningful representations of brain activity patterns. ChronoNet outper-
forms previously reported results on this dataset thereby setting a new benchmark.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the domain-independent nature of ChronoNet by
successfully applying it to classify speech commands.
1 Introduction
Electroencephalography (EEG) is a noninvasive method to measure brain activity through the record-
ing of electrical activity across a patient’s skull and scalp and is frequently used for the diagnosis and
management of various neurological conditions such as epilepsy, somnipathy, coma, encephalopathies,
and others. Despite having lower spatial resolution than brain imaging techniques such as magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT), EEG is a popular diagnostics tool among
physicians due to its excellent temporal resolution, low cost, and noninvasive nature [21].
As symptoms are not guaranteed to be present in the EEG signal at all times, the diagnosis of
a neurological condition via EEG interpretation typically involves long-term monitoring or the
recording of multiple short sessions. In this process, large amounts of data are generated that
subsequently need to be manually interpreted by expert investigators. The relatively low availability
of certiﬁed expert investigators and high volume of data make EEG interpretation a time-consuming
process that can introduce a delay of hours to weeks in the patient’s course of treatment. Introducing
a certain level of automation to the EEG interpretation task could serve as an aid to neurologists by
accelerating the reading process and thereby reducing workload. It is these reasons why automatic
interpretation of EEG by machine learning techniques has gained popularity in recent times [7, 20].
Preprint. Work in progress.
arXiv:1802.00308v2  [eess.SP]  18 May 2018