When interpreting an EEG recording, ﬁrst, an assessment is made as to whether the recorded signal
appears to show abnormal or normal brain activity patterns as per [ 15]. This decision can inﬂuence
which medication is being prescribed or whether further investigation is necessary. Typically, both,
patterns in the recording and the patient’s state of consciousness are being considered when deciding
whether a recording shows a abnormal or normal EEG. Highly trained clinicians typically follow a
complicated decision chart to make this distinction [15].
The motivation behind our work is to automate this ﬁrst step of interpretation. We do so using a
recently released dataset known as the TUH Abnormal EEG Corpus, which is the largest of its type to
date [ 17] and freely available at [ 1]. Inspired by successess in time-domain signal classiﬁcation, we
explore recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures using the raw EEG time-series signal as input.
This sets us apart from previous publications [ 15,16,19], in which the authors used both traditional
machine learning algorithms such as k-nearest neighbour, random forests, and hidden markov models
and modern deep learning techniques such as convolutional neural networks (CNN), however, did not
use RNNs for this task.
Compared to the original studies using hand-engineered features [ 15,16], we show that the combi-
nation of raw time series and RNNs eliminates the need to extract hand-crafted features and allows
the classiﬁer to automatically learn relevant patterns, surpassing their results by 3.51%. Taking
inspiration from 1D convolution layers [ 8], gated recurrent units [ 4], inception modules [ 22], and
densely connected networks [ 13], we build a novel deep gated RNN named ChronoNet which further
increases accuracy by an additional 4.26%, resulting in an overall 7.77% improvement over results
reported in [ 15,16]. Moreover, compared to a recently published study showing state-of-the-art per-
formance on this dataset, ChronoNet achieves 1.17% better results thereby setting a new benchmark
for the TUH Abnormal EEG Corpus. In summary, the primary contributions of this paper are:
•Network Architecture: We use inception layers with exponentially varying kernel lengths
for 1D convolution layers in combination with densely connected recurrent layers.
•Application: We achieve state-of-the-art performance in an EEG classiﬁcation task and
systematically showed how each component affects the performance.
By applying ChronoNet to the Speech Commands Dataset [ 25], we show its utility for general time
series analysis beyond EEG interpretation.
2 Background and Theory
Raw EEG signals are temporal recordings that may exhibit patterns and periodicities at various time
scales. A method that has successfully been used to classify time signals, for example speech, is the
use of recurrent neural networks (RNNs). In this section, we ﬁrst describe the working principle of
RNNs. This will be followed by the description of a modern and sophisticated recurrent unit named
gated recurrent unit (GRU) that is well suited to learning longer-term dependencies and correlations.
We will then discuss the concept of inception modules and densely connected neural networks
(concepts used in convolutional neural networks) which we will use for EEG data analysis to account
for patterns emerging at different scales and for mitigation of vanishing gradients, respectively. This
collection of principles and modules provides the essential basis for understanding the ChronoNet
architecture proposed in Section 3.
2.1 Recurrent Neural Networks
RNNs are a family of neural networks for processing variable-length sequential data. A RNN
maintains a recurrent hidden state whose activation at each time is dependent on that of the previous
time step. More formally, given a sequence x= (x1,x2,...,x T), at each time step t, a RNN updates
its recurrent hidden state htbased on the current input vector xtand the previous hidden state ht−1
as follows:
ht=/braceleftbigg0 ift= 0
g(ht−1,xt)otherwise,(1)
wheregis a nonlinear function.
In a classical RNN, the recurrent hidden unit of Equation( 1) is updated in the following way:
ht=f(Wxt+Uht−1+b), (2)
2