wherefis a pointwise nonlinear activation function such as a logistic sigmoid function or a hyperbolic
tangent function.
While Equation (2) allows an RNN to process sequences of arbitrary length, it has been observed
that gradients of fcan grow or decay exponentially over long sequences during training [ 3]. This
phenomenon makes it difﬁcult for an RNN to learn long-term dependencies and correlations.
One way of tackling this issue is to design more sophisticated recurrent units which compute an afﬁne
transformation followed by a simple element-wise nonlinearity by using gating units. Two popular
models in use are the long short-term memory (LSTM) [ 11,9] and the gated recurrent unit (GRU)
[4]. While it has been shown that LSTMs and GRUs signiﬁcantly outperform classical RNNs, which
one among the two performs better is yet to be conclusively shown [ 6]. In this paper, we use GRUs
since they use fewer parameters than LSTMs and hence offer a faster training time while requiring
data to generalize.
2.2 Gated Recurrent Unit
A gated recurrent unit (GRU) produces the current value of hidden state htby performing a linear
interpolation between an intermediate candidate hidden state ˜htderived from Equation (2) and the
previous value of hidden state ht−1. A GRU employs two gates: an update gate ztcontrolling the
extent to which the previous state will be overwritten and a reset gatertdeciding how much of the
previous state should be forgotten while computing the candidate hidden state. More formally, the
GRU model can be presented in the following mathematical form:
ht= (1−zt)⊙ht−1+zt⊙˜ht (3)
˜ht=g(Whxt+Uh(rt⊙ht−1) +bh) (4)
zt=σ(Wzxt+Uzht−1+bz) (5)
rt=σ(Wrxt+Urht−1+br), (6)
wheregandσare nonlinear activation functions and ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication.
2.3 Inception Module
The inception module was proposed by Szegedy et al. [ 22] as a building block for the GoogLeNet
architecture. Unlike traditional convolutional neural networks, the inception module uses ﬁlters of
varied size in a convolution layer to capture features of different levels of abstraction. Processing
visual information at different scales and aggregating them allows the network to efﬁciently extract
relevant features. Typically, the module uses three ﬁlters of sizes 1×1,3×3, and 5×5. Moreover,
an alternative parallel path is also included which implements a 3×3max-pooling operation.
However, naively introducing more ﬁlters in convolutional layers increases the number of parameters.
This makes training of a network computationally more intensive compared to traditional CNNs.
Hence, 1×1ﬁlters are included in the inception module to implement "bottleneck layers" for
dimensionality reduction.
2.4 DenseNet
DenseNet is a deep convolutional neural network architecture recently proposed by [ 13]. The main
idea of DenseNet is that it connects each layer with every other layer in a feed-forward fashion. Each
layer uses the feature maps of all its preceding layers as input and passes its own feature maps as
input to all subsequent layers. Hence, while a traditional CNN with Llayers hasLconnections, in
DenseNet there are L(L+ 1)/2direct connections.
DenseNet mitigates the problem of vanishing/exploding gradients that is observed in very deep
networks [ 10]. It achieves that by providing short-cut paths for the gradients to pass during back-
propagation. This allows the learning algorithm to choose the appropriate model complexity during
training.
3