– Abnormal Normal
Training 14971 15169
Test 127 150
Table 1: Size of training and test set used in experiments of Section 4.3.
respectively. These sets were further partitioned into a training set (1361 abnormal/1379 normal),
and a test set (127 abnormal/150 normal).
4.2 Data Preparation
TUH Abnormal EEG Corpus consists of EEG sessions recorded according to the 10/20 electrode
conﬁguration [ 12]. We converted the recorded EEG signal into a set of montages or differentials
based on guidelines proposed by the American Clinical Neurophysiology Society [ 2]. In this paper,
we used the transverse central parietal (TCP) montage system for accentuating spike activity [ 16].
Note that we did not extract any hand-engineered features from the dataset because we envisioned
that the deep RNNs used in this paper will be able to automatically extract relevant features and learn
meaningful representations.
In the original study [ 16], the authors noted that neurologists can accurately classify an EEG session
into either abnormal or normal by only examining the initial portion of the signal. This motivated the
authors to build machine learning algorithms that can classify an EEG signal by taking only the ﬁrst
minute of data as input. Hence, training and test set were generated by extracting the ﬁrst minute
from the available EEG sessions. Note that during testing only the ﬁrst minute was used to enable a
fair comparison of the classiﬁer to human-level performance. Using only the ﬁrst minute to create the
training set, on the other hand, was a design choice motivated by the fact that the ﬁrst minute might
be most representative of the test set. Once electrodes are placed on the scalp and data recording
starts, impedances and therewith the signal will gradually change due to external factors such as
slowly drying conductive paste. To have a fair comparison with [ 16], we trained our model only on
the ﬁrst minute and report the obtained results in 4.3.
However, using the above method signiﬁcantly limits the amount of data that can be used for training.
This results in two problems. First, deep learning is a data hungry technique and performance
substantially increases as more data is included in the training set. Second, when applied to small
datasets, RNNs have a tendency to quickly overﬁt, an effect that intensiﬁes as networks become
deeper, as is the case for those considered in this paper. To not limit ourselves unnecessarily, we
analyzed the effect of including more than just the ﬁrst minute from the training sessions. This was
done by choosing a random subset of sessions from the original training by exclusion of any samples
later used for testing. The resulting sets were then further divided into smaller training and test sets.
Separate models were trained for each minute of these training sets. We analysed the performance of
these models on the ﬁrst minute of the intermediate small test sets.
The outcome of this experiment demonstrated that we can use up to 11 minutes of data from the
training EEG sessions without performance degradation. This led to a 11-fold increase in our training
data as compared to the method used in [ 16]. The sizes of the ﬁnal training and test set used in our
experiments are shown in Table 1.
In this dataset, most recordings were done with a sampling frequency of 250 Hz. Where this was not
the case, sessions were resampled to 250 Hz. An input vector to the network was 1 minute long, thus,
consisting of 15000 time points.
4.3 Results
We used the dataset described above to train the four deep recurrent neural network architectures
presented in Section 3. Networks were trained using the adaptive moment estimation optimization
[14] algorithm with a learning rate of 0.001. Moreover, we used a batch size of 64 and trained
the networks for 500 epochs. Table 2 lists mean accuracies of 5 repetitions of these experiments.
Results reported to date on this dataset are included for comparison. In [ 16], the author explored
various machine- and deep learning algorithms and observed that best performance is obtained when
frequency features extracted from the input time-series signal are fed into a convolutional neural
7