3 Methods
Inception modules (see Section 2.3) were originally proposed to enable a convolutional neural
network to account for different abstraction layers in the context of image processing. Similarly,
densely connected networks (see Section 2.4) were developed to address vanishing gradients due to
backpropagation in deep convolutional neural networks.
As described previously, EEG data contains information across different scales in the time-domain.
Furthermore, using deep RNN architectures might lead to the problem of vanishing or exploding
gradients. If designed properly, advantages of inception modules and densely connected layers may,
thus, equally apply to problems in the time-domain. In the following section, we will use the concepts
of inception modules and densely connected networks to build novel recurrent neural networks
architectures for time-series classiﬁcation.
3.1 Convolutional Gated Recurrent Neural Network (C-RNN)
Considering the input is a time series, an obvious ﬁrst approach is to stack multiple GRU layers as
shown in Figure 1a. This popular architecture for handling sequential input data has led to state-
of-the-art accuracy in various pattern recognition tasks, especially in natural language processing
[24, 26].
However, when applied to relatively long input time-series data (as opposed to embedding vectors
[18] in the case of natural language processing), this approach turns out to be computationally
very intensive and time consuming to train. To solve this problem, data can be downsampled to
an acceptable length before it is given as input to RNNs. However, using ﬁxed values means that
networks will not be able to adapt to the data at hand. In order to mitigate these problems, we used
multiple 1D convolution (Conv1D) layers with strides larger than 1, enabling the network to learn to
appropriately reduce the input signal automatically.
The resulting architecture (C-RNN) is a combination of Conv1D layers followed by stacked GRU
layers [ 23,5]. Conv1D layers have two advantages. First, they learn to sub-sample the signal and,
thus, reduce the input vector’s length as we move towards higher layers. This becomes particularly
relevant when reaching GRU layers, which during training constitute the most computationally
expensive part of the network. Second, Conv1D layers extract local information from neighbouring
time points, a ﬁrst step towards learning temporal dependencies. Following Conv1D layers, the GRU
layers are responsible for capturing both short- and long-term dependencies.
The speciﬁc network used in this paper is presented in Figure 1b. The formats used throughout the
paper to describe Conv1D and GRU layers are (layer name, ﬁlter length, number of ﬁlters, stride size)
and (layer name, number of ﬁlters) respectively.
3.2 Inception Convolutional Gated Recurrent Neural Network (IC-RNN)
In the previous C-RNN architecture, each Conv1D layer had the capability to extract local information
at only one time scale determined by a single ﬁxed ﬁlter size, limiting the ﬂexibility of the model.
Since the rate of change of information in a time series depends on the task at hand, the ﬁlter size for
each Conv1D layer would have to be hand-picked to ﬁt the particular data.
To address this problem, taking inspiration from [ 22], we designed an architecture which expands
upon C-RNN by including multiple ﬁlters of varying sizes in each Conv1D layer. This allows for the
network to extract information over multiple time-scales. However, unlike [ 22], in IC-RNN, ﬁlter
lengths used in the Conv1D layers were drawn from a logarithmic instead of a linear scale, leading to
exponentially varying ﬁlter lenghts. Our experiments demonstrated that for the dataset considered in
this paper, exponentially varying ﬁlter lengths lead to better performance. We speculate that this is
because compared to images where relevant features vary in the same order of magnitude, in time
series the range of timescales in which features exist is much wider. Note that, to the best of our
knowledge, inception modules with exponentially varying ﬁlter sizes are reported for the ﬁrst time in
this paper. The speciﬁc conﬁguration used in our experiments is shown in Figure 1c. A Filter Concat
layer concatenates the incoming features along the depth axis.
4