3. MULTIPLICATIVE INTEGRATION OF ENCODER AND
PREDICTION NETWORK OUTPUTS
Here, we discuss a simple change to the joint network equatio n (3)
and its implications:
p(·|ht,gu) = softmax[ Wouttanh(Wencht⊙Wpredgu+b)](4)
where⊙denotes elementwise multiplication (or Hadamard prod-
uct). This modiﬁcation was inspired by the work of [25] where the
authors use multiplicative integration (MI) in the context of a re-
current neural network for fusing the information from the h idden
state vector and the input vector. The advantages of MI over a dditive
integration for fusing different information sources have also been
mentioned in [26] and are summarized below.
Higher-order interactions MI allows for second-order interactions
between the elements of htandguwhich facilitates modeling of
more complex dependencies between the acoustic and LM embed -
dings. Importantly, the shift to second order is achieved wi th no in-
crease in the number of parameters or computational complex ity. In
theory, feedforward neural nets with sufﬁcient capacity an d training
data are universal function approximators; therefore, a jo int network
with(ht,gu)inputs and multiple layers should be optimal. However
the memory requirements are prohibitive because the input t ensor
size for such a network is N×T×U×(E+P)and the mem-
ory for the output tensors is N×T×U×H×LwhereNis the
batchsize, His the number of hidden units and Lis the number of
layers. Therefore, for pure training efﬁciency reasons, we are con-
strained to use shallow (single layer) joint networks, in wh ich case
the functional form of the layer becomes important.
Generalizes additive integration Indeed, when used in conjunction
with biases, the additive terms appear in the expansion
(Wencht+benc)⊙(Wpredgu+bpred) =Wencht⊙Wpredgu
+benc⊙Wpredgu+bpred⊙Wencht+benc⊙bpred
(5)
Scaling and gating effect By multiplying ˜ht:=Wenchtwith
˜gu:=Wpredgu, one embedding has a scaling effect on the other
embedding. In particular, unlike for additive interaction s, in MI the
gradient with respect to one component is gated by the other c om-
ponent and vice versa. Concretely, let us denote by L(x,y;θ) =
−logp(y|x;θ)the NLL loss for one utterance for an RNN-T with
parameters θ. The partial derivatives of the loss with respect to ˜ht
and˜guare:
∂L
∂˜ht= ˜gu⊙∂L
∂(˜ht⊙˜gu)
∂L
∂˜gu=˜ht⊙∂L
∂(˜ht⊙˜gu)(6)
These arguments suggest that multiplicative integration i s a good
candidate for fusing the two different information streams coming
from the encoder and the prediction network. We expect multi plica-
tive RNN-Ts to be, if not better, then at least complementary to ad-
ditive RNN-Ts which should be beneﬁcial for model combinati on.4. TRAINING AND DECODING RECIPE
In this section, we discuss some of the techniques that are pa rt of
our RNN-T training and decoding recipe. While none of the tec h-
niques presented here are novel, the goal is to show their eff ec-
tiveness for RNN-Ts in particular. The techniques can be rou ghly
grouped into: (i) data augmentation/perturbation and mode l regu-
larization, (ii) speaker adaptation and (iii) external lan guage model
fusion.
Speed and tempo perturbation [19] changes the rate of speech in
the interval [0.9,1.1]with or without altering the pitch or timbre of
the speaker. This technique generates additional replicas of the train-
ing data depending on the number of speed and tempo perturbat ion
values.
Sequence noise injection [20] adds, with a given probability, the
downscaled spectra of randomly selected training utteranc es to the
spectrum of the current training utterance. This technique does not
increase the amount of training data per epoch.
SpecAugment [21] masks the spectrum of a training utterance with
a random number of blocks of random size in both time and fre-
quency.
DropConnect [22] zeros out entries randomly in the LSTM hidden-
to-hidden transition matrices.
Switchout [23] randomly replaces labels in the output sequence with
labels drawn uniformly from the output vocabulary.
I-vector speaker adaptation [27] appends a speaker identity vector
to the input features coming from a given speaker. When used i n
conjunction with speed and tempo perturbation, the perturb ed audio
recordings of a speaker are considered to be different speak ers for
the purpose of universal background model (UBM) training, t otal
variability matrix training, and i-vector extraction.
Alignment-length synchronous decoding [17] is a beam search
technique with the property that all competing hypotheses w ithin the
beam have the same alignment length. It has been shown to be fa ster
than time-synchronous search for the same accuracy.
Density ratio (DR) LM fusion [13] is a shallow fusion technique
that combines two language models: an external LM trained on a
target domain corpus and a language model trained on the acou stic
transcripts (source domain) only. The latter is used to subt ract the ef-
fect of the intrinsic LM given by the prediction network (ide a further
developed in [14]). Decoding using DR fusion is done accordi ng to:
y∗= argmax
y∈Y∗{logp(y|x)−µlogpsrc(y)+λlogpext(y)+ρ|y|}
(7)
whereµ,λ,ρ are the weights corresponding to the source LM psrc,
external LM pext, and label length reward |y|.
5. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
We investigate the effectiveness of the proposed technique s on one
public corpus (English conversational telephone speech 30 0 hours)
and two internal datasets (Spanish and Italian conversatio nal speech
780 hours and 900 hours, respectively).
5.1. Experiments on Switchboard 300 hours
The ﬁrst set of experiments was conducted on the Switchboard
speech corpus which contains 300 hours of English telephone con-
versations between two strangers on a preassigned topic. Th e acous-
tic data segmentation and transcript preparation are done a ccording