feature space to support arbitrary input style image. Since
mean and variance of features are calculated globally, lo-
cal details and point-wise patterns are largely dismissed and
thus the local stylization performance is largely degraded
[28]. Similar trade-off between flexibility and capability
also exists in [5, 22, 15, 24, 10], where all local feature
points of the content image are processed by the same trans-
formation function based on style images. To enhance the
locality awareness of arbitrary style transfer models, re-
cently, attention mechanism is adopted in multiple works
[28, 6, 43] for this task. Their common intuition is that a
model should pay more attention to those feature-similar
areas in the style image for stylizing a content image re-
gion. Such attention mechanism has been proved to be ef-
fective for generating more local style details in arbitrary
style transfer. Unfortunately, while improving the perfor-
mance, it fails to totally solve this problem and the local
distortions still occur.
It is not so hard to reveal the reasons of the above
dilemma posed to the attention mechanism. Digging into
the details of current attention based solutions for arbitrary
style transfer, it can be easily figured out that 1) the designed
attention mechanisms are commonly based on deep CNN
features on higher abstraction levels and the low-level de-
tails are dismissed; 2) the attention scores are usually used
to re-weight feature maps of the style image and the re-
weighted style feature is simply fused into content feature
for decoding. Deep CNN features based attention strategy
leaves the low-level patterns of images at shallow network
layers unexplored. Thus the attention scores may focus lit-
tle on low-level textures and are dominated by high-level
semantics. Meanwhile, the spatial re-weighting of style fea-
tures followed by fusion of re-weighted style features and
content features, as done in SANet [28] (Figure 3(b)), works
without consideration of feature distribution.
To this end, we attempt to address these issues and get a
better balance between style pattern transferring and con-
tent structure preserving. Motivated by lessons learned
through the above analysis, we propose a novel atten-
tion and normalization module named Adaptive Attention
Normalization ( AdaAttN )for arbitrary style transfer. It can
adaptively perform attentive normalization on per-point ba-
sis for feature distribution alignment. In more detail, spatial
attention score is learnt from both shallow and deep fea-
tures of content and style images. Then, per-point weighted
statistics is calculated by regarding a style feature point
as a distribution of attention-weighted output of all spa-
tial feature points. Finally the content feature is normal-
ized so that its local feature statistics are the same as the
per-point weighted style feature statistics. In this way, the
attention module takes into account both shallow and deep
CNN features of the style image as well as the content im-
age. Meanwhile, alignment of per-point feature statisticsfrom the content feature to the modulated style feature is
achieved. Based on AdaAttN module, a novel optimization
objective named local feature loss and a new arbitrary im-
age style transfer pipeline are derived. Our contributions
can be summarized as follows:
• We introduce a novel AdaAttN module for arbitrary
style transfer. It takes both shallow and deep features
into account for attention score calculation and prop-
erly normalizes content feature such that feature statis-
tics are well aligned with attention-weighted mean and
variance maps of style features on per-point basis.
• A new optimization objective called local feature loss
is proposed. It helps the model training and improves
arbitrary style transfer quality by regularizing local
features of the generated image.
• Extensive experiments and comparisons with other
state-of-the-art methods are performed to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed method.
• Further extension of our model for video style transfer
via simply introducing cosine-distance based attention
and image-wise similarity loss can result in stable and
appealing results.
2. Related Works
2.1. Arbitrary Style Transfer
Recent arbitrary style transfer methods can be divided
into two categories: global transformation based and local
transformation based methods. The common idea of the
former category is to apply feature modification globally.
WCT [24] achieved this with two transformation steps in-
cluding whitening and coloring. Huang et al. [14] proposed
AdaIN that adaptively applies mean and standard deviation
of each style feature to shift and re-scale the correspond-
ing normalized content feature so that content feature and
style feature share the same distribution. Jing et al . [15]
extended this method by dynamic instance normalization,
where weights for intermediate convolution blocks are gen-
erated by another network taking the style image as input.
Liet al. [22] proposed to generate a linear transformation
according to content and style features. Furthermore, Deng
et al. [5] got the transformation function with multi-channel
correlation. Although these methods accomplish the overall
arbitrary style transfer task and make great progress in this
field, local style transfer performance is generally unsatis-
factory due to global transformations leveraged by them are
hard to take care of detailed local information.
For the latter, Chen et al . [3] proposed a style-swap
method, which is a patch based style transfer method rely-
ing on similarities between content and style patches. [11]
was another patch based method considering matching of
6650