both global statistics and local patches. Avatar-Net [32] fur-
ther proposed a multi-scale framework that combines ideas
of style swap and AdaIN function. In recent years, attention
mechanism is widely used in arbitrary style transfer thanks
to its excellent ability to model fine grained correspondence
among local features of style and content images. On this
routine, Park et al. [28] proposed Style-Attentional Network
(SANet ) to match content and style features. Yao et al. [43]
considered different types of strokes with such attention
framework. Deng et al . [6] proposed a multi-adaptation
module that applies point-wise attention for content fea-
tures and channel-wise attention for style features. Com-
mon practices adopted by these methods are to build the
attention mechanism merely upon deep CNN features with-
out considering shallow features and simply mix the content
feature and the re-weighted style feature. Thus, it tends to
distort original content structures largely and results in un-
desired effect for human eyes. In this paper, our goal is to
explore a better trade-off between style pattern transferring
and content structure preserving.
2.2. Video Style Transfer
Directly applying image style transfer techniques on
video frame sequences usually results in flickering effects
caused by temporal inconsistency. Thus, a lot of works add
optical flow consistency constraint to original image style
transfer solutions, e.g., [30] for optimization based video
style transfer, [31, 1, 12, 13, 8] for per-style-per-model
methods, [37, 38] for arbitrary-style-per-model methods,
and [36, 4, 26] for image-to-image translation frameworks.
Optical flow constraint improves the stability of video style
transfer. However, it heavily relies on a pre-extracted op-
tical flow field with high accuracy to perform flow-based
warping. There are also some works that address the sta-
bility issue with approaches other than optical flow warp-
ing. [22, 5] leveraged linearity of transformation models to
guarantee inter-frame consistency on feature space. Wu et
al. [41] proposed a SANet based method that leads current
frame to focus on similar regions of previous frame with the
help of a SSIM consistency constraint. Different from these
methods, in this work, we add a novel image-wise simi-
larity loss based on attention mechanism to overcome the
flickering artifact and comparable or even better stability is
achieved without prerequisite optical flow.
3. Methods
3.1. Overall Framework
The proposed network takes a style image Isand a con-
tent image Icto synthesize a stylized image Ics. In our
proposed model, we employ a pre-trained VGG-19 network
[33] as encoder to extract multi-scale feature maps. The
decoder follows the setting of [14] with a symmetric struc-
AdaAttNAdaAttNAdaAttNDecoder!"!"#!#VGGLoss FunctionTrainableParametersBack Propagation3_14_15_1VGG$%&$'(Figure 2. Overview of full framework, where three AdaAttN mod-
ules and the decoder are trainable. LlfandLgsare local feature
loss and global style loss separately.
ture of VGG-19. In order to take full advantage of features
in both shallow and deep levels, we employ a multi-level
strategy by integrating three AdaAttN modules on ReLU-
31,ReLU-4 1andReLU-5 1layers of VGG, respectively,
as shown in Figure 2. We denote the extracted feature of
layer ReLU-x 1in VGG as Fx
∗∈RC×H∗W∗when it takes
an image I∗as input and ∗can be corshere represent-
ing content and style features respectively. To fully exploit
low-level patterns, we further concatenate feature of current
layer with down-sampled features of its previous layers as:
F1:x
∗=Dx(F1
∗)⊕Dx(F2
∗)⊕ ··· ⊕ Fx
∗, (1)
where Dxstands for the bilinear interpolation layer which
downsamples the input feature to the same shape of Fx
∗,
and⊕here means concatenation operation along channel
dimension. Then, we can denote the embedded feature of
the AdaAttN module at layer las:
Fx
cs=AdaAttN (Fx
c, Fx
s, F1:x
c, F1:x
s), (2)
where Fc,FsandFcsare content, style, and embedded fea-
ture, respectively. With multi-level embedded features, we
can synthesize the stylized image Icswith decoder as:
Ics=Dec (F3
cs, F4
cs, F5
cs). (3)
3.2. Adaptive Attention Normalization
The feature transformation module is the key compo-
nent in arbitrary style transfer models. A comparison of our
module with other frameworks is demonstrated in Figure 3.
The pioneering AdaIN [14] only considers the holistic style
distributions and the content feature is manipulated such
that its feature distribution globally aligns with that of the
style feature. By taking local style patterns into considera-
tion, SANet [28] calculates attention map from the style and
content feature maps and then modulates the style feature
with the attention map to fuse the attention output into the
content feature. SANet performs in local stylization. How-
ever, it lacks low-level matching and local feature distribu-
tion alignment. Inspired by lessons learned from AdaIN
6651