AdaAttN: Revisit Attention Mechanism in Arbitrary Neural Style Transfer
Songhua Liu1,2,∗, Tianwei Lin1,†, Dongliang He1, Fu Li1, Meiling Wang1,
Xin Li1, Zhengxing Sun2,†, Qian Li3, Errui Ding1
1Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.,
2Nanjing University,3National University of Defense Technology
1{liusonghua,lintianwei01,hedongliang01,lifu,wangmeiling03,lixin41,dingerrui }@baidu.com ,
2songhua.liu@smail.nju.edu.cn, szx@nju.edu.cn,3liqian@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract
Fast arbitrary neural style transfer has attracted
widespread attention from academic, industrial and art
communities due to its flexibility in enabling various ap-
plications. Existing solutions either attentively fuse deep
style feature into deep content feature without considering
feature distributions, or adaptively normalize deep content
feature according to the style such that their global statistics
are matched. Although effective, leaving shallow feature
unexplored and without locally considering feature statis-
tics, they are prone to unnatural output with unpleasing lo-
cal distortions. To alleviate this problem, in this paper, we
propose a novel attention and normalization module, named
Adaptive Attention Normalization ( AdaAttN ), to adaptively
perform attentive normalization on per-point basis. Specif-
ically, spatial attention score is learnt from both shallow
and deep features of content and style images. Then per-
point weighted statistics are calculated by regarding a style
feature point as a distribution of attention-weighted out-
put of all style feature points. Finally, the content fea-
ture is normalized so that they demonstrate the same lo-
cal feature statistics as the calculated per-point weighted
style feature statistics. Besides, a novel local feature loss
is derived based on AdaAttN to enhance local visual qual-
ity. We also extend AdaAttN to be ready for video style
transfer with slight modifications. Experiments demon-
strate that our method achieves state-of-the-art arbitrary
image/video style transfer. Codes and models are available
on https://github.com/wzmsltw/AdaAttN.
1. Introduction
Given a content image Icand a style image Is, artis-
tic style transfer aims at applying style patterns of Isonto
Icwhile preserving content structure of Icsimultaneously,
*This work was done when Songhua Liu was an intern at VIS, Baidu.
†Corresponding authors.
Figure 1. Results generated by our AdaAttN methods for arbitrary
image/video style. Animated clips at the right side can be found in
our supplementary material.
which is widely used in computer-aid art generation. The
seminal work of Gatys et al. [9] proposed an image opti-
mization method that iteratively minimizes the joint content
and style loss in the feature space of a pre-trained deep neu-
ral network. This time-consuming optimization process has
motivated researchers to explore more efficient approaches.
Johnson et al . [18] alternatively considered using a feed-
forward network to generate rendered images directly and
enabled real time style transfer. Since the learned model
can only work for one specific style, this method and its
following works [40, 34, 35, 21, 27, 39, 16, 20] are catego-
rized to Per-Style-Per-Model method [17]. In the literature,
there are Multiple-Style-Per-Model solutions [7, 2, 23, 44]
andArbitrary-Style-Per-Model [14, 3, 22, 28, 15, 24, 6, 5,
43, 32, 42, 11] methods. In the latter case, a model can ac-
cept any style image as input and produce stylized results in
a single forward pass once upon the model is trained. There-
fore, it is the most flexible and attracts increasing attention
from academic, industrial, and art communities.
Nevertheless, arbitrary style transfer is far from being
solved. Enabling flexibility sacrifices local style pattern
modeling capability for an arbitrary style transfer network.
For example, the pioneering work [14] proposed a simple
yet effective method AdaIN , which transfers global mean
and variance of a style image to a content image in the
6649