International Journal of Computer Vision
5.2 Unified (One Stage) Frameworks
The region-based pipeline strategies of Sect. 5.1have dom-
inated since RCNN (Girshick et al. 2014 ), such that the
leading results on popular benchmark datasets are all basedon Faster RCNN (Ren et al. 2015 ). Nevertheless, region-
based approaches are computationally expensive for current
mobile/wearable devices, which have limited storage and
computational capability, therefore instead of trying to opti-mize the individual components of a complex region-based
pipeline, researchers have begun to develop uniﬁed detection
strategies.
Uniﬁed pipelines refer to architectures that directly pre-
dict class probabilities and bounding box offsets from full
images with a single feed-forward CNN in a monolithic set-ting that does not involve region proposal generation or postclassiﬁcation / feature resampling, encapsulating all compu-
tation in a single network. Since the whole pipeline is a single
network, it can be optimized end-to-end directly on detectionperformance.
DetectorNet (Szegedy et al. 2013 ) were among the ﬁrst to
explore CNNs for object detection. DetectorNet formulatedobject detection a regression problem to object bounding
box masks. They use AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al. 2012a )
and replace the ﬁnal softmax classiﬁer layer with a regres-sion layer. Given an image window, they use one networkto predict foreground pixels over a coarse grid, as well as
four additional networks to predict the object’s top, bottom,
left and right halves. A grouping process then converts thepredicted masks into detected bounding boxes. The network
needs to be trained per object type and mask type, and does
not scale to multiple classes. DetectorNet must take manycrops of the image, and run multiple networks for each part
on every crop, thus making it slow.
OverFeat , proposed by Sermanet et al. ( 2014 ) and illus-
trated in Fig. 14, can be considered as one of the ﬁrst
single-stage object detectors based on fully convolutional
(a)
(b)
Fig. 14 Illustration of the OverFeat (Sermanet et al. 2014 ) detection
frameworkdeep networks. It is one of the most inﬂuential object detec-
tion frameworks, winning the ILSVRC2013 localization anddetection competition. OverFeat performs object detection
via a single forward pass through the fully convolutional
layers in the network (i.e. the “Feature Extractor”, shownin Fig. 14a). The key steps of object detection at test time
can be summarized as follows:
1.Generate object candidates by performing object clas-
siﬁcation via a sliding window fashion on multiscale
images OverFeat uses a CNN like AlexNet (Krizhevsky
et al. 2012a ), which would require input images ofa ﬁxed
size due to its fully connected layers, in order to makethe sliding window approach computationally efﬁcient,
OverFeat casts the network (as shown in Fig. 14a) into
a fully convolutional network, taking inputs of any size,by viewing fully connected layers as convolutions with
kernels of size 1 ×1. OverFeat leverages multiscale fea-
tures to improve the overall performance by passing up tosix enlarged scales of the original image through the net-
work (as shown in Fig. 14b), resulting in a signiﬁcantly
increased number of evaluated context views. For eachof the multiscale inputs, the classiﬁer outputs a grid ofpredictions (class and conﬁdence).
2.Increase the number of predictions by offset max pooling
In order to increase resolution, OverFeat applies offsetmax pooling after the last CONV layer, i.e. perform-
ing a subsampling operation at every offset, yielding
many more views for voting, increasing robustness whileremaining efﬁcient.
3.Bounding box regression Once an object is identiﬁed,
a single bounding box regressor is applied. The classi-ﬁer and the regressor share the same feature extraction(CONV) layers, only the FC layers need to be recomputed
after computing the classiﬁcation network.
4.Combine predictions OverFeat uses a greedy merge strat-
egy to combine the individual bounding box predictions
across all locations and scales.
OverFeat has a signiﬁcant speed advantage, but is less accu-
rate than RCNN (Girshick et al. 2014 ), because it was difﬁcult
to train fully convolutional networks at the time. The speedadvantage derives from sharing the computation of convolu-tion between overlapping windows in the fully convolutional
network. OverFeat is similar to later frameworks such as
YOLO (Redmon et al. 2016 ) and SSD (Liu et al. 2016 ),
except that the classiﬁer and the regressors in OverFeat are
trained sequentially.
YOLO Redmon et al. ( 2016 ) proposed YOLO (You Only
Look Once), a uniﬁed detector casting object detection as
a regression problem from image pixels to spatially sep-
arated bounding boxes and associated class probabilities,illustrated in Fig. 13. Since the region proposal generation
123