International Journal of Computer Vision
for each detection, and allows each candidate box to select a
segment out of a large pool of object segmentation proposalsand score the agreement between them. In Shrivastava and
Gupta ( 2016 ), semantic segmentation was used as a form of
contextual priming.
7.2 Local Context
Local context (Zhang et al. 2013 ; Galleguillos and Belongie
2010 ; Rabinovich et al. 2007 ) considers the relationship
among locally nearby objects, as well as the interactions
between an object and its surrounding area. In general, mod-eling object relations is challenging, requiring reasoningabout bounding boxes of different classes, locations, scales
etc. Deep learning research that explicitly models object rela-
tions is quite limited, with representative ones being SpatialMemory Network (SMN) (Chen and Gupta 2017 ), Object
Relation Network (Hu et al. 2018a ), and Structure Inference
Network (SIN) (Liu et al. 2018d ). In SMN, spatial memory
essentially assembles object instances back into a pseudo
image representation that is easy to be fed into another CNN
for object relations reasoning, leading to a new sequentialreasoning architecture where image and memory are pro-cessed in parallel to obtain detections which further update
memory. Inspired by the recent success of attention mod-
ules in natural language processing (Vaswani et al. 2017 ),
ORN processes a set of objects simultaneously through the
interaction between their appearance feature and geometry.
It does not require additional supervision, and it is easy toembed into existing networks, effective in improving object
recognition and duplicate removal steps in modern object
detection pipelines, giving rise to the ﬁrst fully end-to-endobject detector. SIN (Liu et al. 2018d ) considered two kinds
of context: scene contextual information and object relation-
ships within a single image. It formulates object detection as
a problem of graph inference, where the objects are treatedas nodes in a graph and relationships between objects are
modeled as edges.
A wider range of methods has approached the con-
text challenge with a simpler idea: enlarging the detec-
tion window size to extract some form of local context.
Representative approaches include MRCNN (Gidaris andKomodakis 2015 ), Gated BiDirectional CNN (GBDNet)
Zeng et al. ( 2016 ), Zeng et al. ( 2017 ), Attention to Con-
text CNN (ACCNN) (Li et al. 2017b ), CoupleNet (Zhu et al.
2017a ), and Sermanet et al. ( 2013 ). In MRCNN (Gidaris
and Komodakis 2015 ) (Fig. 18a), in addition to the features
extracted from the original object proposal at the last CONV
layer of the backbone, Gidaris and Komodakis proposed toextract features from a number of different regions of an
object proposal (half regions, border regions, central regions,contextual region and semantically segmented regions), in
order to obtain a richer and more robust object representa-tion. All of these features are combined by concatenation.
Quite a number of methods, all closely related to MRCNN,
have been proposed since then. The method in Zagoruykoet al. ( 2016 ) used only four contextual regions, organized in
a foveal structure, where the classiﬁers along multiple paths
are trained jointly end-to-end. Zeng et al. ( 2016 ), Zeng et al.
(2017 ) proposed GBDNet (Fig. 18b) to extract features from
multiscale contextualized regions surrounding an object pro-
posal to improve detection performance. In contrast to the
somewhat naive approach of learning CNN features for eachregion separately and then concatenating them, GBDNet
passes messages among features from different contextual
regions. Noting that message passing is not always helpful,but dependent on individual samples, Zeng et al. ( 2016 )u s e d
gated functions to control message transmission. Li et al.
(2017b ) presented ACCNN (Fig. 18c) to utilize both global
and local contextual information: the global context wascaptured using a Multiscale Local Contextualized (MLC)
subnetwork, which recurrently generates an attention map for
an input image to highlight promising contextual locations;local context adopted a method similar to that of MRCNN
(Gidaris and Komodakis 2015 ). As shown in Fig. 18d, Cou-
pleNet (Zhu et al. 2017a
) is conceptually similar to ACCNN
( L ie ta l . 2017b ), but built upon RFCN (Dai et al. 2016c ),
which captures object information with position sensitive
RoI pooling, CoupleNet added a branch to encode the global
context with RoI pooling.
8 Detection Proposal Methods
An object can be located at any position and scale in animage. During the heyday of handcrafted feature descrip-tors [SIFT (Lowe 2004 ), HOG (Dalal and Triggs 2005 ) and
LBP (Ojala et al. 2002 )], the most successful methods for
object detection [e.g. DPM (Felzenszwalb et al. 2008 )] used
sliding window techniques (Viola and Jones 2001 ; Dalal and
Triggs 2005 ; Felzenszwalb et al. 2008 ; Harzallah et al. 2009 ;
Vedaldi et al. 2009 ). However, the number of windows is
huge, growing with the number of pixels in an image, andthe need to search at multiple scales and aspect ratios further
increases the search space
12. Therefore, it is computationally
too expensive to apply sophisticated classiﬁers.
Around 2011, researchers proposed to relieve the tension
between computational tractability and high detection qual-
12Sliding window based detection requires classifying around 104–
105windows per image. The number of windows grows signiﬁcantly
to 106–107windows per image when considering multiple scales and
aspect ratios.
123