International Journal of Computer Vision
•Fusing information from different layers of the backbone.
The evidence from recent success of cascade for object detec-
tion (Cai and Vasconcelos 2018 ; Cheng et al. 2018a ,b) and
instance segmentation on COCO (Chen et al. 2019a ) and
other challenges has shown that multistage object detection
could be a future framework for a speed-accuracy trade-off.
A teaser investigation is being done in the 2019 WIDERChallenge (Loy et al. 2019 ).
(2) Backbone networks
As discussed in Sect. 6.1, backbone networks are one of
the main driving forces behind the rapid improvement of
detection performance, because of the key role played by dis-
criminative object feature representation. Generally, deeperbackbones such as ResNet (He et al. 2016 ), ResNeXt (Xie
et al. 2017 ), InceptionResNet (Szegedy et al. 2017 ) perform
better; however, they are computationally more expensiveand require much more data and massive computing for train-ing. Some backbones (Howard et al. 2017 ; Iandola et al. 2016 ;
Zhang et al. 2018c ) were proposed for focusing on speed
instead, such as MobileNet (Howard et al. 2017 ) which has
been shown to achieve VGGNet16 accuracy on ImageNet
with only
1
30the computational cost and model size. Back-
bone training from scratch may become possible as moretraining data and better training strategies are available (Wu
and He 2018 ; Luo et al. 2018 ,2019 ).
(3) Improving the robustness of object representation
The variation of real world images is a key challenge in object
recognition. The variations include lighting, pose, deforma-
tions, background clutter, occlusions, blur, resolution, noise,and camera distortions.
(3.1) Object scale and small object size
Large variations of object scale, particularly those of small
objects, pose a great challenge. Here a summary and discus-
sion on the main strategies identiﬁed in Sect. 6.2:
•Using image pyramids: They are simple and effective,
helping to enlarge small objects and to shrink large ones.
They are computationally expensive, but are neverthelesscommonly used during inference for better accuracy.
•Using features from convolutional layers of different
resolutions: In early work like SSD (Liu et al. 2016 ),
predictions are performed independently, and no infor-
mation from other layers is combined or merged. Now
it is quite standard to combine features from differentlayers, e.g. in FPN (Lin et al. 2017a ).Fig. 21 Evolution of object detection performance on COCO (Test-Dev
results). Results are quoted from (Girshick 2015 ;H ee ta l . 2017 ;R e n
et al. 2017 ). The backbone network, the design of detection framework
and the availability of good and large scale datasets are the three mostimportant factors in detection accuracy
•Using dilated convolutions (Li et al. 2018b ,2019b ): A
simple and effective method to incorporate broader con-text and maintain high resolution feature maps.
•Using anchor boxes of different scales and aspect ratios:
Drawbacks of having many parameters, and scales andaspect ratios of anchor boxes are usually heuristically
determined.
•Up-scaling: Particularly for the detection of small objects,
high-resolution networks (Sun et al. 2019a ,b) can be
developed. It remains unclear whether super-resolution
techniques improve detection accuracy or not.
Despite recent advances, the detection accuracy for small
objects is still much lower than that of larger ones. There-
fore, the detection of small objects remains one of the keychallenges in object detection. Perhaps localization require-ments need to be generalized as a function of scale, since
certain applications, e.g. autonomous driving, only require
the identiﬁcation of the existence of small objects within alarger region, and exact localization is not necessary.
(3.2) Deformation, occlusion, and other factors
As discussed in Sect. 2.2, there are approaches to han-
dling geometric transformation, occlusions, and deformation
mainly based on two paradigms. The ﬁrst is a spatialtransformer network, which uses regression to obtain a
deformation ﬁeld and then warp features according to the
deformation ﬁeld (Dai et al. 2017 ). The second is based on
a deformable part-based model (Felzenszwalb et al. 2010b ),
123