International Journal of Computer Vision
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-019-01247-4
Deep Learning for Generic Object Detection: A Survey
Li Liu1,2·Wanli Ouyang3·Xiaogang Wang4·Paul Fieguth5·Jie Chen2·Xinwang Liu1·Matti Pietikäinen2
Received: 6 September 2018 / Accepted: 26 September 2019
© The Author(s) 2019
Abstract
Object detection, one of the most fundamental and challenging problems in computer vision, seeks to locate object instances
from a large number of predeﬁned categories in natural images. Deep learning techniques have emerged as a powerfulstrategy for learning feature representations directly from data and have led to remarkable breakthroughs in the ﬁeld ofgeneric object detection. Given this period of rapid evolution, the goal of this paper is to provide a comprehensive survey of
the recent achievements in this ﬁeld brought about by deep learning techniques. More than 300 research contributions are
included in this survey, covering many aspects of generic object detection: detection frameworks, object feature representation,object proposal generation, context modeling, training strategies, and evaluation metrics. We ﬁnish the survey by identifying
promising directions for future research.
Keywords Object detection ·Deep learning ·Convolutional neural networks ·Object recognition
1 Introduction
As a longstanding, fundamental and challenging problem
in computer vision, object detection (illustrated in Fig. 1)
has been an active area of research for several decades (Fis-
Communicated by Bernt Schiele.
B Li Liu
li.liu@oulu.ﬁ
Wanli Ouyang
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au
Xiaogang Wang
xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
Paul Fieguth
pﬁeguth@uwaterloo.ca
Jie Chen
jie.chen@oulu.ﬁ
Xinwang Liu
xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn
Matti Pietikäinen
matti.pietikainen@oulu.ﬁ
1National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
3University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia
4Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, China
5University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canadachler and Elschlager 1973 ). The goal of object detection is
to determine whether there are any instances of objects fromgiven categories (such as humans, cars, bicycles, dogs or
cats) in an image and, if present, to return the spatial loca-
tion and extent of each object instance (e.g., via a boundingbox Everingham et al. 2010 ; Russakovsky et al. 2015 ). As
the cornerstone of image understanding and computer vision,
object detection forms the basis for solving complex or highlevel vision tasks such as segmentation, scene understand-ing, object tracking, image captioning, event detection, and
activity recognition. Object detection supports a wide range
of applications, including robot vision, consumer electronics,security, autonomous driving, human computer interaction,
content based image retrieval, intelligent video surveillance,
and augmented reality.
Recently, deep learning techniques (Hinton and Salakhut-
dinov 2006 ; LeCun et al. 2015 ) have emerged as powerful
methods for learning feature representations automaticallyfrom data. In particular, these techniques have providedmajor improvements in object detection, as illustrated in
Fig. 3.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, object detection can be grouped
into one of two types (Grauman and Leibe 2011 ; Zhang et al.
2013 ): detection of speciﬁc instances versus the detection of
broad categories. The ﬁrst type aims to detect instances ofa particular object (such as Donald Trump’s face, the Eiffel
Tower, or a neighbor’s dog), essentially a matching problem.
123