International Journal of Computer Vision
Fig. 19 Illustration of the region proposal network (RPN) introduced
in Ren et al. ( 2015 )
9 Other Issues
Data Augmentation Performing data augmentation for learn-
ing DCNNs (Chatﬁeld et al. 2014 ; Girshick 2015 ; Girshick
et al. 2014 ) is generally recognized to be important for visual
recognition. Trivial data augmentation refers to perturbing
an image by transformations that leave the underlying cate-
gory unchanged, such as cropping, ﬂipping, rotating, scaling,translating, color perturbations, and adding noise. By artiﬁ-cially enlarging the number of samples, data augmentation
helps in reducing overﬁtting and improving generalization.
It can be used at training time, at test time, or both. Never-theless, it has the obvious limitation that the time required
for training increases signiﬁcantly. Data augmentation may
synthesize completely new training images (Peng et al. 2015 ;
Wang et al. 2017 ), however it is hard to guarantee that the syn-
thetic images generalize well to real ones. Some researchers
(Dwibedi et al. 2017 ; Gupta et al. 2016 ) proposed augment-
ing datasets by pasting real segmented objects into naturalimages; indeed, Dvornik et al. ( 2018 ) showed that appro-
priately modeling the visual context surrounding objects is
crucial to place them in the right environment, and proposeda context model to automatically ﬁnd appropriate locations
on images to place new objects for data augmentation.
Novel Training Strategies Detecting objects under a wide
range of scale variations, especially the detection of very
small objects, stands out as a key challenge. It has been shown
(Huang et al. 2017b ; Liu et al. 2016 ) that image resolution
has a considerable impact on detection accuracy, thereforescaling is particularly commonly used in data augmentation,
since higher resolutions increase the possibility of detecting
small objects (Huang et al. 2017b ). Recently, Singh et al.
proposed advanced and efﬁcient data argumentation meth-
ods SNIP (Singh and Davis 2018 ) and SNIPER (Singh et al.
2018b ) to 1 illustrate the scale invariance problem, as sum-
marized in Table 10. Motivated by the intuitive understanding
that small and large objects are difﬁcult to detect at smaller
and larger scales, respectively, SNIP introduces a novel train-ing scheme that can reduce scale variations during training,but without reducing training samples; SNIPER allows for
efﬁcient multiscale training, only processing context regionsaround ground truth objects at the appropriate scale, instead
of processing a whole image pyramid. Peng et al. ( 2018 )
studied a key factor in training, the minibatch size, andproposed MegDet, a Large MiniBatch Object Detector, toenable the training with a much larger minibatch size than
before (from 16 to 256). To avoid the failure of convergence
and signiﬁcantly speed up the training process, Peng et al.(2018 ) proposed a learning rate policy and Cross GPU Batch
Normalization, and effectively utilized 128 GPUs, allowing
MegDet to ﬁnish COCO training in 4 hours on 128 GPUs,and winning the COCO 2017 Detection Challenge.
Reducing Localization Error In object detection, the Inter-
section Over Union
15(IOU) between a detected bounding
box and its ground truth box is the most popular evalua-tion metric, and an IOU threshold (e.g. typical value of 0 .5)
is required to deﬁne positives and negatives. From Fig. 13,
in most state of the art detectors (Girshick 2015 ; Liu et al.
2016 ;H ee ta l . 2017 ; Ren et al. 2015 ; Redmon et al. 2016 )
object detection is formulated as a multitask learning prob-
lem, i.e., jointly optimizing a softmax classiﬁer which assignsobject proposals with class labels and bounding box regres-
sors, localizing objects by maximizing IOU or other metrics
between detection results and ground truth. Bounding boxesare only a crude approximation for articulated objects, con-sequently background pixels are almost invariably included
in a bounding box, which affects the accuracy of classiﬁ-
cation and localization. The study in Hoiem et al. ( 2012 )
shows that object localization error is one of the most inﬂu-
ential forms of error, in addition to confusion between similar
objects. Localization error could stem from insufﬁcient over-lap (smaller than the required IOU threshold, such as the
green box in Fig. 20) or duplicate detections (i.e., multiple
overlapping detections for an object instance). Usually, somepost-processing step like NonMaximum Suppression (NMS)(Bodla et al. 2017 ; Hosang et al. 2017 ) is used for eliminat-
ing duplicate detections. However, due to misalignments the
bounding box with better localization could be suppressedduring NMS, leading to poorer localization quality (such as
the purple box shown in Fig. 20). Therefore, there are quite
a few methods aiming at improving detection performanceby reducing localization error.
MRCNN (Gidaris and Komodakis 2015 ) introduces iter-
ative bounding box regression, where an RCNN is appliedseveral times. CRAFT (Yang et al. 2016a ) and AttractioNet
(Gidaris and Komodakis 2016 ) use a multi-stage detection
sub-network to generate accurate proposals, to forward to
Fast RCNN. Cai and Vasconcelos ( 2018 ) proposed Cas-
cade RCNN, a multistage extension of RCNN, in which a
sequence of detectors is trained sequentially with increasing
15Please refer to Sect. 4.2for more details on the deﬁnition of IOU.
123