International Journal of Computer Vision
Table 4 Most frequent object classes for each detection challenge
(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
The size of each word is proportional to the frequency of that class in
the training dataset
cup denote intersection and union, respectively. A typical
value of εis 0.5.
Otherwise, it is considered as a False Positive (FP). The con-
ﬁdence level pis usually compared with some threshold β
to determine whether the predicted class label cis accepted.
AP is computed separately for each of the object classes,
based on Precision andRecall . For a given object class cand
a testing image Ii,l e t{(bij,pij)}M
j=1denote the detections
returned by a detector, ranked by conﬁdence pijin decreasing
order. Each detection (bij,pij)is either a TP or an FP, which
can be determined via the algorithm4in Fig. 10. Based on
the TP and FP detections, the precision P(β)and recall R(β)
(Everingham et al. 2010 ) can be computed as a function of
the conﬁdence threshold β, so by varying the conﬁdence
4It is worth noting that for a given threshold β, multiple detections of
the same object in an image are not considered as all correct detections,and only the detection with the highest conﬁdence level is consideredas a TP and the rest as FPs.threshold different pairs (P,R)can be obtained, in principle
allowing precision to be regarded as a function of recall, i.e.
P(R), from which the Average Precision (AP) (Everingham
et al. 2010 ; Russakovsky et al. 2015 ) can be found.
Since the introduction of MS COCO, more attention has
been placed on the accuracy of the bounding box location.Instead of using a ﬁxed IOU threshold, MS COCO introduces
a few metrics (summarized in Table 5) for characterizing the
performance of an object detector. For instance, in contrast tothe traditional mAP computed at a single IoU of 0 .5,AP
coco
is averaged across all object categories and multiple IOU val-
ues from 0 .5t o0.95 in steps of 0 .05. Because 41% of the
objects in MS COCO are small and 24% are large, metrics
APsmall
coco ,APmedium
coco and APlarge
coco are also introduced. Finally,
Table 5summarizes the main metrics used in the PASCAL,
ILSVRC and MS COCO object detection challenges, with
metric modiﬁcations for the Open Images challenges pro-posed in Kuznetsova et al. ( 2018 ).
5 Detection Frameworks
There has been steady progress in object feature represen-
tations and classiﬁers for recognition, as evidenced by thedramatic change from handcrafted features (Viola and Jones
2001 ; Dalal and Triggs 2005 ; Felzenszwalb et al. 2008 ;
Harzallah et al. 2009 ; Vedaldi et al. 2009 ) to learned DCNN
features (Girshick et al. 2014 ; Ouyang et al. 2015 ; Girshick
2015 ; Ren et al. 2015 ; Dai et al. 2016c ). In contrast, in terms
of localization, the basic “sliding window” strategy (Dalal
and Triggs 2005 ; Felzenszwalb et al. 2010b ,2008 ) remains
mainstream, although with some efforts to avoid exhaustive
search (Lampert et al. 2008 ; Uijlings et al. 2013 ). However,
the number of windows is large and grows quadraticallywith the number of image pixels, and the need to search
over multiple scales and aspect ratios further increases the
search space. Therefore, the design of efﬁcient and effec-tive detection frameworks plays a key role in reducing thiscomputational cost. Commonly adopted strategies include
cascading, sharing feature computation, and reducing per-
window computation.
This section reviews detection frameworks, listed in
Fig. 11and Table 11, the milestone approaches appearing
since deep learning entered the ﬁeld, organized into two maincategories:
(a) Two stage detection frameworks, which include a pre-
processing step for generating object proposals;
(b) One stage detection frameworks, or region proposal free
frameworks, having a single proposed method which
does not separate the process of the detection proposal.
123