International Journal of Computer Vision
(a) (b)
Fig. 8 aIllustration of three operations that are repeatedly applied by a
typical CNN: convolution with a number of linear ﬁlters; Nonlinearities(e.g. ReLU); and local pooling (e.g. max pooling). The Mfeature maps
from a previous layer are convolved with Ndifferent ﬁlters (here shown
as size 3 ×3×M), using a stride of 1. The resulting Nfeature maps
are then passed through a nonlinear function (e.g. ReLU), and pooled(e.g. taking a maximum over 2 ×2 regions) to give Nfeature maps
at a reduced resolution. bIllustration of the architecture of VGGNet
(Simonyan and Zisserman 2015 ), a typical CNN with 11 weight layers.An image with 3 color channels is presented as the input. The network
has 8 convolutional layers, 3 fully connected layers, 5 max pooling lay-ers and a softmax classiﬁcation layer. The last three fully connectedlayers take features from the top convolutional layer as input in vectorform. The ﬁnal layer is a C-way softmax function, Cbeing the number
of classes. The whole network can be learned from labeled training databy optimizing an objective function (e.g. mean squared error or crossentropy loss) via stochastic gradient descent (Color ﬁgure online)
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), the most repre-
sentative models of deep learning, are able to exploit the basicproperties underlying natural signals: translation invariance,
local connectivity, and compositional hierarchies (LeCun
et al. 2015 ). A typical CNN, illustrated in Fig. 8, has a hier-
archical structure and is composed of a number of layers to
learn representations of data with multiple levels of abstrac-
tion (LeCun et al. 2015 ). We begin with a convolution
x
l−1∗wl(1)
between an input feature map xl−1at a feature map from
previous layer l−1, convolved with a 2D convolutional kernel
(or ﬁlter or weights) wl. This convolution appears over a
sequence of layers, subject to a nonlinear operation σ, such
that
xl
j=σ⎛
⎝Nl−1/summationdisplay
i=1xl−1
i∗wl
i,j+bl
j⎞
⎠, (2)
with a convolution now between the Nl−1input feature maps
xl−1
iand the corresponding kernel wl
i,j, plus a bias term bl
j.
The elementwise nonlinear function σ(·)is typically a recti-
ﬁed linear unit (ReLU) for each element,
σ(x)=max{x,0}. (3)Finally, pooling corresponds to the downsampling/upsampl-
ing of feature maps. These three operations (convolution,nonlinearity, pooling) are illustrated in Fig. 8a; CNNs having
a large number of layers, a “deep” network, are referred to
as Deep CNNs (DCNNs), with a typical DCNN architectureillustrated in Fig. 8b.
Most layers of a CNN consist of a number of feature maps,
within which each pixel acts like a neuron. Each neuron in aconvolutional layer is connected to feature maps of the pre-vious layer through a set of weights w
i,j(essentially a set of
2D ﬁlters). As can be seen in Fig. 8b, where the early CNN
layers are typically composed of convolutional and poolinglayers, the later layers are normally fully connected. From
earlier to later layers, the input image is repeatedly con-
volved, and with each layer, the receptive ﬁeld or region ofsupport increases. In general, the initial CNN layers extract
low-level features (e.g., edges), with later layers extracting
more general features of increasing complexity (Zeiler andFergus 2014 ; Bengio et al. 2013 ; LeCun et al. 2015 ; Oquab
et al. 2014 ).
DCNNs have a number of outstanding advantages: a
hierarchical structure to learn representations of data withmultiple levels of abstraction, the capacity to learn very com-
plex functions, and learning feature representations directly
and automatically from data with minimal domain knowl-edge. What has particularly made DCNNs successful has
123