International Journal of Computer Vision
ability which is weakened in the FC layers. Therefore, the
selective search can be replaced by a CNN in producingregion proposals. The Faster RCNN framework proposed
by Ren et al. ( 2015 ,2017 ) offered an efﬁcient and accu-
rate Region Proposal Network (RPN) for generating regionproposals. They utilize the same backbone network, usingfeatures from the last shared convolutional layer to accom-
plish the task of RPN for region proposal and Fast RCNN for
region classiﬁcation, as shown in Fig. 13.
RPN ﬁrst initializes kreference boxes (i.e. the so called
anchors ) of different scales and aspect ratios at each CONV
feature map location. The anchor positions are image content
independent, but the feature vectors themselves, extracted
from anchors, are image content dependent. Each anchor is
mapped to a lower dimensional vector, which is fed into twosibling FC layers—an object category classiﬁcation layer anda box regression layer. In contrast to detection in Fast RCNN,
the features used for regression in RPN are of the same shape
as the anchor box, thus kanchors lead to kregressors. RPN
shares CONV features with Fast RCNN, thus enabling highly
efﬁcient region proposal computation. RPN is, in fact, a kind
of Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) (Long et al. 2015 ;
Shelhamer et al. 2017 ); Faster RCNN is thus a purely CNN
based framework without using handcrafted features.
For the VGG16 model (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015 ),
Faster RCNN can test at 5 FPS (including all stages) on aGPU, while achieving state-of-the-art object detection accu-
racy on PASCAL VOC 2007 using 300 proposals per image.
The initial Faster RCNN in Ren et al. ( 2015 ) contains sev-
eral alternating training stages, later simpliﬁed in Ren et al.
(2017 ).
Concurrent with the development of Faster RCNN, Lenc
and Vedaldi ( 2015 ) challenged the role of region proposal
generation methods such as selective search, studied the role
of region proposal generation in CNN based detectors, andfound that CNNs contain sufﬁcient geometric informationfor accurate object detection in the CONV rather than FC
layers. They showed the possibility of building integrated,
simpler, and faster object detectors that rely exclusively onCNNs, removing region proposal generation methods such
as selective search.
RFCN (Region based Fully Convolutional Network )
While Faster RCNN is an order of magnitude faster than
Fast RCNN, the fact that the region-wise sub-network still
needs to be applied per RoI (several hundred RoIs per image)led Dai et al. ( 2016c ) to propose the RFCN detector which is
fully convolutional (no hidden FC layers) with almost all
computations shared over the entire image. As shown in
Fig. 13, RFCN differs from Faster RCNN only in the RoI
sub-network. In Faster RCNN, the computation after the RoI
pooling layer cannot be shared, so Dai et al. ( 2016c ) proposed
using all CONV layers to construct a shared RoI sub-network,and RoI crops are taken from the last layer of CONV featuresprior to prediction. However, Dai et al. ( 2016c ) found that this
naive design turns out to have considerably inferior detectionaccuracy, conjectured to be that deeper CONV layers are
more sensitive to category semantics, and less sensitive to
translation, whereas object detection needs localization rep-resentations that respect translation invariance. Based on thisobservation, Dai et al. ( 2016c ) constructed a set of position-
sensitive score maps by using a bank of specialized CONV
layers as the FCN output, on top of which a position-sensitiveRoI pooling layer is added. They showed that RFCN with
ResNet101 (He et al. 2016 ) could achieve comparable accu-
racy to Faster RCNN, often at faster running times.
Mask RCNN He et al. ( 2017 ) proposed Mask RCNN to
tackle pixelwise object instance segmentation by extend-
ing Faster RCNN. Mask RCNN adopts the same two stagepipeline, with an identical ﬁrst stage (RPN), but in the sec-ond stage, in parallel to predicting the class and box offset,
Mask RCNN adds a branch which outputs a binary mask for
each RoI. The new branch is a Fully Convolutional Network
(FCN) (Long et al. 2015 ; Shelhamer et al. 2017 ) on top of a
CNN feature map. In order to avoid the misalignments caused
by the original RoI pooling (RoIPool) layer, a RoIAlignlayer was proposed to preserve the pixel level spatial cor-
respondence. With a backbone network ResNeXt101-FPN
(Xie et al. 2017 ; Lin et al. 2017a ), Mask RCNN achieved
top results for the COCO object instance segmentation andbounding box object detection. It is simple to train, general-
izes well, and adds only a small overhead to Faster RCNN,
running at 5 FPS (He et al. 2017 ).
Chained Cascade Network and Cascade RCNN The
essence of cascade (Felzenszwalb et al. 2010a ; Bourdev
and Brandt 2005 ; Li and Zhang 2004 ) is to learn more dis-
criminative classiﬁers by using multistage classiﬁers, such
that early stages discard a large number of easy negative
samples so that later stages can focus on handling more difﬁ-cult examples. Two-stage object detection can be consideredas a cascade, the ﬁrst detector removing large amounts of
background, and the second stage classifying the remaining
regions. Recently, end-to-end learning of more than two cas-caded classiﬁers and DCNNs for generic object detection
were proposed in the Chained Cascade Network (Ouyang
et al. 2017a ), extended in Cascade RCNN (Cai and Vasconce-
los2018 ), and more recently applied for simultaneous object
detection and instance segmentation (Chen et al. 2019a ), win-
ning the COCO 2018 Detection Challenge.
Light Head RCNN In order to further increase the detec-
tion speed of RFCN (Dai et al. 2016c ), Li et al. ( 2018c )p r o -
posed Light Head RCNN, making the head of the detection
network as light as possible to reduce the RoI computation.In particular, Li et al. ( 2018c ) applied a convolution to pro-
duce thin feature maps with small channel numbers (e.g.,
490 channels for COCO) and a cheap RCNN sub-network,leading to an excellent trade-off of speed and accuracy.
123