International Journal of Computer Vision
RCNN
(Girshick et al.)
DetectorNet
(Szegedy et al.)Faster RCNN
(Ren et al.)
RFCN
(Dai et al.)
YOLO
(Redmon et al.)Mask RCNN 
(He et al.)
MultiBox
(Erhan et al.)
OverFeat
(Sermanet et al.)MSC Multibox
(Szegedy et al.)Fast RCNN
(Girshick)
SSD
(Liu et al.)NIN
(Lin et al.)VGGNet
(Simonyan and Zisserman)
GoogLeNet
(Szegedy et al.)ResNet
(He et al.)
SPPNet
(He et al.)YOLO9000
(Redmon and Farhadi)
RetinaNet
(Lin et al.)DenseNet
(Huang et al.)
Feature Pyramid Network 
(FPN) (Lin et al.)CornerNet
(Law and Deng)
Fig. 11 Milestones in generic object detection
Fig. 12 Illustration of the RCNN detection framework (Girshick et al.
2014 ,2016 )
AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al. 2012a ) with a region proposal
selective search (Uijlings et al. 2013 ). As illustrated in detail
in Fig. 12, training an RCNN framework consists of multi-
stage pipelines:
1.Region proposal computation Class agnostic region pro-
posals, which are candidate regions that might contain
objects, are obtained via a selective search (Uijlings et al.
2013 ).
2.CNN model ﬁnetuning Region proposals, which are
cropped from the image and warped into the same size,
are used as the input for ﬁne-tuning a CNN model pre-trained using a large-scale dataset such as ImageNet. Atthis stage, all region proposals with ≥0.5I O U
6overlap
with a ground truth box are deﬁned as positives for that
ground truth box’s class and the rest as negatives.
3.Class speciﬁc SVM classiﬁers training A set of class-
speciﬁc linear SVM classiﬁers are trained using ﬁxed
length features extracted with CNN, replacing the soft-max classiﬁer learned by ﬁne-tuning. For training SVMclassiﬁers, positive examples are deﬁned to be the ground
truth boxes for each class. A region proposal with less
than 0.3 IOU overlap with all ground truth instances of aclass is negative for that class. Note that the positive and
negative examples deﬁned for training the SVM classi-
ﬁers are different from those for ﬁne-tuning the CNN.
4.Class speciﬁc bounding box regressor training Bounding
box regression is learned for each object class with CNN
features.
In spite of achieving high object detection quality, RCNN
has notable drawbacks (Girshick 2015 ):
1. Training is a multistage pipeline, slow and hard to opti-
mize because each individual stage must be trained
separately.
2. For SVM classiﬁer and bounding box regressor training,
it is expensive in both disk space and time, because CNN
features need to be extracted from each object proposal
in each image, posing great challenges for large scaledetection, particularly with very deep networks, such as
VGG16 (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015 ).
3. Testing is slow, since CNN features are extracted per
object proposal in each test image, without shared com-
putation.
All of these drawbacks have motivated successive innova-
tions, leading to a number of improved detection frameworkssuch as SPPNet, Fast RCNN, Faster RCNN etc., as follows.
6Please refer to Sect. 4.2for the deﬁnition of IOU.
123