International Journal of Computer Vision
been the availability of large scale labeled datasets and of
GPUs with very high computational capability.
Despite the great successes, known deﬁciencies remain. In
particular, there is an extreme need for labeled training data
and a requirement of expensive computing resources, andconsiderable skill and experience are still needed to selectappropriate learning parameters and network architectures.
Trained networks are poorly interpretable, there is a lack of
robustness to degradations, and many DCNNs have shownserious vulnerability to attacks (Goodfellow et al. 2015 ), all
of which currently limit the use of DCNNs in real-world
applications.
4 Datasets and Performance Evaluation
4.1 Datasets
Datasets have played a key role throughout the history of
object recognition research, not only as a common ground
for measuring and comparing the performance of competingalgorithms, but also pushing the ﬁeld towards increasingly
complex and challenging problems. In particular, recently,
deep learning techniques have brought tremendous success tomany visual recognition problems, and it is the large amounts
of annotated data which play a key role in their success.
Access to large numbers of images on the Internet makes itpossible to build comprehensive datasets in order to capturea vast richness and diversity of objects, enabling unprece-
dented performance in object recognition.
For generic object detection, there are four famous
datasets: PASCAL VOC (Everingham et al. 2010 ,2015 ),
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009 ), MS COCO (Lin et al. 2014 )
and Open Images (Kuznetsova et al. 2018 ). The attributes
of these datasets are summarized in Table 2, and selected
sample images are shown in Fig. 9. There are three steps to
creating large-scale annotated datasets: determining the set oftarget object categories, collecting a diverse set of candidateimages to represent the selected categories on the Internet,
and annotating the collected images, typically by designing
crowdsourcing strategies. Recognizing space limitations, werefer interested readers to the original papers (Everingham
et al. 2010 ,2015 ; Lin et al. 2014 ; Russakovsky et al. 2015 ;
Kuznetsova et al. 2018 ) for detailed descriptions of these
datasets in terms of construction and properties.
The four datasets form the backbone of their respective
detection challenges. Each challenge consists of a publiclyavailable dataset of images together with ground truth anno-tation and standardized evaluation software, and an annual
competition and corresponding workshop. Statistics for the
number of images and object instances in the training, vali-dation and testing datasets
2for the detection challenges are
given in Table 3. The most frequent object classes in VOC,
COCO, ILSVRC and Open Images detection datasets are
visualized in Table 4.
PASCAL VOC Everingham et al. ( 2010 ,2015 ) is a multi-
year effort devoted to the creation and maintenance of a seriesof benchmark datasets for classiﬁcation and object detection,
creating the precedent for standardized evaluation of recog-
nition algorithms in the form of annual competitions. Startingfrom only four categories in 2005, the dataset has increased to
20 categories that are common in everyday life. Since 2009,
the number of images has grown every year, but with all pre-vious images retained to allow test results to be compared
from year to year. Due the availability of larger datasets like
ImageNet, MS COCO and Open Images, PASCAL VOC hasgradually fallen out of fashion.
ILSVRC, the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge (Russakovsky et al. 2015 ), is derived from Ima-
geNet (Deng et al. 2009 ), scaling up PASCAL VOC’s goal of
standardized training and evaluation of detection algorithms
by more than an order of magnitude in the number of object
classes and images. ImageNet1000, a subset of ImageNetimages with 1000 different object categories and a total of
1.2 million images, has been ﬁxed to provide a standardized
benchmark for the ILSVRC image classiﬁcation challenge.
MS COCO is a response to the criticism of ImageNet that
objects in its dataset tend to be large and well centered, mak-
ing the ImageNet dataset atypical of real-world scenarios.
To push for richer image understanding, researchers createdthe MS COCO database (Lin et al. 2014 ) containing com-
plex everyday scenes with common objects in their natural
context, closer to real life, where objects are labeled usingfully-segmented instances to provide more accurate detec-
tor evaluation. The COCO object detection challenge (Lin
et al. 2014 ) features two object detection tasks: using either
bounding box output or object instance segmentation output.COCO introduced three new challenges:
1. It contains objects at a wide range of scales, including a
high percentage of small objects (Singh and Davis 2018 );
2. Objects are less iconic and amid clutter or heavy occlu-
sion;
3. The evaluation metric (see Table 5) encourages more
accurate object localization.
Just like ImageNet in its time, MS COCO has become the
standard for object detection today.
OICOD (the Open Image Challenge Object Detection) is
derived from Open Images V4 (now V5 in 2019) (Kuznetsova
et al. 2018 ), currently the largest publicly available object
2The annotations on the test set are not publicly released, except for
PASCAL VOC2007.
123